THE HISTORY of the WARS of the Emperor JUSTINIAN in VIII. Books

Of the Persian. II Vandall. II Gothicke. IV


Written in Greek by PROCOPIVS OF CAESAREA. and Englished by HEN: HOLCROFT KNIGHT.



THE HISTORY OF THE VVARRES Of the Emperor JUSTINIAN IN EIGHT BOOKS.

Of the Persian, II. Vandall, II. Gothicke, IV.


Written in Greek by PROCOPIVS OF CAESAREA. AND Englished by Henry Holcroft,
Knight.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

The Preface.
AMidst the throng of Historians, we have very few who were personally
concerned in the actions they write of: few having, like Caesar, wrote their
own Commentaries: Nay, the greatest part were not then in being; and so their
Reports are but Conjectures, and their Books, transmitted to Posterity, are
their Divination rather than their History. And, alas, those few who were
Contemporary to their own story, how biased are their Traditions! how are they
commonly so faction'd and sided, that their Relations are but their Interests;
delivering downwards not what they knew; but what they inclined to. And if any
one amongst them be so unbiased, that he have no partial bent of his own, yet
the awe which Princes or Generals have upon him, makes him many times fear,
that his Truth shall be his Gaol, or Exile; all which considering, the wary
Author writes not a History, but his own Safety. But Procopius (as every one
knows) was not only alive in the times which he wrote of, but did for many
years survive not only the finishing of his History, but the publication
also; and was a very material concerned Agent in all these Wars. And for his
Impartial writing, take first his own word for it, where he says about the
beginning of all, (...), etc. He conceived indeed that Eloquence was decent in
an Orator, and that Poets might be excused for their Fables, but an Historian
must vent nothing but Truth: And then he goes on; Wherefore he has not spared
his dearest friends, and be their faults committed upon what terms they will,
he fails not to charge them home with them. But if his own assertion will not
serve the turn, go but along with him in his History, and thou shall see, that
(while Agathias and Epiphanensis, two learned Writers, about the same time with
Procopius, who if they chance to let any thing fall to the discredit of
Justinian, or the Senators, they do it with exceeding great temper and caution,
were yet fain to conceal their Commentaries with Mauritius the Emperor)
Procopius freely lays about him, sweetens no man's vices, cloaks no man's
miscarriage, but impartially discoursing of Justinian, and the great ones, does
as much arraign, as relate them to posterity. He severely indites John the
Pretorian Prosect of flat impiety, Tribomanus the Questor of grating avarice,
Arethas the General for his deceitful and faithless wit; and then he recounts
the particular Bands of Soldiers, the several Garrisons and Cities, which
became either a prey to the enemy, or were utterly destroyed by the base and
unworthy demeanor of Bessas, Acacius, and the other Questor. He solemnly
rebukes Verus for his intemperance, Sergius for his haughty disdain and
effeminacy, Maximinus for his sloth, and his general ignorance in Martial
affairs. And which is yet much more than all the rest, the gallant Belisarius,
whose wise and valiant conduct (to omit his many other glorious achievements)
did reduce two Kings, and brought them captives to Constantinople, and to whose
fame and renown the whole History seems to be one entire Sacrifice, did but
once manage his affairs amiss, and he hears sharply of it from Procopius;
(...), etc. Belisarius then returned to Constantinople with disrepute; for
during five whole years together, he could gain no footing in Italy, but in all
that time was forced to waft himself by stealth from one Port-town to another;
whereupon the enemy did subdue both Rome her self, and all other places with
greater security. And as for Perusia, a chief City in Tuscany, he left it
straightly besieged, and it was afterward taken by the enemy, whilst he marched
for Constantinople. Nor does Justinian himself escape his chastisement; for he
often inculcates his unworthy deteining the Soldiers pay, his sleepy neglect
of Military preparations, and his profuse reception of the vilest Barbarian,
Isdigunas the Persian Ambassador. How he handles his vices elsewhere, concerns
not our present purpose; but evident it is, that all the countenance and
indulgence, all the promotions and advancements (hereafter mentioned) bestowed
upon him by the Emperor, were looked upon by Procopius, as encouragements to
serve, not slatter his Prince; and as the rewards of his Loyalty, not the
bribes of his Secrecy. And all this did Procopius publish, the parties
themselves being then alive. Which severity of his, as it cannot choose but
reconcile a great opinion and commendation of his veracity, so is it no
emergency of hatred or calumny, but of clear dealing and integrity; not his
Satyr against the Persons, but his just remorse for the Vices.

But though Procopius did publish this History in his own life time, yet it
has since been the fate of this (as Nicolaus Alemannus observes, not of this
only, but of all the other writings of this worthy Author) to be exposed
maime, and mangled to the world. For though it was at first presented to
Justinian the Roman Emperor by Procopius himself, and by him also dispersed in
its native integrity, whereby it became the delight and darling of the whole
Empire; Yet this happiness befell it for many hundred years before Printing was
known. For the first man that committed it to the Press, was Leonardus
Aretinus, who published that part of it which does relate to the Gothic Wars;
and in that also he put a trick upon the World, much misbeseeming so learned a
man; for he quite suppressed the Greek copy, and concealing the right Authors
name, set forth a Latin Translation of his own, pretending it to be a
Collection compiled by himself out of several Writers, and stiling it De Bello
Italico, A Tract concerning the Wars of Italy. Now the Greek Copy of this
Translation of Aretinus does Blondus Flavius recount to have been by his
industry first brought into Italy. But he for his part, since his copy wants
some passages, of which we are now provided, and seeing he inveighs against
some things which we find to be currante and justifiable, in those Editions
which are abroad; was either deluded by the old Manuscript which he had by him,
or else by the person who translated it for him. For he might very well have
forborne his censure, seeing he confesses himself to be altogether ignorant in
the Greek Tongue. Christophorus Persona resenting the injury done to Procopius
by that Addition of Leonardus, did indeed restore him to his right again,
calling the Book by his name, and translating it out of the Original Greek. And
yet his Edition also is lame and infirm, being deprived of many parts. After
all these, Raphael Volateranus did publish in Latin the remaining Books,
namely of the Vandal and Persian Wars; but he also made use of as imperfect a
Copy as Persona did. So that neither of them, though they were both
Library-keepers of the Vatican in Rome, did translate out of the Vatican Copy.

And now, Reader, since the imposture of some, and the ignorance or misfortune
of others, has till of late delivered this Author to posterity either as a
spurious issue, or at best a cripple; Consider how much thou art indebted to
the memory of the deceased Knight, the learned Translator; who has been so
careful to hand it over to thee, not only rendered in thy own language, that
so thou may the better understand it; but also conferred and examined by the
most Authentic Copies, that so thou may the safer credit it. The Greek
Edition which he has translated for thee, is that of David Hoeschelius, who
being about to set forth this History, did first furnish himself with three
several Manuscripts of the same Book; one out of the Duke of Bavaria's
Library, the other two sent him by Joseph Scaliger, and Isaac Casaubon, both
which had undergone their judicious Masters Castigations before. Hoeschelius
made choice of the Bavarian Copy, finding it the most perfect and entire of the
three. But so, as where ever he met with any various Readings in the other two,
he has placed them in the Margin.

In the Translation of these Books of Procopius into English, Sir Henry
Holcroft does exercise the same judicious liberty which Alemannus takes to
himself, in rendering the Arcana Historia, written by the same Author, into
Latin; not confining himself to the strict words of the Author (a course taken
even by St. Jerome himself) but giving faithfully his sense and meaning: Well
knowing, that all Languages have their peculiar Idioms, which being rendered
word by word, would make a strange confusion, and impropriety in that Language
into which they are cast. And though the Learned Knight be not (as I have said)
so impertinently punctual to match the Author word by word, yet the Reader may
be assured, that he has most severely pursued his intentions; so that if
Procopius were now alive, and skilled in our Language, it would never repent
him, that his Book speaks English. And though I shall not (with Alemannus)
charge Procopius himself with the imputation of Tautologies, and too prodigal
Periphrases (allowing much to the luxuriance of the Greek tongue) yet I can
safely ascertain the Reader, he shall find this discourse far more contract and
close, than in the Author himself; and so his expectation shall not linger so
long, ever it be satisfied with the Events: And that nevertheless, he shall
perceive no Material, nor Circumstance omitted: As the Logicians confined Fist
does strike as smart, and as thorough a blow, as the diffused Orators expanded
Palm.

Where the injury of Time, or neglect of Transcribers has left any breach, or
Chasm in the Greek Copy (which in several places of this History does unhappily
befall) the knowing Translator has supplied the defect out of the Latin
copies. And where the Translator himself has suffered any impair, or casually
committed some mistakes, they are both relieved by the able pen of Mr. Edmund
Chilmead, by his exact comparing of the English with the Greek.

I shall now proceed to acquaint the Reader with some farther account of the
Author, and this History. Procopius was born in Caesarea, a City of Palestine,
and in the reign of Anastasius the Emperor came to Constaminople; where
approving himself a person of excellent parts, general Learning, and exceeding
great Prudence, he soon turned the eyes of the chiefest Romans upon him.
Insomuch that Justine the elder, when his Empire was in very great streights
(the Persians being then Victors over the Romans in War) did prefer Procopius
to Belisarius the General, to be of his Counsel. Suidas styles him (...),
Secretary to Belisarius; but He himself, who best knew his own employment, tells
us about the beginning of the Persian History; that he was (...), Belisarius
his Assessor. What profession he was of before he arrived at this, and other
places of trust and honor, is variously delivered by several Authors.
Evagrius, and Agathias call him (...), Oratorem; Suidas, (...). To explain
which words, says Hoeschelius, Ille est Orator, qui causas in concione, in
foro, in senatu agit; hic Latinis Rhetor, qui in scholis docet artem Oratoriam.
Him the Latins call an Orator, who pleads at the Bar; and him a Rhetorician,
who teaches the art of Rhetoric in the Schools. Blondus, and Sabellicus
conceit he was a Physician: But the three former are doubtless so far in the
right, as they all agree that he was (...), an Orator, or Lawyer, and that by
reason of his employment under Belisarius. For, as Alemannus judiciously
observes, Ex eo ordine (...) Consiliarii, and (...) Assessores, exercitus
ducibus summisque Magistratibus dabantur. Counselors and Assessors were
preferred to the Generals of Armies, and chief Magistrates, out of that
Profession. The reason why some Authors are of so different judgment in their
opinions concerning the Profession of Procopius, may possibly be, because there
were three of that name, Procopius Gazaeus, Procopius Sophista, and our
Procopius Caesariensis: Now the truth is, the two former are both called
Sophistae, Rhetoricians, and Gazaei too, being both of Gaza; and all three were
likewise Countrymen; both Gaza, and Caesarea being in Palestine. The first of
these, and ours, lived both in Justinians time; by whom Procopius, our Author,
was not only continued in his employment under Belisarius, being never
permitted upon any terms, either in the expeditions into Italy or Africa, to be
removed from the General, but was prized at so high a rate, that Justinian did
conceive the Roman Territories were as much established, and propagated by the
integrity and advise of Procopius, as by the valor and prowess of Belisarius.
And no sooner was Belisarius called out of Africa, upon his late Victories
completed there, but Procopius was sent to Carthage to Solomon, the then
General, to secure those parts; which being but newly subdued, were therefore
capable of Revolt and Rebellion against the Roman subjection. What employments
he had in Persia, Italy, Rome, Naples, and Syracuse, himself discovers in this
History; which several actions of his, though he mentions very modestly, and by
the by only, as if he reputed them scarce worthy the relation; yet sure we
are, they purchased for him so great renown in the Commonwealth, that
Justinian did thereupon advance him to the dignity of those persons who the
Romans did call Illustres; and hence it is that Suidas begins his account of
Procopius, (...), etc. Procopius Illustris of Caesarea in Palestine. After this
he was preferred to be a Senator also, and at last having put forth all this
History, he arrived at the highest dignity that can befall any Senator, namely
ad Vrbanam Praefecturam, to be Prefect of the City; and this was about the 25.
of Justinians Reign. About which time he finished that Book, which he durst not
then publish, and therefore calls it, (...), his Secret History. And now
Justinian, having for (near upon) seventeen years together delighted himself in
having this History of his Wars divulged, and read by all the Nations subject
to the Roman Scepter, enjoined our Author to write that Book which he calls
(...), Of the Buildings erected by the Emperor Justinian.

These are the known Books of Procopius, two whereof being not to our present
purpose (though Sir Henry has (as I am informed by those that should know)
translated the (...), or Secret History (a book which none of the Ancients met
with, but Suidas only, as appears by Evagrius, Agathias, Epiphanensis, Simeon
Metaphrastes in vita S. Sabae, Porphyrius, and Photius in his Bibliotheca as
neither many other Learned men who wrote since Suidas, as Zonaras, Cedrenus,
Anonymus in his Chronicon Vatican. and others, amongst whom was Cardinal
Baronius, who could never attain the sight of it, though he much desired it and
to my own knowledge, Agathias his History, who takes up the story, where
Procopius leaves off: All which may see the light, kind Reader, if thy
acceptance of this encourage their Impression) that is, the (...), and that
(...), we shall not here render an account of. This History was by the Author
divided into 8 books; 7 of them, namely those two concerning the Persian, those
other two of the Vandal, and the three first of the Gothic War, as himself
affirms in the fourth book, (...), were already divulged and known throughout
all the Roman Dominions. But as to the certain time wherein they were severally
published, Writers afford us no certainty. Yet this is most certain, that the
books of the Persian and Vandal Wars, and a great part of the books of the
Gothic, were finished before the death of Theodora the Empress, that is,
before the 22 year of Justinians reign: for in his (...) he writes, that he was
enforced in this History to conceal the trains which Theodora laid to destroy
Amalasuntha, Queen of the Goths, for fear of Theodora. And likewise our Author
makes mention of the publication of all the first seven books, before the 26 of
Justinians Reign, in his eighth book of these Wars; which book was written in
the 27 of Justinians Reign.

But this eight book is not so properly called the fourth of the Gothic Wars,
because it is indeed Historia quaedam (...), Miscella, as Alemannus styles it;
or as the Author himself, (...), Varia, a Miscellanie, or History containing
the Wars of Justinian with diverse Nations. And this eighth book was published
about the very time wherein it was written, viz. in the 27 of Justinians Reign.

To conclude, what great profit and delight is like to arise to the Reader in
perusing this History, let himself imagine, when he shall meet here with Prudent
Letters and Dispatches from Princes and Generals; Wise Laws and Provisions for
the public Safety; Politic Leagues and Confederacies to secure Interests;
Elegant Speeches and Exhortations to animate the Soldier; Notable Examples of
Vices and Virtures; Inevitable Stratagems to circumvent Adversaries: Lively
Descriptions of the Scituations of Countries, Cities, Buildings, Hills, Seas,
Rivers, and Fountains; Various and Interchangeable Turns and Inconstancies of
Wars and Fortunes; in a word, all the Treasury and Wardrobe that can enrich and
beautify a History. Take one only remarkable passage concerning the last, in
that City, which had been long the aim and envy of the world, Rome her self.
Alaricus the Goth gains her from the Romans; Genserick the Vandal does force
her from the Goths; Theodorick the Goth regains her to the Goths; Belisarius
the Roman General from the Goths: Totilas the Goth from the Romans again:
Belisarius receives her sacked and forsaken by the Goths: Totilas triumphs in
her second Conquest: Narses the Eunuch subdues both Tolilas and her. So that in
this very History, she is eight several times lost, and recovered.

The Contents of the Chapters of the first Book of the PERSIAN War.
CHAP. I. THe preamble of the Author, and of the Roman Archery then. CHAP. II.
Theodosius the second left to the protection of Isdegerdes, King of Persia. The
war of Vararanes, King of Persia, accorded by Anatolius; That neither build
fortifications upon the others frontier. Perozes, King of Persia, makes war
upon the Ephthalite Hunnes, and is beaten. CHAP. III. Perozes breaking his
oath, is destroyed in a pit with his 29. Sonns by the Ephthalites. Of a strange
pearl. His Son Cabades succeeds; is deposed for making women common by a Law:
and imprisoned in the tower of Oblivion. CHAP. IV. A digression of the breach
of the law of the tower of Oblivion once, and the tragical death of Arsaces
King of Armenia, in the reign of Pacurius. Cabades escapes by the means of
his wife and Seoses; Recovers the Kingdom by the aid of the Ephthalites. CHAP.
VI. Captains sent by Anastasius. By their negligence and disunion, the Romans
are overthrown. The plot upon Glones, Governor of Amida, and his killing. The
recovery of Amida for money. CHAP. VII. Anastasius refuses the Caspian gates
for the charge. The Persians take them, and maintain the Garrison against the
Hunnes. Anastasius builds Datas, and fortifies Theodosiopolis, contrary to the
accord with Anatolius. Justine is Emperor, whom Cabades would have to adopt
Chosroes. Photius the Quaestor opposes it. A treaty of peace without effect.
Stoses ungratefully ruined. CHAP. VIII. Cabades warring against the Iberians,
Christians; Their King flies into Lazica; And some Iberians to Constantinople.
Belisarius and Sittas invade Persarmenia. Justinian is Emperor alone. CHAP.
IX. Belisarius, General of the East, is Commander of the Army, with
Hermogenes. The duells of Andrew, master of a Wrestling School in
Constantinople, and his victories; Letters between Belisarius and Hermogenes,
and Mirranes the Persian General. CHAP. X. The battle of Daras, and the
overthrow of the Persians, by Belisarius and Hermogenes. CHAP. XI. A Persian
army under Mermeroes invades Armenia. The victory of Sittas against 30000.
Persians. Pharangium delivered to the Romans by Simeones, to get the Persians
gold mine there; And Bolus by Isaac a Persarmenian, brother to Narses and
Aratius, lately revolted to the Romans, Sittas subdues the Tzanians, a Nation
by Mount Taurus and Armenia. CHAP. XII. Expostulation of Cabades with Rufinus
the Roman Ambassador. The Persians invade the Romans hy Comagena, called
^uphratesia; ever formerly having invaded by Mesopotamia. The heads and courses
of the Euphrates and Tigris. The golden Comana in Cappadocia built by Orestes,
and the Temple of Diana in Tauri. CHAP. XIII. This invasion by Comagena, is by
the counsel of Alamundarus, a Saracen King, who persuades to set upon Syria
and Antioch: The description of Alamundarus. CHAP. XIV. Belisarius in Comagena
is overthrown by Azarethes, the Persian General. Cabades reviles Azarethes,
for his victory. The Persian custom to know their lost men by arrows in
baskets. CHAP. XV. Justinian would associate the Homerites, and Ethiopians
against the Persians. Of the red Sea; Country of Palme-trees. The Auxomites,
Blemmyes, Nobates, Ethiopian Nations. CHAP. XVI. A digression of some wars
between the Ethiopians, Christians, and the Homerits. Aspevedes, and Mermeroes
invade the Romans. Sittas defends. They besiege Martyropolis. CHAP. XVI.
Cabades dies. Chosroes his youngest Son succeeds by the help of Mebodes. The
siege of Martyropolis is raised. The perpetual peace is made Anno 6.
Justiniani; for which Justinian gives 110. Centenaries of gold. CHAP. XVIII. A
conspiracy against Chosroes by his brother Zames withone eye, who perishes in
the plot. The saving of young Cabades by Adergudunbades, is the cause of his
ruin. Mebodes, by Chosroes sent to the Tripos, and after slain. CHAP. XIX.
The Mutiny in Constantinople of the Veneti, and Prasini, called Nica,
suppressed by Belisarius. The character of John the Cappadocian, Prefect of the
Palace, and Tribonianus, the Quaestor. CHAP. XX. John the Cappadocian is ruined
by the plot of Antonina in the tenth year of his office. Is banished to
Cyzicum, made Priest; them absolutely undone, and sent to Antinoe in Egypt. And
about this time another John, usurping at Daras, is slain by the Soldiers.
THE HISTORY Of the Wars of the EMPEROVR JUSTINIAN, Written by Procopius of
CAESAREA.
Of the Persian Wars. The First Book.
CHAP. I.
PROCOPIUS of CAESAREA wrote the History of the wars that the Emperor
Justinian had with the Barbarians, both Eastern and Western, and what the
issue of them was; that the memory of so great Actions might not, through Tract
of Time, be buried in Oblivion, and lost to the Word; The preservation whereof
he conceived might be of very great use, both to those that are now living, and
to those that shall come after; in case that time should again bring about the
necessity of the like actions in any part of the World. For, the knowledge of a
like History, suiting with that of any other Age, is of great advantage to
those that shall have to do with any Wars; in that it informs, what the
success in the like former Actions has been, and intimates withal what issue
the present, (supposing the best Counsels being taken) in all probability
shall have. He was conscious also to himself, that He was the best able to
write this History; though for no other reason, yet because He was chosen to be
Assessor to Belisarius, the Emperors General, and so was present, in a
manner, at all that was done in these Wars.

He conceived further, that as Eloquence became an Orator, and Fables were
proper for Poets, so Truth was that an Historiographer ought chiefly to look
at. Therefore he spared not to note the Failings even of his nearest Friends,
but gave an exact Account of all their Actions, whether they were well, or ill
done. Neither will the Actions of any other Age appear either of more use, or
more Gallant, (to him that shall but duly consider them) then those that have
passed in these Wars; for in most of them, as we have been informed, almost
Miracles have been done. Unless a man will needs give the preeminence to
former Ages, and will not vouchsafe to allow his own to be able to do any
thing.

And therefore as in our Armies now we have some Archers, others Sword and
Buckler-men, and the like names of Soldiers that the Ancients had; yet will
not some allow any of the Ancient Prowess and Valor to have descended down to
our Age; showing herein how pitifully ignorant they are of the Practice of
those times. For they do not at all consider, that the Archers in Homer's time
(whose Profession grew to be a term of reproach) had neither Horse, nor
Javelin, nor Buckler, nor any thing else to defend themselves, but went on foot
into the field, and were forced to find shelter for themselves some other way,
sheltering themselves (instead of a Buckler) either behind some Tombstone, or
Pillar, where neither if they were put to flight, they could be safe; nor, if
their Enemies fled, could they do them any harm: Neither did they ever fight in
open field, but always, as it were, by stealth did, what ever they did.
Besides, the way of their Archery was so lamentable, as that drawing their
Bow-string to their breast, they so let their Arrow fly, which, in all
probability, could not do any execution at all, wheresoever it fell. And this
was the manner of the ancient Archery. But our Archers now adays go into the
field, armed with Habergeons, and Greaves that come up as high as their knees.
They have besides their Quiver of Arrows on their right side, and a Sword on
their left; and some of them have a Javelin also fastened about them, and a kind
of short Buckler, as it were, but without any handle, made fast to their
shoulders, which serves to defend their head and neck. They are also
excellently well horsed; and though their horses run never so fast, they can
with case shoot either way, and annoy their Enemies, either pursuing them, or
flying. Besides, they draw their Bow-string toward their Forehead, up to the
right Ear, which gives such force to the Arrow, that where it lights it kills,
no Shield nor Corslet being able to resist the violence. Some, considering none
of these things, only reverence and admire the old times, not allowing any
advantage to succeeding inventions. But all can be no impediment, but that in
these Wars great exploits, and most famous have been done. First therefore,
beginning a little higher, shall be declared, what happened between the Romans
and Persians, in reference both to their Victories and Losses in these Wars.

CHAP. II.
WHen the Roman Emperor Arcadius drew near his decease in Constantinople,
having a Son, Theodosius, not yet weaned from the breast: He was troubled both
for him, and his Empire, how to provide for both. If he should give Theodosius
a companion in the Empire, he feared in effect he might prove his Sons
Murderer, setting an Enemy upon him armed with sovereign power; and if he
should leave him alone in it, it was likely some taking advantage of his
desolate condition might usurp the Empire, and destroy him. In Constantinople
he had none of his blood to be his Protector; and in Honorius the Uncle, he had
no hope he could suffice for it; the Affairs of Italy being in so ill terms.
The Persians no less troubled him, lest despising the Emperors childhood, they
should ruin the Roman Provinces. Arcadius in this perplexity, though none of
the quickest Wits, yet lighted upon a Counsel which preserved him and his
State, whether it were by communication with Wisemen, which an Emperor cannot
want, or by divine Inspiration. For by his Testament he declared his Son his
Successor, and Isdegerdes, K. of Persia, his Protector; whom he besought with
his whole power and providence, to preserve both his Empire and Son. And thus
Arcadius having disposed of the Empire, and his private Affairs, Anno Domini
398.
died.

Isdegerdes, before renowned for Nobleness, now showed it more than ever, to
deserve wonder and praise: For not neglecting the Injunctions of Arcadius, he
kept perfect peace with the Romans, and preserved the Empire to Theodosius: by
his Letters to the Roman Senate accepting the Protectorship, and threatening War
against any that should rise against Theodosius: Who grown a man, and
Isdegerdes dead, Vararanes begin (...) in Anno Dom. 423.
Vararanes King of Persia invaded the Roman Territories with a great Army; but
did no hurt, returning in this manner. Anatolius was sent the Emperors
Ambassador to the Persian, who being come near the Army, leaped from his Horse,
and alone, and afoot, went toward Vararanes, who demanded of the company, who
this was; they said, it was the Roman General. The King amazed at the excessive
honor, turned his horse, and rode away, and after him his Army. Being in his
Country, he entertained the Ambassador with much courtesy, and yielded to the
terms of peace he desired, That neither should erect any new Fortification near
the others boders; which if it were done, gave either side opportunity of doing
what they pleased.

Afterward Perozes, King of Persia, Perozes began in Anno 457.
with a great Army warred against the Ephthalites (a Nation of Hunnes, called
white Hunnes) about their Boundaries. These Ephthalites are a Hunnish Nation,
but not mingled with other Hunnes, having no part of their Country bordering
upon them; their dwelling being to the North of Persia, where is a City called
Gorgo; and some skirmishing about bounds they have, being no (...), so called
because they have no fixed habitation, but move from place to place, carrying
their families in wagons, and driving their flocks and herds before them, as
the need of fresh pasture requires.
Creaghters, as other Hunnes; but are seated in a good Land; Neither make they
any Inroads into the Roman Territories, but only with the Persian Armies.
These only Hunnes have white bodies, and visages not uncomely; and their
course of life is not as of the rest, brutish; being under one King in a
lawful government, and dealing justly with themselves and neighbors, no less
than the Romans, or any other people. Their Rich men have each twenty or more
companions, to be their perpetual Camerades, and to partake in a community of
their goods. When any Principals die, the Retainers use to be put into the same
grave with them. Perozes invading these Ephthalites, Eusebius then Ambassador
from the Emperor Zeno was with him. The Ephthalites made show to be much
afraid, and betook themselves to flight, and with much have ran into a place
compassed with steep mountains, and covered with thickets; between the
mountains is a broad way, reaching far, with no way out, but still continuing
in the same circle. Perozes suspecting no fraud, nor considering he went in a
strange Country, pursued without looking before him; some few of them flying
before him, but the most hiding themselves in the Fastnesses, who now had the
back of the Enemy; and would not yet appear, that the Persians might be so far
engaged within their Ambushes, and the Mountains, that they should not be able
to retreat. Which the Persians apprehending (the danger now beginning to
appear) were silent for fear of Perozes, but they desired Eusebius to admonish
the King (who saw not the ill terms he was come to) rather to advise upon some
way to escape, than to hazard thus impertinently. Eusebius told not Perozes the
danger, but this tale; That a Lion once spyed a Goat bleating, and tied upon a
bank, and ran to make his dinner of him, but fell into a deep hole, which had
in it a round narrow path without any way out, framed purposely by the owners
of the Goat, which they set over it, to bait the Lion into a snare. Perozes at
this tale grew afraid, lest the Persians pursued their own mischief, and so
went no further, but called a Council what to do. The Hunnes now in sight, had
guarded the entrance, that none might go out. The Persians then clearly seeing
the disaster, lamented; no hope appearing to avoid the danger. The King of the
Ephthalites sent to reproach Perozes for his senseless rashness, in thus
foolishly ruining himself and his people; but promised the Hunnes should grant
them their lives, if Perozes would adore him (being now his Lord) and swear his
Country oath, that the Persians should no more invade the Ephthalites. Perozes
consulted with the Magi, whether these conditions were to be yielded to; Who
answered, that for the Oath he might do what he pleased, but in the other he
should delude the Enemy by a trick: They had a custom each morning to adore the
rising Sun; that he observing duly the hour, should meet the King of the
Ephthalites, with his face to the rising Sun, and so adore, avoiding by this
the disgrace. Perozes accordingly swore the peace, and adored his Enemy, and
then went home with his Army.

CHAP. III.
BUt not long after Perozes, neglecting his Oath, resolved to revenge this
scorn; and assembling from all his Dominions both Persians and Confederates, he
went against these Hunnes; of his thirty Sons leaving only Cabades behind him,
then grown a man. The Ephthalites hearing of it, and grieving to be so
deceived, reviled their King, for betraying their Affairs to the Persians. He
smiling, demanded, what Affairs he had betrayed? whether their Country, or
Arms, or Goods? They replied, Nothing, but our opportunity, upon which all
other things depend; urging him presently to go meet the Enemy. But the
refused, the Invasion being yet not certain, and the Persians still in their
own Country; and staying where he was, he did this. Upon a Plain, through which
the Persians were to enter his Country, he dug in a great space of ground a
deep pit, extreme broad, leaving in the middle a narrow passage, for ten Horse
a breast; over the pit he laid Reeds, and upon the Reeds Turfs, which concealed
the superficies: And he directed his people, running from the Enemy, to keep
close, and few in rank upon the firm ground, and to beware of the pit. On his
Royal Palace also he hung out his Halas, or Gods, by whom Perozes swore, and
breaking his Oath, invaded now the Hunnes. While the Enemy were in their own
Country, he stirred not, but hearing by his Scouts, they were come to Gorgo
(being in the utmost border of Persia) and marching toward him; himself with
most of his Army stayed short of the pit, sending out some to show themselves
upon the Plain at a good distance, and no sooner seen by the Enemy, but to
retreat amain, remembering the pit. They did so, and (at the pit going few in
rank) came clear to the Army. The Persians not imagining the plot, pursued
furiously upon full speed, it being in an open Plain, and so fell into the pit,
not only the foremost of them, but the rear also; for pursuing furiously, they
perceived not the mischief of those in the front, but falling on them with
Horses and Lances, killed them, and were destroyed for company. Among whom was
Perozes, and all his Sons. They say, being ready to fall into this pit, he took
a Pearl hanging at his ear, a most fair one, and of infinite value, and cast it
away, that none might hereafter wear so beautiful a Piece, as no King was ever
master of the like; but to me the report seems not probable, for one in such a
sudden distress to have his mind upon ought else. I rather think his car was
cut off, and the Pearl conveyed away. The Roman Emperor endeavored to buy it
of the Ephthalites, but they could not find it, though they took much pains in
the search. Some say, they found it, and sold another to Cabades for it. The
Persians story of this Pearl is remarkable, and not altogether incredible. They
report, that this Pearl lying in a Scallopfish, not far from the Seashore in
Persia, both the shells opened, and in the midst lay the Pearl, a most goodly
spectacle: No where was found any thing to resemble it in bigness, or beauty,
since the world was. Upon this beauty doted a huge fierce Dog-fish, following
without quitting it day or night: Being to seek his food he would hunt for it,
and having found it, snatch it up, and hastily devour it; then to his
Scallop-fish again, to fill himself with that beloved sight. Which a Fisherman
once observing, but fearing the Fish, he durst not venture on it, but made the
relation to King Perozes, who thereupon longed to have the Pearl, importuning
the Fisherman with fair words, and great hopes; and he yielding to the requests
of his Lord, is reported to have said to him; O my Liege, it is true, Wealth is
desirable, and life more; but above all a man's children are precious; for whose
sake nature forces a man to do any thing. I will venture upon this fish, and
hope to make you master of this Peal. If I come off victorious, it is likely I
shall be ranked among the happy men of the time. Doubtless you, being a King of
Kings, will bestow great wealth on me. And should I get no reward, it is enough
I have been my Prince's benefactor. If I be devoured, be it your part, Sir, to
recompense my children for their fathers death: So shall I have my reward in
those nearest to me; and your glory will be greater, doing good to me in my
children, for which I cannot give you thanks. That only is pure gratitude,
which is shown to the dead. Having thus said, he departed. Being at the place
where the Scallop used to swim, and the Dog-fish to follow, he sat upon a
Rock, watching to get the Pearl alone from her Lover. At last the Dog-fish
finding a fish for his repast, fell aboard. The Fisherman left those who
attended him, and making after the Scallop, caught it, and hasted to shore;
which the Dog-fish perceiving, came to the rescue: The Fisherman, though not
far from shore, finding he should be surprised, threw the Scallop on land, and
presently was caught and devoured. His attendants ashore took the Pearl, and
brought it to the King, relating what happened. Thus the Persians report of
this Pearl. But to return to my former discourse.

Perozes and his Army thus overthrown (for who escaped the pit, fell into the
enemies hand) the Persians made a Law; Not to follow the chase upon the full
speed, though the enemy run away in that kind. As for the rest, that went not
in this expedition, they chose for their King, Cabades began in Anno Domini 486.
Cabades, the yonggest Son of Perozes, only surviving. And they were under the
Ephthalites two years, and paid them tribute; until Cabades, more confirmed
in his kingdom, refused it: who afterward governed Tyrannically, and made
many Alterations, and a Law; That the Persians should have their women in
common: which the Commons misliked, and taking arns deposed him, and kept him
in prison, and chose Blasses King, the brother of Perozes, all his other Sons
being dead: For of a private race the Persians might not choose a King, if the
blood Royal were not quite extinct. Blasses succeeding, assembled the chief men
of Persia, and propounded in counsel touching Cabades, whom the multitude
would not endure to be put to death. Many several opinions being spoken,
Gusanastades, a principal man, and by Office a Chanaranges (which with them is
a General) who had his government bordering upon the Ephthalites, showing his
knife, such as the Persians use to pare their nails with, as long as a man's
finger, and the third part of an inch thick; See this knife, said he, a very
short one; yet can it do that now, which within a while twenty thousand armed
men will not be able: Intimating, that if they did not kill Cabades now, he
would get abroad, and trouble them again. But they thought it not fit to kill
one of the blood Royal, but rather to keep him in the Tower of Oblivion; where
if a man be imprisoned, it is not lawful to mention him; once to name him, is
death; from whence the Persians gave it that name.

CHAP. IV.
THe Armenian Histories report, that once this Law of the Tower of Oblivion was
broken, thus. There was a cruel War between the Persians and Armenians, for
thirty two years, in the Reigns of Pacurius King of Persia, and Arsaces King of
Armenia, of the race of the Arsacides. This war continuing, both were brought
low, especially the Armenians. But being both distrustful, neither sent
Heralds to his adversary. In the mean time the Persians fell into a war with
other Barbarians, inhabiting near the Armenians; who to make demonstration of
their affections to a peace, invaded those people, acquainting the Persians
therewith; and coming unexpected, slew most of their men. Pacurius pleased with
the proceeding, sent to invite Arsaces, giving him his faith. And being come,
he entertained him with much courtesy, and as a brother, used him with all
terms of equality: and having mutually sworn amity and confederacy between the
Persians and Armenians, he dismissed him. A while after, Arsaces was accused to
attempt innovations, and Pacurius believing it, again sent for him, to
communicate of their common affairs. He without delay went, and with him the
gallantest Armenians, and Basicius his chief Captain and Counselor, eminent
for valor and wisdom. Pacurius reproached them both, for forgetting their
Oath, and plotting a revolt. They denied constantly with oaths, never to have
any such thought. At first Pacurius, put them in hold with disgrace; but after
demanded of the Magi what was to be done. They thought it not fit to condemn
men denying, and not evidently convinced; but advised him a way, to bring
Arsaces openly to accuse himself. They directed the Kings Pavillion to be
floored with earth, half of Persia, and the other half of Armenia; and having
used some spel^ upon the Pavillion, they prayed the King to walk some turns
with Arsaces in their presence, to be witnesses of what passed, and to charge
Arsaces with violation of the league and his oath. Accordingly Pacurius sent
for Arsaces, and walked his turns with him in the pavillion, demanding, why
neglecting his oath, he sought again to ruin the Persians and Armenians with a
war. Arsaces (the conference being upon Persian earth) denied, and protested
himself his faithful servant: But when he came upon the Armenian ground,
suddenly, I know not upon what compulsion, he changes into a bolder style,
menacing Pacurius to punish this base usage. With these high terms he went,
till he turned again upon the Persian ground; where recanting, he became an
humble suppliant to Pacurius. But no sooner again upon Armenian ground, but he
returned to his threats; and by turning thus often both ways, he concealed not
his secretest counsels. Upon this the Magi condemned him to have violated the
truce, and his oath. Pacurius caused Basicius to be stripped of his skin, and the
same filled with chaf to be hanged on a high tree. Arsaces he would not kill,
being of Royal blood, but imprisoned him in the Tower of Oblivion. Not long
after an Armenian, a favorite of Arsaces (who followed him this last journey
into Persia) accompanied the Persians in a war against some Barbarians, wherein
he demeaned himself valiantly, and was a great means of the victory. Whom
Pacurius bade demand what he pleased, and he should not fail of it. He demanded
only to do service to Arsaces one day he would make choice of. The King was
troubled to break a Law so ancient, but to keep his word, granted his request,
who by the Kings permission being in the Tower, adored Arsaces; and both
embracing each other, made a kind of sweet lamentation of their fortunes, with
much ado untwining themselves. Having had their fill of mourning, the Armenian
bathed Arsaces, dressed him, and put on him the Royal habit, and placed him upon
a couch; where Arsaces feasted the company Princely, as he used before. Many
discourses past in their cups, and things happened delighting Arsaces; and the
drinking lasting till night, and much joying in each others company, they
parted overwhelmed with contentment. Then they report that Arsaces said; That
having spent this the merriest day he ever had, with him he loved most, he
would no more return to the miseries of life, and then he stabbed himself with
a knife purposely taken up at the Feast. Thus the Armenian Histories relate of
Arsaces, and that Law of the Tower of Oblivion so broken. But to return to my
matter.

While Cabades was in prison, his Wife attended on him, bringing him
necessaries, whom the Captain of the Tower tempted, being exceeding beautiful.
Which Cabades understanding from her, bade her yield to him. And the Captain
getting her to his bed, became doting in love with her; giving her free access
to her Husband, and to retire without impediment. There was also a Nobleman
named Seoses, a great friend of Cabades, who watched near the Tower for an
opportunity to get Cabades out; who by his Wife advertised him of horses and
men ready for him not far from the prison, and In what place. Cabades persuaded
his Wife to let him have her garments, and to put on his, and stay in his
lodging. So Cabades got clear of the prison, the Keepers seeing him, but taking
him for his Wife, and so they neither stayed, nor troubled him. In the morning
finding the Wife in the Husbands chamber and apparel, they took her for him;
and the mistaking prevailed some days, till Cabades was got far away. What
became of the Lady, (the plot being discovered) and how they punished her, I
have no certainty, the Persians therein not agreeing. But Cabades secretly with
Seoses went to the Ephthalite Hunnes, and marrying their Kings daughter,
brought an Army against the Persians; who finding themselves too weak, fled
from the Hunns. Cabades coming where Gusanastades was Governor, said to some,
that that Persian, which that day first came to offer his service, he would
make Chanaranges. But he repented him of his words, remembering the Persian Law,
for no Government to be conferred upon strangers in blood; but such only to
have the place, to whose race it did belong; and he feared, if any presented
himself not of the kindred of the Chanaranges, that to keep his word he might
violate the Law. But by chance his word was kept without injury to the Law;
Adergudunbades appearing first, a young man, cosen to Gusanastades, and very
expert in Martial affairs; who first saluted Cabades his Lord, adored him as
King, and besought him to command him as his slave. *So Cabades entering the
Palace, and finding Blases unguarded, put out his eyes, Cabades restored began
Anno Domini 501.
as the Persians use to malefactors (pouring into them, being kept wide open,
boiling oil; or with a bodkin red hot melting an ointment into the inside of
the eye) and ever after kept him in prison, after two years reigning
Gusanastades he put to death, and made Adergudunbades General. Seoses he made
the Adrasta-daras Salanes; that is, Superintendant over all Offices and Armies;
an office first held by Seoses in Persia; None before nor after ever had it.
Cabades also established and secured his Empire, being witty and valiant, no
man more.

CHAP. V.
AFfterward Cabades became in debt to the King of the Ephthalites, which not
being able to pay, he prayed the Emperor Anastasius to lend him the money. The
Emperor consulting with some about him, they dissuaded him from it; showing
what the inconvenience would be, if he should confirm with his money the
Barbarians friendship among themselves; telling him withal. It were better for
him they should ever clash with one another. * Upon this pretense only,
Cabades resolved to invad^ the Romans; This War began in Anno Dom. 503.
and into Armenia he brought the first news himself with an Army, forraging the
Country. Then, though in the Winter, he sat down before Amida, a City of
Mesopotamia. The Amidenses, though having no Garrison (as having lived before
peaceably and quietly) and wanting all manner of provision, yet stood out
against the dangers and inconveniences of the Siege. At that time one James, a
Syrian, a just, and a very religious man, had for many years been a Recluse at
Endielon, a Town distant from Amida a days journey, that so he might not be
interrupted in his godly contemplations: And the neighbors, to help his good
intent, had pitched a pale about him, with spaces wide enough only to see, and
confer with such as came to him; and a roof over him to keep off rain and
snow. And there he had long continued, not yielding to heats nor colds, and
feeding on roots, and on them not every day, but fasting sometimes a good while
together. Some Ephthalites scouring the Country, espied this James, offered to
shoot at him; but their hands suddenly benumbed, could not draw their bows.
Cabades, hearing the report of it in the Camp, would be an eyewitness of the
miracle; and seeing it, was astonished, and all the Persians with him: he humbly
therefore besought James to remit his men's offense; which he doing at the first
word, they were instantly freed of their fears. Cabades then bade him demand
something, thinking he would have asked some great sum. But he prayed him only
to bestow on him such men, as in this war should come to him for protection:
Which Cabades granted, and left him Letters for their assurance. And it being
divulged, many from all parts came, and were preserved.

But Cabades with his Rams battered Amida on every side, the defendants
avoiding the stroke of the Engine with cross beams: And he gave not over, till
he found the wall that way impregnable; as not falling, nor so much as shaking
at so many strokes: So strong their buildings were in ancient times. Failing
therefore this way, he raised a Mount, so high that it commanded the wall. To
which the defendants drew a Mine from the Town, and by carrying out the earth
from within the Mount, made it hollow, the outside keeping the form it had,
giving no suspicion of any thing to the Enemy. The Persians mounted it,
thinking as upon firm ground to shoot into the Town; But company pressing in,
the Mount sunk, and almost all perished. Cabades, at this despairing, resolved
to raise the siege, commanding the Army the next day to retire. But the
Townsmen now secure, flouted the Barbarians from their walls; and some common
women drew up their clothes, showing Cabades the parts which should not be seen
by men. Upon this the Magi forbade his retreat, assuring the King that ere long
the Amidenses would show him all their secret and hidden things: So the Camp
lay still. Some days after, a Persian found near one of the Turrets the mouth
of an old Vault, only with a few small stones covering it. He entered it a
lone in the night, and got within the wall, and when 'twas day, came and told
it Cabades; who the next night went with some of his Army, and scaling ladders
to the place: where he had a favorable chance. The said Turret was guarded by
Monks (the strictest kind of Christians) who that day observed an Annual Feast,
and at night wearied in their solemn assembly, having taken a greater
proportion of meat and drink than usual, they perceived not the Enemy; who
entering the Town by few at a time, ascended the Turret, and killed the Monks
being fast asleep. Then Cabades set scaling ladders to the wall next the
Turret; and day appearing, the Amidenses, who guarded the next Turret,
perceiving their danger, came hastily to the rescue. Where after a hot conflict
on both sides, at last they got the better, killed many of the men already come
up, kept off those upon the ladders, and were very near quit of the danger. But
Cabades drawing his Cimeter, forced his men up the ladders, threatening death to
the comers down: And so having much the advantage in numbers, they got the
better, and took the Town after eighty days siege. Much slaughter was done,
till Cabades riding into the Town, an old Priest of Amida came to him, and told
him; That it was not Kingly to kill men that were at his mercy. Cabades yet
angry, answered, Why then would they stand out against me? Because, Sir
(replied the Priest) God would give you Amida, not by our wills, but your own
valor. Cabades pleased with this reply, suffered no more execution to be done,
but bad the Persians sack the City, and take prisoners, selecting the
principal for himself. Then leaving a thousand Persians in garrison, under one
Glones, and some few wretched Citizens to serve them in their necessaries, with
the rest of his army and prisoners he went home. To these prisoners Cabades
used a princely courtesy; he let them all go home free, and gave out they ran
away. The Emperor Anastasius also dealt liberally with them, remitting the
Cities tribute for seven years, and destowing many benefits upon their City in
public* and on particular men; so that they soon forgot their miseries. But
this was afterward.

CHAP. VI.
BUt Anastasius hearing of the siege of Amida, immediately sent forth an Army
against the Enemy: In which, besides the Commanders of companies, were
Generals, Areobindus (who married the daughter of Olybrius, late Emperor of
the West) General of the East; and Celer, Commander of the Palatine Cohorts,
called by the Romans Magister; and the two Generals of the Legions in
Constantinople, Patritius the Phrygian, and Hypatius the Emperors Sisters Son.
These were the four Generals; and with them went also Justine, who was Emperor
after Anastasius, and Patriciolus, with Vitalianus his son, who afterward
rebelled against Anastasius; and Paresmanes of Colchis, an excellent good
soldier, with Godidasclus and Sbesas, Goths, who followed not Theodorick into
Italy out of Thrace, both gallant men, and expert Soldiers: others followed of
the best. So brave an Army went not against the Persians before it, nor since.
They marched not together: Every General led his own forces. The Prefect, or
Commissary of Provision for the Army, was Appion an Egyptian, a principal
Patrician, and valiant, whom the Emperor declared his partner in the Empire by
a Patent, that he might have absolute authority in the expense of the army:
which being long in levying, and marching but slowly, found the Persians, after
this cursory invasion, gone home with their spoils. The Generals would not
besiege Amida, hearing it to be abundantly provided with all necessaries; but
were earnest to make an impression into the Enemies Country. And they marched
not in one body, but encamped severally. Cabades being near, and knowing this,
entered the Roman borders. They, not informed of his being there with his whole
army, supposed it to be some small party. Areobindus encamped in a town called
Arzamene; being distant two days journey from the City of Constantina. And
Patricius and Hypatius in a town called Siphris, about 44 miles distant from
Amida. Celer was not yet come up to them. But Areobindus hea^ing Cabades came
with his whole army, quitted his camp, and ran to Constantina. The Author
reckons by furlongs; and says here 350 furlongs. An Italian mile contains 8
furlongs.
The Enemy took the camp and baggage, but no men in it; and from thence with
speed marched to the other. But Patricius and Hypatius, having met eight hundred
Ephthalites marching before the Persian army, had killed them all; and not
dreaming of the army with Cabades, were passing their time merrily like
Conquerors, laying down their arms and preparing for dinner. And they were
washing their meat in the brook there, and some troubled with heat were
bathing, which made the water run foul. Cabades having heard the fortune of his
Ephthalites, marched apace toward the Enemy, and by the thickning of the brook
guest at the matter, and that the enemy was unprepared. So commanding to drive
on with full speed, suddenly he surprised them at dinner, and unarmed. The
Romans not able to abide their charge, ran away without striking stroke. Some
were overtaken and slain, others fled to the Mountain there, and for fear leapt
down the rocks, not one of them escaping. Bat Cabades fearing his enemies, the
Hunnes, who now invaded his country, went home with his whole Army, and had a
long war with them on the Northern borders thereof. In the mean time the other
Roman army came, but did nothing, having no Commander in chief, and the
Generals with their equality of power ever crossing one another opinions.
Celer past the river Nymphius, and invaded Arzamene, (This river runs by
Martyropolis, and is distant from Amida thirty five miles) and having forraged
the country, soon went home. Areobindus, the Emperor sent for to
Constantinople, and the others sat down before Amida in the winter. Who
failing in their endeavors to force the place, resolved to take it by famine:
And the besieged then wanted provisions; but the Generals not knowing it, and
seeing the soldier weary of a winter siege; imagining also, the Persian army
would ere long come against them, they made have in some way to rise from
thence. And the Persians also doubtful in these difficulties, though they
concealed their wants, and made show of plenty, yet gladly they would make a
handsome retreat. In the end a capitulation was made, for the Persians to have
a Are ten Centenaries of gold. If there be but ten ounces and a half to the
Roman pound; then is a Centenary 3150. l. sterling And 10 Centenaries here
31500. l. sterling.
thousand pound weight of Gold, and so to render the City. The articles were
performed, and the Son of Glones receiving the money, gave up Amida. For Glones
himself was slain in this manner. The Romans being not yet set down before
Amida, but not far from it, a peasant who frequented the City, and used
secretly to sell to Glones at great rates, poultery, bread, and ripe fruits,
promised the General Patricius for reward to put Glones and two hundred
Persians into his hands. He promised him his demand, and sent him away. The man
rent his garments, and came weeping into the town; went to Glones; and tearing
his hair, My Lord, quoth he, I was bringing you of my best provisions; but I
was met, beaten, and had all taken from me, by these rogues whose custom it is
to rob the poor peasants (being old Roman soldiers) rambling in small parties;
and who fly before the Persians, and robb the poor Countryman. Thinck Sir I
how you may avenge us and the Persians. It is but hunting without the suburbs,
and you will find good game: For they go prolling about not above four of five
in a company. Glones asked, how many would suffice for the business; He said
fifty was enough, being to meet not above five together; but whatsoever should
happen, it would be good to have 100. and if it were 200. 'twere the better;
Store hurts no man. Glones chose 200. horse, and bad the man guide them. But he
said, 'twas better, to send him before to discover these Roman free booters,
and to bring the Persians word, who then might take their best orportunity.
Glones approved of his counsel; and then he went to the General Patricius,
and acquainted him with all the proceedings, who sent 1000. Soldiers, and two
of his own Lifeguard with him. These he laid in ambush, near a village called
Thialasamum, five miles from Amida, within a valley of coppices and bushes. Then
he ran, and told Glones, his game was ready, and guided him and his 200. men
into the enemies ambush. Being past a good space within it, unseen by Glones or
his Company, he ran and called up the Romans ambush, and showed them the enemy.
The Persians seeing them, were amazed at the sudden accident; Retire they could
not (the enemy having their backs) nor being in an enemies Country knew any
other way to run. As they could therefore, they put in order to receave the
assailants, but overmatcht in numbers were broken, and all killed with Glones,
which vexed his Son, that he could not stay to revenge his Fathers death, so
that he burnt the Church of St. Simeon, where he lodged. Other buildings
neither Glones, nor Cabades, nor any Persian, destroyed nor defaced in Amida,
nor without it.

But to return to my former discourse. Thus the Romans recovered Amida for
money, two years after the taking. Being within it, their own negligence
appeared, and the Persians abstemiousness, finding, by comparing the quantitity
of the victual left, and the Barbarians that went out, not above seven days
provision remaining, though Glones and his son had long issued it out to the
Persians more scarcely, then need could well endure; and to the Romans in the
Town nothing, from the beginning of the siege; So that they were forced to eat
unusual food, and abominable, and at last one another. The Generals, finding
themselves thus deceaved by the Barbarians, reproached the Soldiers
intemperance, and disobedience, who having it in their power to take the Town
with all the Persians in it at mercy, had dishonorably transported the Roman
treasure to Barbarians, and gotten Amida, as a merchandise for money. Afterward
the Persians (their war with the Hunnes growing long) made a Truce with the
Romans for seven years, concluded by Celer the Roman General, and Aspevedes
for the Persian. Thus I have told the beginning and conclusion of these wars
with the Persians.

CHAP. VII.
BUt what happened concerning the Caspian Gates I will now relate. Mount Taurus
of Cilicia passes first by Cappadocia; then Armenia, and Persarmenia, and then
Albania and Iberia, and the other nations that way, free, or subject to the
Persians, extending thus through many Countries, and the further it goes,
growing to a greater breadth and height. Beyond Iberie, you come to a narrow
way, reaching some six miles, and ending at a steep place unpassable; where for
the way out, nature has built a kind of Gate, anciently called the Caspian
gates, or streights. Beyond which are fair champions well watered, and large
plains for horse pastures; where are seated the nations of the Hunnes, and
extend to the Lake of Maeotis, who passing by the streights in their inroads
into Roman or Persian provinces, come with their horses lusty, going not
about, nor nor being engaged in ragged Countries, save only those six miles
into Iberia; whereas by other passages they arrive with much toil, and cannot
make use of the same horses, having been forced to many circuits and craggie
ways: which Ala^^nder the great considering, built Gates indeed there, and by
them a Fort; which through many owners, at last came to Ambazuces a Hunne, a
friend of the Emperor Anastasius. This man grown old, and near his end,
offered Anastasius for money to put the Romans in possession of the Caspian
Gates, and the Fort. But the Emperor (who used not to do things unadvisedly)
considering that it was not possible to maintain a garrison in that place,
wanting all commodities, and having no nation near it subject to the Romans, he
thanckt the man much for his good will, but would not meddle with the thing.
Ambazuces soon after died, and Cabades forcing out his sons, possessed
himself of the Gates. Anastasius also, after the truce with Cabades, at a
place called Daras, built a very strong City, and named it then Anastasia,
being distant from Nisibis about twelve miles, and from the Persian frontier
three miles and a half at most. This building the Persian desiring to hinder,
could not, having his hands full with the Hunnes. But having dispatched that
war, he expostulated with the Romans for this building so near his confines,
and contrary to the Articles of Peace. Anastasius, partly threatening, partly
pretending friendship, and with large presents, put it off. Another City also
this Emperor built upon the frontier of Persarmema, which had been before a
village, and from Theodosius his name was called Theodosia. But Anastasius
compassed it with a strong wall, which no less then the other troubled the
Persians, being both as Rampires upon his Country. Not long after Anastasius
deceasing, Justine succeeded in the Empire, the others kindred being rejected,
though many of them very eminent men.

Cabades was also troubled, fearing innovation upon his house after his
decease; For upon his Sons he could not transfer the Kingdom, without some
question. His eldest, Caoses, the law invited, but him he could not abide; the
fathers opinion therein overruling nature, and the ancient Laws. His second
Son Zames, having lost an eye, the Law excluded, prohibiting to make a King
having but one eye, or any other maime. But Chosroes, borne of the sister of
Aspevedes, he chiefly affected. But seeing the Persians admire the valor of
Zames, as being a good Soldier, and a favourer of virtue, he feared least
taking arms against Chosroes, they might ruin his house, and Kingdom.
Hereupon he resolved to make a peace with the Romans, by procuring his Son
Chosroes to be adopted by the Emperor Justine; which he conceaved the only
way to preserve the security of his Empire. To this purpose he dispatched
Ambassadors to Constantinople, with letters to Justine, to this purpose. Your
self know, that the Romans have done us wrongs, which I am resolved not to
urge; knowing that those in reason ought to have the Victory, He was Son of
Vigilantia, sister of Justine, by a very obscure man, one Sabatius, and
Illyrian. This Quaestor, or Assessor Imperatoris diclated all Laws and Edicts,
and subscribed them. Which war warrant to the Praesectus Praetorio to publish
them. He judged a p^ales to the Emperors person; and in sum had the care of
the whole Empire committed to him. vid. Notitiam utriusque Imperij.
who having the right on their side, are yet willingly put to the worst, to
gratisie their friends. But for this I must demand a favor, which binding our
selves, and subjects by kindred, and the consequent thereof, good affection,
may for ever settle to us the blessings of peace. It is that you would adopt my
Son Chosroes, who is to succeed me in my Kingdom, for your Son. Justine was
glad at the proposition, and so was Justinian, his sisters son, and successor
designed, urging the speedy perfection, and drawing up of the adoption after
the Roman form. But Proclus crossed it: who was assessor to the Emperor (the
Romans call this officer, Quaestor) and a known just man, not to be bribed,
nor hastily passing Edicts, or altring things settled: He opposing it, spoke
thus. I use not to meddle with novelties, which of all things I fear most
knowing that they cannot possibly stand with safety. But were I a very daring
man, I think I should shrinck and tremble at the storm that is to be expected
from this Act. For I cannot conceave any thing now in consulation, but with a
fair pretense to betray our State to the Persians; who in plain words,
without disguising, or modeslie, pray us to let them take our Empire from us;
covering their gross deceit with simplicity, and their impudent proposition
with a pretended desire of quietness. But you both had need to oppose this
design of the Barbarians, to the utmost of your power; you Sir I least you
prove the last Roman Emperor; and you the General, least you block up your own
way to the Empire. Some tricks coverel with fair pretenses, need an
interpreter to the common sort. But this Embassage bluntly, at first dash, will
have this Chosroes heir to the Roman Emperor. Consider it thus, I pray. By
nature is due to children their fathers estates: All Laws, though differing in
other things, do yet in this agree, both among Romans, and Barbarians, that
children are to inherit their fathers estates. So that yiedling to this their
first request, the rest you must consequently grant. The Emperor and his
Nephew approved this speech, consulting what was to be done. In the mean time
came other letters from Cabades to Justine, to send to him men of experience,
for concluding of a peace, and to signify the form that was to be observed in
the adoption. Upon this Proclus more eagerly opposed the Persians proposal,
and urged that they should rather adopt to themselves the Roman power and
dominion; declaring his opinion, that it was fit they, as speedily as might be,
should conclude a peace; and withal that some chief men should be sent; who
being demanded by Cabades, in what manner the adoption should be, should
answer, as is fit for a Barbarian; For the Barbarians adopt sons, not by
writings, but by arming them. Accordingly Ambassadors were sent by Justine, and
promise of some greater men to follow, for consummating all touching the peace,
and Chosroes. There were therefore shortly after sent Hypatius a patrician,
Nephew to the late Emperor Anastasius, and General of the East; and Rufinus,
son of Silvanus, a principal patrician, and one well known to Cabades. From
the Persians came Seoses, their most powerful man, who had the chief power
over all armies and offices; and with him Mebodes, who was Master of the Palace
in Persia. These meeting upon the frontier, treated concerning an according of
the differences, and concluding a peace. And Chosroes came down to the Tigris,
two days journey from Nisibis, that the peace being concluded, he might go to
Constantinople. Many discourses past about their differences; and Seoses
alleged, that Colchis, now called Lazica, anciently belonged to the Persians,
and that the Romans held it from them unjustly. The Romans took it very ill
that their title to Lazica should be questioned; But when they said, that the
Adoption must be performed in a form fit for a Barbarian, the Persians thought
this insufferable. So both broke off, and they severally went home. And
Chosroes returned to his father, vowing to revenge this scorn upon the Romans.

Mebodes afterward accused Seoses for mentioning Lazica without their Master
direction, purposely to break the Treaty, and for communicating therein first
with Hypatius, who bare the King least affection, and crossed the conclusion of
the Peace, and the Adoption. Seoses being charged by his Enemies with many
other things, was called to a judicial trial before the Persian Senate, who
were all displeased with his new Office, and offended at his behavior. He was
a man free from corruption, and very just; but extremely arrogant. Which,
though a vice natural to the great Officers of Persia, yet in Seoses,
themselves thought it to reign in extremity. His accusers charged him with the
matters before mentioned; and for not contenting himself with the ancient
customs of the Persians, worshipping new Gods; and that lately he had buried
his Wife; the Persian Laws prohibiting the burying of dead bodies in the earth.
So the Judges condemned him to dye. And Cabades seemed to grieve as for a
friend, but would not pardon him; professing that he was not offended with him,
but he must not infringe the Laws: And yet he owed his life Seoses, who was the
chiefest cause of his living and reigning; and being thus condemned, he was put
to death. His office as it began so it ended with him, none after him having
ever the like General power over all offices and armies. Rufinus also accused
Hypatius to the Emperor, who upon it discharged him of his Office; but after
torturing some about him, he found no truth in the accusation, and so did no
other harm to him.

CHAP. VIII.
CAbades then desired to invade the Romans, but found this impediment. The
Iberians of Asia, who are seated by the Caspian Gates to the Southward, have
next them to the West, Lazica, and to the East, part of Persia. This people are
Christians, as devout as any, and have always been subject to the King of
Persia. These Cabades would enforce to his Religion, writing to their King
Gurgents to do all things as the Persians did, and not to bury their dead
bodies in the earth, but to throw them out to the dogs and birds. Whereupon
Gurgenes revolted to the Emperor Justine, requesting assurance of him, that he
should not leave him to the mercy of the Persians. Which he granted willingly,
and sent Probus, Sisters son to the late Emperor Anastasius, a Patritian, with
money to raise an army of Hunnes for his aid, to Bosporus, a Maritime City
lying on the left hand as you sail toward the Euxine Sea, 20 days journey
distant from Cherson, which is the farthest Roman City that way; all between
being possessed by Hunnes. These Bosporians were formerly a free people, but
lately they submitted to the Emperor Justine. But Probus returning without
doing any thing, the Emperor sent Peter General into Lazica, with some Hunnes
to aid Gurgenes. And at t^^ same time Cabades sent an army against Gurgenes and
the Iberians, under Boes a Persian, his General. But Gurgenes finding himself
too weak for the Persian, and the Roman succors not competent, fled into
Lazica with his wife and children, and chief men of Iberia, and his brothers,
whereof Peranius was the eldest: and in the confines of Lazica stayed,
fortifying in the fastnesses against the Enemy: Which hindered the Persians that
pursued them, from doing any thing to purpose. Afterward some Iberians came to
Constantinople, and Peter was remanded home. The Lazians also refusing to help
to guard the Province, the Emperor sent an army commanded by Irenaeus.
Formerly the guard of two Forts at the entrance of Lazica from Iberia was
carefully maintained by the Provincials, though enduring much: For no Corn nor
Wine grows near, nor other commodity; nor for the fastnesses can be brought
thither, but upon men's backs; and they lived (being used to it) upon Panicum,
or Mill-seed, there growing. But the Emperor taking thence those Warders, put
Roman Garrisons to keep the places; whom at first the Lazians supplied with
provisions, though hardly; but after refused the service, and the Romans
abandoned the Forts, which the Persians seized on.

In the mean time, the Romans led by Sittas and Belisarius, invaded
Persarmenia, and having forraged much country, and taken many prisoners, they
retired. They were youths then, their beards first springing, and Lanciers of
the guard to Justinian the chief General, who soon after held the Empire with
his Uncle Justine. In another inroad into Armenia by Sittas and Belisarius,
they were suddenly met, and put to the worst by Narses and Aratius, who not
long after revolted to the Romans, and served under Belisarius in Italy.
Licelarius also a Thracian invaded about Nisibis with another Army of Romans,
who retreated running away, and none charging them. Whereupon the Emperor
discharged Licelarius, and gave Belisarius the command of the forces in Daras:
And then was Procopius the Writer of this history chosen his Consellour. Anno
Dom. 527. Justiniani 1. who was declared Emperor with Justine on good friday
being then the first of April, Anno Dom. 527. And Justine died the first of
August after. See Alemannus Historical notes page 43.
Shortly after Justine died, having before declared Justinian his Sisters Son
Emperor with him. Justinian being sole Emperor; directed Belisarius, to build
a Fort at Mindon, upon the confines of Persia, on the left hand of the way to
Nisibis: who having raised it to a good height, the Persians sent to forbid
him, threatening to hinder it, not with words only, but deeds. The Emperor
hereof informed, and how Belisarius was not able with the Forces he had, to
beat off the Persians; he commanded Cutzes and Buzes, Captains of the Forces
in This was one of the fifteen Provinces subordinate to the Governor of the
Orient: And these were there Duces limitanei; The Country bordering with
Arabia, and the Saracens.
Phoenicia Libani, to repair thither with another Army. These were Thracians,
and brethren, young men, and rash in their encounters; They marched together to
the building; where the Persians hindered, and the Romans assisted the workmen,
all they could. In the fight the Romans had the worst, and lost many men;
Cutzes and some other were taken: whom the Persians shut up in a cave
perpetual prisoners; and no Forces defending the building, they cast it down.
Anno Domini. 528.
Justiniani 2.


CHAP. IX.
AFterward Justinian made Belisarius General of the East, and directed him to
make an expedition against Persia: who levying an Army of good importance, came
to Daras. With him was joined in the command, Hermogenes, Captain of the
Emperors Guard, and sometime Quaestor to Vitalianus, when he rebelled against
the Emperor Anastasius. Rusinus also he sent his Ambassador, with direction to
stay at Hierapolis upon the Euphrates, till he should signify his pleasure,
there being some discourses on both sides for a peace. But Belisarius and
Hermogenes had news, that a Persian invasion was feared, to take Daras.
Whereupon they provided to sight, in this manner. Near to the gate toward
Nisibis, a stones cast off, they drew a deep trench, with many passages through
it; not dig'd in a right line, but thus. In the midst was a short Line: on
either end whereof went out two straight horn-works, and from both ends of the
horn-works, the trenches ran in right lines a great space of ground. The
Persians soon after came with their army, and encamped at Amodis, a Village two
miles and a half from Daras, where were Pituazes and Baresmanas with one eye,
and other Commanders; the General of the whole Army being Perozes, by office a
Mirranes, so called in Persia, who sent to command Belisarius, to make ready
the bath, for the next day he meant to bathe in Daras. The Romans upon this
provided strongly for the encounter, as being the next day to fight. The Sun
up, and seeing the enemy come on, they put in order of battle, thus. The
farthest point of their left hand Line, which ran from the horn-work there, to
a hillock, Buzes possessed with store of Horse, and Pharas the Herulian with
three hundred of his Countrymen. To the right hand of these, on the outside of
the trench, in the Angle made by the Line and the horn-work, stood Sunica^, and
Augan, by birth Massagets, with 600 Horse; that if Buzes and Pharas should be
routed, they wheeling about, and getting the backs of the enemy, might readily
second the Romans on that side. On the other hand they were embattel'd in the
same manner: The point of the Line that way was made good with store of Horse,
commanded by John the son of Nicetas, Cyrillus, Marcellus, Germanus, and
Dorotheus; and at the right hand angle were placed 600 Horse, commanded by
Simas and Ascan, Massagetes; who were likewise (if John should be routed) to
fall on from thence, upon the backs of the enemy. All about the trench stood
the rest of the Horse, and the Infantery; behind whom toward the middle, stood
Belisarius and Hermogenes. Thus were the Romans ordered, amounting to 25000;
the Persian being 40000 Horse and Foot. They stood both in rank (their Fronts
against each other) striving to make it as deep, as might be. Neither began the
fight; but the Persians seemed to wonder at the Romans order, musing what they
would do. Toward evening some Horse from their right wing charged the Troops
of Buzes and Pharas; who retreating fair and softly, the Persians did not
pursue them, but stood still; fearing to be compast by the Enemy. The retiring
Romans then of a sudden charged them; who staid it not, but gallopt home to
the Batallion; and Buzes and Pharas put themselves into the same place and
order again. Seven Persians in this encounter were slain, whose bodies the
Romans carried off. As their battles stood thus, a young man, a Persian,
spurred up to the Roman army, challenging any to fight with him. No man daring
to undertake him; one Andrew, a follower of Buzes, no soldier, nor trained to
the wars, but the master of a Wrestling school in Constantinople, and following
the army to attend Buzes in the bath, being a Constantinopolitan born, without
provocation by Buzes, or any other, adventured the combat. And the Barbarian
looking about him which way to assault him, Andrew prevented, and with his
Lance hit him on the right pap, so strong a blow, that the Persian fell from
his horse, and Andrew, as he lay, with a short knife cut his throat. At which,
from the Town-wall, and the Roman army was a huge shout. But the Persians being
grieved at it, sent out another horsman, valiant, and very tall, no youth, but
with some gray hairs. Who approaching the Romans, and slashing with his whip
often, made his challenge also. None presenting themselves, Andrew, though
prohibited by Hermogenes, stole into the field; and both with their Lances made
a furious charge. Their Lances broke upon their Corslets; and their horses
heads meeting, down they fell with their riders; both falling near each other.
And striving to rise, the Persians heavy body could not so easily: But Andrew
by the advantage of his practice in the Wrestling school, first got up, and
struck the other as he was upon one knee, and having him down killed him. Upon
which a greater shout than before was made from the town and Roman army; and
the Persians loosing their bataillion, retired within their trenches, it
growing dark. The next day came 10000 men from Nisibis to the Persians. But
Belisarius and Hermogenes wrote this Letter to Mirranes.

All men confess peace to be the chiefest of blessings, and consequently a
Peacebreaker to be guilty of his own and other men's mischiefs. So that that
General is best, who is apt to end awar in a peace; whereas you bring a
causless war upon us, while all stands well between the Persians and us, and
our Princes are consulting upon terms of peace, and our Ambassadors near at
hand to accord all differences, if some desperate effect of this your invasion
choke not our hopes. Draw home your Army therefore, and be not an obstacle to
so great a blessing, least you prove author of the mischiefs likely to fall on
your own Nation. To these Letters Mirranes returned this answer.

I should be persuaded by your letters to do what you desire, if it were not a
Letter from Romans; who can easily promise, but their performance is not to be
hoped; though you confirm your agreements with oath. So that tired with your
deceipts, we are forced to come armed; and expect nothing, my dear Romans!
now, but war with us. For here will we die, or grow gray, till you have done us
right. Belisarius wrote again unto him.

Good Mirranes! you must not humor your own arrogance, nor lay false
imputations upon others; we have said it, and truly, that Rufinus is coming in
Embassage, and not far hence: Which shortly your self will know. But since
you desire war, with Gods help we shall oppose you; who will assist our
peaceableness, against your arrogance; who being by us invited to peace, reject
it. The Letters we have written both, we shall hang up upon our Ensigns in the
battle. Mirranes to this replies again.

Neither are we entered into this war without Gods; but with them shall come
upon you; who we hope to morrow will put us in possession of Daras. Let there
be made ready therefore for me the best bath in the town. Belisarius then
prepared for the battle.

CHAP. X.
ANd the next day, Mirranes about Sun rising, calling his Soldiers, made a
speech to them; That he knew Persians in dangers, not to take their courage
from their Captains orations, but from their own virtue, and awe of one
another. But seeing them dispute, how the Romans, not using without tumult and
disorder to come to fight, received the Persians now with an order so little
belonging to them: Least upon a false conceit they should commit error, he
warned them, not to suppose the Romans upon the sudden grown more valiant,
and expert Soldiers, but rather cowards more then ever; being so afraid of
Persians, that they dare not embattle without making a trench to defend them;
nor with it begin a fight, but are glad, and thinck their business spedd above
their hopes, if they are able to retire to their walls, the Persians not
charging them: Hence were they in no disorder, not coming to the hazard of a
battle. But if the fight come to handy blows, then their cowardice and want of
experience will put them into their wonted disorder. And for themselves he bad
them have their thoughts upon the judgment of their King of Kings, expecting a
base punishment, if they do not now fight as becomes the valor of Persians.

Mirranes having thus encouraged his Soldiers, led on against the enemy.
Belisarius also and Hermogenes, drawing out their troops from their trench;
exhorted them to consider by the former fight, that the Persians are not
invincible, nor immortal; and that they were beaten by them formerly through
their own disobedience to their commanders, not by any advantage of valor or
strong bodies in the enemy. Which fault they may easily amend. Indeed the
crosses of fortune no industry can cure, but of a man's faults; his own will may
be the Physician. So that if they resolve to obey directions; the day will be
theirs: and the enemy failing in their only confidence, ( the Romans disorder)
will go off, as they did in the former encounter. And for the enemies nombers
(their greatesh scarecrow) he bad them despise it: Seeing their foot was
nothing else, but a multitude of miserable peasants, who come to the war only
to sap a wall, or riffle a dead body, and other things to serve the Soldier:
having no arms to trouble much an enemy; and their bucklers no bigger then to
ward a shot only. So that if they fight bravely this day, they will both
vanquish the Persians now, and restrain their insolence from invading the
Romans. Belisarius and Hermogenes having made this exhortation, and seeing the
Persians coming on, ordered the Army, as before. The Persians stood opposite in
front; Mirranes, not placing so the whole Army, but the one halle only, the
other shood behind him, to receave men from the fight, and to give on fresh,
and so in their turns to come all to fight. The band only, named Immortal,
he commanded to stand still, till himself gave the signal: Who stood in the
front, giving the command of the right wing to Pityazes, and of the left to
Baresmanas. The Armies being thus embattell'd Charas came to Belisarius and
Hermogenes; and said thus: I see no great service I can do upon the enemy,
staying here with my Herulians: But if covering our selves under yonder rising
ground, when the fight is begun, we shall suddenly from the hillock charge,
shooting the enemies backs, in likelihood we shall ruin them. Bel^sarius
approved it, and accordingly it was done. Neither side began the fight till
noone, which being past, the Persians gave on: Who put it off to that time of
the day, because themselves use to eat about evening, and the Romans at noone;
and if they charged them fasting, they thought they would not endure the fight
so well. At first the arrows slew from both sides, and with their multitude
made a kind of duskiness a long time, and slew many. The Persians arrows came
much thicker, by reason of their fresh men still renewing, which the Romans did
not mark: Who notwithstanding had not the worse, a strong wind blowing upon
the Persians, and not suffering their shot to do much effect. The Arrows being
spent, they used their Lances, on both sides, and came up closer. The Romans
left wing was in most distress, where the Cadisens, with Pityazes charging
suddamely and furiously, routed them and killed many in the execution. Which
Sunicas and Algas perceaving, gallopt amain to them: But first the three
hundred Herulians under Pharas came down from the hill upon the enemies backs,
and did wonders, specially upon the Cadisens: who when they saw Sunicas too
giving on upon their flanck, ran away. And there the overthrow being clear, the
Romans on that side joining, made a great slaughter among the Barbarians; so
that of their right wing they lost about 3000. The residue escaped hardly to
the Bataillion; and the Romans chasing no farther, both parts stood still in
their orders; And such was the success on that side. But Mirranes sent the
Immortal band, and many others closely to the left side: which Belisarius, and
Hermogenes perceaving, sent Sunicas and Algas, with their six hundred horse, to
the angle of their right hand line, where Simas and Ascas stood, and behind
them many troupers of Belisarius. The Persians left wing commanded by
Baresmanas, with the Immortalls, charged the Romans with full career: who not
abiding it, fled. Then from the Angle, the Romans, and those behind them gave
on hotly upon the Barbarians sl^nck, as they pursued, and cut their Army in
two, leaving the most to their right hand; the rest to the left, among whom was
the Ensigne-bearer of Baresmana, whom Sunicas with his lance wounded. The
Persians, who pursued foremost, seeing their ill case, turned about, and leaving
the chase, rode against these; and so came to be charged both ways by the
Romans; For they that fledd, knowing what happened, turned head. The Immortal
band, and the other Persians there, seeing the great Ensign taken down, and
lying upon the ground; they with Beresmanas, presently charged the Romans; who
received them; and first Sunicas killed Baresmanas, and threw him from his
horse. Then the Barbarians struck with fear, thought no more of fighting, but
ran away in confusion. The Romans compassing them, as they could, killed about
5000. So the Armies moved, the Persians to their retreat, the Romans to the
pursuit. The Persians foot in the overthrow threw away their bucklers, and
surprised in confusion were cut in pieces! The chafe lasted not long,
Belisarius and Hermogenes not suffering them to follow further, least the
Persians might turn head, and rout them pursueing without order. They thought
it enough to keep the victory entire: For before that day, it was long since the
Persians were overthrown by the Romans. Thus they parted then; nor would the
Persians come to any more battles. Some skirmishings there were upon inroads,
wherein the Romans had not the worst. And this was the success of the Armies in
Mesopotamia.

CHAP. XI.
BUt Cabades sent another Army into the Roman Armenia, consisting of
Persarmenians, Anno Domini. 529. Justiniani 3.
and Sunites (who border upon the Alans) and three thousand Sabirian Hunnes, a
very warlike Nation. The General was Mermeroes, a Persian, who encamped in
Persarmenia, three days journey from Theodosiopolis, preparing for the
invasion. Dorotheus was then General of Armenia, a wise man, and who had seen
many wars; but Sittas, General of the Forces in Constantinople commanded the
Armenian Army in chief. These hearing of Forces levied in P^rsarmenia, sent two
Lanciers to discover the enemies power. To whose Army they came, and having
observed all, and returning, met in a village some of the enemies Hunnes, who
took one of them named Dagaris, the other got away and brought news to the
Generals. Who instantly armed their Forces, and suddenly set upon the
enemies camp; who frighted with the suddaineness, ran away without striking
stroke. The Romans killed many and rifled their Camp, and then rode back
again^. But not long after Mermeroes with his Army entered the Roman territory,
and finding the enemy near the City of Sattala, he encamped in a village called
Octabe, seven miles from Sattala. Sittas behind a hill (whereof are many about
that City, though situate in a plain) with 1000. men lay close, directing
Dorotheus with the rest to keep within their trenches, seeing they were not able
to stand the enemy being 30000. strong, and themselves not half the number. But
the next day the Barbarians came to their trenches, and were compassing them,
when suddenly seeing Sittas coming down from the hill, and not being able to
judge the number, because of the dust, then great in the Summer time, they
thought them more then they were, and so left compassing, and made have to draw
together into less ground; which Sittas to prevent, divided his men into two
Troops, and charged them coming from the trenches. Which the Romans therein
perceaving, took courage, and sallyed all upon the gallop, and charged the
enemy also; and having them thus in the midst of their Troops, they routed
them. But the enemy exceeding them in numbers, made head; and the fight was
fierce, and at handy strokes, and some short chases upon one another, being
all Horsemen. Then Florentius a Thracian, Captain of a Troop of Horse, rusht
into the midst of the enemy, and took away the Generals ensign, and throwing
it down to the ground, gallopt back, but was over-taken and cut in pieces in
the place, and so was the greatest canse of the Romans victory. For the
Barbarians losing sight of the chief Ensign, fell into fear and disorder,
and retired within their Camp, having lost many in the fight. The next day they
marched home, and none followed them; The Romans thinking it much, first to
beat so many of them in their own Country; and now when they invaded them, to
send them home vanquished by a less number, and with nothing done.

The Romans then also took in some towns of the Persians in Persarmenia, and
two Forts called Bolus and Pharangium, where the King has a revenue out of
gold mines. A little before also they had subdued the Tzanians, who lived
formerly within the Roman land, a free people: Concerning all which thus it
was. In the way out of Armenia into Persarmenia to the right hand is Mount
Taurus, reaching to Iberia, and the nations before named. To the left hand the
way is steep with ragged Mountains over head, covered with perpetual clouds
and snow, whence the Phasis springing runns into Lasica. Here anciently have
dwelt these Tzanians subject to none, formerly called Sani, using to robb the
neighboring Romans, and living hardly and upon what they could steal, their
own Country bringing forth nothing good to feed on. The Emperor therefore gave
them a pension in gold, not to robb those parts. For which they took their
Country Oath, and broke it, coming still unlookt for, and mischieving the
Armenians, and other Romans beyond them, even to the sea. They made short
inroads, going quickly home; and if they met a Roman Army, were beaten, but
impossible to be taken, by reason of their strong Country. But Sittas before
this war overcoming them in fight, and using many allurements both by words
and deeds, gained them absolutely, that they became Civil men; and were
enrolled in Roman bands, and marched with their Armies, and turned Christians
also. Beyond these Tzanians Country, a deep rockie valley runns, as far as
Mount Cau^asus; wherein are populous villages, and vines, and other fruits in
abundance. For three days journey, it is tributary to the Romans; but further
begin the marches of Persarmenia, where is that mine of gold, by Cabades
committed to the charge of one Simeones: Who seeing the King in the heat of a
war, cosened him of the revenue thus. He yielded himself, and the Fort of
Pharangium to the Romans, who demanded not the gold of the Mine, being
contented, if the Persian lost the benefit; and the Persians could not force
away the Romans; the Country was so fast and strong. About the same time also
Narses and Aratius, who had some blows with Sittas and Belisarius, (as I said
before) revolted to the Romans, with their Mother, whom Narses, the Emperors
peculiar Treasurer entertained, (being also a Persarmenian) and gave them great
gifts. Which Isaac their younger brother hearing, got secret conference with the
Romans, and delivered them the Fort of Bolus, standing not far from
Theodosiopolis, by causing them to hide Soldiers near, whom he in the night
time closely let into the Fort by a Posterne; and thus he came to
Constantinople too.

CHAP. XII.
IN the mean time the Persians overthrown by Belisarius at Daras, Anno Domini.
530. Justiniani 4.
kept together about those parts, till Rusinus coming to Cabades told him, That
Justinian his brother, had sent him to him with a just complaint, against the
Persians, for entering his Country in Arms. That it would become so great a
King, and so prudent, rather to procure peace, then a troublesome war to
himself and his neighbors. In which hope, he said, he was come to him, that
for the futur^ both of them might enjoy the benefit of peace. Cabades replied;
O Son of Silvanus! Do not recriminate; knowing, (no man better) that you
Romans are the chief cause of these troubles. We for the common benefit of us
both, took the Caspian Gates, forcing thence the Barbarians. The Emperor
Anastasius, (you know) might have purchased them, but would not, least he
should be put to a great expense for us both, by maintaining there forces
continually. And from that time we have lodged a Garrison there, and maintained
it; and you thereby have dwelt in your own Country, unspoiled by Barbarians on
that side, and possessing quietly your estates. But as if this were nothing,
you have fortified at Daras, and made it a great City, and a rampire against
Persia; a thing expressly prohibited in the treaty with Anatolius: And hereby
our affairs have been ruined with toils, ana the expense of two Armies, the
one to hinder the Massagetes from forraging both our Countries, the other to
restrain your incursions; we complaining hereof and demanding either your
joint Forces at the Caspian Gates, or Daras to be dismantell'd, you have
slighted it; nay advanced your desigue with a gre^ter injury, (if I remember)
your fortisieing at Mindon. So that the Romans may chase peace, and they may
choose war, either by righting us, or proceeding in the contrary. For the
Persians shall not lay down their arms, till the Romans (as they ought) either
join in the Guard of the Caspian Gates, or dismantle Daras. Cabades having
thus said, dismiss't the Ambassador, intimating to him, that for a sum of
money he would be content to lay aside all his quarrels to the Romans.
Wherewith Rusinus acquainted the Emperor at his return to Constantinople;
whither soon after came Hermogenes. And so the Winter ended, and Anno Domini.
530. Justimani 5.
the fourth year of Justinians reign.

Anno Domini. 531. Justiniani 5.
In the beginning of the Spring, 15000. Persians all horse, under the command
of Azarethes a Persian, invaded the Romans; and among them Alamundarus the
Saracen, with great numbers of Saracens. In this invasion, they did not as they
were wont, enter by Mesopotamia, but by Comagena, now called Euphratesia. The
reason of forbearing Mesopotamia now, and why it is so called is thus. From a
Mountain of Armenia not very steep, being five miles to the North of
Theodosiopolis, issue two springs, presently making, the right hand spring,
Euphrates, and the left, Tigris. Tigris without winding, goes strait on to
Amida, taking in no waters by the way, and by the North-side of it passes into
Assyria. But the Euphrates, running not far, vanishes, not sinking under
ground but with a kind of miracle. Over the water lies a bogg, deep and six
miles long, and two miles and a half broad, wherein much reed grows, and the
mudd is so stiff, that to passengers it seems firm ground. Horse and Foot
and Wagons pass upon it every day, and stir not the ground, nor discover it
for a bogge. The inhabitants every year burn off the reed, that it stop not
the way: and sometime a strong wind blowing, the fire pierces to the roots, and
discovers the river in a small channel: And the mudd landing up again soon
after, restores to the place the form it had. Hence this river runs to the
Country of Ecelesa, where was the Temple of Diana in Tauri; Iphigenia,
Agamemnons daughter, with Orestes, and Pilades, flying thither with the image
of Diana. The other Temple standing to this day at Comana, is not that of
Tauri. But thus it was. Orestes stealing with his sister from Tauri, fell into
a great sickness; and enquiring of the Oracle for cure, was answered, that he
should have no help, till he had built a Temple to Diana, like that in Tauri,
and there should shave off his hair, and call the City by it. Orestes hereupon
traveling in these parts, saw the river Iris, springing from a steep
Mountain, and supposing it to be the place designed by the Oracle, built there
a fair City, and a Temple to Diana, and shaving his hair, called it Comana,
which continues to this day. But this abated not the disease, which raged
rather more. So that traveling, and seeking yet further, he found a place in
Cappadocia, very like Tauri, and I have wondered seeing it, taking it for Tauri
it self. The Mountain there is absolutely like Taurus, and so called also, and
the river Sarus there very like the river Euphrates. So there Orestes built a
goodly City, with two Temples in it, the one to Diana, the other to his sister
Iphigenid, which the Christians have made Churches, not altring the buildings
at all. This City is called the Golden Comana, where he cut off his hair, and
recovered of his disease. Which some hold to be no other, but the madness he
fell into, for killing his own Mother. But the Euphrates from this Tauri in
Ecelesa of Armenia, runs Southward by much Country, and takes in many rivers,
and among the rest Arsinus, (which comes down from Persarmenia) then grown
large, passes into Leucosyria, now called the lesser Armenia, the Metropolis
whereof is Melitene, a fair City. From thence it runs by Samosata, and
Hierapolis, and many other towns, to Assyria; where both rivers meeting, end
in one name of Tigris. The Country from Samosata beyond the river was anciently
called Comagena, but now Euphratesia from the river. The Country on this side,
between it and the Tigris, is called Mesopotamia: Some part of which has
several other names, as Armenia, unto Amida: Edessa also, with the towns about
it: And Osrhoene, from Osrhoes, who anciently reigned there, when they were
confederates of the Persians. The Persians therefore having taken Nisibis, and
other places in Mesopotamia from the Romans, when they invaded their country,
ever neglected the Province beyond the Euphrates, being without water and wast,
and there drew together, being their own country, and near an enemies
inhabited, and from thence used to make their invasions.

CHAP. XIII.
MIrranes also upon his return with his Army overthrown, having lost most of
his men, had a sharp punishment from the King, who took from him his Head-tire
of gold and pearl, which tied up his hair; a mark of the greatest honor in
Persia, next to the King: where none may wear gold, ring, nor belt, nor buckle,
nor any thing of gold, but by the Kings grant. Cabades then being in doubt how
to invade the Romans; for Mirranes failing thus, he could not presume upon any
other; Alamundarus, King of the Saracens, advised him thus, In all things not
to trust to Fortune, nor in all wars to expect the better; being neither
reasonable, nor man's condition; but the conceit of it prejudicial. For men's
unreasonable hopes of success, failing sometimes, (as they may) prove their
vexation. That men having not ever Fortune to presume on, put not war bluntly
upon hazards, though they have the advantage of their enemies, but study to
deceive them with stratagemes. In a danger upon equal terms is no assurance of
victory. That therefore he should not grieve for the misfortunes of Mirranes,
nor tempt Fortune again. If he enter by Mesopotamia and Osroene, where the
Cities were never stronger, nor better guarded with soldiers, that he will
have no sure bargain of it. That the Country beyond the Euphrates, and Syria
next it, has no fortified City, nor considerable Forces; but he shall find
Antioch the chief Roman City of the East for wealth, bigness, and populousnes,
with no soldiers in it; and a common people thinking upon nothing but
Holy Days, and Feasts, their perpetual quarrels with one another in the
Theaters. Which he may take by surprise, and return home, without meeting an
Enemy, and before the Forces of Mesopotamia can have the news of him. That he
should take no thought about water, or provisions: himself would guide the Army
the best way. Cabades neither disputed against this advise, nor distrusted it;
knowing Alamundarus a wiseman, an experienced soldier, and faithful to the
Persians, and very valiant; who for fifty years, had brought the Romans into
low case, from Egypt to Mesopotamia forraging their country, and driving all
before him, burning cities, and making innumerable slaves, whom he killed, or
sold for a great deal of money. He made his inroads so suddenly, and
advantageously, that none encountered him: The Commanders seldom hearing of
him, before he was gone with his booty. And when any overtook him, he defeated
them, either charging them unprepared, or pursuing disorderly. Once he took
prisoners Demostratus, brother of Rufinus, and John the son of Lucas, with
all their men, and got a great sum of money for their ransom. In a word, he was
the sharpest enemy the Romans had. The reason was, because only Alamundarus
had command of the Saracens under the Persians, with authority and title of a
King; whereby he could invade the Romans when and where he pleased. Neither
were the Roman Captains, called Duces Limitanei, nor the Phylarchi, or
chieftains of the Saracen-tribes in league with the Romans, able to oppose him,
being too weak to fight with him single in their several countries. Whereupon
the Emperor Justinian put many of those Tribes under Arethas, the son of
Gabalas, chieftain of the Saracens in Arabia, giving him the title of a King; a
thing not used by the Romans. But Alamundarus rather more ruined the Romans;
Arethas in the inroads or fights, either having ill fortune, or betraying the
business; we have no certainty of him. And so Alamundarus (none opposing)
forraged the East furthest of any, and longest, being a very old man; and
Cabades liking his counsel, sent 15000 men under the command of Azarethes (as
I have said) whom Alamundarus was to guide the way.

CHAP. XIV.
THese passing the Euphrates into Comagena unlookt for, and being the first
Persians that ever invaded us that way, that we can learn, it amazed the
Romans, and at first perplexed Belisarius, when he heard it. But he soon
resolved upon resistance, and having left competent garrisons in the places, of
Mesopotamia, that Cabades with the rest of his army might not find them
unguarded; he went with speed against the Enemy, compassing the Euphrates, and
having about 20000 horse and foot, 2000 of them Isaurians. The Captains of
horse were the same that fought at Daras with Mirranes. Of the Infantery was
Peter commander, a Lancier of the guard to Justinian; and of the Isaurians,
Longinus and Stephanacius. At the City of Colchis they encamped, hearing the
Enemy were at Gabbula, a place almost fourteen miles from it. Alamundarus, and
Azarethes hearing thereof, stayed their journey, resolving to march homeward,
fearing to hazard; and they retired, keeping the Euphrates to their left hand.
The Roman army followed; and where the Enemy lodged, sat down the night after:
Belisarius purposely not suffering the Army to march greater journeys, having
no mind to fight, and thinking it sufficient if Alamundarus and the Persians
retired home without effect. The army at this murmured at him, both Commanders
and Soldiers, but not yet to his face. The Persians at last lodged upon the
shore of Euphrates, opposite to the City of Callinicum, resolving from thence
to march through a desert country, and so out of Roman ground, and not as
before by the rivers side. The Romans from the City Sura, where they lodged,
rose, and overtook the Enemy trussing up their baggage. The Feast of Easter was
to be the next day, which Christians observe above all others; the day before
it, and much of the night abstaining from all meats and drinks. And Belisarius
seeing them eager upon the enemy, and willing to withdraw them from the
opinion, ( Hermogenes being of the same mind, sent newly Ambassador from the
Emperor) he called them together, and spoke thus; Whether are you transported
fellow soldiers! to choose thus a needless danger? That only is pure victory,
that comes off without damage from the Enemy: and that now fortune, and the
fear of us amazing them, gives us; which advantage it is better to enjoy,
having it, than to seek it when it is gone. The Persians invited with hopes,
invaded us, and now failing, run away. If we force them to change their course,
and fight; overcoming, we gain nothing, but to rout an enemy flying already.
But having the worst, we lose our present victory (not forced from it, but
giving it away) and leave the Emperors land to the spoil of the Enemy, with
none to defend it. Consider also, that God does cooperate with men's necessary,
not wilful actions; how men stopped from flying will fight, though unwillingly;
and how many disadvantages there are to us for a battle, many being marched
hither afoot, and all of us fasting, and some of us not yet come up: The Army
reproached Belisarius for this speech, not muttering now, but with open clamor
to his face, calling him faint-hearted man, and a discourager of them. And this
error some Commanders ran into with the soldier, only to show their valor.
Belisarius amazed at this impudence, turned his discourse to encourage them,
and to order them to the encounter, saying that he knew not their alacrity
before, but now he took courage, and went against the enemy with more hopes. So
he set his Batallion in front, and his foot in the left wing toward the river,
and to the right hand, where there was a steep piece of ground, Arethas with
his Saracens: himself with the horse stood in the middle. Azarethes seeing the
Romans embattell'd, and ready for the encounter, said to his men; That being
Persians, certainly they will never change their honor for life, if they might
have the choice. But that now, if they would, they could make no such choice.
They who can by running from a danger, live dishonorable, if they can so
resolve, choose yet instead of the best, the most pleasant thing. But they who
must die either honorably by an enemy, or basely by a superior, dradg'd to
execution, are mad if they choose not the best condition, instead of the basest.
He bad them therefore, not thinking only upon the enemy, but upon their Lord
and Master, so to fight that day. Having exhorted them, he placed his Batallion
opposite to the Enemy, and gave the right wing to the Persians. and the lest to
the Saracens. The battle then joined, and was stiffly fought. The arrows flew
thick from both sides, and killed many. Some single encounters were between the
Battallions, with much valor performed. The Persians fell more by the shot,
though they shot thicker, and are almost all Archers, and the most dextrous
living; but from weak bows little beut, the shaft lighting upon the Romans
corslet, head-peece, or shield, cracked without hurt doing. The Romans shot is
slower, being from stiff bows much bent, and hardly; but coming from stronger
men than Persians, they speed where they light, no armor resisting the force.
Two thirds of the day were past, and the fight yet equal. When the Persians
best men combining, charged the right wing, where was Arethas and his Saracens.
They opened their Battallion, and not abiding the charge ran away, suspected
that day to betray the Romans. The Persians thus breaking through the ranks,
had the backs of the Romans horse, who weary with their journey and toil in
fight, being fasting too, and pressed both ways by the enemy, gave it over, and
ran into small Islands in the river near them. Some staid and did bravely; among
whom Ascas, having slain many chief Persians, was with much ado cut in pieces,
leaving a noble story to his enemies; and with him eight hundred more fell,
good men; and all the Isaurians, with their Commanders, using no resistance:
Men unexperienced, newly taken from the plough, and who knew not what a battle
meant; yet hotter than any upon the fight, they reproached Belisarius with
cowardice a little before. Indeed they were not all Isaurians, but most
Lycaonians. Belisarius staying with some few, while Ascas and his company
stood, resisted also: But seeing them slain, he fled into the battallion of
foot, where Peter their leader maintained the fight, with some with him, the
most being run away. Then Belisarius quitted his horse, causing his followers
to do the like, and with the rest received the enemy. Who after a short
execution came back, and gave on upon Belisarius; who to prevent the enemies
compass, kept his men's backs to the river, and stood their charge; where was a
fierce fight, though with unequal powers, a few footmen fighting with all the
Persian horse, and yet not routed by them. For standing close, and fencing with
their shields, they shot the enemy to more purpose, than they were shot. And
the Barbarians to break them, riding often against them, rode back again without
effect; their horses being skittish upon the clashing of the shields, and the
riders in confusion. And at night they retired to their camp. Belisarius also
with some few got into a ship, and past into an Island, whether some came after
swimming. The next day the Romans were transported to Callinicum in ships, sent
from thence. The Persians having spoiled the dead bodies, went home; finding
their own not fewer in number than their enemies. Azarethes at his comeing home
had no thanks from Cabades, though he wanne this battle; and upon this reason.
When an Army is levied in Persia the King uses to sit upon his Throne, and by
him stand baskets, and the General designed for the army; which is to pass man
by man before the King, and each to throw an arrow into the baskets; and they
to be sealed with the Kings own seal. When the army comes home, every soldier
takes his arrow out of the panniers, and some Commissioners number the arrows
remaining, and so report to the King the number of the soldiers come home;
whereby it is known how many are perished in that war. This custom is ancient
in Persia; and Azarethes presenting himself to the King, he asked him what place
he had conquered, having invaded the Romans with Alamundarus, with design to
take Antioch? Azarethes answered, that he had taken no place, but had vanquished
Bellisarius in battle. Then Cabades willed the army to come in, and take out
their arrows, whereof many being left in the baskets, the King reviled
Azarethes, and after hold him in disgrace.

CHAP. XV.
THe Emperor Justinian then bethought himself of associating the Homerites,
and Ethiopians against the Persians: Who, where they inhabit, and wherein the
Emperor thought them useful to the Romans, I will tell you. The Homerites are
to the East of Palestina, upon the red sea, which beginning from India, ends in
that part of the Roman Empire; having upon the coast where it ends, in a narrow
straight, the City AElas, and the mountains of Egypt to the South, and a desert
country, reaching far to the North. As you sail in, the land from both fides is
seen, till the Island of Jotabee, which is from Aelas some hundred and five and
twenty miles; where are seated the Hebrews, anciently free, but in Justinians
reign made subject to the Romans. From hence a large sea opening, no land is to
be seen to the right hand, as you sail in, but at night you cast anchor on the
left hand shore, the sea being full of shelfes, and in the dark not to be
meddled with. There are many harbors made by the nature of the places, and
safe to put in at. The coast from Palestina the Saracens possese, who are
anciently seated in the country of Palm Trees, being in the midland, spacious,
and having nothing growing but Date-trees. Which Abocharabus, Governor of the
Saracens there, gave to Justinian, who made him Chieftain of the Saracens in
Palestina, thereby preserving that Province from spoil, Abocharabus being
terrible to his subjects and enemies; and very valiant. This country of
Palm Trees being desert, and in the middle without water, for ten days
journey, is of no use to us. Abocharabus gave us the name of a present only,
which the Emperor knowing well, yet took it of him. Next to the Saracens in
Palestina, are other upon the same coast, called Maadeni, subject to the
Homerites. Upon the coast nextbeyond are the Homerites, and beyond them many
other nations are seated, to the Man-eating Saracens. Beyond whom are the
Indians. Opposite to the Homerites on the other shore are Ethiopians; called
Auxomites, of the City of Auxomis, where is their Kings court. The sea between
them is five days and nights sail over, with a reasonable wind, keeping there
the sea all night, by reason there are no slielves. This some call the Red sea;
and the rest as you sail out to AElas, the Arabian gulf. For all the country
from thence to Gaza was formerly called Arabia, and their King held his Court
at Petra. The Homerites haven from whence they sail into Ethiopia is called
Boulicas, and they land at a haven of the Adulites, from whence, the City of
Adulis is only two miles and a half, and from Auxomis twelve days journey.
The vassels of India, and on these seas, are not built like other ships, nor
trimmed with pitch or such like, nor are the planks fastened with iron through
them, but tied together with cords. Not because of Iron-drawing Rocks (as is
vulgarly thought) the Romans ships upon that sea coming from AElas, though
built with Iron, finding no such matter; but because neither Indians, nor
Ethiopians have. Iron, nor other materials for that use: Nor can they buy any
of the Romans; who forbid it upon pain of death. From Auxomis aforesaid, to the
Roman Frontiers in Egypt, is thirty days journey; where are the Blemmyes, and
Nobates, and other numerous people. The Blemmyes are seated in the midland, but
the Nobates upon the Nile. This was not formerly the Roman frontier, which was
seven days journey beyond. But Dioclesian finding their tribute a trifle, and
their country narrow, being most taken up with the rocks of Nile; and the
garrisons in it (being many) burdening his Treasury with the charge: And
considering how these Nobates then dwelling about the City of Oasis, spoiled
the Towns near them, he drew them to rise from that place, that they might no
more trouble the country about Oasts, by giving them fair Roman Cities, and a
large country, all from Elephantina on both sides the Nile, which he thought
they would now guard, and beat off the Blemmyes (as being their own land) and
other barbarous Nations. He gave them also, and to the Blemmyes, a pension in
Gold, not to prey upon the Roman territories; which they still receive, yet
overrun the Provinces. So impossible it is for Barbarians to keep, faith with
Romans, but for fear of the Soldier. Yet the said Emperor, in an Island of
the Nile near Elephantina, built a strong Castle, with Temples, and Altars for
the Romans, and these people; appointing Priests of each Nation, and thinking
by a participation in the same devotions, to make a sure amity between them.
And upon this he called the place Philae, Both the Blemmyes, and the Nobates
worship the Gods esteemed by the Graecians, and Isis and Osiris and Priapus
too; and the Blemmyes sacrifice men to the Sun. The Temples in Philae these
Barbarians held to my time, but by direction of the Emperor Justinian, Narses
the Persarmenian, who revolted to the Romans, (as I said) commanding the forces
in those parts, demolished them, keeping the Priests in restraint, and sending
the Images to Constantinople.

CHAP. XVI.
BUt during this war with Persia Hellisthaeus King of Ethiopia, a very devout
Christian, hearing how the said Homerites of the opposite continent were many
of them Jews, and many Heathen, and laid excessive burdens upon the
Christians, he sent out a Navy and Army against them, and fighting with them,
routed them, and slew their King and much people. And having made Esimiphaeus
King of them, a Homerite, and a Christian, and imposed a tribute upon them, he
went home. In the Ethiopian Army were many, both slaves and lewd persons, that
would not follow the King home, but staid with the Homerites, being in love
with the Country, as being very good land. But not long after, the people
imprisoned Esimiphaeus, and made one Abramus their King, a Christian, who had
been a slave to a Roman Merchant, residing for his traffic, in the Ethiopian
City of Adulis. Hellisthaus, to punish Abramus, and his accomplices, for the
wrong done to Esimiphaeus, sent against them under the command of a kinsman,
3000. men. These also desiring to remain in that good land, liad secret
conference with Abramus, unknown to their Commander, and in the battle killed
him, and joined with the enemies, and continued there. Hellisthaeus angry, sent
another Army, which coming to a battle returned with much loss; and then
afraid to meddle any more with Abramus, he forbear war. But he being dead,
Abramus was content to pay the tribute to his successor, and so confirmed his
government.

These things happened afterward. But then during the reigns of Hellisthaeus,
and Esimiphaeus, Justinian sent his Ambassador Julian, to desire their
confederacy against the Persians (the Romans, and they consenting in one
religion) and that the Ethiopians would make themselves masters of a rich
trade, by dealing with the Indians for their silk, and selling it to the
Romans, who should have this only advantage therein, that they should carry
out their money to their enemies for it. Of this silk are made the anciently
called Persian, now Serick, or silk garments. The Homerites were prayed also
to make chiefetaine of the Maadeni Saracens, one Caisus, a banished man (who
having killed a kinsman of Esimiphaeus, was fled into a wilderness, being of
the race of the Phylarchi, and a very good Soldier) and that together with
those Saracens, they would invade the Persians. Both dimist the Ambassador with
promise to effect the Emperors desires, but neither performed; the Ethiopians
not being able to buy the silk; because the Persian Merchants ever come first
to the havens, where the Indians unlade, being their next borderers, and buy up
all. And the Homerites thought it hard, to travel through a desert, many days
journey, to fight with a people more warlike then themselves. Afterward Abramus
having settled his Kingdom, promised often to Justinian, but only once began the
journey, and turned home again. Thus the Romans spedd with these people.

In the mean time Hermogenes came to Cabades in Embassage after the battle of
Euphrates, but could not effect the peace, finding him much enraged, and so
came away. Belisarius also the Emperor sent for, discharging him of that
command, to make war upon the Vandales; and Sittas was sent to guard the
East. The Persian Army, led by Chanaranges, Aspevedes and Mermeroes, again
entered Mesopotamia, and (none encountering them) sat down before Martyropolis,
where were garrisoned Buzes, and Bessas; It stands in the Province of
Sophanene, thirty miles to the North of Amida, upon the river of Nymphius,
which bounds the Roman and Persian territories. The Persians assaulted, and
were valiantly received by the besieged, who could not think long to hold out,
the walls being very assaultable, and easy for the Persians works, and they
having neither provisions, nor engines, nor any other thing within of
importance to defend. Sittas with the Roman army came to Attachas, twelve miles
from Martyropolis; where he encamped, not daring to march further: with him was
Hermogenes in another Embassage. In the mean time this happened. The Romans
and Persians have anciently had spies, defrayed at the public charge, who
secretly pass among the enemy; informing themselves of all occurrences, and
advertising their own Princes. Many of these, as affectionate Patriots, do
their best, some betray their Countries secrets to the enemy. One of the
Persian spies then discovered to Justinian much of their affairs, and how a
Nation of Massagetes was coming into Persia, and from thence were to invade the
Romans, with the Persian army. The Emperor had experience of the man's truth,
and persuades him with money, to go and report to the Persians before
Martyropolis, that these Massagetes were hired by the Emperor, and instantly
to come against them. Who according went to the Persian Camp, and told them
that an army of Hunnes their enemies were coming to aid the Romans: which
made them afraid, and doubtful what to do.

CHAP. XVII.
IN the mean time Cabades fell mortally sick, and calling to him Mebodes, a
Persian, his chief favorite, opened his resolution concerning Chosroes, and
the Kingdom, and that he feared, the Persians would seek to frustrate it.
Mebodes prayed him to leave his resolution in writing, and to assure himself,
the Persians would not disrespect it. Cabades thereupon declared Chosroes King
by his testament, written by Mebodes himself, and soon after died. His usual
funeral ceremonies being performed, Caoses presuming upon the Law, took upon
him the dignity. Mebodes forbad him, alleging that none of himself might take
the Kingdom, but by the votes of the principal Persians, Caoses referred to
the great Officers the cognizance of the matter, not suspecting opposition from
thence. So the principal Persians being assembled, and set down; Mebodes, by
reading the testament, manifested the determination of Cabades: Anno Domini
531. and Justiniani 5.
whose great virtues they all remembering, forthwith declared Chosroes King of
Persia. And thus Chosroes got the Kingdom.

But Sittas and Hermogenes, having no means to relieve Martyropolis, sent to
the enemies Generals to tell them; That they were hinderanoes to the King
their master, to the blessings of peace, and to both their commonwealths. That
Ambassadors are sent from the Emperor to their King, to end all differences,
and to make a truce; That therefore they should quit the Roman territory, and
give the Ambassadors leave to negotiate for the good of both parties; and that
they are ready for what they say to give good hostages, that it will shortly be
effected. There chanced to be there at the same time a messenger with the news
of the death of Cabades, and that Chosroes was King, and the affairs in Persia
yet tottering. Which caused the Generals to hear gladly the Romans
propositions, ^earing also the invasion of the Hunnes. So that the Romans
declared for hostages Martinus and Sonecius, one of Sittas his Lifeguard: and
the Persians raised their siege, and went home. The Hunnes not long after
entered the Roman territory, and finding no Persian army, after some few days,
retired home also. And Hermogenes with his fellow Ambassadors, Rufinus,
Alexander, and Thomas, repaired to the Tigris, where was the King of Persia;
who upon their coming, released the hostages. The Ambassadors, to make Chosroes
tractable, used flatteries little becoming Roman Ambassadors, which so pacified
him, that a perpetual peace was concluded for 110. Centenaries, 346500 l. sterling.
to be given him, and the Commanders of the Forces in Mesopotamia to reside no
more at Daras, but at Constantina, as they did formerly: The forts in Lazica he
denied to restore, and yet demanded of the Romans restitution of Bolus, and
Pharangium. A Centenary weighes 100. pound weight, so called of Centum in
Latin: and this gold he demanded to quit the Romans from demolishing Daras, and
sharing in the charge of the Garrison at the Caspian Gates. The Ambassadors
liked all, but the Forts; alleging they could not deliver them without the
Emperors express pleasure. So it was resolved, to send Rufinus to
Constantinople, concerning these particulars, prefixing him seventy days for
his journey; and the rest to stay till his return. The Emperor hearing what
Chosroes stood upon, directed the peace to be concluded upon those terms. But
Chosroes, upon a false rumor that Justinian, offended with Rufinus, had put
him to death, being troubled, and angry at it, he invaded the Romans with his
army. But Rufinus returned, and overto^k him near Nisibis, where they resolved
to consummate the peace, and the money was brought into the town by the
Ambassadors. But Justinian repenting the quitting the two Forts in Lazica,
wrote to his Ambassadors, absolutely forbidding to part with them. So Chosroes
refused to conclude the treaty, and then Rufinus considered how more hastily
then safely he had brought the money into the Persian dominion, and casting
himself prostrate before Chosroes, besought him to safe conduct the money, and
to deferr the present bringing an Army upon the Romans. Chosroes bad him rise,
and promised to grant all for his sake. So the Ambassadors came to Daras with
the money, and the Persian Army marched back. His fellow Ambassadors were jealous
of Rufinus, and accused him to the Emperor, because Chosroes yielded upon his
persuasions to every thing. But the Emperor did him no hurt, sending him
again shortly after, and Hermogenes to Chosroes; when they concluded the
accord, That each should restore what was taken in this war; That there
should be no more any Commander of Forces residing in Daras; And for the
Iberians now in Constantinople, they were to have their choice, either to stay
there, or return home. Upon which many of them staid, and many went into their
own Country. Thus was concluded the Perpetual Peace (as they called it) in the
* sixth year of Justinians reign, Anno Domini 532. Iustiniani 6.
the Romans, delivering up the Forts of Bolus and Pharangium, and the Persians
the places in Lazica: Who then also sent home Dagaris, to the Romans, for
another Persian of quality. Dagaris did often after expel the Hunnes, and he
overcame them in several battles, being an extraordinary good Soldier.

CHAP. XVIII.
THe peace being thus ratified by both parts, two Rebels of their own
subjects fell upon both these Emperors, in this manner. Chosroes was of an
unruly spirit, a great undertaker, troublesome; full of tumult himself, and an
extreme troubler of others. So that the Persians being weary of his
government, such of them, as were stirrers, consulted to make another King of
the house of Cabades. Zames they had a mind to, but the Law excluded him, for
his mayme of an eye: In the end they resolved to advance to the Kingdom the
son of Zames; and he, as his sons protector, to manage the affairs. This
resolution they revealed to Zames, and with their many encouragements,
persuaded him to the business; and a fit time was appointed to surprise the
King. But the plot being discovered to the King, he prevented it, and put Zames
to death, and the rest of his brother, and their male issue, and all such men
of quality, as contrived, or were accessory to the conspiracy; among whom was
Aspevedes, his mothers brother. Cabades, the son of Zames, (being fostered with
the General Adergudunbades) he directed the said General to kill, (though his
own foster child) trusting the man^ neither indeed could he force him, not
without him kill the child. The General much grieved at this dismal
Injunction, acquainted his wife with it, and the child's nurse. The wife
weeping, took him by the knees, and besought him not to kill Cabades. So they
consulted together, and concluded to breed the child closely, and to write to
Chosroes, that he was dead. This they did accordingly, and so concealed the
young Cabades, that none had any suspicion, but his own son Varames, and one of
his trustiest servants. But Cabades being come of age, the General fearing
discovery, gave him money, and bad him save his life in banishment. And all
this he kept from the knowledge of Chosroes: till Chosroes went with his army
into Lazica (as shall be related hereafter) and Varames with him, who had
waiting on him the servant privy to the business of Cabades, and revealed all
to the King, producing his servant who agreed in all points. Chosroes raged,
and thought it unsufferable, to bear such things from one of his own slaves;
and he bethought himself of this way to get the man into his hands. When he
was coming home out of Lazica he wrote to the General, that he resolved to
invade the Romans, and not at one entry, but dividing his army, that he might
make his invasion both on this side, and beyond the Euphrates. One part
himself must lead, and he would upon no servant bestow an equality in honor
with himself, but on him the General, in regard of his valor. So that he
should do well, with speed to meet him in his journey, that he might
communicate, and direct what should concern the expedition, leaving his train
to follow fair and foftly after. The General overjoyed with this honor from
the King, and far from guessing his own mischief, did as he was commanded. But
spent with hard travel, (being an old man) he slipped his bridle, and fell from
his Horse; wherewith his leg being broken, he was forced to stay to be cured.
Chosroes arriving at the same place, he was brought to the Kings presence; who
told him he could not go the expedition appointed, with his leg in that case;
but bad him at some Castle there get the help of Surgeons. And so he sent him
the way to his death, and after him men to kill him; An invincible General,
and so reputed by the Persians; having subdued twelve Nations to Cabades. Being
dead, his son Varames was made General. Long afterward Cabades the son of
Zames, or one usurping his name, came to Constantinople. He was in his face
like King Cabades, and Justinian used him honorably, as the grandchild of that
King. Mebodes also Chosroes killed upon this ground. Being upon earnest
business, he bad Zaberganes call Mebodes to him: who found him training his
Soldiers, and told him, the King called him in have. He said, he would come
presently, when he had dispatched the business he was about. The other hating
him, reported to the King, that Mebodes would not come as yet, alleging
business. The King enraged, sent one to him, to command him to the Tripos, or
three-footed table. Which is thus. An iron three footed table stands ever at
the Court-gate, and when any Persian understands the King to be offended with
him, he may not fly to Temple, or elsewhere; but sitting by this table must
expect the Kings sentence, none being to guard him. Here Mebodes sat many
days in a pitiful habit, till one by the command of Chosroes, took him away,
and killed him. To this came the good services he had done Chosroes.

CHAP. XIX.
ABout the same time happened in Constantinople a sudden mutiny, which grew
high, and ended in much mischief, both to the Senate, and people. The Commons
of every City anciently have been divided into the Veneti and Prasini, the
Blews, and the Greens. But it is not long, since about these names and clours,
(wherein they stand to see sights) they consume their estates, abandon their
bodies to tortures, and refuse not the most shameful death. They run the
danger of fighting with their opposites, being sure, (should they get the
better) to be haled to prison, and after extreme torturing, to be put to
death. There grows in them a hatred without ground, and lasts undeterminable,
not yiedling to alliance, kindred, or any law of friendship; be it brother, or
son, that dotes upon the contrary Color. Nothing human, or divine they regard,
in comparison of the victory in these, be it impiety against God, or violation
of laws, or of the Commonwealth by subjects or enemies: nay themselves wanting
necessaries, and their Country receaving injury in the most important things,
they are not sensible of it, so this their portion may prosper: So they call
their fellow Factionists. Nay the very women partake in this abomination, not
only as their husbands followers, but often their opposites; though they never
go to the Theaters, nor have other inducements. That I know not what to say,
but that it is a mere disease of the mind: and thus it is in every City, and
Corporation. But at that time Praefectus U^bi, next in dignity to the Prefect:
Praetorio. The Author in his old age held this office.
the Governor of the Citizens of Constantinople, led some Factionists to
execution. Both parties then making peace, and conspiring, first took away the
men led to punishment, then let out of prison all who lay either for sedition,
or any other crime; and without respect, slew the said Governors ministers.
The Citizens who were of neither faction fled to the opposite continent; and
the City, (as if under an enemy) was set afire. The Temple of Saint Sophie, and
the Bath of Zeuxippus, and the Emperors Court from the porch to the Temple of
Mars was consumed. Moreover the great Portions, reaching to Constantines market
place; and many great means houses, end much wealth. The Emperor and Empress
with some Senators shut themselves up in the Palace, without stirring. The
peoples word to one another was, Nica, overcome; From whence to this day that
Mutiny is called Nica. John the Cappadocian was then Praefectus Praetorio of
the Orient; There was another of Illyrium, both belonging to the Eastern
Empire.
Prefect of the Court; and Tribonianus, a Pamphylian, Assessor to the Emperor,
by the Romans called Quaestor. John was a man vnbred in any liberal science
(having learned at the Grammar School only poor letters, to write as
poorly) but in natural abilities, the most powerful man we ever knew, both
to discern fit things, and in doubtful to find a resolution; but the
wickedest man alive: wherein he employed the strength of his nature, without
respect of God or men; for gain studying the ruin of men's estates, and of
whole Cities. Quickly growing to a great wealth, he fell into boundless
gluttony, preying upon the subject till dinner time, and the rest of the day
spending in drunkenness, and wanton abusing his body, eating till he vomited.
A man ready to catch money, and more ready to lavish it. Such was John the
Cappadocian. But Tribonianus, beside a great natural ability, had attained to
an excellence in learning, inferior to no man of his time: But in the ways of
Covetousness most industrious, and ever ready to sell right for gain; making,
and repealing Edicts every day, ever selling them to any who had occasion to
use them. During the peoples quarrels about those names, and colors, there
was little speech of these men's misgovernements. But when they consented, and
were now formed into a mutiny; openly in the City they railed upon them, and
sought occasions to kill them. The Emperor to reconcile the people, put them
both out of their places, and made Phocas a Patrician, Prefect of the Palace; a
wise man, and naturally addicted to justice, and Basilides a Patrician he made
Quaestor, a famous honest man. But the mutiny raged nothing less. The fifth day
of the same, about evening, the Emperor commanded Hypatius and Pompeius,
Nephews of the late Emperor Anastasius, to retire to their houses; either
suspecting some attempt of theirs upon his person, or afraid that they were
driven thereto by destiny. They fearing what came to pass, that the people
would force them to the Empire, said, that it was not honest to leave their
Emperor in so great danger. Justinian at this was more suspicious, and bad
them instantly be gone home. They went, and it being night, were quiet; but the
Sun no sooner up, but it was divulged, how these Lords were retired from the
palace: and all the multitude ran to them, and salute^ Hypatius Emperor, and
conducted him to the market place, to take the affairs upon him; Maria his
wife, a wise and sober Matrone, crying, and lamenting, and protesting to her
friends, that the people were leading her husband to his death; and hanging
upon him to stay him, till the people forced him from her. And when he was
unwillingly come to Constantines marketplace, they proclaimed him Emperor of
the Romans, binding about his head a golden wreath, for Diadem they had none,
nor other thing usual to invest the Emperor. The Senators, as many as were
not in the Palace, joined; and the opinions of many were, to try their fortune
at the Palace. But Origin a Senator admonished them; That indeed the case they
were in, could not be decided without war, and that war and Empire are
confessed the greatest things among men. But great actions are not managed in an
instant, but with advises and labors, which must have longer time for their
execution. That if they march now to the Enemy, their affairs will be upon the
edge of a razour; and in a little plece of time they shall adventure all, and
then for what happens, either adore or revile Fortune; into whose hands the
hastiest businesses commonly fall. But that if they carry it leysurely, they
shall not take Justinian in the Palace, if they would; who will thinck it well,
if he may run away. Sovereignty despised, totters downward, the strength of it
daily consuming: That there are other Palaces, Placillianae, and that of
Helena, from whence this Emperor may issue, and manage the war, and other
matters. The multitude embraced this advice, and Hypatius, (who was to have a
mischief) bad them lead on to the Circus. Some say he went thither purposely,
being well affected to the Emperor: Who held a Counsel, whether he should
stay, or fly by Sea: Many discourses were; but the Empress Theodora spoke thus.
I suppose this no time to enquire, whether a woman should be bold among men, or
may be valiant, when they are afraid. They, whose affairs are come into
extremest peril, must attend nothing, but how to settle best, that which lies
before them. I hold flying (if ever, certainly now, though it would preserve
us) not expedient. For a man born into this light, not to die, is impossible:
But for one that has been an Emperor, to become a Exile, is not to be
endured: For let me never come to be without this purple robe, nor live that
day, in which they that speak to me, call me not their Lady and Mistress. If
Sir! you have a mind to escape, it is no hard matter. We have store of money;
and there is the sea; and yonder are ships: But consider, whether you may not
have cause, most willingly to exchange your safety, for death. For me, I like
the old saying; How breave a Sepulcher a Kingdom is! At this speech they took
courage to stand it out, and consulted of means of opposition, if any should
set upon them.

All the Soldiers, both quartered about the Emperors Palace and elsewhere,
neither affected the Emperor, nor durst openly join in this action, but
expected the event. But Justinians whole hope was in Belisarius and Mundus. The
first newly come from the Persian war, had brought a strong retinue with him,
of Lanciers and Targettiers, and others, all old Soldiers. And Mundus, being
There was another called General of all of the Orient; and two Generals of the
Legions in Byzantium: In Latin their name was Magistri militum.
General of Illyrium, chanced, being sent for to Constantinople, to bring with
him a Troop of Herulians. But Hypatius in the Circus, went up directly, and
sat him down in the Emperors Seat, where he uses to see the horse races and
other exercises. Then out of the Palace came Mundus, by the gate called
Cochlea, from the round form like a shell-snaile. But Belisarius went first
toward Hypatius, and the Imperial Seat, and at a hall where uses to be a guard
of Soldiers, he called, willing the Soldiers to open the doors for him to
go against the Usurper. The Soldiers resolving to stand for neither, till one
were clearly the Conqueror, made as if they heard him not. Belisarius
returning to the Emperor, affirmed they were all undone; the Soldiers
revolting, who guarded the Palace. The Emperor bad him go in by the Brazen
gate, and the portall there; and he passing with much danger and toil, through
rubbish, and places half burned, got to the Circus. Being come to the Gallery
of the Veneti, which is to the right hand of the Emperors Seat, he was
thinking to set upon Hypatius; but the gate there was narrow, and he feared the
people, seeing him pestred in a narrow passage, might cut in pieces himself and
his company, and then easily set upon the Emperor. So resolving to give on
upon the innumerable multitude, which stood confusedly and crowded in the
Circus, he drew his sword, and bad the rest do the like, and ran upon them,
with a great shout. The people being crowded together, and seeing corselets, and
Soldiers of approved valor and experience, unmercifully hewing them with
their swords, fell to running away. A fearful cry was made, and Mundus
standing near, and desirous to have his share in the action (being a daring
man) when he saw Belisarius in fight, he rusht into the Circus also at the gate
called Necra. And so the Mutineers between them both were cut in pieces. And
the overthrow being clear, and much slaughter of the Commons, Boraides and
Justus, the Emperors Nephews, pulled Hypatius out of his seat (none resisting)
and led him with Pompeius to the Emperor; (of the common people there being
slain that day more than 30000.) The Emperor commanded them to prison; and
Pompeius wept, being a man little versed in business; but Hypatius chid him,
saying, That none ought to lament for men perishing unjustly; forced at the
first by the people, and then coming to the Circus for no hurt to the Emperor:
But the next day the soldiers killed them both, and threw their bodies into
the sea. The Emperor confiscated their estates, and of all the other Senators
of their faction; but afterward restored to them, and to the sons of
Hypatius, and Pompeius, their former dignities, and so much of their estates,
as he had not But he gave away all their best lands and goods first. See the
Secr. Hist.
given away. And thus the mutiny ended.

CHAP. XX.
TRibonianus and John the Cappadocian had their Offices restored to them again.
Tribonianus lived many years in the same, and dyed in his bed, without
receiving other disgrace, being a fair spoken man, pleasant, and able to vail
his Covetousness with abundance of Learning. But John was irksome to all the
world, threatening the whip to all men, and sharking all kind of booty. In the
tenth year of his Office he paid the just penalty of his lawless life in this
manner. This story begins 8 years after the Mutiny, and ends ten years after
it, when John was stripped of all, and sent begging to Alexandria. As appears in
the end of the Chapter.
The Empress Theodora hated him of all men; and he being fallen foul with her
by some errors, sought not to gain her with flattery and good turns, but
openly plotted against her, and accused her to the Emperor; neither respecting
her fortune, nor the Emperors extreme affection to her. She perceiving his
doings, desired to kill him, but could not, the Emperor so much esteemed him.
But John knowing the Empresses mind, was terribly afraid, suspecting every
night in his bed, some Barbarian should rush in to kill him; and still peeping
out, and searching the entries, that he could not sleep, though he had about
him some thousands of Lanciers and Targetiers; a thing never used by any
Prefect. But no sooner day; but again, forgetting all fear of God, or man, he
became a common destruction to all Romans, frequenting Sorcerers, and harkening
to impious South-sayings, vainly foretelling to him the Imperial dignity; that
one might see his thoughts in the air, transported with hopes of the Empire:
And in his wicked course of life he bated nothing, nor was God in any of his
thoughts. If he went to Church to pray, or watch all night, he observed not the
Christian Rites; but having on a course garment, like a Heathen Priest, he
mumbled all the night some ungodly spells, to captivate more the Emperors mind,
and to preserve himself from mischief.

In the mean time Belisarius, after the conquest of Italy, came to
Constantinople with his wife Antonina, to manage the war against the Persian,
being precious to all men, and indeed deserving much estimation. Yet this John
was harsh to him, and still plotting against him; only because himself was
generally hated, and Belisarius of all men the most renowned. And the hope of
the Romans being upon him, again he made an expedition into Persia, leaving his
wife Antonina in Constantinople, who (being the ablest woman alive to effect
things hard to be effected) to gratify the Empress, devised this. John had a
daughter, his only child, named Euphemia, whom he extremely loved, very
modest, but young, and so easily caught. This maid, Antonina, by much soothing,
and assiduity, at last gained to her lure; not disdaining to impart her secrets
to her. And once having her above in a chamber, she feigned to lament her own
fortune, That Belisarius (after so much enlarging the Roman Empire, and two
Kings brought prisoners to Constantinople, and so vast a wealth) found
Justinian ungrateful; and in other things she accused the Government, as
unjust. Euphemia overjoyed at this discourse, being troubled too with the
Government, and fear of the Empress; Truly, dear Lady! (quoth she) you are the
causes, who having power, will not use it. We are not able, daughter (replied
Antonina) to stir in the Camp, if some in the Court concur not in the
action: But if your Father would, we should easily (being once in the
business) effect, whatsoever it should please God. Euphemia confidently
promised, that this should be done; and departing, related the matter to her
father. Who pleased with it, and conceiving it to lead him the way to his
Prophesies, and the Empire, without pausing upon it, consented: Willing his
daughter to treat for a meeting the next day, and that he might give her his
oath. Antonina knowing his mind, and desirous to draw him from suspecting the
truth: To give him a meeting now (quoth she) will do hurt; it will cause
suspicion, and hinder all: But she was instantly to go into the East to
Belisarius; being departed from Constantinople, and in her house in the suburbs
(which is called Rufinianae, a house of Belisarius) there John should come to
take leave, and bring her on her way; where they might confer, and give oath,
and take it. John liked this, and a day was assigned accordingly. The Empress
informed of all from Antonina, commended the plot, and encouraged her in it.
And at the day appointed, Antonina took leave of the Empress, and came to
Rufinianae, and the next day was to begin her journey. Thither at night came
John, to finish the agreement. The Empress had informed her husband of these
attempts of John to usurp, and so sent to Rufinianae Narses the Eunuch, and
Marcellus, Commander of the Palatine guards, with many soldiers, and direction
to search out the business, and if they found John in any plot, to kill him,
and come away. They say the Emperor advertised of this proceeding, sent one to
John, not to meet Antonina secretly. Which advise John neglecting (it being his
fate to be ruined) about midnight met Antonina near a hedge, behind which she
had placed Narses, and Marcellus, to hear what was said. There did John consent
in plain words to the conspiracy, and confirmed it with most terrible oaths.
Then did Narses and Marcellus, break in upon him. But at the noise, John's
Lanciers (who were at hand) came presently in. One of them wounded Marcellus
with his sword, not knowing who it was; whereby John with them escaped, and ran
to the City. If he had had the heart to go immediately to the Emperor, he had
had no hurt, I verily think: But by flying to the Temple, he gave the Empress
full scope to advance her design against him. So that of a Prefect made a
private man, and removed from that Church, he was brought to another, standing
in a suburb of Cyzicum, called Artace, and there made a Priest, naming himself
Peter. He was not made a Bishop, but a Priest: Neither would he execute the
function of a Priest, lest it should hinder his promotion to greater offices.
For he would not lay down his hopes. His estate being confiscate, the Emperor
remitted much of it, being still inclined to spare him. There had John the
means (secure from dangers, and rich, both by what he had collected himself,
and what he had by the Emperors grace) to use his pleasures without
controlement, and with moderation to esteem his estate happy. At which all men
repined, that being the wickedest devil in the world, he should thus live
happyer than he did before.

But God would not suffer his punishment to stay there, but prepared this
greater scourge for him. Eusebius, the bishop of Cyzicum, was as harsh a man as
John himself. And him the Cyzicenians accused to the Emperor in a judicial
way; but not prevailing ( Eusebius being too strong for them) some young men
laid wait, and killed him in the Marketplace of Cyzicum. With this Eusebius
John had great differences, which cast a suspicion of the fact upon him. So
that some Senators being sent to examine it, first put him in the common
prison, setting him naked like a robber, or some pilfering rogue (one who had
been so powerful a Prefect, enrolled among the Patricians, and had sat in
the Consuls chair, then which dignity none is greater in the Roman state) and
tearing his back with many stripes, they forced him to reveal his own life.
There was no great argument of his guilt of the murder; but the justice of God
exacted from him a revenge, for abusing the whole world. They took then all his
estate from him, and put him naked into a ship, save with one course coat,
which cost not much. His conductors, wheresoever the ship put in, made him beg
his bread, and small moneys for his subsistence. And so begging all the way to
Egypt, he was brought to Antinoe and this is the third year of his being there
a prisoner. Yet in all this affliction, he quitted not his hope of the Empire;
but fell to accuse some Alexandrians: for Arrears to the Treasury.

This just vengeance fell upon John the Cappadocian, ten years after this time.
But then the Emperor made Belisarius General of the East again, and sending
him into Africa, Anno Domini 533. and Iustiniani 7.
recovered the country, as shall be hereafter declared; which much vexed
Chosroes and the Persians, repenting they had made a peace, when he saw the
Romans power so augmented. And sending an Ambassador to Constantinople, he
congratulated with the Emperor, and in merriment demanded his share of the
spoils of Africa, seeing he had not vanquished the Vandales, if the Persians
had not made peace with him. But Justinian sent Chosroes a present in money,
and dismissed the Ambassador.

In the mean time at Daras one John, a soldier of the Garrison (some few of
his fellow soldiers conspiring) usurped, and possessed the City. In the Palace
there, as in a Cittadell) he sat, confirming daily his tyranny: And had not
there been peace then with the Persians, some desperate mischief had fallen
out. The fourth day of this tyranny, some other soldiers, by the direction of
Mamas Bishop of Daras, and Anastasius a principal Citizen, went to the Palace
at noon, each having under his cassock a short sword. And first at the inner
court, finding some few Lanciers of the guard, they killed them; then going
into the Hall, laid hold on the usurper. Some say the soldiers did not begin
with him; but that (they demurring upon it in the inner court, afraid of the
danger) a pudding seller in their company rusht in suddenly upon John, and
with his knife wounded him; not mortally. But flying in haste, he fell among
the soldiers, and then (they say) they laid hold on him; and having set the
place on fire, that it might not encourage any hereafter to rebel, they put
him fettred in the common prison. Where one among them, fearing, that the
soldiers knowing him to be living, might trouble the City again, killed him,
and so appeased the mutiny, and the said tyranny in Daras.

Finis Lib. 1. Bell. Pers.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Second Book of the Persian War.
CHAP. I. CHosroes seeks occasions of war; causes Alamundarus to pick quarrels,
and invade; excepts against Justinian for seeking to gain Alamundarus, and for
provoking the Hunnes to invade Persia. Ambassadors from Vitigis, King of the
Goths, persuade him unto it. CHAP. II. The War in Armenia; where Sittas, a
brave General, is unfortunately slain. Buzes succeeds. Upon the killing of
John they revolt to Chrosroes, and persuade him to break the Perpetual Peace.
CHAP. III. A Comet. A cruel invasion of Hunnes into Thrace and Illyrium.
Justinian dehorts Chosroes from war. Chosroes first invasion. His cunning
taking of Sura; and destroying it. He causes, Candidus Bishop of Sergiopolis to
redeem their captives. CHAP. IV. Buzes abandons Hierapolis with a speech.
Germanus is sent to Antioch: Hierapolis compounds. Berrhoea is taken: Of their
Bishop Megas. CHAP. V. The Antiochians refuse composition. In the absence of
Megas their Bishop, Berrhoea is taken. He obtains their bodies of Chosroes, who
had sacked the City before. CHAP. VI. Antiochia is assaulted; and presently
takes. The Soldiers run away at another gate. Zaberganes disswades mercy. The
cruel execution. Two Ladies drown themselves. Chosroes his vaunting
dissimulation; and his character. CHAP. VII. Chosroes having robbed the Church
of great treasures, and sacked the City, burnt it all, save the Church, and some
few buildings. He spares the walls. The Ambassadors get a promise of peace for
a great sum in hand, and a yearly pension. CHAP. VIII. He burns the Church of
St Michael the Archangel in Daphne, by a mistake: Enters Apamea, which had a
piece of the true Cross; and takes all their treasures. Chosroes will be for
the Prasini, Justinian being for the Veneti. Colchis redeems it self. CHAP. IX.
Chosroes attempts Edessa. A digression of Augarus and Augustus, and Christ's
Letter, that the town should never be taken. Edessa gives a little money, and
is let alone. CHAP. X. The redemption of the Antiochian captives hindered by
Buzes. A digression why Chosroes claimed Constantina. Daras besieged, and saved
by a counter-mine. Antioch of Chosroes. A Prodigy foreshewing the destruction
of Antioch. Belisarius having brought Vitigis prisoner, King of the Goths, is
appointed General against Chosroes. CHAP. XI. Colchis, called Lazica, revolts
to the Persian; and invites him thither with an army; being angered by John
Tzibus, the General there. Belisarius resolves with the advice of his Captains
to invade Persia. CHAP. XII. Chosroes his second invasion of the Romans in
Lazica. Petra is taken by composition, after the killing of John Tzibus. CHAP.
XIII. Belisarius at Nisibis fights with Nabedes, without much advantage: Sends
Arethas to spoil Assyria, who returns another way. Belisarius takes Sisabranum,
and 800 Persians in it; then wisely returns in safety: and Chosroes comes out
of Lazica. CHAP. XIV. Chosroes his third Invasion. Sergiopolis escapes; but
their Bishop Candidus is made a captive, Belisarius comes post into the East,
and gathers the scattered forces to Europus. CHAP. XV. Belisarius rids away
Chosroes with a bravado. A Truce is agreed, yet Cullinicum destroyed by
Chosroes. CHAP. XVI. An universal Pestilence: And how it raged in
Constantinople, where dyed 10000 a day. CHAP. XVII. The peace is not concluded,
through Justinians default. His Captains invade Persarmenia disorderly, and are
overthrown at Anglon, and shamefully run away. CHAP. XVIII. Chosroes his fourth
Invasion against the God of the Christians, and Edessa. He raises a mount.
Stephanus, a Physician, persuades peace, but cannot prevail. CHAP. XIX. The
entreaties of Martinus for a peace are rejected. The Romans burn the Mount. The
Persians are beaten back from their assaults. A truce for five years is
accorded. Alamundarus has a war. CHAP. XX. Chosroes plots: the possession of
Lazica: And by his Ambassador Isdigunas the surprise of Daras; who failed in
that design; but is magnificently entertained by Justinian at Constantinople.
CHAP. XXI. Chosroes sends Fabrizus to kill Gubazes, who fails in his plot.
Gubazes revolts to Justinian. Dagisthaeus besieges the Persians in Petra. The
description of Phasis. Dagisthaeus by absurdly dallying, misses the taking
Petra. CHAP. XXII. Mermeroe^, with an Army of Persians, forces his way through
the passage. Whereupon Dagisthaeus runs basely from Petra, Mermeroes, having
relieved Petra, retires home, leaving 5000, who are cut in pieces by Gubazes.
John the Cappadocian, after Theodora's death, returns to Constantinople, a
priest only; and how he wore the habit of Augustus.
THE HISTORY Of the Wars of the EMPEROVR JUSTINIAN,
Of the Persian War. The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
CHosroes hearing how Belisarius was recovering Italy for the Emperor
Justinian, could hold no longer, but would find some specious pretext to break
the peace: Alamundarus he directed to procure causes of a war. Who charging
Arethas for encroaching on him, with that color forraged the Romans; alleging
it no breach of peace between them and the Persians; neither having included
him. Indeed in no treaties was any mention of the Saracens; being comprehended
in the names of the Romans and Persians. The Country these Saracens disputed,
is called Strata, and lies to the South of the City of Palmyra. Trees nor Corn
it has none, (being parcht with Sun,) only it affoards some flocks of Sheep.
Arethas claimed it for the Romans from the name it had ( Strata in Latin being
a paved way) and producing testimonies of ancient men: But Alamundarus would
not dispute about names, alleging the owners to have anciently paid him rent
for the pasturage. Justinian committed the arbitration of these differences to
Strategius, a Patrician, superintendent of his treasures, a wise man, and nobly
born, and to Summus late Captain of the Forces in Palestine, and brother to
Julian, (who was Ambassador to the Ethiopians and Homerits) who thought it not
sit the Romans should quit the Country. But Strategius prayed the Emperor, not
to give the Persians, (now quarrelling,) occasion for a war, about such a
poor barren Country. Who consulted about it, and much time was spent in the
Arbitration. But Chosroes said the peace was broken, in that Justinian during
the same had manifested a great design upon his house, by endeavoring to
gain from him Alamundarus; Summus at the Arbitration having importuned him
with great offers of money to revolt. Chosroes also produced the Emperors
letters written to Alamundarus; And he alleged, that he had also written to
the Hunnes to invade and forage the Persians, and that the Hunnes had sent him
the Letters. Chosroes with these objections, (true, or false, I know not)
resolved to break the peace.

Then also Vitigis King of the Goths, brought low with the war there, sent two
Ambassadors to him, to persuade his invading the Romans; being not Goths, (for
fear of spoiling the business being discovered) but Ligurian priests, won to
this negotiation by large gifts. He that seemed the better man, and called
himself a Bishop, went for the Ambassador, and the other for his servant.
Being come into Thrace, they took in an Interpreter for the Syrian and Greek
tongues; and so came into Persia undiscovered; the Romans keeping no exact
guards because of the peace: And having access to Chosroes, they spoke thus;
Other men, O King! employ Ambassadors for ends of their own: But Vitigis King
of the Goths and Italians, having sent us to advise you concerning your Empire,
thinck him, as present, to say thus. In a word, O King! you abandon your own
Empire, and all men besides, to Justinian; who being naturally pragmaticall,
ambitious, and restless, has strong desires to conquer every Land and
Dominion. But finding himself unable to deal singly with the Persians, nor
during their opposition, to assail others; he resolved to blind you with a
Peace, and to compel others to join their powers to his, against your
Dominions. The Vandales and Moors he has already ruined, by removing us out
of his way with a title of friendship: And now fully stored with money, and
men, he invades us: showing, that if he can subdue the Goths; with us, and the
slaves he has already made, he will bring his Army upon the Persians,
respecting no name of friendship, nor his Oath. So that while there is yet
hope, do us no more hurt, nor suffer any your self; but in our misfortunes,
see what may happen to the Persians. Thinck the Romans never your friends, but
once above you in power, that they will consummate their hatred. Use your power
in the due time, least you seek it, when it is gone. The point of opportunity
once blunted, never recovers. It Is better to prevent and be safe; then coming
short of the opportunity, to suffer the basest things from an Enemy. Chosroes
esteemed this Counsel of Vitigis to be good; and studied more the breaking the
peace; in his envy of Justinian, not considering these discourses to come from
the Emperors Enemies. He had a mind to it, and so like a willing fugitive he
yielded himself: which happened also to him upon the discourses of the
Armenians and Lazians afterward. They imputed to Justinian that, which is the
high praise of a generous Emperor, the making his Empire greater and more
glorious; which they might as well object to Cyrus the Persian, or Alexander the
Macedonian. But envious men know no right: And thus Chorsroes resolved to
break the peace.

CHAP. II.
BUt in the mean time this happened. Simeones (who gave up Pharangium to the
Romans) in the heat of the war obtained of Justinian some Armenian villages;
and having them, he was slain by some of the ancient possessors; the
murderers being two brothers, the sons of Perozes, fled into ^ersia; and the
Emperor Justinian gave the villages to Amazaspes, sisters son to Simeones, and
made him governor of Armenia. After this a follower of Justinian, one Acacius,
accused Amazaspes of confederacy, and plotting to deliver Theodosiopolis to the
Persian, and other Towns, and by the Emperors direction put him to death
treacherously, and was made Governor of Amenia: He was a wicked man, and so
appeared, and most cruel to the Armenians, by unreasonable rapines, 12600 li.
slerl.
and by taxing them with a new tribute of four Centenaries. The Armenians not
able to endure him longer, conspired and killed him, then seized upon
Pharangium: Against whom the Emperor sent Sittas from Constantinople, where he
had remained ever since the peace. He at first made a slow war, striving to
appease, and reduce them to their former affections; promising to get their new
tribute remitted. But the Emperor, at the instigation of Adolius, the son of
Acacius, reproach't him for dallying. Then he prepared to give battle,
endeavoring with fair promises to join some, to have the rest better cheap.
The Apetians, a great and populous people, willing to submit, sent to him for
assurance; that turning to the Roman Army from their own Contrymen, they
should enjoy their own estates, free from grievance. He gladly made an
Instrument of their assurances, and sent it them signed; and confident upon
this to win the battle without striking stroke, he marched to the
Oenochalaces, where the Armenians encamped. But the bearers of the Instrument
could not meet the Apetians; and part of the Roman Army, not knowing of the
accord, killed some few of them they met. And Sittas finding some children and
women in a cave, angry for the Apetians not joining according to promise, or
not knowing them, killed them. So they stood in battle with the rest, offended
with all this. The fight could not be in one place, but was scattered in ragged
ground, and precipices, and bottomes of hills. So that Sittas not with many,
and some few Armenians, came near each other, with a deep valley between them;
being both sides horsemen: Sittas past the valley, and charged the enemy; who
retiring, stood still, and Sittas stopped there too. By chance an Herulian of the
Roman army came back in fury from the chase of an enemy, passing by Sittas, who
had struck his lance into the ground, The Herulians horse rushing mainly
against it, brake it; which much troubled Sittas. For an Armenian who knew him
(having his helmet off) assured the rest it was Sittas. Who hearing what the
Armenian said, and seeing his lance cracked upon the ground, drew his sword, and
would have retreated over the valley. The Enemy rode eagerly after him, and one
overtook him in the valley with a sword, which cut off the crown of his head,
not hurting the scull. Sittas spurred on; but Artabanes, the son of John, of
the race of the Arsacides, killed him with a thrust of his lance behind. Thus
was Sittas lost impertinently, and not sutably to his former actions; A goodly
man he was, valiant, and an excellent Commander, inferior to none of his time.
Some say one Solomon killed him, an obscure fellow, and not Artabanes.

Sittas being dead, the Emperor sent Buzes against the Armenians. Who being
near them, promised to reconcile them, desiring conference with some of their
chief men. None would give credit to Buzes, nor hearken to his offers, save
John, the father of Artabanes his friend, of the race of the Arsacides, who
presuming upon Buzes, as his friend, came to him with his son in law Bassaces,
and some others. These the next day lodged where they were to meet Buzes, and
perceaved themselves compass't with the Roman army. Bassaces, when he could not
persuade John to fly, rode back, leaving him all alone; whom Buzes killed.

The Armenians having no hope of reconciliation, and unable to maintain the
war; under the conduct of Bassaces, a valiant man, betook themselves to the
Persian King: To whom some of their Chiefs being admitted, spoke thus. There
are amongst us, Sir! many Arsacides, descendants of that Arsaces, who no
stranger to the Persian Empire, when it was under the Parthians, was a famous
King in his time, inferior to none. But we now stand before you, become slaves
and fugitives, not willingly, but forced; in appearance by the Romans, but
indeed, O King! by your resolution. For who gives power to the wrong doer,
justly bears the blame of the wrong. To deduce it higher, and through the
several occurrents, Arsaces, our last King, quitted his Royalty, it seems,
willingly to Theodosius the Roman Emperor, with condition for those of his
blood, to enjoy liberty, and not to be subject to Tribute. Which we preserved
till your famous Peace, or rather common calamity. For now not regarding
friends nor enemies, this friend of yours, O King! in words, and enemy in
deeds, has troubled all the world. Which your self will know ere long, when
he has subdued the Western Nations. What thing prohibited has he not done!
what well settled not stirred? Has he not taxed us with unusual tributes?
made slaves of the Tzanians our borderers, a free people? set a Governor over
the King of the wretched Lazians, a thing not incident to the nature of things?
not to be expressed? Has he not with his Generals unjustly surprised the
Bosporites, subjects of the Hunnes? made league with the Ethiopians, never
heard of by the Romans? added the Homerits, red Sea, and Country of Palme-trees
to the Roman Empire? not to speak of the Affricans and Italians. The whole
world not containing the man, he searches gulfes beyond the Ocean, and another
world. Why do you delay, O King! respecting this wicked ruinous peace? Is it,
after all the rest, to be his last dish? To know what man Justinian is to them
that yield to him, you have us for a Precedent, and the poor Lazians: how he
uses men unknown, as well as them that wrong him; consider the Vandales, Goths
and Moors. But the maine of all: studies he not during the peace to draw
Alamundarus your servant to revolt from you? to associate the Hunnes against
you, men unknown to him? But a shrewder act then this was never: Now he
perceaves his Western conquests ready for conclusion, he seeks to circumvent
the East, having none now to wrestle with left, but the Persians. So that
himself has broken the Perpetual Peace. They break peace, not who arm first,
but who plot against their allies in time of peace, and the crime is acted by
him that goes about to do it, though the success fail. And not they who cause
the war, but they who oppose them, use to conquer. Nor will the match be
equal; their best Soldiers being in the utmost parts of the world; and of
their two best Generals, we have lately slain Sittas; and Belisarius
Justinian will not look on. Which he slighting, holds in his hands the dominion
of Italy: So that you will have none to oppose your invasion; and us you shall
have with our best affections, and long experience of the Country, the guides
of your Army. Chosroes liked these reasons, and imparted to his trustiest
subjects, what Vitigis and the Armenians had said; propounding in Counsel what
was to be done; where the conclusion was, to make war on the Romans in the
beginning of the spring, it being then Autumn; Anno Domini 539. and Anno 13.
Justiniani.
and Justinian in the thirtenth year of his reign; the Romans the while not
suspecting the breach of the Perpetual Peace; but hearing only that Chosroes
murmured against the Emperors successes in the West, and charged him, as I
have mentioned.

CHAP. III.
THen also appeared a Comet, at first about the length of a tall man, afterward
much longer: The tail was toward the East, and the head to the West; and being
in Capricorn, kept behind the Sun in Sagittary. Some called it (being long
with a sharp head) gladiata, some barbata. It was seen more then forty days.
The learned in these things, made several repugnant praedictions upon this
starr: But what has fallen out since, I will relate. Immediately a great army
of Hunnes passing the river Ister overran all Europe; a thing often done, but
never with so much mischief to people. * From the Jonian gulf, to the suburbs
of Constantinople, they spoiled all in their way; in Illyrium they took 32.
Castles; destroyed Cassandria (anciently Potidaea) having never, (that we know)
attempted before a walled Town; and with much booty, and some 120. thousand
captives retired home, meeting no opposition: Afterward they did many mischiefs
to the Romans in their inroads. He calls the Jonian Gulf that which is called
the Adriatique Sea.
They assaulted the wall in Chersonesus, and forcing the Guards, and at full
Sea (being upon the Gulf called Melas) getting over it, entered within it, fell
suddenly upon the Roman inhabitants in Chersonesus, slew many, and made almost
all the rest slaves. Some cross't the Strait between Sestus and Abidus, spoiled
the towns of Asia Minor, and then returning to Chersonesus, went home with the
rest of their army and their booty. In another inroad having spoiled Illyrium
and Thessaly, they assaulted the wall at Thermopylae; where the Garrison
defending stoutly, they unluckily found the path up the mountain, and so
wasted all Greece, save Peloponesus; and then retired.

Not long after the Persians breaking the peace, did much infest the Romans of
the East; Belisarius having newly subdued Vitigis, and brought him to
Constantinople. Before the Persian invasion, Justinian, who saw Chosroes (as I
have said) quarrelling, sent a remonstrance to him by Anastasius, a prudent
man, who lately had suppressed the Rebellion at Daras, and wrote letters to
this effect. Wise men, who know God, strive to root up the occasions of war,
especially with their best friends. But men unadvised, and rashly affecting
even God for their enemy, contrive causes, which are no causes, of sights and
troubles. To break a peace, and run into a war, is an easy matter. The nature
of things makes the worst courses easiest to worthless men. But to finish a
war to ones mind, and to get peace again, is not so easy. You complain of
letters, which by me were written with no all purpose; but by you are
interpreted with a sense, such as conduces to the execution of your own
counsels with some pretense. But we can allege your Alamundarus his forraging
our countries, and acting desperate things during the peace; sucking our Towns,
ransacking, killing, enslaving our people; so that you are not to complain,
but to excuse. The complaints of wrong doers are proved by actions, not
discourses. And we, notwithstanding all this, resolved to observe the peace;
while you seek war, and coin complaints, which concern not us. Men seriously
embracing quiet, shake off complaints against friends, though they press hard:
But such, whom the articles of their friendship displease, study for pretexts:
A thing not becoming ordinary men, much less Kings. Lay then these things by;
and consider the multitudes to perish in this war; and who shall bear the
blame of what shall happen in it. Consider the oath you took when you received
your money, which you slight now, but can with no sophistry evade. God is of a
more excellent nature, then to be cosened by all the men living. Chosroes would
not answer any thing to this Letter, nor dismiss Anastasius.

But in the end of the Winter, and of the Chosroes first Invasion.
thirteenth year of Justinians reign; Chosroes entered the Roman territories
with a great army, and so clearly brake the Perpetual Peace. He marched not
through the midland, Justinians reign ended with the Winter almost; For he was
declared Emperor with his Uncle the third day before Easter. See Secret.
History. So this first Invasion of Chosroes was Anno Iustimani 14. Anno Dom.
540.
but with the Euphrates to his right hand. Beyond the river stands Circesium,
the furthest castle the Romans have, and a very strong one. The river Aborras,
being great, meets the Euphrates there, and the castle stands in the neck of
land between the two rivers; and a long wall from each river, taking in the
ground without the castle, makes it a triangle. Chosroes would not attempt so
strong a place, nor pass the river; his design being for Syria and Cilicia;
so he marched on; and being gone so much way, as would amount to about three
ordinary days journey, by the bancks of Euphrates, he came to Zenobia; a City
built by Zenobia the wife of Odenatus; who anciently being a Prince of the
Saracens, and in amity with the Romans, recovered for them the Eastern Empire,
subdued by the Persians. This Zenobia Chosroes considering to be no place of
importance, and the Country about it desert, and barren; not to take time from
his greater affairs, he attempted to get it by composition; and not
prevailing, marched on as much way more, and came to the City of the Surenians
upon the Euphrates. Staying before it, the horse he rode on neighed, and pawed
with his foot; from which Omen the Magi pronounced the Town would be taken. So
he encamped, and from his Camp drew his Army to assault: where an Armenian, one
Arsaces, who was Captain of the Garrison brought his men up to the battlements,
and after a brave fight, and many enemies slain, was killed by a shot; and the
Persians (it being late) retired to their Camp, meaning the next day to renew
the assault. But the Romans, despairing upon the death of their Commander, sent
out the next day the Bishop of their City, to supplicate Chosroes for the
sparing themselves and the Town. Who with some attending him, and a present of
foul, wine, and fine manchets, cast himself down before Chosroes, weeping,
and beseeching him to spare miserable men, and a City of little estimation with
the Romans, or Persians hitherto, and promising to pay reasonable ransom for
their persons and city. Chosroes was offended with the Surenians; the first
Roman subjects in his way, and refusing to receave him; nay taking arms and
killing many principal Persians: but he hid his anger under a fair
countenance, that by these men's chastisement he might terrify all in his way,
and bring them to yield without fighting. So he took up the Bishop very
courteously, received his present, and pretended to communicate with some chief
men about the ransom, and then to satisfy his request; and so sent him away
without the least jealousy of his design. With him he sent a convoy of
Persians, whom he instructed to go to the Town, comforting the Bishop with
hopes; that himself and company might be seen by the Townsmen cheerful without
fear, and when the guards opened the gate for him, to cast a stone or piece of
wood between, and himder their shutting it awhile; presently his army should
follow; which he presently made ready, with command to ride full speed to the
town upon signal given. The Persians came close to the town, and took leave of
the Bishop, whom the Surenians seeing over-joyed, and honorably conducted by
the enemy, apprehended no mischief, but set their gate wide open, and caught
the bishop in their arms, applauding him. Being in, the Guards thrust the gate
to shut it, but the Persians having thrown a stone between, they could not get
it together; and they durst not open it again, perceiving it possessed by the
enemy. Some report, that it was not a stone, but a piece of wood that the
Persians threw down. But before the townsmen could perceive it, Chosroes came
with the army, and quickly forced open the gate, and entered the town, and being
in a fury, ransackt the houses, killed most of the men, and making the rest
slaves, burnt the City to the ground; and then he sent away Anastasius, willing
him to carry the news to Justinian, in what part of the world he left Chosroes
the son of Cabades. But either for covetousness, or kindness to Euphemia
(whom, being one of these captives, and very beautiful, he made his wife, and
infinitely doted on her) he was pleased to do the poor Surenians some good. He
sent to Sergiopolis, a Roman City (bearing the name of Sergius, a famous Saint,
and distant from this ruined City fifteen miles to the Southward, in the
Barbarian plains) and directed that Candidus the bishop thereof, should ransom
them, being twelve thousand captives, for two Centenaries. But he not having
the money, refused it. Chosroes willed him to send him a bond to pay it
hereafter, 6300. l. sterling. which is but 10. s. a man.
and so with a small sum to redeem a multitude of Captives. Candidus did so,
promising to pay the money within a year, confirming it by oath, and upon
penalty, if it were not paid by the day, to pay it double, and to be no more a
Priest for breaking his oath. This was drawn up in writing, and so he had the
Surenians delivered to him: of whom the most part, not enduring the misery
fallen on them, perished.

CHAP. IV.
CHosroes, this done, marched forward. The Generall-ship of the East the
Emperor had so divided, as that all to the Euphrates was left to Belisarius
(who formerly had the whole command) and from thence to the Persian frontier,
all was under Buzes, and till Belisarius should return out of Italy, he had
the charge of the whole East; who first lay at Hierapolis with all the army.
But understanding what happened to the Surenians, he called to him the chief
men of Hierapolis, and told them; That when the match is equal, there is
reason to fight quickly with an enemy invading; but to men much weaker than
their enemy, it is more expedient to circumvent him with stratagems, then to
run into an evident danger: What forces Chosroes has, they have heard. That if
they make the war from the walls, the Persians will block them up; and furnish
themselves with provisions out of their country (none opposing) while they want
within; and that the siege lasting, their walls cannot hold out, being very
assaultable, nor can the Romans but fall into some desperate estate. But that
guarding the City with part of the army, and lodging the rest in the bottoms of
the mountains near the City, infesting the enemies camp, and his forragers
with sudden courses, they will force him to raise his siege, unable to make
his assaults at his ease, nor to provide food for so great an army. The advice
of Euzes seemed pertinent, but he did nothing; but went away with the choicest
men of the army; and in what part of the world he was, neither the Romans in
Hierapolis, nor the enemy could learn. Justinian, hearing of the invasion,
dispatched Germanus, his brothers son, in much haste with three hundred men,
promising to send a great army soon after. Who came to Antioch, visited the
walls, and found much of them of good strength; the plain ground was compast by
the river Orontes, and the hill was steep, craggy, and unapproachable; only at
the top of mount Casius, he found the wall very assaultable, from a rock
stretching far in breadth, and as high as the wall. He directed therefore,
either to cut the rock from the wall, that none from it might get up, or else
to join it to the wall by a tower upon it. But workmen found both these
impossible, in so short time with an enemy so near, and to begin and not
perfect it, would but show the enemy where to make their war. Germanus failing
in this, and after long time seeing no army from the Emperor, nor likelihood
of any, fearing Chosroes might make it his chief business to take Antioch,
hearing the Emperors Nephew to be within it; and the Antiochians having the
same thoughts, resolved all in counsel to buy their safety with money. And to
Chosroes they sent Megas, Bishop of Berrhoea, a prudent man; who finding the
Persians not far from Hierapolis, and being admitted to Chosroes, besought him
to pity men who never offended him, nor were in case to resist him. That it is
not fit for a King to use violence against yielding men; nor generous to give
the Emperor no time to consult, either for rectifying the peace, or for
preparations to war, by a mutual consent; and to invade thus without warning;
their Emperor not knowing in what case they are. The rude nature of Chosroes
could not be put in tune by discreet words; they rather more swelled him with
pride and folly; threatening to destroy all the Syrians and Cilicians; and he
bade Megas follow him. Then he encamped before Hierapolis; which finding
strong, and a good garrison within, he sent Paul his interpreter to demand
money of them; Paul was bred up in the Roman Territory, and went to a
Grammar School in Antioch, and was thought to be descended of Romans. The
citizens fearing their walls, which embraced a great circuit to the mountain;
and willing to save their country from spoiling, agreed to give two thousand
pound weight of silver. 5250. l'. sterling.
And Megas obtained of Chosroes with much entreating, 31500. l'. sterling.
to accept * ten Centenaries of gold for all the Eastern provinces, and so to
leave them. Megas returned to Antioch; and Chosroes having his money for
Hierapolis, marched to Berrhoea, standing between Antioch and Hierapolis, from
either two days journey. But the fourth day, Megas, with few in company, came
to Antioch; and the Persian army to the suburbs of Berrhoea. Chosroes urged the
Berrhoeans by Paul the interpreter, for twice as much money as Hierapolis gave,
because their walls were weak, nor could they trust to them. They yielded to
his demand, paying down 2000 l. weight of silver, but the other 2000 l.
alleging they could not pay down; and he urging them, they fled by night to
the Castle in the high town. The next day, they that came from him to receive
the rest of the money, found the gates shut, and could speak with none. The
King understanding it, by his command they entered the City with scaling
ladders, none resisting; and opening the gates let in all the army. Chosroes in
a rage would have burnt the City; but first he would take in the Castle; where
some Roman soldiers defended valiantly, and killed some enemies. But the
Berrhoeans flying to the castle with all their horses and cattle, by that
niggardly trick were undone; for there being but one spring, and all the
cattle suffered improvidently to drink up the water, the spring became dry; and
in such estate they were.

CHAP. V.
BUt Megas could not persuade the Antiochians to the agreement he had made with
Chosroes. For the Emperor had sent to him Ambassadors, who then abode at
Antioch, John the son of Rufinus, and Julian his Secretary; which Julian
forbade expressly to give money to the enemy; or to buy ^hus the Emperors
towns. They accused also Ephraim, the Bishop of Antioch, to Germanus, of
attempting to betray the City to Chosroes. So Megas departed, nothing done; and
the Bishop of Antioch, fearing the Persians coming, went into Cilicia, whether
soon after came Germanus with some few, leaving there most of his company. But
Megas arrived at Berrhoea; and much afflicted with what happened, complained to
Chosroes for this perfideous usage, to send him to Antioch about truce, and in
the mean time to ransack his countrymen, who never wronged him; to block them
up thus in the Castle, and burn and ruin their city. Your self, Sir (answered
Chosroes) are too blame, making me lose my time here, and returning so long
after the day appointed. For your countrymen; they contracted to pay money,
which as yet they cannot think of performing; but presumptuous in their strong
Castle, they put us, as you see, to the necessity of a siege: Whom I hope with
the help of the Gods shortly to chastise for it, and for my Persians here lost.
Megas replied; If all must be silent, while you, a King, accuse wretched men;
then am I bound to confess without disputing; absolute power, as in all the
rest, must overcome in words. But if one may (laying aside respects) stand for
truth; O King! you have nothing justly to charge us with. I went the messenger
of your propositions to Antioch, and returning the seventh day (then which what
can be more speedy) I find my country thus used by you. Who having abandoned
all that is most precious, have nothing now left, but to fight for their lives;
and the advantage of not paying the rest of the money; it being impossible for
men to pay what they have not. Names are anciently defined for things;
Disability is one thing, and Ingratitude another. Indeed, he that wantonly
refuses, is with reason hated; but one by disability driven to the same point,
is to be pittyed rather. Though the worst things are befallen us, yet, Sir!
leave us with this comfort, not to have been authors of our own misfortunes.
Think what you have received, to be the whole sum; and enough; not weighing
it by your own greatness, but by the the Berrhoeans ability. Force us no
further; least at last you seem to want power; seeing excessive undertakings
ever are rewarded with unfaisibleness. The most powerful way is to attempt no
Impossibles. Let this be our apology for the present: But if I might speak with
the poor men; I might say something, now not thought of. Chosroes permitted him
to go to the Castle; who finding there what happened to their spring, weeping,
he came back to Chosroes, and falling flat upon the ground, protested, the
Berrhoeans had no money; and besought him to bestow the bodies of the poor men
upon him. Which Chosroes granted upon his lamentable crying, and gave his faith
to all in the Castle. Who being so near lost, thus came out; and went whether
they pleased; and among them some of the soldiers; but the most revolted to
Chosroes; complaining of the state to be behind in their Pay for many years;
and they went with him into Persia afterward.

CHAP. VI.
BUt then, hearing from Megas, that the Antiochians would give no money, he
marched against them, where some were fled the City with their goods, and the
rest resolved the like, if Theoctistus and Molathes, Captains of the forces in
Phoenicia Libani, had not with a supply of 6000 old soldiers encouraged them,
and stayed their flight. Shortly after came the Persian army, and encamped near
the river Orontes. Chosroes sent Paul his Interpreter to demand money of the
city, and for ten Centenaries of Gold, or less, if it were paid presently, he
appeared willing to have been gone. Then came to him the Ambassadors, and
after much expostulation on both sides, about the breaking the peace, returned.
The next day the common people of Antioch, who are not used to serious matters,
but still to merriments and debauches, put scorns upon Chosroes, and derided
him from the battlements; and had almost stoned Paul, if he had not foreseen
and avoided it, for exhorting them to redeem their persons and city for a
little money. Chosroes incensed herewith, resolved upon the assault; and the
next day he commanded part of the army to give on by the river si^^^nd himself
went against the top of the hill, where the wall is most assau^^^e. Here the
Romans finding the places they were to stand and fight on, narrow, tied long
beams between the turrets fast together; and enlarged the standings for more
bodies to oppose the assailants. The Persians came on valiantly, and their
arrows flew to the very top of the hill. The Romans, both soldiers, and many
of the boldest citizens defended stoutly; the great breadth and height of the
rock commanding the wall, and bringing the fight to be equal, as upon even
ground. If the Romans had put out but three hundred men, and possessed the rock
first, and thence kept off the assailants, I do not think the town had been
endangered; for the Barbarians had no means from whence to assault, being
beaten perpendicular from the rock and the walls both. But this was not thought
of; the Antiochians being to perish by this army. The Persians having Chosroes
present, and crying loud unto them, strove beyond power, giving no space to the
other to spy or ward their shot. But the Romans pressing up to defend, the
ropes under them which tied the beams suddenly brake, and down they all fell:
They who made good the next Turret, hearing the noise, thinking the wall to be
thrown down there, ran away. Some young citizens only, who used to quarrel in
the Circus, would run no further; being come down from the wall. But the old
soldiers, with Theoctistus and Molatzes, lept on their horses, which stood
ready, and rode to the gate, giving out that they went to receive in Buzes with
an army with him. Thither ran also the Antiochians, men, women and children,
and the place being narrow, they tumbled over one another, overborn with the
horses; and the soldiers sparing none, but rather urging on faster, that there
was a great slaughter made. But the Persians set their scaling ladders, and
mounted, none opposing; and a while stayed upon the battlements, as if doubtful,
and discovering; lest there might be ambushes in the rough waste ground, among
rocks and precipices, which is within the walls, upon the descent from the
hill. Some say it was upon the advice of Chosroes, who perceiving the bad
ground, and the soldiers running away, feared to necessitate their turning
head upon him, which might hinder him from taking the greatest, fairest, most
populous, richest, and happiest Roman City in the East; than which esteeming
less all things else, he resolved to give the soldiers fair leisure to run
away: so that the Persians pointed with their hands to them, and bade them make
haste away. And they did so, with their Commanders, going out of the gate of
Daphne, a suburb of Antioch, with some few of the common people; the Persians
having only not meddled with that gate, who when they saw the soldiers gone
far, they descended, and from the hill fell into the midst of the City. Some
young men encountered them, some armed with corslets, but most unarmed; only
throwing stones, and driving them off a little, they seemed to have the better,
and sung their Paeans, and cried Emperor Justinian, Callinicus, or the fair
Conqueror, as it they had the victory indeed. In the mean time Chosroes sent
for the Ambassadors to speak with them, sitting upon the Turret by the top of
the hill; when Zaberganes, one of his commanders, conceiving the conference
would be for a composition, came to him hastily, and said: O Master! you differ
from the Romans themselves, to think to preserve these men, who before the
danger flout your Majesty, and being beaten, dare impossibilities and desperate
acts upon the Persians; as if they feared your humanity should pity men,
scorning preservation, and spare them, that will not be spared; such as lay
ambushes for, and kill their Conquerours in a town taken, their own garrison
having forsaken them. Chosroes at this, sent many of his best men against them;
who brought him word, that all was well; the Persians having by their numbers
routed the Antiochians, with much slaughter, sparing no age. Two wives of
Noblemen of Antioch are reported to have gotten without the walls, and that
seeing the enemies coming toward them on all sides, and fearing to be taken,
and abused, they ran to the river Orontes, and covering their faces with their
veils, lept into it, and were drowned. So every species of misery fell upon the
Antiochians. Then did Chosroes speak thus to the Ambassadors. The old saying,
I see, is true; God ever gives the good mingled with the evil; so that we have
not so much as laughter, which we repent not of. Good fortune is attended with
some cross, and pleasure with grief, suffering no prosperity untainted. This
city, the most renowned of the Roman dominion, I have taken without labor; God
has given me, (you see) a sudden victory. Yet to behold the slaughter of
such multitudes, and my trophy died with so much blood, it takes away the
pleasure: And hereof are the miserable Antiochians guilty; who being not able
to beat off the Persians, have yet with senceless rashness sought their own
deaths, struggling under the yoke against men conquering them so easily. My
chief men importune me to compass the city, and destroy every man in it: But I,
to preserve them, direct rather to drive them on that fly; as being impious to
insult on men under my power. This Chosroes spoke in a vaunting affected way to
the Ambassadors; who saw for what reasons he gave the Romans leisure to run
away. He was the shrewdest man living to speak things that were not; to
conceal the truth; and to lay the blame upon men he wronged, for the faults
done by himself; Ever ready to agree to any thing, and swear to it; but more
ready to forget both agreement and oath; skillfull to abase his mind to any
abomination for money, and yet in his countenance to pretend piety, and in
words to detest the action. As when he so treacherously ruined the Surenians,
who never wronged him. Espying a principal matrone (the town being taken)
dragged violently by her left hand by a Barbarian, and with the other haling
after her her little child newly weaned, and fallen to the ground, which she
would not let go, it being not able to keep pace; Here he showed his very
humor; Groaning, and seeming to the standers by, specially Anastasius the
Ambassador to weep, he prayed God to punish the Authors of those things;
intimating the Emperor; though he knew well himself to be the only author.
With this strange bad nature he became King of Persia, after rejection of the
gallant Zames, for his one eye; and of the eldest Caoses, for his Fathers
reasonless hatred; and he prevailed easily against his oppugners; and to the
Romans did even as much mischief, as he desired. Thus Fortune, resolving to
make a man great, ever acts her resolution in the fit time (none opposing the
strong current of her will,) she regards not the worth of the man, nor avoids
things seeming unfit, nor cares for the worlds railing for having advanced one
not deserving her grace; In brief, not thinking upon any thing, but how to
bring her purpose to effect.

CHAP. VII.
CHosroes commanded his army to make slaves of the Antiochians surviving, and
to ransack their estates; and himself with the Ambassadors went down from the
Hill to the Church. Here he found so great treasures of gold and silver, that
had he taken no other spoil, he had gone away with a huge wealth. He took down
many admirable pieces of marble, which he Commanded to lay without the walls,
to be carried into Persia; and then gave order to burn the City. The
Ambassadors requested him, to spare the Church only, for which he had
received a sufficient ransom. This he granted, and commanded to set fire to
all the rest; for which leaving some few, he retired to his camp. God had
foreshewn a while before this calamity to this city. The Ensigns of the
Cohorts residing there, standing to the Westward, of themselves turned to the
East, and then returned where they were before, none touching them. This the
Soldiers showed, among many others, This Officer he calls before Prefect of
the Camp.
to the Pourveyor of the expense of the army, one Tatianus, born at Mopsuestia
in Cilicia, a discreet man. They seeing the prodigy, knew not then how the
dominion of the city would be transferred from the Western to the Eastern
Emperor, that being appointed to suffer what fell out, they might have no
means to avoid it. I am astonished, recording for ages to come this great
calamity, and comprehending what should be the will of God, highly thus to
exalt some man or place, and then upon no reason appearing, to ruin them. It
is not lawful to say, but that all things by him are done with reason; who yet
endured Antioch to be laid flat with the ground by a most impious man; whose
beauty and magnificence could not even then be wholly concealed. The Church
only escaped this destruction, by the Persians care, who had the charge of it;
Many houses also were saved in the Cerataeum, not by any man's care; but
standing in the furthest end of the city, not joining to other buildings, the
fire reached them not. They burnt also all without the walls, but the Church of
Saint Julian, and the houses about it, where the Ambassadors lodged. And the
city-walls they wholly forbore. The Ambassadors came again also to Chosroes,
and said thus. If we did not, Sir! speak to your self present, we should not
believe, that Chosroes the son of Cabades were entered the Roman Territories in
arms, despising his Oath so lately sworn, (the strongest pawn of faith among
men) and breaking Truce, the only hope left in the calamities of war.
Certainly this course is to translate the life of men to that of beasts.
Without Truces must be perpetual war, which will banish those from nature who
use it. You wrote lately to your brother, that he is guilty of breaking the
Truce: confessing thereby, that Truce-breaking is a foul mischief. If the
fault be not his, you do not justly to invade us. If he have done some such
thing, yet pursue your action no further, and appear the better man. He that
has the worst in the ill, ought to overcome in the better. But we know the
Emperor has not transgrest the peace; and we entreat you not to act those
mischiefs upon us, which the Persians will never enjoy: and you will gain
nothing, but the fortune of doing desperate injuries to the Romans, with whom
you lately made Truce. But Chosroes protested, Justinian to have broken the
Truce, and recited particulars, some material, others slight, or
counterfeited. Especially he offered to show the Emperors letters to
Alamundarus; and the Hunnes, the maine causes of the war: but he neither
alleged nor showed, that ever any of the Romans invaded the Persians, or did
any hostile act. The Ambassadors denied some things, and in others laid the
blame upon Justinians Ministers. In conclusion, Chosroes demanded money; not
only a present sum, being to establish a peace for ever; (For friendships
gotten with money, commonly wast with the money) but a yearly pension for a
firm peace, and for the Persians guarding the Caspian Gates, and no more
importuning about Daras; for which they shall be their perpetual
stipendiaries. What! said the Ambassadors, would you have the Romans pay them a
tribute? No! quoth he, but to have the Persians their soldiers, giving them
pay for their service. You give pensions to the Hunnes and Saracens, not as
they are Tributaries, but to guard your Territories. After much debate, in the
end they came to this accord; That Chosroes should presently receave fifty
Centenaries of gold, 157500. l'. 15720. l'. sterling.
and a perpetual yearly payment of five more; and so do no more mischief, but
receaving hostages upon this accord to retire with his whole army into his
country: whither other Ambassadors should be sent from Justinian to settle a
firm peace.

CHAP. VIII.
CHosroes then went on to Seleucia, a maritime city, about sixteen miles from
Antioch, where neither finding nor harming any Roman, he washed only in the
Seawater, did sacrifice to the Sun, and whom he pleased, with a deal of
superstition, and rode back again. Being come to his camp, he desired much,
(as he said, only for curiosity) to see Apamea, which stood near. The
Ambassadors unwillingly yielded, upon condition, that having seen the city,
and received 1000. l'. weight in silver, he should retire without spoiling it.
But Chosroes appeared to the Ambassadors and all men, to take that journey,
only to catch at some trivial cause to sack the city, and country about it.
Then he went up to Daphne, a suburb of Antioch, where he admired the Grove and
the Fountains, things worth the seeing. Having sacrificed to the Nymphs, he
came away, doing no mischief there, but the burning of the Temple of Michaell
the Archangell, upon this mistaking. An eminent Persian, well known to the
King, rode with some in his company by a ragged piece of ground, called Tretum,
where stands the Church of the Archangell made by Evaris; where finding a young
man of Antioch hidden, and alone, he quitted his company and chased him. The
young man was a Butcher, named Acimachus; who ready to be caught, turned upon
his pursuer suddenly, and with a stone hit him under the ear into the dura
matter: and being fallen down, dispatched him with his own Cimiter, rifled his
arms and apparel, got up on his horse, and rode clear away by good chance, or
his knowledge of the ways. Chosroes was grieved at the accident, and commanded
some to burn that Church of the Archangell; who thinking he meant this in
Daphne, burn it with the buildings about it.

Then Chosroes with his army went to Apamea: where is a piece of wood of a
cubit long, part of Christ's Cross, brought thither long ago by a Syrian. This
the Inhabitants believing to be a great defense to them and their city, have
put it in a casket set all with gold and precious stones, and committed it to
three Priests to keep; and one day yearly the whole city brings it out, and
adores it. The Apameans were afraid of the Persians coming, hearing too, how
in Chosroes was no truth: and they entreated their Bishop Thomas, to show them
the wood of the Cross that they might do it their last worship: When a miracle
happened above reason and belief. The Priest carrying, and showing the wood, a
bright flame hovered above it, and the roof over it shone with an
extraordinary light. The Priest goeing round the Church, the light went along,
keeping still the place of the roof directly over him. The Apameans were
ravished with delight at the miracle, at once rejoicing and weeping; and now
confident of their preservation. Thomas having gone round about the Church, put
up the wood of the Cross into the casket, and covered it, and suddenly the
shining ceased. Understanding the enemies to be near, he went to Chosroes; who
asking him if the Apameans meant to oppose his army, he answered, they had no
such thought. Then open your gates ( quoth Chosroes) and receave me into your
city with some few. I am come (replied the Bishop) for the same purpose to
invite you. So the Army pitched their tents by the walls, and Chosroes with two
hundred of his best men rode into the city. And no sooner in, but he forgot his
promise to the Ambassadors, commanding the Bishop to give him not 1000 l.
weight of silver only, nor ter fold that; but all their treasures of gold and
silver, being very great. I doubt not, but without scruple he had sacked,
enslaved the whole city, if God had not manifestly hindered him: So did
covetousness and vain glory besot him; For to lead cities into captivity he
esteemed it a great renown; and thought it nothing to use the Romans thus,
contrary to accords and truces. This humor of his appears by his attempt upon
Daras, and the Callinicians during the truce, which I shall relate hereafter.
But God, as I said, preserved the Apameans. When Chosroes had taken their
treasures, and Thomas saw him drunk with abundance, he brought the wood of the
Cross, and opening the casket, showed it him, saying; O Excellent King! This is
all I have left; This casket beautified with gold and precious stones, I envy
not unto you: Take it with all the rest. But this piece of wood is to us both
preservative, and precious. I beg, and entreat you Sir to give it me. Which
Chosroes granted. Then to show magnificence, he willed the people to go to the
Circus; and the Charioters to run their matches; and himself was an earnest
beholder of their sports. But hearing how Justinian was long addicted to the
Veneti, meaning to be contrary to him in that also, he would procure the
victory for the Prasini. The Charioters from the starting place set out; and
one that wore the Blew, got the start, another wearing Green, following close
at the others wheels. Chosroes supposing it done purposely, chafed, and cried
out, That Caesar was foremost; which should not be; commanding the foremost
Chariot to stay, and so cast behind, to get before again if it could. His
command being fulfilled, his side, the Prasini won the match. There an Apamean
came, and complained to him of a Persian, for entering his house, and forcing
his daughter a virgin. He in a great rage, commanded the man to be produced,
and crucified in the camp; But the people clamoured to him, and begged to spare
the man. Chosroes promised to pardon him, but shortly after secretly crucified
him; and these things done, rode back with his army.

And at Chalcis, distant ten miles and a half from Berrhoea, He forgot the
accord again; encamped before the city, and sent Paul the interpreter,
threatening to force their city, unless they buy their safety, ransom
themselves, and deliver him the Soldiers in their town with their Commander.
The Chalcians feared both the Emperors, and swore they had no soldiers;
hiding most of them, and Adonachus their Captain, in poor cottages from the
enemy; And getting up hardly * two Centenaries of gold, 6300 l'. sterling.
(their city being not rich) with it they ransomed their bodies and city. From
hence Chosroes meant to make his retreat, not by the way he came, but to cross
the Euphrates, and plunder Mesopotamia. Near Obbane, which stands five miles
from the castle of Barbalissus, he made a bridge, and went over, signifying to
the army to follow, and that the third day by such an hour, he would take up
the bridge; and some of them chancing to be cast behind, at the hour, he not
regarding them, sent to take up the bridge, and they got home as they could.

CHAP. IX.
CHosroes was then ambitious to take Edessa; induced by a confident tradition
among the Christians, (which troubled him) that it was never to be taken;
affirmed upon this ground. Augarus, long ago Toparch of Edessa (so they then
called their national Kings) was one of the wisest men of his time, and for
that cause in much savor with the Emperor Augustus. Desiring to be a Roman
Confederat, he went to Rome; and conferring with Augustus, so amazed him with
his wit, and enamored him with his conversation, that he would not part with
him, though he urged his dismission. At last, after long absence, longing to
return to his country, but not persuading Augustus to let him go; he used
this devise. He went out near Rome to hunt (being therein studious) and
compassing much country, took many wild beasts alive, and from every country
where he caught them, carried of the earth home with him to Rome, together with
the beast. Augustus sitting in the Circus (as his manner was) Augarus came to
him, and showed him the beasts, and the earth, and which country earth belonged
to every beast. The earth he caused to be laid in several parts of the Circus,
and the beasts from one place to be let go: When every beast leaving one
another, ran to the country earth from whence he was taken. Augustus beheld it
long and earnestly, wondering to see nature untaught make even to beasts
desirable their native earth. Then Augarus suddenly taking him by the knees,
said, O Sir! And what mind do you think I have, who have wife and children,
and a Kingdom (though a small one) in mine own country? Augustus overcome, and
forced with the truth, dismissed him, though unwillingly; and bad him ask him
some thing. Augarus prayed him to build a Circus at Edessa; which being granted
him, and he dismissed, he came home. His Subjects asked him; what good he had
brought them from the Emperor Augustus. He answered, That he had brought a
Grief without damage, and a joy without gain; intimating the fortune of the
Horse-races. Augarus growing old, and vexed with a grievous gout, and the
pain, and sitting still troubling him, he consulted with the skillfullest
Physicians from all lands; but finding no ease, he forsook them, and absolutely
despairing, bewailed his fortune. At that time Jesus, the Son of God, conversed
in the body with the people of Palestine; by committing no sin, and by working
miracles, manifesting himself indeed the Son of God. He raised dead men, as
from sleep; to men born blind he opened their eyes, cleansed leprous bodies,
lame feet he set loose, and did what ever Physicians pronounce incurable.
Augarus hearing the relation from some Palestinians, residing at Edessa, took
comfort, and wrote to Jesus, to leave Jury, and those ungrateful men, and to
live with him. Christ wrote back again to Augarus, refusing to come, but
promising health by his Letter. They say he added this, That the city should
never be conquered by the Barbarians. This Postscript, the writers of the
history of that time knew not of; but the Edessenians affirm to have found it
with the Epistle; which Epistle they have hung for a defense, engraven upon
their city gates. But shortly after it came under the Persian, not forced, but
thus. Augarus upon the letter from Christ, grew well, and having lived long,
deceased. But his son succeeding him, being the ungodlyest man living, wronged
his subjects; for which fearing the Romans chastisement, he revolted to the
Persians. But long afterward the Edessenians killed the Barbarian Garrison,
and yielded their city to the Romans. Which Chosroes knowing, studies to
recover the city: and this I guess by things happened in my time, which shall
be related in their seasons. And I have had a conceit, that if Christ did not
write that Postscript, yet (men having that opinion) he would keep the city
from taking; that he might give them no excuse of wandering.

But upon this ground Chosroes much affected the taking of Edessa. At Batne, a
little Town three days journey from Edessa, he lodged his army; and by break
of day was marching toward Edessa. But they went out of their way so, that the
next night they lodged in the same place: and this happened twice: And when
with much ado he was gotten to Edessa, they say, his chopps swelled with
Rhewme; which so troubled him, that he resolved not to attempt the city. But he
sent Paul, and demanded money of them. They said, that of their city they had
no fear; but not to hurt their towns, and villages, they agreed upon two
Centenaries of gold; which he received, and kept his agreement.

CHAP. X.
THen came letters from Justinian to Chosroes, agreeing to ratify the treaty
between him and the Ambassadors; upon which he discharged the Hostages, and
prepared for his retreat; being pleased to ransom the Antiochian captives: the
Edessenians therein showed an incredible alacrity. Not a man, but according to
his ability brought the ransomes into the Church, and some above ability.
Courtisans threw in their Jewels, and the husbandman, wanting money or
householdstuffe, brought his ass or poor ewe to the Church, that a great
quantity was gathered of gold and silver, and other goods; but none of it was
given for the ransom. Buzes being there, prohibited the ransoming, expecting
some great gain out of it. So Chosroes with the captives marched on. The
Carrenians met him, and offered him a great sum, but being no Christians but
Heathens, he would not take it. But of the Constantinians he took their money,
yet claimed the city to be his from his Ancestors. For Cabades having taken
Amida, would have also gotten Edessa, and Constantina. And being before Edessa,
he demanded of the Magi, if it were to be won, pointing with his right hand
to the place. They told him, no. For by stretching his right hand to it, he
gave a symbol, not of taking, or of hurting the city, but of preservation. He
was satisfied with this, and led his army against Constantina, and encamped,
with purpose to besiege the town. Baradotus then Bishop of the city (an upright
godly man, mighty with God in prayer, whose very countenance showed him to be
indeed gracious with God) came to Cabades with a present of wine, dry ^iggs,
honey, and fine manchets; and besought him, not to attempt a town of no
importance, neglected by the Romans, without garrison, or other defense, but
the poor miserable inhabitants. Cabades upon this, not only bestowed the city
upon him, but gave him all the store-victualls of the army for the siege, and
then departed out of the Roman territory. Hereupon Chosroes claimed the city to
belong to him from his Father.

Being come to Daras, he sat down before it. Within, the Romans, and the
General Martinus prepared for their defense. The city has two walls, the
innermost large and fair, and sixty foot high, with turrets; all one hundred
foot high: The outward wall is much less, but strong and of good importance.
The ground between is about fifty foot broad; where, upon the approach of an
enemy, the Darenians put their cattle. At first Chosroes with multitude of
arrows forced upon the walls to the Westward, and set fire to the gates of the
lesser wall; but none durst enter. Then he wrought a Mine closely on the
East Side of the town, the rest of it being built upon a rock. The Persians
beginning from the town ditch, being very deep, were neither seen, nor at all
discovered by the enemy. And now they were under the foundation of the outter
wall, and in the ground between the walls, and shortly to pass the great wall,
and take the town; when from the camp of Chosroes, about noon, came a man (or
more than a man) all alone to the wall, seeming to gather up the scattered
arrows; and withal warding with his shield, to flout those upon the
battlements. Then discovering the business, he bade them watchfully provide
for their safety, and went his way. The Romans immediately dig'd for life in
the ground between the walls; which the Persians not discerning, went on with
their work, in a straight line to the wall; and the Romans, by the advice of
Theodorus, a famous Ingineer, traversed with their Mine very deep, that in the
end the Persians in the ground between the walls, fell suddenly into the
Romans cross Mine; who killed the first comers, but the rest escaped to the
camp. The Romans would not pursue them in the dark. Chosroes failing in this,
and seeing no hope of taking the town, capitulated for a thousand pound weight
of silver, which he had from the besieged, and went home. Justinian, for this
attempt of Chosroes upon Daras, during the truce, refused to ratify the
Treaty. And this was the success of Chosroes first Invasion, and so the summer
ended.

In Assyria he built a City a days journey from Ctesiphon, and named it
Antioch of Chosroes, planting there the Antiochian captives. He built them a
public Bath, and a Circus, and fitted it for other delights; bringing from
Antioch, and other Roman Cities, Charioters, and skillful Musicians. He kept
these Antiochians at the public charge, not like captives; and termed them
Basilici, as exempt from all Magistrates but the King. If a Roman captive ran
from his Master, and fled to this Antioch of Chosroes, being there avowed by an
inhabitant for his Kinsman, he might not be led away by his master, though a
very principal Persian. The Prodigy which befell the Antiochians in the reign
of Anastasius was now consummated. A strong wind then, and a sudden, blew up
by the roots, the goodly tall Cypresses in Daphne, the suburb of Antioch; it
being not lawful to cut them. Shortly after this prodigy, in the reign of
Justine, an Earthquake shook the City so, that it overthrew most of the
buildings, and destroyed three hundred thousand men. But in this last
destruction the City, as I have related, was even ruined.

And now Belisarius the Emperor sent for to Constaentinople; where having
wintred, at the beginning of the spring he sent him General against Chosroes;
with the Commanders who came with him out of Italy. Anno Dom. 541. and
Justiniani 15.
Of whom Valerianus was made General of the Cohorts in Armenia; Martinus being
formerly sent into the East; so that, as I said, Chosroes found him at Daras.
Of the Goths, Vitigis stayed at Constantinople; the rest served with Belisarius
against Chosroes. At this time the Ambassador of Vitigis, who called himself a
Bishop, dyed in Persia. The other stayed awhile with them for an Interpreter,
then retired into Roman land; where John, commander of the forces in
Mesopotamia, took him near Constantina, and imprisoned him; and being
questioned, he told him all his negotiation. Belisarius made haste to prevent
any new Invasion of Chosroes; But

CHAP. XI.
IN the mean time Chosroes led an army into Lazica, Second Invasion of
Chosroes, the said Anno Dom. 541.
upon this ground invited by the Lazians. The Lazians first inhabited Cholchis,
and were subject to the Romans; not to payment of tribute: Only upon decease
of their King, the Roman Emperor sent to the Successor the Ensigns of
Majesty; and they guarded the marches of their country; that the Hunnes might
not by Mount Caucasus (which borders with them) pass through Lazica, and
invade the Romans. Neither for this received they money, nor army from the
Romans, nor served in their wars; only they trafficked in Merchandise with the
Romans of Pontus; bartring skins, hides, and slaves for corn, salt, and other
commodities they want. But upon the accident formerly recited by me, to
Gurgenes King of Iberia, some Roman forces were lodged in Lazica; with whom the
Barbarians were discontented, and chiefly with Peter the General, a man
naturally mischeivous. He was born in Arzanene, a country beyond the river of
Nymphius, subject to the Persians. Being a child, he was taken captive by
Justine, invading Persia with Celers army after the taking of Amida; who used
much humanity to him, and sent him to a Grammar school. Then was he Scribe to
Justine; who coming to the Empire upon the death of Anastasius, made him a
General, wherein he grew infinitely covetous, and lewd to all men. Justinian
afterward sent Commanders into Lazica, and at last John Tzibus; a man raised
from mean condition, and advanced to this Generalship, only for being the
wickedest of all men, and very sufficient to find unjust revenues. And he
ruined and confounded the affairs of the Romans and Lazians. He persuaded
Justinian to build a Sea-town in Lazica, called Petra: Where sitting, as in a
Cittadell, he made booty of Lazica. He prohibited Merchants to import Salt, or
other provisions to the Lazians, nor to buy ought of them; but setting up a
Monopoly at Petra, himself was both retailer, and sole master of the said
trade, and sold to the Lazians, not at usual prizes, but as he list. The
people also were displeased at the Roman army, lying upon their country, not
formerly used; and not enduring it, resolved to revolt to the Persians. And
(unknown to the Romans) they sent Ambassadors to negotiate the same with
Chosroes, with instructions to take assurance from Chosroes, not to leave the
Lazians to the Romans without their consent; and so to come home with an army
of Persians. These Ambassadors in Persia geting private access to Chosroes,
spoke thus. Great King, if ever fortune did gladly reduce men revolted
foolishly from their friends to strangers, such think us the Lazians to be. We
were ancient allies of the Persians, and did, and received many good turns; the
monuments whereof remain to this day, both among our Records, and in your
royal Palace. But in succeeding times, our ancestors either neglected by you,
or upon some other ground, entered into league with the Romans. And now both we
and our King present to the Persians our selves and country, praying you to
consider of us thus. If upon no hard measure from the Romans, but of mere ill
nature, we come to you, reject us, as not likely to be faithful to you. The
manner of breaking friendship, is a detection of that made with others. But
being to the Romans friends in words only, but in effect trusty slaves, and
suffering most unrighteous tyranny; receive us for your servants, formerly your
friends; detest a bitter tyranny risen so near you; and do things worthy the
justice natural to the Persians. He is not just who does no wrong himself, if
he rescue not men oppressed by others, being able. To speak some of the things
practiced by these accursed Romans: To our King they have left the only outside
of Royalty, themselves have usurped the authority. The King, in the condition
of a minister, stands in aw of a General directing him. They have laid an army
upon us, not to guard our country (for none molest us but themselves) but to
lock us up in prison, while themselves are masters of what is ours. Nay, see
Sir! a more expedite devise of theirs to rob us. Their own superfluities they
compel us to buy, and they buy what Lazica affords for their use; but so, as
the price in both is set down as our conquerours please. And thus they rob us
of our necessary commodities, and our money too; under the specious name of
Trade, being indeed a mere oppression. Over us is a Governor, a retailer, with
his authority making a trade upon our wants. This being the cause of our
revolt, it has the justice of it in it self. But as to the commodity resulting
to you by accepting the Lazians; you shall add unto the Persian Empire an
ancient Kingdom, and therein enlarge your glory. Then shall you by our Country
have the conveniencie of using to Roman Seas. Wherein building ships, the very
Palace of Constantinople will be accessible unto you, with ease, nothing being
between to stop you. Add also, that it will be in your power, for the
bordering Barbarians to spoil the Romans every year, Lazica, (as you know)
being now their only rampire against the mountains of Caucasus. So that right
leading, and profit following, not to admit our proposition, is certainly no
good counsel. Chosroes was pleased with this discourse, and agreed to aid the
Lazians: Demanding of the Ambassadors, if it were possible for a great army to
march into Lazica, which he heard to be scarce passable for a traveller, being
mountainous, and for a long way entangled with thick woods. They told him that
by cutting the trees, and throwing them into the ill passages, there would be
easy way for his whole army; and they promised to be his guides, and to work
in the head of the army. Chosroes encouraged herewith, gathered a great army,
and prepared for the voyage, not discovering his intent, but to his most secret
Counselors, and charging the Ambassadors not to reveal their negotiation. His
pretense was, a journey into Iberia, to settle things there; where a nation of
Hunnes was reported to invade the Persian dominion.

In the mean time Belisarius gathered together the army in Mesopotamia, and
sent some into Persia to discover; intending to encounter the enemy there, if
he invade again; and he mustred, and furnished his Soldiers; being naked, and
unarmed, and afraid of the name of a Persian. The espialls returning assured
him, there would be no invasion; Chosroes being engaged in a war with the
Hunnes. Belisarius upon this resolved to enter the enemies land with his army.
Arethas came up to him with an army of Saracens; And the Emperor wrote to him
to invade the enemies country immediately. So that calling to him the
Commanders at Daras, he 'spake thus. Fellow Commanders! I know you experienced
in many wars; and I call you not now, by remembrances or exhortations to
provoke your resolution against the enemy (I do not thinck you need discourses
to make you valiant); but that by consulting we may choose the best for the
Emperors affairs. For the war, more then any thing affects the directions of
good counsel: And those who counsel, must be free from awe and fear. For
fear amazing, suffers not the judgment to make choice of the best things: And
awe clouding better determinations, carries the judgment commonly to the
worse. If therefore the Emperor or my self, be thought to have made any
resolution already, believe it not. For he being far distant from the
affairs, cannot fit proceedings to new occasions; and so there is no fear; if
by crossing him, you effect what is most expedient for his affairs. And me,
being but a man, and after a long time come from the West, something cannot but
pass unseen. So that without standing in awe of my opinion, you are to speak
boldly what is best for your selves and the Emperor. At first, we came hither
to restrain the enemy from invading our country. But now, things succeeding
above our hopes, we may consult concerning his country. For which purpose
being now assembled, it is fit for every man to speak freely, what he holds
most expedient. Belisarius spoke thus; and Peter and Buzes bad lead on the army
without delay into the enemies country, whose vote all the Assembly followed.
Requithancus and Theoctistus, commanders of the forces in Phoenicia Libani,
said, they approved the invasion also, but feared in their absence, Alamundarus
would forage Phoenicia and Syria, and that the Emperor might be offended for
their not guarding the country under their charge: So they refused to accompany
the army. Belisarius said, they imagined that which was not; For being now
Summer, two months of this season the Saracens consecrate to their God, and
make no inroads. And so promising to dismiss them, and their troops within
two months, he commanded them to go along, and with much diligence prepared
for the Invasion.

CHAP. XII.
BUt Chosroes and the Persian army, being come through Iberia to the confines
of Lazica, guided by the Ambassadors, cut the tree^ which they found thick and
entangled, and threw them into the steep and ragged ways, and so past easily,
none encountering them. When they were come into the midst of Lazica (where the
Poets fain to have been acted the fortunes of Jason and Medea) Gubazes, King of
the Lazians, came and adored Chosroes as his master; rendering himself with his
Royal Palaces, and all Lazica. Petra stands in Lazica upon the Euxine Sea,
formerly a mean town, but by Justinian furnished with walls, and other
ornaments, and made a strong famous place. Chosroes understanding the Roman
Forces with John Tzibus to be there, sent an army, and Aniavedes General
thereof, to surprise it. But John knowing their coming, directed no man to
sally, nor to be seen upon the battlements; and he placed his forces in arms,
close to the gates, commanding them not to utter the least sound or voice. The
Persian being come before the walls, and seeing no man, supposed the city wast,
and abandoned by the enemy. So he approach't to set up scaling ladders,
expecting none to defend, because he saw nor heard no enemy, and he sent to
Chosroes, to let him know, what they found. He sending the most of his army,
commanded a general assault, and one of the Commanders to make use of the
Ram near the gates, and from the nearest hill to the city himself was a
spectator of the business. When suddenly the Romans opened the gates, and
falling upon the enemy unaware, killed most of them, specially those about the
Ram; The rest with their General ran away and escaped. Chosroes in anger
crucified Aniavedes, for being over-stragem'd by John, a retailer, and no
soldier. Some say he crucified, not Aniavedes, but the commander who attended
the Ram. Then himself with his whole army encamped before the town; and
perceaving upon view the fortifications not very tenable, he brought on his
forces, commanding to shoot at the battlements. The Romans defending with their
engines, and shot, at first the Persians (though they shot thick) hurt little;
but suffered much, being shot from high. Afterward (for Petra was to be taken by
Chosroes) John, being shot into the neck, died. Then the Romans became
careless; and it growing dark the Barbarians retired. The next day, they drew a
mine to the town: which for steep rocks about it, is not accessible, nor yet
to the sea-ward; but by one narrow entrance only upon plain ground, with high
clifts on each side. There the builders of the city foreseeing the walls easy
to be forced, made from each clift a long wall, a cross the entrance, and at
each end two turrets, wrought with great stones, not hollow in the middle, but
whole from the ground, and very high, and the stones so joined, as not to be
shaken with Ram or other engine. The Persians closely with their mine, were
come under one of these turrets; whence carrying out the stones, they set up
timbers, and put fire to them. Which increasing by degrees, crumbled and brake
the firm ess of the stones, and so loosening the Turret, down it came
suddenly. The Romans in it perceaved it just so much before, as not to fall
with the Turret, and to get within the city walls. Then the Enemy could easily
force their entrance upon even ground. But the Romans affrighted, came to a
parley, and receaving Chosroes oath, for their persons, and goods, yielded
themselves and the city by composition. Chosroes finding in Petra much wealth
belonging to John, took it; but of any other, himself nor the Persians touched
nothing; And the Romans, having every man his own, mingled with the Persian
army.

CHAP. XIII.
BElisarius heard nothing from these parts; but marched with the army toward
Nisibis; and being half way thither kept his right hand way, where were store
of springs, and a spacious champian to encampe. But some had no mind to go on,
so that Belisarius made this speech to the Commanders. I did not mean to
publish my determination: For a word vented in a camp spreds at last even to
the enemy. But I see every man will be an absolute Commander; therefore I shall
impart, what I thought to conceal; with this preamble, that when in an army
many will be absolute, nothing can be well done. Certainly Chosroes invading
others, has not left his own country without guard, especially this City,
being the first thereof and a rampire to the rest; wherein, I know, he has
lodged a garrison so strong, and of so good men, as will be able to oppose our
assaults. A demonstration thereof is Nabedes their Commander, who next to
Chosroes is the prime man for reputation in Persia. Who doubtless will set
upon us, and we shall not be rid of him, without vanquishing him in fight. If
we fight near the city, the Persians will have the advantage, backed with their
fortification, to follow their execution securely, if they overcome; and if
they be overcome, to be presently within their walls, which you see well
defended, and inexpugnable. On the other side, if we rout them, we may enter
the town pell-^ell with the enemy, or thrust between them, and force them to
fly to some other region, and so get Nisibis, having none to defend it. Upon
this speech of Belisarius, the rest obeyed, and kept within the camp: Only
Peter, General of Armenia, stood still, with a good part of the army under his
command, a mile and a quarter from Nisibis. Belisarius put in order of battle
the troops with himself, and sent direction to Peter to stand in readiness
till he gave the signal, and to observe at noon, that the Barbarians will
sally, because themselves dine in the evening, and the Romans at noon. But
Peter's men slighted his commands, and being faint with the sun (for that city
is extremely hot) laid down their arms, and disorderly fell to gather figs,
without apprehension of an enemy. Which Nabedes observing, gallopt up to them
with his army. They seeing them issue out of the gates (being in an open
champian) sent to Belisarius to succor them; and themselves tumultuously, and
in confusion encountered. Belisarius, before the messenger came, saw the enemies
motion by the dust raised, and with his troops rode amain to their succor.
But in the mean time the Persians charged them; which they not enduring, ran
away. The enemy pursuing took Peter's Ensign, and slew fifty of them. Doubtless
they had dyed every man, if Belisarius had not received them into his troops,
much distressed. Where first the Goths presenting their long thick Lances, the
Persians stood them not, but fell to running, and the Romans, and Goths
pursuing killed a hundred and fifty of them. The chase was not long. So the
enemy got within their walls, and the Romans returned to their camp. The next
day the Persians set the Ensign of Peter for a trophy, upon one of the turrets;
and laughed and bragged, but durst sally no more out of their fortifications.

Belisarius considering Nisibis strongly situated, and having no hope to take
it, urged to rise thence, and to march, where they might suddenly spoil the
enemy. So after a days march he came to a castle of the Persians called
Sisibranum, full of inhabitants, and eight hundred of the best Persian horsemen
to guard it; commanded by Blechames, a principal man. The Romans encamped
before the Castle, and assaulting were repulsed with loss of many; the walls
being strong, and the Barbarians opposing obstinately. Belisarius then called
his fellow Commanders, and told them; How experience of many wars taught them
to foresee the event in actions doubtful, and before disasters to choose the
better way. That they knew their disadvantage now, marching in an enemies
country, full of strong Garrisons. If they go on, it is likely that from
Nisibis the enemy will follow them, and infest them with ambushes. And if
another army meet them, they will be forced to a battle with both, and may be
undone. Then if they be routed, they have no means of retreat into Roman land.
They should not therefore crush themselves with inconsiderate industry, nor
with ambition to win, hurt the Roman affairs. An ignorant daring brings to
destruction, and a sober delaying laying preserves men. That themselves
therefore should sit down before the Castle, and that Arethas with his Saracens
(men unapt for assaults, but excellent plunderers) should enter Assyria, and
with them some of their best soldiers. These, if no opposition appear, to take
the spoil; and (the enemy opposing) to retire to this army: Which if it take
the Castle, may pass the Tigris, fearing no mischief behind, and informed in
what state the Assyrians are. They all approved this advise of Belisarius: Who
accordingly commanded Arethas to go against the Assyrians, and sent with him
1200 soldiers, most of his own Targettiers, commanded by two of his Lanciers,
Trajanus and John surnamed Phagas, and directed to be obedient to Arethas, whom
he instructed to forage the countries, and coming back to the camp, to report
what forces the Assyrians had. These past the Tigris into Assyria, found the
country rich, and without guard, and so ransackt many towns and got much
wealth. Belisarius in the mean time understood from Persian prisoners, That the
Castle (not using, as Daras and Nisibis, to lay in yearly provisions, and then
prevented by an enemy, and having brought in none, and many suddenly resorting
thither for refuge) wanted provisions. He sent therefore George, a wise man,
and trusted with his secrets, to try if the place might be had by composition.
Who with his reasons, and fair words, prevailed with them to take assurances
for their safety, and to render themselves and the Castle to the Romans.
Belisarius did no harm to the Inhabitants, being Christians, and anciently
Romans. The Persians with Blechames he sent to Constantinople, and threw down
the walls of the Castle. These Persians and Blechames the Emperor sent into
Italy against the Goths.

But Arethas, fearing the Romans might take away his booty, would return no
more to the camp. And he commanded some scoutes sent out purposely by him, to
report a great army of enemies to be at the passage of the river; upon which he
advised John and Trajan to return some other way into the Roman Territories. So
they went not to Belisarius, but keeping the Euphrates on their right hand,
came to Theodosiopolis, standing upon the river of Aborras. The Roman army with
Belisarius, hearing nothing of these forces, were troubled and afraid: And the
said siege having being long in the Persian Mesopotamia, infinitely hot; the
men being not used to heats, specially those of Thrace; and stirring much in
them, and lodging in close cabbins in the summer, the third part of them lay
half dead with Fevers; and all were earnest to be gone home; specially
Requithancus, and Theoctistus, Captains of Phoenicia Libani. Who importuned
Belisarius (the Saracens consecrated time being past) protesting to stay there
to no purpose, and in the mean time to abandon the towns of Libanus and Syria
to Alamundarus. Belisarius hereupon called a counsel, where John the son of
Nicetas first rose, and spoke thus; Excellent Belisarius! I think the world
has not had, neither for time nor valor, a Captain like your self. This
opinion prevails not only with Romans, but with all Barbarians. And certainly
hereby you will preserve this glory firm, if you bring us alive into the Roman
dominions; as we now are, our expectations are not fair. Our Saracens, and best
men are come over the Tigris, and gone into our upper Provinces, so fast, as
not to send us so much as a messenger. Requithancus and Theoctistus will be
instantly gone; supposing Alamundarus forraging Phoenicia: and of the rest we
have more sick, then sound men, to bring them into the Roman dominions. Such,
as if an enemy light on us here, or upon our retreat, not a man will be left to
report our disaster to the Romans at Daras. To march up higher, I think it not
possible in reason. Whilst therefore some hope is left, it is good counsel to
make a fair retreat; and madness for men in our danger, not to advise upon
safety, but designs on an enemy. All approved this speech of John; and cried
out for a speedy retreat. So Belisarius put his sick into wagons, and led home
the army; where he heard what Arethas had done, but could have no right of him,
being not yet come to him.

Chosroes in the mean time, having taken Petra, had the news of Belisarius
invasion; of the battle by Nisibis; the taking of Sisabranum, and what the
forces, which with Arethas past the Tigris, had done. So leaving a Garrison in
Petra, he went into Persia with the rest of his army, and Roman captives. These
were the occurrents of Chosroes's second invasion; And Belisarius was by the
Emperor sent for to Constantinople, where he spent his Winter.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the beginning of the Spring, Chosroes third Invasion in An. Dom. 542. and
Justiniani 16.
Chosroes invaded the Roman territory the third time, with a great army;
keeping the Euphrates to his right hand. Candidus, Bishop of Sergiopolis,
having not kept his day with Chosroes, was afraid, and came to the Persian
Camp; where he besought Chosroes not to be offended with him; That he never had
money, nor ever thought of ransoming the Surenians himself; he had been a
suitor to the Emperor, but got no good. But Chosroes put him in prison, and
bitterly tortured him, and bad him procure double the sum formerly agreed. He
prayed him to send to Sergiopolis, to receave the treasures of the Church;
which Chosroes did, and Candidus sent some with his messengers: to whom the
Sergiopolitans gave many of those treasures, protesting to have nothing left.
But Chosroes said, those should not suffice; he must have more; and he sent
some in pretense to make privy search for their wealth, but indeed to surprise
the city: But Sergiopolis was not then to be taken. For a Saracen under
Alamundarus (being a Christian) named Ambrus, came under the wall by night;
revealed the plot; and bad them receave no Persians into their town. So
Chosroes seeing his men return without effect, in a great rage sent six
thousand men to force the town. Who assaulted, and the Sergiopolitans at first
defended bravely. But grown weary and afraid, they advised to render the city;
having but two hundred Soldiers within. But Ambrus came again by night, and
told them that within two days the Persians would raise their siege; their
water absolutely failing. Whereupon they refused to parley; and the enemy
afflicted with third, rose, and returned to Chosroes. Who would not dismiss
Candidus: It behoved, I think, that having broke his oath, he should no more be
a Priest.

But when Chosroes came into Comagena, called Euphratesia, he would not
forage, nor take towns, as having spoiled all in Syria formerly in his way,
and either sacked or ransomed them, as has been said. But his intent was to
march directly into Palestine, and there to take the spoil, especially of the
Treasures at Jerusalem; hearing the Province was fertile, and richly inhabited.
The Romans both Commanders and Soldiers had no mind to meet the enemy, to stay
his passage; but thought it enough within their fortifications to preserve
them, and themselves. Justinian advertised of this invasion, again sent
Belisarius; who taking Posthorses, arrived with great speed, (having no
Soldiers with him) in Comagena. Justus the Emperors brothers son, with Buzes
and some other, were gotten into Hierapolis; and hearing Belisarius to be near,
wrote this letter to him. Chosroes, as your self know, has again invaded the
Romans, with a much greater army then formerly. Whither he intends, he yet
makes no show: only we hear, he is very near, and hurts no town in his way,
still marching forward. Come therefore speedily unto us, if possibly you can
slip by the enemy; that you may be preserved for the Emperor, and guard here
Hierapolis with us. Belisarius liked not this letter, but went to Europus, a
town upon the Euphrates; from whence he sent, and levied an army; which
encamped there; and to the commanders he returned this answer; If Chosroes go
against other people, and not Romans, you have fallen upon a most safe
counsel. They who by lying still can avoid the mischief, are madd to run into
a needless danger. But you being quit of the Barbarian, he will fall upon some
other country, the best he can find, and without garrisons; Know then, that a
valiant death is better, then such a preservation, or rather treason. Come you
therefore speedily to Europus; where assembling our whole forces, we shall
effect upon our enemies, what God shall grant us. The Commanders took heart at
this letter; and leaving Justus with some to guard Hierapolis, the rest went to
Europus.

CHAP. XV.
WHen Chosroes heard Belisarius to be at Europus, he marched no further; but
sent to him one of his Secretaries, named Abandanes, (a very discreet man, This
is supplied by the Latin Translation.
) to complain; that Justinian had not sent his Ambassadors to ratify the
treaty. Of whose coming Belisarius understanding, he chose six thousand the
goodliest of his men, as if he would send them out to hunt. He commanded also
Diogenes, one of his Lanciers, and Adolius, the son of Acacius and Armenian
(one of those who attend in the Emperors Palace to keep off noise, whom the
Romans call Silentarij, and now Captain of the forces in Armenia) to skirt
along the shore of Euphrates, with a thousand horse, and at times to make show
to pass the river to invade their country. Himself hearing the Ambassador to
be at hand, retired to his pavillion, which uses to be made with boards; that
he might seem to the Ambassador, to be in a poor town without provisions. His
soldiers he thus disposed. On the one side of his pavillion, were the
Thracians, and Illyrians; and behind them the Goths; and next the Herulians;
then the Vandales and Moors. They took up much space, not standing still, but
walking at distance, and looking carelessly, and confidently upon the
Ambassador. None had his mantle on, but linen coats like women girt about
them, and in their hands a Horsemans-whip. For arms some had swords, some
battle axes, others bows only; looking like hunters, in all have, (omitting
all) to be pursueing the wild beasts. Abandanes the Ambassador, coming to
Belisarius said, That it was a foul indignity, that Caesar ( so the Persians
call the Roman Emperor) had not sent Ambassadors about the Articles, which had
constrained his master to enter the Roman territory in arms. Belisarius not
fearing their great army, and without any trouble in his mind or countenance,
smiled, and with a cheerful look answered him; Men do not censure the actions
of Chosroes by the same reasons he does them by: other men demanding ought of
their neighbors, send Ambassadors first, and if they get not right, then they
make war. But he being in arms in the heart of our provinces, shamelesly now
talks of peace. Having thus said, he dismissed the Ambassador. Who coming back
to Chosroes, persuaded him to lay down arms, telling him; That he lighted upon
a captain the stoutest, and the wisest in the world, and upon such soldiers
as he never beheld the like; whose order he extremely admired. Then was the
match between them unequal; He overcoming, should only vanquish a slave of
Cesars; but being overcome, should get infinite dishonor to him and his house.
The Romans also being beaten, may escape into their fortresses, and in their
own country. But if other then well happen to his army, there will be no
messenger left to report the calamity in Persia. Chosroes upon these reasons,
had a mind to go home, but was troubled, knowing the passages of the river to
be guarded by the enemy: Here the Greek begins again.
and march the same way again through a wilderness he could not, the
provisions they brought with them failing. In conclusion he thought it best,
though with hazarding a battle, to get to the land on the other side the
river, and so to march through a plentiful country. Belisarius knew well,
that not 100000. men could hinder his passage; the river being passable by
boats, and his army stronger, then to be barred their way by few enemies.
Having also, as I said, commanded Diogenes and Adolius with a considerable
party to the shore, to amaze the enemy with suddainess, and to put him in
disorder: Now he feared, least by frighting him, he might interrupt his
quitting the Roman territory; thinking it a matter of much importance, to drive
him away, without hazarding with a very small army, heartily afraid of the
Persians, against so many thousands. Wherefore he bad Diogenes and Adolius
stay. And Chosroes speedily making a bridge, passed with his army over the
Euphrates. Which was done with ease, the Persians having in their marches, ever
ready, great iron hooks, wherewith they fasten long timbers together, and make
a bridge suddenly. Being upon the other side, he sent to tell Belisarius, that
he had gratified the Romans with his retreat, but expected Ambassadors from
them immediately. Belisarius also passed the Euphrates, and sent some to
Chosroes, to commend him for retiring; to promise Ambassadors forthwith from
the Emperor, to finish the articles accorded; and to desire him in his passage
through the Roman subjects, to use them as friends. Which he promised, so he
might have some principal man for hostage of performance of what they
undertook. Belisarius hearing what he said, sent him from Edessa John, the son
of Basilius, an unwilling hostage; being the chief man in the city for birth
and estate. But the Romans much extolled Belisarius, who in this action seemed
to gain more reputation, then when he brought Gelimer and Vitigis prisoners to
Constantinople. The truth is, it deserved highly to be valued, when the Romans
were terrified, and hid in their fortresses, and Chosroes with a mighty army in
the midst of their country, for a General coming post from Constantinople, to
encamp with a few in the face of Chosroes; to stop him; and then, either
frighting him with his fortune and valor, or deceaving him with art, to make
him in effect run away, and in words desire a peace.

But Chosroes neglected his agreement, and took Callinicum, none being to guard
it. Their walls, being decayed, they were ever taking down to rebuild them, and
then they had opened a piece, and not made it up. When they heard the enemy to
be near, the richer sort carried out their goods, and retired to other strong
places. The residue, with a number of peasants flock't thither, continued in
the town without any garrison. These Chosroes made slaves, and laid the town
even with the ground. Shortly after he received John the hostage, and retired
into his country. The Armenians also, who revolted to Chosroes, took assurances
from the Romans, and went with Bassaces to Constantinople Belisarius also went
to Constantinople, sent for by the Emperor, to be immediately dispatched into
Italy, where things were very ill.

CHAP. XVI.
ABout the same time was a Plague, which almost consumed mankind. Of all blows
from heaven, bold and subtle men will talk of a cause, amazing us with
reasons, and physiologies above our apprehension; knowing nothing to be sound
they say; but contented, if they may persuade with their cosenages, such as
frequent them. But of this to find any other cause is not possible, but God
himself. For it came not upon one part of the world, nor in one season of the
year, from whence subtle wits might coin a cause. But it vexed the whole
world, and all conditions of men, though differing often even to contrariety;
sparing no constitution, nor age. Men's differing in their places of dwelling,
diets, complexions, addictions, or any thing else in this disease did no good.
It took some in the summer, some in the Winter, others at other seasons. So
that let Sophisters, and discoursers of Meteors show their learning; I will
only relate where it began to rage, and in what manner it destroyed. It began
among the Egyptians of Pelusium, and spread to Alexandria, and the rest of
Egypt one way, and the other, to that Palestine, which borders upon Egypt. From
thence it traveled through the world, as by set journeyes and stages; removing
as by appointed gistes; and staying in each country a certain time; and
making destruction its only business; and spreding on both sides to the utmost
bounds of the world, as if afraid, least any odd hole of the earth should
escape it. It spared neither Island, nor cave, nor top of mountain, which had
men dwelling in it. If it skipt a country, by not touching it at all, or but
here, and there; yet returning afterward, it struck no more the neighboring
people formerly visited, but from that country it removed not the sore, before
it had justly made up the full measure of the dead, according to the lot of
their perished neighbors. It began still at the seacoast, and from thence went
to the uplands. In the second year of it, it came to Constantinople, about the
middle of the Spring; where it was my fortune then to reside. And it was in
this sort. Apparitions of Spirits in all shapes humane, were seen by many; who
thought the man they met, struck them in some part of the body; and so soon as
they saw the Spirit, they were taken with the disease. At first men meeting
such, blessed themselves; repeating the most divine names; and using other
ceremonies; but did no good; For many who fled into Churches perished.
Afterward, they would not hear their friends calling, but locked up in their
chambers, stopped their ears, though the doors were even broken open; fearing
the Sprite called on them. Some in their dreams suffered that, which others
from those that met them; or heard a voice, that they were enrolled in the
appointed to die. But most without warning by dreams, or waking visions,
suddenly became feverish; some newly waking; some walking; others doing other
things. Their body changed not color, nor was hot, as in a fever, no
inflammation being, but the fever so remiss in the beginning, and so till
evening, that neither the sick, nor the physician feeling his pulse apprehended
danger. But to some the same day, to some the next, or many after, there rose a
Bubo, not only in the groyne (which part is called Bubo) but in the armeholes,
under the ear, and in other parts. These things came alike to all; but the
symptoms afterward, I cannot say, whether the difference of bodies made, or
the only will of him, that sent the sickness. Some had a deep slumbring;
others a sharp distraction; both suffering, what was proper to the disease.
These slumberers forgot all they were formerly used to; seeming perpetually to
sleep. If they were looked to, they would eat sometimes; and some neglected,
starved. Those taken with madness, were troubled for want of sleep, and with
many apparitions; thinking men assaulted them to kill them, crying out, and
running away. Their keepers vexed with endless toil, were pitied as much as
themselves: Not for being infected (for no Physician, nor other, caught the
disease by touching sick or dead bodies; many strangely continuing free,
though they buried, and tended such as were nothing to them; and many catching
it, they knew not how, and dying instantly;) but they pitied their perpetual
toil; in raising them tumbling upon the ground; and in struggling with them,
when they would throw themselves out of windows. Such as could, leaped into
the water, not for thirst, but caused by their frenzy; for many leap't into
the Sea. Much toil they had also to get them to eat; and many, for want of
keepers, were starved, or brake their necks. Some without slumbring, or
madness, had their Bubo gangrened, and they dyed with extreme pain. Which
doubtless happened to the rest, but being not themselves, they understood it
not; the Frenzy taking away their senses. Some Physicians upon these
symptoms, conceaving the head of the disease to be in those plague sores,
searched the dead bodies, and opening the sores, found a huge carbuncle, growing
inward. Some died forthwith, some after many days. Such, whose bodies were
spotted with black pimples, the bigness of a lentile, lived not a day. Many, a
voluntary vomiting of blood seizing, died. This I can say, that many famous
Physicians judged some instantly would dye, who unexpectedly grew well; and
confidently affirmed the recovery of others, who were upon the point of death.
So that no cause of this sickness was reached by man's reason; some event
happening to all, whereof no reason could be rendered. Some bathing helped,
others it hurt; Many dyed for want of cure; and many escaped without it; it
proving both ways to those that used it. In a word no way was found of
preservation, neither by preventing the disease, nor mastering it; no cause
appearing neither of their falling sick, nor recovering. Women with child taken
with it, certainly dyed; some miscarrying; some fairly delivered, and
perishing with their children. Yet they say that three women were delivered,
who grew well, their children dying; and one dyed, whose child had the happ to
live. Such as had their sore great, and running with putrefaction, escaped; the
same asswaging the violence of the carbuncle; and this was commonly a certain
sign of health. But whose plague sore stayed, as it first rose, such had the
miserable accidents, I mentioned. Some had their thigh withered, the sore
rising upon it, and not running. Some escaped with imperfect tongues, and lived
stammering, o^ speaking sounds without sense. In Constantinople this sickness
lasted four months, and was three months in extremity. At first few dyed, more
then usually. Then it grew hotter; then died five thousand every day, then
10000 and more. In the beginning, men took care to bury each his own dead,
casting some into other men's Monuments, either unseen or by force. But in the
end all was in confusion: Servants were without Masters; and rich men wanted
servants to attend them; being sick or dead; and many houses were empty. So
that diverse for want of acquaintance lay long unburied. The Greek fails here,
and it is supplied from the Latin translation.
* The Emperor (as was reason) made it his own care; and committed the
oversight to Theodorus, whose office was to subscribe the Emperors answers to
Petitions (the Latins call him Referendarius.) To them that wanted, and to the
poor multitude, he gave reliefs in money out of the Treasury. And now in the
afflicted City were no trades, nor shops to be seen. Many for fear leaving
their bad courses, consecrated themselves to God: and many, when the danger was
past, fell to their old despising of God again.

CHAP. XVII.
BUt to return to my former discourse. Chosroes marched Northward to Ardabigara,
a town in Assyria, Anno Domini 543. Justiniani 17.
purposing from thence to invade the Romans again. Here is a great Pyraeum,
which the Persians adore above all Gods; where the Magi keep a perpetual fire,
and offer much sacrifice; and in their greatest affairs use it for an Oracle;
it is the fire which anciently the Romans called Vestall. Here Chosroes had
news of two Ambassadors from Constantinople, about the Peace, Constantianus an
Illyrian, and Sergius an Edessenian; both Orators, and able men. Chosroes
expecting their coming, forbear hostility. But Constantianus fell sick upon
the way; and the Plague at last came into Persia. But Nabedes, Governor of
Persarmenia, by the Kings command, sent Eudulius, Prelate of the Christians
there, unto Valerianus, Commander of the forces in Armenia; to complain of the
slownesse of the Ambassadors; and to exhort the Romans to peace. He came into
Armenia with his brother, and told Valerianus, that he heartily affected the
Romans, being Christians as himself; and would so persuade Chosroes, that the
Ambassadors should find no impediment of concluding a peace to their own
desire. But the Prelates brother getting privately to Valerianus, told him;
That Chosroes in great distress desired a peace; his son conspiring against
him; and his army being full of the Plague. Valerianus upon this sent away the
Prelate; promising the Ambassadors should shortly come to Chosroes; and the
said advertisement he wrote to Justinian. Who thereupon directed him and the
Army to invade the Persians; for he saw not that any enemy would oppose them;
willing all the forces to join, and enter into Persarmenia. The Captains upon
these Letters rode with their troops into Persarmenia. Chosroes was newly gone
from Ardabigara, for fear of the Plague, with his army to a part of Assyria,
where the sickness was not yet come. Valerianus with his forces encamped at
Theodosiopolis, to whom joined Narses, with some Armenians and Herulians. But
Martinus, General of the East, with Ildiger and Theoctistus, encamped at
Citharizum, a Castle four days journey from Theodosiopolis; whether came Peter
shortly after, and Adolius, with some other Captains; Isaac also, * brother of
Narses was there; Here begins the Greek again.
and Philemuth; and Verus, with the Herulians under their command, came to
Arzanene, not far from the camp of Martinus. Justus also the Emperors Nephew,
and Peranius, and John the son of Nicetas, with Domentiolus, and John Phagas,
encamped at Phison, a Castle near unto Martyropolis. Thus were these Commanders
quartered, with their several troops; amounting in the whole to thirty
thousand. These joined not, nor communicated; save when the Generals sent to
one another to know news of the Persians. Peter upon a sudden motion, without
acquainting the rest, invaded the enemies country. And the next day, Philemuth
and Verus, with their Herulians followed. Martinus and Valerianus hearing
thereof, marched likewise to the Invasion. Shortly all joined in the enemies
country, save Iustus, who was quartered far off; but hearing (though late) that
his fellow Commanders were entered the enemies land, he marched thither also, but
could not unite his troops with theirs. Those Generals marched directly to
Dubis; neither forraging, nor otherwise hurting the country. Dubis is a
Territory eight days journey from Theodosiopolis, of good land, well situated
for air, and water; being fair champians, full of populous villages close
together, and inhabited by Merchants, who traffic with the Indians, and
neighboring Iberians, and with all the Persian Nations, and some Romans. The
Bishop of the Christians, the Greeks call Catholicus, who has the charge of
all the country. Some fifteen miles from Dubis to the right hand coming from
the Roman Territories, stands a ragged mountain, hardly to be passed, and in a
very narrow passage a village called Anglon, where Nabedes hearing of the
enemies coming, kept fast; confident of the strength of the place. The village
is at the furthest end of the mountain; where, upon a steep rock, stands a
Castle of the same name. Nabedes fortified the passage to the village with
stones, and wagons, and drew a trench before, and lodged his army in the said
village; and in old houses without it, laid ambushes of foot. The Persians
amounted in all to four thousand men. The Romans came to a place, distant a
days journey from Anglon, and took a scout of the enemies, who told them, that
Nabedes was retired from Anglon. Narses at this chafed, reproaching his fellow
Commanders for their tardinesse. The same others did likewise; taunting one
another. And now careless of fighting, and fearlesse of dangers, they attended
pillaging only. They marched confusedly, without discipline, without watchword
(as is usual in such actions) or distinction by any kind of order. The
soldiers were mingled with the attendants upon the baggage, and marched as to
some great booty ready dressed for them. Being near Anglon, they sent out
scoutes, who brought them word, that the army was inbattail array. The
Commanders were amazed with the suddenness; yet thought it base and cowardly
to turn their backs with so great an army. So ordering the army as well as in
that case they could; they marched against the enemy. Peter having the right
hand wing, Valerianus the left, and Martinus the battle. Being come near the
enemy, they stood still in their ranks confusedly, by reason of the ragged
ground, and their being newly put in order. The Barbarians also drew close
together, and stood viewing the enemies powers; Nabedes had commanded none to
strike the first blow, but the enemy giving on, to resist him. Narses with his
Herulians, and some Romans, gave on upon the Persians; and them he routed, who
ran away up to the Castle. Much mischief was done between them in the narrow
passage; and Narses pressed upon the enemy, and encouraged his men; and the
rest fell to work. But suddenly the Ambushes issuing from the old houses, into
the narrow lanes, killed some Herulians, and wounded Narses in the head
mortally, whom his brother Isaac carried off; but he dyed quickly, having in
this fight done bravely. The Romans upon this growing to confusion, Nabedes
drew out all his army, which in those narrow lanes shooting at a multitude,
killed them at ease, and most the Herulians; being the most part unarmed, and
in fight never using headpiece, corslet, or other defensive armor, save a
shield, and a thick coat girt about them. Their slaves fight without shields,
which their masters permit them to wear, when they have showed themselves good
soldiers. But the Romans not enduring the enemy longer, fled amain, remembering
neither valor, shame, nor ought that good is. The Persians suspecting, that
they could not fall to so shameless a running away, but had some ambushes;
drove them out of the fastnesses, and then turned bridle, not daring with a few
to encounter so many in a plain. But the Romans (specially the Commanders)
thinking the enemy still pursuing, ran without intermission; urging their
horses with whip and voice; throwing away their arms in haste; as having no
courage to fight with a Persian over-taking, but all their hope of safety in
their horses feet. In a word, it was such a running away, as scarce a horse
over-lived it, but instantly dyed, the course ended. So great a disaster the
Romans have not formerly had. Many were slain, more made slaves to the enemy,
who took so great a quantity of arms and baggage, that the rich state of Persia
appeared much richer by this victory. Adolius in this retreat, passing by a
Castle in Persarmenia, was slain by a wound in his head of a stone thrown by
one of the Inhabitants. Justus and Peranius, having a little plundered the
country of Taraunia, returned home.

CHAP. XVIII.
BUt the next year Chosroes invaded the Romans the fourth time, Chosroes 4th.
Invasion in An. Dom. 544. and Justiniani 18.
with his army into Mesopotamia. And this expedition he made not against the
Emperor Justinian, nor any mortal man indeed, but even against God, whom
only the Christians adore. For in his first Invasion, missing Edessa, and
retiring so; he and his Magi were much discontented to be overcome by the
Christians God. Wherefore he threatened to make the Edessenians slaves, and to
turn their City to a Sheep-pasture. Being come before Edessa with his army, he
sent some Hunnes to the walls over against the Circus to steal the sheep, kept
near the walls by shepherds, presuming upon the strength, and steepness of
the place. But the Barbarians got to the sheep, and the shepherds stoutly
resisted; but with the aid of some Persians they got away one flock; which ran
back again, while some Romans sallying fought with them: Where a Hunne fighting
in the front, and most troubling the Romans, a country fellow hit him with a
sling-stone on his right knee, and down he fell headlong; which encouraged the
Romans. The fight lasted from morning till noon, and both thinking they had the
better, parted, the Romans to their walls, and the Barbarians to pitch their
tents a mile from the City, where they encamped. Chosroes, either upon some
dream, or the apprehension of disgrace to miss Edissa twice, thought of
selling his retreat to the Edessenians for money. Paul the Interpreter
therefore the next day, under the town-walls, advised the Romans to send men of
quality to Chosroes. They chose four eminent men; whom Zaberganes met in the
camp, by the Kings direction; and with threatening words asked them; which they
would rather have, a Peace, or a War. They confessing to choose peace before
dangers: Then must you buy it, quoth Zaberganes, with a great sum. They said
they would give as much as formerly; when he came thither after the sack of
Antioch. Zaberganes laughed; and bade them consult seriously for their lives;
and come back again. Shortly after Chosroes sent for them, and recited the
Roman towns he had led into captivity; threatening to them also the terriblest
usage, if they gave him not all their money within their walls; upon which
only he would raise his siege. The Ambassadors acknowledged, that they would
buy their peace, if he enjoined possibilites. But the conclusion of a danger,
they said, no living man could know before the combat; war being not upon
articles of agreement between the parties. Upon this Chosroes commanded them in
anger to get them gone.

The eighth day of the Siege, he began to raise a mount against the walls;
making, without arrow-shot, a square work of trees cut down with leaves on,
spreading over them much earth, and over all, a quantity of rude unwrought
stones (his only care being to raise the Mount speedily) putting between the
earth and stones long timbers, which fastened the work; that growing high, it
should not be weak. But Peter the Roman General being in the town, with
Martinus and Peranius, sent out Hunnes against the workmen, who falling on
suddenly, killed many. One of his Lanciers, named Arger, killed above seven
and twenty. But the Barbarians kept better guard afterward, and none sallyed on
the workmen: Who being come within arrow-shot, the Romans from the walls
stoutly employed their slings and bows. Before their laborers in this Aggestus
(so is it called in Latin) the Barbarians hung upon long poles hair-cloths of
Goats hair, thick and long, that no fiery darts nor arrows could pierce
through, but there fell dead. Then the Romans afraid, sent Ambassadors to
Chosroes, and with them Stephanus a famous Physician, who had cured King
Cabades of a disease, and got a great estate by him. He with the rest coming to
Chosroes, spoke thus. Men have ever held humanity the mark of a good King. So
that, mighty Sir! if you kill and lead into captivity, you may perchance
obtain some other titles, but shall never be thought a good man. And of all
cities, Edessa should least have a misfortune from you; Where I was borne; who
not foreseeing what would come to pass, fostered you; and by counselling your
father to appoint you his successor, have been to you a principal cause of the
Empire of Persia, and to my country of these miseries. Thus men are themselves
the authors of most of their own misfortunes. But if you have any remembrance
of this service, you will do us no more hurt; bestowing this retribution on
me; by which, O King! you will have the fortune not to be esteemed a most
cruel man. But Chosroes professed not to rise from thence, till the Romans
delivered him Peter, and Peranius his fathers slaves, presuming to bear arms
against him. If they refused this, they must either pay 1575000. l'. sterling.
five hundred Centenaries of gold, or admit his ministers to search the city,
and to bring him all the gold and silver within it, and upon this they might
keep the rest of their goods. This Chosroes spoke at random, expecting with
ease to take the city. And the Ambassadors finding his propositions impossible,
returned much troubled; And reporting the demands, filled the city with noise
and lamentations.

CHAP. XIX.
BUt the mount rose to a great height, and went on apace. The Romans in
perplexity, sent again Ambassadors; who were suitors for the same things, but
were not regarded, but driven out of the Persian camp, with scorn and houting.
Then they began to raise their walls higher, toward the mount; But the Persians
work far overtopping that also, they gave it over; And desired Martinus to
procure a capitulation, as he would himself. He got as near as he could to the
camp, and spoke with some Persian commanders; who to amuse him said, Their King
desired peace, but could not persuade the Emperor to leave quarrelling. He
could not deny Belisarius to be above Martinus in power, and place; who
persuaded the King to retire from the midst of the Roman Provinces, with
promises of Ambassadors to perfect the Treaty of peace; but he could not
perform, being not able to force the Emperors will. In the mean time the
Romans drew a mine to the enemies work; and commanded not to leave working,
till they were under the middle of the Mount. Where being, the Persians above
heard the noise; and finding what they did, cross-mined on both sides, to catch
them in the middle. They perceaving it, stopped up their mine there with earth;
and from underneath the part of the Mount next the town, carried out the
timber, stones, and earth, and made a little hollow room; where they laid dry
loggs steep't in Cedar oil, and Assyrian pitch. During this preparation the
Persian commanders in many meetings with Martinus discoursed to the effect
aforesaid, seeming to entertain a parley for Peace. But their mount being
brought to perfection, and raised far above the walls, they sent away
Martinus; refusing any composition; and fell to work. Here again the Latin
translation fills up a great gap.
The Romans then set the dry loggs a fire: which burnt part of the Mount; but
not spreading to the whole, and being burnt out, they brought more into the
hollow room. Then appeared the smoke from the Mount at night: and the Romans
to prevent the discovery, shot small vessels filled with burning coals, and
fire darts, thick over the mount: and the Persians thinking the smoke came
from them, ran to quench them. But the fire prevailed, and the Barbarians
pitifully crying, were shot and killed from the walls. At Sunrising, Chosroes
came with some of his army; went upon the Mount; and first found the mischief,
showing, how the smoke came not from that darted from the enemy, but from fire
below; and he willed the army to shout. The Romans grew confident, and flouted
them: They all cast on, some earth, others water, which abated the smoke
there, but presently it burst out in another part more vehemently; The water
also added force to the sulfur, and Assyrian pitch, and spread the fire more;
and within, the fire prevailed above the water; and about evening the smoke was
so high, that it was seen at Carr^, and other neighboring parts. There were
fights also upon the Mount, wherein the Romans overcame. And now the flame rose
clearly; when the Persians abandoned the work. Six days after they assaulted
something before daylight, (the Romans being dead asleep): And they set to
their ladders, and were mounting: But a peasant awaking, called up the Romans.
They fought; and the Persians were beaten to their camp; leaving their ladders,
which the Romans drew up. About midnight Chosroes sent a great part of his army
to force the great Gate. The Romans (not only Soldiers, but peasants and
people) stood them, had the better, and routed them. As they were running, Paul
the Interpreter put himself among the Romans, and told them, that Recimer was
newly come from Constantinople an Ambassador about peace. So they parted.
Recimer came to the Barbarians camp some days before; which they concealed
from the Romans; expecting the event of their works; if those prosper'd, they
resolved to come to no treaty; if they were beaten (as they now are) they
might come to it fairly; the Romans having invited them. When Recimer was near
the city gate, the Persians demanded some to be sent out to treat an accord
with Chosroes. They answered, they would within three days send Martinus, who
now was sick. Chosroes suspecting the answer not to be sincere, prepared for
war; commanding store of bricks to be laid upon the Mount. Two days after he
approached the walls with his whole army, and applied his ladders and engines;
and begirt the town; placing squadrons at every gate, and Saracens behind them;
who when the town was taken, were to lay hold on run-awayes. The fight began in
the morning, and at first the Persians had the better; being many against few;
for the Romans were not aware of the assault. The fight proceeding, the city
was full of tumult; the women and little children went to the walls; and the
men resisted valiantly; Many peasants did bravely. The women and children with
the old men brought stones to the combatants. Some threw down boiling oil.
Then the Persians refused to fight any longer; telling the King plainly, they
would not give on: Chosroes in a rage, threatening and urging them, brought them
all on. And again with shouts they applied their ladders, and engines, as if
they would instantly enter. But the Romans defending in great numbers, the
enemy fledd; and the Romans hiss't at Chosroes; daring him to the assault.
Only Azarethes with his troops continued fighting about the gate of Soena;
and from a place called Tripugia, the valiantest of the Romans sallied. Other
Persians assaulting an outwork, pressed hard upon the defendants, till Peranius
with many soldiers, and some Edessenians, having routed Azarethes, rode up to
these. So that Chosroes beginning the assault in the morning, gave it over late
at night: Both passed the night unquietly; the Persians afraid of their
trenches; the Romans providing stones and other things against another assault
the next morning; when the Barbarians came not on. But the day after, a part of
the army animated by Chosroes set upon the gate of Barlaim; but were beaten
back to their camp. Then Paul the Interpreter called up to the walls for
Martinus, to treat an accord. Which he did; and Chosroes receaving 39062. l'.
10. s'. sterling.
50000. gold Staters from the Edessenians, subscribed the articles; promising
no more to infest the Romans. In conclusion, setting his palissadoes and others
works on fire, he went home with his army.

About this time died two Roman commanders, Justus, Justinians nephew, and
Peranius the Iberian; the first by sickness, the other by a fall from his horse
in hunting. In whose rooms the Emperor placed Marcellus, his sisters son, a
youth, and Constantianus, afterward Ambassador to Chosroes about the treaty.
These had audience in Assyria, where stand Seleucia, and Ctesiphon, fair
cities, built by the Macedonians, who after Alexander the great reigned in
Persia. Of which cities the Tigris bounds their territories; no other country
being between them. Here finding the King, they demanded restitution of the
places in Lazica, and ratification of the articles of peace. But Chosroes said,
that a peace would hardly be, without a truce first for a time, during which by
mutual concourse, and communication, they might more firmly determine the
Perpetual Peace, and that the Romans to get it must give him money; and they
must send him one Tribunus, with whom by a day certain he would conclude the
business. This Tribunus, a Physician, had cured Chosroes of a great sickness,
The Quinquennial Cessation, An. Justin. 19. Anno Dommi 545.
for which he was his friend, and very grateful. Justinian forthwith sent him
Tribunus; and of the money twenty thousand Staters. And so a Truce was
concluded for five years, in the nineteenth year of Justinians reign.

Shortly after Alamundarus and Arethas had a war, without any ayds of Persians
or Romans on either side. Alamundarus in an Inroade took a son of Arethas
prisoner, and sacrificed him to Venus. From him was discovered, how Arethas
sold the affairs of the Romans to the Persians. Afterward they came to a battle
with their whole forces, wherein Arethas got the better, and routed the enemy,
and killed many. A while after he had the pursuit of two sons of Alamundarus,
but could not take them.

CHAP. XX.
But in Lazica, Chosroes had a design to kill Gubazes their King, Here the
Greek continues.
* and to transplant the Nation into some other part of his dominions, and to
plant Persians in their room: For he thought it a matter of much importance,
firmly to possess Lazica, being of manifold use to the Persians: First, by
holding more securely the Iberians, who would have none to fly to in case of
revolt: For the principal Iberians with their King Gurgenes revolting (as I
said before) the Persians suffered not the nation to choose their King any more;
neither were they willing subjects to the Persians, but both were suspicious of
each other; and the Iberians discontented, and ready to stir upon fit
opportunity. He considered also, that not only the Persian dominions would
hereby be for ever free from the devastation of the Hunnes bordering upon
Lazica; but that himself, having a mind, might send them against the Romans;
there being no rampire against the Barbarians of Mount Caucasus, but only
Lazica. But principally Lazica would advantage the Persians, by issuing from
thence to infest by land and sea the places upon the Euxine sea, to subdue
Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia, and to surprise Constantinople, there being
none to stop their course. Upon these considerations Chosroes would have
Lazica, but could not be confident in the Nation. For after the Romans were
retired from thence, the common people were discontented at the Persians
Government, who of all men have least variety in their humors, their manner of
life being extremely strict; their laws hard of disgestion, and their commands
intolerable. And in reference to the Lazians the difference infinitely
appeared, both in Religion and conversation; the Lazians being Christians, none
more; and the Persians quite contrary. Besides, no Salt being in Lazica, nor
Wine, nor other native commodity; all is imported from the sea coasts of the
Romans; not giving money to the Merchants, but skins, and slaves, and other
things with them abounding. From which being now barred, they were
discontented. And Chosroes perceiving it, consulted upon some safe prevention,
before they should stir for an alteration; and thought it most expedient to
rid away Gubazes their King, and to transport the Nation, and to plant Persians
and others in their country.

He sent also to Constantinople Isdigunas, under pretext of an Embassage, and
with him five hundred chosen Persians, directing them to get into Daras, and
lodging in several houses to set them afire, and while the Romans were busy
to quench the fire, to open the gates, and receive in the rest of the Persian
army; the Governor of Nisibis being commanded to be in readynesse with forces
concealed thereabout. Thus Chosroes thought without labor to have the killing
of the Romans in Daras, and to be master of the City. But a Roman fugitive in
Persia having knowledge of it, went to Daras, and there revealed it to George;
who formerly persuaded the Persians besieged in Sisibranum to yield to the
Romans. George went out to meet the Ambassador, and told him, this was not like
not Embassage; and that Persians in so great numbers use not to lodge in Roman
Cities; he should do well to leave the rest in a town called Amudis, and with a
few in his company to enter Daras. Isdigunas chased, and took this for a great
affront, being an Ambassador sent to the Emperor. But George, without respect
to his storming, preserved the City to the Romans; receiving him in, with only
twenty of his train. He failing in his plot, went to Constantinople, with his
Wife and two Daughters, the pretense of his extraordinary company. Where having
access to the Emperor, of business great or small he had nothing to say,
though he had been six months in the Roman dominions; but he delivered usual
presents to the Emperor, and letters, to know if he were in good health. This
Isdigunas Justinian entertained with the most grace and honor that we ever saw
him use to any Ambassador; feasting him, and Bradu^ionas his Interpreter; and
setting them upon the same couch with himself, a thing never done before. No
man ever saw an Interpreter sit at table with the meanest Governor, much less
the Emperor. And this Ambassador without business, he entertained, and
dimissed more honorably than ever any. 31500 l. sterling.
His charges and presents came to more than ten Centenaries of gold.

CHAP. XXI.
BUt into Lazica Chosroes first sent much ship-timber, giving out it was for
engines to stand upon the walls of Petra. Then he sent Fabrizus, with three
hundred chosen Persians, instructing him, closely to kill Gubazes, and of the
sequel he would take care. The timbers in Lazica were all consumed by
lightening. But Fabrizus being there, and practicing to execute his
instructions concerning Gubazes, sent for a Nobleman of the country, named
Pharsanses, (whom he understood to be in disgrace with Gubazes for some
offense, not daring to come in his fight) and to him revealed the matter, and
advised with him how to attempt it. The conclusion was, that Fabrizus should
go to Petra, and send for Gubazes, to acquaint him with the great Kings
resolution touching Lazica. But Pharsanses secretly discovered the plot to
Gubazes. Who thereupon refused to come to Fabrizus, and prepared for an open
revolt. Fabrizus committed the guard of Petra to the other Persians, to prepare
all things safe against a siege; and so went home, having done nothing. Gubazes
reported to Justinian the present estate, besought his pardon for things past,
and his present aid to shake off the Persian Government. The Emperor was glad
of the news, and sent him seven thousand men, commanded by Dagisthaeus, and a
thousand Tzanians. Who joined with Gubazes and the natives, and besieged Petra.
The Persians within defended it valiantly, and much time was spent in the
siege; they having laid in store of victual in the town. Chosroes was troubled
at it, and sent against them a great army of horse and foot, under the command
of Mermeroes. Whereof Gubazes being advertised, and upon advise with
Dagisthaeus, did thus. The River of Boas springs near the confines of Tzanica,
about Pharangium in Armenia. First it runs a good way to the Northward, and
is small and fortable, till it comes where it has the Marches of Iberia to the
North, and the utmost ridge of Mount Caucasus to the South. Hereabout inhabit
the Alans, and the Abasgians, in ancient amity with the Romans, and they are
Christians; the Zecchians also, and Sabirian Hunnes. From the Marches of Iberia
and Caucasus, this River is supplied with other waters, grows greater, and
instead of Boas is called Phasis; is navigable, and disembogues into the Euxine
sea. On both sides of it is Lazica. To the right hand the country is well
inhabited, to the borders of Iberia; on that side the river are their villages,
and some small cities, anciently built, as Archaeopolis, a strong place;
Sebastopolis, and the Castle of Pityuntium; and toward Iberia, Scanda, and
Sarap^nis. Other strong Cities there are, as Rhodopolis, and Muchrisiis. But to
the Southward are the Marches of Lazica for a days journey, a country
uninhabited; upon which border the Ponticke Romans. In the desert marches of
Lazica Justinian built Petra in my time, where, (as I said) John Tzibus set up
the monopoly, which caused the Lazians defection. From Petra Southward the
Roman borders begin; where are populous towns, as Rhizaeum, Athens, and others
unto Trapezond. The Lazians, when they brought Chosroes into the country, past
the Boas, and came to Petra; leaving Phasis (then so called) to his right hand;
pretending to avoid the delay and toil of ferrying over the river Phasis; but
in truth not willing to show the Persians their dwellings. And Lazica on both
sides the river is full of bad ways, having rocks on either side the country,
which make long narrow glinnes. (The Romans, as the Grecians, call such ways,
Clausurae.) But then, Lazica being unguarded, the Persians guided by the
natives, came with ease to Petra.

But now Gubazes being informed of the Persians coming, wrote to Dagisthaeus to
send forces to guard the passage beyond the Phasis, and not to raise the siege,
before Petra were taken. Himself with his own army marched to the utmost
borders of Lazica, to guard the Passage there. He had sometime before gotten
some troops of Alans, 9450 l. sterling.
and Sabirians; who agreed for three Centenaries, to help to guard his
country, and so depopulate Iberia, that the Persians should not be able to
come in that way; and the money the Emperor was to pay: whom Gubazes praid to
send the same, and some Donative to the Lazians, now in much distress;
alleging himself also to be behind for ten years, being enrolled a Silentiary
of the Imperial Palace, and having received no pay from the time Chosroes
entered Lazica. Justinian meant to perform his request, but greater business
diverting him, he sent not the money in the due time. But Dagisthaeus, being a
young man, and unable to manage a Persian war, made no advantage of the
opportunities offered him: Whereas he should have sent to the Passage the most
of his army, and been himself at the action, he sent, as to some slight
business, only two hundred men. And he did nothing upon Petra with all his
forces: The enemy within, at first were not 1500. men, who continually being
shot, and slain at the assaults; after as much valor, as ever men showed,
were reduced to a very few; and dispairing, and unable, lay still. The Romans
drew a mine under the wall; and the wall falling with a house joining to it,
fell all into the Ruin, securing the town as much as the wall. This troubled
not the Romans, who saw hope, by mining in another part, to take the town: and
Dagisthaeus wrote of it to the Emperor; urging for rewards of victory, and
appointing what he and his brother should have; for they would take Petra
presently. But the Persians received the assaults bravely, and beyong
expectation; their troops being much decayed. Wherein the Romans prevailing
not, they mined again, and came on with their work so, that the foundation of
the wall had no ground to bear it, and the wall was in the air, suddenly to
fall. And if Dagisthaeus had presently put fire to the supporters, the town had
been taken. But he with his hopes from the Emperor, dallying, did nothing.

CHAP. XXII.
IN the mean time Mermeroes with a Persian army past the marches of Iberia,
and avoiding the towns of Lazica, for fear of stopp, kept the Phasis to his
right hand; his care being to save Petra, and the Persians in it. Where the
piece of the wall which tottered, as I said, fell suddenly; at which fifty
Romans entered, and cried out aloud, The Victorious Emperor Justinian. They
were led by John, a young Armenian, son of that Thomas surnamed Guzes, who by
the Emperors direction built many fortresses in Lazica, commanding the army
there, and well esteemed by the Emperor. This John the Persians encountered,
and so he retired, wanting seconds. Then Mirranes, commander of the garrison,
willed the Persians to attend their guards, and went (being afraid of the
town) to Dagisthaeus; gave him fair words; promised to render the town
shortly, and so amused him, that he did not, as he should have done, presently
march into the town. In the mean time Mermeroes was encountered at the Passage
by the two hundred Romans: who valiantly kept off the assailants. But the
Persians persisting, and being still supplied with new men for their slain
(having lost more then 1000.) The Romans weary with killing, and overprest with
numbers, ran up to the mountains. Dagisthaeus hereof advertised, presently
raised the siege, and without giving any direction to the army, away he gallopt
toward the Phasis, and all the Romans followed; leaving their baggage in the
camp. Which the Persians seeing, sallyed, fell among their Cabbins, and were
rifling the camp. But the Tzanians, who followed not Dagisthaeus, came to the
rescue; routed the enemy (who ran into the town, after the loss of many) and
ransackt the Roman camp themselves; Then went to Rhizaeum, and from thence home
by Athens, and Trapezond.

The ninth day after Dagisthaeus his retreat, Mermeroes with his army came
thither: where he found remaining of the Persian Garrison 350. men, whereof 150
sound, the rest wounded and unserviceable. The dead bodies the survivors never
threw from the walls, but endured almost stifling with the stench; that the
enemy, seeing so many lost, might not be the more encouraged to assault.
Mermeroes said scoffingly, that the Romans affairs were to be lamented, being
fallen into so weak a condition, as not to be able with all their endeavor to
force 150. Persians, that had no walls to defend them. But the walls he
carefully repaired, and wanting lime and other materials, he filled with sand
the linen wallets, wherein the Persians brought their provisions, and laid
them instead of stones; and this served for walling. In the town he left 3000
chosen men, with a proportion of victual for no long time, and direction to
repair the walls. Himself with the rest of his army returned homeward; And
because if he marched the same way he came, he would find no provisions, having
left what he brought out of Iberia in Petra; he went over the mountains, which,
he heard, were inhabited; that by forraging he might make his army live. But
one Fubelius, a noble man of Lazica, conducting Dagisthaeus, and 1000. Romans,
surprised the Persians where they lodged; and having stolen some horses at
pasture, and killed some who kept them, retired; and Mermeroes rose from
thence. But Gubazes not affrighted with what happened to the Romans, quitted
not the Passage on his side, supposing there to be the maine of his hopes. For
though the Persians forced through the Passage beyond the Phasis, and got to
Petra; yet he could not incommode Lazica, being not able to cross the Phasis
without ships; the river is so deep and broad, and so swift, that it enters
the Sea a good way unmingled with salt water, and out of it passengers take in
fresh water: And with ships, the many Fortresses on this side, will make an
enemies landing unsafe. Justinian also at last sent the monyes for the
Sabirians, and other for Gubazes, and the Lazians. Long before he had sent a
good army thither commanded by Recithangus the Thracian, a wise man, and a good
soldier; but it was not yet arrived. Mermeroes having gotten to the
mountains, would have provided victual for Petra, knowing, that that he had
left, would not serve a Garrison of 3000. men. But what he could light on in
the country, hardly sufficing his own army of 30000. he could send nothing to
Petra worth the speaking. So he resolved with the most of his army to quit
Lazica, and leave some few, who of the provisions they could get, were to
transport most to Petra, and to live upon the rest. And so 5000. chosen men he
left with Fabrizus, and three other commanders. He thought a greater army not
needful; there being no enemies. With the residue he went into Persarmenia,
and lay quiet in the towns of Dubis. The 5000. upon the furthest confines of
Lazica, encamped by the river Phasis, straggling to plunder thereabout; Gubazes
observing it, sent to Dagisthaeus to come up to him, as having it in his power
to do the enemy a notable mischief. He did so, marching with the river Phasis
to his left hand, till he came where on the other side encamped the Lazians,
and where the river was fordable. This neither the Romans, nor Persians knew
(not knowing the country) but the Lazians knew it, and there passed the river,
and joined with the Romans. The Persians sent out 1000 chosen men to prevent an
enemies infesting their camp: And two of these advancing to discover, fell into
the enemies hands, and discovered all to them. So the Romans suddenly set
upon the 1000. men, of whom none escaped, but were most slain, and the rest
taken. Gubazes learnt the number of the Persian army, how far off they were,
and in what estate. They marched therefore toward them, computing to fall on
them far within the night. They were in number fourteen thousand. The
Persians, without thought of an enemy, slept securely. They thought the river
not fordable, and their 1000. men far upon their way, without encountering any.
So that the Romans unexpected charging them after midnight, found some asleep,
some newly awake, and naked upon their pallets; not a man with a thought of
fighting; But most of them thus surprised were slain. Some they took, among
whom a principal commander. Some few escaped in the dark. The camp the Romans
and Lazians took, with all their Ensigns; and had the booty of much arms, and
goods, and of Horses and Mules a great number. They followed the execution far
into Iberia; where lighting upon other Persian troops, they killed many. The
Romans and Lazians also found there a quantity of meal and other provision,
and burnt it; which the Persians were conducting out of Iberia to Petra. So
they left at the Passage some numbers of Lazians, that no provisions to Petra
might pass that way; and then returned with all their booty and captives. And
thus ended the fourth year of the Persian affairs, being the three and
twentieth of Justinian's reign.

The year before, Anno Dom. 548. and 23. Justiniani. was the fourth year of
the truce, where Agathias begins.
John the Cappadocian was sent for by the Emperor to Constantinople; for the
Empress Theodora died in that year. Yet could he not recover any of his
offices. The honor of Priesthood he held against his will. He had also
apparitions promising the Empire. For the Devilluses to display before unsettled
judgments, with some great hopes, that which they naturally love: and so was
this John deluded by some Juglers; who told him he should wear the habit of
Augustus. And in Constantinople was a Priest, who kept the treasures of the
Church of S. Sophia, named Augustus. When John was shorn a Priest (having
himself no garment fit,) they, who were employed in it, made him put on the
Cope and Rochet of this Augustus; And so, I think, the prediction was fulfilled.

THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST BOOK OF THE WAR With the VANDALS.
CHAP. I. THe extent of the Roman Empires, Eastern and Western, and the
division thereof. CHAP. II. In the reign of Honorius, the Gothic, or Getick
Nations invade the Roman Empire. They spoil Italy. CHAP. III. Alaricus by a
stratagem takes Rome. Honorius feared the loss of his Game cock Rome. Attalas
made Emperor. Honorius miraculously restored. Alaricus dies. Constantine the
Usurper of Britany slain. CHAP. IV. The Vandals possess Spain by the consent of
Honorius; John after him, is made Emperor, but deposed. Theodosius and
Valentinian held the Empires. Valentinian effeminate. The plot of Aetius
against Bonifacius, which lost Africa, in whose room the Visigoths possess
Spain. Some battles lost to the Vandals by Bonifacius. The presage of Martian
to be Emperor. CHAP. V. Gensericus makes a league with Valentinian, paying him
tribute. Valentinian ravishes the wife of Maximus. Actius unwisely killed by
him. Attilas the Hunn, takes Aquileia by the presage of a Stork. Valentinian
slain by Maximus; who marries Eudoxia. Gensericus revenges his death, and sacks
Rome. CHAP. VI. Gensericus hard proceedings with the Africans. His Army. His
piracies. Leo sends Basiliscus against him; who betraies the business by Aspars
direction. Is defeated by fireships. The valor of John. Basiliscus takes
sanctuary, is pardoned. Aspar slain by Leo. Zeno succeeds. CHAP. VII. Majorinus
disguises himfelf to spy Africa. Dies before he could make war. Basiliscus
expels Zeno. Who recovers, and kills the other in a Wilderness with famine. He
makes a perpetual peace with the Vandals, which lasts till Justinians reign.
CHAP. VIII. Gensericus his Testament. Honoricus succeeds; who persecutes the
Christians, as his successor Gundamund. Trasamund succeeds, and persecutes.
Cunningly marries Amalafrida, sister of Theodorick. Is routed by Cabaon, a More
of Tripolis, whose reverence to the Christian Churches, and order of battle is
remarkable. CHAP. IX. Ildericus succeeds. Is deposed by Gelimer. Justinian
resolves a war against him. Is dissuaded by John of Cappadocia. But by a Bishop
is put again upon it, and appoints Belisarius General. CHAP. X. Pudentius
causes Tripolis to revolt. Godas usurps Sardinia against Gelimer, and calls in
Justinian to his aid. The preparation of the Army against Africa, and names of
the Captains. CHAP. XI. Belisarius sets forth Procopius dream. Belisarius
speech, admonishing the Army to Order. He sets Lanterns in the Generals Ships,
to lead the rest. Many die at Methone by unwholesome biscuit, provided by John
the Prefect. CHAP. XII. Antoninus way to keep the water sweet. The Fleet comes
to Sicily. Procopius discovers the estate of the Vandals. They come to the
coast of Africa. Belisarius after a consultation chooses to land. He encamps
strongly, and gets water by miracle. CHAP. XIII. Belisarius speech upon his
soldiers stealing the ripe fruits. He gets Syllectus by surprise, and the
Inhabitants consent. Gelimers Post conceals Justinians Letters. CHAP. XIV.
Belisarius order of marching safely. He gains the good will of the natives.
Gelimer murders Ildericus. His order to compass the Roman Army. CHAP. XV. A
party of Vandals routed by John; Another by the Hunns. A custom for a Hunnish
Family to give the first blow in a battle. Belisarius encourages his Army to
fight. CHAP. XVI. The Romans are routed; Gelimer not using his advantage,
Belisarius makes a stand, and quite everthrows him. CHAP XVII. Belisarius
forbears to enter Carthage in the night, fearing the disorder of his soldiers.
Strange news to the poor Roman captives in Carthage, when they saw the Roman
fleet entering the harbor. Belisarius is joyfully received in Carthage, the
City not leaving their ordinary affairs; but entertaining the soldiers. He
dines in the Palace on the meat provided for Gelimer. Delphica Palatium. His
admirable government of his soldiers. CHAP. XVIII. Belisarius repairs the
ruined walls. The Prophecy, That Gamma should expel Beta, and Beta Gamma. The
Cypriana storms. St. Cyprian promised often in dreams to be revenged of the
Arrians, for polluting Christian Churches; and now performs it on his festival.
The Arrians running from the same, adorned by themselves. The advice of an old
Vandal, concerning their old Country. The Vandals cruelty to the Zacynthians,
now punished. CHAP. XIX. Gelimer plots to kill Roman soldiers. Diogenes makes a
brave escape with 22. men against 300. Tzazons unseasonable news of his
reducing Sardinia. How Theudis, King of the Visigoths in Spain, used the
Ambassadors of Gelimer, who knew nothing of the ruin of the Vandals. CHAP. XX.
Gelimer is abandoned by the Moors and Numidians, whose Princes send for their
Ensigns of principality from the Romans, according to custom. What those are.
Gelimer sends for his brother Tzazon out of Sardinia by a passionate Letter.
Their mournful meeting.
THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS OF THE SECOND BOOK OF THE WAR With the VANDALS.
CHAP I. GElimer makes head. Attempts a revolt of the Hunns. Belisarius
encourages his Army. The Hunns hover between both. CHAP. II. Gelimer and Tzazon
encourage their soldiers. The Romans order. John begins. The rest of the horse
give the Vandals an absolute defeat. Gelimer basely runs away from his Camp and
Army; which is quite ruined, and the Camp spoiled, where they found infinite
wealth. CHAP. III. The disorder of the Romans after the victory and huge booty.
The unfortunate death of John the Armenian, being ready to take Gelimer. Pharas
the Herulian is left to besiege Gelimer in the mountain of Pappua. Belisarius
fortune to get the royal treasures of Gelimer. CHAP. IV. Sardinia and Corsica
recovered to the Emperor. Likewise Ebusa, Majorica, and Minorica. The Goths
refuse to render Lylibaeum. Pharas attempts Pappua, and fails. The delicacy of
the Vandals; and the hardness of those Moors. CHAP. V. Gelimer refuses the
counsel of Pharas at first: desires a loaf, a sponge, and a harp. Upon the
sight of his Nephew, a boy, beaten by a Morish boy for snatching up a cake, he
relents. Being brought to Belisarius, on a sudden he fell a langhing. CHAP. VI.
Belisarius discovers a plot against him, of his fellow-Commanders. The Moors
revolt, upon the Oracle of their soothsaying women. The Army is left by
Belisarius with Solomon. Belisarius triumphs at Constantinople: Where were
showed the spoils of the Temple of Jerusalem. Gelimer has Towns given him to
live on. CHAP. VII. The unfortunate loss of Aigan and Rufinus. The original of
the Moors from the Canaanites subdued by Joshua. Solomon persuades peace; but
is answered with denial. CHAP. VIII. Solomon kills 10000 Moors, and takes their
camp and baggage. At Burgaon kills 50000. and utterly routs them: He took so
many prisoners, that a Moorish boy was sold for a sheep. He fulfils their
women's prophecy, that they should be destroyed by a man without a beard. CHAP.
IX. The Moors remaining, fly to Jabdas to mount Aurasium. Althias his single
combat with Jabdas. Solomon makes war on him in Aurasium without effect. He
prepares a new war that way, and against the Moors of Sardinia. CHAP. X.
Belisarius in Sicily. A strange passion of the Sun a year together. A mutiny of
the soldiers in Africa, caused by their Vandal wives. Solomon fled to
Belisarius into Sicily. CHAP. XI. Stotzas General of the mutiners; besieges
Carthage. Belisarius coming from Sicily with 100 men, frights him away, and
defeats his Army at Membresa. Then upon a mutiny in Sicily, returns. The
Commanders of Numidia are forsaken by their soldiers, and slain by Stotzas.
CHAP. XII. Germanus, the Emperors nephew, is sent into Africa. He pacifies the
Army somewhat. Defeats Stotzas in Numidia; takes the mutiners Camp. Stotzas
flies into Mauritania, and so that mutiny ended. CHAP. XIII. Maximinus his
mutiny; who growing worse, being made one of the Generals lifeguard. Is
defeated and crucified. CHAP. XIV. Solomon's second Government of Africa. He
beats Jabdas to the top of Aurasium. Takes Zerbule, and besieges Jabdas in
Tumar. CHAP. XV. Solomon encourages his Army. He assails, and takes the two
Castles, and Jabdas flies into Mauritania. CHAP. XVI. Sergius, nephew to
Solomon, is Governor of Tripolis, and kills 70 Moors who came to treat. Antalas
revolts, and with the Leucathian Moors infests Africa Solomon is slain. Sergius
made Governor of Africa. Is hated. Antalas grows strong. CHAP. XVII. Solomon
the younger scapes his imprisonment by a wile. Himerius being taken, gets
Adramettus for the Moors. Which is recovered again by the stratagem of Paul a
Priest. The Moors and Stotzas do much mischief. CHAP. XVIII. Areobindus is
joined with Sergius, then is sole Governor after the death of John, son of
Sisinniolus; who having wished to die after the killing of Stotzas; and Stotzas
having in like sort wished against John, they both have their wishes in a sort.
Gontharis plots against Areobindus with Antalas; and Areobindus has a
counterplot with Cutzinas. CHAP. XIX. Gontharis perfidiously kills Areobindus
after oath given by Reparatus, the Bishop of Carthage, at the baptism of, 28c.
and usurps. The pusillanimity of Areobindus in his death. Artabanes the
Armenian plots his ruin. CHAP. XX. Gontharis plots a marriage with Projecta.
Artabanes willingly omits the beating of Antalas. With Gregorius and Artasiris
plots to kill Gontharis, and resolutely does it at a feast. Africa under John,
after various successes, gets quietness.
THE HISTORY Of THE WARS Of the Emperor JUSTINIAN:
BOOK I. Of the War with the Vandals.
CHAP. I.
THis end had the Emperor Justinian of the Persian war. And now I come to his
actions against the Vandals and Moors: First showing from whence those Vandals
brake in upon the Roman Provinces. After the death of Theodosius, a most just
Prince, and a great Soldier, his two Sons succeeded, Arcadius the elder in the
Eastern Empire, and Honorius in the West. This Division was formerly made by
Constantine and his sons, who first transferred the Empire to Constantinople,
which City he much enlarged, and dignified, and called it by his own name. And
the Emperors divided the two Continents between them, thus. The Ocean
encompasses the whole earth, or the most part of it, (we know no certainty
therein) But into this part comes an Inlet from the Western Ocean, dividing the
two Continents, and making our Seas; which begin from Caliz, and reach to the
lake of Moeotis. The land to the Southward thereof from that pillar of Hercules
which is named Septem (by reason of the seven hillocks there appearing) is
called Asia, and that over against it Europe: And the Strait which parts these
Continents, is ten miles and a half over; which then continue parted by main
seas to the Hellespont; and there they meet at Sestus and Abydus, and again at
Constantinople and Chalcedon, to the anciently named Cyan^an rocks, whereabout
now is that which they call Hieron. At both these last Straits, the Lands are a
mile and a half distant. From one of Hertules pillars to the other, along the
shore, not compassing the Ionian gulf, nor Euxine sea, but crossing from
Chalcedon to Constantinople, and from Otranto to the Land over against it,
(...) 285 days journey. To reckon exactly from Constantinople to the Lake of
Maeotis, along the Euxine sea, is impossible; the Barbarians beyond the River
^^^r, or Danu^^^, making the Coasts unaccessible to Romans: But to the River
(...) from Constantinople is twenty two days journey: And on (...) side, from
Chalcedon to the River of Phasis (which comes out of Cholchis into that sea) is
forty days journey. So the circuit of all the Roman Empire along the Seashore
is three hundred forty seven days journey; crossing the Ionian gulf from
Otranto (as I have said) which is an hundred miles over, and the compass of the
gulf is Leander says, That from Otranto to Venice is 700. miles; and that is
but half of the Gulf. My conceit is, that the Author wrote 54. days journey;
which is twice 700. milei.
four days journey: So great anciently was the Roman Empire. The Emperor of
the West had Africa under him, which contains ninety days journey, from Caliz
to Tripolis: And in Europe his share was from the other Hercules pillar to the
Ionian gulf, 75 days journey: To which must be added the compass of the said
gulf. But the Emperor of the East had for his share 120 days journey from
Cyrene in Africa to Epidamnus upon the Ionian gulf, now called Durazzo; besides
the Roman Provinces upon the Euxine Sea, as I have said. A days journey
contains 120 furlongs, (which are 25 English miles) the distance from Athens to
Megara. Of the Islands Britany, by much the greatest, fell to the Western
Empire, being without Hercules pillars: And within them, Ebusa, and Majorica,
and Minorica, lying above seven days journey from that Inlet of the Ocean. The
other Islands upon the Mediterranean belong to each Emperor, as they are
situate in the limits of either.

CHAP. II.
BUT Honorius holding the Western Empire, the Barbarians invaded his Country:
Who they were, and in what manner, I will tell you. Heretofore were many
Gothic Nations, and now are; but the greatest, and most famous of them are the
Goths, Vandals, Visigoths, and Gepaedes. Anciently they were called Sarmatians,
and Melanchlenians. Some called, these, Getick Nations. They vary all in names,
but in nothing else; being all fair-bodied, with yellow hair; tall, and with
good faces: They have the same laws, customs, and religion (being all
Arrians) and speak all the Gothic language. I suppose them to have been
anciently one Nation, and their names to have been distinguished afterward by
their several Princes. Formerly this people inhabited about the river Danubius;
then the Gepaedes held the places about Singedon and Sirmium, on both sides the
River where now they are. From thence the Visigoths rose first, and came to the
aid of Arcadius; but some time after, (For Barbarians cannot inure themselves
to keep faith with Romans) these Visigoths under their Prince Alaricus rebelled
against both the Emperors: They begun in Thrace, and thence overran all
Europe. Honorius at first sat still in Rome, thinking of no enemy, but
contented to be suffered quiet in his palace but hearing how the enemy was not
far off, but already in Taulantia with a mighty Army, he fled from his Palace
to Ravenna, a strong City lying upon the bottom of the Ionian gulf. That is,
all Italy on this side Otranto, in respect of Constantinople: which must
diligently be observed in this Author, when he says, On this side
Some say (but improbably, by what I can gather by his disposition) that upon
some mutiny by his subjects he drew in the Barbarians: But they finding no
enemy opposing, exceeded all that ever were in cruelty; so destroying the
Cities they took, especially on * this side the Ionian gulf, that they have no
mark now remaining save some turret or gate; killing also all in their way, old
and young, not sparing women nor children, so that Italy remains to this day
extremely unpeopled. They robbed all the wealth of Europe; and having for their
masterpiece left nothing in Rome, public nor private, they marched into
France.

CHAP. III.
THe taking of Rome by Alaricus, was thus. An. Dom. 412. and Honorii 16.
Having spent much time in the Siege, and not taking it by force, nor other
means; he chose out 300 beardless Youths, whom he knew well bred, and valorous
above their years: These he told secretly, that he would colourably present
them for Slaves to some Roman Patricians; and he charged them, being in their
houses, to show all mildness and sobriety, and to serve their masters
cheerfully in all their injunctions; but at a day apyointed, after noon, while
their masters were sleeping after their dinners to meet all at Porta Salaria,
suddenly to kill the Guards, and to open the gate, Alaricus having thus
instructed the young men, sent Ambassadors to the Senate to tell them, That he
admired their good affection to their Emperor, and would trouble them now no
more, seeing manifestly their singular valor and fidelity: But to have
remembrances remaining with such worthy men, he desired to present them with
some few Servants. Soon after, he sent the young men, and commanded the
Barbarians to tru^s up their baggage for a retreat, that the Romans might
perceive it. The Senators gladly entertained this discourse, and the Presents,
and lived merrily, and suspected no design, seeing the young men's obedience,
and in the Camp some gone already, some busy to rise, the rest expected to do
the like immediately. At the hour assigned, Alaricus put his Army, in order by
Porta Salaria, as if to march away, (being there quartered at first) The young
men then also killed the Guards at the said gate, and set them open, receiving
in Alaricus at pleasure. The houses next the Gate they burnt, and among them
that of Salust who wrote the Roman History, whereof the remains half-burnt
stood to my time: Then they sacked the City, slew most of the Romans in it, and
went away. Then they say that the Eunuch of Honorius, then being at Ravenna,
who kept his Cocks of the game, told him the news how Rome was lost; He cried
out, Why! even now he eat from mine own hands, (He had an extraordinary great
Cock named Rome) The Eunuch understanding him, told him, that the City Rome was
lost by Alaricus: The Emperor rousing himself replied, I thought, my friend,
it had been my Cock Rome. So simple, they say, was that Emperor. Some say that
Alaricus took not Rome thus: But that Proba a Roman Lady eminent for wealth and
honor, pitying the people perishing with miseries, and for famine eating one
another, and seeing no hope of better, (the River and Port being blocked up by
the Enemy) directed her servants in the night to open the gates; Alaricus at
his parting from Rome, declared Attalus, one of the Nobility, Emperor, putting
on him the Diadem and Purple robe, and all other ensigns of the Imperial
dignity; that by this he might depose Honorius, and give Attalus the Western
Empire. But Attalus had neither wit himself, nor could follow good counsel;
sending into Africa, without Alaricus's consent, Governors without an Army.

Britany then revolted from the Romans, and the Soldiers chose Constantine
their Emperor, an eminent man, who with a Fleet and a good Army invaded Spain
and Gaul. Honorius with ships in readiness, expected the success in Africa, to
sail thither upon the rejection of those sent from Attalus, and so to retain
some part of the Empire; if otherwise, to go to Theodosius (who being very
young, held the Empire after his father Arcadius and to continue with him. But
fluctuating in these uncertainties and cares, he had a miraculous blessing,
(God usually assisting men not subtle to devise for themselves, so they be not
wicked) For from Africa came sudden news, that Attalus's Governors were slain;
and unexpectedly came to him a great Navy from Constantinople with an Army to
his aid: Alaricus also offended, took from Attalus the Imperial habit, and made
him a prisoner, and himself soon after died; and the Army of Visigoths were by
Adulpbus led against Gaul. Constantine also was overthrown in battle, and
slain with his sons. But Britany the Romans could never recover, continuing
ever since under their own Princes.

He ever calls the Ostrogoths, only Goths.
The Goths who passed over the river Danubius first held Pannonia; then Towns
in Thrace given them by the Emperor, where having not spent much time, they
Conquered Italy. But of that in my discourse of the Goths.

CHAP. IV
BUt the Vandales inhabiting about the Lake of Moeotis, upon a great famine,
went to the Germans, now called Franks, and to the river of Rhine, associating
the Alans, a Gothish Nation. From thence they rose under the conduct of
Godidiscius, and planted in Spain. And Honorius came to conditions with
Godidiscius, to continue there without infesting the Province. And whereas
there is a Roman Law, That men out of possession the space of thirty years,
cannot enter upon the disseisors; but before are by prescription barred their
action in Court for the same; Honorius by his Edict commanded the Vandales
continuance in Roman Land, not to need that thirty years prescription. In this
estate Honorius left Italy, and died. With him Constantius was Emperor, who
married his sister Placidia, but died before Honorius; having had in his small
time in the Empire no means to act any thing, his son Valentinian from his
nurse was brought to the Palace of Theodosius, and there bred. But the
Courtiers in Rome chose Emperor one of the Soldiers named John; a mild and a
prudent man, and valiant. He usurped five years, but ruled moderately, not
harkening to informers, nor unjustly killing nor confiscating any: But against
the Barbarians he could do nothing, by reason all at Constantinople was his
enemy. Theodosius, the son of Arcadius, sent an Army against him under Aspar
and Ardaburius his son, and deposed him; giving the Empire to Valentinian, yet
a child, who took John cut off one of his hands, brought him into the Circus of
Aquileia upon an ass; and when he had endured much scorn and indignity from the
Stage, there put him to death.

Valentinian being thus Emperor of the West, his mother Placidia bred him
effeminately, that he became vicious from a child; he frequented Conjurers and
Star-gazers, made love to other men's wives, and was extremely debaucht, though
he had a wife most beautiful: So that he was so far from recovering the lost
pieces of the Empire, that he added the loss of Afric, and ruined himself;
and after his death his wife and children had the fortune to be captives. The
disaster in Africa happened thus. The two Roman Generals, Aetius and Bonifacius,
both valiant and expert Soldiers, inferior to none of their time, ever were at
difference in the public affairs; being men so high in worth and spirit, that
he shall not err, who calls them the last of the Romans. All the Roman virtue
and valor was so reduced into these two. Bonifacius Placidia made General of
Africa, which displeased Aetius, but he concealed his dislike (their enmity
being covered yet under a fair visour) but Bonifacius once out of the way, he
accused him of Tyranny, and a desire to deprive her and the Emperor of Africa;
and that she might easily find the truth; (for if she sent for Bonifacius he
would not come.) She liked the advice, and did so: But Aetius wrote privately to
him before, that the Emperors mother had a plot upon him, to be rid of him;
for proof whereof he forewarned him, how he should be presently sent for upon
no ground. Bonifacius not thinking light of the advice, and being summoned to
go to the Emperor, refused, concealing the advertisement he had from Aetius.
Upon this, Placidia thought Aetius above all men well affected to the Emperor,
and consulted about Bonifacius: Who ^nable to withstand the Emperor, and to go
to Rome holding it not safe; advised by what means he might make a league with
the Vandales, who, as I said, were ^ea^ed in Spain, not far from Africa.
Godidiscius was dead; but Gonthar^ his legitimate son, and Genserick his base
son succeeded in his Dominions; the first whereof was a ^oy, not much active;
but Genserick very well exercised in Military affairs, and the shrewdest man
alive. Bonifacius sent to Spain to these sons of Godidiscius, to invite them to
equal terms with him, for each of the three to have a third part of Africa; and
if any one of them be invaded, the rest to defend him. Anno Dom. 430 and
Valentiniani Tertii anno quarto.
Upon this accord the Vandales passed the straits of Calize into Africa: and
afterward the Visigoths planted in Spain. But in Rome the friends of
Bonifacius, weighing the disposition of the man, took it for a miracle that
Bonifacius should turn Usurper; and by Placidia's direction went to him to
Carthage, and spoke with him; where they saw Aetius Letters, heard the whole
business, and returning reported to the Empress, in what terms he stood. She
amazed at this, hurt not Aetius, nor reproacht the disservice done to the
Emperors house, his power being great, and the Emperors affairs in bad terms:
But with that advertisement of his, she acquainted Bonifacius's friends, and
besought them to draw him (upon her oath for his safety) to return to his
Country, and not to endure to see the Roman Empire reduced under Barbarians.
Bonifacius hearing this, repented his League with the Barbarians; and wooed
them with large promises to leave Africa. But they thought themselves scorned
by such Propositions, so that he was forced to come to blows with them and
being beaten retired to Hippo, a strong City in Numidia upon the Sea. Where the
Vandales besieged him under the leading of Genserick: Gontharis being dead,
made away by his brother, some say: but other Vandales say, he was taken
prisoner by the Germans in a battle in Spain, and crucified, and that
Genserick was King alone, and lead the Vandales into Africa. But Hippo they
could not get by force nor composition, and they were pressed with famine: so
that after much time spent they raised their siege. Shortly after a great Army
came from Rome and Constantinople under the General Aspar to Bonifacius; which
in a battle very bravely fought, he had much the worse, and all ran away. Aspar
returned home; and Bonifacius came to Placidia, and removed the groundless
suspicion against him.

Thus the Vandals got Africa from the Romans; and the enemies they took alive,
they reserved for slaves in restrains. Among whom was Mantianus, who was
Emperor, after the decease of Theodosius. But then Genserick commanding the
captives to be brought into the Palace, that he might examine if any had not a
Master fit for his quality; and they being together in the open air about noon
in the heat of Summer, troubled with heat and weary, they lay down, and fell
asleep, when an Eagle flying that way, hovered with her wings spread out over
the head of Martianus. Genserick marked this strange Omen not to come for
nothing, called for him, and asked him what he was. This is supplied from the
Latin Translation.
He said he was the Assistant of Aspar in his secret affairs, (an Officer the
Romans call Domesticus.) Genserick considering the gesture of the Eagle, and
Aspars power in Constantinople, would not kill him; not thinking such an Omen
fit for a dying man: If he were to reign, he was not left to him to kill. Gods
decrees are not possibly to be prevented: So he bound him by oath to be his
friend, and upon no ground ever to make war upon the Vandales. Thus was
Martianus dismissed; and shortly after succeeded Theodosius, and proved a very
good Prince: Only he regarded not how things went in Africa. But this was
afterward.

CHAP. V.
GEnserick, after the defeat of Asper and Bonifacius, weighing wisely the
variety of fortune, that new Armies might come from Rome and Constantinople,
that his powers would not match with the Romans; and that God changes men's
fortunes as they grow old; he resolved in his new victories to bear himself
moderately, and not too high. So he made a league with Valentinian, paid him
tribute, and left his son Honoricus in hostage; whom afterward he received
home, when then friendship was more grown. In the mean time Placidia died at
Rome; Valentinian having only two daughters by Eudoxia, sister to Theodosius:
But he was ruined thus. Maximus a Senator, descended from that Maximus the
Tyrant, destroyed by Theodosius the elder, for which the Romans celebrate an
annual festivals; had a very sober and fair Lady to his wife. Valentinian being
in love with her, and desiring to enjoy her, but finding it difficult, used
this wicked plot. He sent for Maximus to the Palace, and at Dice laid gold
against his Ring, and won it; This he sent secretly to the wife in the husbands
name, requiring her to come immediately to visit the Empress Eudoxia: She
obeyed, and some acquainted with the secret waited upon her in the Court into a
room far from the Empresses chamber; Here the Greek continues.
There Valentinian met her, and ravished her. She extremely afflicted with the
dishonor, went home, all blubbered with tears, and reviled Maximus for giving
the opportunity: Who being infinitely grieved at it, conspired against the
Emperor. But seeing the great power of Aetius, who lately had defeated Artilas
invading the Roman Empire with a mighty Army of Massagetes and other Scythians,
and fearing him for an obstacle of his proceedings, he determined first to
remove him, not considering that in Actius was the whole hope of the Romans. So
by the artifices of some Eunuchs about the Emperor, his friends, he infused
into the Emperor, that Aetius was plotting a revolt. And Valentinian judging
the information by no other argument but by the worth and power of Aetius, put
him to death. When a Roman was famous for a word spoken, being asked by the
Emperor, if the killing of Aetius were not well done? and answering, That he
could not tell whether it were well done, or how it was done; but this he knew,
that he had cut off his right hand with his left. Aetius being dead, Attilas
having none to match him, forraged at his ease all Europe, and made both the
Empires tributary, both the Emperors sending him annual taxes.

Then they say, Attilas besieging Aquileia, a great and populous maritime City
within the Ionian gulf, and not being able by force nor otherwise to get the
town, and wearied with a long Siege, put his Army in readiness to rise the next
day by sunrising; and the Barbarians were busy in their retreat accordingly:
When a Stork having his nest upon one of the turrets, where he had bred his
young, suddenly with his young flew from the same, the young ones sometimes
flying even with him, sometimes getting upon his back; and thus they fled far
from the town. Attilas seeing it (being a very cunning Diviner) commanded his
Army to stand still, telling them that the Bird with his young ones was not
fled away for nothing, but prophesied some mischief to the Town. Upon this they
say the Barbarians renewed their siege, and that the wall by the Storks nest
fell down of it self, making the Town open to the enemy, and that so Aquileia
was taken by assault.

But afterward Maximus killed the Emperor, and married Eudoxia by force, his
wife being newly dead. And in bed he spoke a word once, how for her love he had
done what he did. Eudoxia, before offended with Maximus, and desirous to
revenge the wrong done to Valentinian, by this word was more incensed to plot
against him, hearing thus from Maximus himself how her husbands disaster came
for her sake. So that, no sooner day, but she sent to Carthage, entreating
Genserick to revenge Valentinian, ruined by a wicked man, in a manner unworthy
of himself and the Empire; and to redeem her, suffering things abominable, from
the Tyrant. She urged him as his Friend and Allie; and that it were impious,
such a villainy should be acted in a Kings house without a revenger; And from
Constantinople she expected no revenge, Theodosius being dead, and Martianus in
possession of the Empire. Genserick for no other respect, but finding he should
get wealth by it, sailed into Italy with a great Navy, marched up to Rome, and
(none resisting) was Master of the Imperial palace. Maximus running away, the
Romans stoned to death, and cut off his head, and rent his other members in
pieces. Eudoxia with her two daughters by Valentinian, Eudocia and Placidia,
Genserick made prisoners; and carried away to Carthage infinite wealth of gold
and silver, and spared neither Brass nor any thing in the palace: He robbed the
Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and took away half the covering of it being of
the richest brass, with much gold melted in it, and very admirable and
magnificent. They say, the ship where the Images were was cast away, but with
the rest the Vandals landed at Carthage. Eudocia Genserick married to his
eldest son Honoricus; The other daughter was married to Olybrius a principal
Senator of Rome, whom with the mother Eudoxia, at the Emperors request, he
sent to Constantinople. The Empire of the East Leo then held, Aspar placing him
therein after the death of Martianus.

CHAP. VI.
GEnserick afterward took down the walls of all the Cities of Africa, save
Carthage; That the Africans siding with the Romans might have no strong places
to gather head, nor the Emperors forces by taking towns and by garrisons in
them, think to trouble the Vandals. His counsel seemed a good one then, to
secure the Vandals: But afterward, when these Towns without walls were so
easily taken by Belisarius, Genserick was laughed at, and his wise counsel
judged folly. Thus men ever change their opinions of counsels, with the
fortunes of them. The rich and eminent men of Africa he gave as so many
bondmen, with their lands and goods, to his sons, Honoricus and Genson,
Theodorus being dead without issue: From the rest he took their lands, and
bestowed them on the other Vandals, which are yet called the Vandals Heritages.
All the Towns he gave his sons, and others he called the Kings land, freeing
the same perpetually from tributes: The ancient possessors the while had the
fortune to be poor and free men, and had permission to go whither they would.
Lat. verse.
Some held, or claimed their lands to no purpose: Many were banished and put to
death upon no cause, specially such as were thought to have hid money in their
houses. Thus Africa was overwhelmed with miseries. Genserick also in convenient
places had garrisons under 80 Colonels, whom he called Chiliarchs, as if his
Army were so many thousands, being in truth but 50000. At first he enrolled
only Vandals and Alans; afterward he admitted under the name of Vandals all
other Barbarians, except Moors, and at last he received them also into the
Army. After the death of Valentinian, he made every Spring a voyage to rob
Sicily, or Italy, sacking some Cities, and some laying flat with the ground.
When he had made havoc in those parts, turning upon the Eastern Empire, he
infested Illyrium and Peloponesus, and the Islands adjacent, with the rest of
Greece: Then to Italy and Sicily again, if ought were left, to pillage it. Once
hoy^ng sail from the Port of Carthage, his Ship-master asked him, whither he
would go for pillage? His answer was, Whither God shall drive me. Making war
thus at random.

The Emperor Leo, to restrain this insolence, prepared an Army of 100000 men
to send against the Vandals, and a great Navy, collected from all parts of
Greece. This war, they say, cost him a huge treasure, and to no purpose. His
General was Basiliscus, brother to his wife Verina, the trustiest man he had,
and safest for him; friendship continuing yet between him and Aspar, who, being
an Arian, could not get the Empire, but with his power made Leo, against whom
afterward he conspired. And now fearing lest the victory of the Vandals might
make him proud, both to his particular, and in the government, he instructed
Basiliscus at his departure to prolong the war. Leo also sent Anthemius a
Senator, great in blood and estate, to be Emperor of the West, that he might
be aiding to him in the Vandalick war. And Genserick promised the Western
Empire to Olybrius, Placidia's husband, to join with him; upon which confidence
he had higher thoughts, and more vexed the Roman dominions. The Greek again.
In the mean time Marcellianus a friend of Aetius, (who after the murder of
Aetius entered into action against Valentinian, and got the dominion of Dalmatia
none opposing) Leo courted and gained; and then sent him to the Island of
Sardinia, subject to the Vandals, whom Marcellianus presently drove out and got
the Island. From Constantinople also was sent Heraclius into Tripolis in Africa,
who took all the Towns therein, left his ships there, and led his Army by land
to Carthage. These were the entrances into this war. But Basiliscus arrived
with his Army at a small Town 35 miles from Carthage, called Mercurium, from an
ancient Temple of Mercury. And if he had not treacherously dallied, but marched
instantly to Carthage, he had taken the Town instantly, and made the Vandals
his Captives. So much afraid was Genserick of Leo, seeing Tripolis and Sardinia
taken, and so brave a Navy as the Romans had not set out of a long time. But
this the Generals either cowardly, or traitorous delay hindered. But Genserick
made this good use of Basiliscus his negligente. He armed his Subjects, manned
most of his ships, and made ready of the rest the swiftest of sail without men
in them; then sent Ambassadors to Basiliscus,, desiring a five days cessation,
that he might advise upon the means of doing the Emperors pleasure. They say,
he sent him closely a great sum of money, which bought this truce, supposing
(which came to pass) that he should get in that time a wind to bring his ships
about. And Basiliscus, either to comply with his promise to Aspar, or selling
his opportunity, or whether he thought it so best, lay still, attending the
enemies advantage. But the Vandals (the wind serving) hoist sail against the
enemy, towing after the ships without men. When they came near, they put fire
into the empty ships, whose sails spreading to the wind, they let them run upon
the Roman Navy. They falling in among a multitude of Vessels, suddenly consumed
with themselves, those they fell foul with. In the mean time the Roman fleet
was in confusion, with cries equalling the winds, and the whizzing of the
flames, and with the Soldiers and Mariners calling, and thrusting the
fireships with long poles, from their own pitifully perishing. The Vandals
also shot, and sunk the rest, taking the flying Soldiers with Arms and all.
Some in this overthrow did bravely; specially John, Lieutenant General to
Basiliscus, but not acquainted with his Treason: His ship being boarded, he
slew many upon the deck; and when he saw the ship taken by the enemy, he leapt
into the sea with all his Arms. Genson, the son of Genserick wooed him, and
gave him his faith to save his life; but he plunged into the sea, using this
word only, That John should never come into the hands of dogs.

And this was the end of this war: Heraclius returned home; Marcellianus
perished by the Treason of one of his fellow-Commanders: But Basiliscus in
Constantinople took sanctuary in the great Church dedicated to Christ, (the
Constantinopolitans call it the Church of St. Sophia, holding the attribute of
wisdom most becoming God;) and the Empress Verina obtained his pardon. But the
Empire he could not then get, what he endeavored: for Leo shortly after killed
Aspar and Ardaburius in his Palace, suspecting them to conspire his death.
Anthemius, also Emperor of the West, was slain by Recimer who married his
daughter. And Olybrius succeeding him, had not long after the same fate. Leo
deceasing in Constantinople, Leo the son of Zeno, and of Ariadne daughter to
Leo, received the Empire, being very young. And his father being chosen his
partner in the Empire, the child was quickly rid out of the way.

CHAP. VII:
THen Majorinus had the Western Empire; a man worth the remembering; as
excelling in virtue all the Roman Emperors that ever were. He could not with
patience endure the disaster of Africa, but raised a great Army in Liguria to
go against the Vandals himself, being industrious and very ventrous of his
person. He thought best first to discover the Vandals power, and the humor of
Genserick; and how the Moors and Africans stood affected toward them: And
resolving to put this in execution himself, he took his journey to Genserick
with a feigned name, and as an Ambassador from the Emperor. And further to
avoid mischief and the overthrow of his business by discovery, he died his
hair, (which was as yellow as the finest gold) into a perfect blew for the
time. Genserick to fright him, took him in a friendly way, into his Armory,
where was much good Arms. They say the Arms then of themselves moved, and
clashed together; that Genserick thought it an Earthquake: but being without,
and upon enquiry finding no notice taken of any Earthquake, he thought it a
miracle, not guessing the meaning. Majorinus dispatched to his desire, returned
into Liguria; lead his Army over land, purposing to cross the Straits at
Hercules Pillars, and so to march to Carthage. Genserick informed thereof, and
how he was deceived by Majorinus, was heartily afraid, and made preparation for
the war; and the Romans from the virtues of Majorinus conceived hope of
recovering Africa. In the mean time Majorinus died of a dyssentery; a man
moderate to his Subjects, and to his enemies terrible; newly come to the
Empire, and living in it too short a time, An. dom. 471.
Glycerius succeeded him, and had the (...) fortune. Then Augustulus received
the Empire. Other Emperors there were in the West, whose names though I know, I
omit; they living a very short time in the Government, and so doing nothing
worth mentioning.

But Basiliscus in Constantinople passionately in love with the Empire
attempted to usurp, and prevailed, Zano with his Empress fled into Isauria his
native Country: And Basiliscus usurped a year and eight months, generally hated
by all men, and by the very Guards of his Palace for his extreme avarice. Zeno
thereof advertised, went against him with an Army, to whom Basiliscus opposed
another under A^^^dius his General. But being encamped near, Armatus delivered
his Army to Zeno, upon condition, he should make his son Basiliscus, Caesar
(being very young) and make him his successor Basiliscus forsken by all the
world, fled to the Church of St. Sophia; but Acacius the Bishop of the City,
put him into Zeno's hands, objecting against him impiety, in much embroiling
and innovating the Christian Doctrine, as inclining to the heresy of E^^yches:
And so it was indeed. Zeno resuming the Empire, (to comply somewhat with his
oath to Armatus) adopted his son Basiliscus; but soon after deprived him of
that honor, and killed Armatus. Basiliscus with his wife and children he sent
into Cappadocia in the winter season, commanding them to be left without meat
or apparel, or any other conveniences. Where pincht with cold and hunger, and
^lying to one another for succor, embracing them own dear bodies, they all
died. Such punishment had Basiliscus of his ill Government. But these things
happened afterward. Genserick, having now either with force, or artifices, shaken
off his enomies, ^a^^ied the Roman Provinces more then ever; till Zeno came to
a Treaty with him, and perpetual peace was concluded; That the Vandals should
commit no acts of hostility against the Romans; nor from them receive any.

THis Treaty was observed all the time of Zeno, and Anastasius his successor,
and during the reign of Justin; whose sisters son Justinian succeeding; in his
time this war was, which I purpose to relate.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt Genserick shortly after died a very old man; charging the Vandals by his
Testament, that the Kingdom should descend ever to such male descendent of
Genserick, as was eldest in years. Genserick having reigned over the Vandals
from his taking of Carthage 39 years, An. dom. 479. and Zenonis septimo.
Honoricus his eldest son succeeded, Genson being dead. In the reign of
Honoricus, the Vandals had war only with the Moors, who being rid of Genserick,
who kept them in awe, did the Vandals many mischiefs and suffered many. This
Honoricus was most cruel, and unjust to the Christians of Africa; forcing them
to turn Arrians, or for refusing, burning, and in several sorts destroying
them. From many he cut out their tongues by the roots; who to my time lived in
Constantinople, speaking perfectly, and feeling no manner of inconvenience from
that torture. Two of these, meddling with light women after it, lost their
speech. He reigned 8 years, and died in his bed. The Moors inhabiting the
mountain Aurasium, being revolted already from the Vandals, and not to be
reduced, by reason the Vandals could not come to fight with them in that sleep
unpassable mountain; which stands in Numidia, (...) days journey to the
Southward of Carthage. After Honoricus, An. dom. 488. and Zenonis 15.
the Dominion of the Vandals come to Gundamund the son of Genson, the son of
Genserick, having the advantage of year above any of Gensericks race. Gundamund
had many battles with the M^ors, (...) the Christians more then the other; An.
Dom. 500. and Anastasii 7.
and died in the middle of the 12th. year of his reign. * His brother Trasamund
succeeded; a goodly man, wise and magnanimous. But he constrained the
Christians to change, not by tortures, as his Predecessors; but courting them
with honors and offices, and with large gifts; taking no notice of such as
would not submit. If he found a man in a great crime, he offered him impunity
to change his religion. His wife being dead without children, and he desirous
to establish his government with succession, demanded to wife Amalafrida, the
sister of Theodorick King of the Goths, whose husband was lately dead: He sent
him his sister with a guard of 1000 selected Goths, attended with 5000 more,
fighting men; and he gave her Lilybaeum, one of the Promontories of Sicily. So
Trasamund of all the Princes of the Vandals seemed the most powerful. Yet in
his reign the Vandals had a great overthrow from the Moors, Cabaon, Prince of
the Moors about Tripolis, a man experienced in many wars, and very witty,
hearing that the Vandals would make war upon him, first enjoined his Subjects
to forbear unjust dealings, delicious foods, and specially the company of
women: Then he made two Entrenchments; in the one himself lodged, and his men;
in the other he shut up the women, making it death for any man to go into the
women's Entrenchment. Then he sent Spies to Carthage with this direction, to
mark what scorns the Vandals upon their march, did to the Christians Churches;
and when they were gone from the place, themselves to do the quite contrary.
And they say he used this speech, That it is true, he was ignorant of the God
whom the Christians worship: But it was likely (if he were so powerful as they
say he is) that he will punish those that scorn him, and defend those that
honor him.

The Spies having marked the Vandals preparations at Carthage, followed their
Army in a poor disguise toward Tripolis. The Vandals at their first days march
lodged in the Christians Churches, put in their horses and other beasts, and
spared no kind of scorn. They practiced therein all lewdness, and beat and
whipped the Priests they found, commanding them services which they imposed on
their meanest slaves. So soon as they were gone, the Spies of Cabaon, according
to his order, made the Churches clean again, took away the dirt and such like
profanely left in them, lighted the Lamps, did lowly reverence to the Priests,
and used them courteously, and to many poor about those Churches gave money,
and then followed the Vandals Army. Thus in all the journey, they mended herein
what the Vandals offended: And being come near, went before to Cabaon, and told
him how far the enemy was, and what was done to the Christians Churches. He
presently put in order to fight. The field where he would entrench, he took in
with a circle about, and placed his Camels side-long in a round to fence his
Camp, making the Front 12 Camels deep: The women and children, unable men, and
baggage he put in the middle, and his fighting men between the legs of those
beasts with shields to ward with. The Vandals knew not what to do to this kind
of batallion, being neither Archers, nor Darters, nor good Infantry, but most
Hors-men using the Lance and the Sword, and not able to hurt an enemy afar off;
and their horses not enduring the sight of the Camels, would not approach the
enemy, who darting at multitudes from a safe place, killed them and their
horses, that they ran away. The Moors followed the execution, and killed and
took them, so that few came home. This fortune had Trasamund with the Moors,
and after 27 years reign dyed.

An Dom. 527. and Justini 9. It was Justiniani 1. who began to reign with
Justin on good Friday of that year, 5 Ap. and alone in August following.
CHAP. IX.
ILderick succeeded him, the son of Honoricus, the son of Genserick: A Prince
mild to his subjects, and not harsh to Christians, nor to any; but
faint-hearted, not enduring to hear of war. In such expeditions at the Vandals
had, Hoamer was General, his nephew, a good Soldier, whom they called the
Achilles of the Vandals. In his reign the Vandals lost a battle against the
Moors of Byzacium, commanded by Antallas; and fell out with Theodorick and the
Goths in Italy. For they kept in prison Amalafrida, and put all the Goths to
death who attended her, charging them with practice against their King and
State. Of this Theodorick had no revenge, wanting a Navy to make war upon
Africa; and Ilderick was an ancient friend of Justinian, who governed
absolutely then, (his Uncle Justin being very old, and not skilled in affairs
of State) and they courted each other with Presents.

There was of the race of Genserick one Gelimer, the son of Gelgris the son of
Genson, of ripe years, and so expected immediately to succeed Ilderick. In war
he was thought one of the best of his time, but wicked, and skilful in mutinies
and rapines. Perceiving his Reign coming slowly, though he had taken the
government by the yieldingness of Ilderick, he could not keep his thoughts in
that condition, but made a party, and persuaded the best men to depose
Ilderick, as a Coward, beaten by the Moors; and betraying the State to the
Emperor Justin, to keep the Kingdom from him, who was of the other house,
which he said was the intent of the late Embassage to Constantinople. They did
so upon these persuasions: An. dom. 530. and Justiniani quarto.
And Gelimer getting the Kingdom, kept Ilderick in prison, after seven years
reign; with Hoamer, and his brother Evagees. Justinian hereof advertised, being
now Emperor, sent Ambassadors, and wrote thus to Gelimer. You do not
religiously, nor as is due to the testament of Genserick, to keep in prison an
old man of your blood, and your King ( if Genserick's wise constitutions be
worth ought) and to force from him a Kingdom, which shortly you will have by
law. Proceed not in evil; nor change the title of a King to that of an Usurper,
for a little advantage of time: But let him carry the image of Royalty to his
grave (whereinto he is stepping) yourself having the execution of it already;
and having the substance, attend upon the Law of Genserick for the name. If you
do thus, you will find God propitious, and Us your friend. But Gelimer sent
away the Ambassadors unsatisfied; put out Hoamers eyes, and kept Ilderick and
Evagees in straiter prison, accusing them to have attempted an escape to
Constantinople. Upon this Justinian sent other Ambassadors, and wrote thus. We
did not think, you would have done the quite contrary to our advices. But
seeing it pleases you to get a Kingdom thus, take what fortune gives you. But
send to us Ilderick, and blind Hoamer and his brother, to get such comfort,
whereof men are capable, who have lost Kingdoms and eye-sights. If you refuse
this, we will not endure it. The hope they had in our friendship induces us;
and the Treaties with Genserick cannot stop us, being not to make war upon, but
to vindicate his Successor. To this Gelimer made this answer. King Gelimer to
the Emperor Justinian. I have neither taken the Kingdom by force, nor
committed impiety against mine own blood. The Vandals deposed Ilderick for
practicing against the house of Genserick: And me time has called to the
Kingdom, giving me my right of eldership according to the law. It Is good for a
man to govern the State he has, and not to encroach upon other men's cares; and
it is just in you, who have a Kingdom of your own, not to be thus meddling. If
you break the Treaties, and invade us, we shall oppose you to our power;
calling to witness the oath sworn by Zeno, whose successor you are. Justinian
was angry before, but these letters more set him upon a revenge: And being an
acute deviser, and nimble in execution, he resolved to conclude the Persian war
speedily, and then to invade Africa. Belisarius General of the East was, then
at Court, sent for; but with no word of leading an Army into Africa. It was
given out, that he was discharged of his government: And An. dom. 533.
Justiniani septimo.
the Persian perpetual Truce was newly made.

Justinian (all being well at home, and with Persia) at a consultation
acquainted the great Officers, that he would levy an Army against Gelimer and
the Vandals. The most of them were discontented at it, remembering the overthrow
of Basiliscus, and that great Fleet of the Emperor Leo, the Soldiers lost,
and the huge debt made by the State. Above all, the Prefect of the Palace,
(whom the Romans call Praetor) was netled at it, and the Lord High-Treasurer,
and all Collectors of tributes, both belonging to the Treasury and the
Emperor; considering how they must supply the necessities of the war
infinitely, and not be admitted to excuse or delay. And every General,
doubting the employment, apprehended the greatness of the hazard; after
escaping the sea, to encamp in an enemies country, and upon their landing to
fight with a great and potent Kingdom. The Soldiers newly returned from a long
and difficult war, scarce having tasted of their home-contentments, were
troubled to be led now to a Sea Fight (a thing they had never heard of) and to
be sent from the East to the West, to hazard against Vandals and Moors. All
others (as is the manner of multitudes) meant to be spectators of new
businesses, with other men's danger. None durst cross the voyage, save John the
Cappadocian, Prefect of the Palace, being the boldest and smartest man of his
time: He (while others mourned in silence) spoke thus to the Emperor. Sir! The
security of conversing with you gives me confidence, to speak things expedient
for your service, though not pleasing. Your wisdom has so tempered power and
justice in you, that you judge not him absolutely a friend to your affairs who
seconds you, nor are offended with opposing you; weighing things by the sincere
meaning: which makes it safe to differ from your counsels. Hereby induced, Sir!
I shall advise happily what for the present may offend, but hereafter I shall
make my affection apparent, and call you for a witness. If you shall begin a
war with the Vandals, and then find it grow into length, my counsel will then
appear good. If your confidence arise from assurance of victory, no marvail you
venture men, spend money, and engage the toyls of such combats; for victory
gotten covers these afflictions of war. But seeing this is in the hands of God,
and that looking upon foregoing presidents, we cannot but fear the event of
this war; certainly to content our selves with quietness, is better, then the
hazards of battles. You will send an Army against Carthage, whither by land it
must march 140 days journey; or sail the ^ength of the great sea to the utmost
bounds of it: So that the news of the occurrents will be a year in coming to
you. And if you vanquish your enemies, yet you cannot be master of Africa,
Sicily and Italy being in other hands. But if you be overthrown, (the Peace
being broken) you will draw the war upon your own country. In a word, it will
not be in your power to enjoy the victory; and if fortune be cross, it will
ruin the affairs well settled. Before action, consultation is profitable: when
the blow is given, it is vain to repent; but before it, one may safely change
his mind: It will be most expedient therefore to make due use of the times. The
Emperor approved this advise, and let fall his eagerness to the war. But a
Bishop out of the East got access to him, and told him, That God had charged
him in a dream to blame him; having undertaken to deliver the Christians in
Africa from Tyranny, to grow faint now upon no ground; whereas I will assist
him (said he) and make him master of Africa. The Emperor upon this could hold
no longer; but prepared an Army and a Navy, and provisions, requiring
Belisarius to be in readiness to go General into Africa.

CHAP. X.
TRIPOLIS was already put into rebellion against the Vandals by one Pudentius,
a native there, who sent to the Emperor for an Army to subdue the Province
unto him: who sent Tattimuth with some small forces; with whom Pudentius
joining, and finding no Vandals there, he took the Country for the Emperor.
Gelimer was hindered from chastizing Pudentius, by Godas a Goth and servant of
Gelimer, a man pragmatical and courageous, and seeming well affected to his
Master. To this Godas Gelimer had committed the Guard of Sardinia, and to
collect the tributes there: whose mind not digesting such a fortune, he usurped
the Island, and denied to send the Tributes, keeping them to himself. And
understanding that Justinian sought occasions of a war with Gelimer; He wrote
thus to him. Not out of ingratitude, not suffering any disfavour from my
Master, I have thought upon a revols. But seeing his cruelty both to kindred
and subjects; I would not willingly be a partaker of the same. It is better to
serve a just Emperor, then a Tyrant who commands things unlawful. Consider
therefore of assisting my enterprise, and send me forces to defend me from an
invasion. The Emperor sent Eulogius to him, and wrote him an answer,
commending his wisdom and zeal to justice; and promising aides, and a General
sufficient to keep the Island, and assistance otherwise, that the Vandals
should not hurt him. Eulogius being come into Sardinia, found Godas had put on
the title and habit of a King, and gotten a Guard about him. And to the
Emperors Letters he said, That for soldiers he desired them, but had no need
of a General. Which he wrote to the Emperor, and dismissed Eulogius.

But before, the Emperor had prepared 100 men's commanded by Cyrillus, to guard
the Island for Godas. And with them he had in readiness for Carthage 10000
foot, and 5000 horse levied of the Legionaries and Confederates. Heretofore
such Barbarians only were enrolled Confederates, as were admitted into the
Roman State, not to be slaves (as having not been vanquished by the Romans) but
upon equal terms; the Romans calling foedera; their Treaties with those they
have had war with: but now all take that name; time not deigning to keep names
upon the things they were first put, and things being called as men please; not
as they were before their times. The Commanders of the Confederates were,
Dorotheus General of Armenia, and Solomon, who was assistant to the General
Belisarius; the Romans call such an Officer, Domesticus; Cassiodorus calls these
Domesticos ministros qui comitibus ad obeunda publica munera obsequebantur. Why
followed the Comites or Generals to execute public services, Lib. 9 ad vilum.
(he was an Eunuch, but not purposely cut, but upon an accident in his swathing
clouts) Cyprianus also, and Valerianus, Martinus, Altheas, John, Marcellus, and
Cyrillus before mentioned! Of the Legionaries, Ruffinus and Aigan (who had been
of the retinue of Belisarius) and Barbatus, and Rappus, were Commanders of
horse; and of foot, Zaedus, Martianus, Sarapis and Theodorus, surnamed
Ctenatus, and Terentius. John who was born at Durazzo, commanded in chief all
the foot. Solomon came from the farthest East, belonging to the Romans, near
Daras. Aigan was a Hunne; all the rest were Thracians. Pharas also commanded
400 Herrulians: Which is among the 500 ships, 40 to a ship, one with another. I
wonder how the Latin Translator thought 3000 Mariners could mann 500 wips. But
he, though a learned man, had not the Greek Edition now extant; and so his
Translation is full of errors.
and Sinnion and Balas, gallant men, had 600 auxiliary Hunn^; all Archers on
horseback. This Army was transported by 500 ships none being of more burden
then 50000 Medimni, nor of less then 3000. They were manned with 20000
Mariners, most Egiptians, Ionians, and Cilicians. The Admiral of the whole
Fleet was Calonymus an Alexandrian. They had also 92 About 1200. tun,
accounting a medimnus for a bushel.
Pinnaces in case of a sea fight, with one row of oars, and decks over their
heads; not to be subject to the Enemies shot. They call these Dromones, for
their swiftness. They had aboard no passengers, but 2000 rowers,
Constantinopolitans. Archelaus, a Patritian, who had been Prefect of the
Palace in Constantinople, and Illyrium, went now Prefect of the Camp. So is
the Officer called who makes provision for the Army. Over them all, the
Emperor placed Belisarius (late Commander of the Oriental Legions) his General
with absolute authority; whom many Launciers and Targetiers followed, old tried
Soldiers. The Emperor enabled him by his Letters to do whatsoever seemed best
unto him; and the same to be firm, as the Emperors own act. Belisarius was
born in Germania, Not in Germany, as some Germans would have it; but in
Germania, a City of Thrace in the confines of Illyrium. It was a Metropolis,
and recited in the Sanctions of the Eastern Bishops, says, Alemannus, in his
Historical notes upon the Secret History.
a City which stands in the confines of Illyrium and Thrace.

Gelimer in the mean time having lost Tripolis by Pudentius, and Sardinia by
Godas: The first lying far off, and having Roman aids already, he gave over;
and sent no forces against it. But to prevent the Emperors succors in the
Island, he sent under his brother Trazon 5000 Vandals in 120 good ships. But
Justinian having commanded away Valerianus and Martinus, to attend the rest of
the Army in Peloponesus; and being both a shipboard, he had some further
direction to give them, which he had resolved, but it was forgotten upon other
business intervening. So he sent for them; to tell it; but again thinking it
inconvenient to interrupt their passage; he sent to command them not to return
to him any more, nor to come ashore. The Messenger called out aloud to them not
to come back again at all. The company took it for a bad Omen, that none of
them should return out of Africa to Constantinople. And they thought the
Emperor unwittingly had sent them a kind of a curse. If it be interpreted of
Valerianus and Martinus, the conceit proved not true. But Stotzas, there a
Lancier of Martius, was to rebel against the Emperors and usurp, and never to
come back to Constantinople: upon whom it may be conjectured fortune conferred
that curse.

CHAP. XI.
BUt in the seventh year of Justinians reign, about the Summer Tropic, the
Army was embarked; and Belisarius the General commanded the Praetorian ship to
ride under the Emperors Palace. Thither came Epiphanius, Archbishop of the
City; and having prayed as was fitting, he put aboard a Soldier newly
baptized, Being supplied out of the beginning of the Secret History.
Whose Godfather and Godmother were Belisarius, and Antonina, being one of
their household, and named Theodosius, and much valued by them. And thus the
said General and his wife put to sea. With them was Procopius; the Writer of
this History; who at the first was afraid of this Voyage; but a dream, he had,
encouraged him, and made him eager upon it. He dreamt he was in Belisarius his
house, whom a servant told that one had brought him presents; that Belisarius
bad himself go look upon them; and he in the inner Court, saw men carrying
flowers growing with their earth; which he commanded them to lay down in the
Porch. That then Belisarius came with his Lifeguard, sat down upon that earth
and eat of the flowers, willing the rest to do the like, who fell to, and
seemed much pleased with the dainties. Thus was the dream. But the fleet
followed the Praetorian ship, and at Perinthus, now called Heraclia, staid five
days; where the Emperor gave the General almost all his horses of his pastures
in Thrace. From thence they came before Abydus, where being becalmed four days;
it fell out that two Massagetes in their drink (the Massagetes being all great
drunkards) killed one of their Countrymen, whom Belisarius crucified upon a
hillock near Abydus. The rest, especially the kinsmen of the men, murmured;
That they came not to aid the Romans upon terms of subjection to their Laws;
and by their own Laws, murders had no such punishments. Some Roman Soldiers
murmured too; such as would not be punished for their offenses. Whereupon
Belisarius spoke thus to the Army. To men that never saw wars, I should need a
long speech to persuade, how great a preparation for victory it is, to be just.
But you by often vanquishing enemies, not inferior in bodies, and very
valiant; and by often having the contrary success, have learnt; that men fight
in both the Armies, but God determines the victory, as himself pleases. So that
we must make less account of good bodies, of arms, and warlick preparations,
then of justice and duty to God* For men in need are to honor that most, which
is most able to do them good. Now the principal mark of justice is, the
punishment of murderers: For if we must judge of right and wrong, by what men
do to one another; certainly to a man nothing is so precious as life. If any
Barbarian killing his Countryman in drink, upon that pleads impunity; I
conceive his excuse aggravates his crime: For a man must not be so drunk as to
kill his best friends; specially in an Army; nay drunkenness it self, without
murder, deserves punishment. And then to wrong ones own Nation, appears more
heinous to any man of understanding, then a stranger. The example and event of
such doings you may all yonder behold. And you must not begin quarrels, nor
take away ought which is other men's. Neither will I endure that man, or esteem
him a soldier of mine, who cannot employ innocent hands against our enemies,
No valor will get the victory, which is not rankt with justice. The Army upon
this speech, and seeing the crucified men, and expecting the danger of
committing unlawful acts, grew afraid, and resolved to live soberly. Then,
that the whole Army might sail, and lie at anchor together (in a great fleet
many ships necessarily being cast behind, specially if the wind blow high, and
the ship-masters know not what leader to follow) he painted the masts of his
own ship, and two others where his train was, from the top about a third part,
with red, and in their sterns setting up high poles, hung up lanterns, that the
Generals ships might be seen both by night and day. And to these he commanded
the ship-masters to hold their course; which thus leading the whole fleet, not
one ship was cast behind. And at weighing anchor from any harbor, the Trumpets
ever sounded the warnings. From Abydus a stiff wind brought them to Sigaeum;
from whence being becalmed, they came late to Malea. There the calm stood them
instead; for the want of sea-room for so great a fleet, and in the night,
troubled, and endangered the same. The Mariners did bravely, calling out, and
thrusting with their long poles, and skilfully keeping their distances but if
the wind had risen strong, and against them, they had with much ado saved the
ships. But getting by, they reached Taenarus, now called Caenopolis. From
thence they came before Methone where they found Valerianus and Martinus,
arrived a little before; and the wind not serving, Belisarius landed the whole
Army. There he distributed the Commands, and ordered the Soldiers; and being
therein busy, and the wind not serving, many of the Army died of a sickness
thus occasioned, John the Cappadocian, a bad man, was ingenuous to find
projects for money to the treasury, with the ruin of men; (a man beyond my
power to describe; and in my former History I have spoken of him;) but now he
destroyed these soldiers thus. The bread for the Army, to make it last, and
not corrupt too soon, is to be twice baked; and so of necessity must weigh
less; and the soldiers, in the giving it out, must have a fourth part less in
weight. John, that he might spend less wood, and wages upon bakers, and by gain
the weight, brought the loaves unbaked to the public bath, and put the same
into the stove there, under which the fire is made, and being thus sorrily
baked, sent it in bags to the fleet: which being at Methone, the biscuit turned
to dough, and that moldy, corrupt, and ^usty; and the Officers distributed it
thus to the soldiers by pecks, and sometimes by bushels. Who feeding upon it in
the Summer, and a place of extreme heats, grew sick, and above 500 died; and
more had, if Belisarius had not provided bread of the Country to help them. He
acquainted the Emperor therewith, who commended him for it: but he could not
get John punished as then.

CHAP. XII.
FRom Methone, they came to the Port of Zante. Here they took in fresh water,
and other necessaries, to pass the Adriatique sea; Thus the Author calls
constantly that sea which others call Mare Ionium.
through which, with a scant wind, they came in sixteen days to a desert coast
of Sicily; near Mount Aetna. In this lingering passage their waters corrupted,
all save what was drank at the table of Belisarius, which his wife devised to
keep untainted, in six vessels of glass, covered thick with sand in a little
cabin in the hold, where the Sun could not come. Belisarius landed there, and
was much troubled in his thoughts, not knowing what soldiers the Vandals were,
nor how, nor from whence to make the war upon them. The soldiers also troubled
him, fearful of a sea fight, and not ashamed to tell him, that on land they
will do their best, but if the enemies ships come they will fly, not able to
fight with them and waters too. In this perplexity he sent Procopius, his
Assessor, to Syracuse, to enquire if the enemy waylaid their passage in the
Island, or main Land: what part of Africa was best to land in, and from whence
to make the war, and this done, to meet him at Caucana; about 27 miles from
Syracuse, where the fleet should ride at anchor. It was given out, he was sent
to buy victual of the Goths: For Amalasuntha, the mother of A^^l^ricus, had
agreed with Justinian to give his Army free market. Aralaricius was under years
bred by his mother, and was King of the Goths and Italians: upon whom after the
death of Theodoricus, the Kingdom descended, being son to his daughter
Amalasuntha; by a man deceased also. Amalasuntha, to make Justinian her friend,
had yielded to this free market, among other his commands, and now performed
it. But Procopius found at Syracuse, a Countryman and friend of his from a boy,
residing there about his Traffic at Sea; of whom he learnt all his demands.
For a servant of his who had returned within three days from Carthage, told
him, that there was no fear of the Vandals way-laying the fleet; there being
there no news of an Army coming; and their valiantest men being newly sent
against Godas; and that Gelimer having no thought of an enemy, neglected
Carthage, and the sea-towns and made his abode at Hermione, near Byzacium, 4
days journey from any sea; so that they might sail on securely, and put in where
the wind and weather should invite. Procopius hearing this, took the servant by
the hand to the Port, and was inquisitive of many particulars; til being
abo^rd, he commanded to hoist sail for Caucana. The Master of the fellow stood
upon the shore wondering at his man's not returning. But Procopius called out to
him not to take it unkindly, for his servant must speak with the General, and
guide the Army into Africa, and then should be returned to him to Syracuse,
with a rich reward. But arrived in the Army, he found them all mourning the
death of Dorotheus, General of Armenia, a man much desired by the Army.
Belisarius, when he heard the news from the man, rejoiced extremely, and much
commending Procopius, commanded the Trumpets to give warning for weighing
anchor And so they came to the Isles of Gaulus and Malta, dividing the
Adriatique and Tyrrhen^ seas; and thence with an Easterly wind, they came the
second day upon the coast of Africa, five days journey from Carthage.

Being near the shore, Belisarius commanded to cast anchor; and assembling the
Commanders consulted of their landing. After some diversity of opinions,
Archelaus spoke thus, Our General is to be commended highly, who having the
advantage of wisdom, experience and power, yet consults, and commands us to
speak our opinions of landing, though knowing by his own observations, what
must and may be done. And I cannot but admire you the Commanders for so readily
persuading our landing; who know that to exhort men to an imminent danger,
brings no advantage to the adviser, but lays him open to an accusation. For
men when things succeed to their desire, are pleased, and that is all; but when
otherwise, they accuse the author of the advice; though it be unjust that a man
for his counsel in public deliberations should be questioned. But resolving
thus to land in an enemies Country, in what Port will you leave your ships?
What fortification, or walled Town expect you? The coast from Lecca to
Carthage, you hear is nine days journey open to all winds, and without any
harbor: And in all Africa, by Genserick his command, no walled Towns are
standing but Carthage: And the Country, I am told, is destitute of waters. And
if in the midst of these incommodities we meet with an enemy, what shall we
resolve then? shall we not think such counsels infused rather by some unlucky
Damon, then humane reason? Our ships also, when we are landed, and a storm
comes, must either be scattered infinitely, or else perish upon this shore.
Then for your necessary support, what supply expect you? Let no man look upon
me the Commissary for Provisions. Then there are no servants for you, the
soldiers must supply that Office. To conclude, where will you put your spare
arms and baggage? and when you need such, whence will you be furnished? My
opinion is, to sail directly for Carthage, where there is a haven four miles
and a half from it, called the Pool, unguarded and capable of a great fleet,
from whence you may make the war, and easily take Carthage. And then having
vanquished the enemy far from thence, nothing will be difficult nor dangerous to
Conquerours. For naturally, the head once gone, the rest falls of it self. These
things you are to consider, and choose the best.

After this speech, Belisarius began thus. 'Let none, fellow Commanders, think
me to sit here a judge of what has been spoken, nor to speak last, supposing
my sentence necessarily to be followed. I have heard your opinions, and my part
is to propound what I conceive, and together with you to choose the best. One
thing you must remember, that the soldiers even profess to fear a sea fight,
and if the enemy come, to turn their backs to them. And in that case it is
foolish to pray to God for success, being afraid, and our selves procuring the
contrary event. If then we sail to Carthage and encounter an enemies Navy and
our men fly from them, our counsel will be followed with repentance and
complaints. A fatal error admits some excuse, but this none. And if a Tempest
happen (which is most urged to fright us, and not well) and our ships be
^^attered (as they say) or perish upon this coast: I pray which is less hurt,
to have our ships cast away alone, or with them, all the rest of us to fall by
the enemy? Besides, falling upon the enemy unprovided, and not looking for us,
we may subdue him; but when he is armed and prepared, we shall hazard a war
upon equal terms. Concerning the provision of necessaries, and how we shall put
ashore, it is not now time to consult, nor enquire. Shall we stay for a
temipest to fall upon our Navy in a fight (as often happens) and then begin to
learn what to do? I think we ought forthwith to land, taking with us our
horses, arms, and other needful things; and presently to entrench our selves
within a good Rampire (which will defend us as the strongest wall) and from
thence make the war. And think not to want any thing, if we fight valiantly.
Who vanquish their enemies, all they have is theirs; Victory brings all to that
side it enclines to. In your swords therefore consists your safety, and
abundance.

All the Counsel easily consented to this, and rose; forthwith landing the
Army, three months after their departure from Constantinople. The General chose
by the seaside, a place which both soldiers and mariners fortified with trench
and rampire; and by multitude of hands concurring, and the General urging, it
was finished the same day. Digging the earth, they came to much water (a thing
never before seen in Byzacium, a dry Country) which supplied men and beasts.
Procopius congratulated with the General, not so much (as he said) for the
water, as for the presage of an easy victory, which proved so indeed. That
night the Army lodged in the Camp, set their watches and did all as is usual.
Only aboard every ship Belisarius appointed five Archers, and the light Galleys
to lie round about them to prevent sudden mischief.

CHAP. XIII.
THe next day some soldiers went up into the Country, and stole their ripe
fruits, whom the General severely chastised; and calling the Army together,
spoke thus. To feed upon other men's goods by violence, is at all times wicked,
because unjust; But now, setting the consideration of justice aside (though
that were hard) it is so abundantly inconvenient, that we must fear the
danger: we are here put ashore with this only confidence, that the Africans
being anciently Romans, are unsure, and ill affected to the Vandals. From this
I did hope for supply of necessaries, and to avoid mischief from the enemy. But
now your intemperance has changed all to the contrary. You have reconciled the
Africans to the Vandals, and turned their hatred upon your selves, (for wronged
men naturally hate them that do them the present violence;) and so you have for
a little gain now sold your future safety, and plenty. By buying what you
needed, you might have avoided the imputation of injustice, and made the owners
your friends. Now you must have the war with Africans and Vandals too; nay with
God himself; whose assistance no man can invoke, doing wrong. But give over
this sharking, and quit your hands of a gain so full of hazard: The proper time
now being, when sobriety must preserve us, and disorder will bring certain
death* If you be careful of these things, God will be propitious, the people
of Africa well affected, and the Vandals easy to be dealt with.

After this speech, Belisarius sent Boraides, one of his lifeguard, with some
of his Targetiers, to Syllectus a sea-town in the way to Carthage, and a days
journey from the Camp; whose Inhabitants, he heard, instead of their demolished
walls, to have fortified each man his own house, to keep off the Moors, and so
to have made a kind of Town wall. Boraides he instructed to attempt the Town,
and taking it, to do no hurt, but with representing many conveniences, and how
they come to set them at liberty, to get entrance for the Army. They about
candles lighting getting near the Town, past the night in a deep bottom there;
and the next morning overtaking some Peasants, they slipped into the Town with
them, and possessed it; then without tumult, called the Bishop, and principal of
the Town; told them their Generals instructions, and immediately receiving the
keys from them, sent the same to the General. The same day the Master of the
Kings Posts revolted, and gave up all his horses. The General also took one of
those that ride with the Kings Packets, which they call Veredarii, and did him
no hurt, but took his oath to deliver Justinians Letters, written to the
Vandals, into the hands of the Governors. Which signified thus. We make no war
upon the Vandals, nor infring the Treaty with Genserick. But we endeavor to
free you from an usurper; who, disrespecting the Testament of Genserick, keeps
your King in prison, and has begun to destroy such of his blood, whom he
hated; and of the rest, has put out their eyes, and imprisoned them, not
suffering them to end their sorrows by death. Assist us therefore to free you
from so wicked Tyranny, that you may enjoy peace and liberty: which to observe
to you, we make oath here to God. The man that took these Letters from
Belisarius, durst not show them, but to some private friends, and did nothing
material.

CHAP. XIV.
BUt Belisarius marched in order for a battle toward Carthage. He gave 3^0 of
his Targetiers to John, who was the Steward of his household, whom the Romans
call Optio; being an Armenian, and eminent for valor and discretion. Him he
directed to march some two miles and a half before the Army, and to give
warning, if they see an enemy, that the Army may prepare for fight. And to the
left hand of the Army, he directed the Massagetes to march. And himself was in
the rear with his best men, looking for Gelimer to come shortly from Hermione.
To the right hand was no fear, being to march by the seashore; and the seamen
he commanded to keep them company, by letting down all their sails, but their
sprit sail, in case of a strong gale; and in a calm, to force their way with
oars. When they came to Syllectus, Belisarius had his soldiers most sober, not
striking, nor using any disorder. And the Africans he so gained with his
gentleness, that he marched as in his own Country; the people not withdrawing
themselves nor goods, but giving free market, and being very serviceable to the
soldier. They marched ten miles a day, till they came to Carthage, lodging still
in a Town, or safely in their Camp. We came by Lepta and Adrymettum to Grassa,
about 43 miles from Carthage; where was a Palace of the Vandal Governor, and
the fairest Gardens we ever saw, abundantly watered with fountains; and with a
large grove of trees loaded with ripe fruit, whereof the soldiers took their
fill without any miss, every man setting his cabin under a fruit-tree.

But Gelimer hearing the enemies arrival, wrote from Hermione to Carthage, to
his brother Ammatas, to kill Ilderick, and the other prisoners of his blood,
and otherwise appertaining to him; and himself to arm the Vandals, and such
forces as he had in the City; and at the narrow passage near a town called
Decimum, to charge the enemy on both sides, and so to catch him as in a net.
Ammatas accordingly killed Ilderick, and his cousin Evagees: Hoamer was dead
before. He armed also the Vandals, to sally in the due time. Gelimer followed
us close; and one night only, as we lodged in Grassa, he gave us an alarm; upon
some skirmishing of our scouts with theirs; by whose returning to the Camp, we
understood the enemy to be near. From hence marching, we lost sight of our
ships, being put to go about some high rocks there, and a Promontory under
which stands Mercurium. Belisarius sent word to Archelaus the Commissary, not
to put in at Carthage, but to stay 25 miles short, till he send for them. From
Grassa the fourth day we came to Decimum, about 8 miles from Carthage. This day
Gelimer sent his Nephew, Gibamumdus, before with 2000 Vandals, to march to our
left hand; that so Ammatas from Carthage. himself in our rear, and Gibamundus
at our left hand, charging together, might compass us.

CHAP. XV.
FOr my part, I could not but wonder in this battle to see, how God knowing the
event, draws out the model thereof to his own will; and how men are ignorant
whether they mistake, or whether they be upon a right counsel, that a way so
may be made to the success before determined. If Belisarius had not commanded
John to advance before the Army, and the Massagetes to march at our left hand,
we could not have escaped the Vandals. And for all this, the Vandals could not
have been so ruined, if Ammatas had not come to Decimum about noon, three hours
sooner then his time, we being then far short of it, and the Vandals Army
also. And this was not all his fault. He came with a few, and those not of his
best, to encounter John, leaving the main body in Carthage, with direction to
come after to Decimum. He killed 12 good men of ours in the head of John's
troops, but himself fell, having shown much valor; and being fallen, the rest
were routed, and running away, turned the whole body marching from Carthage;
who being in no order to fight, but in small parties of thirty and twenty
together, and seeing Ammatas troops running, and imagining multitudes pursuing,
ran back for company. Whom John's Troops killed up to the gates of Carthage; And
so great was the execution of that 8 miles, that one would have guest it the
work of 20000 men at least. Gibamundus at the same time, and his 2000 men, came
to the Salt plains, five miles from Decimum, on the left hand of the way to
Carthage, a place without men or trees, or ought else (the saltness of the
water hindering the grouth of any thing but salt;) here falling upon the
Massagetes, they perished every man. Among the Massagetes was a man valiant and
strong, but Captain of a few; who had a privilege from his ancestors, in all
encounters to charge first; and no Massagete to shoot or strike till he began
the fight.

This man rode up close to the Vandals Army; who either amazed with his daring,
or suspecting some plot of the enemy, stirred not so much as to shoot at him;
fearing (it may be) to venture, hearing the Massagetes to be a warlick Nation,
and having never seen their manner of fighting. But he returning, told his
Countrymen, that God had sent them those strangers ready dressed; So they gave on
furiously, and the Vandals breaking their ranks, and not resisting, basely
perished every man. We without hearing these accidents, marched toward Decimum.
And Belisarius, in a convenient place, some four miles from Decimum, fortified
an entrenchment, and placed his foot in it; and then made this speech to the
Army. Now, fellow Soldiers! is come the time of our trial. Our enemies, I hear,
are marching toward us; and our ships, by the situation of the place, are
severed from us; and now our only hope of safety is in our swords; having
neither Town nor Fortress to be bold upon. If we now do valiantly, we shall in
likelihood subdue our enemies; but if we faint, nothing remains, but to be
beaten, and perish by the enemy: Advantages for victory we have: First, We
fight for the possession of that which in right is ours; then do the Vandals
hate their own usurping Tyrant, and commonly God assists the rightful cause;
and the soldier ill affected to his Prince, never fights valiantly for him.
Besides, we have spent our time against Persians and Scythians; but the
Vandals, since their Conquest of Africa, have seen no enemy but naked Moors.
Now, in every Trade practice breeds skill, and disusage ignorance. Our
Entrenchment from whence we are to make the war, is finished; where leaving our
arms which we cannot carry, and baggage, we may sallie, and retiring, find what
we need. I entreat therefore every man to think upon his reputation, and the
pledges he has left at home, and so undanted to encounter the enemy.

CHAP. XVI.
BElisarius having thus spoken, and said a prayer, leaving the guard of his
wife and the Camp to the foot, he sallied with his horse. He thought not good
to hazard with the whole Army, but first to skirmish with his horse, and try
the enemy, then to give battle with the main; so he sent the Confederates
before, and followed with the rest, and with his own Lanciers and Targetiers.
The Confederates being come to Decimum, found the bodies of the 12 companions
of John; and close by them the body of Ammatas, and some other Vandals. Being
in doubt, and not knowing whether to go further; and from a hill discovering
round, they saw a dust, and soon after a great troop of Vandals. They sent to
Belisarius to come speedily; the enemy being upon them; and the Commanders,
some urged to charge the enemy, others alleged their forces not sufficient.
While they were disputing, the Barbarians came up close, with Gelimer in the
head of them; having passed between the way where Belisarius went, and that
where the Massagetes, who had fought with Gibamundus; but the hilly ground
between, hindered their sight of Belisarius; or his entrenchment, and of the
defeat of Gibamundus. Being near, each contended to possess the highest down,
which seemed apt for an entrenchment. The Vandals running hard, gained the
down, and grown terrible, routed the enemy. The Romans fan away to a Town less
then a mile from Decimum, where was Vliaris, one of Belisarius his lifeguard,
and 800 of his Targetiers. The Vandals staid their course, thinking that
Vliaris would stand them; but his troops, so soon as the other began to charge,
fled amain to Belisarius. It was strange, that Gelimer having thus the victory
in his hands, should voluntarily quit it. But God, when he will have a mischief
befall a man, infects his reason, not suffering the most expedient things to
come into his mind. If he had followed the execution, Belisarius himself had
not stood him, but we had al been absolutely ruined; so great seemed the number
of the Vandals, and the Romans fear. Or if he had rode on to Carthage, he had
killed the troops of John, every man, (who were carelessly scattered, and
rifling the dead bodies) and had saved the City, and been Master of our ships,
and cut off all our hope, either of victory or return home: But he did neither;
but riding softly down the hill, and in the plain, finding his brothers dead
body, he spent the time in lamentations, and about the funeral, and thus lost
his opportunity, which he could never recover. Belisarius stopped his flying men,
chiding them; and hearing of the death of Ammatas; and the brave execution of
John; and informed sufficiently of the place and the enemy, he marched against
Gelimer and the Vandals: who being in disorder, and unprepared, ran away amain,
with the loss of many, (the execution lasting till night) and fled not to
Carthage, nor Byzacium, from whence they came; but toward the plains of Bule,
and the way to Numidia. About evening, John, and the Massagets also came to us;
and relating, and hearing the several adventures, lodged with us that night in
Decimum.

CHAP. XVII.
THe next day our foot coming up, with Belisarius his wife, we marched toward
Carthage; and arriving within night, lodged abroad near the City. No man would
have opposed our entrance; the Carthaginians opening their gates, and the City
shining all night with lights and bonfires; and the Vandals remaining, were
fled into the Churches. But Belisarius feared in the night some ambush, and the
soldiers disorder, lest in the dark they might fall to pillage. The same day
also the fleet came up to the Promontory, and the Carthaginians had opened the
iron Chain of Mandracium their haven, to let it in. In the Palace is a dark
prison, called Ancon, (or the Elbow) for such as the Tyrant was offended with.
Here at that time were many Eastern Merchants, whom the Tyrant accused to
solicit the Emperor to invade him; and the same day that Ammatas was slain
in Decimum, he had given order for their execution.

The keeper of the prison hearing the accident at Decimum, and seeing the fleet
within the Promontory, went to the men (who had heard nothing, but sat in the
dark expecting death) and asked them what they would give to be saved from
thence. They promising to pay any thing, he said, he would none of their money,
but prayed them to swear, if they escaped, and he came into danger, to assist
him to their power; they did so. And he taking out a board, showed them the
fleet sailing in, and then set them lose, and went along with them.

The fleet first doubted, hearing nothing: then sending to Mercurium, they were
advertised of all, and with great joy sailed on with a strong gale. Which
bringing them within 18 miles of Carthage, Archelaus, and the land-men,
commanded to cast anchor, according to the Generals instructions. But the
Mariners alleged the coast to be without harbor, and that there was
likelihood of a storm, which kind of storms the natives call Cypriana; which
falling in that place, they should not be able to save a ship. And so it was
indeed: Wherefore striking sail, and consulting, they thought not fit to
attempt the haven of Mandracium, fearing to break Belisarius's direction, and
suspecting Mandracium to be chained up, and besides, not able to hold the whole
fleet; but they thought the Pool to be for their purpose (being but five miles
from Carthage, and capable of the whole fleet) and to find there no stop. So
coming thither about evening, they cast anchor, all, save Calonymus, with some
mariners; who not regarding the General, put into Mandracium, and there robbed
some Merchants, strangers, and Carthaginians, dwelling upon the seaside.

The next day Belisarius commanded the men a shipboard to land, and with the
Army, in order of battle, rode toward Carthage, fearing the enemies ambushes.
Here he put the soldiers in mind of their good fortunes since their moderation
to the Africans; admonishing them to continue their good order, especially in
Carthage; That the Africans were formerly Roman subjects, and unwillingly
brought under the Vandals, from whom they had suffered abominable things; That
for this, the Emperor made war with the Vandals; and that it were impious now
to abuse them, whose liberty was the cause of this expedition. Then he entered
Carthage, none opposing; went to the Palace, and sat down in Gelimers Throne.
Here the Merchants, and the other Carthaginians, who dwelt upon the sea, came
in a multitude, and with clamor to Belisarius, complaining that Mariners the
last night had robbed them of all they had. He made Calonymus swear to produce
the goods; but he neglecting his oath, went away with the goods then; but
afterward at Constantinople, by a terrible judgment, he fell mad, bit out his
own tongue, and died. Belisarius then commanded his dinner to be, where Gelimer
used to feast his great men. The Romans from the Greeks, call the place
Delphica, from a three-footed Table standing in the Palace at Rome, upon which
the Emperors Cup-bearers set the cups; which they call Delphica (a
three-footed table, and first used at Delphos) and so in Constantinople; and
wheresoever the Emperors Table stands, they call the room Delphica. The
Emperors house also they call Palatium, of one Pallas a Grecian, who dwelt in
that place before the sack of Troy, and built in it a good handsome house;
where Augustus, having got the Empire, first lodged, and thence they called the
Emperors house the Palace. Thus Belisarius dined in the Delphica, and with him
the Commanders of the Army. The day before, a dinner was provided for Gelimer,
and we feasted upon the meats. Gelimers servants brought in our dinner, filled
our wine, and in all things else attended us. Here a man might see fortune in
her bravery; showing all things to be hers, and that none can call any thing
his own. And that day Belisarius attained a glory, which never happened in his
own time, nor to any of the ancients. For the soldiers using not to enter, no
not into any Roman City, and but 500 together, without some disorder, specially
upon the sudden: This General had his men in such order, that there was not the
least insolence or menace used. There was no interruption of Trade; but in a
City newly taken, in a state changed, and upon the alteration of their King,
not an Officer of Justice had his house shut up. The public notaries dispatched
their writings at the Courts, and took the soldiers home with them, as is the
manner; and the soldiers bought what they liked in the market place, using no
unquietness.

CHAP. XVIII.
THen Belisarius gave assurances to the Vandals fled into the Churches; and
took care of the walls of Carthage, which had been so neglected, that in many
places they were easily to be mounted, and a great part was quite fallen down;
which, the Carthaginians told us, caused Gelimer not to stay in the City; as
not able in so short a time to secure the walls. We heard also of an old
Prophecy, that had been among the boys in Carthage. That Gamma should expel
Beta; and again Beta should expel Gamma. It was then acounted as an idle
riddle among sporting boys; but now it was clear; for Genserick expelled
Bonifacius, and now Belisarius Gelimer. Then also the meaning of a dream was
manifested, which many had dreamt, and often; not guessing at the event. The
Carthaginians, above all, reverence St. Cyprian and by the seaside have
dedicated a Church to him close to the City, where they use many devotions, and
yearly celebrate a feast which they call Cypriana; and from thence those storms
I mentioned, are named, which happened about that feastival. This Church, in
the reign of Honoricus, the Vandals got, forcing out the Christians and their
Priests with much indignity; and officiating there themselves, as now
appertaining to the Arrians. The Africans being much grieved at this, they say
St. Cyprian often appeared to many in their dreams, and bad the Christians not
be careful for him; he would be his own revenger. Which saying being divulged;
the Africans expected the time of punishment upon the Vandals for these
devotions; but guest not at the event. But now, the Feast being to be the next
day, and the Arrian Priests having made clean the Church, hung out their
fairest relics, prepared the lamps, brought out their treasures, and fitted
every thing for the proper use. When they heard of the overthrow of Ammatas at
Decimum, away they all ran. And the Orthodox Christians came to the Church,
lighted the lamps, and officiated according to their own rites. And so the
prediction of that vision was known also. The Vandals likewise remembered an
ancient story, and wondering acknowledged, that to man no expectation is
impossible, nor no possession firm. The story was this. That when the Vandals
were forced by a famine, to forsake their ancient native Country, yet some
staid, having no mind to follow Godigisclus. They in time came to have plenty,
and Genserick with his followers got Africa. Which they were glad to hear, who
followed not Godigisclus, finding their Country now able to feed them. And they
feared lest their African Plantators or their posterity, might in time come
home upon them again, expelled by the Romans, who (they doubted) would not
always neglect that Province. So they sent Ambassadors to Genserick, who said
unto him, That they congratulated their Countrymens great prosperity, but were
no more able to guard their own Country; which they despising, had planted
themselves in Africa. Wherefore they prayed them, if they make no account of
their native soil, to bestow on them a possession to themselves useless. That
so being absolute proprietaries of the Country, they might cheerfully spend
their lives for it against any invader. Genserick and the Vandals, thought this
just, and yielded to the Ambassadors desire. But an old man among them,
esteemed very wise, said. He would never consent to it; for among men is
nothing settled upon a sure foundation; there is no firm and perpetual estate in
what they have; nor in what they have not, impossibility. Genserick approved
his saying, and sent away the Ambassadors with a denial: and was then laughed
at, and his old Counselor, for foreseeing things impossible.

But upon these accidents I have related, the Vandals were better instructed in
humane affairs, and found it the speech of a wise man. Of those Vandals that
staid in their own Country, there is no memorial left. They were few, and
either forced under some bordering Barbarians, or willingly mingled, and their
names drowned in the other. And these subdued by Belisarius, had no thought of
going to their ancient Country, having no means suddenly to pass into Europe,
specially their ships being gone. But in Africa they were punished for the
mischiefs done the Romans; chiefly the Zacynthians: For Genserick infesting
formerly Peloponesus, and attempting Tenarus, but repulsed with loss of many
men, and put to a shameful retreat; being angry, set upon Zacynthus, killed
many, made captives of 500 principal men, and then sailed away; and in the
middle of the Adriatique sea, cut those 500 men in pieces, and scattered their
pieces in the Sea. This was formerly.

CHAP. XIX.
BUt now Gelimer by money and courteous usage, gained many African peasants to
undertake the killing of such Romans as they found straggling; and he proclaimed
a sum of gold upon every killing to the actor. Many slaves and attendants upon
the Army were slain, pilfring in the Villages, and their heads were brought to
Gelimer, for which the peasants were well paid by him, supposing to have been
rid of so many soldiers. About this time Diogenes, one of Belisarius his
lifeguard, did very bravely; who sent him out with 22 of his Targetiers to
discover the enemy. These men, at a Town two days journey from Carthage, the
peasants being not able of themselves to kill them, advertised Gelimer. Who
sent against them 300 horse, with direction to bring them alive; he thought it
a great matter to have one of Belisarius his lifeguard, and 22 of his
Targetiers his prisoners. Diogenes and his company entered one of the houses,
and in an upper chamber went to bed, hearing the enemy to be far enough off.
The Vandals came after midnight, and thought it not good to force into the
doors in the night, fearing in the dark they might kill one another, and open a
passage out for the enemy. Cowardice dul'd their wits; for by using fire, or
without it, they might have with ease taken them, being naked in their beds. So
they put themselves in rank round about the house, and chiefly at the door. In
the mean time a Roman soldier waked, and hearing the noise (some Vandals
murmuring to one another, and stirring their arms) he guest the matter, waked
his companions, and softly told them the accident. They, by Diogenes direction,
quietly put on their clothes, cook their arms, went down, and bridling their
horses, got up unespied. And after a short stay in the Court, suddenly they
open the doors and sally. The Vandals charged them, but the Romans warding with
their shields, and with their javelins keeping off the assailants, rode away
clear; with loss only of two men. Diogenes himself had three wounds, one in the
neck, into the face another, of which he was within a little of dying; and one
upon his left hand, by which he lost the use of his little finger. But in
Carthage, Belisarius with money got artificers, and laborers, and made a
Trench, and strong Palissadoes round about the walls; and in short time
repaired also the decaies thereof; a work much admired by the Carthaginians,
and afterward by Gelimer, being brought thither prisoner. Who wondering at the
walls, said, that his negligence therein had been the cause of his present
condition.

In the mean time Tzazon the brother of Gelimer, arrived with his fleet in
Sardinia, at the Port of Carnalis; took the Town at the first charge, and slew
Godas and his soldiers, and hearing that the Emperors fleet was upon the coast
of Africa; but not what was done, he wrote this Letter to Gelimer. Know O King
of Vandals and Alans, that Godas the Usurper is slain by us, and the Island
again under your Empire; Keep therefore a festival of Victory; And hope that
the enemy who presumes now to invade our Country, shall find the same fortune,
which they had formerly, when they invaded our Ancestors. The bearers of these
Letters sailed into the haven of Carthage without thought of an enemy, and by
the watch being brought to the General, delivered the Letters, and revealed
their negotiation; amazed to see the sudden change. But from Belisarius they
had no hard usage.

About the same time this happened also. Before the coming of our fleet,
Gelimer had sent Gotthaeus, and Fuscias, and other Ambassadors to Theudis,
Prince of the Visigoths in Spain, for a league. Who being past the straits,
found that Theudis was at a Town far from the sea. When they ca^e to him, he
feasted them with much courtesy, and asked them at the feast, how things were
with Gelimer and the Vandals. He had heard all before (the Ambassadors coming
slowly) from a Merchants ship which parted from Carthage the same day the
Romans entered it, and with a fair wind arrived in Spain. And he had forbidden
the Merchants to divulge it. But now when Gotthaeus and his fellows answered
him, that all was well, he demanded about what they came? They propounding a
League, Theudis bad them go to the seaside; and there you shall know certainly
your affairs at home. The Ambassadors taking it for the idle speech of a man in
drink, replied not. But the next day again propounding the League, and again
Theudis using the same words, they thought there was some alteration in Africa;
but not imagining any thing of Carthage, they sailed thither, and landing near
it, fell among the soldiers, and yielded; and were brought to the General, and
told him their business, and had no hurt from him.

CHAP. XX.
CYRILLVS also came to Sardinia; but hearing what was become of Godas, he
sailed to Carthage; where he found Bel^sarius and the Roman Army victorious.
Solomon was sent to the Emperor to relate the successes.

Gelimer in the Plains of Bule, near the Frontier of Numidia, four days journey
from Carthage, gathered together the Vandals, and such Moors as were his
friends; being few, and without Government. For the Rulers of the Moors of
Mauritania, Numidia and Byzacium, sent Ambassadors to Belisarius, to profess
their service to the Emperor, and to promise to join with him. Some of them
sent their sons for hostages, and desired him to send them their Ensigns of
Principality, according to the ancient custom; which was, that none might rule
Moors, before he had those Ensigns sent by the Emperor, though he were an
enemy to the Romans; And having them now from the Vandals, they thought not
their Government firm. The Ensigns are, a silver Rod gilt, a silver Cap, not
covering the whole head, but like a Garland, and kept upright with silver wire
round about: A white Mantle also, fastened with a golden Clasp over the right
shoulder, in the manner of a Thessalian Mantle: A white Robe embroidered, and a
gilt shoe. Belisarius sent all these unto them, and money also, but they did not
join with him, nor yet durst stand for the Vandals, but kept aloof, watching
the event of the war.

Gelimer also sent a Vandal into Sardinia, with a Letter to his brother Tzazon,
containing this It was not Godas surely, but some mischief from heaven upon us,
that put that Island into rebellion; which thereby deprived us of you, and our
best Vandals, and in sum, swept away the prosperity of Gensericks house: You
went not from hence to recover that Island, but that Justinian might be Lord of
Africa. We understand by the events, what Fortune then determined. Belisarius
came upon us but with a small Army: But the Vandals valor presently ran away,
with our good fortune Ammatas and ^ibamundus are lost by the Vandals cowardice
Our horses, ships, all Africa, nay Carthage it self are in our enemies hands;
while the Vandals sit down with the loss of their wives and children, and
estates, having fought poorly. We have nothing left but the Plains of Bule;
where the hope we have in you has put us, and still keeps us. So that leaving
any farther to usurp, and quitting Sardinia, and those cares, come speedily
unto us with your whole f^et. It is inconvenient for men in hazard for the
main, to quillet about the rest. And combating our enemies together, we shall
either recover our former fortune, or gain this, not to suffer without one
another.

Tzazon, when he had perused this Letter, and imparted it to the Vandals, they
howled and lamented, concealing it from the Islanders; but between themselves
bewailing in silence their present estate. And forthwith disposing the
businesses at random, they went all to sea, with the whole fleet, and the third
day landed in Africa, upon the Frontiers of Numidia and Mauritania. Thence they
marched a foot to the Plains of Bule, and joined to the rest of the Army. There
were many sad rencontres then among the Vandals, not to be expressed, and such as
an enemy would have pitied to look on, and see the condition of mankind.
Gelimer and Tzazon fallen on each others neck, could not let go. They said
nothing, but grasping each others hand, howled. The like did the others,
embracing those who came from Sardinia; and a long time they enjoyed that
contentment: And were so amazed at the present fortune, that what was important
before, was not now thought upon; Gelimer not enquiring concerning Godas, nor
Tzazon of the passages in Africa. Which he might conjecture by the place they
were now in. Neither was there speech of wives or children; they perceiving
well, that what was not here, was certainly dead, or a prisoner with the enemy.

THE HISTORY OF THE WARS Of the Emperor IV STINIAN:
BOOK II. Of the War with the Vandals.
CHAP. I.
BUT Gelimer conducted the Army of Vandals, being now all come together against
Carthage: where he cut off the Cities Aquaeduct encamped a while, and no enemy
sallying, retired. They quartered themselves in the neighboring Towns, and
thought to block up the City so, setting guards upon the highways. They used
no spoil nor pillage, assuming the Country as their own: and expecting some
Treason by the Carthaginians, and such Roman soldiers as were Arrians. With
large promises also, they invited the Commanders of the Hunns to be their
friends and confederates: They, who were disaffected to the Romans, alleging
that Peter, the Roman General, had brought them to Constantinople against their
wills, and contrary to his express oath. So they entertained the motion, and
agreed in the battle to turn their powers against the Romans. Of all this
Belisarius had some suspicion, by relation of some fugitives; and the walls
being not wholly finished, he would not sally, but accommodated all things
within. He crucified one Laurus a Carthaginian, for Treason, upon a hillock
before the City, convinced by his own Secretary; which frighted the rest from
the like attempts The Massagetes courting with gifts, and invitations to his
table, and other complements, at last he got out of them what Gelimer had
promised them, to turn cowards in the battle; and indeed that they had no mind
to fight, fearing that, the Vandals being overthrown, the Romans would not
dismiss them to their own Country, but wear them out in Africa; and besides,
take their booty from them. Belisarius swear to them, that they should be sent
home so soon as the Vandals were absolutely overthrown, with all their booty;
and bound them by oath to aid us with all alacrity. Then, all things being well
prepared he spoke thus to the Army. To use exhortations of courage to you, may
seem needless fellow soldiers! who have already so vanquished the enemy, that
Carthage and all Africa is the purchase of your valor: and Victors never have
faint hearts. But it is not unseasonable to put you in mind, that fighting
bravely now the Vandals will have an end of their hopes, and we of fighting.
You ought then cheerfully and with pleasure to enter into this combat; being to
be the period of your labors: And let none speak of the Vandals multitude;
which uses not to determine wars, but men's valor. Let the most powerful thing
among men, a sense of reputation upon your former actions affect you: it being
a shame for men in their wits, to grow worse, and to lessen their own virtue.
The enemy their fear, and remembrance of misfortunes will make cowards; the one
frighting with things past, the other expelling hope of victory; ill fortune
ever instantly dejecting men's spirirs. Besides, our combat is for greater
things. If the former fight had succeeded ill, our danger had been, not to
conquer another Country: But now we lose that which is our own, if we be not
victorious. So that our fear is so much the greater, as it is less to purcha^e
nothing, then to lose what one has. Formerly we got a victory without our
Foot; but now with our whole Army I hope we shall get the enemies Camp, men, and
all they have. You have in your hands the conclusion of this war; if you
neglect it, and put off opportunity, you will seek it when it is gone. Fortune
despised, stops; especially if the judgments be improved of those she favored
not before. That Goddess hates such as squander away their prosperity. And if
any man imagine that the fight of the enemies wives and children, and most
precious things, will make them dare even beyond power, he errs. Anger about
things so dear, weakens minds excessively affected, and suffers them not to
make due use of occasions. All which taking into our consideration, let us
undaunted march against the enemy.

Having thus encouraged them, he sent out all his horse that day, save 500. and
to John the Armenian he gave his own Targetiers and Ensign, (which the Romans
call Bandum) commanding him to skirmish upon occasion. Himself with the foot,
and ^oo horse followed. The Hunns were determined to keep their accords with
Gelimer and Belisarius too, and to begin no fight for the Romans, nor before it
to turn to the Vandals; but upon the victory of either, to follow the execution
upon the vanquished. The Roman Army found the Vandals encamped at Tricamazus,
about 17 miles from Carthage, and lodged not far from them. Where about
midnight, fires were seen upon the Romans spears, and the heads thereof red
hot; and the few who saw this Prodigy were amazed, not knowing what the event
would be. But the same happening long afterward in Italy, they took it upon
experience for a sign of victory. But then it happening first, they were
troubled, and past the night in fear.

CHAP. II.
THe next day Gelimer placed the Vandals wives and children, and all their
wealth, in the midst of the Trench, though unfortified; and calling them
together, spoke thus. We strive not now, dear Countrymen! about loss of honor,
or Empire; as if by cowardly abandoning these, we might live quietly at home,
and hold our estates. Fortune has turned us now to this point, either to
conquer our enemies, or to leave them masters of our wives, and children,
Country, and all our wealth; and the only advantage of our escaping will be to
be slaves, and beholders of these things. But if we vanquish we shall live in
prosperity, and after an honorable death, leave our Families happy, and
preserve the Vandals name and Empire. If ever men fought a battle for all they
have, and for the hopes of all men, we are they. Our fear and danger now, is
not to die; but not to vanquish our enemies: which failing, only death is good
for us. Let none of you therefore faint, but courageously abandon his person;
affecting death rather, then the base miseries of a defe^t. He that is ashamed
to be base, fears no dangers. Think not upon the former fight, wherein not our
cowardice, but some cross fortune tript us; whose stream holds not always the
same course, but changes every day. In valor we presume to have the advantage;
and in numbers we exceed our enemies by ten times as many men. Then have we
many, and great provocations to valor. The glory of our ancestors, ashamed of
our degenerating and the Empire they left us, protesting to forsake us, if
unworthy. Then to see the howlings of these women, and these weeping children,
even stops my speech, with the extreme grief: so that I will only say this:
That these our dearest pledges we shall never more see, if we vanquish not our
enemies. Consider it, and be valiant, and do not deface the glory of Gens^rich.

Having thus said, he commanded his brother Tzazon particularly to animate his
soldiers, that came from Sardinia; who assembling them some space from the
camp, spoke thus. 'Fellow soldiers! The generality of Vandals are to combat for
what you have heard from the King: but you are moreover to strive with your own
selves. Lately fighting for dominion, and to recover the Island, you overcame.
Now you hazard in the greatest things you have, and must use your greatest
courage. Who fight for dominion, and are vanquished, are not ruined in the
main: But fighting for all, their lives depend upon the conclusion of the
battle. And if you be valiant to day, the deposition of Godas will clearly
appear an effect of your valor; but if now you faint, you will lose the
reputation also of that action. And we have the advantage over the rest;
terrified with their former defeat; we being unvanquisht, and fighting with a
courage untainted. Then will the greatest part of the garland of victory be
yours, you will be called the Preservers of the Vandal Nation: for by winning
in company of men formerly unfortunate, you will appropriate to your selves the
better fortune. Upon these considerations you may do well to stint the howling
of your women and children, and calling God to your assistance, to march boldly
against the enemy in the head of your Countrymen.

Gelimer and Tzazon, after these exhortations, drew them out; and about noon
came on (the Romans being preparing their dinners) and stood in order upon the
banks of the brook there. On the other bank the Romans put also in order thus;
The left wing Martinus, Valerianus, John, Cyprian, Althias, and Marcellus had,
and the other Commanders of Confederates: The right wing Pappus, Barbatus, and
Aigan, and the Captains of the Legionary horse. In the midst stood John, with
the Generals Lanciers, and Ensign; and thither in the due season came
Belisarius himself, leaving the foot behind, marching fair and softly. The
Hunns who used before not to mingle their ranks with the Roman Army, then stood
aloof, with the intention I have said. The Vandals order was, to distribute
each wing among the Colonels of thousands, every one leading his proper
Regiment: And in the middle stood Tzazon; and in the rear the Moors. Gelimer
himself rode about from place to place, to encourage his soldiers: Whom he
warned in this fight, not to use Javelins, nor any weapons but their swords. It
was long ere they began. Then John, by Belisarius his direction, with a few
chosen men, passed the brook, and charged those in the middle; where Tzazon
repulsed him back toward the main Army, pursuing him to the brooks side, but
not going over. Again John drawing out more Targetiers of Belisarius, rode
against Tzazon; and being again repulsed, retired. He renewed the charge the
third time, with almost all Belisarius his Targetiers and Lanciers, and the
Generals Ensign, shouting and clashing their arms. The Barbarians valiantly
received them, using their swords only; and the fight grew stiff, where many
Vandals, and of the best, were slain, and Tzazon himself. Then came on the
whole Roman Cavalry, and passing the brook, charged the enemy. And the defeat,
beginning in the middle, appeared clearly; each one routing their opposites
with ease. Which the Massagetes perceiving, according to their resolution they
followed the execution with the Roman Army, which lasted not long; the Vandals
recovering their Camp; and the Romans not holding themselves able to fight with
them in their entrenchment, stripped such dead bodies as had any gold upon them,
and retired to their Camp. In this fight were slain of Romans 50. and of
Vandals 800. But Belisarius about the evening (his foot being come up) marched
with his whole Army to the Vandals Camp. Gelimer seeing Belisarius with his
foot, and all marching, without one word speaking, or giving any direction,
leapt on horseback and fled the way into Numidia; his kinsmen, and some few
household servants following him, amazed, and concealing what it was for. Some
time the Vandals knew not of Gelimers flight; but when they found it, and saw
the enemy, the men were in a tumult; the women howled, the children cried; none
sought to save their goods, nor regarded the lamentations of their dearest
friends; But every man in confusion ran away. The Romans took the Camp, with
all the wealth in it, and destitute of men: And following the chase all night,
killed the men they overtook, and made slaves of the women and children. They
found in the Camp so great a mass of wealth, as was never together in a place.
For the Vandals had long ransackt the Roman Provinces, and brought much wealth
into Africa; which being also good land, and most plentiful of all
commodities; the revenues in money were not spent in other Countries, but put up
by the owners for the space of 95 years, An. Dom. 533. Just. 70.
in which the Vandals had the dominion of Africa. From whence their wealth now
grown into a great bulk, was that day restored to the Romans. This overthrow,
and taking the Vandals Camp, happened three months after the coming of the
Roman Army to Carthage, in the middle of December.

CHAP. III.
BUt Belisarius was troubled to see the Romans disorder, and all night was
afraid, lest the Vandals making head again, might ruin them. If they had come,
not one Roman had escaped to enjoy their booty. For the soldiers, being of a
sudden become masters of so great wealth, and of personages extremely
beautiful, could not contain, nor find any satiety in their booty. They were
drunk with their prosperity, and would have every man returned to Carthage,
carrying all along with them. And they stragled by one and by two, as their
hope of gain led them, searching in woods and fastnesses, and in caves and such
places, subject to danger, and ambushes, fearing no enemy, nor respecting
Belisarius; being affected with nothing but the desire of booty. Which
Belisarius seeing, he knew not what order to take. And so soon as it was day,
he stood upon a hillock by the high way, calling upon them for order, and
chiding the soldiers and commanders. Such as came that way, sent their booty
and captives with their Comrades to Carthage; and themselves repaired to the
General, and obeyed his directions. He commanded John the Armenian, to follow
Gelimer without intermission, and to take him alive or dead. And he wrote to
his friends in Carthage, to take the Vandals out of the Churches in Towns
thereabout, giving them assurances and to disarm them that they might not stir,
and to keep them safe in the City till his coming. With the troops he had, he
went about recollecting the Army, and giving assurances to such Vandals as he
found, there being none but in Churches; whom he disarmed, and sent under
guards to Carthage, giving them no time to make head. All being settled, he
marched with the rest of his Army against Gelimer. John following the chase five
days together, came very near to Gelimer; who being not ordained to be taken by
John, this cross chance happened. Among the pursuers with John, was one
Vliaris, a Lancier of Belisarius; valiant, and of an able body; but not
serious, his greatest delight being wine, and jests. The sixth day of their
pursuit, being in drink, he spied about Sunrising a bird upon a tree, and let
fly an arrow at it. He mist the bird; but shot John behind in the neck; who
soon after dyed of the wound; leaving a great miss both to the General and
Emperor, and all, both Romans and Carthaginians. He was a valiant, and a
virtuous man, and bore himself mildly and moderately to all men. Thus John the
Armenian died. But Vliaris coming to himself, fled into the Church of a Village
near hand; And the soldiers pursued no further, but attended the cure of John;
and being dead, performed his funeral rites, and acquainted Belisarius with the
accident, staying in the place: Who came immediately to the Sepulcher, mourning
the misfortune, and honored the same with a yearly Revenue, and many other
things. To Vliaris he did no harm, hearing from the soldiers that John had made
them swear that he should not be punished for the fact, being unwittingly done.
Thus Gelimer escaped his enemies hands that day. Belisarius still pursued ^im;
and at Hippo Regia, a City upon the sea in Numidia, ten days journey from
Carthage, he learnt how he was gone up to the mountain of Pappua, and not
possible to be taken. This mountain is steep, and very ill way; high rocks
standing round about it. In it inhabit Barbarian Moors, friends and
confederates of Gelimer; and on the utmost border of it, stands an ancient
City, named Medenos. Here Gelimer with his company rested. But Belisarius being
not able to attempt the mountain in the winter; and holding it unsafe to be
absent from Carthage, the state being unsettled, he left Pharas with some forces
to besiege the mountain. This Pharas was a valiant, prudent, and virtuous man,
though an Herulian. And for an Herulian not to be false and a drunkard, but to
pretend to virtue, is rare, and much to be commended. But he was both himself
an affecter of discipline, and all the Herulians that followed him. Belisarius
commanded him to lie all the winter at the foot of the hill, exactly guarding,
that neither Gelimer get down, nor have provisions brought to him.

Then taking the Vandals out of the Churches in Hippo, upon his faith given
them (being of the best) he sent them with a guard to Carthage: and he had this
fortune here. One Bonifacius an African of Byzacium, Secretary to Gelimer, was
by Gelimer furnished with a good ship, having in it all the royal treasures;
and he was commanded to lie at anchor in the Port of Hippo; and if he saw the
affairs go ill, to sail with the money to Theudis, Prince of the Visigoths in
Spai^; where himself, upon the ruin of the Vandals, intended to save himself.
Bonifacius staid, while there was any hope; but hearing of the battle of
Tricamarus, and the rest formerly related, he hoists sail according to Gelimers
appointment: But a contrary wind brought him back into the Port of Hippo: and
understanding the enemy to be near, he wooed the Mariners with large promises,
to get to some other Land. But they could not, a storm coming, and the Tyrrhene
sea being grown high; so they resolved, that God certainly meant to give the
Romans that treasure, not suffering them to put to sea: and with much ado
getting clear of the harbor, they lay off at sea in some danger. Bonifacius
sent to Belisarius, being come to Hippo, some whom he directed to get into a
Church; saying that they were sent by Bonifacius, who had Gelimers Treasures;
but concealing where he was, before oath given; that delivering the Treasures,
he shall have no hurt done him, but keep such moneys as are his own. They
performed these directions. And Belisarius glad of the news, made no scruple to
swear: But sent some who received the Treasures, and dismissed Bonifacius with
his own moneys, having stolen a mass of wealth from Gelimer.

CHAP. IV.
BEing returned to Carthage, he made the Vandal prisoners ready to send to
Constantinople with the first of the spring; and sent forces to take in what
had been under the Vandals: and to Sardinia Cyrillus, with the head of Tzazon;
the Islanders not yet yielding, nor believing the report of the Vandals il
fortune at Tricamarus. And he directed him to send part of his forces to take
in Corsica (anciently called Cyrnus) not far from Sardinia, which had been
under the Vandals also. Cyrillus accordingly showed the head of Tzazon to the
Islanders of Sardinia, and made both the Islands tributary.

Belisarius sent also John with the foot company under his leading, unto
Caesarea in Mauritania, being 30 days journey from Carthage, in the way to
Caliz and Hercules Pillars; and a populous maritine City. Another John, one of
his targetiers, he sent to the Straits of Caliz, to possess the Castle of
Septum, one of the Pillars. To the Isles of Ebusa, Majorica, and Minorica, he
sent Apollinarius, an Italian, who went young into Africa; and there being
grown rich by the bounty of Ilderick, after his deposing and imprisonment, he
went a suitor for Ilderick to Justinian, with some other Africans. And in this
voyage with the Romans he did valiantly, and at Tricamarus the best of any. For
which service Belisarius gave him the command of those Islands. He re-enforced
also the Romans under Pudentius and Tattimuth in Tripolis, the Moors pressing
sore upon them. He sent some likewise to receive the Castle at Lilybaeum in
Sicily, as belonging to the Vandals dominion, but was repulsed by the Goths,
refusing to yield any part of Sicily, and denying the Castle to have been the
Vandals.

Whereupon he wrote thus to the Governors there* You deprive us of Lilybaeum,
a Castle of the Vandals, the Emperors slaves; wherein you deal both unjustly
and unwisely, without your Princes mind and privity, to put the Emperor into a
war with him, whose favor he has so labored to purchase. How strange a
proceeding is it, to suffer Gelimer to hold the Castle, and from the Emperor,
Gelimers Master, to take away his slaves possessions? Take heed: consider how
friendship covers many grievances: but an enemy endures not the least injury,
but looks back, and will not wink at his foe grown rich, whence he should not;
But then he alleadges the wrongs done to his Ancestors; then he fights; wherein
though he fail, yet he loses no possession; but prospering, makes the
vanquished ask forgiveness. Do you therefore do us no farther ill, nor suffer
any. Make not the Emperor an enemy to the Goths, whom you wish propitious. For
know, that if you dispute this Castle, you will have a war, not only for
Lilybaeum; but for all you hold without just title.

The Goths imparted these Letters to Atalaricus his mother, and by her
direction made this answer. Excellent Belisarius! your exhortation may be
pertinent to some other men, but not Goths. We are not so mad as to detain any
thing from the Emperor: Sicily we challenge all to be ours; whereof that
Castle is one of the head Lands. If Theodorick gave his sister, married to a
Vandal King, the use of a Mart Town in Sicily, this can give no pretense of
title. But noble General! do us right; and decide this controversy not as an
enemy, by a battle, but as a friend at an Arbitrament. We refer it to the
Emperor himself, to do as to him shall seem legal and just. And we wish you to
be advised, and to attend the determination of your Emperor.

Belisarius herewith acquainted the Emperor, and staid till he should further
direct him.

In the mean time Pharas being weary of a winter-siege, and supposing the Moors
unable to oppose him, he undertook the ascent unto Pappua, with his troops well
armed. But the Moors defended it so, that those who went up the Hill being
steep, and bad way, were easily ruined; and Pharas being obstinate lost 110
men, and with the residue was beaten back. But he set very diligent guards,
that they might be put to yield for hunger, permitting none to escape away, nor
any thing to be brought them from without. Where the sufferings of Gelimer and
his kindred and others with him, delicately bred, no relation can equal. The
Vandals being of all the known Nations the most effeminate, and these Moors the
hardiest. They first since their possession of Africa have used their daily
baths, and plentiful tables, of the best and pleasantest things the earth and
sea afford; most of them wore gold and silk, and past their times in Theaters,
horse-races, and other delights, and principally huntings: They had their
Masks and Plays, Musiques and gallant sights; many had gardens furnished
with waters and trees, used much feasting, and were as much addicted to
venerie. But those Moors are choked up in close cabbins, never removing for
heat of summer, or any inconvenience; and lying upon the ground, or happily
with a sheeps-skin under them: They never change apparel, but all the year wear
a thick coarse mantle, and a Freese-coat: They have no bread nor wine, eating
their wheat, barley, and Olyra (as other animals) without reducing it to flour.
With these Moors Gelimers company having long sojourned, in this strange change
of diet, and now necessaries failing too; they could hold out no longer, but
thought it the most pleasant to die, and to serve not base.

CHAP. V.
WHich Pharas understanding, wrote thus to Gelimer. I also am a Barbarian, not
used to discourses; but do write now what I cannot but learn from the course of
things. Why have you cast your self, dear Gelimer! and your whole kindred into
this depth of misery? Is it to avoid being a slave? is that it you stomach, as
conceiving all miseries good cheap for liberty? And do you not now serve,
having your best hopes of safety upon the most wretched of all the Moors? It Is
better for a man to be a slave among Romans begging, then to reign over the
Moors of Pappua. And can it be so extreme a scorn to be a fellow servants of
Belisarius? Fie^l noble Gelimer. We glory (being not born of noble parentage)
to be the Emperors slaves. But you (they say) the Emperor intends to receive
into the Senate, and to the highest honor called the Patriciate, and to bestow
on you a large fertile country, and much wealth; and Belisarius will undertake
these conditions upon his oath. Can you bear what fortune brings generously?
and when she mingles her distastes with some good, will you peevishly reject
it? Are not good things from fortune as needful for us as bad? But these
things the most senseless will not think. It seems being plunged in disasters,
you lose your wits; For grief uses to amaze, and turn the mind upon bad
counsels. But if you can manage your thoughts, without repining against
fortune; you have it in your power, to choose what is good for you, and to rid
your self of these miseries.

Gelimer lamented bitterly at the reading this Letter, and wrote back thus. I
thank you much for your counsel; but to serve an Enemy wronging me, I hold
intolerable; Of whom I would get right, if God were propitious. He has set
Belisarius upon me, I know not why; found a reasonless pretext of a war, and
brought me to this, having never offended him in word nor deed. It is not
impossible, but that something he wishes not may happen to him, though an
Emperor, yet but a man. I can add no more; my misfortune has taken away my
invention. Farewell gentle Pharas; and at my request send me a Harp, a Loaf of
bread, and a Sponge. Pharas doubted long how to construe the last clause of the
Letter; till the beater told him, That Gelimer asked him a Loaf of bread,
longing to see and taste a baked loaf, which he had not seen since his coming
to Pappua: That he needed a Sponge for his eye, swelled with a rheum, for want
of sweating and bathing: And being skilful upon the Harp, he desired one to
sing to it a sad Ditty he had composed upon his present calamity. Pharas
condoling with him, and at the condition of mankind, sent him the things
according to his Letter; but block him up faster then before. And three
winter-moneths were spent in this siege; And Gelimer feared that ere long they
would get up to him; He saw the children of his kin even swarm with lice; full
of sorrow he was, weary of the thought of any thing but dying; yet he endured
all beyond imagination, till he saw this sight. A Moorish woman had pounded
some wheat, and thereof made a little Cake, which she threw in the hot ashes
upon the hearth, as the Moors use to bake then bread: Two hungry boys, (one
the said woman's son, and the other Gelimers sisters son) watched at the hearth
to catch the cake when it was baked: The Vandale boy caught it first, and
hungerly thrust it hot into his mouth, with the ashes on; the other boy took
him by the hair, and with beating forced him to put out the cake again.
Gelimer, who observed all this accident, could not bear it, but relented, and
presently wrote thus to Pharas. If ever man endured misery with a success quite
contrary to his counsels, such am I, Excellent Pharas! I mean not to neglect
your good advice; being no longer able to strive with fortune, nor struggle
under the yoke of destiny, which I will follow as it pleases the same to lead
me. Let me have assurance of Belisarius undertaking the performance of that by
the Emperor, which you lately intimated, and I will immediately render my self
to you, and all my kindred, and Vandals here with me.

Pharas acquainted Belisarius with this, and the former Letters; desiring to
know his pleasure. Who much desiring to bring Gelimer alive to the Emperor,
and overjoyed with the news, instantly sent to Pappua, Cyprian Commander of the
Confederates, with some others, to give oath to Gelimer for the safety of
himself and company, and that he should have an honorable rank with the
Emperor, and want nothing. And they with Pharas went to the foot of the
mountain, whither came Gelimer, received the assurances as he desired, and went
with them to Carthage. Belisarius was in a suburb thereof, named Aclae: where
Gelimer being presented, fell a laughing openly, that some imagined him to be
distracted through the extremity of his misery: But his friends alleged the
man to be of sudden apprehension; He was royally born, and a King; and now from
a continued power and wealth, fallen into bondage and fear; And after his
enduring so much in Pappua, he must now be ranked amongst slaves; And thus
having had experience of Fortunes smiles and frowns, he thought Humane
condition to deserve only laughter. Thus they conceived of it. But Belisarius
acquainted the Emperor how Gelimer was a Captive at Carthage, and prayed leave
to come along with him to Constantinople; keeping him in the mean time in an
honorable restraint, and preparing his Fleet. Many experiments the world has
seen beyond hope, and many it will, while Fortune continues the same. Many
things seeming to Reason impossible, have come to pass, and been wondered at:
But I know not whether ever the like of these things has happened. For a
fourth Successor of Genserick (his Kingdom flourishing with wealth and men of
war) to be ruined in so short a time, by 5000 new comers without a place to
anchor in, (so many only were the Horse, who by their valor or fortune debated
the whole war) is justly to be wondered at. But I return from whence I
digressed; This being the conclusion of the Vandal wars.

CHAP. VI.
But some Commanders being envious of Belisarius (as is usual in great
felicities) traduced him without any color of truth, to the Emperor, of
usurpation. The Emperor made no show of it, either despising the accusation,
or thinking it his best way; and sent thither Solomon, and gave Belisarius his
choice, either to come to Constantinople with Gelimer and the Vandals, or to
stay and send them. But he (who was not ignorant how the Commanders charged him
with usurpation) urged to go to Constantinople to clear the imputation, and to
be revenged of his accusers. He came to discover the plot against him thus. His
accusers fearing the miscarriage of their letters to the Emperor, and so to
spoil their design, wrote of the usurpation in two letters, by several
messengers in several ships; one whereof sailed away unespied; but the other
upon some suspicion was taken in Mandracium, and his letter intercepted, and
the plot discovered to Belisarius, who thereupon made haste to get to the
Emperors presence. But the Moors of Byzacium and Numidia, breaking their
truce, revolted, and suddenly made war upon the Romans, without any occasion at
all: An action agreeable to their dispositions; for with Moors is no care of
oaths, nor hostages, (though of their children, brethren, or Rulers) neither
any assured peace, but by their fear of the enemy. They made truce with
Belisarius, and broke it, as I shall tell you. The Emperors Fleet being
expected in Africa, the Moors afraid, resorted to their soothsaying women, it
being not lawful for their men to soothsay. These women after being possessed
with a Spirit, as was usual for them, according to the manner of the ancient
Oracles; foretold an Army from the waters, the ruin of the Vandals, and
destruction of the Moors, when a General of Romans should come without a
beard. Upon this answer the Moors, seeing the Fleet at sea, were afraid, and
would not assist the Vandals; but sent to Belisarius, and made a peace,
watching for the success. And the business of the Vandals being dispatched, they
sent to spy in the Roman Army if there were any Commander without a beard; And
finding all well stored with beards, they thought (as they would have it) the
Oracle to concern some after-ages, and not them. So they longed to break the
truce, but were afraid of Belisarius, despairing of overcoming the Romans, he
being with them. And hearing him to be ready to go, and his Lanciers,
Targetiers, and Vandal Captives to be already on shipboard, they took arms
suddenly, and did the Africans much mischief: For the Soldiers being dispersed
in small garrisons upon the borders, and unprepared, could not every where
oppose, nor hinder the Barbarians inroads, which were often, and secret. And so
men in confusion were slain, women and children made slaves, goods every where
carried away, and all the Country full of flights. Belisarius was at sea when
he heard of this, and could not come back now; but he appointed Solomon to
govern Africa, and to take the most part of his Targetiers and Lanciers, and to
chastise the Moors for this wrong to the Romans. Another Army the Emperor sent
to Solomon, with Theodorus the Cappadocian, and Ildeger, who married the
daughter of Antonina, Belisarius his wife. And the ancient African tributes
being not to be found upon the ancient Roman records there, which Genserick had
destroyed; Tryphon and Eustratius were sent with commission from the Emperor
to make a tax; Men whom the Africans found harsh and intolerable.

But Belisarius being arrived at Constantinople with Gelimer and the Vandals,
was thought worthy of those ancient honors given to Generals for the greatest
victories. It is about 600 years since any had the same, unless it were Titus,
Trajanus, and such Emperors, as led the Army in person, and got victory of
some Barbarian nation. He led the spoils, and prisoners of war, in pomp through
the City; which the Romans call a Triumph; but it was not in the ancient
manner: He went afoot from his own house to the Circus, and there from his
Pavillion to the Emperors throne. The spoils were things belonging to the
service of the King, and Gold-chains, and the Chariots for his Queen, with many
Jewels and Cups of gold, and all things useful at a Kings feast. Silver also
weighing many thousand talents and a huge mass of Royal furniture, ( Genserick
having sacked, as I said, the Palace at Rome) among which were some monuments of
the Jews, brought to Rome by Titus, after the destruction of Jerusalem. A Jew
there espying the same, standing by one of the Emperors familiar friends, It
is not so good (quoth he) to bring these monuments into the Palace of
Constantinople; for they cannot continue but where Solomon first placed them:
Hence it is that Genserick sacked the Palace in Rome, and now Belisarius that of
the Vandals. The Emperor hearing this, sent them to the Christian Churches in
Jerusalem. The Captives were, Gelimer, bearing a Purple robe, and all his
kindred, and the tallest and beautifullest of the Vandals. Gelimer seeing the
Emperor sitting upon a high throne, and the people on both sides in the
Circus, and himself in that calamity, used no lamentation, but still repeated
that in the Scripture, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Being at the
Emperors throne, they took from him the Purple robe, and caused him to fall
upon his face and adore the Emperor. The same did Belisarius, supplicating for
him to the Emperor: who, with his Empress Theodora, gave large means to
Ildericks children, and the descendants of Valentinian; and to Gelimer they
gave towns in Galatia of good value, where they suffered him to dwell. He would
not change his Arrian Religion; so he was not admitted a Patrician. Belisarius
not long after had a Triumph according to the ancient custom. Going to be
installed Consul, he was born by Captives in a chariot, from whence he threw of
the Vandal spoils among the people, silver-vessels, and gold-belts, and much
more of the Vandals wealth. And then men saw things forgotten, thus renewed by
time.

CHAP. VII.
BUt Solomon taking the charge of the Army in Africa, the Moors being up, and
the State tottering, was uncertain what to do; Hearing how the Barbarians had
killed the Garrisons in Byzacium, An. Dom. 534. Just. 8.
and forraged the Country; but the misfortune in Byzacium of Aigan the Hunn,
and Rufinus the Thracian, troubled him most, and all Carthage, being men of
great reputation in Belisarius his retinue, and the whole Army. Aigan was one
of Belisarius his lifeguard; and the other, as the valiantest of the rest, was
the Generals Standard Bearer, whom the Romans call Bandophorus: These
commanding then Troops of horse, and seeing the Moors make booty, and slaves of
the Africans, laid wait for them in a narrow passage, killed them, and rescued
all their captives. Which the Barbarian Princes, Cutzinas, Esdilasas,
Juphruthes, and Medisinissas hearing, set upon them about evening; whom the
Romans, being few, and surprised in the narrow passage, in the midst of
thousands, were not able to resist; which way soever they turned the enemy
having their backs. Rusinus and Aigan ran to a rock, and thence kept off the
enemy with their arrows; who durst not come up, but darted their Javelins.
Their arrows being spent, the Moors came to handy blows, and they awhile
defended themselves with their swords; but numbers overpressing, cut Aigan in
pieces, and carried away Rufinus. But Medisinissas, fearing he might escape,
and trouble them again, took off his head, and showed it at home to his wives;
being for bigness, and abundance of hair, a goodly sight.

It is not amiss to say something here, how, and from whence the Moors came
originally to inhabit Africa. When the Hebrews came out of Egypt, and Moses was
dead, and Joshua his successor, with more then humane valor, had brought the
people into Palestine, possessed the Country, overthrown the Nations, conquered
their Cities, and was thought invincible: The Gergesites and Jebusites, and
other Nations, mentioned in the Scripture (being populous, and inhabiting the
seacoast, from Sidon to Egypt, called Phoenicia, and under one King, as is
confessed by all Writers of Antiquities) seeing this new Captain unresistible,
they removed from their own Country into Egypt. Where finding no room, ( Egypt
being anciently populous) they went on into Africa: and building many Cities,
possessed it all, unto Hercules Pillars, and to this day continue there, using
the Phoenician language. In Numidia they built a Castle, where now is the City
of Tigisis. In which stand two Pillars, near the great Conduit, with these
words engraven in the Phoenician language. We are they who fled from before
Joshua the chief, the son of Nun. Other people anciently inhabited Africa, and
therefore were said to be born of the earth. Whereupon their King, Antoeus,
(who wrastled with Hercules in Clypea) was called the son of the earth.
Afterward the Phaenicians came with Dido into Africa, to those of the same
race, who received them and permitted them to build Carthage. But in time, the
Carthaginians grown great and populous, overcame these Moors in battle, who
came thus out of Palestine, and forced them to inhabit far from Carthage. And
the Romans afterward being Masters of the world, planted the Moors upon the
uttermost borders of the inhabited Countries of Africa, and made the
Carthaginians, and other Africans Tributary. But lately the Moors got many
victories of the Vandals, and held Mauritania, extending from Caliz to
Caesarea, and the most part of Africa beside.

But Solomon understanding the accident of Aigan, and Rufinus, prepared for a
War, and wrote this Letter to the Princes of the Moors. Others heretofore have
ventured foolishly, and perished, not divining the event of their presumption:
But you, seeing a president of your neighbors the Vandals, upon what madness
have you drawn your swords against the great Emperor? and do thus abandon your
safeties, after solemn oaths, and your sons given for pledges? Is it to show
that you regard neither God, faith, kindred, nor safety? Being such, in what
God can you trust for help, provoking a Roman Emperor? You have lost your
sons; for what is it you mean to hazard? If you repent for what is past, write
that you will give over; If not, expect a Roman war to come upon you, with your
violated oaths, and the undoing your own sons.

The Moors made this answer to Solomon. Belisarius persuaded us with large
promises, to obey the Emperor. But now affording us no share of your
prosperity, you would have us friends and aids still, starving with hunger. It
is you are the faith-breakers, not the Moors: Not they, who fly off from their
associates upon wrongs, violate Truces, but they who demand Truce, and then
oppress men: Not they, who fight for their own, make God their enemy; but who
usurping other men's right, dare hazard a war. Concerning sons, you may be
troubled, who must have but one wife: We who may have 50 wives at once, can
never want a generation.

Upon this, Solomon resolved to lead his Army against them; and having disposed
of things in Carthage, marched into Byzacium, and encamped at Mamme, near the
aforesaid Moorish Princes.

CHAP. VIII.
AT the foot of high mountains there, upon a plain piece of ground, the
Barbarians put their battle in order to fight, thus. They put their Camels in a
round (as Cabaon did formerly) made their front 12. Camels deep, and placed
their women and children in the middle, save some few, who made their
entrenchments, and cabbins; dressed their horses and Camels, and their own diet,
and did many services in their fights. Themselves stood between the Camels
legs, having shields, swords, and Javelins; and some horse upon the mountains.
Half the Round next the mountain, Solomon omitted; fearing lest the enemy from
thence, and from the Round might charge his men at once, and so get their
backs, opposing the Army to the rest, and finding them dejected with the
accident of Aigan and Rufinus, he made them this speech to encourage them. You
that are fellow soldiers of Belisarius, are not to fear, nor make it an
example, if 50000 Moors have vanquished 500 Romans. Call to mind your own
valor: Think how the Vandals vanquished the Moors, and with what ease you are
now Masters of the Vandals; and having beaten the better men, will you fear the
weaker? The Moors are the poorest Nation to fight in the world, coming naked,
or with short shields only, ill made, and unable to keep out a blow, and such
men, as when they have thrown out their two Javelins, if they do no effect, run
instantly away: So that we may by warding their first fury, have the better
with ease, your advantage in your arms, valor, strength of body, experience in
battles, and confidence, for having been already victorious over every enemy,
you are to consider. All which the Moors wanting trust only to their multitude,
who being no soldiers, are the more easily beaten by a few well prepared. The
soldier has his confidence in himself: but the coward is commonly distressed
by his crowd of assistants. And these Camels deserve your contempt, which
cannot resist us, and being wounded by us (as they shall) will put these men in
disorder. Their presumption upon their former good fortune, will fight for you.
For boldness measured by ones power, may be an advantage: but exceeding that,
it runs him into danger. Which considering, and not valuing the enemy, you
shall silently, and with ease vanquish him.

The Princes of the Moors also, seeing their men amazed at the Romans order,
used this encouragement. You have found, fellow soldiers I that these Romans
have but the bodies of men, having killed some of their best men, overwhelmed
with our Javelins, and taken many of them prisoners. Then have we a great
advantage in numbers: And our strife is about the greatest things, either to be
Masters of Africa, or slaves of these braggarts. So that now hazarding for all,
if we be not more then ordinarily valiant, we shall do no good. And let us not
regard their arming, which combers their foot, then whom the Moors will be much
the swifter. And their horse will be disordered by the sight of our Camels, and
by their cries, louder then the noise of the battle. To think the enemy
unresistible because of his victory of the Vandals, is an error. The Generals
virtue ever poises the battle: and Belisarius, the greatest cause of that
victory, fortune has removed: Besides, the Vandals we had weakened before, and
made them an easy conquest to the Romans: And if we do valiantly now, we shall
be Masters of these men also.

This exhortation ended, the battle begun. At first the Romans were put into
confusion by their horses skittishness at the sight and cry of the Camels,
throwing their riders, and running away, and by the Moors incursions, darting
the Javelins they had: so that being frighted and in tumult, they neither
defended, nor kept their ranks. Which Solomon seeing, leapt from his horse, and
commanded the rest to do the like, and to stand still, warding with their
shields, against the enemies Javelins, and to keep their orders. Himself with
500 men gave on upon the Round; directing to kill the Camels. The Moors there
ran away, and some 200 Camels were killed. Which being done, the Round was to
be entered, and the Romans pierced into the midst of it, where the Moors wives
were. The Barbarians all amazed, ran up the mountain, whom the Romans pursuing,
killed some 10000 of them, flying in confusion. The Camels surviving were
taken: and the Romans marched to Carthage, to keep their Feast of Victory.

The Barbarians grown angry, made an universal invasion, leaving none behind.
First they overran Byzacium, sparing no age they could catch. Solomon was newly
come to Carthage, when this news was told him. So that he marched against them
with the whole Army; and at the mountain of Burgaon, upon which the Moors
encamped, he sat down, expecting the Moors descent, that he might give them
battle upon plain ground. But seeing them not come down, he put the Army in a
fair order to fight. But they watched their occasions in the mountain, being
heartily afraid of the Romans, and having no mind to fight in a champian.
Burgaon is most of it very ragged; and to the East inaccessible; but to the
West passable; and rising gently; and between two rocks is a deep woody Valley.
The top of the mountain, where they expected no enemy, they left without men;
and they quitted the foot of it, which was easy of access; and encamped in the
middle, to have the shooting of the enemies heads from above. And they had
horses, either to run away with, or to chase, if they got the day: Solomon
seeing the Moors would not yet come to the even ground, and the Roman Army
weary in that desert place, made haste to fight. But finding the soldier
dismayed atheir enemies multitude, much greater then in the former battle; he
spoke thus to them.

The enemies fear of you needs no accuser nor witness; it convinces it self. So
many thousands not daring to encounter you upon even ground; and having no
confidence in themselves, but making this fastness their refuge: So that
exhortations in words are needless to you, whom the things themselves, and your
enemies weakness animates: Only let me put you in mind, that by the prosperous
conclusion of this day, you will instantly enjoy all the wealth of Africa; the
Vandals being overcome, and the Moors reduced, and no enemy left to think of.
And that the enemies may not shoot down upon our heads, nor we suffer harm from
the nature of the place, shall be my care.

Solomon having thus said, commanded Theodorus the Scout-Master, to draw out
1000 foot, with their Ensigns, about the evening, and closely to get up at the
East side of Burgaon, where the mountain is most difficult, and being come to
the top, to pass the night without noise; and with Sunrising to show
themselves to the enemy, displaying their Ensigns, and to shoot at them. He
did accordingly, and at midnight, passing up a ragged way near the rock, was
neither discerned by Moors nor Romans; being said to be sent to ly abroad, to
prevent mischief to the Camp. Before break of day Solomon went to the skirt of
the hill, toward the enemy; and the soldiers, when the day grew bright, seeing
the top of the mountain, full of men displaying Roman Ensigns, were amazed.
When they on the top, began the fight, the Romans perceived them to be their
own; and the Barbarians finding themselves shot on both sides, and without
means to drive off the enemy, they despaired and ran away. But daring to fly
neither to the top nor bottom of the hill, being both possessed by the enemy;
they ran amain to the woody Valley, some on horseback, some afoot. And being a
multitude, and in fear, and tumult, they killed one another, and falling in to
the Valley very deep, the foremost were slain, and not discerned by them that
followed. But when the Valley was full of horses and dead bodies, the residue
were saved, passing over the bodies from Burgaon to the other rock. The
survivers affirmed 50 thousand Moors to have been slain in this overthrow. The
Romans lost not a man, nor so much as received a wound from the enemy, nor
other accident, but all enjoyed the victory untoucht. The Barbarians Princes
escaped all, save Isdilasas, who upon promise of life, yielded himself
prisoner. Their booty of women and children was so great, that they sold a
Moorish boy for the price of a sheep. The Moors remaining, then remembered the
women's Prophecy, That their Nation should perish by a man without a beard.

CHAP. IX.
THe Roman Army with their booty and Jsdilasas returned to Carthage. But the
Barbarians surviving, would not continue in Byzacium, being few, and fearing to
be oppressed by the neighboring Africans, but fled to to Jabdas, An. Dom. 535.
Just. 9.
Prince of the Moors of Aurasium in Numidia. In Byzacium such of them only
remained, as were subject to Antalas, who kept his faith to the Romans, and had
no harm done to his Sujects. In the mean time the said Jabdas forraged Numidia
with 3^000 men, and made slaves of many Africans. Althias then had the command
of a Castle thereabout, who having a mind to rescue some of those captives,
drew out 70 Hunns of his Garrison; but not conceiving it possible with such a
number to stand the multitude of the Moors, he would have possessed some narrow
passage, where the enemy marching, he might have seized upon the captives. But
finding all open champian about the Towns there, he resolved to possess a great
well standing in Tigisis, an unwalled City, but in a great fastness; thinking
that the enemy being thirsty, would certainly come thither, no other water
being near. The great odds in numbers caused his conceit herein to savor of
madness. The Moors having toiled in the summer heats, and being extreme
thirsty, ran to the well, imagining no opposition: But finding the place
possessed by the enemy, they stood amazed, being faint, and longing for water.
Jabdas therefore came to a parley with Althias, and offered the third part of
his booty, that his Moors might drink, which he refused, but offered to fight a
single combat with him. Which Jabdas accepted; and it was agreed, that if he
vanquished Althias, the Moors should drink. Who were glad, and confident, seeing
Althias a lean man, not tall; whereas Jabdas was the goodliest and valiantest
of all the Moors. They were on horseback; and Jabdas threw first his Javelin,
which Althias caught flying at him in his right hand (which amazed his enemy)
and with his left hand bent his bow (being both-handed) and killed Jabdas
horse. The Moors brought their Prince another horse, upon which he leaped up,
and ran away; the Moors following in disorder. Althias recovered the captives
and booty, and got a great name in Africa for this act.

But Solomon, after a short stay in Carthage, led the Army against Jabdas to
mount Aurasium, for sacking the Towns of Numidia, while the Roman Army was
busy in Byzacium. The other Moorish Princes also incensed Solomon against him;
as Massonas, being enemy to Jabdas, who killed Mephanias his father
treacherously, though he had married his daughter: And Orthaeus, because he had
plotted with Mastinas, Prince of the Barbarians in Mauritania, to expel him,
and the Moors his subjects, from their ancient habitation. So the Army under
Solomon, and their Moorish aides, encamped by the river of Amigas, which runs
by Aurasium. Jabdas thought the champian disadvantageous for him to fight in;
so he made Aurasium as difficult as he could in the fit places for an assault.

This mountain is 13 days journey from Carthage, and the greatest we know; the
circuit being three days journey. It is difficult to get up, but being up, and
on even ground, are fields, fountains, rivers, and many admirable gardens; the
wheat there, and all that grows, is twice as big as in any other part of
Africa. Some neglected Castles also there are, the Inhabitants finding no use
of them: who never were put into any fear since the Moors took Aurasium from
the Vandals. Nay they demolished Tamugadis, a populous City to the Eastward of
the mountain, upon the very entrance of the plain, that enemies might not lodge
there, and for the Cities sake approach the mountain. The Country to the west
of Aurasium being large and good, the Moors had likewise; beyond whom are other
Moors subject to Ortaeus, who aided Solomon. I have heard that man say, that
beyond his Country is a Wilderness, and beyond that, men not black, like Moors,
but with white bodies, and yellow hair.

Solomon distributed moneys amongst his Auxiliaries, encouraged them, and with
his whole Army ascended mount Aurasium, in order of battle, thinking that day
to try his fortune against the enemy; so that the soldier had brought but
little fodder for their horses. They went six miles and a quarter in very bad
way, and lay all that night in the fields. And the seventh day (going every
day as much) they came to an old Castle by a river, called by the Latins,
Mons-scuti. Here they had been told the enemy was encamped; but none
encountering, themselves encamped there, preparing to fight: they spent there
three days. But seeing the enemy absolutely gone, and necessaries failing,
Solomon and the whole Army doubted some plot of their Auxiliary Moors. Who
knowing perfectly the ways of Aurasium, and in likelihood the enemies designs,
by riding to them secretly, and often being sent by the Romans to discover, yet
they never spoke a true word. So they thought it best to be gone before some
blow, and to return with greater provisions, and better furnished in other
things. Now they were afraid, and suspected treason from their Auxiliaries,
whom they knew naturally false, and especially when they aid the Romans, or any
against the Moors. Upon all these considerations, and the famine pinching, they
went down immediately, and made an entrenchment in the champian.

But the winter being come, Solomon marched to Carthage, where he prepared for
another journey in the beginning of the spring to Aurasium, without any
auxiliary Moors, if it might be; and he appointed forces and a fleet against
the Moors in Sardinia; being a rich Island, and as big as two third parts of
Sicily; the circumference of it is twenty days journey; and is in the midway
between Rome and Carthage, and much vexed with Moors, who were confined and
planted there with their wives and children, by the Vandals. There possessed the
mountains near Carnalis, and at first committed petty stealths upon the
natives; but being grown to a number of 3000 men, they made open inroads, and
ransackt all the places near them, being by the natives called Barbaracini.
Against these Moors Solomon prepared a fleet the winter.

CHAP. X.
BUt at the same time, Belisarius being sent into Italy by the Emperor,
against Theodatus and the Goths, landed first in Sicily, and took the Island;
the manner whereof I refer to my ensuing History of the affairs of Italy. When
I have written the occurrences of Africa, I will come to the Relation of Italy
and the Goths. This winter Belisarius spent in Syracuse, and Solomon in
Carthage. And all this year the Sun had a fearful and prodigious light,
without beams, like that of the Moon, and for the most part it was as eclipsed,
without the clear and usual luster. And during the same, famine, war, and all
kind of mortality did infest mankind. It was in the tenth year of Justinians
reign.

In the beginning of the spring, the Christians celebrating their Easter, An.
Dom. 536. Just. 10.
the soldiers mutinyed in Africa upon this occasion. The Roman soldiers having
vanquished the Vandals, married their wives and daughters. Who drew their
husbands to challenge the possessions formerly theirs, as being unjust (having
enjoyed the same by the Vandals) to be deprived of them now, being married to
their Conquerors. The soldiers having this put into their heads, thought they
ought not to yield those possessions to Solomon, who intended to annex the same
to the Treasury, and the Emperors house; not refusing the slaves and movables
for spoils to the soldier; but the Lands he alleged to belong to the
Emperor, and State, which fed them, and gave them the quality of soldiers, not
to conquer for themselves the Lands taken by Barbarians from the Empire; but to
recover them to the Treasury, from whence they and the other Armies had their
entertainments. Another party also there was which troubled Africa as much, or
more. In the Army were some thousand Arrian soldiers, most Herulians. These
were provoked by the Vandal Priests, being not allowed their accustomed divine
service, but barred from all, both Sacraments and Churches: For Justinian
permitted not any Christian not Orthodoxal, to have the benefit of Baptism, or
any other Sacrament: Especially they were troubled, the Feast of Easter
approaching, wherein they might not baptize their children in the holy Laver,
nor do what belonged to the Feast. And Fortune heaped to this, another mischief
upon the Romans, by adding a supply to these Mutiners. The Emperor had made
five horse troops of the Vandals, brought to Constantinople by Belisarius, to
lie perpetually in Cities of the East, under the title of Vandalici. The most
of these went by sea into the East, and made up the appointed troops, till this
day serving against the Persians. But 400 of them from Lesbos, forcing the
Mariners, came upon the coast of Peloponesus, and from thence sailed into
Africa, landing in a desert coast; where leaving the ships, they went into
Mauritania to mount Aurasium. This encouraged and more combined the mutinying
soldiers, who had many conferences and oaths about it.

The Feast being at hand, the discontented Arrians, who were interdicted the
Church, eagerly urged it. And the ringleaders of them had resolved to kill
Solomon, the first day of the Feast, called the great day. The plot was
undiscerned by any: For though many were engaged in it, yet none misliked, nor
revealed it; many of Solomon's Lanciers, and Targetiers, and most of his
houshold-servants coveting those possessions, were in the mutiny. At the day,
Solomon sat in the Church, apprehending no mischief; The men appointed to kill
him, made signs to one another, and had their hands on their swords; but did
nothing: either reverencing the Church Service, or abashed at the state of
their General, or by something divine restrained: But divine service being
ended, and every man come home, the soldiers blamed each other for fainting,
and appointed the plot the next day: When they likewise came from Church
without doing any thing; and meeting in the marketplace, railed upon one
another, each man terming his fellow false, and faint-hearted, and reproaching
his awe of Solomon. And their plot being divulged, they thought it unsafe to
stay in Carthage. So the most of them went out, and pillaged the Villages, and
used the Africans as enemies. The rest remained in the City unsuspected, and
seeming ignorant of the conspiracy.

Solomon hearing what the soldiers did in the Country, and exhorting them in
the City to good affection to the Emperor, at first they seemed to entertain
his discourse. But hearing how those abroad did what they listed in the
Countries, securely; the fifth day of their mutiny, they impudently railed upon
Solomon, and the other Commanders in the Circus. Solomon seat Theodorus the
Cappadocian to appease them, a man that loved him not, and was suspected to
practice against him. Whereupon the mutiners with cries chose him their
General, and with him went to the Palace, where they killed another Theodorus
the Scout-Master, a worthy man, and a good soldier. Being blouded, they killed
all they met, whether Africans or Romans, if Solomon's friends, or with money
about them. Then they pillaged the houses, where no soldiers defended, taking
away all of any value, till the night, and drink after their toil quieted them.
Solomon fled to the great Church of the Palace; whither about the evening came
Martinus; and when the mutiners were asleep, they went to the Lodging of
Theodorus the Cappadocian, who constrained them to sup, though they bad little
mind to it, and brought them to a ship in the harbor, provided for them by
Valerianus. Procopius, the writer of this History, was in company, and five of
Solomon's retinue. After 37 miles sailing, they came to Messua, a road for
Carthage shipping, and a safe place. From hence Solomon sent Martinus to
Valerianus, and the other ommanders in Numidia, to attempt to reduce such
mutiners as any of them knew, by money, and all means. And he wrote to Theodorus
to take care of Carthage, and to do what he could. Himself with Procopius went
to Belisarius to Syracuse, relating the accident, and praying him to repair to
Carthage, and vindicate the Emperor from this affront of his own soldiers.

CHAP. XI.
IN the mean time the mutiners having sacked Carthage, made their rendezvous in
the Plains of Bule, and chose Stotzas, one of Martinus his lifeguard, their
General; a man courageous and active, hoping to get Africa thus, by expelling
the Emperors commanders. He arming his forces, being 8000. led them to
Carthage, expecting instantly to take the City. He sent for the Vandals who
escaped from Lesbos, and others who w^nt not with Belisarius, being either
concealed, or neglected by the Officers. In all they were 1000 men, who went
readily to Stotzas Camp, and a multitude of slaves came also, Stotzas being
near, sent to Carthage to yield without further hurt. But Theodorus and the
rest professed to guard the City for the Emperor, and required them to forbear
force; sending to them Josephius, who had been of the Emperors guard, and now
was one of Belisarius retinue, and lately sent to Carthage about business: whom
Stotzas put to death for his message, and fell to the siege. And the Citizens
afraid, were thinking to yield upon composition. When Belisarius with 100 of
his Lanciers and Targetiers, and Solomon with one ship arrived at Carthage
toward the evening: the besiegers expecting the rendering the City on the next
day, and with that hope lying still that night; and when it was day, hearing of
Belisarius arrival, shamefully rose, and ran away. Belisarius got together 2000
of the Army, and with fair words and money, exhorting thm to a good affection to
the Emperor, he pursued the flyers, and overtook them at Membresa, about 43
miles from Carthage. Here they both encamped, and prepared to fight; Belisarius
by the river of Bagradas; the other upon a high ragged ground: Neither would
enter the City, being unwalled. The next day they drew out to fight, the
mutiners trusting in their numbers, whom Belisarius his men despised, for
foolish fellows, undisciplined.

And to imprint this the more firmly, Belisarius spoke thus unto them. Fellow
soldiers! This happens to the Emperor against our hopes and wishes, to come to
a battle with our kinsmen and companions, whom we cannot conquer without grief.
But our comfort is, that we began not; we only defend our selves. He who by his
treasons renounces his kindred, is not killed by his friends, but in the
quality of an enemy is punished for his injury done them. These men have
proclaimed themselves enemies, Barbarians, any thing, by their spoiling Africa,
and killing both natives, and many Roman soldiers, for no offense, but their
good affection to the State. For this we come to chastise them, now enemies,
though some time friends. No men are friends or enemies by nature; but in their
actions are either united in a joint assistance by a similitude of manners and
opinions, or disunited by a dissimilitude. And as they are unjust men and
enemies, we are to fight with them: So are they to be despised, being a
multitude not assembled by Law, but upon wrong: And such never fight valiantly:
valor not vouchsafing to keep company with outlaws, and men unjust: neither
will they keep their orders, nor obey the directions of their new General, who
wanting power to be confident, must necessarily be contemned by them For
rebellion is naturally hated, never honored; and being timorous it self,
cannot govern the subject, and keep him in awe. So that the enemy wanting both
valor and government, their defeat will be easy; and you must march against
them with contempt, not estimating the power of a battle by numbers, but by
order and valor.

Stotzas also used this exhortation. You have with me, shaken off the Roman
servitude; and grudg not now to die for the liberty gotten by your valor. It
is not so grievous to grow old and die in slavery, as after freedom to return
to it again; the interim of ease making the calamity taste more sour. You may
consider therefore, how in the overthrow of the Vandals, you had your part in
the toil, and others now possess the spoils; and how being soldiers, you are
engaged to a life of hazarding, either for the Emperor, if you serve him
again, or for your selves, if you keep your liberty. And the better of these
two you may now choose, by resolving in this action to fight, without fainting.
Consider also that you have taken arms, and if you now be subdued, you will not
find the Romans gentle masters, but shall suffer extremities, with the addition
of being justly ruined: So you see our death will be honorable if we die, and
if we be victorious, our life will be free and happy; but bitter, if we be
beaten, when our only hope must be in our enemies mercy. And in the battle the
enemy has much the disadvantage in numbers, and has no great mind to charge
us, wishing, it seems, their part in our liberty.

Thus spoke Stotzas, and the Armies came to the encounter. But a strong wind
blew in the mutiners faces, who fearing the disadvantage of fighing, where the
wind would carry the enemies arrows violently on them, and abate the force of
theirs; they wheeled about, thinking the enemy, not to have their backs open,
would turn about too; and so have the wind in their faces. But Belisarius
seeing them open their ranks, and straggle disorderly, bad begin the fight,
which Stotzas men not looking for, fell into confusion, and ran away into
Numidia, where they rallied again. Belisarius followed no execution, thinking
it enough with so small an Army to beat the enemy, and send him going.

To the soldiers lie gave the enemies camp to pillage, who found not a man in
it, but much wealth, and many Vandal women, for whose sake this war was. Then,
Belisarius marched back to Carthage, where hearing that his Army in Sicily
mutinied too, and would undo all, if himself in person did not prevent; he
took order for Africa, and committing Carthage to Ildiger and Theodorus, he
went into Sicily.

The Commanders in Numidia, hearing of Stotzas being there, and gathering head,
prepared to fight with him. Marcellus and Cyrillus commanded the Confederates,
Barbatus the horse, and Terentius and Sarapis the foot; Marcellus commanded in
chief, being Governor of Numidia. Who hearing of Stotzas being, with a few at
Gazophyli, a Town two days journey from Constantina; marched with speed to
prevent the coming of the other mutiners. The Armies being near, and the fight
ready to begin, Stotzas came alone into the midst, and spoke thus to the enemy.
Fellow soldiers! It is unjust in you to take arms against your kinsmen and
companions, who have undertaken this war with the Emperor, being grieved to
see your miseries and wrongs. Do you not remember how long your pay has been
due, and still is detained from you? how the spoils of the enemy, your prizes
appointed by the law of arms, are taken from you? The fruits of your victory
others must riot upon, while you follow as their servants If I offend you, use
your anger against this body presently; for I hate to fly to others for refuge.
If you have no exception to me, come and use your arms for your selves.

The soldiers embraced this motion of Stotzas, and affectionately saluted him;
and their Commanders seeing it, retired into a Church in Gazophyli. Stotzas
joined the Armies against them, gave them his faith for their coming out, and
then killed them all.

CHAP. XII.
THe Emperor hearing these things, sent Germanus his brothers son, a
Patrician, accompanied with Symmachus, as Prefect of the Camp, to manage the
expense of the Army, An. Dom. 537. Just. 11.
and Domnicus, to be Commanders of the foot, upon the decease of John his
predecessor. Germanus being landed at Carthage, mustered the forces, and by the
Check Roll of the soldiers names, he found a third part of them to be in
Carthage and other Cities, and the rest joined with the Rebels. Wherefore he
would begin no fight, but took care of the Army; and finding the soldiers in
Carthage to be kinsmen and comrades of the enemies; he courted them: and said
the Emperor had sent him expressly into Africa to vindicate the soldiers, and
to chastise such as had wronged them. Which the mutiners hearing, came in by
few at a time; whom Germanus received courteously, gave them his faith, and
held them in good account, paying them their full dues for the time they had
been in rebellion. The report whereof drew them in troops from the enemy. And
then Germanus hoping to match the Rebels in numbers, prepared for a battle.

Stotzas also perceiving the mischief, and fearing more defection of his men,
made haste to try his fortune. He had some hope too, if he could get near the
soldiers in Carthage, to get them to run away to him. And with this hope he
chiefly confirmed his Army, and speedily marched to Carthage, and encamped near
the sea, about four miles from the City.

Germanus armed and put in order his soldiers, and having heard what hopes
Stotzas had, he spoke thus. Fellow soldiers! you have no just complaint against
the Emperors usage of you: Who in Constantinople took you to him newly come
out of the Country with a knap-sack, and one poor coat; and has now made you
so great, that the Roman State is committed to you. But how he has been
scorned by you, and suffered the greatest extremities, you cannot be ignorant.
Whereof the remembrance indeed he would have you retain, but the prosecution he
clearly remits, expecting this only satisfaction from you, to be ashamed of
what you have done, and thereupon to learn a new lesson of fidelity, and to
repair your former ingratitude. The timely repentance of erring men obtains
their pardon; and a seasonable service done, may take the name of ungrateful
men from you. Nay if at this time you appear well affected to the Emperor,
know this, that no memory will remain of what is past, The actions of men have
their names from the conclusion: and errors done, no ages can undo; but being
repaired by better deeds, they get a handsome silence, and commonly are
forgotten. If now you neglect your duties against these rogues; your many
battles hereafter for the Romans, and victories of our enemies, will not by the
Emperor be thought a recompense. The bravest apology is, to get honor in the
very things men have erred in. Thus you are to think concerning the Emperor.
And I, who never wronged you, but to my power have showed my affection to you,
entreat this only of you in this danger, That no man will march against the
enemy contrary to his mind; but if he desire to join with their Army, to pass
over to them immediately; doing us this only favor, not to abuse us secretly,
but in an open way: Which is the reason I move this here between the Armies,
and not in Carthage; not to hinder any that will run away; but to leave it in
every man's power, to show his affection to the State.

Every man upon this speech, bustled to show himself to his General, and to
swear the good affection he had to the Emperor. And some days they were thus
encamped against each other. At length the mutiners seeing none come to them,
whom Stotzas told them of, being afraid, as failing in their hope, they
disbanded, and went into Numidia, where were their wives and booty. Germanus
shortly after, with his Army well prepared, and with store of wagons for it,
came thither also; and overtaking the enemy at a Town called Scalae Veteres, he
prepared to fight, setting the wagons in front, and the foot by them
(commanded by Domnicus) to secureing their backs. The best horsemen, and such
as came from Constantinople, himself had at the left hand of the foot. The rest
he set at the right wing in three Troops, commanded by Ildiger, and Theodorus
the Cappadocian; and the biggest by John the brother of Pappus: the fourth by
himself. The Mutiners stood opposite to them, not in much order, but scattered
like Barbarians. Not far behind came many thousand Moors, led by Jabdas and
Orthaeas, not all true to Stotzas; many having sent to Germanus, and promised
in the fight to turn against the enemy. Germanus could not much trust them,
being a people so false to all men. And they joined not with the mutiners, but
kept aloof behind, waiting the event, and with the conquerours to pursue the
vanquished. Stotzas approaching the enemy, and seeing the Generals Ensign,
called to his men, and marched toward him. But the Herulian mutiners stopped him,
saying, that the powers of Germanus they knew not; but they knew that the enemy
in the right wing would not stand. So that charging them, and they running
away, they are likely to put the enemies whole Army in disorder; whereas if
Germanus beat them, all will be lost. Stotzas approving the advice, left the
rest to fight with Germanus, and himself with his best men, gave on upon John,
and his troops, who not abiding them, ran away in confusion. The mutiners took
their Ensigns, and pursued them. Some turned upon the foot, who began to
disband; When Germanus drawing his sword, and calling upon his troop to do the
like, with much ado he routed the enemy on his side; and gallopt up to
Stotzas, with the troops of Ildiger and Theodorus. And all was so mingled, that
the mutiners chasing some of their enemies, fell among others, and were slain.
The confusion grew great, and Germanus his troops coming on nearer behind them,
they were afraid, and thought no more of fighting. Both sides using the same
language, and arms, and differing not in shape, habit, nor any thing, could not
be distinguished; till Germanus directed the Emperors Army to ask any they
took, what he was; if he said he was a soldier of Germanus, to bid him give the
watchword, which if he could not, to kill him. Germanus had his horse killed
in the fight, and himself being down and in danger, his lifeguard rescued and
remounted him. Stotzas in the tumult with some few escaped; and Germanus marched
against the enemies camp; where the mutiners who had the guard of the Trenches,
opposed him; and there was a stiff fight, the mutiners being very near beating
them back. But some sent by Germanus to attempt the camp in another place, got
into the entrenchment with ease, which the mutiners seeing, ran away; and
Germanus with the Army, entered the camp. The soldiers fell to pillage, neither
thinking of the enemy, nor harkening to their Generals directions; Who fearing
the enemy might rally, and charge them, stood in the camp gate, crying and
complaining for discipline to men that heard him not. The Moors followed the
execution upon the mutiners, and pillaged the camp with the Army. Stotzas at
first trusting to the Moors, rode up to them, to renew the fight. But finding
what they were doing, he made a shift to escape with 100 men. Many made head
with him, and tried to fight again, but being repulsed, they all submitted to
Germanus; only Stotzas, with a few Vandals, retired into Mauritania, and there
marrying a daughter of one of their Princes, remained. And so ended this mutiny.

CHAP. XIII.
BUt Maximinus, a Lancier of Theodorus the Cappadorian, had gotten many of
those mutiners with a design to usurp, and drew still more, revealing his
intent, among others, to one Asclepiades, a Palestinian, a great favorite of
Theodorus; who discovered the plot to Theodorus, and he to Germanus. Germanus
would not stir new business in a state unsettled, but thought to gain the man
by fair usage, rather then to punish him. The lifeguard of any great Roman
officer use at their admittance, to swear fidelity to him and the Emperor: He
sent therefore for Maximinus, and extolling his valor, took him for one of his
own guard, and he, glad of the honor, and means hereby to facilitate his
design, took the Oath, but neglected the same, and persisted more then ever in
his Treason. The City keeping a public festival, many of Maximinus mutiners
came at dinner time to the Palace, as Germanus was feasting his friends, with
Maximinus behind him. One whispered Germanus, that many soldiers stood
tumultuously at the Court gate, complaining of their pay for a long time
unsatisfied. Germanus commanded some of the trustiest of his lifeguard to make
sure of Maximinus, without letting him perceive any thing. Those mutiners with
threatenings and tumult, ran to the Circus; and such other conspirators as knew
their intent, ran thither by one and one. If they had been all assembled, it
had been hard to suppress them: But most of them being yet behind, Germanus
sent instantly such as affected the Emperor and himself, and they came to a
fight with the mutiners, who expected not such a thing from the soldiers; but
missing Maximinus to conduct them, and wanting the numbers they looked for, gave
it over, and disorderly ran away; many of them were killed, and many taken, and
brought to Germanus. Such as came not to the Circus, showed as if they had not
been in the conspiracy; and Germanus would not make any search after them. He
examined if Maximinus had, since his Oath, proceeded in his Treason; and being
convicted to have been more forward in it since his being of the lifeguard, he
caused him to be crucified under the walls of Carthage: And so absolutely
dispersed the mutiny.

CHAP. XIV.
BUt the Emperor called home Germanus, with Domnicus, and Symmachus, and again
made Solomon Governor of Africa, being now in the thirteenth year of his
reign; An D^m. 539 Just. 13.
giving him another Army, and Commanders in it, Rufinus, and Leontius the son
of Zannas, the son of Pharesmanes and John the son of Sisiniolus; Martinus and
Valerianus being formerly sent for to Constantinople. Solomon being come to
Carthage, and free from the mutiny, governed Africa moderately, and kept it
safe, disciplining the Army, and sending the suspicious men to Constantinople,
and to Belisarius, supplying their rooms with new, and banishing the remains of
the Vandals, and all their women. He compassed the Cities with walls, and
observing the Laws exactly, preserved the State; that Africa in his Government
was rich and happy.

Things being settled, he made war upon Jabdas, and the Moors of Aurasium: and
sent out before with forces, Gontharis, one of his lifeguard, a good soldier;
who encamped by Bagais, a desert Town upon the River of Abigas; and there he
was overthrown in a fight by the enemy, and retiring to his camp, was straightly
besieged. Solomon afterward encamped with the whole Army, seven miles and a
half from Gontharis entrenchment; and hearing how he had sped, he sent him part
of his Army, and bad him be of good courage and fight again. The River Abigas
comes from Aurasium, and being in the plain below, waters the land as the
Inhabitants will, by drawing the stream to their uses. For it enters through
several breaches under ground into the plain, where it rises again, gathering a
stream: And the Inhabitants, by damming up the breaches, or opening them, make
what use they please of the waters. The Moors then opened the breaches, and let
in all the River about the Romans camp, which made a marish not to be past for
deepness. The Romans were distracted at it; but Solomon bearing thereof, marched
thither; whom the Barbarians fearing, retired, and in Babos^s, at the foot of
the mountain encamped. Solomon came thither too, and in fight beat them, and
made them run away. The Moors thought it disadvantageous to have fights upon
equal terms, thus being not able to stand them; but trusting to the fastnesses
of Aurasium, and hoping that the Romans would be weary of the toil, as
formerly, and be gone, many of them went away into Mauritani^ and to the
Barbarians to the southward of mount Aurasium. But Jabdas with 20000 Moors,
went to Zerbule, a Castle built by him in Aurasium, and there lay still.
Solomon, not to spend time in besieging; and hearing how the Country of
Tamugadas had store of ripe wheat, he conducted his Army thither, took the
spoil, and burnt the rest, and then returned to Zerbule. In the mean time
Jabdas leaving a sufficient guard for the Castle was gone up to the top of
Aurasium, fearing to be blockt up in the Castle, and reduced to wants. And at
Tumaz, a place rising with cliffs round about, and fenced with broken rocks, he
rested. The Romans three days assaulted Zerbule, and the walls being low, shot
many Moors, and chanced to kill all their Commanders. The third day at night,
the Romans, hearing nothing of those Commanders death, consulted to rise;
Solomon thinking it best to go against Jabdas and the main body of the Moors,
who being subdued, Zorbule would quickly yield. But the Barbarians (their
Leaders being slain) would hold no longer, but silently ran away, and abandoned
the Castle, undiscovered by the enemy. The Romans at day break were trusting
baggage; but wondered to see no enemy upon the wall. And doubting what it should
mean, and compassing the Castle, they find the gate open, where the Moors ran
way. They entered and took the booty, but would not pursue the enemy, being men
apparelled lightly and skillful in all the passages. Having sacked the Castle,
and left a Garrison in it, they went on, all afoot. And at Tumaz, where the
enemy was, they encamped in a fastness, having water and other necessaries very
scarcely. A long time was spent, and the Moors sallied not, so that being more
besieged then the enemy, they fretted, chiefly for the want of water, Here the
Latin Translation.
which Solomon put a guard upon, giving out but a cup full to a man every day.
But seeing them impatient, and unable to endure longer this hard diet, he
resolved to stay no longer, but to draw the men to fight near this Castle, and
thus exhorted his men.

CHAP. XV.
HAving by Gods favor beaten the Moors out of Zerbule, a thing seeming
difficult, and uncredible to such as have not seen our former actions; we must
not now neglect the gift of God, but with our accustomed valor, boldly
undergo this hazard, and from our former good fortune presage a future
victory. And the advantages of all actions standing in the due use of
occasions; if any man now slothfully neglect the offer of fortune, let him not
accuse her, but himself, being abandoned through his own default. You see the
Moors weakness, and this Castle wherein they shelter themselves, destitute of
provisions. And you must with a patient siege expect the enemies surrender, or
by neglecting that, neglect with danger, a victory ready for us. How much
better, and less dangerous is it to try your fortune against men, not likely to
fight with you, being wasted with famine? Confider these things seriously and
obey directions.

Solomon spoke thus, and then studying how, and where to assault (all being
round about a rock) fortune showed him his way. One Geson, a Lieutenant of
foot, (whom the Romans call Optio,) either in sport, or earnest, or by divine
impulsion mounted alone, and presently other soldiers admiring his courage
followed him. Three Moors ran to oppose him, and the place being narrow, came
single. The first by chance falling, the Roman used his advantage, and killed
him. The soldier who followed him seeing it, ran up with a shout; and the
whole Army neither expecting leader, nor sound of trumpet, nor observing order,
but crying and encouraging one another, gave on: where Rufinus, and Leontius,
the son of Zan^as, did so bravely upon the enemy, that terrified at it, and
seeing their guards cut in pieces, they all ran away, and the most overtaken in
narrow passages were slain.

Jabdas, though woudned by a dart in his thigh, escaped and fled into
Mauritania. The Romans pillaged the enemies camp, and Solomon caused them to
stay in Aurasium, and repair the Castle, and left a garrison to hinder the
Moors recourse thither in their rebellions. In Aurasium is an ancient Tower,
standing upon a rock called Geminians Rock, safe, and difficult of access.
Here Jabdas had lately put his wealth, with his women; and never thinking that
an enemy could get thither, or force the Tower, he left one old Moore only to
take charge of his treasure. But the Romans through all the difficulties got
thither, and one of the soldiers as in sport, began to climb up to the Tower;
whom the old man and the women laughed at for a mad man. But he scrambled up
with his hands and feet, and being got up drew his sword, and cut off the old
man's head. The rest of the soldiers boldly and with alacrity helped one another
up, took the women and a great treasure, with which Solomon re-edified the
walls of many cities in Africa. The Moors being beaten out of Numidia, fled
into Zebe, a Country of Mauritania beyond mount Aurasium: whose metropolis is
Sitiphis, tributary to the Empire. Caesarea is head of the other Mauritania,
tributary likewise, except the City it self, exempted by Belisarius for a
landing place for Romans; there being no good passage to it by land. So in Zebe
the Moors sat down, whereby the Affricans continued in obedience, and a settled
peace, without thought of hostility, and were very happy under Solomon, a
prudent and moderate Governor.

CHAP. XVI.
IN the fourth year after, all this prosperity changed into miseries. It was
Justinians fourteenth year of his reign, An. Dom. 540. Just. 14.
when Cyrus and Sergius the sons of Baccus, Solomon's brother, were sent to
govern in Africa; the elder Pentapolis, and the younger Tripolis. To these the
Leucathian Moors came with an Army as far as Leptis Magna, giving out it was
to give them presents, and to establish a peace. Sergius by the persuasions of
Pudentius the Tripolitan (who made the first war against the Vandals for the
Emperor) received into the City 70. Moors, whom be invited courteously to a
feast, promising to grant their demands, and the rest he willed to stay in the
suburbs. They say they came with a treacherous intent to kill Sergius; and that
one of them in speech with him expostulated the Romans unjust spoiling their
corns and Towns, and other wrongs; which Sergius slighting, and rising from his
seat, and going away; one of them caught him by the mantle, and would have
staid him, Hereupon the rest rose, and tumultuously stood about Sergius: and
one of his Lifeguard drew his sword, and killed the Moore that held him by the
mantle: whereupon all being in an uproar, the Lifeguard of Sergius killed all
the Moors, save one; who seeing his fellows slain, Here again the Greek
begins.
stole out of the room, and got to his countrymen, telling them what happened:
who ran to their camp, and with the rest came in Arms against the Romans. Near
Leptis Magna Sergius and Pudentius, with their whole forces, met them. The
fight came presently to handy blows, and the Romans were victorious and flew
many, sacked their camp, and got a great booty, and abundance of women and
children. Afterward Pudentius was slain by his own rash adventuring, and
Sergius retired with the Army into Leptis Magna, it being grown dark. Shortly
after the L^ucathians came with a greater preparation against the Romans;
Sergius went to Solomon his Uncle, to desire that he would come back against
these with a great Army; where he found Cyrus his brother. The Moors the while
over ran Bizacium, and sacked most of the towns. Antalas also formerly ever
faithful to the Romans and therefore having the Government of the Moors in
Bizacium, was now turned enemy to Solomon, who had taken from him those
allowances the Emperor had assigned him, and killed his brother, for making a
commotion in Beracium. So he willingly joined in a league with these
Barbarians, and led them to Carthage against Solomon: who advertized thereof,
marched toward them; and finding them at Tebeste, a City six days journey from
Carthage, he encamped his Army, together with Cyrus, and Sergius, and Solomon
the younger, all sons of Bacchus. He sent to the chiefes of the Leucathians
(being afraid of their multitude) complaining of their taking arms, and
invading, being yet in league with the Romans; demanding a ratification of the
peace; and promising to take the strongest oaths, to abolish the memory of
what they had done. They laugh at these overtures, and said; That doubtless
they would swear the Christians oath, which they call, the Gospels: which
Sergius having sworn, and then killed those who trusted him; they meant now to
try by a battle, what power those oracles have against men that forswear them;
that so being confident in them, they may come to a treaty.

Solomon, hearing this, prepared to fight; and the next day, meeting some
enemies driving a great prey, he defeated them, and took it from them. The
soldiers murmured because he kept it to himself, not giving them the spoils
of War: But he bad them stay till the War was ended, and then every man should
have his share according to his desert. The Barbarians again urged to give
battle. But of the Romans, some were absent, others went on with no heart: yet
at first the fight was equal; afterward, the Moors surmounting much in
numbers, the Romans ran away. Solomon with his company endured their shot a
while, then being over pressed, fled; and at a torrent his horse stumbling he
fell. His Lifeguard set him up again, but being in pain not able to hold his
bridle, the Barbarians overtook and killed him, and many of his guard, Solomon
being dead thus the Emperor gave the Government of Africa to Sergius, who
proved the destruction of the Province. All were discontented; the commander at
his youth, indiscretion, and insolence, and the impertinent affronts he did
them, wherein he employed his power, wealth, and the authority of his place;
The soldiers, because he was a coward; And the provincials, for all this, and
moreover for his unsatiable love of their wives and Estates.

Above all, John, the son of Sisinniolus, being an able soldier, and of great
reputation, was offended with his greatness, and extreme ingratitude to
himself. So that neither he nor a man among them would draw their swords
against the enemy. Almost all the Moors followed Antalas, who had sent for
Stotzas out of Mauritania. And Antalas then wrote this letter to the Emperor.
That I am the servant of your Empire I deny not; But the Moors have been forced
to take arms upon the base injuries done by Solomon, not to rise up in arms
against you, but to resist an enemy; especially I from whom he was not
contented only to take away my allowances, designed by Belisarius, and by you
given me, but he has killed my brother guiltless; we have now righted our
selves upon him that wronged us; and if you will have the Moors obsequious
servants of your Empire, as formerly, command Sergius the Nephew of Solomon to
leave Africa, and send some other General: you cannot want men far worthier
then Sergius. So long as he commands your Army, there can be no peace between
the Romans and Moors. The Emperor notwithstanding this letter, and though he
knew the General hatred of Sergius; yet in respect of Solomon's worth, and
manner of death, he would not remove him.

CHAP. XVII.
THe brother of Sergius, young Solomon, was thought to have perished with his
Uncle, and was not looked after, so much as by his brother. But he was taken
prisoner by the Moors; and being asked who he was; he said he was a Vandal, and
slave to Solomon, and that he had a friend at Laribum, a Town thereabout, named
Pegasus, a Physician, who would pay his ransom. The Moors under the Town-walls
called for Pegasus, and showing him Solomon, asked if he would redeem him; 38 l.
15 ^.
and for 50 gold staters they delivered him to him. Being within, he slouted
the Moors for being cosened by a boy; and told them how he was the brothers son
of Solomon. The Moors angry for having so easily let go such a pawn, besieged
Laribum to take Solomon. The besieged were afraid, wanting provisions, and
offered the Moors money to raise their siege: which they accepted, finding they
should not force the Town, being not used to assaults; and not knowing the
wants within: So the Leucathians went home; But Antalas made head again in
Byzacium; having besides his Moors, Stotzas with some few Romans, and Vandals.
John the son of Sisinniolus, at the Africans opportunity, raised Forces and
went against them; and he appointed Himerius the Thracian, Commander of the
forces in Byzacium, to draw out his troops, and to join with him at Menephesis
in Byzacium. But heating the enemy to be there encamped, he wrote of it to
Himerius, and to join with him in another place, that they might with joint
forces encounter the enemy. The bearers of the Letters going another way, met
not Himerius; who with his troops fell into the enemies hands; only Severianus
a young man, the son of Asiaticus a Phaenician, with his troop of horse, being
50. fought with the enemy, and held out, till pressed with multitude, they ran
to a Castle upon a hill, which was of no strength, and there yielded upon
composition to the enemy, who killed him not, nor any of the soldiers, but they
took Himerius prisoner, and bestowed all the soldiers on Stotzas, upon their
promise to serve against the Romans. Himerius they threatened to kill if he
performed not his promise: which was to deliver to them the City of Adramettus;
and upon the protestation of his true meaning, they went thither with him,
being not far off. Him they sent before with some soldiers of Stotzas, dragging
after them Moors bound: Themselves followed. They directed Himerius to tell the
guards that John was victorious, and would forthwith come with a multitude of
Moors his prisoners; and that the gates being open, he should get in with his
company. They did thus, and the Adramettians were deceived, and let them in,
not mistrusting one who commanded the whole forces in Byzacium. They that
entered with him, staid the guards from shutting the gates, and received all the
Moors into the City; which they sacked, and leaving a small Garrison, departed.
Some prisoners afterward escaped to Carthage, among whom was Himerius, and
Severianus; it being no hard matter to run from Moors Many staid willingly with
Stotzas.

Shortly after one Paul, a Priest, (such as oversee the sick) told some
principal men of Adramettus, that he would go to Carthage, and hoped to return
with an Army shortly, which he bad them be ready to receive in. They let him
down the wall by cords; and ^e finding at seaside a fishing Busse, persuaded
the owners with money, and sailed to Carthage. Where he acquainted Sergius with
the matter, and desired some forces to recover Adramettus, Sergius liked it
not, having not many soldiers in Carthage; He desired him to give him some few;
and getting but 80. he put them aboard a number of ships and boats, with many
Manners and Africans, wearing soldiers coats; and with this fleet sailed to
Adramettus; and being near it, sent word secretly to some chief Citizens, that
Germanus, the Emperors Nephew, was newly come to Carthage, and had sent a good
Army to the Adramettians, in the confidence of which, he bad them open one of
their gates. They did so, and Paul with his company got in, killed the enemy,
and recovered thus Adramettus. The report of Germanus spread as far as
Carthage: and the Moors, and Stotzas followers at first ran to the utmost
marches of Africa; but hearing the truth, it vexed them to be used thus by the
Adramettians, whom they had spared; so that every where they committed
cruelties upon the Africans, sparing no age; the Country became waste, the
Provincials that were left flying, some to the Citi^^, some into Sicily, and
other Islands, and the chief of them to Constantinople; among whom was Paul who
recovered Adramettus. The Moors in the mean time (none opposing) ransackt all
without control, and with them was Stotzas, grown powerful; and many Roman
soldiers followed him, some voluntaries, some taken prisoners at first, but now
staying willingly; John also, whom the Moors did somewhat respect, being in
disgrace with Sergius, lay still.

CHAP. XVIII.
IN the mean time the Emperor sent into Africa with some soldiers another
General, Areobindus, a Senator, and a gallant man, but no soldier. With him for
Prefect of the Camp, he sent Athanasius, lately come out of Italy, and some
Armenians commanded by Artabanes and John, the sons of John, of the race of the
Arsacides: These, with the Armenians with them, lately revolted from the
Persians to the Romans. With Areobindus was his sister, and his wife Projecta,
daughter to Vigilantia, the Emperors sister. Justinian did not call home
Sergius, but divided the Generalship, the Province, and the Cohorts between
Areobindus and him. And him he directed to make the war in Numidia, and
Areobindus in Byzacium; who arriving at Carthage, Sergius with his Army went
into Numidia. And Areobindus hearing that Antalas, and Stotzas were encamped at
Sicavenerea, three days journey from Carthage, sent John the son of Sisinniolus
against them, with the choice of his Army, and wrote to Sergius to join with
John, and in one body to encounter the enemy. Sergius slighted the direction,
and the business; so that John with a small power was forced to combat with
innumerable enemies. Between him and Stotzas was an everlasting hatred; Their
wish had been to kill one another, and so die. This bat^el being ready to join,
they both rode out against each other. John shot Stotzas in the groine on the
right side, who having his deaths wound, fell upon the place, but died not
instantly; His own men and the Moors set him against a tree ready to expire,
and then they furiously charged the Romans, and exceeding them so much in
numbers, easily routed them. They say, John then said, that he should die a
pleasant death, seeing his wish upon Stotzas accomplised: and then his horse
stumbling down a hill, threw him: and the enemy killed him striving to get up
again. A man great in reputation and valor Stotzas being told of it, said this
only word and died, that now he died with delight. John the Armenian was also
slain, having done very bravely. The Emperor advertised of the death of John,
and troubled for the great worth of the man, finding it also inconvenient to
have two Generals, recalled Sergius, and sent him with forces into Italy, and
committed Africa wholly to Areobindus. Two months after Sergius departure,
Gontharis attempted to usurp, being Commander of the Cohorts in Numidia, and
there residing. He dealt secretly with the Moors that they should invade
Carthage; and they suddenly with an Army levied out of Numidia and Byzacium,
marched thitherward; the Numidians led by Cutzinas and Jabdas, and the Byzacians
by Antalas: With them was John, who was made General in the room of Stotzas, by
the Roman mutiners. Areobindus informed hereof, sent for Gontharis and other
Captains to Carthage: Artabanes also came to him with his Armenians. Gontharis
being commanded by Areobindus to march in the van, and promising much
forwardness, sent to the enemies camp a Moor, his cook, to pretend himself a
runaway, but to Antalas privately to say, that Gontharis would share with him in
the dominion of Africa. The cook performed accordingly; and Antalas, though
glad at the motion, yet answered him, That men do not execute great matters by
cooks. Gontharis hearing this, sent to him Vlitheus, one of his guard, whom he
most trusted, to entreat him to come as near Carthage as he could, and
promising to kill Areobindus. And Vlitheus (without the knowledge of the rest
of the Moors) agrees that Antalas shall have the dominion of Byzacium, and half
Areobindus wealth, and 1500 Roman soldiers; and that Gontharis shall retain the
title of Emperor, Carthage, and the rest of Africa. Having negotiated this,
Gontharis returned to the camp; the Romans being quartered before the walls, to
guard the several gates of Carthage. The Barbarians made haste thither,
encamped at Decimum, and the next day marched forward. Some Romans fought with
them unlookt for, and killed many; whom Gontharis called in, rating them for
putting the State into evident danger by unadvised adventuring. In the mean
time Areobindus practiced also on that side with Cutzinas, who promised him in
the battle to turn against Antalas, and the Moors of Byzacium; thus the Moors
observe no faith to others, nor among themselves. Ariobindus revealed the plot
to Gontharis, who desirous to dash it, advised him not to trust Cutzinas
without his sons for hostages. But Areobindus and Cutzinas proceeded closely in
their design; and Gontharis secretly sending Vlitheus, acquainted Antalas with
the design; who neither charged Cutzinas, nor made show to have heard of his
Treason, nor yet revealed the plot between him and Gontharis. They both hated
one another, yet with these bad intents fought in company together, each
against his own friend.

CHAP. XIX.
BUt Gontharis his intent was to kill Areobindus secretly in the battle, that
he might not seem to intrude into the Empire; but rather that the soldiers,
thinking the treason to be acted by others, might constrain him to usurp the
dominion of Africa. To circumvent Areobindus, he counsels him to lead the whole
Army the next day by sunrising against the enemy, who was now come near to
Carthage. But Areobindus being backward and raw in such businesses, delayed,
and spent most of the day in fitting his arms about him, and other things for
the fight; which he thus put off till the next day. Gontharis suspected him
purposely to dally, as senting the plot; and resolved openly to murder him, and
so to make himself King of Africa. His plot was, to set open the gate whereof
he had the guard, and to hinder the shutting of it again by great stones put
between; and then to place armed men upon the battlements; himself standing in
the gate with his corselet on: This he invented, not for the Moors reception
into the City (who being false themselves, suspect all men else; and good
reason, that a faithless man should trust none, weighing others disposition by
his own.) So that he did not hope that the Moors would trust him, and come
within the walls; but that Areobindus being frighted, might run away to
Constantinople: and he lighted upon a right conceit, if a sudden storm had not
slaid Areobindus; who being informed of the plot, sent for Athanasius, and
other principal men. Artabanes, with two others, came to him, and advised him
not to shrink at this presumption of Gontharis, but instantly to sally, and
fall to work before further mischief: But Areobindas first sent Phredas, one of
his favorites, to Gontharis, to feel his resolution. Who brought him back word,
that Gontharis avowed the usurpation. Then he resolved to go out and fight with
him. Gontharis in the mean time accused Areobindus to the soldiers for a
coward, and that to detain their pay from them, his intent ^as to sail away out
at the Port of Mandracium with Athanasius, and to leave the soldiers to perish
by famine and the Moors. He therefore demanded, if it were their pleasure to
seize upon them both. His hope herein was, that either Areobindus would run
away at the tumult, or be taken and killed by the soldiers; and himself
undertook to satisfy their arrears. They embraced the counsel: And Areobindus,
with Artabanes, and their troops coming up to them, there was a fight at the
battleme^ts, and the gate where Gontharis stood. The soldiers well affected to
the Emperor, making head from several quarters, (the most part continuing
^ound, and not corrupted by Gontharis) had absolutely routed the mutiners* but
Areobindus astonished to see men killed (a sight he was not used to) cowardly
ran away. Within the walls of Carthage, by the seaside, is a Church of Monks,
men who precisely exercise duties to God. This Church Solomon lately had
repaired, walled, and made a strong Castle of it: And hither Areobindus fled,
and sent for his wife and sister. Artabanes retired also, and the rest; and
Gontharis having an absolute victory, seized upon the Palace with his soldiers,
and put guards upon the City gates, and the Haven. He sent first for
Athanasius; who soothed him, and seemed to like the action wondrous well: Then
he sent the Bishop of the City, to will Areobindus to come to the Palace upon
assurances of safety; threatening, if he refused, to pull him out, and kill him.
The Bishop, named Reparatus, went, and by Gontharis his direction offered to
swear that he should have no hurt, and told him what he threatened upon his
refusal. Areobindus was afraid, and promised, if the Bishop at the celebration
of the holy Baptism would in Gontharis his name by oath assure his security,
that he would go with him. This the Bishop did, and Areobindus without more
scruple went with him, having on a garment called in Latin Casula) not sit for
a General, nor a common soldier, but for a slave rather. At the Palace he took
the Bible from the Bishop; and being brought to Gontharis, he fell upon his
face, and lay so a long time, holding out his supplication, and the Bible, and
his little son, newly made partaker of the holy Baptism, at which the Bishop
had sworn his safety. Gontharis raised him with much ado; he conjuring him by
all that is holy, to tell him if his life were safe. Gontharis bad him be of
courage; for the next day he should go from Carthage safe, with his wife and
goods. Then he dismissed the Bishop, and invited Areobindus and Athanasius to
sup with him in the Palace. At supper he honored Areobindus, placing him on
his right hand upon the couch. After supper he would not let him go, forcing
him to lie in a Chamber alone whither he sent Vlitheus and some others, who
after his much crying and wailing, and words to move pity, killed him.
Athanasius they spared, despising his age. The next day Gontharis sent
Areobindus his head to Antalas, but kept his goods. and the 1500 soldiers. At
which Antalas chased; and it troubled him to see how Gontharis had forswore
himself to Areobindus his friend, so that he could not think he should ever
keep faith to himself, or any. After much debate, he resolved to submit to the
Emperor, and so marched away. He then sent to Marcentius, Commander of the
Horse in Byzacium (who was fled into an Island) acquainted him with the
business, and upon assurances got him to come to him. So Marcentius was with
Antalas; and the soldiers of Byzacium, true to the Emperor, guarded
Adramettus. The mutiners of Stotzas about 1000 men, were led by John to
Gontharis, who gladly received them. Of them were 500 Romans, and 80. Hunnes;
the rest were Vandals.

Artabanes, upon assurances came to the Palace with his Armenians, professing
his service to the usurper. But closely he plotted his death, consulting with
Gregorius, his Nephew, and Artasiris, one of his guard. Gregorius, to egg him
on, told him, That he had now the means to gain the glory of Belisarius, nay to
exceed it. He, with a gallant Army, a huge treasure, with many Commanders and
Counselors; with a Fleet of ships (the like whereof this age had not heard of)
with store of horse and arms, and with a preparation fitting the Roman Empire,
had recovered Africa, All which was now so cast away, as if none of it had ever
been; and that the Romans from Belisarius his victory were fallen to be abused
in their persons, and robbed of their goods. But that it was only in his
spirit, wit, and sword now, to recover all this to the Emperor. He bad him
consider, how he was of the race of the Arsacides, and think how men nobly born
must be every where valiant. Being a youth, he slew Acacius, Governor of
Armenia, and Sittas the General; and thereby was made known to King Chosroes,
and made war for him against the Romans: that being such a person, he ought not
now to abandon the Roman Empire thus to a drunken dog, but to make it appear,
that his former actions proceeded from true nobleness and valor: that himself,
and Artasiris would serve his commands therein. Thus Gregorius incensed
Artabanes against the Tyrant.

CHAP. XX.
WHo in the mean time removed the wife and sister of Areobindus from the
Castle, to a house where they had competent provisions, and had no dishonor
honor nor constraint used to them, save only that Projecta was made to write
to the Emperor her Uncle; That Gontharis used her with all due respect, and
was clear of her husbands murder, committed by Vlitheus without his allowance,
Gontharis did this upon the advice of Pasiphilus, a chief mutiner in Byzacium,
and his principal assistant in this usurpation; who alleged, that by thus
doing, the Emperor might give him the Lady to wife, which would bring him much
wealth. Gontharis also commanded Artabanes to lead the Army against Antalas,
and the Moors of Byzacium: Cutzinas was fallen from Antalas, and joined with
Gontharis, and had given him his mother and children for hostages. Artabanes
marched directly against Antalas, with John Captain of Stotzas mutiners: and
Vlitheus with the Moors under Cutzinas. They past by Adramettus, whereabout
they found the enemy, and encamped a little distant. The next day John and
Vlitheus staid with part of the Army; and Artabanes and Cutzinas with the rest
drew out against the enemy. But Antalas and his Moors stood them not, but ran
away; And Artabanes with a willing cowardice turned about his ensign suddenly,
and rode back: whom Vlitheus would have killed at his coming; but he excused it
upon his fear, lest Marcentius with aids from Adramettus might distress them,
and that it were ^it that Gontharis should oppose the enemy with his whole
Army. Artabanes hereupon thought first to join with the Emperors Army at
Adramettus: but upon better advise he resolved to kill Gontharis, and so rid
the Emperor and Africa from trouble. Returning therefore to Carthage, he told
the Tyrant the necessity of a greater Army; who after consulting with
Pasiphilus, armed the whole forces, and purposed to lead them himself, leaving
a garrison in Carthage. And every day he killed some upon causeless
jealousies. He instructed Pasiphilus (to whom he left the guard of Carthage) to
murder all the Greeks; and having set all in order, he thought good to feast
his friends, being the next day to depart. His feast was in a room where three
couches stood ever ready: upon the uppermost himself sat, with Athanasius, and
Artabanes, and some of Gontharis favorites, and Peter a Thracian, formerly of
the guard to Solomon. At both the other couches were the best men of the
Vandals: John, the captain of Stotzas mutiners, was feasted by Pasiphilus, and
the rest severally by Gontharis friends: Artabanes when he was invited,
resolved it for a sit opportunity to kill the Tyrant, and to execute his
design. He acquainted Gregorius and Artasiris therewith, and three other of
his guard; these he directed to get in with their swords (the fashion being,
while the Commanders feast, for their guard to stand behind them) and when they
see their time, to fall to work suddenly, and Artasiris to begin. Gregorius he
instructed to bring many of their valiantest Armenians to the Palace only with
swords (it not being lawful to attend their Commanders in a City with other
weapons,) and leaving them in the utter Court, to go in with the guard. And
they to pretend themselves jealous, lest Gontharis had invited Artabanes for no
good, and to desire to stand among Gontharis guards to guard their Captain. And
then in sport, to eatch the others shields, and to toss them, and play with
them, and when they heard the cry within, to put on the shields and run in.
This direction of Artabanes Gregorius put in execution, and Artasiris had this
devise also. He cut arrows in two, and the pieces he thrust in round about his
left arm to his elbow: tying them with whip-cord, and covering all with the
sleeve of his coat; that he might take any blow made at him upon his arm, and
so cause it to glaunce down the wood of the arrows from off the body. To
Artabanes also he spoke thus I will undertake this without the least fear, and
I hope with this sword to pierce Gontharis. The success I know not, whither
God offended with the Tyrant will assist me, or, to punish my sins, cross me.
If you see him not mortally wounded, kill me with this sword instantly; lest by
torture I should discover you, and so basely perish my self, and be forced to
ruin you too. Having thus said, he went with Gregorius and one of the guard,
and stood behind Artabanes. The rest staid with the guards without, and did as
they were directed. Artasiris at the beginning of the feast would have done it,
and had his hand upon his cimiter. But Gregorius stopped him, saying in the
Armenian tongue; that Gontharis was yet himself, not having drunk much wine. 'O
the brave spirit in me you suppress now! quoth Artasiris. The drink
proceeding, and Gontharis being well drencht, and grown bountiful, gave of his
meats to the guard, which they went out to eat, leaving Vlitheus, and two other
of the guard by Gontharis. Artasiris went out for company; and having a conceit
that something might hinder the drawing his Cimiter, being without, he slipped
off his scabbard; and with his sword naked under his mantle, he stepped suddenly
to Gontharis, as to say something in private. Artabanes seeing him, his heart
boiled, and falling into a deep musing, he shaked his head, and changed his
color, seeming wrapped with the greatness of the action. Peter marked it, and
perceived the business: but loving the Emperor, he liked it well, and so made
no discovery.

Artasiris being come near to Gontharis, one of the waiters thrust him off, and
perceiving his naked sword, cried out, what is this my friends? Gontharis
crossing his hand over his own right shoulder, turned about to look at him. In
the doing whereof Artasiris struck him with his sword, and cut off part of his
head, and his fingers. Peter cried out to Artasiris to kill the wickedest of
all men. Artabanes seeing the Tyrant down, and sitting next him, with a broad
knife he had hanging at his side, thrust him into the left side up to the haft,
and there left it: Gontharis strove to rise; but fell, the wound being mortal.
Vlitheus made a blow to have cleft Artasiris head: but he held up his left arm,
and had the benefit of his own wit at his most need: For the sword losing the
vigor upon those arrows about his arm, he had no hurt, but he killed Vlitheus
Peter and Artabanes took up the swords of Gontharis and Vlitheus, and killed
the other two of the guard. The Armenians who stood without with the guards,
hearing the cry and tumult, snatched up the shields according to their plot,
and ran to the other couches, where they slew the Vandals, and Gontharis
favorites. Artabanes charged Athanasius openly, to look to the treasures of the
Palace, all being there Which Areobindus left. The guards without hearing of
the Tyrants death, joined presently with the Armenians, having been most of
Areobindus retinue. And with one voice, they all cried, Emperor Justinian
victorious! which growing very loud from such a multitude, reached to most parts
of the City. Such as were well affected to the Emperor, brake into the
mutiners lodgings, and killed them, being asleep or eating, or amazed with the
terror of it; and among them, Pasiphilus. John the mutiner, and some Vandals,
fled to the Church; whom Artabanes took out upon assurances, and sent them to
Constantinople; and having recovered the City for the Emperor, he made it
safe. This killing of the Tyrant, was the 35 day of his usurpation. in the 19
year of Justinians reign. And for this service Artabanes got a great renown:
Projecta, Areobindus widow, An. d^m. 545. Just. 19.
gave him a great present; and the Emperor made him General of Africa. Not
long after, at the entreaty of Artabanes, he sent for him home, and made John,
the brother of Pappus, General. Who immediately fought with Antalas, and the
Moors of Byzacium, and defeated them, killing many, and recovering all the
Ensigns taken at the killing of Solomon, which he sent to the Emperor. All
other Moors he drove as far as he could from the Roman dominion. But afterward
the Leucathians coming from Tripolis into Byzacium, with a great Army, and
joining with Antalas; John met them, and was beaten, with the loss of many, and
fled to Laribum. The enemy then overran Africa, and did much mischief, even to
the gates of Carthage. John quickly rallied the soldiers remaining, and drew
Cutzinas, and other Moors to his aid; and in a battle with the enemy, overthrew
them beyond expectation, and killed numbers of them in the execution, as they
fled in confusion. The rest escaped to the uttermost marches of Africa. And so
at length the Africans who were left, being few, and very poor, with much ado
obtained some quietness.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK Of the GOTHIC War.
Chap. I. OF Augustulus, and his Father Orestes Odoacer, Tyrant of Italy: whom
Theodorick overthrew; and beseiges Ravenna three years, and is King of Italy.
Chap. II. Theodoricks strange death; after killing Symmachus, and Boethius, by a
fishes head. Amalasun^ha for her Son Atalarick governes; the Goths mislike
their Kings civil breeding: conspire against her. She seems to fly to
Constantinople. Theodatus plots revolt to Justinian. Chap. III. Justinian
quarrels with Amalasuntha in show: Has offers from her, and Theodatus, of
Italy. Atalarick dies. She unwisely invites Theodatus to the Kingdom. Chap.
IV. Amalasuntha is imprisoned. Justinian would aid her, but before, she is
murdered. He enters into war with the Goths, Anno 9. of his Reign. Belisarius
is sent with 7000 men: who finishes the subduing of Sicily on the last day of
his Consulship. Theodatus agrees to share Italy with the Emperor. Chap. V.
Theodatus agrees to resign Italy to Justinian, for Lands worth 12 Centenaries
per annum. Mundus and his Son are killed by the Goths in Dalmatia, which
causes Theodatus to refuse the agreement. Discourse concerning Ambassadors.
Chap. VI, Constantianus subdues Dalmatia, and Liburnia. Belisarius besieges
Naples, and tryes to get it by Composition. Chap. VII. Pastor and Asclepiodotus
hinder the surrendering of Naples. The Augury of Hogs frights Theodatus.
Belisarius is rising from Naples, but Chap. VIII. He takes the City the great
Aquaeduct, and restores to the Neapolitans their women, children, and other
Prisoners after much slaughter. Chap. IX. The deaths of Pastor and
Asclepiodotus. Theodatus deposed. Vitigis is chosen King. Theodatus is slain
by Optaris, whose Love he had taken from him, and married to another. Chap. X.
Vitigis leaves Rome: his reasons; he marryes Amalasunth's Daughter. A
digression of the Franks coming into Gaul with the Arborychi; and a remnant of
Roman soldiers. Theodorick allies himself with them. Chap. XI. The Franks
and Theodorick share the Burgundians country. They beat the Visigoths. Theudis
a Goth usurpes Spain: The Francks conquer Thuringia, utterly expel the
Visigoths (who fled into Spain) and divide all Gaul with the Goths. Chap.
XII. The Goths give the French their part of Gaul, and 20. Centenaries of gold
to join with them. Via Appi^. Belisarius enters Rome, repaires the walls, and
prepares against a siege. Chap. XIII. Half Samnium, Calabria, and Apulia
submit to the Emperor. Diomedes, and the Boares teeth. The Palladium. A
description of Italy, and the countries about it. Tuscany taken: wars in
Dalmatia. Chap. XIV. Vitigis marches toward Rome, passes the Tiber, where
Belisarius, with a few, hazards his person in the first rancks. Chap. XV.
Belisarius enters Rome with difficulty. Visandus found among the dead bodies. A
false alarm. Vacis is sent to rail^. Belisarius is confident of victory. Chap.
XVI. The manner of the Goths intrenchments, and of the Romans quartering at
the several Gates. Belisarius invention of mills with Boats: a presage of his
Victory by Samnite boys. Chap. XVII. Vitigis sends Ambassadors to terrify the
Romans, already fainting. Of the form of the Ram, Balista, Wolf. Belisarius
laughs at the Enemy, shootes two of their men dead, and by killing their Oxen,
prevents their assault. Chap. XVIII. Moles Adriana, or Adrians Tomb is
assaulted and well defended: the broken wall in the guard of St. Peter. A Goth
stuck into a tree with an arrow from a Balista. Chap. XIX. The Goths defeated
in the Park. Belisarius sallies, and routs their whole army, and kills ^0000
men. More forces demanded by Belisarius of the Emperor, and sent. The Romans
victory presaged by Theodoricks Image at Naples in Musaique work. Sibylla's
oracles obscure. Chap. XX. Belisarius rids Rome of the unnecessary mouths. The
Commons are entertained to serve upon the guards. Silverius Bishop of Rome is
sent into Greece, and Vigilius by Belisarius made Bishop. The Temple of Janus.
Vitigis causes the Roman Senators his Prisoners to be slain. Chap. XXI.
Portus surprised by the Goths. The description thereof, and of Ostia.
Belisasarius with three sallies kills 4000 Goths, who imitating his stratagem
therein are cut in pieces. Chap. XXII. Belisarius tells why he was so confident
of victory: he is importuned by the soldiers to a battle: he incourages them,
orders his troops, resolved to fight with the horse only, the foot being over
few; but is dissuaded by Principius and Tarmutus. Chap. XXIII. Vitigis
encourages his army, and sets it in order of battle. The Romans in Nero's
feilds first conquer; then by dis^^der are ruined: the rest first have the
better, in the end are beaten unto their walls by the Goths, with some loss,
especially of Principius and Tarmutus.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS of the Emperor JUSTINIAN.
Of the GOTHIC War, the first BOOK:
CHAP. I.
THUS were the Roman Affairs in Afric. But I proceed to the Gothic War;
First, touching in a word what happened to the Goths and Italians before this
War. When Zeno was Emperor of Constantinople, Augustus held the Western
Dominion, whom by a diminitive, the Romans called Augustulus, because he
received the Empire being yet a Boy, which his Father Orestes, a very wise man,
did administer. The Romans sometime before had drawn to their aid Skirrians
and Alans, and other Gothic Nations; from whence they came to suffer those
things from Alaricus, and Attalus formerly related. As the Barbarians grew
strong, the Roman Soldiers were under-valued; and by these New-comers under
color of ayds, they were tir^nnyzed, and forced impudently to many things: And
in Conclusion they demanded of Ores^es all the Lands in Italy to be divided,
and to have a third part allotted them, and refusing to do it, they killed him.
There was among them one Odoacer, one of the Lifeguard to the Emperor, who
promised to satisfy their demands, if they would place him in the Government:
so he usurped, Anno Domini 479.
permitting the Emperor to live still a private man, without other harm: He
gave the third part of the Lands to the Barbarians, and so made them sure his
own, and established his Tyranny for ten years together. About the same time
the Goths, planted in Thrace by the Emperor, rebelled against the Romans under
Theodoricus, a Patritian, and advanced in Constantinople to the Consul^ship:
Zeno, skillful at a present accommodation, advised Theodoricus to go into
Italy, to fight with Odoacer, and to get for himself and the Goths the
Dominion of the West; it being better for him (being a Senator) to beat out the
Tyrant, and reign in Rome and Italy, then to run a hazard by contending with
the Emperor. Theodoricus liked his Counsel and went into Italy with all the
Goths, putting their Wives and Children in Wagons, and all the Goods they
could carry. They could not cross the Jonian Gulf, These were seated in
Albania, now, upon the Gulf of Venice, near unto Epidamus, now Durazzo.
wanting ships, but compassed the Gulf, and passed by the Taulantians, and
other Nations. Odoacer and his people opposed them, and were beaten in many
Battles: then they shut themselves up in Ravenna with their Prince, and in
other strong Towns. All the Towns the Goths took in by Siege, save the Castle
of Caesina, about thirty seven miles distant from Ravenna, and Ravenna it
self, where Odoacer was; which they could not get by Force nor Composition. It
is situate in an open Champian, at the bottom of the Jonian gulf, distant
only a quarter of a mile from the Sea. Ravenna is hard of access for an Army
by Sea or Land; no ships can land upon the shore, by reason of a shelve of
almost four miles lying before it, which keeps the Sayler far from the Coast,
though it seem near at first. Neither is it approachable by an Army of Foot, by
reason of the River Poe, (by some called Eridanus) which descends from the
mountains of Gaul; and of other navigable Rivers and Lakes, compassing the
City with waters, where happens a daily wonder. The sea each morning rises a
days journey into the Land, and makes it navigable; and at evening draws home
her waters, and spoils the passage. Such as are to import to the City
Merchandise, or to export the same, towe their ships to the place where the
water uses to make a Passage, and there stay for a Flood; which coming, by
little and little they float their Vessels, and steer away.

This happens all along that coast to Aquileia, but not always alike: when the
Light of the moon is little, the tide is weak, and after the first half moon
to the other, the course of the flood is stronger.

But Theodorick and the Goths spent three years in the Siege of Ravenna, and
were wearied with it, as well as Odoacer and his men, who were also pressed with
wants: So that by the mediation of the Bishop of Ravenna, they came to an
accord, that Theodorick and Odoacer should remain in Ravenna upon equal
terms. This for a while was observed; but Theodorick (as he said) finding him
plotting against him, invited him to a Feast, and killed him; and gaining so
the Barbarian Enemies surviving, he had the sole Dominion of the Goths and
Italians. He did not assume the Habit, or Style of Emperor of the Romans, but
continued the name of Rex, as the Barbarians call their Rulers. In the
government of his Subjects he had all the Ornaments of a true King; being
zealous of Justice, and maintaining the Laws; guarding also the Province from
the Neighboring Barbarians, and attaining to a great height of wisdom and
valor. He never did Injury to his Subjects, nor suffered others, that
practiced such things: Only he distributed to the Goths the Lands by Odoacer
allotted for his Partisans. So that he was in repute an Usurper; but in Effect
a true Prince, no less then those, who have successively been graced with
that Dignity. The Goths and Italians loved him exceedingly, and not according
to the ordinary Humor; for in States, men have several Inclinations, and
while things are as they would have them, they are pleased with the present
Government; but if otherwise, they are malcontent.

CHAP. II.
THeodorick having reigned thirty seven years, died, being grown terrible to
his Enemies, and much beloved by his Subjects. The manner of his Death was
thus. Symmachus, and his Son in Law, Boethius, ancient noble men, and chelfe of
the Senate, having been Consulls, and both being Philosophers, just men, and
great Relievers of the poor, had many bitter envyers; by whose false
accusations Theodorick being persuaded, that they plotted against him, put them
to Death, and confiscated their Estates. Not long after, his Wayters set before
him at Supper a great head of a Fish, which seemed to him to be the Head of
Symmachus lately murdered, and with the teeth sticking out, and fierce glaring
eyes to threaten him. Being frighted at it, he became chill, and presently went
to bed, commanding store of clothes to be laid on him: And afterward he
revealed all to Elpidius his Physician, lamenting the sin he had done against
Symmachus and Boethius; and soon after dyed. This was the first, and last wrong
he ever did his Subjects, in pronouncing sentence thus against men without
Examination. Atalarick, Anno Domini, 526.
his Daughters Son, succeeded, being eight years of age, and bred with his
Mother Amalasuntha, his Father being dead also. Not long after Justinian
received the Empire in Constantinople, and Amalasuntha governed as her Sons
Guardian, being Wise, Just, and of a very manly nature. She never, during her
Government, laid corporal punishment, or fine upon any Roman, nor gave way to
the Goths longing to do them Injuryes. She restored to the Children of
Symmachus and Boethius their Estates; and she desired to form her Son in his
manner of living like to the Roman Princes. She caused him to frequent the
Grammar School, and chose three discreet, moderate men of the Gothic Nation
to accompany him. This the Goths misliked, and desiring to wrong the Subjects,
would have him bred more according to the Barbarian way. The Mother once taking
her Son in some dis-order in the Bedchamber, struck him; and he weeping,
went out into the great Chamber, where some Goths seeing him, made a great
matter of it, and rayled upon Amalasuntha, that she made haste to be rid of
the youth, and marrying some man, with him to reign over the Goths and
Italians. And their principal men assembling, complained; that their King was
ill bred, and not as was fit for him; that Learning is opposite to Valor; that
this schooling by old men produces commonly cowardly and low spirits, and that
whosoever will prove daring, and a man of Reputation, must be removed from
fear of School Masters, and employ his Study in Arms. Theodorick (they said)
suffered not the Goths to send their Sons to the Grammar school; alleging
that if they were seasoned once with the fear of a Feruler, they would never
despise a Sword, nor a Lance. They besought the Queen to consider, how
Theodorcik gained large Provinces, and a Kingdom to which he had no right, and
was dead without knowing his Letters; and therefore to dismiss those
Paedagogues, and to give Atalarick Companions of his own Age, who growing up
with him, might incite him to govern according to the Barbarian Laws.
Amalasuntha approved not these reasons, but fearing Treason, she seemed
pleased with the discourse, and yielded to their demands. The old men left
Atalarick, and Youths were bred up, with him, having some small advantage of
years above him: who when he was come to years, provoking him to Drink, and
Women, made him extremely ill-conditioned, and so foolish, as to be disobedient
to his Mother; nay to desert her, in a Faction of Barbarians, who impudently
commanded her to retire from Court. But Amalasuntha feared not their Faction,
nor womanlike softened her Resolution, but with the Majesty of a Prince she
picked out three of most Account, and most faulty, and confined them single, and
far asunder, to the remotest parts of Italy. They were reported to be employed
in guarding the Marches against the Enemy; but they continued still
correspondence with their Friends and Kinsmen, and all men flockt to them, and
the conspiracy grow ripe: Which she not able to stand against, she sen^ ^o
Justinian, desiring him to be pleased, that Amalasuntha the Daughter of
Theodorick might repair to him, she minding instantly to quit Italy. The
Emperor was glad of the news, bade her come, and directed the fairest House in
Epidamnus to be made ready for her to lodge in, and having stayed there what
time she pleased, to be convoyed to Constantinople. When Amalasuntha
understood this, she chose some Goths, valiant, and men most inward with her,
and sent them to kill those three cheifes of the Mutiny. And she put a board a
ship four hundred Centenaries of Gold, and much other wealth, A million and
260000 l. sterling.
under the charge of some of her most confidents, whom she commanded to sail
to Epidamnus, and to lie at Anchor in the harbor, without unshipping any thing
till she sent direction. This she did, purposing if those three were
Executed, to stay and remand the ship, fearing then no Enemies; but if any of
them escaped, to fly into the Emperors Dominions, there being no sound hope at
home. Such was her Resolution: And her Ministers with the Treasure came into
Epidamnus, observing her directions. But she quickly (those Executions being
dispatched) called back the ship, and remaining at Ravenna, fortified her
Government. Among the Goths was one Theodatus, Son unto Amalafrida, the
Sister of Theodorick, a man in years, and who had been conversant in Latin
discourses, and the Doctrines of Plato, but unpractised in War, and never
aspiring to seats of Justice, yet extremely avaricious. He was Lord of many
Towns in Tuscany, and by Oppression sought to spoil the owners of those
remaining: it was an Affliction to Theodatus to have Neighbors. Amalasuntha
endeavored to curb this humor in him, which made him very spiteful against
her; And he plotted to deliver Tuscany to the Emperor for a great sum of
Money, and to be made a Senator, and to remain at Constantinople. In the mean
time came Ambassadors from Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome, Hypatius
Bishop of Ephesus, and Demetrius, Bishop of Philippi in Macedonia, about points
which Christians of different opinions dispute among themselves. The questions
I know, but will not recite; To search what the nature of God is, I hold to be
a frantic arrogance; humane things are not to man exactly comprehensible, much
less things pertaining to the nature of God: Let me therefore be silent
without danger, only by my not mis-beleiving that which in God is honored.
For let Priests or private men speak as they are persuaded, I can say no other
thing concerning God, but that he is absolutely good, and has all things in
his power. But Theodatus, meeting privately with these Ambassadors, gave them
order to acquaint the Emperor with the plot I mentioned before.

CHAP. III.
IN the mean time Atalarick fell into a Consumption with his excessive
gluttony; which much distracted Amalasuntha, who had no confidence in her
Son, being run into so much folly; nor if he dyed could she think her
life safe, having offended the principal Goths. So she resolved to deliver
the Dominion of the Goths and Italians to Justinian, and to save her self.
With Hypatius, and Demetrius, came one Alexander, a Senator; whom the Emperor
(hearing of Amalasuntha's ship in the harbor of Epidamnus, and that she came
not, much time being spent) sent to view, and report concerning her, in
pretense as an Ambassador, to treat about Lilyboeum, and about ten Hunnes, who
were run from the Camp in Afric into Campania, and entertained by Vliaris,
Captain of Naples, without Amalasuntha^s consent. And the Goths warring with
the Gepaedes about Sirmium, had used hostitility upon Gratiana, a City in the
marches of Illyrium: All which the Empeperour charged Amalasuntha with, and
wrote his Letter to her by Alexander; who left the Bishops at Rome to negotiate
their affairs, and repayring to Ravenna, had access to Amalasuntha, whom
privately he acquainted with the Emperors propositions; and openly presented
the Letter, which was thus. You detain from us our Castle of Lilyboeum; you
have entertained our fugitive Soldiers, and do not yet send them back; you
have also used our City of Gratiana with extremity without cause; from all
which you are to judge what the conclusion is likely to be. Amalasuntha to this
Letter returned this answer. It were more fit for a great Emperor, and one who
pretends to virtue, to assist an Orphan, ignorant of these passages, then upon
no ground to quarrel with him; no victory bringing credit, when the opposition
is not equal. You expostulate for Lilyboeum, and ten fugitives, and an Error
of Soldiers marching against their Enemies, unwittingly committed upon a City
in Amity with us. Do not thus, O Emperor! But think how in your invasion of
the Vandales we gave you no impediment, nay gave you quiet passage, and free
market freindly of what you needed, cheifely of Horses in such abundance, as
with them principally you vanquished your Enemies. Not only he who sends his
neighbor aids, is a friend and an Associate, but he also who readily
furnishes him for the war with necessaryes. Consider how then your Navy had no
place to put into, but Sicily, nor could go into Afric without what was there
bought. So that the principal cause of your Victory is from us; who releiving
you in time of need, may lay a claim to the good success: and what greater
contentment, O! Emperor, could you have, then to subdue your Enemies? nay it
is a great wrong to us, not to receive according to the Law of War, our share
in the spoils: Whereas you seek to take Lilyboeum from us, long appertaining
to the Goths, and a poor Rock not worth the money (in case it did belong to
your Empire) which in reason you ought to recompense Atalarick with, for
assisting you in your greatest needs. Thus Amalasuntha wrote publicly, but in
private promised to deliver Italy to the Emperor; to whom the Ambassadors at
their Return to Constantinople related all; Alexander concerning Amalasuntha's
Resolution; and Demetrius and Hypatius, what they had in trust from Theodutus,
and how having great power in Tuscany, and being Lord of a large Country, he
could easily perform his promises. The Emperor being over joyed with it, sent
forthwith into Italy, Peter, an Illyrian by Race, but borne in Thessalonica,
and an Orator in Constantinople, a wife, mild man, and of great ability to
persuade. In the mean time the Tuscans accused Theodatus to Amalasuntha for his
oppressions; and for intruding not only into the Lands of common persons, but
into the Royal domeans, called Patrimonium. Amalasuntha called him to his
answer, and upon express conviction; compelled him to restore his unlawful
Intrusions, which infinitely offended Theodatus, and made him her Enemy, being
vexed that he could not use his sin of oppression. About the same time
Atalarick dyed of his consumption, having reigned eight years. And Amalasuntha
(ordained for a mischeife) without considering Theodatus nature, nor her late
proceeding against him, imagined by some extraordinary good Turn to oblige him
from hurting her. She sent for him, and to appease him, told him; That she had
long foreseen her Sons end, by the daily wasting of his Body, and the
opinion of the Physicians; that she found the Goths and Italians inclined to
him, being of Theodoricks blood; That she endeavored therefore to purge him of
aspersions, which might hinder his calling to the Kingdom; that she was also
troubled in the point of Justice, if men wronged should complain, to have none
to make their cases known to, but to have their Adversary their Lord. But now
being clear, she invited him to the Kingdom: But they must bind themselves by
solemn oaths, for him to continue the name of King, and her self to continue
her former power. Theodatus swore what she pleased, with a false Intent,
remembering how she had used him formerly. Thus Amalasuntha, deceaved by her
own Counsels, placed Theodatus in the government, Anno Demini, 534.
Justiniani 8.
and sent some Goths to Constantinople to acquaint Justinian with her
proceedings.

CHAP. IV.
THeodatus being in possession of the Kingdom, did quite contrary to her
hopes, and his own Engagements. He drew to him many principal Goths, kinsmen
to such as she had put to death; some of Amalasuntha's party he suddenly
killed, and put her self in safe custody in a strong castle in an Island upon
the Lake of Vulsinus in Tuscany. But fearing that the Emperor might be
offended at it, (as indeed he was) he sent Liberius and Opilio, two Senators of
Rome, and others to make his Excuses, and to assure the Emperor, that
Amalasuntha had no harm, though she had done him extreme Injury formerly.
This he wrote to the Emperor, and made Amalasuntha write as much. The Emperor
in the mean time had instructed Peter to get private speech with Theodatus,
and to give his Oath to conceal the negotiation, and so to make Tuscany sure;
to deal likewise with Amalasuntha, and to conclude for all Italy, but
publicly to pretend his Embassage for Lilyboeum, and the rest before
mentioned. For of the death of Atalarick, or succession of Theodatus, or of the
Fortune of Amalasuntha, the Emperor had not yet heard. Peter upon the way met
Amalasuntha's Ambassadors, and heard of the Succession of Theodatus. Shortly
after at Appollonia upon the Jonian gulf he met with Liberius and Opilio; and
was informed of all the passages. He advertised the Emperor, and stayed there:
Who thereupon intending to imbroyle Theodatus and the Goths, wrote Letters to
Amalasuntha, of his Resolution to take her part, and sent instructions to Peter
to profess the same openly to Theodatus, and all the Goths; Whose Ambassadors
being arrived at Constantinople, Liberius, who was a very honest man, and
careful to speak no untruth, and the rest acquainted the Emperor with the
whole matter; only Opilio protested that Theodatus had not wronged the person
of Amasuntha. But before Peter came into Italy, Amalasuntha was murdered; The
kinsmen of those put to death by her alleging to Theodatus, that neither he,
nor they could be safe, if she were not made out of the way. So with his
permission, they went to the Island, and killed her. Which much greived the
rest of the Goths, and all the Italians. For (as I said before) she was a
woman strongly bent to all kind of virtue. Peter protested openly to Theodatus
and the Goths, that for this foul fact there should be implacable war between
the Emperor and them. Theodatus was so absurd, as albeit he graced
Amalasuntha's Murderers, yet he would persuade Peter, and the Emperor, that
the villainy was committed by no allowance of his, but much against his will.

At the same time Belisarius had newly conquered Gelimer, and the Vandales; and
the Emperor advertized of Amalasuntha's misfortune, presently entered into
this war, in the Anno 9. Just. The Gothic war now begins, and is Annus 1
bell. Goth. begin. Anno Domini 535.
ninth year of his Reign: He commanded Mundus, General of Illyrium, to march
into Dalmatia, which was subject to the Goths, and to attempt Salonae. Mundus
was a Barbarian borne, but much affected to the Emperor, and a good Soldier.
Belisarius he sent with a fleet, having 4000 Legi^naries and Confederates, and
3000 Isaurians. Commanders of mark there were Constantinus and Bessas.
Thracians, and Peranius of the Iberia next to Media, but he revolted from the
Persian, and was now of the Emperors side. Captains of Horse were Valentinus,
Magnus and Innocentius. Of foot, Herodian, Paulus, D^metrius and Vrsicinus; of
the Isaurians Ennes was Leader. There were also 200 auxiliary Hunnes, and 300
Moors. General with absolute power was Belisarius, who had with him many
Lanciers and Targettiers of his guard, tried men. With him went also Photius,
the Son of his wife Antonina by a former Husband, a discreet young man, and
showing an Ability above his years. The Emperors instructions to Belisarius
were, to pretend the voyage for Carthage, but upon some pretext to attempt
Sicily, and if he found it feasible and easy, to subdue it, and not to quit it
upon any terms; but if he found Impediment, to sail away to Afric, without
discovering his intent: He wrote likewise this Letter to the Princes of the
Francks. The Goths have by force taken from us Italy, which they not only
refuse to restore, but add uns^fferable injuryes: which constrayne us to send
an Army against them, and you have reason to join with us in the war, which
our Orthodoxe Religion rejecting Arrianisme, and our equal Enmity with the
Goths makes common to us both. The Emperor accompanied this Letter with
liberal gifts, and promise of more, when they came to the business; they
readily promised to join with him. But Mundus in Dalmatia had a battle with
the Goths, was victorious and got Salonae. And Belisarius landing in Sicily,
took Catana; and from thence got Syracuse by composition, and the other towns
without any difficulty. The Goths only in Panormus presuming upon their walls,
and strong Town, refused to yield. Belisarius finding it by Land impregnable,
sailed with the fleet into the Haven, which reaches to the walls, none being
there, neither without nor within, to oppose him therein: The ships being at
Anchor, had their Masts higher then the Battlements. Belisarius filled his Cock
boats with Archers, which he hung fast to the Mast tops, and the Enemy being
thereby shot upon their heads, their hearts fainted, and they surrendered
Panormus to him by composition; then all Sicily became tributary to the
Emperor, where Belisarius had a fortune beyond expression. He had received the
consulship upon his conquest of the Vandales, and in the last day of it he
conquered Sicily, and rode into Syracuse, applauded by the Army and Sicilians,
and throwing pieces of gold among them. This was not so appointed, but it was
his fortune that very day to recover the Island to the Romans, and to ride into
Syracuse, and there to lay down his Consulship at the end of his year, and not
as the use is, in the Senate house of Constantinople. Peter, upon the news of
these successes of Belisarius urged Theodatus, and frighted him: And he, his
heart failing, came to a secret conference with Peter, and to this accord; That
Theodatus should surrender the whole Island of Sicily to the Emperor, and
should yearly send him a crown of Gold of three hundred pound weight, and
three thousand fighting Goths, when ever he should require them. And that he
should not kill, or confiscate the goods of any Priest, or Senator, without
the Emperors assent; Nor make any Patrician or Senator by his own authority;
but be a Suitor for it to the Emperor: That the common people in their
acclamations shall always name the Emperor first; In the Theaters, Circus, or
elsewhere, he must not erect any Statue to himself alone, but ever another to
the Emperor, which is to stand to the right hand of his own.

CHAP. V.
THeodatus subscribed the accord, and dismissed the Ambassador; but presently
his cowardice drove him to endless fears, and the thought of a War vexed
him, which he instantly expected, if the Emperor should not allow the said
conditions. He sent for Peter, being gone as far as into Albania, secretly to
communicate something to him; and ask't him, if he thought the Emperor would
like the accord; who answered, that he thought so. But if he do not, said the
other, what will follow? A war Noble Sir, quoth Peter. And is that just?
replied he; Why not just (quoth Peter) for every man to be constant in his own
addictions? Theodatus asked, what he meant by that? Because, quoth he, your
addiction is to Philosophy; and the Emperor Justinians to be Noble; The
difference is, that for you, professing Philosophy, and that from the School
of Plato, to cause the death of so many men, is not decent, but wicked, not to
be absolutely clear of murder; But for him to challenge the ancient
appurtenances of his Empire, is not unreasonable. Theodatus persuaded by the
advice, agreed to quit the Kingdom to Justinian; and to that effect himself
and his Wife took their Oaths; and he bound Peter by oath not to discover this
to the Emperor, before he perceived him not to accept the former accord; and
with him he sent Rusticus, a Priest, a Roman borne, and his Favorite. These at
Constantinople acquainted the Emperor with the first accord; who not accepting
the conditions, they showed the second agreement, contained in a letter written
by him, thus. I am no stranger to a Court, O Emperor I being born in the
Palace of the King mine Uncle, and bred as became my birth. Indeed in the
tumults of War I have no skill, my love of learning and exercises therein, have
removed me from the noise of Battles. So that I have no reason to be
ambitious of Kingdoms, nor to live in dangers, having means to avoid both,
neither pleasing me. The first, as all other sweets, being ever punished with
satiety: And the other, vexing a man that is not used to it. If therefore I may
have lands in possession of the yearly value of 12. Centenaries of gold, I
shall prefer them before a Kingdom; and will surrender to you the Dominion of
the Goths. and Italians. I shall be more contented to live a Husbandman, then
in the cares and multiplying dangers of a Kingdom. Send to me therefore
speedily some man, to whom I may resign Italy, and the State. The Emperor
infinitely over-joyed, returned this answer. I ever took you for a wise man,
and now my experience assures it, in that you depend not on the uncertain
event of a War, by which some have undone themselves already; and you shall
never repent for having made us a friend of an Enemy; your demands you shall
have, with this addition, to be advanced to the prime honors of the Roman
State. I have sent Athanasius, and Peter to make our selves sure by some
Articles; and Belisarius shall be speedily sent to put a conclusion thereunto.
The Emperor accordingly sent Athanasius brother to that Alexander lately sent
Ambassador to Atalaricus, and the aforementioned Peter, with Instructions, to
allot lands to Theodatus of the Emperors Demeans; and having by writings and
oath perfected the accord; to call in Belisarius from Sicily to take possession
of the Imperial Palaces, and Italy, and the custody thereof: And he directed
Belisarius, being sent for, instantly to go over.

During this negotiation, an Army of Goths led by Asinarius, and Gripas, entered
Dalmatia; and near Salonae were encountered by Mauritius the son of Mundus,
who with a few went out to discover only. They made a furious charge, and the
best of the Goths fell, but the Romans almost all, and Mauritius their Leader.
Munaus was much grieved at the news, and in his passion marched against the
Enemy with no good order. The Battle was stiffly fought, and the Romans got a
Cadm^an victory, clearly defeating the Enemy, and cutting off the most part.
But Mundus killing and chasing at adventure, as enraged for the loss of his
son, was wounded and slain by a Runaway; Whereupon the Execution ceased, and
the Armies parted. Then did the Romans remember a verse of Sibyll, famous, and
seeming formerly to foretell some strange prodigy; That when Affricke should
again come under the Romans, Mundus cum suo semine interibit. But in the Oracle
it was not so expressed; but having intimated the said return of Affricke, it
says Quod tunc Mundus cum filio interibit. Mundus signifying the world in
Latin, they conceived it to be meant of the world. But into Salonae no man
entered; The Romans destitute of a General retired home; and the Goths, having
lost their chief men, kept close in their Garrisons, having no confidence in
the Fortifications of Salonae, and the Romans inhabiting it being not their
friends. Theodatus upon the news hereof slighted the Ambassadors, being
naturally slippery and faithless; The present fortune ever drew him either
into senseless fears not suitable to the occasion, or into excessive
presumption. As now upon the news of Mundus, and Mauritius, he was exalted,
not proportionably to the accident, and he flowted the Ambassadors, being now
with him. Peter once expostulating his breach of agreements, he called him into
public, and said, That Ambassadors indeed are persons of respect, and by all
men honored; but that they preserve this privilege, and the honor of their
places by moderation only. For men use to put an Ambassador to death if he
demean himself insolently to a Kings person, or lie with another man's Wife.
Theodatus said not thus, as thinking Peter to kave layen with any man's Wife;
but to show that there were crimes in an Ambassador punishable with death. But
the Ambassadors made him this answer. O Prince of the Goths! upon such
mistaken, unsound pretenses do not you violate the persons of Ambassadors. An
Ambassador, if he would, cannot be an Adulterer; who can hardly have so much as
the use of water, without the privity of those that guard him. For words
(though harsh) if he utter such as he received from his Master, not he, but his
Master is to bear the blame; An Ambassadors only part is, to execute the
service. And we, what we have received from the Emperor, will utter it all,
and you are patiently to hear us. If you be angry, you have no help, but to
abuse men that are Ambassadors. It is high time for you to perform your
Covenants with the Emperor; For which purpose we are sent hither. His letters
to your self you have; another, directed to the principal Goths, we will
deliver only to themselves. The great Officers being present, bad them give the
Letter to Theodatus; which was thus. Our care is, to receive you into our
State; for which you ought to rejoice; For you shall mingle with us, not for
your diminution, but to add more value to you. We invite not the Goths to
Countries strange, and unknown to them; but to our selves, sometimes their
familiars, though for a time divided from them. Athanasius and Peter are sent
about this business, whom you are to assist in all things.

CHAP. VI.
THeodatus perused all the letters, but refused to perform the agreements, and
put a strait guard upon the Ambassadors. The Emperor advertized hereof, and of
the successes in Dalmatia, sent into Illyrium Constantianus, Master of his
Horse, to gather an Army, and attempt Salonae; and he directed Belisarius
without delay to pass into Italy, and make War upon the Goths. Constantianus
at Epidamnus stayed some time, and raised Forces. Gripas in the mean time had
entered Salonae with the Goths. And Constantianus having made his preparations,
left Epidamnus with his Fleet, and Ragusa stands now where about this was, upon
the gulf of Venice.
cast Anchor at Epidaurus, standing to the right hand, as you sail into the
Jonian gulf. Some here sent by Gripas to discover, seeing the land Army, and
the Ships covering (as they imagined) Land and Sea, reported to Gripas, that
Constantianus had many thousands. He afraid, thought it not best to encounter
them; Neither would he willingly be besieged by the Emperors Army, Master of
the Sea. The walls of Salonae much decayed troubled him too; and he could not
trust the Inhabitants.

For these reasons he removed from thence, and encamped in a champian between
Salonae, and the City of Croton. Constantianus wayed Anchor from Epidaurus,
and came before Lys^ne upon the gulf. Hence he sent some to discover, and
report concerning Gripas; from whom understanding how it was, The Gothic war
began in the Spring, which begins exactly 11. Martii, the Sun emring into
Aries. Justinian began to reign alone after Justins death on the first of July,
says Evagrius: And with Justin the 3. day before Easter. vide Secret. Hist.
cap. 7.
he made for Salonae. Where arrived, he landed, and rested his Army upon the
place; and he directed Siphyllas, one of his Lifeguard, with 500. chosen men,
to possess a narrow passage in the Suburbs of Salonae; which he performed. And
the next day Constantianus entered the City with the Land army, and the Fleet
lay before it at Anchor. He took care of the walls, and repaired the decays;
And Gripas seeing the Romans masters of Salonae, seven days after rose, and
transported the Goths over to Ravenna. So Constantianus took in Dalmatia, and
Liburnia, and the Goths there inhabiting. And then ended the Winter, and the
first year of this War, written by Procopius.

Belisarius leaving Garrisons in Syracusa, and Annus. 2. B^ll. Goth. incipit.
being in 10. Iustiniani. (...) Ann. Dom. 536.
Panormus, passed over his Army from Messinae to Rhegium, where the Poets fain
Scylla, and Charybdis to have been. The Inhabitants came in to him daily, their
Towns having been long without walls, and without Garrisons; and they hated the
Goths, weary (it seems) of the present Government. Ebrimus also a Goth revolted
to him, with his Followers, having married Theodatus Daughter, Theodenanthe. He
was sent to the Emperor, and besides other bounties, made a Patrician. The
Army marched from Rhegium through Brutia, and Lucania, and the Navy kept close
to the Coast. In Campania they sat down before Naples, a strong maritime
City, with a great Garrison in it of Goths. The Fleet Belisarius commanded to
lie at Anchor, without Bow-shot in the Harbor. Then he took the Castle in the
Suburbs by composition. He gave the Citizens leave to send him some chief men,
to acquaint him with what they had to say, and hearing his Propositions, to
report them to their Communalty. The Napolitans sent him Stephanus, who spoke
thus to Belisarius. It is not just, O General! to bring your Army upon Romans,
and who never wronged you, having a small City, and the Barbarians within our
Masters; that we cannot do as we would: Nay the Soldiers of our Garrison have
lest under Theodatus their Wives and Children, and most precious things, that
by practicing upon us, they should not more betray our Town, then themselves.
But if we may say the truth without mincing, you have advised ill to invade us.
For take Rome first, and Naples is yours without difficulty; but repulsed from
thence, you can never be sure of this Town. So that you will spend time
impertinently in this siege. Belisarius made Stephanus this answer. We mean
not to refer it to the Napolitans, whether We be here upon good, or bad
advice. We desire you to consult of what concerns your selves, and to choose
your own best advantage. Entertain therefore the Emperors Army, come to
free you and all Italy; and do not prefer the most sorrowful things. Such as
make War to shake off slavery, or other base condition, gain in vanquishing,
with the victory, freedom from misery; and being vanquished are yet comforted
for not having willingly submitted to a wretched fortune. But such as may be
free without fighting, and yet will fight to establish their own servitude; if
they conquer, they do but more ruin themselves; and if they have the worse,
they add to their other wretchedness, the calamity of a defeat. This he said
to the Napolitans. To the Goths we give Liberty either to serve the Emperor
with us, or to retire home without harm. If you slight all this, and employ
your arms against us, we shall use you as Enemies: But if the Napolitans will
join with the Emperor, and be rid of a sharp servitude; I will pawn my faith
for such conditions, as the Sicilians had, who cannot say we are forsworn.
This Belisarius commanded Stephanus to impart to the people; promising him
great rewards, if he drew them to the Emperor. Stephanus acquainted the City
with these propositions, and with his own opinion of the inconvenience of
resisting the Emperor. With him joined Antiochus a Syrian merchant, who had
long dwelt there, and was esteemed a very wise and an honest man.

CHAP. VII.
BUt Pastor and Asclepiodotus, two Orators much esteemed in Naples, and friends
to the Goths, to cross the treaty, drew the people to propound great things,
and many, and that Belisarius would swear to their present obtaining the same:
And they gave to Stephanus demands in writing, which they thought Belisarius
would never yield to. He went to the Camp, showed the writing to the General,
demanding if he would grant those propositions, and take his Oath accordingly.
He promised to grant all, and sent him away. The Napolitans embraced the
Capitulation, and commanded the army to be received into the City: which (said
they) may safely be done, the Sicilians giving us ample proof, who for
Barbarian Tyrants have chosen the Empire of Justinian, and are become free men,
and eased of all greivance. And then in much tumult they went to open the
gates; which troubled the Goths: but being not able to hinder it, they kept out
of the way. But Pastor and Asclepiodotus assembled the people, and spoke thus.
It is not strange for a City-multitude to ruin it self, when they will
resolve in the general absolutely, without communicating with the better sort.
But being with you upon the point of destruction, we cannot but contribute this
last advise to our country. You are running to deliver your selves, and City to
Belisarius, who promises much, and will solemnly swear to it. If he could
assure you, that he shall conquer in this war, no man can gainsay, but that
these things will be good for us. It were foolish not to gratify him that is
to be our Lord; but since this is uncertain, and since none can secure the
Resolutions of Fortune; consider for what miseries you may take this pains. For
the Goths overcoming, will punish you for having done them the greatest
despite, revolting thus not forced by necessity, but as willing cowards. Nay
even Belisarius himself being Victor will esteem us false and Traitors to our
Princes; and as such, we must expect a perpetual garrison upon us. A Traitors
service pleases for the present with the victory obtained, but afterward the
Victor suspects, fears, and hates his Benefactor, having with him the marks of
his falsehood. But continuing true to the Goths, and valiant in this danger, if
they conquer, they will do us many good turns; and Belisarius getting the
victory will pardon us. No understanding man will punish a good affection
failing of success. And why fear you this seige? being in no wants, nor blockt
up; but at home, secured by these walls and soldiers? If Belisarius could hope
to force us, he would not come to this capitulation: and if he would do justly,
and us good, he would not fright us thus, and establish a power upon our
wronging the Goths, but come roundly to a battle with them, that we without
danger or Treason might follow the Conqueror. Having thus said, they produced
Jews, who assured the town should want nothing: and the Goths promised to
guard them safely. Wherewith persuaded, they defied Belisarius; who fell to
assault, and was often repulsed with losie of many, and even of his valiantest
men. For the walls what by reason of the sea, and for the steep ground, were
unaccessible, and not to be approacht by an enemy. And the cutting of the
Aquaeduct by Belisarius troubled not the Napolitans much, their wells within
supplying their uses: And they sent to Theodatus to Rome, to send them
succors. Theodatus being a coward (as I have said) made little preparation for
a war: and he had an accident (they say, but not credibly to my conceit)
which put him into great fear. Theodatus was acquainted ever with men thar
pretend to foretell things to come; and being now perplexed with the present
affairs (when men use most to run after prophesies) he asked an Hebrew,
famous for such things, what would be the event of the War. He directed him to
shut up three half scores of Hoggs severally, and to each ten to give several
names, of Goths, Romans, and the Emperors Soldiers, and so for a certain
number of days to let them alone. Theodatus at the appointed day went to the
sties, to see the Hoggs. Those which were called Goths, he found all dead, save
two: Those called the Emperors Soldiers, were almost all alive: And those
who bare the name of Romans were half living, and all with their hairs fallen
off. Theodatus by this divined the success of the war, and was afraid:
perceiving that one half of the Romans should perish, and all loose their
Estates; that the Goths should be vanquished; and reduced to a small remnant,
and that the Emperor should get the victory with the loss of few. Upon this
he was afraid to fight with Belisarius; who besieging Naples was troubled, not
thinking it would yield, and being not able to force the difficulty of the
place: and his loss to time vexed him, fearing to be put to set upon Theodatus
and Rome in the winter. But having directed the army to rise, and being thus
perplexed, he had this fortune,

CHAP. VIII.
AN Isaurian, curious to see the structure of the Aquaeduct, and how it brought
water to the City, entered it far from the city where Belisarius had cut it;
(which had made it dry) and being come in near to the town-wall, he met with a
Rock to which the Aquaeduct was joined, and through it was cut a vault, not
sufficient for a man to enter, but only to let through the water; so that there
the Aquaeduct was not passable, especially by a man armed with shield and
corslet. The Isaurian observing it, conceived that by widening the vault,
forces might enter; and being himself an obscure man, unknown to the
Commanders, he revealed it to Paucaris, a Targettier of the guard to
Belisarius, who told it to Belisarius; and he revived with the news promised
the man money, and persuaded him to take some Isaurians, and with speed and
secrecy to cut the rock wider. Paucaris, with some choice Isaurians fit to
work, entered silently the Aquaeduct, and being come to the Rock and narrow
Vault, they wrought, not cutting it with hatchets and axes, lest the noise
should discover them, but paring and filing it with instruments of iron; and in
short time there was room for a man with his shield and corslet on to go
through. All being ready, Belisarius considered, how the army entering by force,
there would be slaughter and such things as befall places forced by Enemies. He
sent therefore for Stephanus, and said to him thus. I have been at the taking
of many Cities, and and am acquainted with the usual accidents therein. They
kill the men of all ages; the women they vouchsafe not to kill, though they beg
it, but lead them away for base and pitiful uses. The children without other
Education must learn to serve their greatest enemies, whose hands are stained
with their Fathers blood. I speak not of the fire which will consume your
goods, and the beauty of your city. Beholding as in a glass in other ruined
cities, the miseries of Naples, I pity it. For my engines are ready, wherewith I
shall not fail to take it. And while I am General; I would not have an
ancient city, long inhabited with Christians and Romans, come to this fortune:
the rather having in the army Barbarians, enraged for the loss of brothers and
kindred, whom I shall not be able to restrain; if they enter by hostility. So
that choose the best for your selves while you may, and avoid this calamity;
which happening (as it will) blame not fortune, but your own Counsels.
Stephanus weeping, reported to the People this Speech of Belisarius: But they
(whose Subjection to the Emperor was to be accompanied with their mischief)
feared not, nor thought of yiedling.

Then did Belisarius about Evening choose out 400. men, and gave the Command of
them to Magnus, a Captain of Horse, and Ennes, Commander of the Isaurians,
whom he directed to stand ready with their Corselets on, and with Swords and
Shields, till he should give the Signal. And he sent for Bessas, to advise
with him of some things of Importance. Far within night, he told Magnus and
Ennes the business, showed them the place, where he had cut the Aquaeduct, and
commanded affright the Town, and to signify to him what they did. Himself
had many scaling Ladders in readiness. They entered the Aquaeduct, and went
toward the Town, and himself, with Bessas and Photius, staid in the place,
directing the Army to stand with their Arms ready; and keeping many of the
Valiantest men about himself. More then the one half who were to enter,
apprehending the danger, came back to the General, and Magnus with them: after
much exhorting them to go on, but not prevailing, Belisarius rated them, and
gave Magnus 200. other of his own Retinew, whom Photius would have led, and
first entered the vault; but Belisarius forbad him. The Run-awaies ashamed at
the reprehensions of Belisarius, took heart, and followed the rest. Belisarius,
least the Enemies sentinels upon the Turret next the Aquaeduct should discover
them, went thither, and bad Bessas talk with the Goths in their own Language,
that they might not hear the clashing of the Arms. Bessas aloud called to
them to yield, promising many Advantages; And they flouted him with scornful
Speeches against Belisarius, and the Emperor. The Aquaeduct is not only
covered without the Walls, but so continues with a high Arch of Brick a great
way within; that Magnus and Ennes being within the City, could not imagine
where-about they were, nor find where to get up, till their fore-most men
came, where they found the Roof uncovered, and where stood a Cottage, and in
it dwelt a Woman alone, and very poor; and at the top of the Aquaeduct grew an
Olive Tree. The men perceiving the Sky, and themselves in the midst of the
City, would willingly get up, but could not with their Arms, the Building
being high, and without Steps. Being long in doubt, and beginning to be crowded
with the Company pressing behind them; one of them, having a mind to make
trial, laid down his Arms, and clambered up; and finding the poor Woman in
the Cottage, threatened to kill her, if she made any noise. She astonished, sat
mute; and he tying a Rope to the Olive Tree, threw the other end into the
Aquaeduct, by which the Soldiers mounted one by one. All being up, and but a
fourth part of the Night remaining, they ascended the Wall, and killed the
Sentinels upon two Turrets on the North side, where Belisarius, Bessas, and
Photius stood expecting the Event. They called them to the Walls with their
Trumpets, and Belisarius set to the scaling Ladders, commanding the Soldiers
to mount. The Ladders were too short, the Workmen having not made them upon
view, and so not judging of a just scantling. But they tied two together, and
so mounted the Battlements. That part of the Walls next the Sea, where the
Jews guarded, the Soldiers could not ascend. For the Jews had offended the
Enemy, in hindering a peaceable surrender of the Town, and so being hopeless,
(if subdued) they fought valiantly, though the Town were entered; and they
endured beyond Expectation. But day appearing, and being charged behind by
some who were entered already, they fled; and Naples was absolutely taken, and
the Gates set open; where the rest of the Army entered. Those who were quartered
Eastward, having no Ladders, burnt open the Gates there, the Guards being all
run away. A great Slaughter was made; all being angry, and especially such as
had Brothers, or Kins-men slain in the former Assaults, and they killed all,
sparing no Age; broke into the Houses, and made the Women and Children Slaves,
and pillaged the Goods; principally the Massagetes, who spared not the
Churches, but killed many who fled into them; till Belisarius rode about and
restrained them, and assembling the Army, spoke thus. Since God has given us
Victory, and the glory of subduing a City, heretofore impregnable; let us not
prove unworthy of the Favor, but by our Clemency to the Vanquished, make it
appear, that we have justly overcome them. Do not without limit extend your
hatred to the Napolitans, beyond the Rules of War. No Conquerours continue
hating the Vanquished; if you kill them now, you are not rid of Enemies, but
indamaged by the death fo your Subjects. So that do them no further harm, nor
gratify you own Anger. It is base, having conquered your Enemies, to be
overcome by your own Passion. Take the Wealth, as the Reward of your Valor;
but restore the Women and Children, and let the Conquered find by the Events,
what kind of Friends they lost by their own ill Counsels. Belisarius having
thus said, released all their Women and Children, and other Prisoners, without
enduring any Dishonor, and reconciled the Soldiers to them. So in the same
day the Napolitans had the Fortune to be made Slaves, and to recover their
Liberty, with the most precious of their Goods; having hid their Gold, and
things of Value from the Enemy, under ground, and so found them upon the
Restitution of their Houses. Thus ended this Seige, having lasted twenty days.

CHAP. IX.
THE Gothish Garrison, being 800. men, Belisarius took, and hurt not, but
respected them as his own Soldiers. Pastor, when he saw the Town taken, fell
dead of an Apoplexy, having never had any touch of it before; Asclepiodotus his
associate, with some other chief men, came to Belisarius, whom Stephanus
seeing, Thou vildest of all men (quoth he) what mischief have thou done thy
Countrymen, and sold their safety for Barbarians Favor? If they had
prospered, thou would have claimed Rewards, and accused us of Conspiracy with
the Romans, who gave the best Counsels. And now the City being the Emperors,
and we preserved by this man's Virtue, dare thou thus foolishly come to him?
as if clear of all disservice to the Neapolitans, and the Imperial Army?
Stephanus in passion for the Disaster uttered this. But he answered him; Worthy
Sir, you unwittingly extol me, in that you rail at me for my affection to the
Goths. None loves his Superiors in danger, but from a constant mind. Me the
Victors shall find a Defender of their State, as lately their Enemy. A
faithful man changes not his Mind with Fortune, nor entertaines Propositions
from Enemies in an alteration. But he that is sick of Inconstancy, renounces
his Friends upon his first fears. Having thus said, and retiring, the common
people followed and charged him with their Sufferings, and left him not, till
they had killed him, and torn him in pieces. And they entered Pastors house,
searching, and not beleiving the Servants Affirmation of his Death, till they
saw his Body, which they crucified in the Suburbs; then excused their doings
to Belisarius upon such just provocation; and obtaining Pardon, went home.

But the Goths in Rome, and other Towns that way, wondered to see Theodatus so
tame, not offering to fight with the Romans, being his so near Neighbors: And
they suspected him to betray their State to Justinian, caring only to live at
ease himself, and to be rich. When they heard that Naples was taken, they
assembled at Regeta 35. miles from Rome, and accused him openly. The place they
found fit to encamp in, being near to a fair Champian, and to the River of
Decanovius, so called, because having made a compass of 19. miles, it enters
the Sea about the City of Taracina. Near unto which is the Mountain Circaeum,
where they say Ulysses had the Company of Circe, improbably in my conceit;
Homer affirming Circes house to be in an Island. Indeed Circaeum runs far into
the Sea, and seems an Island along the Shore to the Sailer: but being in it,
he finds his mistaking. Upon this reason Homer might call it an Island. But
the Goths assembled at Regeta, chose Vitigis their King, a man of no
conspicuous Family: but in Fights about Sirmium, against the Gepaedes (with
whom Theodorick had War) he got great Reputation. Theodatus hearing his, ran
away to Ravenna: after him Vitigis sent Optaris a Goth, to bring him alive, or
dead. This Optaris had a pique against Theodatus: for having betroathed a
handsome Maid, an Inheritrix, Theodatus persuaded her for Wealth to marry
another man. So that to gratify his own Anger and Vitigis too, he pursued
Theodatus eagerly day and night: And overtaking him upon the way, laid him upon
his back like a Beast, and cut his Throat. This end made Theodatus in the third
year of his Reign.

CHAP. X.
VItigis then marched to Rome, glad of the news of Theodatus Death, and he put
his Son Theudegisclus in safe Custody. From thence, finding things yet in no
good preparation, he thought it best to go to Ravema, and having there
completely furnished himself, to enter into the War. He assembled therefore
the Goths; and spoke thus unto them. Great Actions, fellow Soldiers, prosper
not commonly by sudden Opportunities, but by solid Counsels; seasonable
delaying often doing good, and many undoing their hopes by undue have. For men
unprovided, though equal in numbers, are more easily beaten in Fight, then
though inferior in Powers, yet well prepared. Let us not therefore, provoked
with the present honor, hurt our selves incurably. It is better with a short
disgrace to preserve a perperuall Reputation, then avoding it for a moment, to
be ever confounded with Ignominy. Leander calls this Venetia Marca Trivigiana.
Our maine numbers, and our magazines are in Gaul, and Venetia, and other
remote Parts. We have also a War with the Francks; which before we have settled,
to enter into another, is folly. Who stands between two Enemies, and has not
his eye upon one at once, is commonly ruined by both. I say then, that we ought
to go to Ravenna, and having agreed the War with the Francks, and disposed our
business, then to fight with Belisarius. Let none be ashamed, or fear that
this Retraite will be called a running away. A seasonable Imputation of
Cowardice has crowned many a man with Success: And the name of Valor, gotten
by some before the time, has ended in a Defeat. Let us not affect Names, but
real Advantages. Actions in their conclusions, not beginnings, show the worth
of men. They run not away, who return upon the Enemy with greater
preparations; but who hide themselves, as if they would keep their Bodies ever
alive. And of this City be not afraid. If the Romans be well affected to us,
they will secure it for us; being to endure no extremity in the short time
before we return. If they be unsure, they will hurt us less by receiving the
Enemy into their City; it being ever best to Encounter men that hate us in an
open way. But this also I shall prevent; leaving in it a strong Garrison, and
an able Commander; and that being so settled, we can have no hurt by this
Retrait. The Goths approved this advise of Vitigis, and prepared for the
Journey. Then Vitigis using many Exhortations to Liberius the Bishop of Rome,
the Senate and People, to think of Theodoricks Reign, and to continue their
affections to the Gothish Nation, he bound them in strong Oaths; And leaving
to guard Rome 4000. men under Leuderis, a man ancient, and much esteemed for
his Wisdom, he marched to Ravenna with the rest of his Army, taking the most
part of the Roman Senators with him in the quality of Hostages. There he
married perforce Mattasuntha, a Beautiful Virgin, the Daughter of Amalasuntha,
that by alliance with the Blood of Theodorick he might make his Reign firm.
Then he assembled the Goths from all parts, and ranckt them in order,
distributing Horses and Arms to them. Those only lying in Gaul, for fear of
the Francks, he sent not for.

The Francks were formerly called Germans, where they first inhabited: and how
they incroached upon Gaul, and then fell out with the Goths, I will tell you.
I said before, how from Calis and the Ocean, into the Mediterranean, the left
hand continent is called Europe; and that against it, Africa, and further on,
Asia. The Countries beyond Africa I can say nothing of, being not inhabited;
whereby the Spring of Nile is unknown, which, they say, comes from those
Parts. But Europe at the first is like Peloponesus, having the Sea on both
sides. The first Province from the Ocean is named Spain, unto the Alps, which
are in the Pyrenaean Mountains (the Natives calling narrow passages, Alps)
From thence Gaul reaches to Liguria, where other Alps divide the Gauls and
Ligurians. Gaul is broader then Spain (for Europe begins narrow, and proceeds
to a great breadth by degrees) and it has the Ocean on the North side, and on
the South the Tyrhene Sea. Among other Rivers it has the Rhone, and the Rhine,
having contrary courses; the Rhone into the Tyrrhene Sea, but into the Ocean
the Rhine. Here Lakes also are, where-about anciently these Germans did
inhabit, now called Francks, a Barbarian Nation, and at first not considerable.
Beyond them dwelt the They inhabit (some say) Belgia about Brabant.
Arborychi, subject formerly to the Romans, as all the rest of Gaul and
Spain. Augustus planted the Thuringians to the East of the Arborychi, not far
from whom to the South inhabited the Burgundians, and beyond the Thuringians
the Suevians, and Almans, Potent Nations. All these were free States, and from
all Antiquity seated there. In process of time the Visigoths oppressing the
Roman Empire, subdued Spain, and Gaul, to the River of Poe, and made them
tributary. The Arborychi were then become Roman Soldiers, whom the Germans, or
Francks, to bring them in Subjection, being their Borderers, and for having
abandoned their former Commonwealth, pillaged, and made a general War upon
them. In this War the Arborychi showed much Valor and Affection to the Romans:
And the Germans not able to force them, offered to make them their
Confederates, which they willingly embraced (both being Christians) and being
joined into one people, they grew into a great power. Other Roman Soldiers
also Garrisoned in the Confines of Gaul, being not able to return to Rome,
nor willing to mingle with the Goths their Enemies, and Arrians, yielded
themselves, their Ensigns, and the Country under their Guard to the Arborychi
and Germans, which they have left to their Posterity, and preserved the Roman
Customs, which to my time they religiously observe. They still are enrolled in
the same Bands they anciently served in, have their proper Ensigns in Fights,
and use the Roman Laws, and Habit; and especially the Fashion of their
Diadems. The Roman State flourishing, Gaul on this side the Poe was the
Emperors; But Odoacer usurping the same, by the Tyrants cession, the Visigoths
had all Gallia Cisalpina to The Author calls the Pyrean and the Apennine by the
name of Alps.
those Alps, which sever Gaul and Liguria. Odoacer being slain, the
Thuringians and Visigoths; fearing the Germans power (who were grown a strong
multitude, subduing all in their way) sought alliance with the Goths: And
Theodorick afterward gladly contracted affinities with them. Theudichusa his
Daughter, a young Virgin, he betroathed to Alarick the younger, Prince of the
Visigoths; and Amaloberga, the Daughter of his sister Amalafrida, he affianced
to Hermenefridus, Prince of the Thuringians. And the Francks, fearing
Theodorick, forbear to force the Visigoths and Thuringians, but made War upon
the Burgundians.

CHAP. XI.
Afterward the Francks and Goths made a league against the Burgundians, upon
conditions to ruin the race of them, and to subdue their Country, and that
the Conquerours shall have a Fine from the part not joining in the War, but the
Country to be a common conquest of both. The Francks accordingly went with a
great Army against the Burgundians. Theodorick made preparations in show, but
delayed the expedition, expecting the event. At last he sent his Army, which he
bade march fair and softly; and hearing the Francks to be vanquished, to go no
further; but understanding them to be victorious, to march on speedily. They
did so; And the Francks in a Battle with the Burgundians stiffly fought, with
much slaughter, routed the Enemy, and drove them into the uttermost borders of
their country (where they had many strong places) and subdued the rest. The
Goths hearing it, were speedily with them; and being blamed by their
Confederates, they alleged the ill ways, and paying their Fine, divided the
Country with the Conquerours. And thus Theodorick showed his great providence,
by gaining thus half the Country with a little money, and without loss of
his Subjects: Thus the Goths and Francks held part of Gaul. Afterward the
Francks power increasing, without any fear of Theodorick, they led an Army
against Alarick and the Visigoths. Alarick sent for Theodorick, who marched with
a great Army to his aid. In the mean time the Visigoths hearing how the
Francks besieged Carcasona, encamped themselves near to oppose them. The siege
continuing, and their country being spoiled by the Enemy, they murmured, and
put scorns upon Alarick, railing at the delay of his Kinsman, and affirming
themselves strong enough without company to beat the Francks. Alarick thus
constrained to hazard a Battle, before the Goths could come, was therein
slain, and many of his people by the Francks, who thus got the greatest part
of Gaul. They straightly besieged Carcasona, hearing there was much treasure
in it, which Alarick the Elder had pillaged, when he took Rome. There were the
jewels of King Solomon, goodly pieces, by reason of a green stone in many of
them, and long ago taken by the Romans out of Jerusalem. The Visigoths
remaining, made Giselick their Prince, a base son of Alarick; Amalarick, his
Daughters son, being a child. But Theodorick coming with the Goths Army, the
Francks raised their siege; and returning from thence, Note. Beyond the Rhone
in respect of Italy.
held the parts of Gaul beyond the Rhone to the Ocean; from which Theodorick
could not drive them, and so let them keep it, and recovered the rest of Gaul.
Giselick also being dead, he made Amalarick his Daughters son Prince of the
Visigoths, and himself protector of the Child, and out of Carcasona he took
the Treasures, and returned to Ravenna. His aim was to make the Dominion of
Spain and Gaul his own for ever, sending Forces thither, and Governors, whom
he appointed to send the tributes to him, which (not to appear avaricious) he
gave as a yearly donative to his Armies of Goths and Visigoths: who upon this
occasion, of having one Prince and the same Country, married with one another,
and mingled their races: And afterward Theudis a Goth (whom Theodorick sent to
command the Army) married a Wife of a rich Family of the Spaniards, no
Visigoth, but very wealthy, and Lady of a great country. He had 2000.
Soldiers, and a strong guard of Lanciers, and was in show as Theodoricks
Governor of the Visigoths, but in effect an usurper.

Theodorick grown now an absolute wise man, fearing least while he had a War
with his own servant, the Francks might assail him, and the Visigoths rebel,
he discharged not Theudis of his command, but still upon any War directed him
to lead the Army. Only he got some principal Goths to write to him, that he
should do both justly, and as a wise man, to go to Ravenna, and salute
Theodorick. He continued obedient to Theodoricks command, and failed not in the
annual tribute, but to Ravenna he would neither go, nor promise it.

Theodorick being dead, the Francks invaded the Thuringians, killed their
Prince Hermenfridus, and held them in subjection. Hermenfridus his Widow fled
to Theodatus her Brother, then King of the Goths. Afterward the Francks
vanquished the remaining Burgundians in a Battle, and kept their Prince close
prisoner in a Castle; they used them as men conquered in War, made them serve
in their Armies, and their Country tributary which they dwelt in before.
Amalarick Prince of the Visigoths, From the Poe and Gallia Cis-Alpina to the
Rhone.
being at man's estate, and fearing the Francks greatness, married the Sister
of their King Theudibert: And Gaul he gave to Atalarick his cozen german, King
of the Goths. So that Gaul on this side the Rhone the Goths had, and that
beyond it was subject to the Visigoths: Namely Gallia Narbonersis, or rather
some part of it.
And they agreed to suppress the tribute imposed by Theodorick; And the said
Atalarick fairly restored to Amalarick the treasures taken out of Carcassona by
Theodorick.

The two Nations being joined thus in alliance, who had married any Wife of the
other, might either go with his Wife, or bring her home to his own kindred;
And some (as they pleased) brought home their Wives, others followed them.
Amalarick afterward offended his Wives brother, and was ruined. He was an
Arrian, and permitted not his Wife, being orthodoxall, to use her country
fashions, nor religion; but for her not applying her self to his customs, he
used her with much dis-respect.

The Lady acquainted her Brother with her grievance, which put the Francks, and
Visigoths into a War; and in a Battle long and stoutly fought, Amalarick was
vanquished, with loss of many, and of his own life. Theudibert received his
Sister with all her goods, and so much of Gaul as the Visigoths held. The
survivors with their Wives and Children went into Spain to Theudis, who now
openly usurped. So then all Gaul was held by the Francks and Goths: But
Theodatus King of the Goths, hearing of Belisarius landing in Sicily, made an
accord with the Francks; That they should command in the War; and have the
Goths part of Gaul, and twenty Centenaries of gold to assist them in this War.
But before this treaty was finished, he dyed as has been told.

CHAP. XII.
AND many of the Goths best men under Marcias were Garrisoned in that part of
Gaul; These Vitigis could not safely raise from thence, but thought them
rather too weak for the Francks, who would certainly overrun that part of
Gaul and Italy, if he with his Army went to Rome. So he called to him those
Goths he trusted most, and said; I call you here to impart an advice not
pleasing perhaps, but necessary; and you must hear patiently, and in the
present case counsel what becomes you. Whose affairs are not according to
their mind, such must obey necessity and fortune, and so manage the occasions
presented. We are excellent well prepared for this War, save only that the
Francks stand in our way; our ancient Enemies, with whom hitherto, though with
the hazard of our lives and fortunes, we make our party good. But now (another
Enemy appearing, against whom we must march) it behooves us to make peace with
them. If they continue Enemies, certainly they will come with Belisarius; A
common Enemy ever combines men in amity and mutual aid. And if we encounter
them severally, we shall be beaten by both: So that it is better by loosing a
little, to save the maine of our Dominions, then by coveting all, to perish and
loose all. My opinion is, if we give the Francks the parts of Gaul, bordering
on them, they will lay down their quarrels, and join with us in the War. How
to recover those parts upon our good success, let none examine now: I remember
an old saying; To settle well the present.

The principal Goths conceiving this course advantageous, resolved upon it,
and Ambassadors were sent to the Francks, to surrender Gaul, and pay the
money, and to conclude a Confederacy. The Princes of the Franks were then
Childebert, Note. Clouis the first Christian K. of France had 4. sons,
Childebert, Theodorick, Clotarius, and Clodomir. Clodomir died without issue,
and Childebert had his partage; this Theodebert was son of Theodorick. See
Agathias, lib. 1. cap. 1.
Theudebert, and Clotarius, who received that Gaul with the money, and divided
it proportionably to every man's dominion; They agreed to be firm friends to the
Goths, and to send them succors, not Francks, but of the Nations subject to
them. They could not enter into an open War with the Romans, having lately
promised to join with the Emperor in this. The Ambassadors having dispatched,
returned to Ravenna, and Vitigis sent for Marcias and his Troops.

Belisarius in this mean time prepared his journey for Rome. He appointed 300.
Foot under Herodian for the guard of Naples. He put a Garrison into Cuma to
guard the Castle there; there being no strong place in all Campania, but Naples
and Cuma. In Cuma they yet show Sibyllas Cave, where her Oracle was. It is a
maritime Town, distant sixteen miles from Naples. Belisarius put his Army in
order; but the Romans fearing the fortune of the Napolitans, resolved to
receive the Emperors Army, being moved thereunto chiefly by the Bishop of
Rome, Liberius Note. He calls this Bishop of Rome in the secret History
Silverius. And so Helvicus in his Chronology.
. They sent one Fidelius, born in Milan, a City of Liguria, and formerly
Quaestor to King Atalaricus, inviting Belisarius, and promising to surrender
the City. He led his Army by Via Latina, leaving Via Appia on his left hand;
which Appius a Roman Consul made 900. years ago; and it reaches five days
journey from Rome to Capua: It is broad enough for two Carts a breast, and
worth the sight; all the stones being of Millstone quarry, and very hard, and
brought by Appius from a far country. They are smooth wrought, square, and
close fastened, without brass between, or any thing else. They are so well
fastened and close, that one would think them to grow together. After so long a
time trampling on by Carts, and Beasts every day, there is not the least chink
in the pavement, nor any stone broken, nor worn out, nor that has lost the
brightness.

But the Gothish Garrison in Rome understanding the Enemies approach, and the
Romans intent, were troubled; being not able both to guard the City, and
encounter the Enemy. So that by the Romans permission they left Rome, and went
to Ravenna: Only Leuderis (ashamed it seems) staid behind. The same day and
hour Belisarius entered Rome with the Emperors Army at Porta Asinaria, and the
Goths went out at Porta Flaminia. The taking of Rome, Anno 11. Iustiniani, Anno
Dom. 337.
Thus Rome was recovered in the. 11. year of Justinians Reign, sixty years
after the last taking of it. The keys of it, and Leuderis Belisarius sent to
the Emperor: He took care of the walls decayed in many places, and made the
turrets tenable against an assault. He made Works upon the left side of every
turret, to secure the Defendants left side from shot: And about the walls he
drew a good deep ditch. The Romans commended the Generals providence, and
chiefly his skill in contriving the turrets: But they murmured, wondering he
would enter Rome with an opinion of being besieged, a place unfit for a siege
for want of provisions, being not upon the Sea, and having a huge compass of
walls, and in an open champian easily invested. But he, though he heard all
this, yet still prepared for a siege. The corn he brought from Sicily he kept
in public Granaries, and he compelled the Romans (though they grumbled) to
bring in all their provisions from their Farms.

CHAP. XIII.
A GOTH then, one Pitzas, yielded to Belisarius half Samnium, lying upon the
Sea, and the Goths there inhabiting to the River, which divides the country.
The Goths on the other side the River, neither would follow Pitzas, nor submit
to the Emperor. Belisarius gave him some Soldiers to help to guard the Towns
there. The Calabrians and Apulians having no Goths, had voluntarily before
submitted to Belisarius, both in the Mid land, and upon the Seacoast; Of which
was Beneventum, anciently by the Romans called Maleventum; now Beneventum, to
avoid the reproach of the name: for Ventus in Latin signifies the Wind:
because in Dalmatia over against it uses to blow a rough wind, during which no
Traveller is seen upon the ways; they all shut themselves in their houses. The
force of the wind is such, that it snatches up a Horseman and his Horse
together, carries them in the air, and throws them down and kills them. And
Beneventum standing high, and over against Dalmatia, shares in the
inconvenience of this wind. Diomedes built the City, being banished from Argos
after the destruction of Troy. It has a monument of him, the teeth of the
Calydonian Bore, the prize of Meleager his Uncle in that famous hunting, which
are still there, and worth the seeing, the circumference like a half moon,
being of three spanns. Here they say Diomedes met with Aeneas, and according to
Minerva's Oracle, gave him the Image stolen by him and Ulysses out of her
Temple, when they came as spies into Troy, before the City could be taken.
Afterward being sick, they say, he consulted the Oracle, which answered, that
he should never have ease, unless he gave that Image to some Trojan. Where it
is the Romans now know not, but show the figure of it graven in stone, standing
to my time in the Temple of Fortune, before the brazen Statue of Minerva in the
open air, on the East Side of that Temple. It resembles Minerva fighting, and
charging her Lance; yet in a long robe, and with a face not like her Grecian
Statues, but as the ancient Egyptians made them. They of Constantinople say,
that Constantine buried the Statue in the Marketplace bearing his name. But
Belisarius thus conquered Italy on this side the Jonian Gulf, to Rome and
Samnium. On the other side Constantianus (as has been said) got all, to
Liburnia.

To speak something how Italy is inhabited; the Adriatique Sea discharges a
stream far into the firm Land, and makes the Jonian Gulf; Not as in other
places, where the Sea running to the Land-ward, in the end makes an Isthmus, or
neck of Land. As the Chrisaean Gulf ending in the Haven of Lechaeum by
Corinth, makes there the Isthmus, being some five miles broad: And the Gulf
Melas from the Hellespont makes another of the same breadth in Chersonesus.
Whereas from Ravenna, where ends the Jonian Gulf, to the Tyrrhene Sea, is
eight days journey over land, by reason the current of that Sea is carried out
far to the Southward. The first Town on this side the Jonian Gulf is
Otranto in Apulia. To the North of that Town is part of Calabria, and Samaium:
Next to which is Picenia, reaching to Ravenna. On the other side of that Town
is the rest of Calabria, then Bruttia, and Lucania. Next to which is Campania,
to the City of Taracina. To them adjoynes the Territory of Rome. These Nations
hold both the shores of the Mediterranean, and all the Mid-lands that way. Here
is that which was formerly called Magna Graecia. In Bruttia are seated the
Epizephyrian Locrians, Crotonians, and Thurians. On the other side of the
Jonian Gulf, first are the Graecians of Epirus, to Epidamnus, which stands
upon the Sea. Bordering thereunto is the Province of Precalis: Beyond which it
is called Dalmatia, accounted of the western Empire, and all beyond it, as
Liburnia, Istria, and Venetia, reaching to Ravenna. Above these up into the
Land are the Siscians, and the Suevians (not those subject to the Francks) and
the Carnians, and Norioi beyond them. To the right hand of whom are the Dacians
and Pannonians, holding Singidon, Sirmium, and other places, and extending to
the river Ister. The Nations on that side the Jonian gulf, the Goths at the
beginning of this war ruled. Beyond Ravenna, to the left hand, and by North of
the Poe, are the Ligurians, and beyond them Northward the Albanians, in an
excellent Country, called Languvilla. To the West of these Nations are the
Gauls, and then the Spaniards. To the South of the Poe is Aemilia, and Tuscany,
which reaches to the Territory of Rome.

But Belisarius took all the said territory of Rome to the Tiber, and fortified
it round about; which being in good estate, he directed Constantianus with a
band of his own Targetiers, and with Zanter, Chorsomanus, and Aeschmanus,
Hunnes, and some of his Lifeguard, and other Forces to march into Tuscany, and
take in the Towns there. And he gave order to Bessas to take Narnia, a strong
place in Tuscany. Bessas was of the race of the Goths formerly inhabiting
Thrace, but followed not Theodorick into Italy. He was valiant, a skillful
Soldier, and an excellent Captain, and very dextrous in his own person. He got
Narnia by the Inhabitants good will; and Constantianus as easily took Spoletum
and Perusia, and some other Towns in Tuscany; the Tuscans willingly receiving
him. He placed a Garrison in Spoletum, and himself with his Forces lodged in
Perusia, the chief City in Tuscany. Vitigis sent an Army against him under
Vnilas, and Pitzas, whom Constantinus encountered in the Suburbs of Perusia. At
first, the Barbarians having advantage in numbers, the battle was equal; but
at last the Romans by their valor routed them, and killed them almost all;
Their Commanders they sent prisoners to Belisarius. Vitigis upon this would
stay no more at Ravenna, where he attended Marcias and his Troops. First he
sent an Army under Asinarius and Vligisalus, to recover Dalmatia to the Goths;
directing them to get Barbarians out of Suavia to join with them, and so to
march directly to Salonae: Which to besiege by Sea also he sent along many
Pinnaces. Then himself prepared to go against Belisarius, and Rome, with no
less then 150000. Horse and Foot, the most of them armed, horses and Men.
Asinarius raised an Army of Suevians; and Vligisalus led the Goths alone into
Liburnia, where he fought with the Romans at a place called Scardon, was
beaten, and retired to the City of Burnus, where he staid for Asinarius.
Constantianus hearing of Asinarius his preparations, and fearing Salonae, drew
together the Soldiers garrisoned thereabout, made a Ditch about the City
walls, and provided against a siege. Asinarius with a great levy of Barbarians
came to Burnus, and joining with Vligisalus marched to Salonae. They compast
the Walls with their Trenches, and manning their Pinnaces with soldiers,
blockt Salonae to the Sea-ward, and so besieged it by Sea and Land: But the
Romans set suddenly upon their Pinnaces, scattered them, and sunck many with
the men aboard, and took many, the men being gone. Yet the Goths raised not
their siege, but were rather more eager upon the Romans within.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the mean time Vitigis hearing of the smalnesse of Belisarius his Army, it
repented him for retiring from Rome; so not enduring longer where he was, in
much anger he marched thitherward. Upon the way he met a Roman Priest, of whom,
they say, he asked earnestly, if Belisarius were yet at Rome; as fearing not to
catch him before his running away. He bad him apprehend no such thing,
undertaking that Belisarius would not fly, but stay upon the place: Which made
him have the more; openly praying, to see Rome before Belisarius were run out
of it. Who hearing the whole Nation of Goths thus coming upon him, was
troubled; For though his Army were very small, he would not leave destitute
Constantinus and Bessas, nor abandon the places in Tuscany, least with them the
Goths should block up Rome. So upon advice he sent to Constantinus, and Bessas,
to leave competent Garrisons in the most important places, and with the rest to
come to Rome. Constantinus accordingly placing Garrisons in Spoletum and
Perusia, came with the rest to Rome. But Bessas staying to settle Narnia, the
Enemy passed that way, and the Feilds and Suburbs were full of them, being
Avant-coureurs, whom Bessas charged, and defeated them, and killed many; but
pressed with their numbers, he retired into Narnia, where he left a Garrison; and
coming to Rome, brought news, that the Enemy would speedily be with them.
Narnia stands almost 44. miles from Rome. Vitigis would not spend time upon
Perusia, and Spoletum, being strong places. His desire was to find Belisarius
in Rome, before he was run away. And Narnia possessed by the Enemy, and a place
steep and hard of access, he would not stir neither: it stands on a high hill,
at the foot whereof is the River of Narnus, giving the name to the City; and it
has two ascents on the East and West sides; the one narrow with ragged rocks;
to the other is no coming, but over the bridge upon the River, which is an
ancient building of Augustus Caesar, admirable to see, and with the highest
arches we know. Vitigis, not to spend time, speedily went thence with his whole
Army toward Rome, marching through the Sabins Country. Being within a mile and
three quarters thereof, he came to a bridge upon the Tiber, where Belisarius had
built a Tower, and Gates, and placed a Garrison. The Tiber was every where
passable by Boats and other Bridges; but this he did, to put the Enemy to more
delay (expecting from the Emperor more Forces) and that the Romans might have
the more time to bring in provisions; conceiving that the Goths repulsed here,
could not pass by any other Bridge in less then twenty days; and to get Boats
would be a longer work.

Upon these considerations he placed that Garrison. The Goths lodged near it,
and the next day intended to assault the Tower. Here came to them 22.
Fugitives, Barbarians born, but Roman Soldiers of Innocentius Horse-troop.
Belisarius thought fit to make a Camp near the Tiber, the more to hinder the
Enemies passage, and to give some demonstration of their own courage.

The Roman Garrison upon the Bridge frighted with the multitude, and the danger,
quitted the Tower at night, and ran away into Campania. They would not go to
Rome, fearing chastisement from the General, or ashamed to see their fellows.
The next day the Goths brake down the Gates, and passed over, none opposing.
Whereof Belisarius hearing nothing, with 1000. Horse marched toward the bridge,
to view their ground, where they might best incamp; who lighting upon the Enemy
newly passed over, were engaged in a fight unwillingly. They were both sides
Horse: And Belisarius, though formerly cautions, observed not then the rank of
a General, but fought in the head of his Soldiers, which hazarded extremely
the Roman affairs, the whole inclination of the War depending on him. But he
was upon a Horse used to the War, and skillful to save his Rider. He was of a
brown bay, and from the forehead to the nostrils white (Such a Horse the
Grecians call (...), and the Barbarians, Balan.) Most of the Goths shot at
Belisarius and his Horse upon this occasion. Those new-come Fugitives seeing
Belisarius fighting in the first rank, and knowing that by his fall the Romans
would be ruined, cried aloud to shoot at the bald faced Horse. This word ran
through the Goths Army, who in the tumult being not inquisitive, nor certain it
was Belisarius, but guessing the word so generally spread was not for nothing,
most left all others, and shot at Belisarius. Such as were ventrous, and
ambitious of honor, got near, reached at him, and in fury laid on with Lances
and swords. And Belisarius laid about him too, killing those within his reach.
The affection of his Lanciers and Targetiers stood him in good stead in this
danger; who sticking close to him, showed valor, the like whereof (I think)
was never seen, holding their sheilds before the General, and receiving all
the arrows, and thrusting off the multitudes with main strength.

CHAP. XV.
THus was the whole fight about one man, wherein fell at least 1000 Goths, and
such as fought in the first rancks. Many of the best of Belisarius his Retinue
were slain, and Maxentius, one of his Lanciers, after he had performed
bravely: Himself was neither wounded that day nor shot, though the fight was
about him alone. In conclusion, the Romans routed the Enemy; multitudes flying,
till they recovered their camp: where their foot being fresh, received the
Romans, and easily repulsed them. Who seeing another supply of Horse coming,
fled up to a Hill, where they made a stand; and encountered the Barbarian horse
overtaking them. Where Valentinus, Gentleman of the horse to Photius,
Antonina's son, showed extraordinary valor, gallopping into the thickest of
the enemy, and stopping their course, and bringing off his company; and thus
they escaped to the Walls of Rome, with the Barbarians at their heels up to the
gate, now called Belisaria. The Romans within, fearing the Enemy might enter
pell mell, would not open the gate, notwithstanding Belisarius's earnest
commands, loud cries, and threats, who could not be discerned from the Turret
(it being after Sun set) having his face covered with blood and dust, and they
did not think the General to be alive; those that ran away at the first defeat
having reported him to be slain, fighting bravely in the head of his troops.
The Enemy therefore coming with multitudes, and much Fury, thought to get over
the ditch, and charged the retirers, who near the Walls stood thick and close
body to body in a small room. And they within being no Soldiers, nor prepared
at all, and afraid of their city, could not succor them; when a sudden bold
resolution of Belisarius saved all, who encouraging his company, charged the
Enemy: and they being disordered, as in the dark, and upon a chase, and seeing
those that fled unexpectedly coming on, suspected succors to be come from the
city, and in a fear run all away. Belisarius pursued them not, but turned about
to the walls; whom the Romans, taking heart, received in, and his company. In
so great peril was Belisarius, and the Emperors affairs. The fight beginning
in the morning ended at night; wherein Belisarius did best of the Romans, and
of the Goths Visandus the standard bearer, who with the rest charged
Belisarius; and went not off, before he fell to the ground after 13 wounds
received, and neglected by his companions (though they had the victory) he was
left among the dead. Three days after, the Goths being encamped near Rome,
sent out to bury the dead men, and to perform their funeral rites: these
searching the bodies, found Visandus with breath in him, but he could not
speak; his inward parts with famine and drouth being extremely inflamed, they
put water in his mouth, and so having drunk and got life, they carried him to
the camp; and for this he was in great reputation with the Goths, and he lived
long after. Belisarius being in safety, assembled his soldiers to the walls,
and most of the common people; commanding them to light fires, and to watch all
night. He went the round himself, set all in order, and appointed commanders to
every gate. Bessas, who guarded Porta Praenestina, sent him word, that the town
was entered by the Enemy at a gate bearing the name from Saint Pancratius. The
company advised Belisarius to escape out at some other gate; but he misliked
the motion, sent horsemen down to the Tiber, who upon the view brought word,
that there was no Enemy thereabout appearing. Wherefore he sent direction to
the Commanders of every gate, if they heard that the Enemy was entered at any
other part, not to succor, but to continue upon their guards; least they
should be disordered with false alarms; Himself would take care of those
things. Vitigis (the Romans being in this tumult) sent a Commander named Vacis,
to Porta Salaria, who reviled there the Romans for their disloyalty to the
Goths, and thus betraying their country, and indeed themselves, having
exchanged the Goths power, for Greeks, unable to defend them; none of which
nation were formerly seen in Italy, but stage players, and some pilfring
mariners. But seeing none would answer him, he went back to Vitigis. The Romans
also flouted Belisarius, who had so hardly escaped, yet bade them despise these
Barbarians; for he knew he should absolutely beat them. By what he knew this,
shall be said anon; but now it being grown late, and he being yet fasting, his
wife and friends had much ado to persuade him to eat something.

CHAP. XVI.
THe next day the Goths thinking with ease to enter Rome, by reason of the
greatness of it; and the Romans defending it, were thus quartered. The city
has fourteen gates, and some posterns; but the Goths, unable to encompasse the
whole circuit thereof, made ^ixe intrenchments, and infested the space of five
Gates, from Porta Flaminia to Porta Praenestina. These were on this side the
Tiber; But fearing least the enemy should take down Pons Milvius, and so
exclude them from all from the river to the sea, and thereby might not feel the
inconveniences of the Seige; they made a seventh Intrenchment on the other side
of Tiber, in Nero's feilds; that they might have the said bridge in the midst
between their Camps. And so they infested two gates more; It was called Porta
Triumphalis, and Vaticana, and was next to Pons Triumphalis, Leand. in descrip.
Italiae. Mons Janiculus it was called.
Porta Aurelia (now named of Peter, the chief of Christ's Apostles, lying
buried near unto it) and the Gate beyond the Tiber. Thus they encompassed half
the city; and being not cut off by the River, made the war in what part of it
they pleased. The Romans have built their walls on both sides the River, thus.
The Tiber grown great, runs a good space by the walls on this side of it,
which stand by the Rivers side, upon Ground flat, and very assaultable.
Opposite to them beyond the Tiber, is a * great hill, where stand the City
mills; the water being brought by an Aquaeduct to the hill top, and from thence
descending with much swiftness: which caused the ancient Romans to compass
this hill, and the Rivers banck near it with a wall; that an Enemy might not
demolish the mills, nor pass the River to assail the town walls; which with a
bridge they joined to this part; and building houses upon this ground beyond
the Tiber, took the River into the midst of the City. The Goths also made deep
ditches about their intrenchments; and casting the Earth inward, and therewith
making the intrenchment very high, and pitching the top with multitude of
stakes, they made their camps not inferior to so many Castles. The
Entrenchment in Nero's feilds Marcias commanded, being come out of Gaul with
his troops, and there quartered. The other were commanded by Vitigis, and five
other; a Commander to every intrenchment. They cut also all the Aquaeducts, to
cut off the cities water that way: they are fourteen in all, ancient works of
brick; and so deep and broad, that a man on Horse back may ride in them. But
Belisarius to guard the City used this order; himself had Porta Pinciana, and
Porta Salaria standing to the right hand of it, because the wall there is very
assaultable; and being opposite to the Enemy, the Romans were to sally there.
He gave Porta Praenestina to Bessas, and to Constantianus Porta Flaminia (which
stands to the left hand of Pinciana) and rammed up the gate with stones within,
that it might not be opened; fearing the Enemies designs there, being close to
one of their Entrenchments. The other gates he directed the commanders of the
foot to guard. The Aquaeducts he fortified a good space, to avoid mischeife
that way from without. But the Aquaeducts being cut, they wanted water for
their mills, and with beasts they could not work, their scarce provisions of
fodder (as in a siege) not sufficing for their horses of service. Belisarius to
help this, tied cables before the bridge, that joined to the City wall, from
one banck of the river to the other, stretching them stiff, and fastening boats
to them two foot asunder, where the stream from the arches of the bridge ran
strongest; and putting into each boat a millstone, he hung the Engine between
the boats which turns the Mill. Beneath these he tied other boats together in
the same manner in a distance proportionable, fitting them with like Engines;
and the stream being strong, and turning the Engines, set the Mill stones on
work, and grinded sufficient for the City. The Enemies informed hereof by
fugitives, endeavored to spoil the Engines by throwing into the River great
trees and bodies of Romans slain, and these being driven down with the stream,
brake the Engines at first; but Belisarius had this remedy. He hung before the
bridge iron chains across the River, which stopped all that came down the
stream; which men appointed drew up to the land; and this he did not only for
the mills, but to prevent the Enemies entrance with boats through the bridge
into the midst of the City. The Barbarians failing in their attempt gave it
over, and the Romans made use of those mills, but for want of water were shut
from their Baths; they had sufficient to drink, those who dwelt far from the
River having the commodity of wells. Their common sewers they needed not
secure, having all their mouths into the River; and so impossible to be entered
by the Enemy.

In the mean time among the Samnites, their boys who kept their sheep, choosing
two of the lustiest, and calling one Belisarius and the other Vitigis, caused
them to wrestle. It was Vitigis chance to be thrown; whom the boys in sport
hung on a tree, and suddenly a wolf appearing, they all ran away, and poor
Vitigis after a long time hanging in great pain dyed. The Samnite upon this
accident punished not the boys, but divining at the event, believed that
Belisarius would get the Victory.

CHAP. XVII.
BUT the people of Rome not used to the miseries of war, and a siege; and now
wanting their baths, and pincht with scarcity, being put also to guard the
walls, and want their sleeps; supposing too, that ere long their City would be
taken, and seeing already their country farms spoiled by the Enemy; they
murmured greivously to be besieged and run this hazard, having done no offense.
So assembling themselves, they railed at Belisarius for presuming to make war
with the Goths, having no competent forces from the Emperor, and the Senators
privately objected the same unto him. Vitigis understanding this from fugitives,
to exasperate them yet more, and so to put the Romans affairs into confusion,
he sent Ambassadors to Belisarius; among whom was one Albes, who having access
to him in the presence of the Senate, and Commanders of the army, spoke thus.
Anciently, O General! men fitly defining names for things, have distinguished
presumption from valor; the one drives men into danger with dishonor, the
other with virtue brings abundantly glory. One of these has brought you
hither, and which of them you may quickly manifest. If in the confidence of
your valor you have entered into this war; you see from your walls your
Enemies; and brave S^. you have means to be valiant enough. If through
presumption you have invaded us, you will certainly repent what you have rashly
done, as overweening men ever use when they come to the trial: Add not
therefore more misery to these Romans, whom Theodorick has bred in freedom and
delights; and oppose not your self against the Lord of the Goths and Italians.
How absurd is it for you, shut up thus, and afraid of your Enemies, to lodge
in Rome, while her King lives in a trench, acting the mischeifes of a war upon
his own Subjects? Yet will we grant to you and your troops a free retreat,
and leave to carry away your goods; holding it not religious nor manly to
insult upon men, who have learnt to be sober again. But we would willingly ask
these Romans wherewith they can charge the Goths, that they thus have betrayed
both us and themselves; having hitherto enjoyed our moderation, and now finding
what your aides are. Belisarius to this speech made this answer. Our season for
fighting shall not be at your disposing; men use not to make war by the advice
of their Enemies, whose Law is for every man to order his own business to his
own liking: The time will come when you would hide your heads in bushes, and
shall not be able. We having taken Rome, possess nothing that is another. You
usurped it formerly being not yours, and now have restored it to the ancient
owners. And who ever of you hopes to enter Rome without fighting, he is
mistaken. It is impossible Belisarius should live, and so much degenerate. Thus
spoke Belisarius. But the Romans for fear sat mute, not daring to contradict
the Ambassadors, though reproached thus with treason. Only Fidelius was bold
to reprove them, being Prefect of the palace made by Belisarius, and most
affected to the Emperors Service. The Ambassadors were reconducted to the
camp; whom Vitigis asked what manner of man Belisarius was, and how resolving,
touching his retreat. They answered, that the Goths hoped an impossibility, if
they thought to fright Belisarius: whereupon Vitigis resolved to assault the
City; for which he was thus prepared. He made Towers of wood equal with the
walls; having the just measure of them by often numbering the stones: at the
Bases and corners of the towers were wheels, which with ease were moved and
turned about as the assailants pleased, and drawn by oxen. He fitted also many
Ladders, and made four Rams; which Engine is made first setting up four
wooden pillars equal and opposite to each other; into which are mortessed
eight cross beams, four above and four into the Bases, making the form of a
little house four square. This instead of roof and walls was covered with
Skins, that it might be light to draw, and they within secure from shot. Within
about the Engine aloft, hangs another cross beam with loose chains, the top
whereof is made sharp, and over it a great quantity of iron laid as on the
head end of an arrow, where the said iron is made four square like an anvill.
The Engine is raised upon four wheels, fastened to the four pillars; and within
fifty men at least move it, who having set it to the walls, draw the said loose
beam backward with a pully, then let it go with violence at the walls; and by
often shooting it thus, it shakes and makes a breach where it hits: hence the
Engine has the name; the point of the said beam putting forth, and pushing like
a ram. The Goths also had quantity of fagots of wood and reed ready, to make
the ground and the City ditch even for their Engines to pass without rubb.
Belisarius upon the other side placed upon the Towers engines called Balistae.
These have the form of a bow, with a hollow horn sticking out beneath and
hanging loose, but lying upon a strait piece of Iron: when they are to shoot,
they bend the two pieces of wood, making the two ends of the bow, with cord;
and put the arrow upon the hollow horn, being half so long as common arrows,
and four times as thick. It mounts not with feathers, but instead thereof has
thinn pieces of wood mortess'd in, and it is in shape wholly like common
arrows, having a head of iron proportionable to its thickness; men at both
ends bend the bow with pullyes; and the hollow horn going forward, at last
falls off, and out flies the arrow with such force, that it reaches twice as
far as an arrow from a bow, and lighting upon tree or stone, cleaves it
asunder. It is called Balistae, because (...)it shootes very far. Other Engines
were set upon the battlements proper for slinging stones, and are like slings,
and are called wild Asses. At the Gates they set up wolves, These wolves were
something like Potteulisses.
made thus. They set two beams from the ground reaching to the battlements; and
laying Chequer wise pieces of Timber wrought, some upright and some a cross,
they joint them so, that the mortessing holes meet one another. And before
each joint sticks out a pointed piece of wood like a thick spurr and fastening
the cross timbers to another beam, which from the top reaches half way down,
they lay the beams flat-long upon the Gates, and an Enemy approaching, men
above lay hold of the higher ends of the beams and thrust them down, which
falling suddenly among the Assailants with those wooden points sticking out,
kill all they light on. Belisarius having these preparations, the Goths
conducted by Vitigis himself the eighteenth day of the siege about sun rising,
marched to the assault. The Towers and Rams in the head of them astonished the
Romans, not used to such sights. But Belisarius seeing the Enemies order with
their Engines, fell into a laughing, and bade the Soldiers stand and begin no
fight, till he gave the Signal. He imparted not the reason of his laughing,
but afterward it was known. The Romans thinking he jeered them, railed at him,
and called him an impudent man, and extremely murmured, that he did not stop
the Enemy coming near or still. Who being approacht the town ditch, the
General bent his bow and shot an armed man, leading the rest into the neck;
and the wound being mortal, the man fell down with his face upward. All the
people of Rome upon the Battlements taking it for an excellent presage, made a
huge shout. Belisarius shot again, with the like fortune, and again there was
a greater shout from the walls, that the Romans within thought the Enemy had
been vanquished. Then Belisarius gave the signal to the whole Army to shoot,
and commanded those about himself, to employ all their Arrows against the
Oxen; which soon fell all, and so the Enemy could neither bring on their
Towers, nor invent any remedy, being puzzel'd in the midst of their business.
Then was known Belisarius providence, not to stop them afar off; and that he
laughed at their sottishness, in hoping to bring their Oxen to their Enemies
walls so unadvisedly. These things were about Porta Belisaria.

CHAP. XVIII.
BUT Vitigis being there repulsed, left a good part of the Army, ordered in a
deep Batallion; and directing the Commanders, not to assail the walls, but to
stand in their orders, and ply the Battlements with shot, to divert Belisarius
from succouring another part (which with greater Forces he meant to assault)
he marched toward Porta Praenestina, to that part which is called Vivarium (or
the Park) where the Walls are most assaultable, having other Engines of Rams,
Towers, and scaling Ladders. The Goths also made another assault against Porta
Aurelia; without which stands Adrians Tomb, a stones cast from the walls, worth
the sight. It is made of Parian stone close joined, without any other matter
within. It has four equal squares, each being near a stones cast broad, and
is higher then the City walls. On the top are Statues of the same stone of men
and horses, of admirable work. This tomb the Citizens have anciently joined
to the walls by two Flanckers from the same; that it shows as a turret
defending the gate there. The Fortification being very sufficient, Belisarius
gave the command of it to Constantianus, directing him to take care of the wall
adjoining, which had but a small guard. For the wall being there strong (the
river running under it, he looked not for an assault that way, and so put no
important guard at it; distributing his maine Forces (which were but few) to
the most necessary places. For the Emperors Army at the beginning of this
siege amounted but to five thousand men in Rome.

Constantianus perceiving the Enemy to attempt a passage over the Tiber, and
fearing the Flancker there, himself went to the succor with a few, directing
the rest to guard the Gate and Adrians tomb. Where the Goths gave on, holding
before them their leather Bucklers like Persian Targets, and having no engines
of Batteries, but store of scaling Ladders and Archery, thinking quickly to
perplex the Enemy, and master the Garrison being few. Their opposites saw them
not, till they came very near, being covered by the Porticus, which reaches to
Saint Peter's Church. Then suddenly the Goths showing themselves, began; and the
Romans were not able to use their Balistas (which can shoot but right forward)
nor with their Archery to annoy them, the shot doing no good by reason of those
Bucklers. The Goths pressed hard, and shot thick at the Battlements, and were
ready to se their Ladders to the Flanckers, having almost encompassed the tomb,
and when the Romans came on, still wheeling about at their backs. The Romans
were troubled, seeing no hope of holding out, till they agreed to take down the
Statues being great, and the stones huge, which they threw down upon the
Enemies heads. Who being hurt, gave ground by little and little, and the Romans
grew bold, and repelled them with their Bows and stones; and falling to their
Engines, put them into fear, so that their assault was not long. And
Constantianus appearing, frighted those who attempted to pass the River, not
finding the Flancker there without guard, as they imagined.

Thus the Aurelian gate was in safety, and all about it. The Enemy also
attempted Porta Pancratiana upon the River, but did no good upon the place,
being strong, and the walls not easily assaultable there, standing on steep
ground. Paulus with his Foot company guarded there. Neither attempted they
Porta Flaminia, situate upon craggy ground, not easy of access, and guarded
by a Foot-company of Rhegians, commanded by Vrsicinus. Between this gate and
Porta Pinciana, next it on the right hand, part of the wall had been long
broken half way down from the top. It fell not, but panch't on both sides,
part appearing inward, and part outward: whence the Romans call it the broken
wall. Belisarius at his first coming, going about to repair it, the Romans
hindered him, alleging that the Apostle Peter had promised to guard the
place, whom above all they reverence. And it succeeded according to their
expectation: For neither that day, nor during all the siege of Rome the Enemy
ever approacht it, not was the least trouble about it. And we wondered in all
the time, that the place never came into the Enemies thoughts, having made so
many assaults, and attempts by night. No man since has been so bold as to
repair it, but still the wall remains broken. At Porta Salaria in the mean
time, a tall goodly man, valiant, and of good quality among the Goths, being
armed with Corslet and Morion, left his rank; and standing on a tree, threw a
rope up to the Battlements, whom an arrow from a Balista piercing through his
body half way into the tree, nailed him dead to the same. This frighted the
Goths from coming within arrow-shot, and kept them in their ranks, from
infesting any more those upon the walls.

CHAP. XIX.
IN the mean time Bessas and Peranius (whom Vitigis hotly charged in the
Vivarium) sent for Belisarius. And he speedily came to their relief, fearing
the weakness of the wall in that part; and leaving at Porta Salaria one of his
retinew, He encouraged the Soldiers in the Park, frighted with the assault,
and the Enemies multitude. Anciently the Romans finding the ground flat, and
fit for invasion, and the bricks of the wall there grown loose, scarce sticking
together, compassed the same with a Flancker, not so much for safety (for it
had no Battlements, nor other Fortification upon it, to resist an Enemy) but
for pleasure, to keep in it Lions, and other wild Beasts, whereupon it was
named Vivarium, the Park. Vitigis made ready his Engines against the wall
there, and commanded the Goths to get through the Flancker into the Park, and
then he knew he should be easily master of the Town-walls, being weak.
Belisarius seeing the Enemy digging through into the Park, and in many parts
assaulting the walls, suffered not his men to defend, nor stay upon the
Battlements, but held them, with their swords and Armor ready near unto the
Gate there. The Goths having now cut through the wall, and entered the Park, he
sent out Cyprianus with his company to begin the fight; who killed them all,
falling down for fear, and spoiled by one another, running out at their
narrow breach: the whole Enemy being amazed with the suddenness, and out of
their orders, and some carried one way, some another. Belisarius instantly
opened the Gate, and sallied with the whole Army; And the Goths having no mind
to fight, ran away every man; whom the Romans followed, and killed them with
ease, and had a long execution; the Goths having assaulted there far from their
Entrenchments. Belisarius commanded to burn the Enemies Engines, which with the
flame (being high) more astonished them. At Porta Salaria also they sallied at
the same time unexpectedly, killed the Enemy running away without resistance,
and burnt their Engines. The flame rose above the walls, which put them all to
a general retreat: the Romans from the walls shouting to encourage the
pursuers, and the others from the Entrenchments wailing the disaster. Thirty
thousand Goths were slain that day (as their Commanders affirmed) and more
wounded. For from the Battlements shooting at multitudes, they seldom mist;
and they who sallied, slew heaps of amazed flying men, and the business lasted
from morning to evening. At night they retreated; the Romans singing their
Paeans upon the walls, extolling Belisarius with acclamations, and some
stripping the dead bodies; and the Goths curing their wounded, and mourning for
their dead. Belisarius also wrote to the Emperor this letter.

We are come into Italy, according to your commands, and have gained a great
part of the Country, and taken Rome, expelling the Goths, whose Commander
Leuderis we send. Belisarius defended Rome with 5000 against 150000. Goths.
But in the strong places of Sicily and Italy (which we took by siege) we have
left the greatest part of our Army; that it is now reduced to 5000 men, the
Enemy assailing us with 150000. First, going out to discover the Enemy near
the Tiber, we were put to fight beyond our determination, and were almost
overwhelmed with the multitude of their Lances. Afterward they made a general
assault with men and Engines on all sides, and failed little of taking Rome at
the first assault, if fortune had not rescued us. Hitherto what has been done
by fortune, or valor, has succeeded well: But now I must entreat, what may
conduce to your future service. I will never conceal what it behooves me to
say, and you to do. I know affairs go as God guides them, but the Governors
of them get blame or commendation by the actions they perform. So that Arms
must be sent us, and such numbers of Men, as that we may encounter the Enemy
with aequivalent powers. We must not ever trust to fortune, which runs not
always one way. And consider, O Emperor! That if the Goths now beat us, we
shall loose Italy (now yours) and our Army too; besides the disgrace for our
ill carriage of the business. And we shall also undo the Romans, who have
preferred their faith to your Empire before their safety; and so will our
prosperity prove the occasion of our calamity. For if we had been repulsed from
Italy, or before from Sicily, the lightest of misfortunes would have troubled
us only; not to be rich with other men's goods. You are to consider also, that
Rome was never before kept so long, with many thousands; it compasses so much
ground: and being not upon the Sea, it is excluded from necessaries. The Romans
yet are well affected to us, but the prolongation of their miseries will make
them choose the best for themselves* New friends to any men, keep faith, not
when they suffer, but when they prosper by them. Besides, the Romans will by
famine be forced to do things they would not. I know I owe my death to your
Majesty, so that none shall ever pull me out of this place alive; But think,
what glory such a death of Belisarius will bring you.

The Emperor upon this letter gathered an Army and Ships, and sent direction
to Valerianus, and Martinus, who were dispatched with an Army about the Winter
Solstice, to sail for Italy with all speed; but not able to keep the Sea
further, went on Land, and wintred in Aetolia, and A^arnania. The Emperor
advertised Belisarius thereof, which much comforted him and the Romans.

In the mean time in Naples this happened. The Image of Theodorick, King of the
Goths stood in the Marketplace, made of small peeble stones, dyed into all
colors. In his life time the stones of the head of this Image peeled and shed
off, and presently after he dyed: Eight years after, the peebles forming the
Images belly dropped off, and instantly Atalarick dyed, Theodoricks daughters
son: soon after fell off the pebles upon the privities, and then his daughter
Amalasuntha was murdered. And now the Goths besieging Rome, the limbs down to
the Images feet were in the same manner spoiled, and the whole outside
defaced; and the Romans divining upon it, were confident of the Emperors
prevailing in this War; taking Theodoricks feet for his Subjects, the people
of the Goths. In Rome also some Patricians produced Oracles of Sibylla, that
the Cities danger would last but till July; when the Romans should have a King,
through whom they should no more fear Geticke Nations: And the Goths, they
say, are a Nation of Getes. In the Oracle it is the fifth month, which they
interpreted July; some, because the siege began in the beginning of March, from
which July is the fifth; others, because before Numa March was the first
month, there being but ten in all, whence July was called Quintilis. But this
was mistaken all. For the Romans had no such King, and the siege was raised
after that time, and another siege was under Totilas King of the Goths, as
shall be said hereafter. I conceive the Prophecy to intend not this, but some
other invasion of Barbarians, happened already, or to come: And to find the
meaning of Sibylla's Oracles before the event, is not possible, for a cause I
shall tell you, having read them all over. Sibylla utters not things in order,
nor with any congruity. Having said a few words of the calamities of Africa,
instantly she leaps into Persia; Then talks of the Romans, then comes to the
Assyrians. Then having prophesied again of the Romans, she fore-tels the
miseries of the Brittons; that it is not possible to understand her, before the
event of her Oracles; when time, having made the trial, proves the only exact
Interpreter thereof. But to return to my matter.

CHAP. XX.
THE Goths were thus repulsed, and both parts past that night as I have said.
The next day Belisarius commanded the Romans to send away their Wives and
Children to Naples, and such servants as were not useful for defense of the
City, to save victuals; and he willed the Soldiers to send away their women
servants, telling them he should not be able to feed such, but must be
constrained to put themselves to half victuals every day, and to take the
remainder of their entertainments in money. They did so, and multitudes went
into Campania, some getting shipping at the Port of Rome, and the rest going by
Via Appia by Land. And neither that way, nor to the Port feared they danger;
the Enemy being not able to encompasse Rome with their Entrenchments, nor
daring in small parties to be far from their Camp, for fear of the Romans
excursions: That the besieged had means enough for a time to remove out of the
City, and to bring in provisions, especially by night. For the Goths were
afraid, and attending their Guards, kept in; and the Moors often sallyed, and
finding them either asleep, or in small companies upon the ways to pasture
their Cattle, or to get necessaries for themselves (as is usual in great
Arms) they killed and stripped them; and if they saw numbers of Enemies charging
them, they ran home, being naturally swift of foot, lightly apparelled, and
beginning to fly in time. Thus the useless multititude got away out of Rome,
some into Campania, some into Sicily, or whether they could with most ease.

But the Soldiers being few, and not sufficient for so great a circuit of
wall, and some being to take their rest, while others guarded; and the common
people being poor handi-crafts men, having nothing but from one day to another,
and there being no means to relieve them; Belisarius mingled them with the
Soldiers upon the Guards, and appointed them them a daily pay, raising
Companies of them, competent to guard the City; and to every company allotting
their nights, so that all in their turns stood Sentinells. And by this means
the Soldiers were releived, and they fed.

Having some suspicion that Liberius Bishop of Rome practiced to betray the
City to the Goths, he sent him into Greece, and made Vigilius Bishop soon
after. Upon the same ground he banished some Senators, whom he recalled after
the siege was raised, and the Goths retired. One of these was Maximus, whose
Grandfather. Maximus ruined the Emperor Valentinian. Fearing designs upon the
Gates, and lest some might be corrupted with money, he brake the old keys
twice a month, and made new of the same form. And he still changed the
Sentinels to other Guards far off; and every night appointed new Commanders of
those Guards, who were directed every night by turns to go rounds, with notes
in writing of the Sentinels names, and where any was missing, to place new in
his room, and the next day to produce the defaulters for due punishment to be
inflicted. And he commanded Musicians to play all night on their Instruments
upon the walls. He sent out Moors also with dogs to lie all night about the
ditch, to discover such as came toward the walls though afar off.

Some Romans then attempted secretly to force open the gates of Janus. This was
the chief of those ancient gods, whom the Romans called Penates. His Temple is
in the Forum, before the Senate house, a little beyond the Temple of the three
Fates. It is all of Brass, apiece, high enough only to cover the Image,
which is of brass also, five cubits high, resembling a man, only it has two
faces, one standing to the East, and the other to the West, and against each
face are brazen gates, which the Romans anciently kept shut in Peace and
Prosperity, and in time of War set them open. But since the Romans have
embraced Christian Religion, as much as any men whatsoever, they opened these
Gates no more, though they were in Wars. But in this Seige, some having the old
Religion (I think) in their minds, endeavored secretly to open them, but
could not wholly, but only so much, as they stood not close together as
before. The Actors were not known, nor inquired after in that troublesome
time; none of the Magistrates, and few of the People having notice of it
Vitigis in the mean time being in Rage, and troubled, sent some of his
Lanciers to Ravenna to kill the Roman Senators, whom in the beginning of the
War he had brought thither. Some having notice of it, fled; of whom were
Gerbenti^u^, and Reparatus, Brother to Vigilius Bishop of Rome; who both got
into Liguria, and there staid; the rest all perished.

CHAP. XXI.
VItigis also seeing the Enemies free scope of exporting from the City what
they pleased, and of importing Provisions by Sea and Land; resolved to take in
Portus, the Romans Haven, standing almost 13. miles from the City, (so far is
Rome distant from the Sea:) and being at the mouth of the Tiber, which coming
from Rome, and being almost within two miles of the Sea, parts in two, and
makes the Holy Island. This Island grows still broader down the River, and
for about two miles together is as broad as long, and on both sides of it the
Tiber is navigable in two several Streams. The right hand Stream runs into
the Haven; where without the Rivers mouth upon the Strand is an ancient City
called Portus, encompassed with a strong Wall on the left hand. At the other
Streams mouth beyond the shore of the Tiber stands Ostia, anciently a famous
City, but now without Walls. The way from Portus to the City the Romans have
made passable; and still Lighters are in readiness in the Haven, and many Oxen
for Merchants to draw up their Goods to Rome aboard those Lighters not using
Sails, no wind being able to stem them up the Stream, by reason of the many
eddies in the River: And Oars can do no good, the Stream against them is so
strong; so that they tie the Lighters with long Ropes to the Oxen, and draw
them up to Rome like Wagons. The way to Rome on the other side the Tiber is
woody and neglected, and not near the shore; the Lighters being never drawn
that way. The Goths finding the said Town of Portus ungaurded, took it at the
first onset, and killed many Romans dwelling in it, and so held the Haven too;
leaving a Garrison of a 1000. men, and the rest retiring to their Camp. So
that nothing could come to Rome from the Sea, but by Ostia with much toil and
danger; the Romans Ships coming no more in at Portus, but lying at Antium, a
days journey from Ostia, and from thence bringing their Commodities. Scarcety
of men caused this: For Belisarius searing Rome it self, could put none into
Portus; if there had been but 300. men in it, the Goths had never attempted it,
being a strong Place; and this they did the third day after their being beaten
from the Assault. Twenty days after the taking of Portus, and the Haven, came
Martinus and Valerianus with 1600. Horsemen, most Hunnes, Slavonians, and
Antians, seated beyond the River Jole not far from it. Belisarius glad of their
company, resolved now to make the War upon the Enemy; and the next day
commanded Traianus, one of his Lifeguard, a valiant man, to march with 200. of
his Targetiers on Horseback against the Barbarians, and near their
Entrenchments to get up to a Hill which he showed them, and there to stand; if
the Enemy came against them, not to come to the Sword, or ^ance with them, but
only to use their Bows; and having empted their Quivers, to make no scruple
to retire, running away to the Town Walls. Having thus directed, he prepared
the shooting Engines, and their Engineers. Traianus at Porta Salaria sallied
out upon the Enemies Camp; who amazed with the suddenness, encountered, as
every man chanced to ^e in readiness. Traianus, got up to the Hill, kept off
the Goths with his shot, which falling among a multitude, still hit Man, or
Horse; and their Arrows being spent, they gallopt home with the Goths at their
heels: who being near the Walls, the Engineers fell to work with their
Engines, and then the Goths gave over the Chase. In this Action were killed a
1000. Goths. Some few days after Belisarius sent out Mundilas, one of his
Guard, his Favorite, and Diogenes, extraordinary good Soldiers, with. 300. of
his Targettiers, to do the like, and they did so; and killed rather more of the
Enemy, then fell before, and in the same manner. The third time he sent out
Oilas, one of his Lifeguard, who performed upon the Enemy the same things; So
that with these three Sallies he killed about 4000. Enemies. Vitigis (who
conceaved not the difference between training men to their Arms in Camps, and
an experimental perfectness in the Actions of War) though by charging also
with small Forces to indamage the Enemy. And so he sent 500. Horse to approach
the Walls, and what they had suffered from a few, to act upon the Enemies whole
Army. These got to a rising ground near the City, only out of Arrow shot, and
there stood. Belisarius commanded Bessas with a 1000. selected men to charge
them: These made a compass, and shooting the Enemies backs, killed many, and
forced the rest to come down to the plain ground, where the Fight being with
Sword and Lance, and with unequal powers, the Goths were most cut in pieces,
and the rest retired with difficulty to their Camp; whom Vitigis reviled, as
beaten through want of Valor. Three days after he sent out 500. selected out
of all the Quarters, and bad them do as became their Valor and Reputation.
Belisarius seeing them approach, sent against them Martinus and Valerianns with
their 1500. Horse, who exceeding the Enemy so much in numbers, with ease routed
them, and killed almost every man. The Enemy thought it strange ill Fortune, to
be beaten before, being many, by a few, and now being few, to be cut in pieces.

CHAP. XXII.
BUT the Romans extolled Belisarius for his Wisdom; admiring him, as they had
reason. One of his Favorites asked him, what Argument he saw that day wherein
he escaped the Enemy, to be so full of the hope of Victory. He answered, that
beginning to fight with them with a few in his Company, he found the difference
of either Army, such as if he make his Fights proportionable to his Powers, the
Enemies multitude shall not ruin his small numbers. The difference was, that
the Romans almost all, and the auxiliary Hunnes were Archers on Horseback; a
matter not practiced by the Goths, whose Horsemen have only Lances and Swords,
and all their Archers fight on foot, covered with their armed men; so that the
Horsemen, unless the Fight be at handy blows, having nothing to resist with,
are easily shot and ruined by the Enemy, using Bows; and their Foot cannot
make excursions against Horse. These he alleged to be the reasons of their
being beaten in the former Encounters. But the Goths finding how strangly
things fell out, would no more ride up to the Walls in small Parties, nor
pursue the Enemy infesting, but so much only as to drive them from their
Trenches. The Romans exalted with these Prosperities, longed to come to a
general Battle, and would have the War made in an open brave way: but
Belisarius seeing the great odds against him, was fearful to hazard his whole
Army; at last wearied with the railings of the Army, and Roman Citizens, he
resolved to give Battle; but to begin with Excursions. Often he was repulsed
attempting, and forced to put it off till the next day: But at last finding the
Enemy advertised by Fugitives what would be, and beyond his Expectation in
readiness, he determined to fight in the open way, which the Goths gladly
entertained; And both Parties being Imbattelled, Belisarius made this Speech to
his Army. Fellow Soldiers, I have been backward to come to a Battle with the
Enemy, not condemning you of faintness, nor fearing their Powers; but because
in this way of Excursions we have prospered, and I thought it best to ply the
cause of our prospering; holding it inconvenient, for men settled in a course to
their mind, to be altered by others. But seeing now your forwardness to
hazard, I hope well, and will be no further a stop to your Courage; knowing
that in War, the Resolutions of those that fight, contribute the greatest part
of the Success, and that most things are acted by their Alacrity. And your
selves know, not by hearsay, but by your daily experience, that few, well
ordered with Valor, can conquer multitudes. It is now in your power not to
blemish the glory of my former Stratagems, nor my hope in this your Alacrity.
All we have acted in this War, must be judged by the Success of this day. The
present opportunity is for us, and in likelihood will subdue the Enemy to us,
their Courage being dejected by what is past; and the Resolutions of men often
unfortunate, seldom performing valiantly. Let none therefore spare his Horse,
or Bow; what is spoiled in Fight, shall instantly be supplied by me. Belisarius
having thus said, led out the Army at Porta Pinciana, and Salaria. Valentinus a
Captain of Horse, he sent out at Porta Aurelia to Nero's Feilds, with not many;
whom he directed not to begin any Fight, nor to approach the Enemies Camp, but
still to make countenance of charging, thereby to keep the Enemy there from
passing the Bridge, Pons Milvius, which stood something distant from the City.
to succor the other Quarters. For he held it enough to cut off those in
Nero's Feilds (being many) from succouring the rest of the Enemy. The Commons
of Rome being Voluntaries, he would not mingle with the Soldiers in the
Battle, fearing, least being handicrafts men, unexperienced in War, they might
upon apprehension of the danger disorder the Army. So he commanded them to
stand in a Battallion without Porta Pancratiana beyond the Tiber, till he gave
the Signal; imagining that which fell out, that the Enemy in Nero's Feilds
(who were in great numbers) seeing them, and Valentinus Troops, would not
venture out of their quarter to join with the rest of the Gothish Army; and to
keep them divided, he took to be a matter of great Importance. He resolved also
that day to fight with Horse only; for most of the Foot having stolen Horse
from the Enemy, and being skillful Riders, were turned Horsemen. And so his
Foot being few, not able to make a Batallion of any Importance, nor daring to
fight, but in case to run away at the first charge, he thought it safest to
place them not far from the City, and caused them to stand still close to the
City Ditch, to receive the Horse if they were beaten back, and being fresh, to
help to resist the Enemy. But Principius one of his Guard, a Pisidian, and an
approved Soldier, and Tarmutus an Isaurian, Brother to Ennes, Collonell of the
Isaurians, came to Belisarius, and said this. Excellent General, suffer not
your small Army encountering so many thousands, to want your Battallion of Foot,
nor put not a disgrace upon the Roman Infantry, by which the Empire of the
ancient Romans arrived to so much greatness. If in this War they have done
little Service, it is no Argument of their Cowardice, but their Commanders are
to bear the blame, for serving on Horseback, and not esteeming the Fortune of
the War common to all, nay often running away before the Fight. Now you see our
Foot Commanders all Horsemen, not contented to serve with those under their
Conduct; And keep them, Sr. with the other Horse in this Battle, but suffer us
to lead on the Foot; and we alighting on foot, will with them stand this
multitude of Barbarians, hoping to do something, as God shall give us Grace.
Belisarius at first would not grant this Motion, loving the men whom he knew
valiant, and unwilling to put the Foot (being few) to the hazard; at last
importuned with their forwardness, he placed some few Foot at the Gates, and
upon the Battlements with the common People, and about the Engines; the rest he
commanded to stand in order behind him, under Principius, and Tarmutus, that
they might not by apprehending danger, put the rest of the Army in confusion;
and if any Horse were routed, they might not run far, but flying to the Foot,
with them resist the Pursuers.

CHAP. XXIII.
VITIGIS also put the Goths in arms, not leaving any in the Trenches but
unserviceable men. The troops under Marcias he commanded to stand still in
Neros feilds attending the Guard of the bridge, that the Enemy might not come
that way; and assembling the Army he spoke thus. Some may think me fearful of
the loss of my Kingdom, and from thence grown kind, and to speak now what may
move you to courage: and it is no strange conceit, for ill natur^d men use to
be courteous to meaner people when they need them; and to be churlish to those
whose service they have no use of. For me; I care neither for loss of life,
nor Kingdom: I could wish this day to put off this purple robe, if a Goth were
to put it on; and I think the death of Theodatus to have been very happy,
loosing his life and Government at once, by the hands of his own Nation: A
private disaster, not ruining the whole race, is not without comfort to a wise
man. When I consider the miseries of the Vandales, and the end of Gelimer, I
can think nothing tolerable. Me thinks I see the Goths with their children
made slaves, and their wives doing the basest services to their greatest foes;
and my self, with this Daughter of Theodoricks daughter, led away whether it
pleases our Enemies I would have you with the fear of these things to enter
into this fight; for so will you rather choose death upon the place, then safety
after an overthrow. Generous men judge of misfortunes by one rule only; namely
to be vanquished by their Enemies: Besides, a quick Death makes men happy before
miserable. And it is evident that these our choice men disputing this battle
will easily overcome the Enemy, (a few Greeks, or no better then Greeks) and
chastise them for the wrongs and scorns they have done us. Certainly we hold
our selves their betters in valor, numbers, and every thing; and their
boldness is grown out of our misfortunes, nothing sustains them but our
negligence; it is their prospering beyond their deserts that feeds their
confidence. Vitigis having used this Exhortation, marshalled his army. He
placed his bataillion of foot between the wings of horse very near their
intrenchments, that having routed the Enemy they might overtake them the
better, and have the Execution in a great way of Ground. For by reason the
Enemies army was much inferior in powers, he hoped that the battle coming to
Sword and Lance, they would not be able to stand them. They began on both sides
early in the morning, Vitigis and Belisarius encouraging their men in their
Reares. At first the Romans had the better, and the Goths fell thick by the
shot: but there was no rout; the Goths with their great numbers easily
supplying the slain, that the loss was not seen; and the Romans being few
thought it enough to be at this point, to continue the fight up to the
entrenchments, and having killed many to return to the city with the first
fair pretense. In this Encounter three Romans did best; Athenodorus an
Isaurian, one of the life Guard to Belisarius, of good reputation; and
Theodoret and George, Cappadocians, and of the Life Guard to Martinus; who
still sallied out of their bataillion, and kept off the Barbarians. In Nero's
feilds both sides stood still a long time, only the Moors made excursions
darting their Javelins, and infested the Goths, who would not charge them for
fear of the common people, whom they took to be Soldiers; and to stand there
with some design to get their backs and by shooting them both ways to ruin
them. About noon suddenly the Romans there gave on, and routed the Goths amazed
with the suddenness who could not fly to their quarter, but got up to some
hill and there stood. The Romans (though many) were most an unarmed multitude;
many mariners and Servants being mingled with Soldiers, and the main army
being else where; yet terrifying the Goths with their numbers they thus routed
them; but by their disorder undid themselves. For the Soldiers being so
mingled fell into confusion, and were deaf to all the directions of Valentinus
their Commander; They not so much as followed the Enemy nor killed any, but
^ave them leave quietly upon the hills to view what they did. Neither came it
into their minds to cut the bridge which had excluded the Enemy from beyond the
Tiber, and from besieging Rome on both sides: nor by passing the bridge, did
they charge the Enemies backs fighting with Belisarius Troops; which had put
the Enemy to flight doubtless without resisting any longer; but they turned to
pillage the Enemies quarter, and carried away much silver vessel and other
Goods. The Barbarians where they were, stood still a while to see what they
did. At last all together shouting, and with much fury they charged them; and
finding them pillaging and in confusion, they killed many, and drove away the
rest; who threw away their pillage and ran away. Whilst this was doing in
Nero's feilds, the other Goths near their quarters fencing with their sheilds
resisted the Enemy, and killed many men, and more horses. The Romans some
wounded, some having lost their Horses, left their rancks, and then in the army
(small before) the fewness was more apparent, and their great disproportion to
the Goths multitude; which the Barbarian horse perceiving, from the left wing
gallopt toward the Enemy next them. They not abiding the Goths Lances, fled to
their bataillion of foot, who stood not the charge neither, but ran away
together with the horse; and presently the whole army retired with the Enemy at
their heels, and it was an absolute route. But Principius and Tarmutus with
some few foot did things worthy their valor, and made a stand; fighting, and
not enduring to be routed, and the Goths admiring their resolution. By their
means the foot, and most of the horse escaped with more ease. Principius with
his body hewn in pieces fell upon the place, and near him two and forty of the
foot. But Tarmutus with an Isaurian Javeling in either hand kept off the
assailants, and being spent with perpetual knocks, his Brother came to his
succor with some horse, which revived him, that with full speed he ran to the
walls full of sweat and wounds, and having still both his Javelins. Being a
strong man and swift, he got clear (though in that case) as far as to Porta
Pinciana, where he fell down. His companions thinking him dead, brought him in
upon a shield. He survived only two days and then dyed, leaving a great name
behind him in the whole Army. The Romans within were terrified, guarded the
walls, and tumultuously shut the gates against the flying soldiers, fearing
the Enemy might enter with them pell mell. Such Soldiers, as had not gotten
within the walls already, leapt over the ditch, and with their backs to the
walls stood trembling, unable to keep off the Goths (ready to leap over the
Ditch to them) in regard their Lances were broken, and their bows they could
not use standing so close to one another. While few were on the battlements,
the Goths pressed on to cut them in pieces, and all that were left behind; but
when they saw numbers of Soldiers and common people upon the battlements ready
to resist, they rode back despairing thereof after some railing words. And thus
the fight, which began at the Goths Trenches, ended at the ditch and city Wall.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK Of the GOTHJCK War.
Chap. I. SKIRMISHES by Bessas, Peranius, Constantianus, wherein the Goths are
routed. A Roman and a Goth, being both fallen into a pit, agree as friends to
get out. The valor, rashness, and death of Chorsomantis. Chap. II. Treasure
arrives from Constantinople: Many brave Skirmishes divert the Goths from
hindering the entry thereof into Rome. Cutilas, Buchas bravely end their lives.
Arzes strange recovery of a hurt. Chap. III. The Goths block up Rome, which
causes a Famine and a plague. Belisarius refuses to fight at the peoples
importunity, and sends Procopius and Antonina to Naples, and also sends out
parties to cut off the Goths forragers. Chap. IV. The Goths by garrisons abroad
are brought to Famine and Pestilence. Mount Vesuvius bellowed. New forces from
Constantinople. Belisarius issues out at Porta Flaminia, and puts the enemy
into despair. Chap. V. The Goths despair, and send an Embassage of peace.
Their ^offer of Sicily, Campania, Naples is refused. They have leave to send to
the Emperor. Chap. VI. Acessation. Provisions are brought into Rome, and new
forces. Portus, Centumcellae, and Alba surprised by the Romans. The Goths long
to break the cessation. Belisarius sends out John with strong forces.. Chap.
VII. Upon a quarrel between Belisarius and Valerianus; the later looses his
life: the Goths tried to enter the City by an Aquaeduct; but failed: as in
another design, and in an assault. Chap. VIII. John prospers, takes Ariminum,
which made the Goths raise their seige of Rome: who in their retreat receive a
great overthrow. Ildiger and Martinus are sent to John; and Vitigis puts
garrisons in the strongest places. Chap. IX. Ildiger and Martinus take
Petra-pertusa. Vitigis besieges Ariminum; is beaten off with his tower, and
resolves to famish it. Chap. X. Mundilas overthrowes the Goths, and seizes upon
Millane: Vitigis comes with his army, and an aid of an 10000 Burgundians, sent
by Theodibert K. of the Francks. Millane is besieged by the Goths, and Ancona;
which is assaulted, but preserved by two of Belisarius his Lifeguard. Chap.
XI. A digression touching the Herulians; who being overthrown by the Lombards,
some of them come into Illyrium and make league with the Emperor Anastasius;
others went to the Island of Thule. Chap. XII. The description of Thule. The
Scritifini. The Herulians near Illyrium send thither for a King to their
kinsmen already planted there. They sent one; but before they had demanded of
Justinian, one Suartuas, their countryman; whom they expelled, and took him
that came from Thule: upon this occasion they revolt from the Romans. Chap.
XIII. Belisarius, by the opinion of Narses, is brought to relieve John in
Ariminum. A strange child nursed by a shee-goat. Chap. XIV The siege of
Ariminum raised by a stratagem of Belisarius. Narses raises a faction against
him. Chap. XV. Urbinum despaired of by Narses, but taken by Belisarius upon
composition with half the army. John takes in Emilia. Belisarius besieges
Urbiventum. Chap. XVI. A digression concerning a general famine wasting Italy:
Millane in danger is not releived, as it should, by Martinus, and Uliaris; nor
by John. Chap. XVII. Millane for want of releiving is miserably destroyed, and
300000 men slain; the rest made slaves. John attending Narses direction, and
not joining with Martinus by Belisarius's command, caused this ruin. Chap.
XVIII. Narses is sent from home: The Herulians abandon the army. Vitigis sends
Ambassadors to Chosroes, to provoke him against Justinian. Belisarius sends out
forces, to favor his intended siege of Auximum and Ravenna. Chap. XIX.
Belisarius blocks up Auximum: The Romans are beaten by an Ambush, for want of
knowing the use of Trumpets. Vitigis promises to relieve the Town, but only
sends Uraias; who lies close by the Romans, neither having a mind to fight.
Chap. XX. The Francks, cr Germans, come into Italy with 50000 men against both
parts; and route 2 armies of each. But are ruined with sicknesses, and retire,
having lost a third part of their army. Chap. XXI. The Goths in Auximum endure
much; convey letters to Vitigis by Burcentius, a Roman soldier: which practice
is discovered by the stealing of a Goth by a Slavonian, and is punished by
burning Burcentius alive. Chap. XXII. In a fight about breaking of a cisterne,
the Goths are routed, by the valor chiefly of 7 Armenians: Fesula is yielded
to Cyprian by composition; and Auximum to Belisarius after much enduring. Chap.
XXIII. The Poe strangely is so low, that the Goths provisions are intercepted.
The Goths refuse the Francks motion to divide Italy. Belisarius hires one to
burn the magazins of Ravenna: Castles upon Alps Cottiae are taken in by the
Romans. Chap. XXIV. The Emperor offers a peace. Belisarius mislikes the
conditions, though the Commanders approved it. The Goths offer him the
kingdom, which he seems to accept; and thereby takes Vitigis, and the
principal Goths, and Ravenna with their own consents. Chap. XXV, Belisarius is
sent for home: Uraias refuses to be King of the Goths. They choose Ildebad; and
by his advice importune Belisarius to take the Kingdom: He constantly refuses,
and goes toward Constantinople.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS of the Emperor JUSTINIAN.
Of the GOTHJCK War, the second BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THE Romans durst no more hazard their whole Army with the Goths, but
skirmished with the Goths (as before) with their Horse. Both of them were lined
with Foot marching at their Horses sides; and ever the Romans had the better of
the Barbarians. Bessas in one Encounter, charging the Enemy with his Lance,
killed three of their best Horsemen, and made the rest run away. Constantianus
at another time, led the Hunnes into Neros Feilds about the Evening, and
finding himself over-matcht in numbers, he did thus. Upon a great old Stadium
standing there (where formerly the Fencers used to combat) are many houses
built, and consequently diverse narrow Lanes. Constantianus not able to
Encounter the Goths multitude, nor yet safely to run from them, caused the
Hunnes to alight from their Horses, and with them made a stand in a narrow
Lane; and shooting the Enemy from a secure place, killed many. The Goths a
while stood their shot, hoping when the Hunnes Quivers were empty, to take them
all Prisoners good cheap; But they being good Archers, and shooting at a
multitude, almost at every shot killed an Enemy, that half their number
appeared to be lost. And being about Sunset, and having no place to be safe
in, they ran away; and the Hunnes pursuing them close, and being excellent to
shoot upon the full speed, killed them as fast as before, and at night came
back to Rome with Constantianus. Some days after Peranius fallied at Porta
Salaria with Romans, and routed the Goths. The overthrow being sudden, and
about Sunset, a Roman Footman in the tumult fell into a Pit, there being many
anciently made in that place to lay up Corn in. He durst not cry out so near
the Enemies Camp, and he could not get up; so there he stayed all night, the
next day the Barbariaus being again routed, a Goth fell into the same Pit. They
here grew acquainted; necessity making them Friends, and they swear to procure
each others safety; and then both roared as loud as they could. The Goths ran
to the Pit, and asked who made that crying: The Roman by agreement between them
was silent, and the other prayed them in their Language, to let down a Rope to
lift him up; they threw in a Rope, which the Roman first caught, and said, that
he being up, the Goths would not leave their Companion behind, but would make
no account to save him being an Enemy, and so got up. The Goths when they saw
him, wondered, but hearing the Story, took up the other, who went along with
them, and the Roman was permitted to go to the City without harm. Some
Bravadoes there were often between small parties of Horse, as if they would
fight; but still the Quarrel ended in a Duel, wherein the Romans ever had the
Victory. At an Encounter in Nero's Feilds, there being many Chases on both
sides by the Horse, Chorsomantis of the Lifeguard to Belisarius, by Birth a
Hunne, pursued with some others 70. Goths; who being gone far, the rest rode
back, only Chorsomantis followed still; the Goths turned about at him, and he
killed on of their best men, and routed the rest: They fearing that they were
seen from their Trenches, and ashamed, charging him again, and again, after the
loss of another of their best men, were made to run away as fast as before;
and Chorsomantis chased them up to the Trenches, and then returned all alone.
Not long after at another Fight he was shot into the left leg to the bone, and
lying for the cure unserviceable, he chafed (being a Barbarian) and threatened
to be even with the Goths, for the wrong they had done his leg. When he was
well, and had drunk store of Wine at his Dinner, out he went toward the Enemy
to be revenged for his leg; he told the Sentinels at Porta pinciana, that
Belisarius sent him to the Enemies Camp, who not mistrusting one of the
Generals Guard, opened the Gate, and let him go out. The Enemy seeing him, took
him for a Fugitive; but when he was come near, and fell to use his Bow, some
twenty came upon him, whom he shook off and retired a foot pace; more came on,
yet he would not run away, and still resisting (though more still charging
him.) The Romans from the Turrets seeing it, thought him some mad man, not
knowing it to be Chorsomantis, who did there brave things, and highly to be
commended: but at last being compassed by the Enemy, he paid the penalty of his
fool-hardinesse. Belisarius and the Army (when they knew who it was) mourned
for him, as if all their hopes had perished with him.

CHAP. II.
BUT about Midsommer, Euthalius arrived at Taracina, with Moneys from
Constantinople owing to the Army; who fearing the Enemy, and his Money, wrote
to Belisarius to conduct him safe into Rome, who sent out a 100. of his
Targetiers, with two of his Lanciers to Taracina, to convoy the Treasure, and
himself made a show of giving Battle to the whole Army, to amuse the Enemy
from going out upon occasion of Forraging. The nex day hearing Euthalius with
his convoy would arrive, he ordered his Army for a Fight; and knowing Enthalius
would enter by night, he stood all the morning near the Gates in Arms, and at
Noon he commanded the Army to dine; the Goths did likewise, thinking that he
put off the Battle till the next day: Then he sent Martinus, and Valerianus to
Nero's Feilds, to give Alarmes to the Enemy there. And at Porta Pinciana he
sent out 600. Horse against the Trenches, led by three of his Lifeguard,
Artacines a Persian, Buchas a Hunne, and Cutilas a Thracian. The Enemy
encountered them with many, and a good while they spent in charges, and
retirings only, without coming up to the Sword, and Lance, seeming willing so
to wear out the day. At last they grew angry, and the Fight being hot, many,
and of the best fell, and seconds came in from the City and the Camp; from
whence (the Skirmish growing more and more) the shouts filled the Combatants
with Courage. In conclusion the Romans routed them; Cutilas was hit into the
head with a Dart, which sticking therein, he followed the Execution; and that
being done, he rode with the rest into the City, with the Dart dangling on his
head; a strange Sight. Arxes a Targetier of Belisarius was shot between the nose
and the right eye; the Arrows head peircing to his neck, but not appearing
through^, and the Shaft as he rode shaked upon his Forehead: The Romans
wondered to see him, and Cutilas, ride so little sensible of such hurts. This
was the Success here; but in Nero's Feilds the Goths had the better: Martinus
and Valerianus sustaining their great numbers, with much difficulty and danger.
Belisarius commanded Buchas, who was come off untoucht, to ride up to Nero's
Feilds, to succor there; who falling on suddenly, and in the Evening, defeated
them: but charging himself too far, he was compast by twelve Enemies with
Lances; which troubled him not, his Corselet holding good against the pushes
thereof, till a Goth thrust him behind under his right arme-hole, which Wound
was not mortal: but another thrust him into the left thigh, and cut the Muscle
acrosse. Valerianus, and Martinus, rode speedily to his rescue, and beat off
the Enemy, then led him into the City, taking his Horse by the Bridle. Night
being come, Euthalius entered the City with the Treasure, and all being within,
they looked to their hurt men; the Surgeons desired to take the Arrow out of
Arzes Face, but demurred; not in respect of the eye (which they had no thought
to save) but least by tearing the Membranes and Nerves there-about, they might
kill one of the bravest men of Belisarius retinew. One of them (named
Theoctistus) pressing with his hand behind upon the neck, asked if it pained
him; he answering that it did: then (quoth the Surgeon) your life is safe, and
your Sight unhurt. This his confidence was, because he found the head of the
Arrow not far from the Skin; such of the Shaft which stuck out, he cut off and
threw away, then opened the Fibers, or small Strings, where his pain was most,
and drew out the Arrow head with the rest of the Shaft that way with ease; So
Arzes was not only unmaimed, but had not so much as a Skar left in his Face.
But the Dart being pulled violently out of Cutilas head (where it stuck deep,
and fast) he swounded; then the Meninges inflaming, he fell into a Frenzy,
and died quickly. Buchas thigh fell into such a bleeding, by reason the Muscle
was cut crosse-way, that he died within three days. The Romans mourned that
night for these misfortunes, and from the Goths Trenches heard extreme
Lamentations. They wondered at it, not supposing the Enemy to have received any
notable loss, but to have had much more in former Skirmishes, which troubled
them not, by reason of their multitudes. Incipit Annus 3. bell. Goth. 11. Reg.
Justinian An. Dom. 537.
The next day they knew that it was for many of the bravest men they had slain,
in Buchas first Encounter in Nero's Feilds. Many petty Skirmishes there were,
which I mention not: In all there were during the Seige, 67. the two last shall
be related in their due place. And then ended the Winter, and the second year
of this War, written by Procopius.

CHAP. III.
Soon after the middle of the Summer, the City was visited with Famine, and
Pestilence, and the Soldier also was in want of Corn, but of no other
Provision. But the Citizens besides that want, were sorely pressed with the
Famine, and Pestilence. The Goths found it, and resolved to hazard no more
Fights; but with Garrisons to hinder the importing Provisions to the Enemy. Two
Aquaeducts between Via Latina, and Via Appia, high built with goodly Arches,
meet at a place about six miles from Rome; then that which took the right hand
way before, goes to the left, crossing one another, and again they meet, and
sever again, enclosing the ground in the middle; and the Goths damming up the
Arches with Stone, and Earth, made it as a Castle, and lodged in it a Garrison
of 7000. men, to cut of the Roman Forragers. The Romans then grew hopeless,
compassed with every species of misery. While the Corn was, some Soldiers (the
most daring) rode out in the night, and cut off the Ears, and brought them in
unseen by the Enemy, upon spare Horses, and sold them to the Rich for great
Sums. The rest lived upon Grass growing within, and near the Walls, (The
Feilds about Rome being green with Grass Summer, and Winter, which served the
Army for their Horses.) Some made Saussages of Mules flesh which died in the
Town, and sold them secretly. But the Corn being gone, and the Citizens in
extremity, they flockt about Belisarius, urging him to end all in one Battle,
and promising that not a Citizen should be absent from it. He was much
troubled, and the Commons still importuned; saying, that their present
Condition had over-taken them suddenly, and that their hopes ended in the quite
contrary; having gotten what they longed for, and yet now being in this
Calamity: And their former Opinion of doing well, in affecting the Emperors
Protection, being now their folly, and the ground of their misery, which now
necessitated them to a daring, and again to put on Arms against the Enemy.
They craved Pardon, though saucy with Belisarius. A hungry belly knows no
modesty; and their fool-hardinesse to fight, Fortune must excuse, seeing life
prolonged in misery, is of all the most grievous. That he saw their case, their
Farms in the Country in the Enemies hands, and their City blockt up; the
Citizens lying dead without earth to cover them, and the Survivers wishing
their Carcasses lying by them; all mischiefs being made tolerable by the
Plague, and forgotten, when that appears, it making all other Deaths, but from
it self, a kind of pleasure. They prayed leave to try their Fortune in Fight,
before the sickness had utterly subdued them; either they should conquer, or
be rid of their troubles. Men who have hope in delaying, are unwise to hazard
all with forwardness; but in such as find their match the worse by deferring,
a little delay is more to be blamed, then instant rashness. To this Speech
Belisarius made this answer; This is no more then I expected from you: I know
what an inconsiderate thing a common People is; who neither can bear the
present, nor provide for the future; only it can attempt Impossibilities, and
ruin it self unadvisedly. But let me never willingly destroy you, and the
Emperors Affairs by your negligence. The War prospers not by brutish
eagerness, but by weighing the Opportunities wisely, and with consultation.
You thinking you are at Dice, will throw at all; but it is my manner not to
choose hasty, but profitable counsels. You promise to fight with the Enemy in
our Company: since when have you been trained to your Arms? and were you
perfect therein, who knows not, that a Battle is, not proper to try Masteries
in? In the Fight the Enemy will not give you leave to practice, and learn. I
commend therefore your forwardness, and pardon this Tumult. But why it is not
seasonable, and why we use a provident backwardness, I will tell you. The
Emperor has sent a mighty Army gathered out of all Lands, and a Fleet (the
like whereof the Romans never had) covering the shores of Campania, and much of
the Jonian Gulf. These Forces are coming to us, and will deliver you from your
fears, and over-whelme the Barbarians with their Arrows; and I defer our
fighting till their Arrival, to get rather a secure Victory, then by
adventring without reason, to abandon our safety; and I will take order, they
shall be with us without delay. Belisarius with this quieted the Commons, and
dismissed them. And it being reported, that the Emperor, would send Forces to
Naples, he dispatched Procopius thither, the Writer of his History, with
Instructions to freight Ships with Corn, and to assemble the Soldiers come
from Constantinople, and the Horsemen quartred in those Countries; and
marching then into Campania, to take also some out of every Garrison, and to
convoy the Corn to Ostia. Procopius went out at Saint Paul's Gate, with Mundilas
one of the Lifeguard, and some Horsemen, and were not seen by the Enemy,
quartered by Via Appia. When Mundilas at his return, reported how Procopius was
by that time in Campania, without meeting a Goth, who went not out of their
Camp in the night, they all took heart: And Belisarius grown bolder, sent store
of Horse to the next Fortresses, from thence to charge the Enemies Forragers,
and to lay Ambushes to cut of their bringing Provisions to the Camp, that by
this the City might be less vexed with wants, and the Goths might be beseiged
more then It. He sent Martinus, and Traianus with a 1000. men to convoy his
Wife Antonina to Taracina, and from thence to give her a convoy to Naples;
where she was to expect the Event in a safe place. And he sent Magnus, and
Sinthues, one of his Lifeguard, with 500. men to the Castle of Tibur; standing
about 17. miles from Rome. To the small City of Alba, standing so many miles
also from Rome, upon Via Appia, he had before sent Gontharis with some
Herulians; whom the Enemy beat out from thence a while after. There stands a
Church of the Apostle Saint Paul, a mile and three quarters from the walls of
Rome upon the Tiber. It is not fortified, but a Porticus reaches to it from the
City, which with the buildings upon it make the place not easily to be invaded.
The Goths also so much reverence those two Apostles, that during the siege no
hurt was done to either of these Temples, but the priests celebrated divine
Service in them as formerly. In this place Belisarius commanded Valerianus with
all the Hunnes to entrench upon the bancks of Tiber, thereby to favor the
pasturing of their own Horse, and to restrain the Goths from coming out so far
at their pleasure. Valerianus encamped the Hunns accordingly, and then returned
to the City, And Belisarius having settled these things, lay still, resolving to
begin no fight, but to defend only the walls from harm, and to some of the
Commons he distributed corn.

CHAP. IV.
BUT Martinus and Trajanus, past in the night by the Enemies camps, came to
Taracina, and sent Antonina with a convoy into Campania; themselves seized the
fortresses there about: from whence issuing and charging ever suddenly, they
restrained the Goths inroads that way. Magnus also, and Synthues, repaired the
decays of the castle of Tibur, and from a safe place infested the Enemy, and a
fortification they had not far off, frighting with unlook't for charges their
convoys of provisions: Until Synthues by a hurt of a Lance upon his right
hand, was disabled, his sinews being cut asunder. The Hunnes also, quartered
near there about, did the Goths as much hurt; that the Famine vexed them,
having not provisions brought so freely; and the plague killed many, especially
in the camp near Via Appia; where the few that escaped ran to the other
intrenchments: The Hunnes also suffered the like, and went back to Rome.

Procopius in Campania got together 500 soldiers, and ships freighted with
corn, and when Antonina came, she took care with him to set out the fleet.
Vesuvius then bellowed, but did not cast up, which was expected; and the
inhabitants were terribly frighted. This mountain stands eight miles three
quarters from Naples northward, steep, and thick with wood below, and above
craggy and very wild. At the top is a deep cave, seeming to reach to the bottom
of the mountain, and if you peep in, you may see fire, which ordinarily keeps
in, not troubling the people; But when the mountain bellows like an Ox, soon
after it casts out far away a huge quantity of cynders, which catching a man
upon the way, he has no means to save his life; if it fall upon houses, they
fall with the weight; if the wind blow stiff, it rises up past ones sight, and
is carried by the wind to very far countries. They say, it fell once in
Constantinople, which so frighted the Citizens, that to this day they have
yearly public supplications to appease God; and that another time it fell in
Tripolis. Formerly this bellowing came every 100 years, or more, but since
oftener. When the Vesuvius casts out cynders, they are confident of a plentiful
year: the air about it is pure, and none more healthy; that the Physicians
send thither men far gone in Consumptions.

But from Constantinople arrived at Naples 3000 Isaurians, commanded by Paulus
and Conon, and at Otranto 800 horse, Thracians, led by John, Sisters Son of
that Vitalianus, who formerly rebelled against the Emperor. With them were a
1000 more horsemen, commanded by Alexander and Marcentius, and others. Zeno
with 300 horse was already come to Rome through Samnium, and by Via Latina.
John and the rest coming into Campania with many wagons out of Calabria, and
joining the 500 levied (as I said) in Campania, marched by the Sea shore with
their wagons, which they were to fortify with, in case of an Enemies assault.
Paulus and Conon they sent by sea with their troops, to join with them at
Ostia, having put corn sufficient in their wagons and fraighted the ships
therewith, and with wine and other provisions. They thought to find Martinus
and Trajanus about Taracina, but they were newly sent for and gone to Rome.
Belisarius fearing the Enemy with multitudes might cut off the troops marching
with John, and having at the beginning of the war ram'd up Porta Flaminia
with stones, that the Enemy encamping near it, might not there force the city
(neither was there ever any fight there, nor did the Barbarians look for any
Enemy thence) from this gate he took away the stones secretly, and put there in
arms the greatest part of his army, and at daybreak he sent out Diogenes and
Trajanus, by Porta Pinciana, with a thousand horse, to shoot into the Enemies
quarters, and when they came out to run away, upon the full speed to the town
walls. They accordingly provoked the Goths, who from all their quarters
encountered them; and both parts came upon the speed toward the walls, the one
flying the other pursuing. When Belisarius saw the Enemy upon the chase, he
opened Porta Flaminia, and drew out the army unexpected. Near the high way,
there was one of their camps and before it a narrow lane craggy and hard to
pass: where a Barbarian gallant and well armed, seeing the Enemy coming ran
and preposessed the said passage, calling to his companions to help to maintain
it; but Mundilas overtook him and killed him, not suffering any of the rest to
come to the Lane. So they went through without opposition to the Enemies
quarter: which some attempted, but could not take it, though few were within,
by reason the ditch was deep and the Earth cast up inward, and was raised to a
kind of a wall, and the stakes were very well pitched and thick, wherein the
Goths trusting resisted valiantly. Aquilinus a Targetier of Belisarius, and
very valiant, leapt into the quarter, drawing his horse by the bridle after,
and some he killed; but they darted thick at him, and killed his horse, himself
escaped strangely through the Enemy, and went toward Porta Pinciana, with his
fellows, who overtook the Goths yet pursuing and killed them shooting them
behind. Trajanus with his troops seeing it, (their horse there also seconding)
gallopt against the pursuing Goths, who surprised between the Enemy thus, were
slain in confusion; and the slaughter was great, and few recovered their
Quarters: Which they were all afraid of, kept in, and fortified; expecting a
present assult. In this fight Trajanus was shot above his right eye, near the
nose. The arrow head though broad and long stuck fast, and was not seen; but
the shaft fell off, the head being loose set. Trajanus felt it not, but
continued chasing and killing, and 5 years after the point of the arrow head
appeared of it self out of his fore head. This is the third year that still by
little and little it comes out; and in time it is thought it will all come out.
In the mean time it is no trouble to him at all.

CHAP. V.
BUT the Goths upon these successes despaired of the war, and thought of
retiring, being reduced by the plague and Ememy from many thousands to a few,
pincht with famine, excluded from all provisions, and in show besieging, but
indeed besieged themselves. Hearing also of other forces come from
Constantinople, by sea and land, not as they were, but as same gave them out,
they consulted upon a retreat, and sent into Rome a Roman of good account among
them, "with two other Ambassadors, who spoke thus to Belisarius. How neither
part has got by this war, all of us find by our experience of the
incommodities thereof. And neither army can deny what no man can be ignorant
of, that no wise man will for a little Emulation perpetually toil and seek no
relaxation; he must be senseless that says the contrary. So that it behooves
our Princes, not to sacrifice their Subjects safety to their own Glory; but to
embrace what is just and profitable not only for themselves but their
adversaries, and so to end these troubles. By desiring moderate things,
difficulties are accommodated, but by wrangling nothing concluded. We having
therefore advised upon a conclusion of the war, are come to propound things
advantageous to both, parting with some of our Right, as we conceive. And do
not you by contending with us run your selves rather, then choose what is best
for you; and herein it is not so good to use Rhetorical speeches, but to reply
instantly, if any thing seem to be said or done amiss. Belisarius approved the
conference to be so, but bade them speak peceable and just things. They
replied, you have done us wrong to take arms against us your friends and
allies, and we will say what you all know: The Goths conquered Italy, not
forcing it from the Romans; but Odoacer had deposed the Emperor and changed
the state into a Tyranny: and Zeno, then Emperor of the East, desiring to
revenge his fellow Emperor upon the usurper, and to free the Province, but
unable to suppress Odoacer, persuaded our Prince Theodoriok, (ready then to
besiege him in Constantinople) to lay down that quarrel, being a Patritian,
and having been a Roman Consul; and by revenging the wrong done to Augustulus,
upon Odoacer, to become with the Goths lawful master of the province. Thus we
received the Dominion of Italy, and have maintained the Commonwealth and
Laws, as much as any Emperor. There is not one new Law made by Theodorick,
nor any of his Successors, written, nor unwritten. And concerning Faith and
Gods Worship, we have conserved them exactly, that not an Italian willingly nor
unwillingly has changed his Religion, and when Goths have changed, it has not
been questioned. The Romans Churches have been by us held in highest Reverence,
and none flying to them has been violated. The great Offices the Romans have
had, not a Goth has been advanced to any. If any man think this not to be so,
let him stand out and disprove me. Nay the Goths have given way, that the Roman
Consulship should yearly be conferred on Romans, by the Eastern Emperor.
Things being thus; you, who never pretended to Italy, wasted by Barbarians
under Odoacer (who for ten years together wrought so much mischief now force
out the lawful Purchasers, having nothing to do with it.

Be gone therefore from us, keeping what is yours, and the Booties you have
taken. Belisarius replied: Your promise was to be brief and moderate, but your
discourse has been tedious, and something insolent. The Emperor Zeno sent
Theodorick against Odoacer, not to be King of Italy (for to him what
distinction could be between one Usurper and another?) but that it might be
free and obedient to the Emperor. And Theodorick did good Service against the
Usurper, but in the rest proved extremely ungrateful; never bethinking
himself to restore the Country to the Lord thereof. He that ejects forcibly,
and he that restores not what is his Neighbors, is the same man. For me, I may
not give away the Emperors Provinces: If you would have any thing else, speak
on. Ambassador. You know all, that we have spoken nothing but truth. But to
show, we affect no Disputes; we quit to you Sicily, a great and rich Island,
without which you cannot hold Africa securely. And we Mr. Cambden out of this
passage, and other authorities, proves the Goths to inhabit Scotland, sent
thither by Gratian, and Valentinian; and that the Scots are their descendents
vid. Camb. Brit. page 88.
quit all Britanny to the Goths, greater then Sicily, and formerly subject to
the Romans. It is fit to requite such as do us Benefits, with the like. If we
mention Campania, and Naples, you will not accept. Belisarius: We have no power
to dispose of what is the Emperors, but with his liking. Ambassador. Nor if
we shall yield to the payment of an annual Tribute. Belisarius: No truly; we
have no absolute power in any thing, but to guard the Province for the
Conqueror. Ambassador. Be pleased then we may repair to the Emperor, and
conclude and accord with him, and some time must be limited for the Armies to
forbear hostility. Belisarius: Be it so, I will not hinder, while you consult
upon ways of peace. Thus the Conference ended, and the Ambassadorurs returned
to the Goths Camp.

CHAP. VI.
AFTER often meetings, they concluded a Cessation, and to give Hostages
mutually of eminent men. During this negotiation, the Fleet of Isaurians came
into the Haven of Rome, and the Troops of John to Ostia, without the Enemies
interruption to land or encamp. The Isaurians to lodge securely from the
Enemy, drew a deep Ditch near the Haven, and kept guards; and John lay fenced
within his Wagons. At night Belisarius came to Ostia with a 100. Horse,
acquainting them with the occurrents, and conclusion with the Goths, and
commanding them to send up their lading, and to go boldly to Rome; promising
them to secure the way for them: himself before day rode back into the City.
When it was day, Antonina consulted with the Commanders about sending up their
lading; which seemed difficult, and scarce faisible. The Oxen were half dead,
and could not hold out: and it was unsafe to go with their Wagons in a way so
narrow; and to draw Lighters up the River, as formerly, was impossible; the
left hand way by the same being possessed (as I said) by the Enemy, and not
passable for the Romans; and by the other bank was no passage at all: So that
taking the Cock-boats of the greater Ships, and walling them round with boards,
to guard the men from shot, they put aboard those Boats a proportion of
Archers, and Mariners; and stowing as much as they could carry in them, and
getting a wind, they sailed up the Tiber; a part of the Army winging them on
the right hand shore: And they left a strong guard of Isaurians in the Ships.
Their sails they took from the Enemy, and went up with ease. Only where the
Stream with an eddy went side-long, their sails had no wind for them, and the
Mariners rowed, and with much toil forced up. The Barbarians interrupted them
not, either fearing to hazard, or not thinking provisions could be imported
that way. And they held it inconvenient to cross the Cessation promised, upon
a slight occasion; In Portus also the Goths meddled not with them, as they
sailed by them, wondering what their intent was. Having in this manner, sailing
to and fro, imported their ladings; the Mariners went away with the Ships, it
being now toward the Winter Tropic. The rest of the Army entered Rome, save
Paulus, who staid in Ostia with some Isaurians. Afterward they gave Hostages
for observing the Cessation, the Romans Zeno, and the Goths, Vlias, a man of
quality; Neither to invade the other for three months, till the Ambassadors
should bring the Emperors resolution. And if any should begin to wrong the
other, yet the Ambassadors should be returned home safe. The Goths Ambassadors
were convoyed by the Romans to Constantinople; and Ildiger, who married
Antonina's daughter, came from Africa to Rome with a fair troop of Horse. The
Goths in the Castle of Portus wanting provisions, quitted it, and came to the
camp by Vitigis direction: The place Paulus with his Isaurians from Ostia
surprised. It was the Romans being Masters of the Sea, which caused these wants
of Victual, permitting no Provisions to come to the Barbarians. Upon the like
scarcity they quitted then also Centumcellae, a Sea Town of much importance,
great, and populous, and standing in Tuscany, 35. miles to the West of Rome.
The taking of it much strengthened the Romans: and of Alba likewise, standing
to the East of Rome, and abandoned by the Enemy for the same reason. So that
the Romans compassed them round; which made the Goths eager to break the
Accord, and to do them mischief. They sent Ambassadors to Belisarius,
complaining, that Vitigis having upon some occasion sent for the Goths from the
Castle of Portus, Paulus without any reason had surprised it; and pretending
the like for Alba and Centumcellae, with menaces, if they had not restitution.
Belisarius sent them away, laughing at their pretext, all men knowing why they
quitted those places. From hence forward they were suspicious of each other.

Belisarius seeing then Rome strong with Soldiers, sent out many parties of
Horse to places near Rome: And Vitalianus, John's Nephew, to winter about Alba
in Picenia, with his own 800. Horse, and 400. of the Troops of Valerianus,
whose Sisters Son Damianus commanded them, and 800. of his own Targetiers,
extraordinary good men, led by two of his Lifeguard, Sutas, and Abigis. These
he directed to follow John, withersoever, and him, while the Enemy kept the
Truce, to be quiet; but if they broke it, suddenly to fall upon Picenia, to
visit the Towns before they had news of his coming, (few men being left in
the Country, but almost all before Rome; and their Wives, Children, and Goods
being in every Town some) and to carry away Captive, and pillage all he found,
taking care not to hurt the Roman Inhabitants: lighting upon any Town Fortified
and Garrisoned, to attempt it; and if he took it, to march forward; but if were
too tough for him, to come back, or stay: For going on with a strong Town at
his back, it would be dangerous, and he could hardly be succored, if
distressed by an Enemy: that he should keep all the Booty to be distributed to
the Army. Then smiling, he added this word; That it is not just for some to
toil, to kill the Droanes, and others at their ease to eat the Honey.
Belisarius with these Instructions sent away John, and those Forces.

ABout that time Datius, Bishop of Millane, with some chief Citizens came to
Rome, and entreated of Belisarius some Soldiers, with whom they undertook not
only to draw Millane from the Goths to the Emperor, but all Liguria. This City
is in Liguria, This Author calls much more Liguria then now is. Leander sates,
there was a Liguria Cisappeninna anciently. The Liguria now he names
Transappennina.
in the mid way between Ravenna and the Alps (which are upon the Frontier of
Gaul) standing eight days Journey from either. Next to Rome it was the
greatest of the Western Cities, and the most populous and rich. Belisarius
promised as they desired, and kept them there the Winter; but Fortune grew
envious at the Romans Prosperity, and meant to temper it with some ill; putting
a quarrel between Belisarius, and Constantianus, upon a slight ground.
Persidius, a Roman Citizen of quality, who dwelt at Ravenna, having offended
the Goths (when Vitigis was upon leading his Army to Rome) under a pretense
with some few Servants to go a hunting, ran away, communicating his Design to
none, nor carrying money, nor money-worth, save two short Swords with
Scabberds, set with much Gold and precious Stones. Being come to Spoletum, he
lodged in a Church without the Walls, which Constantianus, (then there)
understanding, sent Maxentiolus, one of his Targetiers, and took the Cimiters
from him; who being grieved at the wrong, went to Rome to Belisarius; whether
soon after came Constantianus also, the Goths Army being reported to be near.
While the Romans were in trouble and danger, Persidius was silent; but they
having the better, and the Goths Ambassadors being dispatched to the Empetour,
he acquainted Belisarius with the Injury, praying his assistance in his just
Cause; who in Person, and by others reproved Constantianus, and advised him to
wash his hands of so foul an Imputation. But Constantianus (who was to have a
mischief) put off the advice with a Jest, and flouted the man he had wronged.
Who meeting Belisarius riding through the Market place, took his Horse by the
Bridle, and clamouring aloud, asked, if it were the Emperors Law, that when a
poor Suppliant comes for refuge from Barbarians, any man may take from him what
he has about him. The Company threatened him, and bad him let go the Bridle;
which he would not do, before Belisarius promised to give him the Swords. The
next day he called Constantianus and many Commanders to a Room in the Palace;
putting him in mind of the Accident the day before, and (though late) to
restore the Cimiters. He said, he would sooner throw them into the Tiber,
Belisarius grew angry; and asked, if he took not himself to be under his
command: In other things he professed to obey him, since it was the Emperors
pleasure; but that which he now commanded, he would never do. Belisarius then
had his Guard to come in; is it to kill me, quoth Constantianus? no, said
Belisarius, but to compel your Targetier Maxentiolus, to restore to the man
his Swords, which he took from him by violence, and brought them to you.
Constantianus supposing yet it was to kill him, thought first to do some brave
Act; and drawing a short Sword, made a thrust suddently at the Belly of
Belisarius; who amazed stepped back, and embracing Bess^us who stood next him,
avoided the danger. Constantianus yet in rage made at him; but Ildeger taking
him by the right hand, and Valerianus by the left, drew him back: Then came in
the Guard, who wrested his Sword from him, and snatched him away. Then they hurt
him not, respecting the Commanders present, but they led him to another Room,
and there by Belisarius Command, killed him. This was the only impious Act ever
done by Belisarius, This History is supplied in the secret History; where it
appears to be impious indeed.
not conformable to the much moderation he had still used to all men. But (as I
said) Constantianus was to have a mischief.

Shortly after the Goths had a design upon Rome; They let down some men into
an Aquaeduct, whose water they had cut off in the beginning of the Seige; these
with Lamps, and Torches searched for an entrance into the City. Not far from
Porta Pinciana, an Arch of this Aquaeduct had a breach in it, out of which a
Centinell saw light, and told it his fellows; they said it was a Wolf, there
being no Land to be seen over the building of the Acquaeduct, they took it to
be a Wolfes eyes, showing like fire. The Goths in the Aquaeduct came into the
midst of the City, where had been an ascent into the Palace, and found there a
Building made by Belisarius, providently in the beginning of the Seige, which
hindered their further passage, or ascent. So they took a small Stone out of it,
and returned to Vitigis, showing him the Stone, and relating the particulars;
who held a Counsel about it. The next day the Romans upon the Guard at Porta
Pinciana had speech of their suspicion about the Wolf; which being spread, and
coming to the wise General, he did not slightly give ear to it, but instantly
let down into the Aquaeduct Diogenes, one of his Lifeguard, with some choice
men, to search; who found scattered Lamps of the Enemy, and droppings of
Torches, and saw where they had taken out the Stone, and reported all to
Belisarius; whereupon he kept a strong Guard upon the Aquaeduct: which the
Goths perceiving, forbear the attempt. But they prepared to give an open
Assault; and at dinner time with scaling Ladders and fire, they came unlookt
for to Porta Pinciana, hoping to take the City so by a sudden onset, few
Soldiers being left within it. Ildeger then kept the Watch with his Company,
every man being appointed to guard by turns. Seeing the Enemy approach
disorderly, he charged them not ranckt for a Fight, but marching in confusion,
and he routed and killed them. At the noise the Romans ran up to the Walls, and
the Goths without doing any thing retired. Vitigis then had another design;
the Walls are very assaultable by the Tibers Banck, the Ancients having built
the Wall carelessly there, and low, without Towers, trusting to the
Fortification of the River. Here he hoped to take the City, there being no
considerable guard. He corrupted two Romans dwelling about Saint Peter's Church,
to repair to the Sentinels there with a Vessel of Wine about the Evening, and
with some color of kindness, to bestow the Wine on them, to sit drinking with
them till midnight, and to throw into their Cups a sleepie Drug, which he gave
them. He prepared Boats upon the opposite Shore, in which the Goths upon a
Signal, (the Sentinels being asleep) were to pass over and assault; and he
put the whole Army in readiness to force the City. But one of the men hired
for the Service, ( Rome being not to be taken by that Army of Goths) revealed
the Plot to Belisarius, and discovered his fellow; who upon torture opened all,
and showed the Drug given by Vitigis. Belisarius cut of his Nose, and Ears,
and sent him upon an Ass into the Enemies Camp; who seeing him, saw God
preventing their Counsels, and therefore the City by them not to be taken.

CHAP. VIII.
IN the mean time Belisarius wrote of John to attend close his business. And
he with 2000. Horse forraged Picenia, taking all in his way, Women, and
Children Captives. And he overthrew Vlithius, Vitigis his Uncle, killing him
and almost his whole Army; Auximum is now called Osano, in Marca Anconitanna,
subject to the Pope.
that none durst encounter him. At Auximum he heard there was but a weak
Garrison of Goths; but finding the place strong, and hard to take, he would not
beseige it, but marched forward. He left also Vrbinum, and marched toward
Ariminum, and days Journey from Ravenna, whether some Romans invited him. The
Goths being jealous of the Townes-men, when they heard of the Roman Army coming
toward them, ran all away. So John got Ariminum, and left at his back Garrisons
in Auximum, and Vrbinum, not forgetting Belisarius Instructions, nor upon any
ungrounded temerity (being one who had Discretion mixed with Valor) but
considering what came to pass; that when the Goths heard a Roman Army to be
near Ravenna, they would instantly raise their Seige, afraid of the place. And
he lighted upon a right conceit; for Vitigis and the Goths, understanding
Ariminum to be in his Possession, and extremely fearing Ravenna. made a direct
Retreat, without any further consideration; for which John got a great
Reputation, being before generally famous; a daring man, laborious in his own
Person, and fearlesse in dangers. He used a hard Diet, and in toiles was
inferior to no Barbarian, or common Soldier. Mattasuntha, Vitigis Wife,
offended with her Husband, who at first attained her Bed by violence, and
hearing John to be in Ariminum, was glad of it, and secretly treated with him,
touching a Marriage and a plot of Treason: This they negotiated by Messages
unknown to any. And the Goths having the news of Ariminum, and their
Provisions failing, and the three Months being expired, made their Retreat,
though they heard nothing of their Ambassadors success. About the Summer
Tropic having spent one year and nine days in this Seige, they burnt up
their Hutts, and by daybreak began their Journey. The Romans seeing them,
doubted what to do, their main body of Horse being not present; but sent out
several ways, as I have said, and conceiving themselves not able to fight
with such multitudes: Yet Belisarius armed his Horse, and Foot; and more then
half the Enemies being past over the Bridge, he sallied at Porta Pinciana. The
Fight came to the Sword, and Lance, and the Goths first stiffly sustaining the
Enemy, many fell on both sides: But afterward the Goths being routed, made
their overthrow very great, by pressing and crowding to pass the Bridge, that
they suffered extraordinary loss, being killed by Enemies and one another.
Many fell into the Tiber, and were drowned in their Arms; and having lost most
of their men, the rest ever-took those formerly past over. Longinus the
Isaurian, and Mundilas, two of Belisarius his Lifeguard, did extraordinarily
in this Battle: Mundilas killed four Barbarians, and came off; but Longinus
having been the greatest cause of the Enemies overthrow, fell upon the place,
much lamented by the whole Army. Vitigis in his march toward Ravenna with the
remainder of his Army, fortified the defensible places with strong Garrisons;
leaving in Clusium, a City in Tuscany, a 1000. men under Gelimer, and as many
in Vrbiventum, under Albilas a Goth; and in Tudera Vligisalus, with 400. In
Picenia he continued the 400. formerly lodged in the Castle of Petra; In
Auximum, the greatest City there, he left 4000. selected Goths, and Visandus a
valiant Commander. And in Vrbinum 2000. under Tomoras; In Caesina and
Monteferetrum, other Castles there, he Garrisoned 500. men in each; Himself
marched with the rest to beseige Ariminum. Belisarius when the Seige was raised,
sent Ildeger and Martinus with a 1000. Horse to get before the Enemy into
Ariminum, (taking so^e other way) and to cause John and his Troops to rise from
thence, placing in their stead other sufficient numbers to guard the Town, and
to be taken out of Ancona standing upon the Jonian Gulf, two days journey
from Ariminum; which he had taken in before, sending Conon with an Army of
Thracians, and Isaurians. He hoped, that there being only Foot in Ariminum, and
no Commanders of Note, the Goths would not employ their powers to beseige it,
but despise it, and march on to Ravenna; and if they should beseige it, that
Provisions would last longer for Foot only, and that the 2000. Horse with John
would infest the Enemy, and force them to raise their Seige. Ildeger, and
Martinus with these Instructions took their Journey by Via Flaminia, and by
much prevented the Goths, who by reason of their multitudes marched slowly, and
were forced to go about for want of Provisions, neither would they come near
the strong places upon Via Flaminia, the Romans (as has been said) holding
Narnia, Spoletum, and Perusia.

CHAP. IX.
BUT those Romans finding Petra in their way, attempted the Castle as a
by-businesse; a fortress not made by men, but by the nature of the place,
where is a craggy way, and to the right hand a swift running river unfordable;
on the left hand a steep rock so high, that men on the top seem below like
little birds. Anciently there was no passage through, but in time a way was
dig'd through it, and a gate made; the other entrance was walled, save so much
as was left for a gate there, and so of it self the place became of
fortification, and was named Petra, it is called afterward Petra Pertusa,
because of the passage cut through the Rock.
the Rock. Martinus and Ildiger assaulted one of the Gates, but did no good
with their shot, though the Goths within made no defense. And last behind they
forced their way up the crag, and threw stones upon the Enemies heads: they ran
into the houses, and there kept close. The Romans when they could not reach
them with stones, cut great pieces out of the Rock, and with many hands tossed
them down aiming at the houses, such as they light on tottered, and so frighted
the Goths that they held up their hands to those at the Gate, and yielded upon
composition, to have no hurt, but to be servants to the Emperor, and obedient
to Belisarius. Martinus and Ildiger, removed the most of them, leaving some few
with their wives and children, and placing a Garrison of Romans, Then they went
to Ancona from whence they took many foot companies, and brought them the third
day to Arnum, declaring Belisarius his direction. But John refused to go with
them, and detained Damianus with his 400 men; so that leaving the foot
companies, they went away with the Lanciers and Targetiers of Belisarius. Soon
after Vitigis with his whole army sat down before Ariminum. He made a wooden
tower higher then the walis, and upon wheels brought it where the same were
most assaultable: They drew it not on with oxen, least they should speed as
they did at Rome; but men covered within it, shoved it on: within it was a
great broad scaling ladder for the common soldier to mount the battlements,
they not doubting but to get up with ease so soon as their tower was set to the
walls, so was the figure thereof contrived. Being come near the walls with it,
they lay still, because it grew dark, set their sentinells about it, and took
their rest, dreaming of no opposition; there being but a small trench only to
hinder their approach. The Romans past the night in fear, expecting the next
day to be ruined. But John neither despairing nor fearing, about midnight left
the rest upon their Guards, and himself with his Isaurians carrying Mattocks
and other instruments, got secretly without the walls, and caused them to dig
in the trench, and to cast up the Earth to the town-ward, which served for a
rampire, and in a small time, the Enemy being fast a sleep, they made the
Trench of reasonable depth and breadth, where the walls were weakest, and the
Goths were to approach with their tower: who (the night being far spent)
perceived it, and ran to beat them off: but they, the trench being completed,
got within the walls. Vitigis was extremely vexed at in the morning, and put to
death some sentinells: and being as eager as ever, commanded to fill up the
ditch with Faggots, and so to draw the tower on. They did his commands with
alacrity, though mightily opposed from the walls. But the faggots with the
weight of the Tower sunk, that they could not get it forward, the Ground
growing still steeper, where the Earth was cast up, as I said. So that fearing
the night approaching, and the Enemies sallying to burn their Engine, they drew
it back. John to hinder them, put the Soldiers in Arms, and used this
Exhortation. "Fellow soldiers, and my partners in this danger, he that would
live, and see those he has left at home; let him know that he holds this hope
by his sword only. When Belisarius sent us out, the hope and Love of many
things made us cheerful in the business. We suspected not so near the sea
(the Romans being masters of the sea) to be besieged, nor imagined, that the
Emperors army could so much neglect us. Then the occasion of showing our
affection to the state, and of getting Glory encouraged us; now, but by our
valor, we cannot so much as live, and for life (were there nothing else) we
must of necessity undergo this hazard. And who pretends to valor also, has a
fair opportunity this day to get Glory by it; which is gotten not by overcoming
inferiors in power, but by a victory with less preparations, and greater
courage. And who love their lives best, shall gain most by daring; whose
affairs (as ours now) are upon the Edge of a razor, such as are preserved only
by despising danger. Having thus said, he led them against the Enemy, leaving
some upon the battlements; the Enemy received them bravely, and it was hotly
fought; and with much ado about Evening they brought their Tower to the Camp
with loss of many good men, that they resolved to assault no more; but lay
still to take the Romans by Famine; whose provisions failed, and they knew not
which way to get supply.

CHAP. X.
BUT Belisarius sent toward Millan, 1000 Isaurians and Thracians; Ennes led
the Isaurians, and Paulus the Thracians, and Mundilas commanded in chief,
having some Targetiers of Belisarius. Fidelius (made Prefect of the Palace)
being born at Millan, was thought fit to accompany these forces, having some
power in Liguria. From the port of Rome, they went by Sea to Genoa, the utmost
City in Tuscany, at the Entrance of the Gaulish and Spanish seas; where leaving
their ships they took their journey, putting their schiffs upon waynes to pass
the Poe with. Being passed the River, and come to the City of Picenum, the
Goths, with many and of their best men fought with them; For such of them as
dwelt in those parts, had put into Picenum their Goods of most value, it being
a strong place; but the Romans after a hot fight had the victory, slew many,
and failed little of taking the town; for the Goths had much ado to shut their
gates, they were so closely pursued. Fidelius, as the Romans rod back, staid to
pray in a Church; and having a fall by the stumbling of his horse near the
Town: the Goths sallied and killed him, unseen by the Enemy, which much greived
Mundilas and the Romans, who went to Millan, and took it without fight, and all
Liguria. Vitigis understanding it, sent an army thither under Vraeas, his
Sisters son. And Theodebert, King of the Francks, sent to his aid at his
request, 10000, not Francks, but Burgundians, that he might not seem to wrong
the Emperor. These Burgundians pretended to come of their own accord, not upon
the Command of Theodebert. The Goths joining with them came before Millan
unexpected by the Romans, and besieged it; that they had no means to import
provisions, but were instantly in want of necessaries. Neither could the
Soldiers guard the walls; Mundilas having put Garrisons into Pergamum, Comum,
Novarra, and other small fortresses near Millan; and having there with himself
but about 300 men, and Ennes and Paulus, so that necessarily the Cityzens were
to guard in their turns. And thus the winter ended, and the third year of this
war written by Precopius.

But Belisarius about midsummer went against Vitigis, leaving in Rome a small
Garrison; and taking the rest with him. He sent some to entrench before Tudera,
Incipit annus quartus bell. Goth, being in It reg. Justinian et anno domini 539.
and Clusium, meanning to follow, and with them to besiege the Goths therein.
But they hearing of the army coming, sent to Belisarius, and yielded upon
composition to have no hurt done them. He took the Goths there, and sent them
to Naples and into Sicily, then left Garrisons in Tudera and Clusium, and
marched on. In the mean time Vitigis sent another army under Vacimus to Auximum,
to join with the Goths there, and to attempt the castle of Ancona. This Ancona
is a cornerd rock, from whence it has the name, Ancoa, signifying an Elbow. It
stands from Auximum ten miles, and is the Haven for it; the Castle is at the
corner of a rock, very secure, but the houses without being not many, have no
defense of walls. Conon, who had the Guard of the place, hearing Vacimus to
come against him, and not far off, fell upon a senseless resolution, as if it
were nothing to save the Castle, Peole, and Soldiers. He left the castle
unguarded, and drew out some five furlongs off, standing in order of battle,
not of any depth, but compassing the hill, as if he were hunting. But when they
saw the Enemy so much exceeding in numbers, they all ran away to the Castle.
The Barbarians pursuing, killed many that could not get in; set to their
Ladders to mount the Castle, and put fire to the houses without. The Romans who
dwelt within were amazed, and first having opened the Gate, and received in the
flying Soldiers, now seeing the Goths at their heels ready to enter with
them, they shut the Gates, and drew up with ropes diverse, and Conon among them.
The Goths, mounting by their Ladders, had taken the Castle, if two men upon the
Battlements had not miraculously thrust them off, the one a Thracian, and a
Lancier to Belisarius, named Vlimun, the other Bulgudas a Hunne, a Lancier of
Valerianus. These by chance landed a little before at Ancona, and in this fight
keeping off the Goths with their Swords, saved the Castle beyond expectation,
but were carried off themselves mangled and half dead.

CHAP. XI.
THen came news to Belisarius, that Narses was come from Constantinople with
an army, and was in Picenia, Narses was an Eunuch, and Treasurer to the
Emperor, valiant above the condition of an Eunuch: with him came 5000 men in
several Regiments, commanded by Justinus, General of Illyrium, and others;
and another Narses, a Pers-Armenian, who revolted formerly to the Romans with
Horatius his Brother, who came a little before to Belisarius with other forces,
and 2000 Herulians under Visandus, Alueth, and Phanotheus. Formerly the
Herulians inhabited beyond the river Ister, serving many Gods, and holding it
no impiety to appease them with human sacrifices. They had Laws differing from
other men: When men were grown aged or sick, they were not to live, But to
entreat their kindred to put them out of the world: Who made a pile of wood,
and set the man in the top, and sent a stranger to him, in blood, with a sword
to dispatch him; then set the pile on fire, and the flame being done, gathered
up his Bones, and buried them. When an Herulian died, his wise (if she would be
thought virtuous) was to strangle her self over her husbands Tomb; otherwise
she was esteemed infamous, and an Enemy to her husbands kindred. In time
over-topping the bordering Barbarians in populousness and power, they
vanquished them in fight one by one, and forraged their country, and kept them
under. They subdued the Lombards being Christians, and made them pay Tribute,
upon Covetousness or vain glory, it being a thing not used by the Barbarians
in those parts. In the Reign of the Emperor Anastasius, having none left to
invade, they remained quiet for three years: But were discontented for it at
their King Rodulphus, flocking about him, and calling him coward, and
immodestly they scoft and abused him. Who not enduring the disgrace, made a
causeless war upon the Lombards, not charging them with breach of Treaties, or
any other pretense. The Lombards sent to R^dulphus to know why the Herulians
were in arms against them; if their Tribute were not all paid, they would
satisfy it with advantage; if they thought it too mean, they would make it
greater. But Redulphus sent their Ambassadors away with Threats. They sent
again other Ambassadors, who used much entreaty; but speeding not, the third
came and advised him; In no sort to make a war without a cause: if he did, the
Lombards (though unwillingly) must oppose the invasion; calling God to
witness, whose least drop upon the scale will weigh down all the power of men,
and as he is induced by the causes, will determine the conclusion of this war.
The Herulians not frighted herewith, nor relenting, resolved to have a Battle.
Both parts being near each other; over the Lombards the air was suddenly over
cast with a black thick cloud; there being a clear sky over the Herulians, a
Presage that the Herulians entered the fight for their own mischeife, and among
those Barbarians before a battle the saddest prodigy that can be. But the
Herulians, not heeding the same, marched proudly against the Enemy, judging of
the success by their great multitudes. But they were very many slain, with
their King Rodulphus, and the rest flying were almost all cut in pieces. Upon
this they left their Country, and passing through all the land beyond the River
Ister, came where the Regians, or Rugians had inhabited, (who were gone with
the Goths into Italy) and there they sat down. But the land being wast, and
famine compelling they removed, and came to a country next the Gepaedes; who at
the first perm^tted them to plant, coming as Suppliants: But afterward they
wronged them, forcing their wives, and making prey of their Cattle and Goods,
and at last began unjust quarrels with them: which the Herulians not able to
bear, past the River Ister to dwell by the Romans there. And Anastasius the
Emperor received them, to plant in the country. Soon after by committing much
wickedness upon their neighboring Romans, they offended him, and he sent an
army against them; which in a battle had the victory, killed most of them, and
would have destroyed them all; but their cheiftains remaining, with
supplications begged their lives, and to be taken for Auxiliaries and Servants
to the Emperor; who granted the same, and so some Herulians escaped alive, but
neither aided nor served the Romans. Justinian coming to the Empire gave them a
good country, and Goods, and made them absolute Associates, and persuaded them
to be Christians; upon this they grew civiller, and applied themselves to the
Laws of Christians, serving the Romans as Auxiliaries. But still they are
false to us, and covetous; not thinking it any shame to wrong their Neighbors.
They use impious mixtures with men and Beasts, being indeed the wickedest of
all men, and wretches wretchedly to perish. Some few of them continued their
League with us; the rest revolted upon this occasion. To show the lavagenesse
of their nature, they killed Ochon their King, suddenly, without alleging any
thing, but that they would no more be under a King. And indeed their King
before had only the name, otherwise little advantage above a private man. All
sat and ate with him, and put licentious scorns on him; the Herulians being
the most indiscreet, and the lightest men alive. This foul Fact they instantly
repented, finding no possibility to live without Governors, and Generals.
After much consultation, they resolved to send for one of the Blood Royal from
the Island of Thule. For the Herulians being overthrown by the Lombards, and
leaving their native Soil, some dwelt in Illyrium (as I said) others past not
the River Ister, but thought it better to plant in the uttermost borders of the
habitable World. Conducted by many of the Blood Royal, they past through all
the Nations of the Slavonians; then passing a large desert Country, they came
to a Nation called the Varnians, after whom they traversed the Nations of the
Danes; the Barbarians there using no violence against them: Then they came to
the Ocean, and getting Shipping, arrived at the Island of Thule, where they
staid.

CHAP. XII.
THule is ten times bigger then Britany, much distant from it to the Northward:
The most of it is waste; Mr. Cambden. Nec me latet vastissiman illam ^egion^m
Scandiam sub Thules nomine a Procopio describi. Indeed this Scandia, wherein is
Norway and part of Denmark, it appears in the Map as a Peninsule. It is
called by some of our Writers, Vagina gentium.
but in that which is inhabited are seated thirteen populous Nations, and over
every Nation is a King. The Sun about the Summer Tropic sets not in the Island
for forty days, being in all that time a strange sight still above the Earth.
And near the Winter Tropic, it is not seen in the Island for forty days, but
a continual night hangs over it; the Inhabitants leading a sad life all the
while, and not conversing which one another. It was not my fortune to go to
this Island, though I much desired to behold the wonder: But inquiring of some
that came from thence, how they knew the due times of Sunrising and
Sunsetting, they told me the true reason; That the Sun sets not indeed there
for forty days, but it shines sometimes from the Eastward, sometimes from the
West; and when they see it return to that place of the Horizon, where first
they saw it rise, they reckon a day and a night. And in the long nights they
count the days by the courses of the Moon, which they see every month. When
five and thirty days are runn out of this long night, men used to it are sent
to the tops of the Mountains, who there seeing the Sun, bring word that within
five days it will shine again. For this good news a solemn Feast is
celebrated in the dark; which is the Thulites greatest Holy Day. They fear (it
seems, notwithstanding their yearly experience) that the Sun may forsake them
quite. Of all the Nations of Thule, only the Scritifini are Savages, who use
no apparel, nor shoes to their feet, nor get any man's meat out of the earth;
themselves neither manuring it, nor their Wives using any work, but both
perpetually hunting; for their vast Woods and Mountains breed multitudes of
wild Beasts; which they, catch and feed upon their flesh, covering themselves
with their Skins, which they patch together with Sinews of Beasts, wanting
thread, or any thing to sow with. Their Children are not nursed like other
people, with Woman's milk, nor hang at the Mothers breast, but are nourished
with the Marrow of the wild Beasts they take. The Woman having brought forth
her child, wraps it in a Skin, and hangs it on a Tree, and laying Marrow to
the mouth of it, out she goes a hunting with her Husband.

The rest of the Thulites differ not much from other people. They worship many
Gods, and Damons, both Celestial, and of the Air, Earth, and Sea; and the
Spirits said to be in Fountains, and Rivers. They are perpetually sacrificing,
and pacifying with blood; and their fairest Victime is a Man, before taken
Prisoner, whom they sacrifice to Mars, esteemed their greatest God. And they
do it, not by cutting his throat only, but hanging him on a tree, and
throwing him among Briars, and other kinds of death. Among these Thulites the
Herulian wanderers, planted themselves; and those who continued among the
Romans, having murdered their King, sent some chief men to the Island of
Thule, to bring home one of the blood royal, if they could find any there.
They found many, and made choice of one whom they liked best, and took him
with them. But being come near home, he dyed of a sickness; and the men went
again to Thule, and brought another, named Todasius, accompanied with his
Brother Aordus, and two hundred Herulians of the Island. Who being long upon
their journey, the Herulians about Singedon conceiving it might be inconvenient
to introduce a King from Thule, without the Emperor Justinians consent, to
Constaneinople to the Emperor, to give them what King he pleased: He sent them
Suartuas, an Herulian, who had long continued in Constantiople, whom the
Herulians at first received joyfully, adored him as King, and obeyed him in the
usual directions: But within few days, they had news how the Ambassadors
from Thule were near. Suartuas commanded them to go out and kill them; and the
Herulians followed him with a seeming approbation; but being within a days
journey of them, they revolted from him by night to the new comers, and
himself alone fled to Constantinople; the Emperor was studious to restore
him; and the Herulians fearing the Romans, betook themselves to the Gepaedes:
And this was the cause of their Revolt.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE Armies of Belisarius and Narses joined at Firma, a City standing near the
Jonian Gulf, a days journey from Auximum. They held a Counsel of War where
to oppose the Enemy with best advantage. If they go to relieve Auximum, they
doubted the Enemy from Auximum might at their backs infest them, and spoil the
Romans inhabiting those parts. And likewise of the beseiged in Ariminum, they
were afraid they might be distressed for want of Victual. Most of the
Captains offended with John, charged him in their speeches for running into
that danger rashly, and to get money, and for crossing (contrary to order) the
Counsels of Belisarius concerning the War. But Narses (who loved John above all
men) fearing least Belisarius upon the Captains speeches might put Ariminum in
the second place, spoke thus. Fellow Commanders, you discourse in things not to
be discoursed of, and consult where none reasonably can be of two Opinions; but
where he who never knew the War may choose upon the sudden. When the danger
appears equal, and the damage alike in mistaking, abundant consultation, and
much discourse is fit, and so to determine the matters propounded. But we
deferring to attempt Auximum now, shall receive no important hurt; for what so
soon can alter our case? Whereas if we receive a blow at Ariminum (as can no
otherwise be) we shall ruin (a harsh word) our whole power in Italy. If John
have contemned your Commands, excellent Belisarius, you have it now in your
power to punish him, by saving the Offender, or abandoning him to the Enemy.
But take heed you do not punish the Emperor and us, for an unwitting Offense
of John. If the Goths take Ariminum, they will make Captive a valiant General
with his Army, and a City of the Emperors obedience. Neither will the
mischief stop there, but even constitute the whole fortune of the War. For the
Enemy have now much advantage in numbers; but by being often beaten, are become
Cowards, their ill Fortune having taken their confidence from them. But if in
this design they prosper, they will soon recover their Spirits; and them
dispute the War with more then equal Courage: Such as escape difficulties
being commonly wiser, then they who never had misfortunes. Thus Narses spoke.
But a Soldier from Ariminum brought Letters to Belisarius from John, which
were thus; Know, that our Victual has long failed us, and we can no longer
answer the People, nor resist the Enemy; but within seven days must sore
against our wills yield the city and our selves. We can no longer strive
against our necessities, which will sufficiently apologize for us, if we shall
do any thing not so honorable. Belisarius at this was troubled, and full of
irresolution. He was afraid of the besieged; and he doubted that the Enemy in
Auximum would fly abroad and burn the towns thereabout without control; and
by watching advantages distress his own army, especially if there should be a
battle. In the end he left Aratius with a thousand men to incamp by the Sea
side, 25 miles from Auximum, and not to stir, nor give fight to the Enemy but
in their own Defense; By this he hoped that Enemy would lie quiet in Auximum,
and not infest his army, having a camp of Romans so near them. He sent also
forces by Sea, commanded by Herodian, Vliaris, and Narses, Brother to Aratius,
and the whole in chief by Ildeger. Whom Belisarius directed to sail directly
for Ariminum, and to land not far off from the foot, which should march by the
Sea shore commanded by Martinus, and appointed to wait upon the Fleet; whom he
directed being near the Enemy to light many fires, not proportionable to their
small army so to give the Enemy apprehension of greater numbers. Himself with
Narses, and the rest of the army, marched by Vrbisalia, far from the Sea coast;
a city so ruined by Alaricus, that nothing remained of the former beauty, but
some relics of one Gate, and of the pavement. Here I met with this adventure.
When Jo came with his army into P. the people were in much confusion. and the
women some suddenly fled where they could, others were carried away captives.
In this place some woman, newly delivered of a Child, had left it in swathing
clouts upon the Ground; whether she ran away, or were taken from it by the
Enemy, she never did return, being likely either gone out of Italy, or the
World. The child lying in that Desert cried, and a she Goat perceiving it,
pitied it, and having also lately brought forth young, came to it and gave it
her Teate, guarding the child, that no Dog nor wild beast might hurt it. The
troubles lasting long in the country, this Infant had long the benefit of this
Teat. But the Picenians finding the Emperors army was come against the Goths
only, and not to hurt the Romans, returned to their several homes. And into
Vrbisalia the women with their husbands coming, and seeing the child, could not
imagine what it was, and wondered how it lived: such women as were sit, offered
their breasts; but the child would not take woman's milk, neither would the Goat
leave it; but importunatly bleated, and seemed to be greived at the women's
troubling it, and in a word pretended to it her own. So that the women let it
alone, and the Goat nursed it; for which the people called the child Aegisthus.
I traveling that way, they brought me to it, and angered it to make it cry;
the Goat hearing it, being a stones cast off, ran to it bleating, and stood
over it that none might hurt it, and this is the story of Aegisthus.

CHAP. XV.
BUT Belisarius marched by the mountains, resolving not to come to a direct
battle, being much inferior in numbers, and the Goths desperate with their
misfortunes. But he thought that when they heard of Forces invading on every
side, they would not resist, but run away; and the guest as it fell out. For
being upon the Mountains a days journey from Ariminum, he lighted upon Goths
traveling about business; who being suddenly surprised, could not turn out
of the way, but were some slain by the Romans, and the rest wounded ran up, and
hid them in the rocks: from whence seeing the Romans marching many together in
narrow passages, they judged them far more then they were, and perceiving the
Ensign of Belisarius, they knew that he led them. The night overtaking, the
Romans flayed there, and the Goths hurt men run to Vitigis Camp; whether being
arrived about noon the next day, they showed their wounds, and reported
Belisarius to be at hand with an innumerable army. Hereupon they prepared to
fight; marching to the North of Ariminum (which way they thought the Enemy
would come) and still looking to the mountain tops. At night having put off
their arms, and taking their rest, they saw fires some seven miles from the
City Eastward, kindled by Martinus. They fell into terrible fear, apprehending
in the morning to be surrounded by the Enemy; and so lay still that night in
that fear. And by Sun rising they saw a great fleet coming, which even struck
them dumb; that with tumult and clamouring they tru^s'd up, harkning to no
commands, nor thinking upon any thing but how to get quit of the camp, and
within the walls of Ravenna. If the besieged had had any strength or courage
left, they had cut the Enemy in pieces, and made an end of the war; but they
were heartlesse with their miseries, and feeble with want of food. The Goths in
that confusion left much of their baggage behind, and ran amain to Ravenna
Ildiger with his forces first seized the Enemies trenches, took the baggage
they left there, and some sick men At noon Belisarius came with the army, and
seeing John and his company pale, and greivously nasty, he said, he must give
thanks to Ildiger, glancing at his unadvised presumption. He answered that he
acknowledged none to Ildiger, but to Narses the Emperors Treasurer; intimating
that Belisarius did not willingly relieve him, but persuaded by Narses; both
these were ever after jealous of each other: That Narses friends would not let
him march with Belisarius, su^gesting how poor it was for him who communicated
of the Emperors secrets, not to be an absolute commander, but to obey one that
was but a General; and that Belisarius would never endure to command with him
in Equality, but that if he would himself lead an army, he should have more
Soldiers and better captains to follow him; the Herulians, and his own
Lanciers and Targetiers, and the troops under Justinus and John himself, with
those of Narses and Aratius, being not less in all then 10000 valiant men and
able Soldiers. That they would not have the conquest of Italy wholly
attributed to Belisarius, but Narses to share in it, who had not left his
attendance on the Emperors person, to establish with his own dangers the Glory
of Belisarius; but by showing his own valor and wisdom, to grow famous in the
world; and that Belisarius without him could do nothing; most of the army
commanded by him being dispersed in the places he had taken. All which they
reckoned up from Sicily to Picenia. Narses was much pleased with these
discourses, and could not contain himself within his present condition: but
Belisarius directing him any business, still he flew to some excuse, rejecting
his commands. Which Belisarius observing, he assembled the Commanders, and
spoke thus. Fellow commanders, I find not my self to be of the same opinion
with you concerning this War. You despise the Enemy, as absolutely subdued; but
I think this confidence will bring you into danger; knowing that the Goths
have not been beaten through their cowardice, or want of men, but
overstratagem'd with counsel and foresight, and so routed. And you in like
sort I fear from some false opinion may receive a blow, which may undo your
selves and the Roman affairs. They are more easily undone, who are insolent
with successes and conceit of victory; then such as having lost some honor, do
for the time to come use fear and caution toward their Enemies. Carelessness
has ruined many well settled, and a solicitous labor releived men after
misfortunes: the powers of the negligent lessening of themselves, but care
naturally adding powers, Consider that Vitigis is in Ravenna with many
thousands, That Vraas besieges Millar, and holds all Liguria; That in Auximum
is a great and gallant army; and that there are other garrisons of Goths able
to fight with us, all along to Vrbiventum, which is a neighbor to Rome. That
if we should now be compassed by the Enemy, our danger were more then ever. The
Francks also are said to be in arms in Liguria, which every Roman ought to
consider and apprehend. My opinion therefore is, that part of the army be sent
into Liguria and Millan, and all the rest to march against Auximum, and
undertake as God shall enable, and as shall seem best and most advantageous. To
this speech of Belisarius, Narses replied. Noble General, in all the rest
(being nothing but truth) none can contradict you; but that all the rest of the
Emperors army should be confined to Auximum and Millan, I hold it
inconvenient; for you to lead such of the army as you please for those
purposes, is good reason: In the mean time we will get Lombard Ci^padana, from
the city of Ast to Parma vid. Leanurum.
Emilia for the Emperor, a Province most set by by the Goths; and we will give
such alarmes to Ravenna, that you shall bring the Enemy on your part to what
terms you please, being excluded from hope of succors. I fear if we sit down
before Auximum together, the Goths will set on us from Ravenna, and we shall be
charged on both sides, and wanting Victual perish upon the place. Belisarius
fearing least by dividing the Forces, the Emperors Affairs might fall
asunder, and ruin by the disorder arising from thence; produced the Emperors
Letters directed to the Commanders in these words. We have sent Narses our
Treasurer into Italy, not to command the Army; it being our pleasure that
Belisarius alone shall have the leading thereof, whethersoever himself thinks
best; and it behooves you all to follow him for the good of our State. Narses
took hold of the last words of this Letter; and said, that Belisarius did now
advise against the good of the State, and therefore they were not bound to
follow him.

CHAP. XV.
BElisarius upon this sent Peranius with an Army to beseige Vrbiventum;
Himself led the rest to Vrbinum, a strong Town, a days journey from Ariminum,
which had a good Garrison of Goths within it: Narses and John followed him, but
before the Town they encamped severally at the foot of the Hill, Belisarius on
the East side, and Narses on the West. Vrbinum stands upon a round high Hill,
not craggy, but unsafe to mount, only for the steepness, and neernesse to the
City. Toward the North is an entrance upon plain ground. Belisarius (the Army
being thus quartered) sent Ambassadors to the Goths, hoping to bring them
(being afraid) to a composition; and promising many advantages by their
submission to the Emperor. The Ambassadors at the Gates (being not admitted
into the Town) used many allurements; but the Goths presuming upon the strength
of the place, and their abundance of Provisions, rejected them and their
motions. Belisarius upon this caused the Army to gather Poles, and with them to
make a Gallery for men, to approach the Gates and Walls under this covert. Some
Friends of Narses told him that Belisarius labored in vain, ( John having
attempted the place when the Garrison was small, and found it impregnable)
therefore he should take in the Emperors Towns in Emilia. Narses upon this
advise rose that night (though much wooed by Belisarius to stay and help to
take Vrbinum) and went to Ariminum with the rest of the Army. Morras and the
Goths under him, in the morning seeing half the Army gone, flouted from their
Walls at those that staid behind. But Belisarius with them resolved, to
assault, and consulting about it, he had strange Success. The only Fountain in
Vrbinum which watered all the Inhabitants, grew dry of it self, and in three
days so failed, that the Goths drunk the water with mud, whereupon they
determined to yield: whereof Belisarius not knowing, put the Army in readiness
to assault round about the Hill, and commanded to bring on the wooden Gallery
upon the even ground. The men within unseen by the Enemy brought the same on,
at which the Goths held out their hands, crying for peace. The Romans knowing
nothing of the Fountain, conceived that it was the Fight they feared, which
they gladly forbear: And the Goths rendered themselves, and Town to Belisarius,
upon composition of indemnity, they becoming Subjects to the Emperor, and
serving in the Army with equal conditions. Narses wondered to hear the News,
and took it for a misfortune. He lay still in Ariminum, but commanded John with
the Army to lead out against Cesina. They approach the Castle with their
scaling Ladders upon their backs, and assaulted; But the Goths defended
stoutly, and Phanotheus Leader of the Herulians was slain, and many more, so
that John would attempt it no more, seeming impregnable, but marched on with
Justinus, and the rest of the Army, and took an ancient City, named Forum
Corneli^, by surprise: And he recovered all Emilia; the Goths avoiding still to
fight with him. Belisarius also having taken in Vrbinum, thought it not
expedient (being at the Winter Tropic) to go against Auximum, expecting a long
Seige of it, the place being strong, and impossible to be forced, by reason the
Goths within it were many, and of the best, who having forraged much Country,
had brought in great quantity of Provisions, so that he appointed Aratius to
winter in Firmum, and to restrain the Goths incursions, and to spoil the
Country; and himself marched against Vrbiventum, persuaded by Peranius, who had
learnt of run awaies, that the Goths within wanted Victual; and that it was
thought, they would yield upon sight of Belisarius Army, which came so to
pass. Belisarius quartered his Army before it, and himself went round, and
viewed the Town, and found it not possible to be taken by force, but he thought
by some plot it might be faisable. Vrbiventum is built upon a Hill, standing
alone in a Valley, and being plain at the top, and toward the bottom craggy.
About it, a stones cast off are many Rocks, and the Town has no Walls, nor
other Fortification, Nature having made it impregnable; in regard there is but
one way to it between those Rocks: which being guarded, the Townes-men fear no
invasion at any other part. And where the way into the Town is, a large River
unfordable takes up all the space between the Hill and those Rocks. So that
there is only a small Fortification at the said passage, and a Gate to it,
which the Goths guarded.

CHAP. XVI.
BUT Belisarius begirt the Town with his Army, hoping to incommode the Enemy
from the River, and to take them by Famine. The Goths for a while were in no
absolute wants, and though furnished very barely, yet they endured beyond
expectation, having not Food to satisfy, but to keep alive only; and their
Provisions being failed, they fed upon Hides, and Skins soaked in water, and
upon vain hopes, which Albilas their Commander gave them, a man of great
Reputation with the Goths.

The Summer being come, the Corn in all those parts grew of it self, but not
in such quantity as formerly; being not covered under Furrows by the Plow and
Harrow; but lying upon the Face of the Land, which could yield so but small
Crop: And none being to reap it, much shed, and never grew again. The same
happened in Emilia, that the Inhabitants went all into Picenia, which being
upon the Sea, they thought the Famine not to be so much there: Which seized
also upon Tuscany; but there the Mountainers grinded Acornes, and made bread,
which bred all kind of Diseases in many; but some recovered and lived. But in
Picenia 50000. Roman Husbandmen at least perished, and more on this side the
Jonian Gulf. I have seen their Countenances, and manner of deaths. They grew
lanck, and pale, the Flesh wanting Food (according to the old saying) feeding
on it self; Choler prevailing spread a wan Complexion over their Bodies: And as
the Disease grew, all moisture forsook them; the Skin was hard like a tanned
Hide, and looked as if it cleft to the bones; afterward they became
black-coloured, and like Lincks much burnt. Their Countenance were hideous,
like madmen; and as most dyed for want of Sustenance, so some with greedy
feeding: whose heat being quenched within, if they were nourished to
satisfaction, and not by little, and little, like Babes new born, being not
able to digest the meat, they dyed. Some forced by the Famine fed upon one
another. Two Women in a Village beyond. Ariminum were reported to have eaten
17. men, they only were left alive in the place, and so Passengers lodged in
their Cottage, whom they killed sleeping, and eat them. As they were attempting
the like upon the 18. he waked, and finding out the truth, killed them both.
Many being pincht with this Famine, went where there was Grass, and stooping
to gather it, but being not strong enough to pull it up, they fell upon their
hands, and dyed with the Grass in their mouths. None buried any, nor had the
least thought of Funerals: The very ravenous Fowls, that feed on dead bodies,
would not touch them, there being no flesh left to allure them, which the
Famine had consumed all. So grievous was that Famine.

But Belisarius sent Martinus and Vliaris with an Army against Vrbias and the
Goths, whom he heard to besiege Millan. They encamped and stayed upon the Poe a
days journey from Millan, and spent much time in consulting about their
passage over the River. Which Mundilas understanding, sent one Paulus a Roman
to them; who slipped by the Enemy and finding no Boats upon the Poe stripped
himself, and in great danger swam over the River. Coming to the Roman Camp he
told the Commanders Martinus and Vliaris, that they did unjustly, and not
befitting their reputations, to come there in pretense to serve the Emperor,
but in effect to augment the Goths power. That Millan, the chief of the
Italian Cities for bigness, wealth, and populousness, being a Bulwark for the
whole Roman Empire against the Germans, and other Barbarians, is now in peril
with Mundilas and the Emperors Forces, and yet by them neglected. The wrong
they did the Emperor, he would forbear to aggravate, time not allowing many
words, but demanding speedy succor, whilst yet some hope is left. That
therefore they must instantly relieve Millan; if they delayed it, Our fortunes
(quoth he) will be after the bitterest sufferings to perish, and yours, to
betray the Emperors Soldiers to the Enemy.. Seeing such are justly said to
betray, not only who open their Gates to an Enemy, but who having means to
rescue their best Friends beseiged, by preferring a backward security before
hazarding, abandon them to the Enemy. Paulus spoke in that sort, and Martinus
and Vliaris promised him to follow immediately, and so sent him away; who
entered Millan by night, revived the Soldiers and other Romans, and made them
yet more cheerful in their Faith to the Emperor.

CHAP. XVII.
BUT still the Troops with Martinus were backward, and lay still, and so
continued long. Martinus to put the blame from himself, wrote thus to
Belisarius: You sent us out to relieve our distressed Friends in Millan: we
have used our best diligence, and are as far as the River of Poe; which the
Army fears to pass, hearing that in Liguria is a great Army of Goths, and a
multitude of Burgundians; with whom we conceive our selves not able to fight.
Command therefore John and Justinus (who are our neighbors in Emilia) to join
their Troops with us in this adventure; whereby we shall be safe our selves,
and do some hurt to the Enemy. Belisarius upon receite of this Letter,
commanded John and Justinus immediately to join with Martinus for Millan. They
refused, unless Narses directed them; whereupon Belisarius wrote thus to
Narses: Consider how the Emperors Army is one body: If (as members in bodies)
you be not all of a mind, but will be doing one without another concurrence;
in the end (having done nothing you should) you will all perish. Wherefore
leave Emilia, which has no strong place in it, and for (...) present is not of
any importance to us; and command John and Justinus immediately to march with
Martinus against the Enemy before Millan, whose Troops are near the same, and
well furnished to vanquish the Barbarians. From hence it is not convenient to
send Forces thither, much time will be spent in the march, that they will come
after the season; and being come, they will not be able to use their Horses in
a fight after so long a journey. But those, and Martinus and Vliaris marching
to Millan, in likely hood will beat the Goths, and then again subdue Emilia,
none being to oppose them. Narses after perusal of this Letter, wrote to John
and Justinus to march to Millan accordingly. John afterward was sent to the
Seacoast, to get Barks for transporting the Army over the Poe; but a sickness
hindered his business. In the mean time of this backwardness of Martinus
Troops, and John's staying for Narses his Orders, the Besieged became infinitely
distressed with Famine. The extremity constrained them to feed on Dogs, Rats,
Mice, and such uncouth creatures. The Goths sent to Mundilas to render the
City, offering Indemnity to himself, and the Soldiers. He accepted, so they
would give assurances of performance, and not use hard measure to the
Inhabitants. When the Enemy had given assurances to Mundilas and the Soldiers,
but being angry with the Ligurians, appeared resolved to destroy them; he
called the Soldiers and spoke thus. If ever men have chosen to dye honorably
when they might have lived basely, such would I have you now to be, and not for
love of breath to live in disgrace; the rather being of the School of
Belisarius, where you have learnt so plentifully, that it were impious not to
be generous, and extremely daring. To all men that come into this light, one
fate is appointed, in their due time to dye. But in the manner of their deaths
men are distinguished; Cowards first becoming the scorn and laughter of their
Foes, fulfill their destiny too in their defined times. But generous men suffer
the same with Virtue, and an advantage of Honor. If by becoming Slaves to the
Barbarians we could preserve this People, our base preservation would have an
excuse; but for us to behold so many Romans destroyed by the Enemy, is more
bitter then any death; for we shall seem even to have helped the Goths to act
this Calamity. Whilst therefore we are yet Masters of our selves, and can bear
necessity with Virtue, let us make this our hard Fortune, our Glory. My Opinion
is, to arm our selves completely, and to sally upon the Enemy not looking for
us: We shall gain one of these two; either Fortune to do something for us, or
else an honorable riddance of our miseries, by a happy death beyond our hopes.
The Soldiers for all these words of Mundilas would not hazard, but yielded
themselves and the City upon the Conditions offered. Them the Goths hurt not,
but made Prisoners with Mundilas, but the City they demolisht to the Ground,
killing men of all ages, 300000. at least. The Women they made Slaves, and gave
to the Burgundians, to gratify their joining with them. Finding there
Reparatus, Prefect of the Palace, they cut him in pieces, and threw them to
the Dogs. Vergentinus, who was then in Millan, went into Dalmatia with his
Troops through Venetia, This is now Marca Trivigiana, says Leander.
and other Countries, and from thence brought the news to the Emperor, of the
Romans Disaster at Millan. The Goths also took other Towns by composition from
the Roman Garrisons, and quickly subdued all Liguria. And Martinus and Vliaris
returned toward Rome with their Army.

CHAP. XVIII.
BElisarius heard nothing of these Occurrents in Liguria, but the Winter being
ended, he marched with his Army into Picenia: In which Journey he understood to
his great grief what was become of Millan. Vliaris he suffered not to come
into his sight, and wrote the whole matter to the Emperor, who punished no man;
but hearing of the differences between Belisarius and Narses, he sent for
Narses home, and appointed Belisarius absolutely to command all the Army.
Narses went to Constantinople with some few Soldiers; And being gone, the
Herulians would (...) stay in Italy, though Belisarius in his own name and the
Emperors made them large promises. They first went into Liguria; where meeting
with Vraeas his Army, they sold their Slaves, and Cattle they had, and for a
Sum of money given them, swear never to take Arms against the Goths, and so
peaceably they came into Venetia; where having speech with Vitalius, they
repented of their Error against the Emperor, and to expiate the same, left
Visandus there, and his Troops. The rest came to Constantinople, conducted by
Alu^th, and Philimuth, who was chief; Phanotheus being dead in his Tent.

But Vitigis hearing that in the beginning of the Spring Belisarius would come
against him, and the Goths in Ravenna, they were all afraid, and consulted
what to do; and finding upon debate themselves alone not able to match the
Enemy, they resolved to draw in the aid of other Barbarians. Of the Germans
they were shy, having already had experience of their unfaithfulness, being
contented they should continue neutrall, not joining with Belisarius. But to
Vacis King of the Lombards they sent Ambassadors and large Sums for aid; but
he being a Friend, and Auxiliary of the Emperor, they returned without doing
any thing. So that Vitigis, in much perplexity, demanded the advice of ancient
men, what was to be done to repair his Affairs. After many Opinions of his
Counsel, some unseasonable, some worthy of consideration, it was said; That
the Roman Emperor could not invade the Barbarians of the West, before he had
made truce with the Persians. Then the Vandales, and Moors were ruined, and
these things now befell the Goths. If the King of Persia might be put into a
quarrel with Justinian, the Romans in war with that Nation could maintain none
elsewhere. Vitigis liked the Counsel, and resolved to send Ambassadors, who
were not Goths, to set Chosroes, King of Persia, at variance with Justinian
(for fear of discovering, and spoiling of the negotiation.) But they persuaded
two Priests of Liguria with money to undertake the Service. One of them taking
upon him the show and name of a Bishop, was the Ambassador, and the other went
as his attendant. To these Vitigis gave his Letters to Chosroes, who being
therewith moved, did those mischiefs to the Romans during the Truce I
formerly, related. And the Emperor, so soon as he found the Persians plotting
those mischiefs, thought good to end the War in the West: He sent therefore
for Belisarius to go against the Persian, and he dispatched Vitigis
Ambassadors, (who yet were at Constantinople) with promise to send some to
Ravenna, to conclude a Truce with the Goths, as should be expedient for both
parts. But Belisarius made stay of the Enemies Ambassadors, until they also
sent home Athanasius and Peter, who went to Constantinople, and were highly
rewarded. Incipit. Annus 5. belli Goth. 13. Reg. Justiniani and Ann. Dom. 540.
Athanasius the Emperor made Prefect of the Palace in Italy, and Peter,
Captain of the Emperors Guard. And thus the Winter ended, and the fourth year
of this War, written by Proc^pius.

Belisarius resolved first to get Auximum and Faesulae, and then no Enemy being
in his way, nor to be at his back, to set upon Vitigis and Ravenna. Unto
Faesulae he sent Cyprian and Jastinus with their own Troops, and some
Isaurians, and 500. Foot under D^metrius; these beseiged the Goths in that
Castle. Toward the Poe he sent Martinus and John Phagas with their own Troops,
and other Forces, commanded by that John; whom he directed, in case Vraeas with
his Forces came toward them out of Millan, by any means to get the Rear of
them, and to follow at their backs. These taking Dorthon, a Town unwalled upon
the River, there encamped.

CHAP. XIX.
BElisarius himself with eleven thousand men came before Auximum; which is the
Metropolis of Picenia. It stands ten miles and a half from the shore of the
Jonian Gulf, and from Ravenna three days journey, and ten miles more, upon a
high Hill, with no entrance in any plain ground, and so not approachable by an
Enemy. Vitigis had Garrisoned in it the choicest Goths, supposing that the
Romans, missing this Town, would not dare to invade Ravenna. Belisarius
encamped his Army round about the bottom of the Hill, divided and lodged in
several quarters. The Goths seeing them thus severed, and not likely in a
great Campagnia to succor one another, charged them about evening from the
East side of the Town, where Belisarius Quarter was with his Lanciers and
Targetiers: who opposed the Invaders, and soon routed them; and pursuing got up
to the midst of the Hill; where the Barbarians trusting to the advantage of the
place, turned head against them, killed many, shooting upon their heads, till
the night prevented them. The day before this skirmish, some Goths being sent
out early to get Provisions, were returning by night; and seeing the Romans
fires, stood amazed. Many adventured and got into Auximum unseen by the Romans,
others of them hid themselves in the Woods, thinking to go to Ravenna, but
were surprised, and all cut in pieces. Belisarius finding Auximum strong, and
no means to assault it, despaired to take it by force, but hoped by a close
Siege to reduce them to wants, and in time to subdue them. The store of Grass
near the Walls was occasion of daily skirmishes: The Romans seeing the Goths
cut the same for their Horses, ran up the Hill, fought with them gallantly
still, hindered their carrying away the Grass, and killed many of them. The
Barbarians overmatcht by their Enemies valor, did thus. They took the Wheels
and Axeltrees off their Wagons, and (their men beginning to cut Grass) they
rolled them down upon the Romans, when they were ascended the middle of the
Hill; but they went to the bottom without touching a man. The Goths failing
herein, ran into the Town. Afterward they laid an ambush of their best men in
Valleys near the town; then some few appeared about the Grass plot, and when
the fight was come to Sword and Lance, they rose from their ambush, and having
the advantage much in numbers, and amazing the Romans being unlookt for, they,
killed many, and put the rest to flight. The Romans in the quarters saw the
Enemy rise from their ambush, and cried loud to their companions to retire, but
were not heard, being divided from them the whole length of the hill, and the
Barbarians clashing their arms to drown their cries. Belisarius was troubled
at it, and Procopius, the writer of this History, came to him, and said. Noble
General, Anciently the Roman Trumpeters were skillful in two tunes, one
composed to encourage the Soldiers to fight, the other to sound a retreat,
when the General saw his time: Who by this means signified his pleasure, and
the Soldiers put it in Execution. For in a battle to do it by shouting is
impossible; the fright of it amazing, and the clashing of arms overcoming the
noise. But now rudeness has berest us of this skill, and we cannot signify
both with one Trumpet: wherefore do you thus. Let the horsemens trumpets
encourage the Soldiers to fight, and let those of the foot call them to the
retreat; they cannot but distinguish the sound, the one being made of Leather,
and very thin wood, and the other of a thick piece of Brass. Belisarius liked
Procopius advise, and calling the army, spoke thus. Courage and forwardness is
expedient and commendable so far as it is moderate, and hurts not them who use
it; all things becoming ever worse with Excess. Commit therefore no more of
these Errors through vain ambition; to fly sometime is no shame, and who
unadvisedly runs into evident mischief, if he chance to escape, yet is he
guilty of Folly. The gallant man is he, that fights valiantly in time of need.
The Goths now unable to fight with you, endeavor to ruin you with ambushes;
and you are more to be blamed for standing the danger, then if you had run out
of their ambush; nothing being baser, then to serve an Enemies Counsels. I
will be careful to prevent your falling into ambushes; and you, when I give
the signal, presently retire, which shall be done by the sound of the foot
Trumpets. The Soldiers after this speech, seeing the Enemy at the Grass, went
toward them, and at first killed some. A Moore espying one of them with Gold
Ornaments, ook him by the hair, and drew him aside to strip him; but a Goth hit
him through both the calves of his legs with a dart, and so fettered them both
together, yet still he drew the dead body, holding, it by the Hair. In this
instant the Goths rose from their ambush, and immediately Belisarius seeing all
from the camp, caused the foot Trumpets to sound, which the Romans hearing,
retired gently, taking up the Moore with the Dart through his legs. The Goths
durst not follow them, but retired too. Afterward the Goths considered how they
might advertise Vitigis of their wants, which grew great, and none adventuring
to go, as thinking it impossible to slip by the Enemy, they observed a night
without moon light, and preparing their men with Letters to Vitigis, when the
night was far spent, they made great cries upon the walls, as if they were in
some terrible confusion, pressed by Enemies, and their town suddenly taken. The
Romans could not imagine the cause, and kept within their quarters by
Belisarius's direction, fearing a surprise from the Town, and from some army
from Ravenna, which might be come to the Enemies succor; and so thought better
to lie still in a safe place, then in a dark night to run into danger: Whereby
the Goths sent out their men unespied to Ravenna; who the third day, without
meeting Enemy, delivered the Letters to Vitigis, to this Effect.

When your Majesty placed us in Auximum, you said, that in our hands you left
the keys of Ravenna, and of your Kingdom, and you therefore summoned our
uttermost power to conserve the dominion of the Goths, and if we needed it, you
promised to come to us unsent for with your whole army. We have fought with
Famine and Belisarius, and been faithful Guards of your Kingdom; but you have
not thought meet to succor us at all. Think if the Romans take Auximum, and
the keys which lie here by you forgotten, whether they will be kept out of any
thing you have. Vitigis, upon perusal hereof, promised forthwith to succor
Auximum with his whole forces, and difmist the men: But upon better
consideration he lay still, doubting least the troops with John might fall upon
his back, and before him fearing a great power of resolute men with Belisarius;
but principally want of victual troubled him, not knowing from whence to
furnish his army, in regard the Romans were masters of the Sea, and
transporting their provisions from Sicily and Calabria, to the Castle of
Ancona, from thence had it brought with case in the due season; but the Goths
in Picenia should have no means of supply. But the Messengers came safe to
Auximum with Vitigis promise, which raised them with vain hope. And Belisarius
hearing thereof, caused the Guards to be more strictly kept.

In the mean time Cyprian and Justinus, besieging Faesulae, could not approach
to assault the place; and the Goths willing rather to end it by fights, then to
endure the want of victual, sallied often. At first the fights were equal, in
the end the Romans being too hard for them, shut them within their walls;
keeping exact watch that none might get out. In Auximum the Goths perplexed
with their wants, sent out again to Vitigis for succor, as unable to hold out
any longer. He directed Vraeas with the army in Liguria to march into Picenia;
promising also to come to the besieged with his whole power. Vraeas went into
Picenia accordingly, with the army with him; passed the Poe, and came near the
Romans Camp. and sat down about 7 miles distant from them. They began no
fights, the Romans thinking it enough to keep them from joining with the
besieged. And the Goths were afraid to fight, considering if they should lose
the battle, they should ruin all; being to have no more means of joining with
Vitigis, and with him of opposing the Enemy: with there counsels they both lay
still.

CHAP. XX.
IN the mean time the Francks hearing how both the Goths and Romans were wasted
with this war, conceived it easy to get a good share of Italy, and repined to
sit idle thus, and look upon others, disputing a province so near neighboring.
So that forgetting their late oaths and accords both with Romans and Goths
(for this nation of all men is the most slippery of Faith) with an army of
50000 men under the leading of Theodebert, they invaded Italy. They had some
few horse men, Lanc^ers, to attend their King. The rest were foot men, without
bows or Lances, only wearing a sword, a shield, and a battle axe; the iron
whereof was broad and sharp on both sides, and the handle very short; This upon
a signal at the first charge they throw from them, to break the Enemies
sheilds and kill them. Thus the Francks, passing the Alps which divide Gaul
and Italy, came into Liguria. The Goths were before angry for their not
accepting their offers of a large country, and great sums to aid them; but
now hearing Theodebert was come with a mighty army they rejoiced; and hoped to
beat their Enemy now without striking stroke. And the Francks, while they were
in Liguria, hurt not the Goths, that they might find no impediment in their
passage over the Poe; and at a Town in Picenia, where was an ancient bridge
over the River, the Garrison supplied them, and let them at their pleasure
pass the Poe. But the Francks being masters of the Bridge, such women and
children as they found, they sacrificed, and threw into the River as the first
spoils of the War, It seems they had Almans with them yet Heathen. See
Agathias lib. 1. cap. 3.
retaining yet (though Christians) much of the old religion, and using
sacrifices, and other ungodly Rites in making their predictions. The Goths
seeing it, in a great fear fled into the town, and the Francks being past,
marched toward the Goths Camp: Who at first seeing them in small troops, were
glad of their coming, thinking it to be to aid them. But when numbers came on,
and fell to the business, and darting their Battle axes hurt many, they turned
about, and ran away by the Romans camp into Ravenna. The Romans seeing them
fly, thought that Belisarius had vanquished them in fight, and taken their camp
from them; and they took arms, thinking to join with him in the pursuit; but
they found an Enemy unlook't for, and unwillingly they fought, till being
beaten, and not able to return to their camp, they fled into Tuscany, and sent
News of the accident to Belisarius. The Francks having conquered both parts,
and taken their Camps without any men in them; there then found their
provisions. But in a while they had nothing to feed on in a wasted Country, but
Oxen, and water of the Poe, no bread at all, and being not able to digest the
flesh, and abundance of water, they fell into fluxes and dysenteries, which they
could not get cured for want of things convenient: So that a third part of them
are said to have so perished, and being not able to march on, they staid there.
Belisarius hearing of this army of Francks, and how the troops of John and
Martinus were routed, he was afraid of his army, especially of those before
Faesulae, who were nearest the Barbarians, and he wrote this Letter to
Theodebert. Noble Theodebert, for one pretending to virtue, and especially
being a King of so great a Nation, not to be true of his word, is not Princely;
but to violate oaths and accords reduced into writing, is not fit for the
meanest man. Herein you know your self a Transgressor; having lately agreed to
join with us against the Goths; and now not so much as continuing neutrall,
but advisedly having taken arms, and set upon us. Put not this affront upon
the Emperor, Good Sr. who will revenge it in the highest kind. It is better
for a man to hold his own securely, then by meddling with what belongs not to
him, to run a danger in that which most concerns him. Theodebert upon this
Letter, and being troubled with his present Estate, and reviled by the Germans
for letting them die thus in a desert country to no purpose, rose with the
Francks surviving, and made haste home.

CHAP. XXI.
Nevertheless Martinus and John came back with their Troops, least the Enemy
should set upon the Army before Auximum. Where the Goths hearing nothing of the
Franks retreat, but despairing at the delays from Ravenna, thought once more
to importune Vitigis, but could not get by the Enemy. Seeing at noon one
Burcensius, a Bessian by birth, and a Soldier of Narses the Armenian, standing
Sentinel to keep off the Town from cutting Grass; some came to parley with
him, and agreed to give him a great Sum in hand to carry a Letter to Ravenna,
and more at his return with Letters from Vitigis. The man for the Money
undertook the service, and presently put it in execution. He brought the
Letters sealed up to Vitigis with all speed, which were thus. You will perceive
our estate, by enquiring who is the bearer of this Letter; there being no
means for a Goth to get out of the Town walls; and our best supply of
Victual is the Grass that grows about them, which we cannot touch without
fighting and loss of men. To what conclusion this will bring us, you and the
Goths in Ravenna are seriously to consider. Vitigis returned this answer: My
best Friends in the World! think not I am so dejected, nor come to that degree
of baseness, as through sloth to abandon the Goths affairs; my own journey
was in readiness, and Vraeas by my direction was coming from Millan with his
Army; but an unexpected invasion of Franks stopped our preparations, whereof I am
not to bear the blame: For things above humane power bestow this favor on the
unfortunate, to make him unblameable; Fortune taking the whole imputation upon
her self. But Theodebert being now gone, as we hear, we will shortly, God
willing, be with you with our whole Army. And you must bear your Fortune
valiantly, and suitably to the necessity. Think upon the virtue for which we
made choice of you to guard Auximum; and respect that general opinion held of
you by all the Goths, which set you there a Bulwark of Ravenna, and of their
whole safety.

Vitigis with this Letter and good store of Money, dispatched the man: Who
coming before Auximum pretended to his Companions a sudden sickness, which
caused him to go to a Church near there for cure; and standing Sentinel where
he was wont, he delivered the Letters unseene by the Romans. The reading
whereof so raised their Spirits, though oppressed with the Famine, that they
would not yield, albeit Belisarius much woed them to it: But having no news of
any Army from Ravenna, and being in extreme want of Victual, again they sent
Burcensius, writing only, That they were able to struggle with the Famine five
days, and no more; who brought them again a Letter from Vitigis, holding them
in suspense with like hopes. The Romans also were weary of this long Siege in a
barren desert Country, and troubled to see the Goths not to yield, though in
so much misery. Belisarius therefore sought to take some Enemy alive, from whom
he might learn the ground of this obstinacy of the Goths. Valerianus promised
to serve him therein; who had in his Troops Slavonians, that used to lie under
some Stone or Bush, and to steal Enemies; a thing ordinarily practiced by them
by the River Ister, where their dwellings are, both upon Romans and Barbarians.
Belisarius liking his way, and committing it to his care, he chose out a
Slavonian, a tall lusty fellow, and valiant, and assured him a good reward from
Belisarius to get an Enemy alive; and told him, That at the Grass plat, which
the Goths used to eat for want of food, he might do it with ease. The
Slavonian before day-breake, put himself near the Town walls, concealed in a
Bush, and gathering up his feet close about him. By daylight a Goth came out
to gather Grass, suspecting nothing from the Bush; but had his eye upon the
Camp, least any enemy might come from thence. The Slavonian stealing behind
him, snatched him up fast between his arms, and delivered him to Valerianus;
who enquiring, from what confidence the Goths being so weak refused to yield,
and wilfully endured so much distress; the Barbarian told him all the story
about Burcensius, desiring he might be brought face to face. Burcensius seeing
himself discovered, concealed nothing; and Belisarius gave him to his
Companions to use him as they pleased, who burnt him alive in the sight of the
Enemy: And this fruit had Burcensius, of his covetousness. But Belisarius
seeing the Goths still hold out, he had a design upon their water, by that way
thinking to take them in with most ease and advantage.

CHAP. XXII.
THere was a Springhead to the Northward of Auximum, in a craggy ground, a
stones cast from the Town, sending a small stream into a Cistern anciently
there built, which being filled from that small stream, supplied water for the
Citizens. Belisarius thought that if the water were not received into the
Cistern, the Goths being plied with Arrows, would be long filling their
Vessels from so small a stream. To spoil this Cistern, he did thus; he put his
Forces in Arms, and in their orders round about the Town, as if he would make
a general Assault; The Goths fearing the same, stood upon the Battlements, to
oppose the Enemy. In the mean time Belisarius brought to the Cistern five
Isaurians, covered under a multitude of Shields, skillful in Masonry, with
Axes, and other Instruments to cut stones, commanding them to break down the
sides of the Cistern. The Goths thinking they came to approach the Walls, kept
quiet; that being nearer they might shoot at them with more advantage, not
imagining the business. But seeing the Isaurians within the Cistern, they
plied them with Arrows, and stones; The rest ran back, and the five Isaurians
being under in safety, fell to work; there being an Arch over the water for
shade, under which they made no account of the Enemies shot, though it came
thick. The Goths opening the Gate there, sallied furiously upon the Isaurians,
and the Romans encountered them, where was a hot fight long, and body to body,
and much slaughter on both sides. The Romans fell thicker, the Goths having the
advantage of the upper ground; but the Romans gave not back, Belisarius being
present, and with loud shouts encouraging them: When from the Enemy came an
Arrow whizzing toward the Generals belly, whether shot by chance, or
purposely: Belisarius seeing it not, could not ward nor shun it; but Vnigatus,
one of his Lifeguard, perceiving the Arrow coming almost to his belly, put his
right hand between, and saved the Generals life; and being himself wounded
with it, and in extremity of pain, he retired: His Sinews were afterward cut
asunder, and he lost the use of his hand. The Fight beginning in the morning
ended at noon, where seven Armenians of the Troops of Narses, and Aratius,
showed great deeds of Valor; running up the steep Hill, and upon the plain
killed all that stood them, until they had routed the Goths in that part. And
the Romans seeing the Enemy give ground, fell to Execution and the Defeat being
clear, the Goths got within their Walls. The Romans thought the Cistern to be
down, and the Isaurians to have dispatched their work; but they could not force
one stone out of it. The ancient Artists, above all, careful of their Credits,
had so wrought this building, that it would not yield to time, nor the attemps
of men; wherefore the Isaurians, seeing the Romans masters of the Field, came
out of the Cistern, and retired to the Camp. Hereupon Belisarius caused the
Soldiers to throw dead bodies of Beasts, and poisonous Herbs into the water,
and to quench burning Lime in it; that the Goths having but one Well within the
Walls, with little water in it, were much scanted. Neither did Belisarius use
any more force or designs against the Town, hoping by Famine only to have his
will of the Enemy; and therefore he attended earnestly to his Guards and
Sentinels. The Goths also in their great wants were quiet, expecting an Army
from Ravenna.

In Faesulae the Beseiged endured fore Famine, and much misery, and having no
hope from Ravenna, they resolved to yield: And coming to a Parley with Cyprian
and Justinus, and taking assurance for their lives, they rendered themselves and
the Castle. Cyprian brought them and the Roman Army before Auximum, leaving a
Garrison in Faesulae. Belisarius showed their Leaders to the Goths in Auximum,
bidding them leave their Opiniativenesse, and hopes from Ravenna, from whence
receiving no good, but being more ruined daily, they will at last come to the
same Fortune with those of Faesulae. They considered of it, and being unable to
hold out longer against the Famine, they embraced the Proposition, and rendered
the City upon conditions of indemnity to themselves, and to go with their Goods
to Ravenna. Belisarius was in some doubt to suffer so many brave men to join
with those in Ravenna; but he would not lose the opportunity of marching
thither against Vitigis, while Affairs was yet in suspense, and the Francks
expected to come with succors to the Goths; whose coming though he would
willingly prevent, yet he would not raise the Seige of Auximum, before it were,
taken. But the Soldiers opposed the Goths having their Goods, showing their
wounds, and recounting their toiles in the Seige, whereof they alleged the
spoils of the Conquered to be the due Prizes. In the end forced by the
pressing opportunity, and the Goths compelled by the Famine, they came to this
accord; That the Romans should have half the Goods, and the Goths with the
other half he subject to the Emperor: And upon this they gave Oath, the Roman
Commanders to observe the Agreement, and the Goths not to conceal any of their
Goods. So they shared the Goods, and the Romans had Auximum, and the Goths were
mingled with the Army.

CHAP. XXIII.
BElisarius having taken Auximum, made have to Ravenna with his whole Army; He
sent Magnus before with competent numbers, to skirt the Bancks of Poe, and
prevent the transporting of Provisions into Ravenna that way. Vitalius, being
come out of Dalmatia with Forces, guarded the other side of the River; a
Fortune here befell, which showed evidently, that she it is who will determine
the controversy. For the Goths had formerly brought down into the Poe many
Barks out of Liguria laded with Corn, bound for Ravenna; but the water was
grown so low then, that they could not row on; till the Romans coming,
surprised the Barks and all the lading. Soon after, the River had the wonted
stream and was Navigable again; which never happened so before, that we could
hear. And now the Goths began to be scarce of Provisions, importing nothing
from the Jonian Gulf (by reason the Enemy was Master of the Sea) and the River
being blockt up.

The Kings of the Francks understanding how things went, and desiring to put
for Italy* sent Ambassadors to Vitigis with offers of aides, so they might
share the Dominion of the Country with him; which Belisarius being advertised
of, sent also Ambassadors to dispute it with the Francks, and among others,
Theodosius the Steward of his house. The Francks Ambassadors were first heard,
and spoke thus: The Kings of the Francks have sent us hither, sorry to hear
that you are distressed by Belisarius, and ready according to their League to
avenge you. There is an Army passed the Alps, of 500000. men, who at their
very first Encounter will over-whelme the Roman Army with their battle Axes.
Hearken not therefore to their Counsel, who would make you Slaves, but to
theirs rather who in their Affection to you embrace the hazards of a War; And
the rather, because joining with us, the Romans cannot hope to match both our
powers, but we shall with ease have the Victory. Whereas if you join with the
Romans, yet shall they not be able to stand against the Francks, (the Battle
even then being not to be with equal powers) and you will be vanquished in the
company of your greatest Foes. To run therefore into so evident mischief,
having means to be preserved without hazard, is extremest folly. The Romans
are not faithful to any Barbarians, but naturally Enemies to them. But we (if
you like it) will share with you the Dominion of Italy, and divide the Country
as we shall both think best. Make choice therefore of what is most expedient
for you. The Francks having done, the Ambassadors of Belisarius spoke thus:
That the Francks multitudes shall not hurt the Emperors Army, as these men
would fright us, what needs a long Speech to you, whose experience has learnt
all the moments of War? and that Valor is not vanquished with multitudes. The
Emperor can more then any, (if he please) exceed his Enemy in numbers. The
faithfulness of these men to all Barbarians, we know, and themselves have
showed it to the Thuringians, Burgundians, and to you their Allies: So that we
would gladly ask, by what God they mean to swear for the pledge of their
Faith. How they have respected him by whom they have already sworn, you know;
who coming as Friends to aid you, did not only not join in the danger, but
impudently took Arms against you; if you remember what they did at the Poe.
What need we, by repeating things past, convince the Francks impiety? Can any
thing be more detestable then this their Embassage? as if they had forgotten
former Treaties; now they pretend their aides to be better then other men's; but
if they obtain the Goths to mingle with their Armies once, what will be the
period or their insatiable desires, were good to consider. Belisarius
Ambassadors having thus spoken, Vitigis after long conference with the
principal Goths, chose an Accord with the Emperor, and dismissed the Francks
with denial.

From hence forward the Romans and Goths sent Ambassadors to each other: But
still Belisarius set Guards to hinder importation of Provisions; and he
employed Vitalius to take in Towns in Venetia, and himself with Ildeger
guarded both sides of the Poe, to draw thus the Goths to yield to him upon his
own terms for want of Victual. Hearing how there was much Corn in the
public Magazines of Ravenna, he won a Citizen with money to set them all on
fire; which loss (some say) happened by Mattasuntha's advise, the Wife of
Vitigis. It was so suddenly done, that some thought it was by lightning, as
others by design, and Vitigis and the Goths taking it in either kind, fell
into more irresolution, neither trusting one another, and thinking God himself
made War against them.

In the Alps also which divide Gaul and Liguria, (called Alps Cottiae) are
many Castles, whereof many principal Goths have the Guard, having long dwelt
there with their wives and children. Belisarius desirous to reduce them, sent
Thomas thither, one of his retinue, with some few, to give Faith, and receive
the Goths upon composition, whom Sisigis commander of all those Garrisons
received into a Castle, and with himself brought in all the rest. In the mean
time Vraeas with 4000 choice men out of Liguria, and those Castles, was
marching to succor Ravenna: These hearing what Sisigis had done, and afraid of
their own Estates, with Vraeas went first to these Cottian Alps, and besieged
Sisigis and Thomas. John Vitalianus hearing of it, and Martinus (being then
about the Poe) came to their succor with their forces, and some of the Castles
they surprised, and made the Inhabitants slaves, and among them many wives and
Children of Vraeas soldiers, who from those Castles had followed him; but
hearing now how their own Estates were ransacked they suddenly ran from the
Goths Camp to John, whereby Vraeas could do nothing there, nor yet relieve
Ravenna, but went into Liguria with some few, and lay still.

CHAP. XXIV.
IN the mean time, Belisarius shut up in Ravenna, Vitigis, and the chief of
the Goths: and the Emperors Ambassadors arrived, Domnicus and Maximinus, both
Senators; with commission to make peace upon Terms, that Vitigis should have
half the Revenues of the Crown, and the Dominion of the country beyond the Poe;
the other half of the Revenues to be the Emperors, and the rest of Italy to be
subject to him, and to pay him Tribute. The Ambassadors showed the Emperors
instructions to Belisarius, and were conducted into Ravenna: And Vitigis and
the Goths gladly agreed to conclude the treaty upon those condition. This
discontented Belisarius, as an ill service to hinder him from the absolute
conquest, and his bringing Vitigis to Constantinople prisoner, having it in his
power: and at the Ambassadors return he refused to sign the Treaty, upon which
the Goths were jealous of the Romans that they fraudulently propounded a peace,
and protested to conclude nothing without the signature and oath of Belisarius.
Who hearing that some Commanders taxed him with a design against the Emperors
service, to prolong the War; he called them all, and in the presence of
Domnicus and Maximinus spoke thus The fortune of the war (I and you know)
stands not upon firm Ground; many in hope of an instant victory have been
overthrown, and an Enemy, in appearance ruined, has beyond imagination
subsisted. So that men consulting of peace, are not to fancy the best for
themselves only, but to consider the event both ways in possibility, and so to
resolve. And I now assemble you my fellow Commanders, and the Emperors
Ambassadors, that choosing with all freedom what you think most expedient for
the Emperor, you may not after the business done, lay imputations upon me; it
being most unreasonable, when you may choose the best, to be silent, and when
you see the Event, then to coin accusations. The Emperors resolution, and
Vitigis mind for concluding the war, you know; which if you conceive to be
expedient, say so; but if you think your selves able to recover Italy, and to
subdue the Enemy, there is no danger, boldly to say it. Belisarius having
spoken, they all said plainly that the Emperors instructions were best, and
that they were not able to do more then they had done. The opinion pleased
Belisarius, and he bade them express it in a writing, that they might not deny
it afterward; which they signed accordingly; that they were not able to subdue
the Enemy by war. But the Goths the while pressed with Famine, could hold out no
longer; weary they were of Vitigis government, and yet scrupulous to yield to
the Emperor; fearing to be removed by him out of Italy to Constantinople, and
planted thereabout. So that the principal men upon debate resolved to declare
Belisarius Emperor of the West, and secretly they sent to entreat him to
accept the Empire, professing to be most willing to obey him. Belisarius would
not take the Empire without the Emperors consent; to whom he was tied in a
solemn oath, not to innovat during the said Emperors life; and the very name
of an Usurper he hated: yet to facilitate his business, he seemed to accept
the offer. Vitigis perceiving it, out of fear, commended the Goths resolution,
and secretly animated Belisarius, that there should be no rub in his way to the
Empire. Belisarius hereupon called the Commanders with the Ambassadors, and
asked them, if they thought it not a matter of importance, to make all the
Goths, and Vitigis the Emperors Captives; to share their wealth, and to
recover all Italy to the Romans: They said, it would be an extreme high
fortune, and prayed him to effect it if he could. Presently Belisarius sent
some of his favorites to Vitigis, and the chief Goths, willing them to perform
their offer immediately. Indeed the Famine would not permit a put-off, but
brought them to it; that again they sent Ambassadors with the former
propositions openly, but privately to take Belisarius oath for their indemnity,
and that he would be King of Italy; and that done, to return into Ravenna with
the Roman army. Concerning the rest Belisarius gave oath; but touching the
Kingdom, he said he would swear it to Vitigis and the Goths Commanders. The
Ambassadors not thinking he would reject the Kingdom, but that he desired it
above all things, prayed him forthwith to march into Ravenna. Belisarius sent
away Narses, Aratius, Bessas and John, (whom he suspected to be worst affected
to him) to quarter with their Troops in several countries, telling them he
could not possibly bring into that city provisions for the whole army. They
with Athanasius, Prefect of the Palace, lately come from Constantinople, went
accordingly; and himself and the rest of the army entered Ravenna, with the
Goths Ambassadors. He commanded also ships he had laded with Corn, to come into
Esclae the haven for Ravenaa. When I saw the entrance of this army into
Ravenna, I considered how actions are not concluded by valor, multitudes, or
human virtue; but that some spirit steers the wits and judgments of men
thither, where nothing can hinder the pre-ordained conclusion. The Goths had
much the advantage in numbers and power, and since they came to Ravenna had no
battle, nor their courages dejected with any accident, yet they became
prisoners, and thought it no shame to be slaves to fewer in number. The women
(who had heard from their Husbands, that the Enemy were tall gallant men, and
not to be numbered, scorned the Soldiers when they saw them in the City, and
reviled their husbands cowardice, pointing at their conquerours.

CHAP. XXV.
BUT Belisarius kept Vitigis in an honorable restraint, and sent away such
Goths as inhabited this side the Poe, to their own houses, to possess them
freely; fearing from thence no hostility, nor that the Goths would gather head
in those parts, because much of the Army was there Garrisoned. And these Goths
were glad to go home, whereby the Romans in Ravenna were secure, having equal
numbers. The Treasures in the Palace he seized, with intent to carry them to
the Emperor; But neither himself plundered any Goth, nor suffered others;
leaving them their Estates according to the Accord. The Captains of
Fortresses, hearing Ravenna and Vitigis to be in the Romans hands, sent to
Belisarius offers of surrendering the same upon Composition. He gave them
assurances, and received Tarvisium, and another strong Hold: Cesina and Emilia
he had taken in before with Ravenna; and the Goths Garrisoned in those places,
upon assurances given, came into Beli^arius, and staid with him. ^^debad also,
Governor of Verona, having his Children Prisoners in Ravenna, sent to
Belisarius to the same purpose; but he would not put himself into his hands
there. In the mean time some Commanders had traduced Belisarius to the Emperor
falsely with usurpation; Who not beleiving the accusation, but the Persian war
pressing him, sent for Belisarius to make an Expedition that way. Belisarius
left the charge of Italy with Bessas and John, and some others; and he directed
Constantianus to come to Ravenna from Dalmatia. But the Goths inhabiting beyond
the Poe, hearing how Belisarius was called home, at first made no account of
it, not thinking that he would less esteem a Kingdom then his faith to
Justinian: But afterward seeing his preparations to be gone, their chief men
continuing in those parts, went into Picenia to Vraeas, sisters Son to
Vitigis, and after much lamenting, spoke thus. There is none a greater cause of
these miseries of our Nation, then your self. We had long since deposed your
uncle, so cowardly and unfortunate a Prince, as formerly we did Theodatus the
sisters Son of Theoderick, if we had not (respecting your valor) given him the
Title, but in Effect put the Kingdom into your hands. But now our then seeming
good counsel, appears our folly, and the cause of these Calamities. The best
Goths are consumed by the war, and the best of the remainder Belisarius is
carrying, away with all our Treasures; and no man doubts, but we shortly being
few, and enemies, shall suffer the same. In this extremity a glorious death is
better, then to behold our wives and children led Captives to the uttermost
bounds of the earth; and might we have you in the head of us, we may yet do
something worthy the name of valor. Vraeas made this answer* I am of your
opinion to choose danger before slavery; but to make me King I hold it in no
fort convenient. For being the Nephew of Vitigis, a man so unlucky, the Enemy
may despise me, supposing Fortunes ever to run in a blood. Besides I shall seem
dishonest to intrude upon my Uncle, and thereby have many malcontents. My
Sentence is, to make Ildebad King in this danger, a man accomplished in Virtue,
and very valiant, whole Uncle Theudis, King of the Visigoths, in likelihood
will enter into this War for his sake, whereby we may dispute it with more
hope. This advise of Vraeas seemed best; and forthwith Ildebad was sent for
from Verona, whom they invested with the purple Robe, and proclaimed King,
recommending unto him their Affairs Ildebad being thus made King, assembled
the Goths, and spoke thus: Fellow Soldiers, we have had experience of many
Wars, and in likelihood shall not run rashly now into this; Experience brings
Wit; and wit is never Foole-hardy. It is fit now to consult of our present
Estate, by calling to mind the former Accidents. Men by an affected
forgetfulness of things past, and so by foolishly keeping high thoughts, have
been ruined in their greatest occasions. Vitigis, without your opposing him,
has put himself into the Enemies hands; you being tired with cross Fortunes,
and choosing rather (quietly sitting at home) to obey Belisarius, then to
hazard. But he being going to Constantinople, now you resolve to stir; whereas
you should consider, that men speed not always in the way they expect, that
often the Event beyond Imagination is contrary to the appearance; Fortune and
Repentance commonly doing best, unlookt for, which is not unlikely, may be now
the case of Belisarius. Wherefore our best way is, to send first to know his
mind, and to persuade him to what was lately accorded, and so to enter into
action. This counsel of Ildebad they all conceived to be best, and immediately
sent Ambassadors to Ravenna; who put Belisarius in mind of his Agreement,
blamed his infringing the same, and reproached him for not blushing to be thus
a Voluntary Slave, and to prefer Servitude before a Kingdom. Many such
Provocations they used, and animated him to accept the Government, assuring him
that Ildebad would willingly give place, lay at his feet the Purple Robe, and
salute him, Belisarius, King of the Goths and Italians. The Ambassadors spoke
thus, thinking that Belisarius would not be so scrupulous, as to reject the
Title of a King. But he, contrary to their expectations, plainly refused it,
saying; that during the Emperor Justinians life, he would not intrude upon
such a Title. They hearing this, instantly departed, and reported it to
Ildebad. And Belisarius took his Journey toward Constantinople, the Winter
ending, and the fifth year of this War, written by Procopius.

Finis lib. 2. Bell. Goth.
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK Of the GOTHJCK War.
Chap. I. AN Elogium of Belisarius. The ill carriage of the other Commanders in
Italy. Ildebad is chosen King, and the Goths recover. The Roman Soldiers and
Subjects are discontented with Alexander Psalidion the Auditor. Ildebad kills
Uraeas, and is slain himself by Vilas, one of his Guard. Chap. II. Erarick, a
Rogian, is chosen King. The Romans have II. Commanders under Constantianus, and
Alexander Psalidion; They basely run away from Verona, and are routed by the
Poe, through the want of Artabazes, who was hurt in a Duel. Chap. III.
Florence attempted, and mist by Totilas, elected King of the Goths. The Roman
Army makes head, and is routed. Naples besieged by Totilas, who is Master of
Italy. Demetrius, sent from Constantinople, is routed in a Sea Fight, taken
Prisoner, and the Navy ruined by storm. Chap. IV. Totiles takes Naples by
composition: His humanity to the Citizens and Soldiers. His noble punishment
of a Rape. The baseness of the Roman Army. Totilas invites the Roman Senators
to revolt. Chap. V. Belisarius is sent into Italy. Otranto is besieged, and
relieved by Valentinus. Tibur is surprised by the Goths. Belisarius come to
Ravenna. The Illyrians go home. Forces are sent to relieve Auximum. Chap. VI.
Some Romans are slain by an Ambush. Pisaurus is repaired. Belisarius writes to
the Emperor for supplies. The Goths take Spoletum, and Assisium by
composition, besiege Rome, and block it up by Sea and Land. Belisarius
unfortunate, or infatuated, returns to Epidamnus. The Emperor sends him an
Army with John. Narses the Eunuch levies an Army of Herulians; who by chance do
great service against the Slavonians. Chap. VII. A digression of a counterfeit
Chilbudius, a Romam General upon the River Iste^. A description of the
Slavonians, and Antians; inhabiting the further side of the River Ister. Chap.
VIII. Valentinus and Phocas are slain before Rome, by the baseness of Bessas.
Ships of Corn sent by Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, for Rome, are surprised by the
Enemy. Pelagius, a Deacon, is sent Ambassador to supplicate Totilas, but
prevails not. Chap. IX. The miserable Famine in Rome. John recovers Calabria,
Bruttia, and Lucania. He defeats an Army of Goths about Rhegium. Totilas builds
Towers, and a Bridge upon Tiber. Chap. X. Belisarius burns one of the Towers
with a Fire-boat; being ready to relieve Rome, is diverted, by a report of
Isaac's taking, whose madness, and the baseness of Bessas spoiled the Action.
Four Isaurians offer to receive in Totilas, Bessas negligently guarding it.
Chap. XI. Totilas takes Rome by the Treason of the four Isaurians. He spares
slaughter, at the supplication of Pelagius: Whom he sends Ambassador to
Justinian for Peace; and in the mean time spares the demolishing of Rome. A
small defeat of Goths by Tullianus. Chap. XII. Totilas is diverted from
destroying Rome, by the advises of Belisarius, and left it without any man in
it. Martianus by a plot recovers Spoletum. John fortifies an Isthmus at
Tarentum, and makes head. Totilas goes toward Ravenna. Chap. XIII. Belisarius
repaires Rome, and defends it against Totilas; and after some time, beats him
away. The speech of Totilas to the Goths in his own Apology. Chap. XIV. John
rescues the Senators and their Wives, confined in Campania, is beaten out of
his Camp by Totilas, with loss of 100. men. The Emperor sends new Forces into
Italy, Scyllaeum, The bay of Tarentum, Thurium, and Croton. Chap. XV. The
Forces sent by Belisarius to guard the passages are cut in pieces by Totilas,
where Pharas is slain. Belisarius frighted with the news, runs a Shipboard.
The Slavonians overrun Illyrium. Inundation of Nile; The great Whale. Russiana
is taken by Totilas. Conon is killed by his Soldiers. Chap. XVI. Belisarius
dares not relieve Russiana: and the Garrison yields it to Totilas upon their
lives saved. A plot against the person of Justinian, by Artabanes, and others.
Chap. XVII. Artabanes, and Arsaces endeavor to bring in Germanus, and his son
Justinus into the plot against the Emperor. Marcellus, by deferring the
discovery, hazards Germanus, and after by telling the whole truth, saves him.
The Kings of the Francks coin gold Staters, a thing not done by the King of
Persia himself. No gold pieces will go, no not among Barbarian Merchants, but
of the Emperors coin. Chap. XVIII. The Gepaedes and Lombards spoil the
Empire: Fall at difference: Demand aid of the Emperor by both their
Ambassadors. The Lombards arguments have more justice in them. But the Gepaedes
more reason of State. Chap. XIX. The Gepaedes and Lombards make Peace without
the Romans. Belisarius returns to Constantinople without honor. of Ildeges a
Lombard, who was coming to aid Totilas, but returned. Ilauf, a revolter, does
mischief in Dalmatia; and sackes Monecurum, and Laureata. Totilas besieges
Rome, which is bravely defended by Diogenes. Chap. XX. Totitas takes Rome
again by another Isaurian Treason; but demolishes it not, upon an occasion of
being formerly refused alliance with the French King, because he durst not hold
Rome, but demolish it. Paul, a Cilician, makes a gallant composition. Justinian
refuses to see the Goths Ambassadors for Peace. Centumcellae agreed to be
yielded, if succors came not. Germanus, then Liberius, appointed General for
Italy. Verus is slain. Chap. XXI. The Slavonians spoil Thrace, and Illyrium,
beat the Emperors Army, and commit savage murders. Rhegium yielded to the
Goths. Messina besieged. After Liberius, and Artabanes, Germanus is made
General against the Goths; who makes a powerful preparation, frights away the
Slavonians out of Illyrium, and dies at Sardice in Illyrium. John is appointed
to lead the Army. Chap. XXII. Artabanes escapes a storm at Sea. Liberius quits
Syracuse. Totilas is persuaded by Spinus to leave Sicily. The Slavonians do
much spoil; rout a Roman Army, and come up even to the Long walls in Thrace, a
days journey from Constantinople. They are beaten home.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS of the Emperor JUSTINIAN.
Of the GOTHJCK War, the Third BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THUS Belisarius, leaving Italy yet unsettled, brought Vitigis and Ildebads
children to Constantinople, with all the rich spoils; accompanied only with
Ildiger, Valerianus, Martinus, and Herodian. Justinian was glad to see Vitigis
and his Queen, admiting the Goths for their beautiful tall bodies. Theodericks
treasures (a goodly sight to behold) he took into the Palace, and in private
exposed them to the view of the Senate, glorying much in the greatness of the
things done. He showed not the same to the People, nor allowed Belisarius a
triumph, as after his conquest of Gelimer and the Vandals. Yet was Belisarius
the discourse of all the world, having gained the honor of two unmatchable
victories, brought two Kings Prisoners to Constantinople; and beyond all
expectation, made spoils of War the race and wealth of Gensericke, and
Theoderick, the most illustrious of all the Barbarians. He brought back also
to the Roman State their own wealth from the hands of their Enemies, and in a
short time recovered the Dominion of almost one half of the Land and Seas
thereof. It was a delight to the Constantinopolitans (and they could not be
satisfied with it) to behold daily Belisarius passing from his house, and
returning thither through the Marketplace; His going in the streets being a
kind of triumph; multitudes of Vandales, Goths, and Moors ever following him:
and he was a beautiful personage, tall, and of the goodliest countenance that
could be seen; To suitors ever easy of access, and mild as the meanest man.
Both the Soldier, and the Countryman were ever infinitely in love with his
Government, being to the Soldiers exceeding bountiful; to such as had
mischances in fight, comforting their wounds with large sums, and to such as
did bravely, giving chains and bracelets for prizes of honor. If a Soldier
in fight, lost his horse, or his Bow, or the like, presently he had another
from Belisarius. And he was dear to the Country people, because he used such
good husbandry and providence, that where he was General, none ever suffered
violence, but all where his Army came had the strange fortune to grow richer;
selling their commodities to the Soldier at their own rates, who guarded
still their ripe Corns, to keep off Horse from spoiling them; Neither was any
suffered to take away their ripe fruits. Besides he had a wonderful care of
his chastity, never touching any woman but his Wife; and of so many fair
Prisoners of the Vandales and the Goths (such as none ever saw the like)
suffering not one to be brought into his sight, nor to come at him. He was of a
very sharp wit, and excellent in a doubtful case to devise the best way;
valiant in War with cautiousnesse, and bold upon advise of reason; ever either
swift or flow in his undertakings upon an Enemy, according to occasion. In
extreamities resolute, full of hope, and free from perturbation. In prosperity
he was neither exalted, nor voluptuous: No man ever saw Belisarius drunck. And
thus during his command in Afric and Italy, he was still victorious, and
Master of all in his way: And when he came home to Constantinople, his worth
was yet more taken notice of; For being himself eminent in virtue, and
exceeding all the Generals that ever were in wealth, and in the strength of
his Lanciers, and Targettiers, he was terrible both to Commanders and common
Soldiers. So that no man durst oppose his commands, but readily put in
execution what he directed; both reverencing his worth, and fearing his power.
For he had ready of the Retinew of his House 7000. Horsemen, choice men, and
every one of them thinking himself fit to stand in the first rank at a
Battle, and to challenge the bravest of the Enemies. The ancient men of Rome
at that siege seeing what those men did in the fights then, and taking if for a
great wonder, said, That one man's Family ruined the power of Theoderick. Thus
was Belisarius grown powerful both in dignity and counsel, ever advising the
Emperors best advantage, and cheerfully executing what was resolved.

But the other Commanders (being equal in power, and having no thought but
upon their own private gain) made spoil of the Roman Subjects, and exposed
them to the injuries of the Soldier. They apprehended nothing worthy
themselves, nor had the Common soldiers obedient to their commands; and so
commiting many errors, the Romans affairs were in a short time ruined; and
thus it was.

Ildebad hearing that Belisarius was gone from Ravenna, and upon his journey,
recollected the Goths, and such Roman Soldiers as would revolt; was careful
of the Government, and diligent to recover the Dominion of Italy. At first he
had with him but a thousand men, and no Town but Picenum. But in a while all
who were in Liguria, and Venetia, came dropping in to him.

There was in Constantinople one Alexander, chief Auditor of the public
Treasury, called Logothetes by the Romans, from the Greek. This man's practice
was to inform against Soldiers for wronging the Treasury; and for such
misdemeanors by bringing them to justice, he became of an obscure man eminent,
and of a Beggar very rich. He raised as much money for the Emperor as any man;
but was the greatest cause that the Soldiers were few and poor, and backward in
dangers. At Constantinople they gave him a nickname, Psalidion, for the
dexterity he had to clip away the ring of the gold coin; and though he made it
less, yet to have it keep the circular form it had at the first. The
instrument wherewith this is done, is called Psalidion, or clipping sheers.
This man the Emperor sent into Italy, when he recalled ^elisarius; And he in
Ravenna set a foot Audits without reason, calling the Italians to account, who
never touched the Emperor moneys, and some that never had public employment,
and charging them with wrong done to Theodorick, and the other Gothish Kings,
and compelling them to repay what they had robbed, or fraududulently gained, as
he alleged. The Soldiers for their wounds and bazards he requited with
slender accounts; whereby the Italians grew ill affected to the Emperor, and
the Soldiers would not engage themselves into dangers; but turning wilful
cowards, advanced the Enemies affairs to a great height.

All the Commanders sat still, but Vitalius, who had with him in Venetia many
Herulians, and some other numbers of the Army; he would fight with Ildebad,
fearing (what afterward came to pass) that his growing power might not so
easily be restrained. The Battle was valiantly fought near the City of
Tarvisium; but Vitalius had the worst; and suffering the loss of most of his
men, with a few escaped by flight. Many Herulians fell, and Visandus their
Leader. Theudimund, the Son of Mauricius, the Son of Mundus, a young man, was
in much danger of being lost, but escaped with Vitalius. This Battle made
Ildebad famous with the Emperor, and all men; But afterward Vraeas fell foul
with him, upon this occasion. Vraas had a Wife, for Wealth and Beauty, the
chief of her Nation. She went once to the public Bath bravely dressed, and with
a goodly Train; where seeing Ildehads Wife in a mean Habit, she bowed not to
her, as to the Kings Consort, but slighted, and scoffed at her; for as yet her
Husband was in a low Condition, as having not been Master of any Kingly
Revenue. But the Queen vexed with this gross Affront, came weeping to her
Husband, desiring him to right her, having suffered from Vraeas Wife things not
to be endured. Whereupon Ildebad first accused Vraeas to the Goths, of
purposing a Revolt; and afterward killed him treacherously, and was hated for
it by the Goths, who liked not this killing of Vraas without Examination; and
they gathered together, and railed upon Ildebad for this foul Act; yet none of
them were willing he should suffer for it. One among them, named Vilas, by race
a Gepaede, and a Lancier of the Guard to the Emperor, was a Suitor to a very
fair Woman, and infinitely doted upon his love. But being sent upon some
Service, Ildebad the mean while gave his Mistress to another in marriage;
either ignorantly, or upon some motive: Which Vilas hearing at his coming from
the Army, and being naturally impatient, could not bear the disgrace, but
resolved to kill Ildebad; wherein he thought too to gratify all the Goths. He
observed his time as the King feasted the chief men, when many use to stand by
him, especially his Guards. The King reaching his hand to a dish, and bowing
with his face upon the Couch, Vilas suddenly struck him with his Sword upon the
neck, that the meat being between his fingers, the head fell off, and amassed
all the Company. Thus was the Murder of Vraeas revenged upon Ildebad; and the
Winter ended, and the sixth Incipit Annus 7. Bell. Goth, in anno 15. Justiniani.
year of this War, written by Procopius.

CHAP. II.
AMong the Goths was one Erarick, a Rogian by Nation, but he had gained a great
power with the Goths. The Rogians are a Gothish Nation, formerly a free People;
but Theoderick made them and some other Nations his Confederates, and mingled
them all together, and used them jointly against the Enemy. But these taking no
Wives of any other Nation, preserved their Name in a Posterity of the whole
blood. And the State being in trouble upon the Murder of Ildebad, they
proclaimed Erarick King, which the Goths misliked, whose hearts were now quite
down, and their hopes frustrated. For Ildebad was a man able enough to have
recovered the Dominion of Italy; but Erarick did nothing to purpose; and having
reigned five Months, he was slain in this manner. Totilas, Nephew to Ildebad,
(a wise and a Valourous man, and in much Estimation with the Goths) commanded
then the Goths in Tarvis^um; and hearing how Ildebad was slain, sent to Ravenna
to Constantianus, offering upon assurances of indemnity to deliver up
Tarvisium, and the Goths under his Command. Constantianus most gladly gave
Oath; as Totilas desired, and a day was appointed for receiving into the Town
men sent by Constantianus, and to put the Gothish Garrison into their hands.
All the Goths were weary of Eraricks Government, finding him not capable to
make a War with the Romans; and they railed on him as a hinderer of many good
Designs they were ready to act, when they killed Ildebad. In conclusion, by
common consent they sent to Tarvisium, exhorting Totilus to the Government.
They felt the miss of Ildebad, and turned their hope of Victory upon Totilus,
his Kinsman, hoping therein what they desired. He told them plainly his accord
with the Romans, and that if they shall kill Erarick before his day of
Assignment with the Romans, he will follow them, and do as they desire him. The
Goths upon this resolved the ruin of Erarick. In the mean time, the Roman Army
secure, and enjoying their Enemies troubles, neither drew together, nor had any
design upon them. But Erarick assembling the Goths propounded the sending
Ambassadors to Justinian, for such a peace as was once resolved to be made
with Vitigis: namely, that the Goths holding all beyond the Poe, should quit
the rest of Italy. The Goths all approved the Motion; and he sent Caballarius,
and some other of his Friends Ambassadors, who were to pretend the
negotiation, as aforesaid; but he gave them secret Instructions, to treat only
with the Emperor, to give him a good Sum of money, and to make him a
Patritian, upon condition of his delivering up all Italy, and his laying down
the Royal Habit. The Ambassadors coming to Constantinople, did according to
his directions. In the mean time the Goths kill Erarick by treachery, and
Totilas takes the Government, as was agreed. Justinian advertised hereof, both
of the accident of Erarick, and that Totilas was made King, he could no longer
contain from sharply reproving the Commanders: whereupon John, Vitalianus
Sisters Son, Bessas, Vitalius, and the rest, leaving Garrisons in the Towns,
drew together at Ravenna, where were Constantianus, and Alexander. They
resolved in Counsel to lead the Army first against Verona, which is in
Venetia, and having taken the same, to go against Totilas and Picenum. The Army
was gotten together 12000. men, under eleven Commanders; and Constantianus and
Alexander in chief. Being come within seven miles of Verona, they encamped
before it; the City being compassed with fair Champians, reaching as far as
Mantua, which is a days journey from Verona. In Venetia one Marcianus, a
principal man, dwelling in a Castle not far from Verona, and well affected to
the Emperor, sought means of delivering the City to the Romans. He was
acquainted with one of the Watchmen, to whom he sent a Friend, and persuaded
him for money to receive in the Emperors Army. The Watchman promised, and
Marcianus sent some to the Roman Commanders to negotiate, and to let them know
the Agreement, and to enter the Town by night with them. The Commanders thought
it best to send one of themselves before with a few; if the Watchman open^d
the Gate, to make it good, and then the rest to bring the Army in without
hazarding. All refusing the danger, Artabazes an Armenian cheerfully undertook
it; a very gallant Soldier, who was Captain of those Persians, whom Belisarius
brought to Constantinople with Blischames, after his taking the Castle of
Sisaurium. He settled a 100. men of the Army, and late in the night got near to
the Town. The Watchman opened the Gate; some stood still and sent for the
Army, others mounted the Walls and slew the Sentinels, coming unexpected: And
the Goths perceiving the mischief, ran out at another Gate, and retired to a
high Hill over against Verona (from whence one may discern all done in the
City, and number the men in the Streets, and it has a large Prospect into the
Champian) and here they stayed all night. The Romans being within five miles of
the City, would go no further; the Generals disputing about the Booty of it;
and while they were thus brabling for the spoils, the day grew bright. The
Goths from the Hill discovering the Enemy in the Town, and how great a way the
Army was from it, ran in at the same Gate they ran out; the Romans within being
not able to possess it: who advising together fled to the Battlements, where
the Goths in multitudes assailed, and they stoutly defended, and did wonders;
especially Artabazes. The Roman Commanders, when they had disposed the Wealth
of Verona among themselves, marched against the Town with the Army. But finding
the Gates shut, and the Enemy strongly opposing, they forthwith ran away,
though they saw their Companions upon the Walls fighting, and calling to them
to stay for them. So that Artabazes, and the rest being oppressed with
multitudes, and despairing of Succor, leapt from the Walls; and himself, with
such as lighted upon smooth ground, came safe to the Camp, but they that fell
upon stony ground, perished all. The Roman Army past the Poe, and came to
Faventia, which is a City of Emilia, standing 15. miles from it. Totilas when
he heard what had happened at Verona, sent for most of that Garrison, and with
his whole Army being 50000. he marched against the Enemy. The Roman Commanders
hereof advertised, held a Counsel; where Artabazes spoke thus.

Fellow Commanders, let us not despise the Enemy, as inferior in numbers; nor
as being to fight with men cowed by Belisarius, go on with resolution. False
conceits have deceived and undone many, and their unseasonable despising an
Enemy dissolved their Forces. The former ill success of these men invites them
to some better Fortune; Fortune by making men desperate, brings them to an
excess of daring. I speak not this by gues^e, I have learnt their Courage by
mine own late danger. And let none be offended with me for extolling their
power, having been with a few with me beaten by them. Men's Valor is seen as
well when they are more, as when they are fewer then those they fight with. My
Opinion therefore is, to guard the passage of the River, and when the Goths are
half past over, to fight with them rather, then now with their whole body. And
let no man think that there is no honor in such a Victory. Honor and disgrace
receive their names from the Event. Men commend the Victors, not searching into
the manner of the Victory. Artabazes so spoke; But the Commanders contradicting
one another, did nothing they should do, but there staid, and did nothing. The
Goths came near, and being ready to pass the River, Totilas spoke thus unto
them. Friends and Countrymen; other Battles begin upon the show of equality
in the Armies to fight, but we now stand to fight, having a Fortune most
unequal. If they be beaten, they have means to fight with us again, having
numbers of Soldiers in their Garrisons, all Italy over, and expecting
forthwith the seconds of another Army from Constantinople. But if the same
befall us, the hopes and name of our Nation is lost; being already from 200000.
reduced to 50000. yet is it sit that you be put in mind, that when you took
Arms with Ildebad against the Emperor, you had but 1000. men together, and no
place left but the Town of Picenum. But no sooner were you Conquerours, but
your Armies and Towns augmented: And if you now do bravely, I hope (the War
proceeding probably) we shall vanquish the Enemy. It is the Fortune of
Conquerours ever to grow in numbers, and power. So that resolve to meet the
Enemy cheerfully, and stoutly; knowing, that if you get not the honor of this
day, you can never possibly fight again. Moreover our Enemies Injustice is to
embolden us in this Battle. The Italians subject to them they have so oppressed,
that they need no other punishment for their Treason against the Goths: So (in
a word) have they found all manner of mischiefs from their new Guests. Now
what is more easily caught then an Enemy, who stands not sound with God? Their
fear of us also may encourage us; we going against no other men then those,
who being in the midst of Verona, quitted it without reason, and ran away
shamefully, none pursuing them. Totilas having used this encouragement,
commanded 300. men to pass the River two miles and a half off, and to get
behind the Enemy; and (the Fight being begun) to shoot at their backs, and
being in confusion to gall them. Himself with the rest past there the River,
and went against the Enemy. The Romans encountered them, and both marching fair
and softly, and being near each other, Valiaris, a Goth, tall, and of a stern
Countenance, and very Valiant, rode out from the rest between the Armies, armed
with Corslet and Helmet, and challenged any Roman to fight with him. Artabazes
accepted the Combat. Both rode against each other, and charged their Lances;
Artabazes preventing, ran Valiaris into the left side, who having his mortal
wound, and sincking backward, his Lance resting upon the ground and at a great
stone, kept him from falling: Artabazes with eagerness thrust his Lance into
his belly, not thinking he had his deaths wound already; and the head of
Valiaris Lance standing upright, lighted upon the Corslet of Artabazes, and
gliding over it, peirced his neck, and cut one of the Arteries: He bled
instantly in abundance, but feeling no pain, gallopt to the Roman Camp, and
left Valiaris dead upon the place. The blood could not be stancht, so that the
third day he dyed, and staggered all the hopes of the Romans; for his being not
able to fight in that Battle, was an extreme ruin to them. He attending the
cure of his Wound without Arrow-shot, the Armies joined Battle; in the heat
whereof the 300. Goths at the Romans backs suddenly appeared; the Romans
thinking them to be great numbers, were afraid, and ran away in confusion,
with the Enemy at their heels; who took many Prisoners, and all their Ensigns,
a thing never before happened to the Romans. The Commanders with some few ran
into several Towns for safety, and guarded the same.

CHAP. III.
TOtilas forthwith sent forces against Florence, commanded by Bledas,
Rodericus, and Valiaris, who sat down before it. Justinus within it having
laid in no provisions, sent to Ravenna, praying the Commanders to come to his
succor. The messenger by night slipped by the Enemy, and reported their Estate
to the Roman Commanders in Ravenna, whereupon an army of good importance under
Bessas, Cyprianus and John, Vitalianus his Sisters Son, marched to Florence. The
news of them raised the Goths siege, who retired to Micale, a Town standing a
days journey from Florence. The Roman army left with Justinus some few men,
and went against the Enemy: Upon the way they advised to make choice of one of
the Commanders of most account, suddenly to set upon the Enemy, and the rest to
march after fair and softly; they cast lots, and fortune gave it to John; but
the commanders would not stand to the agreement, so that John with his own
troops only went against the enemy. The Goths understanding their coming, left
the champian, and in fear and tumult ran up to a high hill: John's Troops ran up
also, and began the fight. The Goths valiantly opposed, and many brave men fell
on both sides. Then John furiously giving upon the Enemy with a great shout,
one of his life guard was slain by a dart, whereupon the Romans retired, beaten
back: Then came up the rest of the Roman army, and in the plain put themselves
in batallion, and made an halte: if they had set upon the flying Troops of
John, and with them set upon the Enemy, they had gotten the day, and had them
almost all at their mercy; but an unlucky rumor was spread that John was slain
in the fight by one of his own Lifeguard, so that they would stay no longer,
but made a shameful retreat, not retiring in a whole body, nor yet in Troops;
but every man ran away as he could. Many of them perished, and they who escaped
ran on for many days, none pursuing them, and at last every man as he could
got into strong places, reporting to all they met, that John was slain: From
thence forward they joined not, nor had thought of making head; but every one
kept within his walls, expecting a siege. Totilas gained his prisoners with his
much humanity to serve him willingly against the Romans, and then ended the
winter, and the seventh year of this war, written by Procopius.

Totilas then took in the Castles of Cesina and Petra, Incipit An. 8. bell. Goth
6. Justiniani, Anno domini 542.
came into Tuscany; and the Towns there not yiedling to him, he past the Tiber,
but would not touch upon the Territories of Rome, but went into Campania and
Samnium, and took without labor the strong Town of Beneventum, and laid the
walls flat with the Ground, that the Romans coming from Constantinople might
not from a fortified place infest the Goths. Naples refusing to receive him,
notwithstanding his fair words (having Conon within, with a thousand Romans and
Isaurians) he encamped before it with the most part of his army, and sent out
some forces, who took in Cuma and other fortresses, from whence he raised great
sums of money. The wives of some Senators he found in the fame, who had no
incivility used to them, but were dismissed with much courtesy: from whence he
got a great fame of the Romans of discretion and humanity. He still sent out
small parties (no Enemy appearing against him) and did things of good
importance, taking Bruttia, and Lucania, Apulia, and Calabria, He took up the
Tributes, and from the land-holders received the rents; disposing all things as
absolute Master of Italy. The Roman army hereby received no entertainments, and
the Emperor owed it huge sums; and the Italians mourned, being reduced to so
great danger, The Soldiers also grew more disobedient to their Commanders, and
were glad to lie still in their Garrisons. Constantianus held Ravenna, John
Rome, Ressas Spoletum, Justinus Florence, and Cyprianus Perusia; every one the
place he had fled to. The Emperor hereof advertised, and esteeming it a great
calamity, Praefectus praetorio per Italiam.
forthwith made Maximinus * Prefect of the Palace for Italy, that he might be
over the Commanders, and to furnish provisions to the Soldiers. With him he
sent a navy, having aboard an army consisting of Thracians under Herodian, and
of Armenians under Phazas an Iberian, sisters Son of Peranius, and some few
Huns they had with them. Maximinus from Constantinople, with his Fleet came
upon the coast of Epirus, where he spent the time to no purpose, being no
Soldier, a coward; and an extreme delayer. Afterward the Emperor sent
Demetrius General; who had formerly commanded a company of Foot under
Belisarius: He arriving in Sicily, and hearing how Conon was besieged in Naples
and in great want of victual, had a mind to succor him speedily; but with so
small an army being not able, be freighted a number of ships, (which he got
together from all parts of. Sicily) with corn and other provisions, making the
Enemy believe that he had a great army abroad, who indeed hearing of a huge
navy coming from Sicily, expected a great army with it. If Demetrius had made
directly for Naples, he had frighted away the Enemy and saved the city. But he
was afraid to put in there, and sailed on to the port of Rome, employing
himself there to gather together the Soldiers; Who being already beaten by the
Goths, and extremely afraid of them, refused to follow him against Totilas. So
that with those only he brought from Constantinople, he went toward Naples.
Another Demetrius, a Cephalenian, an ancient mariner very skillful, when he
sailed with Belisarius into Africa and Italy, grew famous for his skill, and
the Emperor made him Procurator of Naples. In the beginning of the Goths seige
there, being a man of a foul intemperate tongue, he used many disgraceful
words against Totilas. the Famine there growing, and the mortality still
increasing, with Conons consent he adventured in a small bark alone to go
secretly to Demetrius, and hardly escaping, he met with Demetrius, and
encouraging him, drew him to undertake the business. Totilas hearing of the
Fleet coming back, prepared many Pinnaces swift of sail, and the enemy being
upon the coast near Naples, he set on them suddenly, amazed them, and put them
to flight; killing many and taking more: They only escaped, who at first leapt
into the cock-boats, among whom was Demetrius the General. The ships the
Goths took with all their men and Lading, and there sound Demetrius the
Procurator of Naples, whose Tongue they cut out, and so let him go whether he
would; such was the punishment of Demetrius for his intemperate language.
Afterward came Maximinus with his Fleet upon the coast of Sicily, where he sat
still in Syracuse, afraid of the war. The Roman commanders, and especially
Conon from Naples (whom all provisions now failed) sent to him to come to their
succors: He wore out the season in this cowardly fear; but at last fearing the
Emperors menaces, and wearied with the revilings of all men, he stayed
himself; but sent the army to Naples under Demetrius, Herodian, and Phazas in
the sharpest of the winter. The Fleet being near to Naples a storm took them,
so great, that Demetrius and the two other yielded to the Sea. The Waves would
not suffer the sea men to use their Oars, nor do any other work, neither
could they hear one another call for the Tempest. Confusion had the victory,
and the storm was the absolute judge, bringing them against their wills to the
shore, where the Enemy was encamped; who clining up into their vessels,
killed men and sunk ships none resisting; many prisoners they took, and the
General himself, Demetrius. Heredian and Phazas, with some few putting in
further from the Enemies camp, escaped.

CHAP. IV.
TOTILAS led Demetrius with a rope about his neck to the Town wall, willing him
to persuade the besieged, not to perish, trusting in Groundless hopes, but by
yiedling to get free of their miseries; that no further succors could possibly
be expected from the Emperor, and that their hopes and power was lost with
that Navy. Demetrius spoke all this unto them, and they being extremely pressed
with famine, and all kind of necessities, and seeing the disaster of Demetrius,
and hearing what he said, dispaired, and lamented, not knowing what to do; and
their City was full of tumult and howlings, Totilas then calling them to the
battlements, spoke thus.

Citizens of Naples, we do not now besiege you upon any quarrel we have
against you; but to disingage you from Masters that hate you, and to have the
power to recompense the service of every one of you to us, and his sufferings
from the Enemy, you of all the Italians having showed greatest affection to our
Nation, and with most unwillingnesse come under the enemy; that now being
necesssarily to besiege you, we blush when we think of your fidelity, though
we besiege you not for your hurt. Think not therefore, as offended with the
accidents of the siege, that you must he ever angry with us. They who study the
Good of their friends, are not to be blamed by them, when they are enforced to
do them good by none of the gentlest means. And be not afraid of the Enemy,
nor think by what has past, that they will conquer at last: strange, unlookt
for, and accidental things melt away in time. We have thus determined of you,
to suffer Conon and his Soldiers to go free without harm, or loss, they
presently surrendering the City unto us; and upon this we are ready to swear
that the Napolitans shall be safe. Both Conon and the Napolitans accepted this
offer of Totilas, being extremely pressed with the Famine; but to comply with
their faith to the Emperor, and having some hope of succors, they promised to
surrender the City within thirty days. Totilas to put such hopes out of their
heads, assigned three Months, in which time he would not assault nor have any
design upon them. But the besieged not attending the day (though assigned
accordingly) urged by their necessitiess, received a while after Totilas into
the City. The winter also ended, and the eighth year of this war, written by
Procopius. Totilas used humanity to the Napolitans, not like a Barbarian Enemy.
For fearing least the languishing Romans with Famine, coming suddenly to eat
their fill, Incipit an bell. Goth 9.17.
might surfeit themselves with fulness; He commanded guards at the Gates,
Justinian^ and An. Dom. 544.
and the port, to suffer no man to go out, and with a provident sparingnesse he
gave them food more scarcely then according to their appetite; adding thereunto
every day unsensibly. Then having restored them to strength, he set open the
Gates, and let them go that would. Conon, and such Soldiers as would not stay
with him, he shipped, and bade them sail whether they pleased: They were
ashamed to return to Constantinople but making toward Rome, the wind came
cross, and being not able to get away, they feared least Totilas might neglect
his agreements, and do them mischief: but he perceiving their trouble, called
them to him, comforted and cheered them, and invited them to join with the
Goths, and buy what they wanted, or take it as from friends. The wind
continuing contrary a long time, he furnished them with horses, wagons, and
provisions, and gave them a convoy of Goths to Rome: But the walls of Naples he
threw to the Gound; that the Romans might not (surprising the Town) infest the
Goths from it: his desire being rather to determine the war at once by a
battle, then to be ever skirmishing against artifices, and stratagems: yet he
left a good part of the said walls standing.

There came to him at that time a Roman of Calabria, complaining, that one of
his Life Guard had forced his daughter, a Virgin; he in great anger put the man
in prison, not denying the fact, and was eager to punish him; but the chief
Goths fearing in the man's behalf, being valiant, and a good soldier, assembled
themselves in his presence, and besought him to pardon the crime; he mildly,
and without any perturbation, made them this answer. Fellow soldiers, I shall
speak to you, not from any humor of cruelty, or delight in my countrymens
misfortunes; but from my fear of some ill consequence unto us. I know that
most men shift the names of things to their contrary; they call the
inobservation of Laws, Mercy; and hence all good things come to be corrupted,
and confounded. On the contraty, to pinch upon Laws too exactly, is perverse
and grievous, and also to use specious names, as a veil to a lincentious
power, thereby to act wickedness with more security. But you I advise by no
means to exchange your own safety for the guilt of another man's sin, nor to
share in his impiety, having done no ill your selves: For to commit an offense,
and to hinder the offenders punishment is equal. Consider thus the business
now presented, and determine accordingly; you have the choice offered you,
whether this man shall escape the just punishment of his offense, or our nation
be preserved, and conquer in this war. Think what numbers of Soldiers we had
in the beginning of it, how famous, how well experienced in war; in a word, our
endless wealth, abundance of horse and arms, and all the strong holds of
Italy, and these were important preparations for a War. But when under
Theodatus, a man that valued riches more then right, we made God angry with us
by our lawless living; how we sped you all know, and by what kind of men, and
by how many we were beaten. Now God, having sufficiently punished our faults,
frames our life to his own will, and conducts our affairs beyond our hopes.
And being such now, and having vanquished our Enemies, not proportionably to our
powers, it will be more advantageous for us, to prepare a fair occasion of
victory by doing that which is just, then by the contrary to appear envious of
our own Good For it cannot, it cannot be, that he that practices wrong and
oppression; should get honor in the day of battle: the fortune of the War is
adjudged to man's good or bad lives. The chief Goths upon this speech of
Totilas, ceased to intercede for the offender, and left him to him; who soon
after put him to death, and bestowed his Estate upon the ravished maid.

In this mean time the Roman army preyed upon the Subjects, leaving no
insolence unacted. Their commanders in their Garrisons with their Mistresses
lived riotously; having the Soldiers disobedient, and full of all kind of
disorders: between both the armies, the Italians suffered the hardest measures;
the Enemy took their lands from them, and the Emperors army their goods: they
were basely beaten for nothing, and perished for want of food. The Soldiers
could not defend them from the Enemy, and were so far from blushing to see
their miseries, that by their wrongs they made the Barbarians dear unto them.
Constianus troubled at this, wrote to Justinian, professing his disability to
encounter the Goths: and the Commanders signed the Letter, being a confession
of their base fear to fight.

Totilas also sent this Letter to the Roman Senate. When men ignorantly, or upon
forgetfullnesse do wrong, the wronged are to be easy to grant pardon: The
cause of the offense concurring in such, excuses the heaviest of the
accusation. But a man that does wrong upon malice, is not to be admitted so
much as to plead; seeing he is to bear the blame not only of his fact; but of
his intent. Which being so, what can you apologize for your actions against the
Goths? Can you be ignorant of the favors of Theoderick and Amalasuntha? or can
time wear them out of your remembrance? neither is possible. The benefits have
not been mean, nor are of an ancient date; but in the most important things,
and lately done. For the Greeks Goodness to their subjects, your selves have,
heard of it, and you have had trial of it, and you have known how the Goths
and Italians have sped under them. What Guests and friends they have been to
you, the Audits of Alexander may inform you, to say nothing of their Soldiers
and Captains; you have enjoyed their noble usage, by which their affairs are
come into this case now. Think not this to be the reproaches of an insolent
young man, nor the vaunts of a Barbarian Prince. I say not, that our subduing
of these men is a work of my valor; but that due vengeance for the injuries
done to you has overtaken them. And how absurdly it shows, that God should
punish them for you, and yet you adhere to their folly, and refuse deliverance
from the miseries arising from thence. Make therefore some introduction of an
apology, and of our pardoning you; which will be, if while you have some hope
(though a poor one) you choose what is best for you, and repair what you have
done amiss against us.

Totilas gave this letter to some prisoners, to deliver to the Senators in
Rome; which they did; but John forbade them to answer it. Totilas wrote many
other Letters to them, wherein were strong oaths, that no Roman should receive
hurt from the Goths I cannot say who were the Messengers, all of them were in
the night, and set up in the most public places of the City, and discovered in
the morning. The Roman Commanders suspected the Arian priests, and put them out
of Rome. Totilas hereupon sent part of his army into Calabria, to summon the
Castle of Otranto; and (the Garrison refusing to yield) to besiege it: Himself
with his main forces went against the towns about Rome.

CHAP. V.
THE news of these things troubled the Emperor; and though the Persian War
lay heavily upon him, he was constrained to send Belisarius against Totilas;
and the Winter ended, and the ninth year of this War, written by Procopius;
when Belisarius went the second time into Italy. Incipit Annus 10. Bell. Goth.
in anno 18. reg. Justiniani, and Anno Dom. 544.
Having but few Soldiers, (as being not able to withdraw his own Forces from
the Army in Persia) he levied with his own money Voluntaries in Thrace, being
assisted by the Emperors direction with Vitalius, General of Illyrium, lately
returned from Italy, where he had left the Illyrian Cohorts; they both raised
4000. men, and came to Salona, determining to go to Ravenna, and thence to make
the War: For about Rome they found they could not land unespyed, (the Enemy
being in Campania and Calabria) nor yet force their landing, being inferior in
powers.

In the mean time, the Garrison in Otranto (the Victual being absolutely
failed,) capitulated about the surrender of the Castle, by a day assigned.
Belisarius put a years Victual aboard Ships, and commanded Valentinus to
transport it to Otranto, and to take out the former Garrison, pined with
Sickness, and Famine, and put in the Soldiers he had with him aboard, being
fresh and well supplied. Valentinus with a fair wind got to Otranto four days
before the time assigned, and finding the Harbor unguarded, was Master of it,
and entered the Castle without resistance. The Goths being careless, and lying
still under their confidence in the Capitulation, and imagining no opposition,
and then seeing the Fleet enter, ran away in fear, and encamped themselves
some distance from the Town, and advertised Totilas of what happened. Some
Troops of Valentinus from Otranto made in-roads into the Country, and meeting
the Enemy upon the Sea shore, they fought, were beaten, and most of them fled
into the Sea; where having lost 170. men, the rest retired into the Castle. But
Valentinus, as Belisarius commanded, took out the old Garrison, (being men
half dead) and leaving fresh men with a years Victual, he went to Salonae
with the rest. Belisarius from thence came with the Fleet before Pola; where he
staid, and ordered the Army. Totilas hearing of his coming, and being desirous
to know his Forces, he wrote Letters to him in the name of one Bonus, Nephew to
one John, and Commander of the Garrison in Genoa, entreating his speedy repair
to him, as being in much distress and danger. This Letter he delivered to five
witty fellows, directing them to spy what Forces Belisarius had, and to give
out that they came from Bonus. Belisarius used the men courteously, (as his
manner was) perused the Letter, and bad them tell Bonus that he would be with
him with his Army. They having spyed into every thing, returned to the Camp to
Totilas, assuring him that Belisarius powers were not considerable.

In the mean time Totilas took Tibur, which had in it a Garrison of Isaurians:
Some of the Townes-men, guarding the Gates with the Isaurians, fell into an
idle brable with them, and upon that ground drew in the Enemy by night. The
Isaurians rallyed themselves (seeing the Town taken) and almost all got away;
but of the Townes-men the Goths spared not a man, and killed the Bishop of the
Town in a fashion, which I will conceal, not to leave to Posterity Monuments
of Inhumanity: And one Catellus, a man much esteemed in Italy, perished also.
Thus the Goths having Tibur, the Roman Citizens could no more import Provisions
out of Tuscany, by the River of Tiber, the Town being upon the River 15. miles
above Rome, and commanding the passage thither. Then came Belisarius to
Ravennae with his Fleet, and calling to him the Goths there, and the Roman
Soldiers, he spoke thus.

It is not now only, that Vice has ruined, what has been built by Virtue;
from the beginning it has been so in humane Affairs. The lewdness of bad men
has been still able to demolish the Actions of the good. This has overturned
the Emperors Affairs; who to repair the Error, has made less account of
subduing the Persians, then of it; and has sent me to cure the Faults
committed by either Captains, Soldiers, or Goths. It is above humane
condition not to err, but it becomes the Emperor to repair the Errors of
those, whom from his Soul he loves; whereby you shall be also eased of your
grievances, and both perceive and feel his good affection toward you, then
which what Wealth is more valuable. My coming therefore being to this purpose,
it behooves you to endeavor the obtaining of that Fruit, which will arise from
thence. If any of you have Friends, or Kinsmen with Totilas the Usurper, let
him send for them, acquainting them with the Emperors intention. Thus you may
find good both from a peace, and the Emperors Favor for me: I come not to
pick Quarrels, nor to be an Enemy to the Emperors Subjects by my good will:
But if some will still make slight the choosing their own good, and others take
Arms against us; we must, though most unwillingly, use such as Enemies.
Belisarius spoke thus; but no Goth, nor Roman came into him; so he sent
Therimuth, one of his Lifeguard, with some of his own Retinew, and Vitalius
with the Illyrian Cohorts into Emilia, to attempt the Towns there: Vitalius
came to Bononia, and after the taking of some Castles by composition, lay still
there. Soon after the Illyrians retired home upon the sudden, having suffered
nothing, nor so much as heard any ill. They sent Agents to the Emperor, for
pardon of this Retreat, in regard they had long served in Italy, and received
no pay, and much was due to them from the Treasury. They heard besides of an
Army of Hunnes, which in Illyrium made Captives their Wives and Children, which
caused them (wanting necessaries also) to go home all in one Troop. The
Emperor was troubled at the proceeding, but at last pardoned them. Totilas
hearing of the Illyrians Retreat, sent Forces to drive Vitalius and his Troops
out of Bononia, who with Therimuth laid an Ambush for them, killed many, and
routed the rest; where Nazares an Illyrian Captain of good quality, did
Miracles upon the Enemy. Therimuth then returned to Belisarius, who sent him
Nicetas, and Sabinianus with 1000. men to Auximum, to re-enforce Magnus there
beseiged. They by night got into the Town unseen by Totilas and the Enemies
Camp. The next day at noon, they sallied to encounter a party of Enemies they
had notice of; sending before avantcoureurs to discover their Forces, that they
might not blindly set on them. Ricilas of the Lifeguard to Belisarius, being
in drink, would himself go upon the discovery, and gallopt on alone. In a
rough stony way he met three Goths, and made a stand, as to fight with them,
being very Valiant; but when he saw more coming in from all sides, he ran away.
His Horse in the rough ground came over and over with him, at which the Enemy
gave a great shout, and darted all their Javelins at him; the Romans perceiving
it, went to his rescue, but he was covered with Javelins, and dyed upon the
place. Therimuth took up his dead body and carried it into Auximum, having met
with a conclusion of life not suitable to the Valor of the man.

CHAP. VI.
SAbinianus and Therimuth upon conference with Magnus, and consideration of the
inconvenience of their longer stay, being so far under-matcht to the Enemy, and
by consuming the Towns Provision making it more ready to be lost, they
prepared to be gone, and to begin their journey in the night: But a Soldier
ran out to the Enemies Camp closely, and revealed the design. Totilas chose
out 1000. good men, and laid them concealed three miles and three quarters from
Auximum. These perceiving the Enemy at midnight upon the way, fell to work with
their Swords, and killed 200. but being dark, Sabinianus and Therimuth got away
to Ariminum; all the Baggage, Arms and Apparel, the Goths took. Between
Auximum and Ariminum are two small Towns, Pisaurus and Phanus upon the Jonian
Gulf. Vitigis in the beginning of the War had burnt the houses, and broken
down half their Walls, that the Romans surprising them, might not infest the
Goths. Pisaurus Belisarius resolved to seize, as a place fit for
Horse-pastures; he sent some in the night to take the exact measure of the
Dimension of each Gate, then framed Gates lined with Iron, and sent them
thither by Sea, commanding Sabinianus and Therimuth to set them up, and to stay
in the Town; and being secure, to repair the Walls with stones, and earth, as
they could. This they did; and Totilas upon the news came against them with a
great Army. But failing to take the Town, after much time spent in the
attempt, he retired to his Camp before Auximum: Where the Romans sallied no
more, but kept close within their walls. Belisarius sent Artasiras a Persian,
and Barbation a Thracian, two of his Lifeguard, to guard Rome with Bessas,
being there already, directing them not to sally at all.

But Totilas finding Belisarius not able to fight with him, fell upon the
strong Towns; in Picenia he blocked up Firmum, and Asculum: and so ended the
Winter, and the tenth year of this War, written by Procopius.

When Belisarius, Incipit annus 11. Bell. Goth. in Anno 19.
having no means to relieve the besieged Towns, sent John to Constantinople,
Justiniani, and Ann. Dom. 545.
making him swear to return speedily, and to importune the Emperor for an
Army and money, horses, and arms; the Soldiers being few, and refusing to
fight, because of their wants, the Treasury owing them much money. And he wrote
of these particulars to the Emperor in these words.

Most mighty Emperor! We are come into Italy, wanting men, horses, arms, and
money; And without a competent preparation of these, no man can make War. Our
Thracians and Illyrians we behold here few, wretched, and straggling without
Arms, and unexercised for any fight; The rest deficient, fearful of the Enemy,
with spirits dejected by their often beating, and not simple running away only,
but quitting their Horses, and throwing down their Arms. To raise contribution
in Italy is not possible, it being possessed by the Enemy; And being behind with
the Soldiers for their Pay, we cannot lay commands on them, the debt taking
away our confidence. And the most of those that served your Majesty are run to
the Enemy. If nothing therefore needed, but the sending Belisarius into Italy,
the War is excellently prepared; for I am in the midst of Italy. But if you
mean to vanquish your Enemies, there must be other preparations. No General
can subsist without men to follow him. Above all things it behooves therefore,
that you send me mine own Lanciers and Targettiers, and store of Hunnes and
other Barbarians, who must have present money.

Thus wrote Belisarius: But John staying long at Constantinople, effected
nothing for what he came thither, but married the Daughter of Germanus,
brothers son to the Emperor.

In the mean time Totilas took Firmum and Asculum by composition; and in
Tuscany besieged Spoletum, and Assisium. Herodian commanded the Garrison in
Spoletum; and that of Assisium, Sisiphris a Goth, but well affected to the
Romans. Herodian agreed to render the Town with himself and Soldiers within
thirty days, if no succor came, and gave his son for Hostage. And the day
presixed being come, and no Romans appearing, Herodian and the Soldiers
yielded themselves and the Town to Totilas. Some say that Herodian did this
upon hatred to Belisarius, who threatened to question him for his rapines and
oppression. Sisiphris in Assisium made some sallies, and in the end most of his
men and himself were slain; whereat the Townsmen despairing, rendered the
Town. Totilas also sent to Perusia, threatening Cyprianus there, if he would
not yield the Town to him, and promising him money to do it. Not prevailing
with him, he practiced with Vliphus, one of his Lifeguard, for money to murder
him; who watched him when he was alone, and having killed him, ran to Totilas.
Yet the Garrison kept the Town for the Emperor, and the Goths retired from it.
Then went Totilas to Rome, and besieged it. To the Husbandmen of Italy he did
no damage, letting them securely manure their Land, paying to him the rents and
tributes reserved to the Treasury, or the Owners At Rome, some Goths
approaching the walls, Artasiras and Barbation (against the opinion of Bessas)
sallyed with some Troops, and killed many, routing the rest; whom pursuing too
far, they fell into the Enemies Ambushes, where they lost most of their men,
and escaped narrowly themselves, and afterward for bare to charge the Enemy,
though they pressed upon them.

Hence the Famine grew sore in Rome, no Victual coming in by Land, and being
shut from the Sea. For the Goths, after they had Naples, kept a kind of a Fleet
of small Barques about the Islands of Aeolus, and other Islands in that Sea,
which guarded exactly the passage of ships; that all from Sicily, sailing to
the Port of Rome, fell among them.

Totilas sent also an Army into Emilia, to take Placentia by force or
composition, being the chief City of that Province, and well fortified, and
standing upon the Poe, and only remaining obedient to the Romans. This Army
summoned the Garrison to yield upon composition; and not prevailing, fell to
besiege it, finding they wanted provisions. And at the same time the Commanders
in Rome were jealous of Cethegus, a Patrician, that he betrayed them; who
thereupon fled to Centumcellae.

Belisarius fearing the loss of Rome, and of all the rest; and from Ravenna,
and with so small an Army, to relieve them being not able, he resolved to rise
from thence, and to surprise some places near Rome, from whence he might aid
it in distress. He repented his coming to Ravenna, upon the persuasions of
Vitalius, disadvantageously for the Emperors service; For being shut up there,
he gave the Enemy free scope to advance their affairs. Either Belisarius chose
the worst, that the Romans might have a mischief; or he chose the best: but
God crossed it, purposing to favor Totilas and the Goths, and turning Belisarias
good counsels to the quite contrary. So when Fortune blows a fair gale, men's
worst counsels meet no disaster, being wasted by the higher power to all
advantages. Unfortunate men either advise nothing well, their fate hiding from
them all knowledge and right apprehension of things: Or advising well, fortune
with a cross wind turns their good advises to bad events.

But Belisarius left Ravenna, committing the guard of it to Justinus; and
through Dalmatia came to Epidamnus, where he staid, expecting an Army from
Constantinople, and by his letters acquainting the Emperor with his condition.
Who sent him an Army of Barbarians and Roman Soldiers under John, the Nephew
of Vitalianus, and Isaac the Armenian, Brother to Aratius, and Narses; who
coming to Epidamnus, joined with Belisarius.

He sent also Narses the Eunuch to the Herulian Princes, to obtain aides of
them for Italy. Many Herulians came along with him, under Philimuth and others,
to the confines of Thrace, there to Winter, and at the beginning of the Spring
to be sent to Belisarius. With them was John Phagas In this journey they did
the Romans a great service by chance. A multitude of Slavonians had passed the
River Ister, and sacked the Towns thereabout, and taken abundance of Roman
Captives. The Herulians fought with them, and though inferior in numbers,
beat them, and killed many, and freed the captives, and sent them home.

CHAP. VII.
AT that time Narses discovered the imposture of one naming himself
Chilbudius, who had been a famous General of the Romans. This Chilbudius was
first of Iustinian's Retinew, a valiant Soldier, and so great a despiser of
wealth, that it was his greatest riches to possess nothing. Justinian in the
fourth year of his Reign made him General of Thrace, and gave him the guard
of the River Ister, to hinder the passage of Barbarians; the Hunnes formerly,
Antians and Slavonians having come over, and done much mischief to the Romans.
Chilbudius grew so terrible there, that in his three years continuance in that
charge, not a Barbarian durst pass the River; and the Romans under Chilbudius
invaded the other side, and killed and took many Captives. After three years
he passed over the River with a small Army; the Slavonians in a Battle stiffly
fought, killed many Romans, and Chilbudins the General. From thence forward
the Barbarians came over at pleasure, and the Provinces lay open to them; all
the Roman Empire in this not countervailing the valor of one man. After this
the Antians and Slavonians fell out, and in a Battle the Antians were
vanquished. Wherein a Slavonian took a youth of the Enemy named Chilbudius, and
led him home. This man in time became very affectionate to his Master, and
valiant against the Enemy; having often fought singularly well, hazarding for
his Master, and so getting a great reputation. About the same time the Antians
entered Thrace, which they pillaged, and took many Captives; one of whom Fortune
brought to a gentle Master. But the fellow being a knave, and cunning to
deceive, and desirous withal to return to his own Country, came once to his
Master, and commended his humanity, which God (he said) would reward, and
himself would not be ungrateful to so kind a Master; but if he would follow
his advice, he would make him a rich man. For among the Slavonians was one
Chilbudius the Roman General, unknown, and reputed a slave; whom if he would
ransom, and conduct into Roman Land, he should get the Emperors favor, and a
great reward. Thus this Roman persuaded his Master, and with him went into
Slavonia, there being truce then between them, and safe intercourse. He paid
the ransom to this Chilbudius Master, and took him home; where he asked the
man if he were Chilbudius the Roman General. He told him all the truth; that
he was an Antian, and taken Prisoner by the Slavonians then Enemies, but now
being restored to his Country, he claimed freedom according to the Law.

The man who had laid out his money, stood mute, and vexed to fall from his
hopes thus. But the Roman cheered him up, and to outface the truth, that it
might not cross his return home, confidently said that it was Chilbudius; but
being among Barbarians, he was afraid to reveal himself; Were he once upon
Roman ground, he would be proud of the name, as he had reason. In the end the
business came to the knowledge of all the Antians; who stird in it, pretending a
public interest, and imagining to make a great advantage, of having
Chilbudius the Roman General.

These people both Antians and Slavonians, are not under a Prince, but
anciently are a Democratie: whence all things are brought to the common vote.
They have almost the same Laws and customs: They hold one God, who makes the
lightning, and is only Lord of all things. To him they sacrifice Oxen and other
victimes. They acknowledge no destiny to govern among men; when Death threatens
either in a sickness, or in a War; they promise if they may escape, to offer
to God a sacrifice in recompense for their life: And if they escape, they pay
their vow, and think they have bought their safety. They worship also Rivers,
Nymphs, and other Spirits, to whom they sacrifice too; and by those sacrifices
make their predictions. They dwell in poor wretched Booths, scattered, and
still shifting their habitations. In fights the most part serve on foot, with
Shields and Javelins, having no Corselets, and some not so much as a Coat, or
Mantle; but they tie up their Trouses above their Privities, and so enter into
the fight. They both use one Language, and that a very barbarous one: And they
differ not in shape, being all tall and very strong. Their hair is neither
very white, nor yellow, nor yet black at all, but inclining to red. They live
hardly, and slovenly like the Hunnes; wicked they are not, nor cunning, but in
their simplicity much of the Hunnish disposition. They had both formerly but
one name, and were called Spori, because they pitch their booths (...)
scatteredly; and so they take up much space of Land, holding the most part of
the other side of the River Ister.

But then the Antians in their Assembly urged the said man to acknowledge
himself to be Chilbudius, and denying it, threatened him. In the mean time
came Ambassadors to them from Justinian, who offered to plant them in Turris,
an ancient City built by Trajan; which had been sacked by Barbarians, and layen
long wast. Justinian offered them this City, and the Country about, formerly
belonging to the Romans, and to plant them in it with his powers; and besides
to give them great sums of money; Conditionally they should keep a perpetual
league with the Romans, and hinder the Hunnes from overrunning the Empire that
way. They liked the Proposition, and promised to do so, if the Emperor would
make Chilbudius his General, to settle their Plantation, affirming that man to
be Chilbudius: And the fellow exalted with these hopes, had now a mind to it,
and took the name upon him. So he was sent to Constantinople, and upon his way
thither, Narses met him; and upon speech with him, found him a counterset; yet
he spoke Latin, and had many marks of Chilbudius, which he cunningly assumed.
Narses kept him close Prisoner, and at last got out of him all the matter, and
took him with him to Constantinople.

CHAP. VIII
IN the mean time Belisarius sent Valentinus, and one of his life Guard named
Phocas, an expert Soldier, with forces to the Haven of Rome, directing them to
guard the castle of Portus, with the Garrison already there, commanded by
Innocentius, and by excursions from thence to infest the Enemies camp. They
accordingly sent word to Bessas in Rome, that they were ready to give a sudden
alarm to the Enemies quarters, praying him when he saw the fight begun, to
ride out to second them with some of his choice men; that so both together
might do some service upon the Enemy. Bessas, though he had 3000 Soldiers,
liked it not: yet Valentinus and Phocas with 500 charged of a sudden, and
killed some. The besieged saw the stir and tumult, but sallied not; so that the
other retired safe to Portus. Again they sent to Bessas, complaining of his
unbeseeming sloth, and that they would make another Excursion, praying him to
charge at the same time with all his army; but he refused to hazard a sally. So
Valentinus and Phocas resolved to charge with greater forces. But a Soldier of
Innocentius ran away to Totilas, advertizing him how from Portus he would be
assaulted the next day. Totilas laid ambushes in their way, into which the next
day they fell, and with the loss of most of their men were slain themselves;
few escaped to Portus.

Vigilius Bishop of Rome, being then in Sicily, sent some ships laden with
corn, by some means to be put into Rome. The Enemy saw them coming into the
harbor, and hid themselves in houses, to surprise them so soon as they put to
land; which the Garrison in Portus perceiving, from the battlements, they waved
their Garments to those in the ships, to come no nearer, but to turn some other
way. But they understanding not their signs, took them for rejoycings at their
coming, and invitings into the harbor; and the wind being fair they soon got
in. There were Roman passengers aboard, and Valentinus a Bishop; and the Goths
from their Ambush seized upon the ships, none resisting, and put all to the
sword save the Bishop, whom they brought prisoner to Totilas: and he, after he
had questioned what he would, cut off his hands, charging him that he had not
spoke truth. And then ended the Winter, and the eleventh year of this war,
written by Procopius.

Vigilius also, Bishop of Rome, left Sicily, Incipit anus 12. bell. Goth. in
anno 20. Justinian and anno Dom. 546.
being sent for to Constantinople by the Emperor, and having staid long in
Sicily upon that occasion.

In Placentia, the besieged Romans wanting victual fell to food abominated,
and in the End to eat one another; so that they rendered upon Composition. Rome
also was destitute of all provisions; where was Pelagius, a Deacon of the same,
who had long dwelt in Constantinople, much favored by Justinian, and was grown
rich; and lately come to Rome, he spent most of his riches upon men in want in
this siege, and for his bounty got a great fame; being famous before through
all Italy. The Romans having suffered under the famine incredibly, sent this
Pelagius to Tetilas to obtain some few days of cessation, conditionally, that
if during the same, no succors came from Constantinople, to render themselves
upon a Composition. Pelagius accordingly came to Totilas, who saluted him with
much reverence and courtesy, and first spoke to him thus. Almost all Barbarians
reverence Ambassadors, but I besides, have from my youth honored virtuous men
like your self. And I know that the honoring or disgracing an Ambassador, is
discerned not by fair countenances and hollow-hearted complements, but by true
and real dealing; he is most honored who has the plain truth told him, and is
so dismissed: and he most affronted, who carries home nothing, but fained,
deceitful words. So that Pelagius, there are three things, which if you ask
not, you shall obtain all the rest; and it is good you should not mention them,
least being the cause of your own effecting nothing, you lay the blame on us;
the not asking things suitable to the condition of affairs producing commonly
want of success This then I say, move not for any Sicilian, nor for sparing
the walls of Rome, nor for restitution of your fugitive servants. For it cannot
be, that the Goths should favor a Sicilian, that these walls should stand, or
that our Soldiers should return again to be slaves to their Masters. And I
will tell you my reasons of these propositions, that they may not seem to
proceed from a wilfulness. Sicily has been ever happy, rich, and most
fruitful, not supplying only the Inhabitants; but transporting also to you of
Rome, yearly sufficient for your uses; whereupon you besought Th^od^rick not to
place Garrisons in it; least it might decay in the Liberties and happiness
thereof. Things being thus, upon the coming of a Fleet of Enemies upon the
Coast, not comparable to our powers, the Sicilians neither advertized the
Goths, nor shut their Gates, nor opposed them in any sort, but with all
alacrity received them with open arms, like persidious slaves, who long had
watched an opportunity to run from their old masters to strangers. Hence the
Enemy issued and got all Italy, surprising Rome, and maintaining it against
more then a years siege, with the abundance of corn brought out of Sicily.
Thus it stands with the Sicilians, whom the Goths cannot pardon, the
heinousness of their crimes making them incapable of mercy. These walls when
the Enemy had once got into, they could never be drawn to a battle in open
field: with stratagems and circumventions they cluded our powers, and became
strangely Lords of all we had: And now we must prevent the like hereafter. Men
ignorantly undone, to fall again into the same ruin whereof they had experience
before, is not to be attributed to the crosnesse of Fortune, but to their own
gross Folly. Besides, the demolishing your walls is your own advantage;
Neither part hereafter being to be shut within them, and starved by the
besieging adversary. So that both will put it to the fortune of a battle, and
you without incurring danger, will be the prize of the victor. Touching your
fugitive slaves, who have fought for us, and have our promise not to abandon
them to their former Masters, if we should now betray them, even your selves
will never trust us; it being impossible that he that neglects his Engagements
to men of all the most to be pityed, should be constant to any: It will be a
Character of his falsehood to all that meet him. To this Speech of Totilas,
Pelagius thus answered. Great Sir, having intimated your respect of my Person,
and of the quality of an Ambassador, yet have you ranckt both in the basest
condition. I conceive him to affront more his Friend, and an Ambassador, who
resolves to send him away without his business, then he that strikes, or
otherwise abuses him. Ambassadors come not to receive honors from those who
admit them, but to get dispatches for their good that sent them. It is better
they were affronted at first, and at last effect that they come for; then after
many Caresses, to return without their hopes. So that to what purpose should I
supplicate you in these things, or importune one that denies us, before he
hear us? Only this I must say; that you show what mercy you mean to use to the
Romans, who have taken Arms against you; who resolve an irreconcilable hatred
against the Sicilians, who never did it. But forbearing Supplications to you, I
lift them up to God, who takes vengeance of men that despise Supplications.
Pelagius having thus said, went his way.

CHAP. IX.
THE Romans seeing Pelagius come back without effecting any thing, were much
troubled. The Famine grew sore, albeit the Soldiers Victual was not yet all
spent: But the People in multitudes came about Bessas, and Conon, weeping and
howling, and said thus.

Our Fortune O Generals is such, that if we could do you any mischief, it were
a Crime we could not be blamed for; our extreme necessity being our excuse. But
being not able to take revenge, we come to bewail our Calamity; And hear
patiently our bold expression, weighing it by our sharp Sufferings. They who
must despair of safety, cannot observe their duty in words, nor deeds. Think
us not Romans, nor your Kins-men, nor conformable to your State; nor to have
cheerfully received the Emperors Army, but ancient Enemies, and to have taken
Arms against you, and to be vanquished in fight, and made your Prisoners by the
Law of War. Yet furnish your Captives with Food, not sufficient for our need,
but so much as may keep us alive to do you Service. If you please not to do
this, yet vouchsafe to manumit us, and free your selves from the trouble of
burying your Slaves. If this neither may be afforded, kill us, deprive us not
of an honest end; envy not to us the sweetest of all deaths, but with one Act
deliver us from a thousand miseries. Bessas, and Conon told them, that to
supply them with Victual was not possible, to kill them was impious, and to
let them go, unsafe. But they comforted them with an assurance of Belisarius,
and an Army from Constantinople, and so dismissed them. The Famine still grew,
and destroyed, suggesting strange unnatural Food. At first Bessas and Conon,
who had laid up in store a great quantity of Corn for the Soldier, retranched
their own allowances, and sold Corn to the richer sort at huge rates; a bushel
of Wheat for seven Gold Staters. Such whose Means could not attain to so
costly feeding, paid a fourth part of the price, and had the bushel filled up
with Branne, which their hunger made dainty food. An Ox, such as Bessas
Targetiers could get out and take, they sold for 50. Gold Staters. He was happy
that could get a dead Horse to feed on. The poor multitude fed on Nettles,
growing near the Town Walls, and among the rubbish in the City; first seething
them to avoid stinging. Such as bought Corn, and Branne, as aforesaid, when
their money was spent, brought their Household Stuff to the Marketplace, and
exchanged it for a little daily food. In the end the Soldiers Corn being
consumed, (save some small quantity which Bessas had) and the Romans money
spent, they all fell to Nettles; which food not sufficing Nature, and there
being of it not enough to fill their bellies, their flesh pined away, their
color grew wanne, and they looked like so many Ghosts. Many walking, with their
teeth chewing Nettles, fell suddenly dead. They did eat also one another
dung, and many, when they could find no more Dogs, nor Rats to feed on, killed
themselves. One having five Children hanging importunately upon him for meat,
made no show to lament, but restraining his passion, he willed the Children to
follow him, and they should have meat. When he came to the Bridge over the
Tiber, tying his Cloak about his face and eyes, he leapt into the River, his
Children and many more looking on. Afterward the Commanders, for money,
suffered such as would, to go out of the City; some few staid, the rest fled
whether they could; the most of whom were so weak, that they dyed a Shipboard,
or upon the high ways. Many the Enemy caught, and killed. To this was reduced
the Fortune of the People and Senate of Rome.

Isaac and John being joined with Belisarius at Epidamnus, John advised to
cross the Jonian Gulf, and with the whole Army to try their Fortune by Land.
But Belisarius liked it not; for more time would be spent, and some impediment
might encounter them by Land. He would have John march through Calabria, and
those Countries, to expel the Goths being few there; and having subdued all on
this side the Gulf, to join with him about Rome; where himself purposed to
land with the rest of the Army. He considered how the least delay would ruin
all at Rome, and that in five days with a wind they might land at Portus;
whereas from Otranto thither, would cost the Army 40. days march. So he hoist
Sail with a strong gale, and came before Otranto. The Goths seeing them,
instantly raised their Seige, and went to Brundusium, standing upon the Gulf,
a days journey from Otranto, with no Walls about it. They advertised Totilas
of it, thinking that Belisarius would instantly pass the straits there; who
prepared to encounter him, and directed the Goths in Calabria to guard the
Passage there: But the wind coming fair, Belisarius left Otranto, and the
Goths were secure and quiet in Calabria.

Totilas before Rome guarded the Avenues more stictly, to keep out Provisions.
He made choice of a place about eleven miles below Rome upon the Tiber, where
it is narrowest, and there laid a Bridge of Plancks, reaching from one Banck to
the other. At either end he built Towers of Wood, and put good Garrisons into
them, to impede the passage of Barks from Portus to Rome. In the mean time
Belisarius landed at Portus, and attended John's Army. John past over into
Calabria, undiscerned by the Goths, who were all at Brundusium: He took two
Scouts of the Enemy upon the high way, and having killed the one, the other
took him about the knees, and besought him for mercy, promising to be useful
to him; John demanded wherein; he said, he would bring him upon the Goths
unlookt for. John told him, he should not then fail in his request; but bad
him first show him where were any Horse-pastures,; The Goth promising that
also, went along with him. And first surprising the Enemies Horses at their
Pasture, such as were a foot leapt on them, being many of the best men. Then
they gallopt to the Enemies Camp, who being unarmed, unprepared, and amazed
with the suddenness, were most of them cut off, using no resistance. Some few
escaped to Totilas. John then animated the Calabrians, and reconciled their
affections to the Emperor with fair promises of many advantages. He staid not
in Brundusium, but surprised Canusium, a Town in the middle of Apulia, five
days journey to the Westward of Brundusium, in the way to Rome. About three
miles from this Town is Cannae, where Hanniball gave that great overthrow to
the Romans. Here Tullianus the Son of Venantius, a Roman of great power in
Bruttia and Lucania, complained to John of what the Army had done formerly
against the Italians, and promised, if moderation were used hereafter, to
reduce his Countrymen to obedience and payment of Tribute; who revolted
unwillingly to Barbarians and Arrians, forced by them, and extremely wronged by
the Emperors Army. John promised all favor from the Emperor to the Italians,
and Tullianus went along with him, whence the Italians were no more jealous of
the Soldiers, and the most part of the Country on this side the Jonian Gulf
became Friends to them, and obedient to the Emperor. Totilas upon the news
hereof, sent 300. Goths to Capua; whom he directed, when they saw John's Army
march toward Rome, closely to follow it. Himself would take care of the rest:
This stopped John, (fearing to be encompast by the Enemy) from marching further
toward Belisarius; and he went into Bruttia and Lucania. Recimund an eminent
Goth, was placed by Totilas with some Goths, fugitive Romans, and Moors to
guard Bruttia, and the straits of Scylla, and the Coast thereabout, and to
hinder the landing of Boats from Sicily, and the pasting over thither. John
suddenly fell upon this Army between Rhegiam and Bivona, and routed them using
no resistance: They fled toward a Mountain hard of access and craggy. But
John ran up with them, and before they could be settled in the fastnesses,
killed most of the Moors and Roman Soldiers, stoutly defending themselves,
and took Recimund and the Goths upon composition. And having thus done, staid
in the Country; while Belisarius lay still attending his coming, and blaming
him for not adventuring to pass by a Garrison of 300. men in Capua, having
with him the choice of the Roman Army. But John despaired of getting by, and
lay quiet at Cervarium, a place in Apulia.

CHAP. X.
SO that Belisarius fearing some desperate resolution of the starving Romans,
studied means to Victual the City. Forces he wanted to fight with the Enemy;
but he did thus. He tied two Barks together, upon which he built a Tower of
wood, higher then those, which the Enemy had at the Bridge; having by some
Soldiers, pretending to run away, taken the exact measure of them. He lancht
into the Tiber also 200. Pinnaces, having Walls made of boards full of
loop-holes, to shoot at the Enemy. Aboard the Prinnaces he put Corn and other
Provisions, and toward the Rivers mouth in places of advantage, he laid Horse
and Foot by either Banck, who were to impede the Enemy, if he set upon Portus;
which he committed to the Guard of Isaac, with his Wife, and what he had there,
directing him not to stir, though he heard Belisarius were slain; but to keep
close to his Guard, that upon any mischance, there might be a place of retreat;
for other Fortresses there was none, all the Country thereabout being their
Enemy. Himself aboard one of the Pinnaces, led the rest; and caused the two
Barks with the Tower to be towed after. Upon the top of the Tower he put a
Cock-boat full of Pitch, Rozin, Brimstone, and other combustible matter upon
the Banck, where is the way from Portus to Rome, stood the Foot. He had sent
the day before to Bessas, to make a general Sally, and to alarm the Enemies
Camp. The like he had directed him often before, but neither before nor now,
would he perform his directions: for he had Corn yet for his own use left, sent
formerly by the Governors of Sicily, sufficient both for the Soldier and the
People. Of this he gave little to the People, but took most of it upon the
account of the Army, and kept it to himself, selling it at huge rates to the
Senators: So that he had no mind to have the Seige raised. But Belisarius rowed
up the River with a strong stream against him: The Goths lying quiet in their
Trenches. Near the Bridge they came to a Guard of Enemies, and found an Iron
Chain fastened from Banck to Banck, which Totilas had put there, to hinder the
passage to the Bridge. They shot, and killed some, and frighted away the rest,
then took up the Chain and rowed on to the Bridge, where they fell to work; The
Goths, valiantly defending from their Towers, and many running in from the
Camp. Then Belisarius brought his two Barks with the Tower on them close to the
Enemies Tower, which stood into the water by the way from Portus. He caused
them to fire the Cock-boat, and to shoove it down just upon the Enemies Tower,
which instantly fell afire, and burnt with it self 200. Goths within it, and
their Commander, one of the valiantest of the Nation. Mean while the Romans
shot so thick upon the seconds which came from the Camp, that being also amazed
at the Accident, they ran all away. The Romans laid hands on the Bridge, and
had suddenly pulled it down, and gotten into Rome, none opposing; But Fortune
was not so pleased. Some envious Demon plotted that, which ruined the Romans
Affairs. The Armies being thus employed, the report (to the Romans mischief)
came to Portus, how Belisarius had taken up the Chain, and killed the Goths
there. Isaac could not hold, but would have his share in the honor; and
fogetting Belisarius Commands, he went hastily to the other side of the River
where Ostia stands, and with a 100. Horse of the men left him by Belisarius, he
charged the Enemies quarter commanded by Roderick a skillful Soldier. And
coming suddenly, he wounded many, and Roderick himself and the Goths quitted
their Quarter, either suspecting more to be coming after Isaac, or deceiving
him, to surprise his Troops, which happened. For Isaac entering the Enemies
Trenches, and falling to pillage, the Goths returned, killed many, and took
himself, and others Prisoners. Some Horsemen gallopt to Belisarius, and
reported that Isaac was taken by the Enemy; Who astonished with the news, and
not enquiring the manner, but thinking Portus and his Wife to be lost, and all
ruined, and how no Fortress was now left for the Army to retire to, he had not
a word to say, a thing never happening to him before: And immediately he drew
back his Forces, meaning to charge the Enemy unprepared, and by all means to
recover the place; And thus the Romans retired without doing any thing. But
Belisarius when at Portus he found the rashness of Isaac, and perceived his
own Counsel perturbation, the vexation of it, and at the cross Fortune put
him into a Fever, which afflicted him long, and brought him to deaths door.
Two days after Roderick dyed, which so grieved Totilas, that he put Isaac to
death. But Bessas still trading with his Corn, grew rich, hunger and necessity
setting the prises for him. His whole thoughts were upon it, neglecting the
Guard of the Walls or any thing tending to preservation; and the Soldiers
might be as negligent as they pleased. Upon the Walls were small Guards, and
those not attended. The Sentinels might sleep securely, none ever visiting
them, to call them to an account, nor going the round, as is usual. And the
Citizens being few left, and they almost starved, would not keep any Watch. At
last four Isaurians, who stood Sentinels near Porta Asinaria, at the time of
night, when their turn came to watch, and their fellows to sleep, slipped down
the Walls by Ropes tied to the Battlements, and came to Totilas, undertaking to
receive his Army into the City with ease: Totilas promised many Favors, and to
make them rich if they performed it, and sent two Soldiers with them to view
the place, where they said the City might be entered. They came to the Wall,
mounted the Battlements by the Ropes; not a man speaking, nor taking notice.
Being there, the Isaurians showed them how nothing would oppose their coming
up, nor encounter them being up; which they bad them to report to Totilas; who
though he was glad of the report, yet he could not trust them, being Isaurians.
Not many days after they came again, urging him upon the same business, and
he sent two others, who examined all exactly, and made their report, agreeing
with the former. In the mean time some Roman Scouts met ten Goths near the
City upon the highway, whom they took, and brought to Bessas: Who by enquiry
learnt of them, that Totilas hope was to have the City betrayed to him by
Isaurians. Bessas and Conon made slight of the advertisement; and the Isaurians
coming the third time to Totilas, and he sending others, and one of his own
Kindred with them, and they reporting still the same, he resolved the enterprise.

CHAP. XI.
THE same night he silently armed his forces, and led them to Porta Asinaria,
willing four Goths valiant and strong to mount the Battlements with the
Isaurians, at the hour when they were to watch, and the rest were to go to bed
in their turns. They being gotten into the Town, went to Porta Asinaria
without meeting any; and with their Battleaxes cut in two the Timber posts upon
which the Gates on each side hung, and wrench'd off the iron work where-into
the Watchmen put their keys to open and shut then: And so having set them
open, they received in Totilas and the Army. Totilas drew all to one place, not
suffering them to scatter, afraid of some ambush from the Enemy. The City
suddenly was full of tumult, and most of the Roman Soldiers fled with their
Commanders out at another gate. Some took Sanctuary with other Romans in
Churches. Of the Patricians, Decius, Basilius, and some others fled out with
Bessas, having Horses; but Maximus, Olybrius, Orestes and others fled into St.
Peter's Church. Of the commons remained but 500. men, who took Sanctuary also,
the rest were all gone away, or starved. Totilas being told in the night, that
Bessas and the Enemy were running away, said, they brought him very good news,
and that they should not follow them; For what should please a man mare then
his Enemies running away? In the morning Totilas suspecting now no Ambush, went
to St. Peter's Church to Prayer: But the Goths killed some in their way, about
26. Soldiers, and sixty Commons.

Totilas being in the Church, Pelagius came a suppliant to him with the Gospels
in his hand, crying out, O spare, my Lord! your own people. Now (quoth
Totilas, scoffing) you come an humble Petitioner to me; Because God has made
me your slave, replied Pelagius. And now, O Master! spare your own slaves.

Totilas won with his supplications, for bad the Goths to kill any more; but
to make booty of their Goods, reserving the most precious for himself. They
found much wealth in the Patricians houses, but most in the lodging of Bessas,
who had heaped up those wicked prices of his Corn for Totilas: The Romans, even
Senators, and Rusticiana the Widow of Boethius, and daughter of Symmachus (a
woman that ever laid out her Revenues upon the poor) went begging their bread
of their Enemies; wandering from house to house, knocking at the doors, and
craving sustenance without blushing.

The Goths endeavored to put Rusticiana to death, for bribing the Roman
Commanders to break down Theodericks Images, in revenge of her Husbands and
Fathers deaths: But Totilas preserved her, and protected all the Women from the
Soldiers insolence, who were eager to ravish them; but not one was abused: For
which his modesty Totilas got a great reputation. The next day he assembled the
Goths, and spoke thus;

Fellow Soldiers! I call you together, not to make any new exhortations, but
the same I have given formerly, and by entertayning which, you have found your
greatest good: And do not now to this hearken carelessly. Advises conducting you
to happiness should never be tedious, nor many words seem wearisome, since
the fruits springing from them must not weary you. I say then again, that the
other day we had 200000. valiant fighting men together, were masters of
infinite wealth, had abundance of Horses, and other preparations, and many wise
old men, who in War are of greatest use. Yet were we beaten by 7000. Greeks,
and senselesly deprived of our Empire, and all things else. But now being
reduced to few, and those naked, poor, and unexperienced, we have vanquished
the Enemy; being upward of 20000. men. The cause of this our success I will
tell you, though you know it already. The Goths then not valuing Justice, acted
foul wrongs upon themselves, and their Roman Subjects: Which moved God (as
could not otherwise be) to fight against them for the Enemy: Whom we
exceeding in numbers, valor, and other preparations, yet were we beaten by an
unseen power. It is now in your power to keep your prosperity by keeping your
justice. If you change, God will be your Enemy: Who assists not this or that
race, or Nation, but the men to whom Justice is precious: In him it is no
labor to transferr prosperity from one to another. Let man only resolve never
to do wrong; To God all things naturally are in his free power. Observe
therefore justice, and you shall for ever maintain your happiness.

Having said thus to the Goths, he called the Roman Senators to him, and
bitterly reproacht them; That having received benefits from Theoderick and
Atalarick, been employed in all offices, managed the whole State, and made
themselves rich; they had proved ungrateful to their Benefactors, by
unworthily revolting to their own mischief, and had betrayed themselves by
bringing Greeks into their Country. He urged them to say, what hurt the Goths,
or what benefit the Emperor Justinian had done them. They were deprived of
almost all commands, wrung and tortured by the public Tax-gatherers to
account for their carriages toward the Goths in the Treasury: And being
spoiled by the War, yet the Greeks made them pay their tributes, as in the
times of Peace.

He objected many such things, as angry Masters use to their new made slaves.
Then pointing to Herodian, and the four Isaurians: You, quoth he, having been
bred with us, could never yield up to us so much as one forsaken Town: but
these have received us into Spoletum, and Rome it self. Be you therefore in
the condition of slaves, and these who have been friends, and as Contrymen
to us, shall have your offices.

The Patricians stood silent at these words: But Pelagius interceded for them,
as men ruined and unfortunate, till Totilas promised mercy, and let them go.
He sent Pelagius, and Theodorus, an Orator of Rome, to Justinian, his
Ambassadors, making them swear to deal fairly, and to return into Italy so
soon as they could: He instructed them to persuade the Emperor to make peace,
otherwise he should be compelled to lay Rome flat with the ground, to kill all
the Senate, and to bring the War into Illyrium; And he wrote letters to the
Emperor; who had the news already of the successes in Italy. When they came to
him, they declared their instructions from Totilas, and presented his letter,
of this tenor.

You are fully advertised what has happened to Rome, I doubt it not. But my
reason of this Embassage is, to crave of you to entertain the blessings of
Peace your self, and to permit them to us. Whereof we have a fair precedent
in Anastasius and Theodericke: Who reigned together not long since; but they
filled their Reigns with Peace and good things. If you be pleased to do the
like, I will call you my Father, and you shall have the Goths your Auxiliaries
against whom you please.

Justinian read the Letter, and heard the Ambassadors, but instantly sent them
away with this answer in writing to Totilas:

That he had made Belisarius absolute General in this War, who had full power
to manage all things concerning Totilas as he pleased. During this voyage of
the Ambassadors to Constantinople, and back again, Tullianus in Lucania leavyed
some Peasants, and guarded the Straits there, to hinder the Enemies entering to
infest Lucania; With him were 300. Antians, left with him by John; being of all
Barbarians the aptest to fight in a fastness. Totilas thought it not fit to
employ all the Goths against them; But he sent numbers of Peasants in the
company of some Goths, whom he commanded to attempt the passage. They fought,
and much stirring there was, but by the valor of the Antians, and favor of
the fastness, Tullianus in the end routed them.

CHAP. XII.
TOtilas hearing of it, resolved to demolish Rome, and leaving part of his army
in some town thereabout with the rest to go against John and the Lucanians. He
threw down about the third part of the walls of Rome, and was ready to fire
the fairest, and most eminent buildings, and to make Rome a sheep pasture; but
Belisarius advertized of his intention, sent Ambassadors to him, and wrote him
this Letter, It has been the invention of wise men of old, affecting civility,
to raise goodly buildings; and none destroy them but some dull men, not ashamed
to leave to posterity such a mark of their disposition. And of all Cities under
the Sun, Rome is confessed to be the greatest and most famous; being not the work
of one man's virtue, nor arrived to this beauty and bigness in a small time.
Many Emperors and excellent men, length of time, and excess of wealth have
drawn together materials from all countries, and rare artificers, and having
so by little and little built the City as you now see it, they have filled it
with monuments of all their virtues, and the violence done to the same is an
injury committed against all mankind; taking from our progenitors the
memorialls of their worth, and from posterity the sight of such goodly works.
Know then, that one of the two must be, either you will be vanquished by the
Emperor, or get the better. If you be victorious, by having destroyed Rome;
you have ruined, Great Sir, not another, but your own; by preserving which,
you will be rich in the goodliest possession in the world. But if you draw the
loosing lot; having preserved Rome, you have reserved abundant thanks from the
conqueror: But by destroying it, bereft your self of all pretense to favor.
And you will get nothing by it, but a fame in the world suitable to such a
proceeding, which attends your Resolution herein either way. Whatsoever the
actions of Princes be, such are necessarily the name they must bear from them.
Totilas upon often reading this Letter, and pondring the advice, forbear
further harm to Rome. and signifying to Belisarius his determination, he
dismissed the Ambassadors: He encamped most of his army at Algidum, 15 miles from
Rome to the Westward, to ly there and keep Belisarius fast in Portus, and
himself and the rest went against John and the Lucanians. Some Roman Senators
he led with him, and the rest with their wives and children he sent to
Campania, leaving not a man in Rome. John hearing of Totilas coming, would stay
no longer in Apulia, but ran into Otranto. The Patricians confined in Campania,
sent commands by Totilas direction to their husbandmen of Lucania, to leave
John, and to manure their Lands as formerly, which were declared to belong to
their Landlords. Whereupon they forsook John, and went and lived peaceably at
home. Tullianus also ran away, and his 300 Antians retired to John's army. So
all on this side the Jonian Gulf, save Otranto, became again subject to
Totilas: and the Goths grown bold, stragled about in small parties; John sent
forces out, and killed many of them, which caused Totilas to unite his army
about mount Gargarus, almost in the middle of Apulia, where he encamped in
Hanniballs Entrenchment. In the mean time Martianus, a Constantinopolitan born,
and one of the soldiers that escaped out of Rome with Conon, when it was
taken, desired Belisarius that he might go to the Enemy, pretending himself a
runaway, and he would do good service. Belisarius approving it, Martianus went
to Totilas, who was glad of him, having heard much of the young man, and seen
him do bravely in some single combats: Presently he restored to him his wife a
captive, and one of his children (there being two) but reserved the other for a
hostage, and he sent them with some others to Spoletum, whereof the Goths had
demolisht the walls after their taking it by Herodians Treason, and put a
Garrison there of Goths and Romans fugitives, into the place used for the
hunting of wild beasts (called the Amphitheater) which they had fortified.
Martianus got some Associates, whom he persuaded to do some remarkable service,
and so to return to the Roman army, and to the Roman Commander in Perusia, he
sent for forces, discovering his design to him. Old^gandon, a Hunne, the
commander there ( Cyprianus Being murdered by one of his own Lifeguard, as
aforesaid) marched with some forces to Spoletum; whom Martianus seeing, with the
15 Soldiers he had got to join with him, he killed the Captain of the Goths
Garrison, and received the Romans into the Fort; they killed most of the
Enemies, and brought the rest to Belisarius.

Who resolved thereupon to enter Rome, and with a thousand Soldiers he marched
to it. The Enemy at Algedon was advertized hereof by a Roman, and laid an
Ambush near Rome, which seeing, Belisarius set upon his troops, and a hot fight
being, the Romans valor routed the Enemy, who after the killing of most of
them, retired to Portus. Upon the seacoast of Calabria, stands Tarentum, two
days journey from Otranto, in the way to Thurium and Rhegium. John, invited by
the Tarentines, went thither with some few, leaving the rest in Otranto, the
city he found great and unfortified, and conceived it impossible to man it. But
finding to the northward of the City the sea to embay it self on both sides the
Land, and to make it an Isthmus between, of two miles and a half broad; he cut
the said Isthmus from the city with a wall and a deep ditch, and put in it the
Tarentines and the inhabitants of some other Towns with a good Garrison. The
Calabrians having gotten this refuge, thought of revolting from the Goths. In
the mean time Totilas surprised Acherontis a strong Castle in Lucania, upon the
confines of Calabria, and put into it a Garrison of 400 men. Then himself with
his army went toward Ravenna, leaving some Goths in Campania, to Guard the
Senators there confined.

CHAP. XIII.
BUt Belisarius undertook a design provident and bold, which seemed a kind of
madness at first, but proved a gallant work. He left a small Garrison in
Portus, and with the rest of his army he went into Rome with a resolution to
hold it. He could not in so short a time repair the walls, demolished by
Totilas; but he heaped stones one upon another rudely, without lime or the like
between, only to give it the form of a wall; without it he pitched good store of
stakes; And a ditch he had formerly made round about, as I said before. The
whole army working cheerfully, in five and twenty days the breaches were
filled up.

The Romans from the towns about flocked thither, as well desiring to dwell in
Rome again, as to be supplied with Victual which they wanted, and found there
in abundance, imported by Belisarius up the River. Totilas at the news, went
instantly thitherward; Belisarius having not yet set up the Gates, which
Totilas had broken down; and he for want of Artificers, could not build them
again. The Barbarian Army encamped by the River of Tiber, and there lodged that
night; the next morning they marched furiously to the City-walls. Belisarius
placed, where the Gates had stood, some of his best men, and commanded the rest
from the Walls to maintain fight against the Assailants, and it was hotly
fought; For the Goths, who hoped to take the Town at the first onset, finding
the business prove tough, and the Romans powerfully defending, grew angry, and
their anger made them more ventrous. The Romans also held out beyond
expectation, the danger inducing them to be valiant. The Slaughter was great of
the Goths, being annoyed by shot from the Walls. Both the Armies toyled hard,
the Fight beginning in the morning, and ending at night. When it grew dark, the
Goths returned to their Quarters, and spent the night in dressing their wounded
men. The Romans kept Guards upon the Walls, and put the best men where the
Gates had been, to guard by turns, having pitched before them many Triboli,
that the Enemy might not ride in upon them. The Triboli, or Gall-traps are of
this Fashion. They fit to one another the blunt ends of four Iron sprigs, of
equal length, whose right lines make a triangle every way. These they throw
upon the ground, and three of them stick fast; the other stand upright, and
hinders the approach of horse and men: and if by chance they be turned over,
the point that stood up before, pitches into the Ground, and another gets up
instead of it, hindering a charging Enemy. But the next morning Totilas again
assaulted, and the Romans defended in their former order, got the better, and
growing bold sallied; and some chasing the retiring Enemy far from the Town,
the Goths fell to compass them, and to cut off their retreat; which
Belisarius perceiving, sent out some of his own company, who brought them off:
And the Goths repulsed, retired with loss of many of their best men, and
carrying off many wounded. They kept close in their Quarters, dressing their
hurt-men, and mending their Arms (which were much spoiled) and making other
preparations. Many days after they assaulted again, and the Romans killed the
Ensigne-bearer of Totilas, who being deadly wounded, and falling, threw away
his Ensign. The Romans in the Van ran for it, and to strip the dead body: But
the Goths took up the Ensign, and cut off the dead man's left Arm, and carried
it off, having a rich Bracelet of Gold on it, which they thought would be an
affront to them, if some vaunting Enemy should wear it; And then they made a
disorderly retreat. The Romans followed the Execution a good way, stripped the
rest of the dead bodies, and came into the City without loss of a man. The
principal Goths reproached Totilas something licentiously, for his
unadvisednesse, in not demolishing all Rome when he took it, (that no Enemy
might hold it) or in not keeping it himself; but in thus ruining, what they
had effected with much toil and time. Thus men ever tune their Judgments to
the Events of things, and yield up the same to the stream of Fortune, from
thence taking quick and sudden changes of Opinion. The Goths, when Totilas
prospered, admired him like a God; calling him unresistible, invincible, as
they did before, when he suffered them to destroy part of the Cities Walls
which they took: But no sooner he received a blow, but they shamelessely rail
on him, fogetting their former words, and contradicting themselves without
reason. But such Errors being the effects of nature, it is not possible for
men not to commit them. But Totilas raised his Seige, and went to the City
Tibur, breaking down the Bridges upon the Tiber, that the Enemy might not
charge him. Pons Milvius, a Bridge near to Rome, they could not demolish. They
rebuilt the Castle of Tibur, which they had cast down before, and kept
themselves quiet within it, and all their Baggage. Belisarius set up the Gates
of Rome at his ease, lining them with Iron; and he sent the Keys again to the
Emperor: And so ended the Winter, and the 12. year of this War, written by
Procopius.

Some Forces not long before sent by Totilas straightly beseiged the Romans in
Perusia, Incipit Annus 13. bell. Goth. in ann. 21. Justiniani and An. Dom. 547.
and finding that Victual began to fail the besieged, they sent to Totilas to
come with his whole Army to take the Town with more ease. But Totilas finding
the Goths not cheerfully to receive his directions, he called them all to him,
and spoke thus.

Fellow Soldiers, seeing you are causelessly angry with me, and do pine at our
late cross Fortune; I now call you together, to rectify your Opinion, and to
settle your Judgments aright; least you appear not only unthankful to me, but
foolishly to use ingratitude even to God himself. Humane things are subject to
mischances, and he, that being but a man, yet takes such things in ill part,
shall necessarily be thought to want wit, and yet nevertheless undergo the
necessity of his Fortune. I will put you in mind of former proceedings, not so
much to excuse these now, as to show that they ought rather to be commended. In
the beginning of the War Vitigas demolisht the Walls of Fanus and Pensaurum,
maritime Towns, letting Rome and all the other Cities in Italy stand
undefaced. And from Fanus and Pensaurum we have had no inconvenience; but from
Rome, and the other fortified places, our Affairs have succeeded as you know.
When by your Gift I received this Government, I chose rather to follow the best
courses, then by the contrary to hurt you; since naturally men differ not much,
but experience is it, which makes the good Scholars of her School in all
things better, then they who learn not of her. So that taking Beneventum we
threw down the Walls, and were presently Masters of the rest, whose Walls we
also demolisht: That we might not have our Enemies ever issuing from
Fortresses, and making the War with Artifices, but to come directly to a Field,
and there to fight it out. And there they ran away, and their Cities which I
took, I dismantelled, and you then were the Admirers, and Ministers of that my
resolution, and made the work (as it was indeed) your own; seeing he who
commends a man for an Act, is himself an Actor. But now you are changed, since
a boldness without reason taken by Belisarius, has succeeded; and now you are
afraid of the man, being so valiant. Indeed foolhardy men are sooner thought
to be courageous, then the provident, to be cautious. He that adventures more
then the occasion allows, is honored yet with a reputation of seeming Valor;
But he that upon a provident consideration is apprehensive of the danger, and
then fails, draws upon himself the blame of all that happens. And if it
succeed well, unskilful men will not think that he dath done any thing in it.
Besides, you consider not how you are offended with me, for what I rather may
take ill of you. Is it now only that Belisarius has gotten honor upon you?
Who being his Captives, and fugitive Slaves, took Arms under me, and have
gotten the better of him in this War? And if by my virtue you have effected
this, you should be patient and consider in mischances, that nothing is made to
be ever the same. And Fortune having adjudged to you the Victory, you shall do
better to reverence the same, then to be peevish against it; least it be
offended, and t^ach you a new Lesson of gratitude and better nature. For how
can that be a good nature, that having lately attempted great Fortunes, and now
failed in a small matter, is so poorly dejected? This is plainly to renounce
your selves to be men; for never to slip is peculiar to God alone. So that
setting by these things, I say, that you are to go to Perusia, and to encounter
the Enemy: If you conquer them, Fortune will clear up again. No age can make
that undone, which has happened to us; but the memory of ill Fortunes is
aswaged by the arrival of good. The getting Perusia will cost little labor;
Cyprianus the Commander, Fortune and our Counsels have removed; and a multitude
without a Governor, and without Victuals too, are no fit men to fight
valiantly. None shall infest your backs, I having beaten down the Bridges to
prevent any sudden incursions. Belisarius likewise and John are jealous of one
another, as may appear by their Actions, (which ever convince the disagreement
of minds) they to this day having never joined their Forces, by reason of their
mutual jealousy. And that Guest whosoever has, may be sure of hatred and
envy in the same lodging, which being intermingled, nothing can possibly be
done that should be. Having thus spoken, he led the Army toward Perusia, and
there fate down before it, preparing for a Siege.

CHAP. XIIII.
IN the mean time John besieged the Castle of Acherontis, and finding that he
could do no good upon it, he fell upon a bold resolution, which preserved some
Roman Senators, and got much reputation to himself. While Totilas was busy
before Rome, he took to himself a party of choice Horsemen, and concealing
his intent, made a journey into Campania (where Totilas had confined the
Senators) resting neither day nor night, that coming suddenly he might rescue
the Senators, the Towns being altogether unfortified. Totilas before fearing
this, and that by some Enemy he might lose his Prisoners, had sent into
Campania some Forces of Horse; who being come to the City of Minturnae, thought
it best to stay there, and to rest their Horses, being weary with the journey.
Some others Totilas had directed, (being men in much account with him, and
about 400.) to view in what Estate Capua was, and the Towns about it; And the
journey thither was but 37. miles, and the Horses of these and themselves were
fresh and lusty. It happened that these 400, and John arrived at the same day
and hour at Capua, not knowing of one another coming. Suddenly a gallant
fight was performed, both parties falling to it at first sight, wherein the
Romans had the absolute Victory, and killed many; some few of them got away,
and gallopt to Minturnae; whom the others there seeing all bloody, and some
with Arrows sticking in them, others not so much as telling them what had
befallen them, (so earnest they were to get away) and bewraying the fear they
were in, they also leapt upon their Horses and ran with them for company: And
coming to Totilas, they told him of innumerable Enemies, to save the shame of
their running away. Seventy Roman Soldiers then came into John, who were
quartered in Campania; And some few Senators he found there, but almost all
their Wives. For most of the men at the taking of Rome, were fled into Portus
with the Soldiers, but all the Women were taken Prisoners. One Clementinus a
Patritian, fled into a Church, not accompanying the Roman Army; because having
betrayed a Castle near unto Naples to Totilas, he feared the Emperors
indignation. Orestes also, who had been Consul, staid at his house for want of
Horses to carry him away; John sent the Senators he found, and the 70.
Soldiers into Sicily: But Totilas was vexed at this news, and eager to have
his revenge upon John; And he marched against him, leaving only some of his
Troops to guard the Camp before Perusia: John had encamped his 100. men in
Lucania, and sent out some to discover upon all the ways, that the Enemy might
not surprise him. And Totilas guesting as much, and that John would not lie in
his Camp, without his Scouts abroad; left the ordinary ways, and marched over
the Mountains which were many, high and craggy, and thought unpassable, that
none would suspect his coming that way. John's Scouts found the Enemy was
thereabout, but no certainty they could learn; and fearing what came to pass,
they rode back to their Camp, and with them arrived there the Goths in the
night, Totilas being in a rage, and so not well advised, had the fruit of his
impertinet anger. His Army was ten times greater then his Enemies; and it is
evidently best for a stronger Army to make an open fight; so that he should
have charged the Enemy in the morning (to take from them the benefit of the
dark to hide themselves) and so he had taken them all as in a net. But he
giving way to his anger, set on them in the dark night. They used no
resistance, being taken most of them asleep; yet the Goths killed not many,
they having the means in the dark to slip away unseen, leaving their camp, and
running up to the next mountains. John escaped amongst the rest, and Arusus,
Captain of the Herulians. Almost 100. Romans were slain: There was with John
one Gilacius an Armenian, commanding some few of his Contrymen, who spoke
neither Greek, Latin, nor Gothish, but Armenian only; some Goths lighting
upon him, asked him who he was: (They forbear to kill any in the dark, lest
they might kill their own) He could make no other answer, but that he was
General Gilacius, having learnt the title of his place in Greek, by hearing it
often named. The Goths finding him an Enemy, took him Prisoner, and soon after
killed him. John, and Arusus with their troops gallop't amain to Otranto: And
the Goths afterward pillaging the Romans Camp, retired.

Things being thus in Italy, the Emperor upon the importunate letters of
Belisarius, thought good to send more Forces thither.

First, he sent Bacurius, the son of Peranius, and Sergius, Solomon's sisters
son, who with some few came to the rest of the Army. Afterward he sent ^^rus
with 300. Herulians, and Varazes an Armenian with 80. Roman Soldiers. He
caused also Valerianus, General of Armenia, from thence to go into ^^^ly with
his guard of Lanciers, and l'argettiers, being above a thousand men. (...)
first arrived at Otranto, where leaving his Ships, and not joining with John's
Army, he rode forward with his men. He was no serious man, but an excessive
Drinker: and consequently rash, and unadvised. He encamped near to Brundusium:
Which Totilas hearing; Either quoth he, Verus is very strong, or very foolish.
Let us go to him; either to make trial of his power, or to make him sensible
of his folly. Accordingly he went against him with a great Army; But the
Herulians seeing them, fled into a Wood, where the Enemy compassed them, and
slew above 200. Verus and the rest were ready to be caught; but it chanced that
Varazes and the Armenians came suddenly to an Anchor upon that shore; and
Totilas suspecting some great Forces aboard, rode away with his Army, and so
they escaped, with much joy to the ships. Varazes put into Tarentum, whither
soon after came John. The emperor had written to Belisarius of a great Army
sent, with which he was to join in Calabria, and to give Batta^le to the Enemy.
Val^rianus also was come near the Jonian gulf, but would not pass over,
fearing that the Soldiers and their Horses would, want provisions now toward
the Winter tropic. He sent unto John 300. of his men, and promised in the
beginning of the Spring to be with him.

But Belisarius upon perusal of the Emperors letters, chose of his best men
700. Horse, and 200. Foot: And leaving the Guard of the places about Rome to
the rest under Conon, he made for Sicily, thence purposing to put in at
Tarentum. He left at his left hand the place called Scyll^um, where the Poets
say, that Scylla did abide. Not that any such savage Woman was, as they tell
it: But in that part are of old many small rocks like whelps, and they are to
this day called (...) little Dogs. At first names were given thus to signify
the things. Then fame spreading them among men ignorant of the truth, caused
many false conceits: And time at length became the powerful Author of some
fable, suborning, for Witnesses of things that are not, Poets by license of
their art. So anciently the Natives of Corcyra have called their Easter^
promontory Cynocephale, the head of a Dog; Whereupon others would have the
Islanders headed like Dogs. Some Pisidians are called Lycocranites, not because
they have heads like Wolves, but because the mountains there are called (...)
the head of a Wolf. But to return from whence I digressed.

Belisarius endeavored to make directly for Tarentum. There is a coast in form
like a half moon, the Sea embaying it self far into the land; the compass
whereof being 125. miles, near to the mouth of the Bay are Croton to the
Eastward, and Thurium to the West, And about the middle of it is Tarentum. A
storm being in their teeth, and the wind blowing high, and the waves being
great, being unable to sail on, they cast Anchor in the Haven of Croton: Where
Belisarius finding no Fortress near, nor how to supply the Army with
provisions, staid with his Wife and all the Foot, intending to send for John's
Army. His Horse he commanded to march higher, and to quarter themselves upon
the entrances of the Country, giving them for Commanders Pharas the Iberian,
and Barbation, one of his Lifeguard; Thinking that so they might best get
provisions for themselves and their Horses, and keep off the Enemy in
fastnesses. For there the mountains of Lucania reaching into Bruttia, and
meeting at a strait, make two narrow passages; the one called in Latin Petra
sanguinis, the bloody rock; the other Labulla, or Lambula. Here by the Sea side
stands Ruscia, where the Thurians ships ride. Seven miles and a half above
this, the ancient Romans built a strong Castle, which John had long possessed,
and placed a Garrison in it.

CHAP. XV.
THE Horse sent by Belisarius met Forces of the Enemy sent by Totilas to
attempt that Castle: With these they fought, and though much inferior in
numbers, they routed them, and killed above 200. The rest ran away to Totilas
with the news. The Romans encamped in the place; and being ill governed, and
victorious, lived carelessly, neither lying together in one body, nor keeping
guards upon the two passages; but lodging too securely far asunder, and all
the day straggling for Provisions, without sending out Scouts, or advising upon
any course of safety. Totilas being thereof advertised, went against them with
3000. chosen Horsemen: And coming unlooked for upon them, being in no order to
fight, but straggling, he amazed and routed them. Pharas encountered the Enemy,
and did valiantly; whereby some escaped, but himself, and his company were
slain. This the Romans took grievously, having their hopes in these, being
extraordinary good men. Barbation, of the Lifeguard to Belisarius, ran away to
Croton with the news, reporting that the Goths would be instantly there.
Belisarius exceedingly grieved, ran to his Ships, weighed anchor, and with a
fair wind came the same day before Messina in Sicily, distant from Croton 87.
miles, being right over against Rhegium.

About this time an Army of Slavonians passed the River Ister, and did infinite
mischief in Illyrium, even to Epidamnus, killing and captivating all and of
all ages they found, and taking the spoil. They took many strong Castles, none
to defend them, and ranged about every where without control. The Commanders
of Illyrium waited upon them with 15000. men, but never durst come near them.

In that Winter were many terrible Earthquakes in Constantinople and
elsewhere, all in the night; that the Inhabitants feared to be overwhelmed,
but no hurt was done. The Nile also swelled 18. cubits, drowning all Egypt: In
the Country of Thebais, and the up-lands, the waters abated in the seasonable
time, and gave the people means to sow, and husband the ground as was usual.
But they retired not from the lower grounds at all, but covered them all the
seed-season, which never happened so before: To some grounds the water returned
again, and rotted all the seed put into the ground during the abatement. So
that the people were much troubled with the strangeness of it, and most of
their cattle perished for want of food. The great Whale was then also taken,
which the Constantinopoli^ans called the Porphyrion. It had troubled them, and
the Towns about them above fifty years at times; drowning Ships, and catching
men from aboard, and carrying them away. Justinian could by no endeavor get
this Monster taken. But now a great number of Daulphins coming upon the mouth
of the Euxine Sea, and espying the whale, fled from him, the most of them to
the mouth of Sangaris, where the Whale overtook some of them, and devoured
them: But either hunger or anger provoking him to pursue near the shore, he
fell into the mud, where tumbling and striving, he was more engaged; and the
Inhabitants hearing of it, ran down, and hewed him with their Axes; but not
being able to kill him, they drew him ashore, with great ropes, laying him upon
Waynes, and found him thirty cubits long, and ten broad. They cut him in
pieces, and some presently eat them, others pickled them up. The news of the
overflowing of Nile, and this Whale, added to the Earthquake which they had
felt, filled the Constantinopolitans with prophesies of strange events; Men
using still in present perplexities, and disturbances to make groundless
conjectures of things to come.

But leaving sooth-sayings, and the interpretation of prodigies; doubtless the
flood lying so long upon Egypt, caused for the present much calamity; and the
killing of the Whale was the riddance of a great mischief; But some say it was
not the Porphyrion, but some other Whale.

But to return to my matter. Totilas understanding that the Romans in Rusciana
were very scarce of Victual, sat down close by it, to take it before it could
be releived. And then ended the Winter, and the 13. year of this War, written
by Procopius.

When the Emperor sent 2000. Foot into Sicily, and commanded Valerianus
instantly to repair to Belisarius, He passing the Gulf, found at Otranto
Belisarius and his Wife Antonina, who then sailed to Constantinople, to entreat
the Empress Theodora for some better supplies to her Husband in this War. But
she found her dead, having lived in the Empire 22. years, and three months.
In the mean time the Garrison in Rusciana capitulated to yield up the Castle
about Midsommer, if in the mean time they were not succored; provided they
have no hurt done them. In it were many Italians, men of quality, and
Theopheron, brother to Tullianus, and of the Romans 300. Illyrian Horsemen,
whom John had left there under Chalazar a Hunne, one of his Lifeguard, and a
very good Soldier, and Godilas a Thracian: Belisarius had sent 100. Soldiers
to this Castle, who with those appointed by him to guard Rome, killed their
Commander Conon, for selling the Corn and other victual at Rome, to their
prejudice. They sent some Priests to the Emperor, protesting, that if he
granted not abolition of this fault, and paid them their arrears by such a
day, they would immediately revolt to Totilas. The Emperor did what they
desired.

CHAP. XVI.
BELISARIVS sent then for John to Otranto, and with him, and Valerianus, and a
Fleet he had got together, he sailed to succor Rusciana. The Garrison there
discerning the Fleet, took courage, and refused to yield, though the day
assigned were at hand. But a storm dispersed all the Ships, the coast being
Harbour-lesse; and in the Haven of Croton they met all, and made for Rusciana
again. The Goths seeing them, leaped on Horseback, and stood upon the shore
to oppose their landing, set in front by Totilas against their fore-ships; some
with their Lances, others with their Bows bent. The Romans seeing it, durst,
come no nearer, but lay at hull far off in the Sea; And at length despairing,
turned about to Sea-ward, and came again to an Anchor in the haven of Croton:
Where they resolved in counsel, that Belisarius should make for Rome, and
Victual it, as he could; and that John and Valerianus should land, and ride
into Picenia, to impede the Enemies sieges of the Towns there; hoping also to
draw Totilas toward them, with the raising of the siege of Rusciana. John with
his Troops being 1000. men, did accordingly: But Valerianus was afraid, and by
the Jonian Gulf sailed for Ancona, thinking so more securely to get into
Picenia, to join with John. Totilas raised not his siege, but sent 2000.
selected Horsemen into Picenia, to join with other Goths, and to beat away
John and Valerianus. But the Garrison in Rusciana (their Victual being
absolutely failed) sent Godilas the Lancier, and Theopheron the Italian to
intercede for their lives, and pardon for their fault. Totilas promised it to
all, save Chalazar only; Who had formerly broken faith with him; and so
received the Castle, and put to death Chalazar, cutting off his hands and privy
members. The Soldiers that would, he kept in equal rank with Goths, and left
them their goods (as he used in all places) And such as would not, he dismissed,
stripped, and unarmed, not desiring any to serve him unwillingly: And 80. of them
quitted their goods, and came to Croton; the rest staid; of whom the Italians
had their goods taken away afterward, but no hurt was done to their persons.

Antonina finding the Empress dead at Constantinople, besought the Emperor to
send for her Husband home: Which she easily obtained, the Persian War pressing
sore. In the mean time there was an attempt against the Emperors person, which
began, and was defeated in this manner. Artabanes, who slew the Tyrant
Gontharis in Afric, was eager to marry Projecta, the Emperors sisters
daughter; He was betroathed to her, and she affected the match; not for love of
his person so much, as in her gratitude to a man, who had revenged the murder
of her Husband Areobindus, and rescued her a Captive, and ready to be put into
the loathed bed of Gontharis the Tyrant. Both thus consenting, Artabanes sent
Projecta to the Emperor; and being made General of Africa, besought the
Emperor with some pretenses, to send for him to Constantinople; Hoping thereby
to effect the marriage, and to get many advantages, and even to put for the
Empire.

Men thus getting fortunes which they looked not for, yet look still further;
and foment their rising hopes, till they fall from the happiness they have.
The Empeperour granted his desire, and sent for him to Constantinople, and made
another General of Afric, as is said in my former relations. And being a
tall comely personage, liberal, and of few words, the Constantinopolitans
loved him, and admired him for his deeds. And the Emperor respected him with
the best, made him General of the Forces in Constantinople, and Commander of
the Confederates, and enrolled him a Consul. But he could not marry Projecta,
by reason he had a former Wife, his Country-woman, whom he married young, and
shook off long before upon some exceptions for slight matters, wherein women
offend their Husbands. And she, while Artabanes fortunes were not yet made,
sat quiet at home; But he being grown famous for his Actions, and great in his
fortunes, she would suffer no longer the dishonor; but became suitor in
Constantinople to the Empress for her Husband to be restored to her. The
Empress, ever inclinable to assist distressed women, brought her to live with
her Husband, much against his will: And Projecta was married to John, the son
of Pompey.

Artabanes was wild at this misfortune; and that having done so great service
to the Romans, they had not only barred him from his betroathed Wife, but put
him to lead his whole life with a woman that hated him; the greatest vexation
which the soul of man can suffer. And so soon as the Empress was dead, he
presently sent away his Wife. Germanus also, the Emperors brothers son, had
a Brother named Boraides; Who was lately dead, leaving his main estate to
Germanus and his sons, and to his own only daughter, so much only as law
compelled. This daughter the Emperor protected, which troubled Germanus.

There was also in Constantinople Arsaces, an Armenian of the race of the
Arsacides, and kindred of Artabanes. This man was taken lately in a manifest
practice of Treason with Chosroes, King of Persia. The Emperor punished him
only with some few lashes upon his back, and made him ride through the City
upon a Camel: taking nothing from him, nor so much as banishing him the Court.
Yet was he discontented for what befell him, and he devised mischief against
the Emperor and the State; finding likewise his Cozen Artabanes discontented,
he provoked him more, surprising him with cunning words, and chiding him. That
he was grown a coward and effeminate in an unfit time. He was valiant to rescue
others, and to pull down Tyrants, and had killed without any provocation
Gentharis his friend, and feaster. But that now he lay still poorly and
heartlesse; while his country languished under a perpetual Garrison, and
unusual taxations, having lost his Father treacherously slain under color of
a Treaty, and having his kinsmen made slaves, and scattered through the whole
Roman Empire. Yet Artabanes (quoth he) thinks it enough to have a Roman
Generallship, and the bare title of a Consul, and me your kinsman you can
behold suffering base things, without condoling with me; but I pity noble Sir
your own sufferings in both your wives, both her you have lost, and her you
must live with. And surely there is no cause neither upon deliberation nor
fear, that can discourage a man from killing Justinian, who sits, at midnight
without his Guards, discoursing with some old Priests, and busy in endless
scanning the Christians Oracles. None of his kinsmen will oppose you Germanus
the most powerful, and his Sons, young men enraged against Justinian, (I
verily think) will join with you; that so the business will even do it self.
For they have been more wronged by him then we, or any Armenian. Arsaces with
such enchantments as these, finding Artabanes yiedling, imparted the matter to
one Chanaranges; a Persarmenian, a handsome youth, but nothing serious; and
having brought him and Artabanes together in the same resolution, he left them,
promising to draw Germanus and his Sons into the plot.

CHAP. XVII.
JVSTINVS, the elder of them, was young (his beard newly sprouting) but valiant
and sharp witted; and not long before was made Consul. Arsaces went to him,
telling him, that he would willingly meet him in a certain Church. Being met,
Arsaces prayed him to assure him by oath, that he would not reveal their
conference to any but to his Father. When he had sworn accordingly, he fell to
chide him. That being the Emperors nearest kinsman, and seeing Pettifoggers
and common fellows holding all the great offices, himself at these years would
endure so long the affairs to be managed by mean men. That the Emperor did
not only despise him, but even his Father, a man attained to the height of
virtue; and suffered Justinian his Brother still a private man. That he could not
get the estate of Boraides his Uncle, who had made him his heir by his will;
but was deprived of the most part of it: and he would despise them more, so
soon as Belisarius was returned out of Italy, who was reported to be in the
midst of Illirium. With such allegations he incited Justinus, and discovered
the conspiracy between him, Artabanes and Chanaranges. The young man was amazed
and troubled to hear him, and plainly told him, that neither himself nor his
Father could ever join in such an Action. Arsaces reported the success to
Artabanes, and Justinus acquainted his Father with the discourse, who
communicated it to Marcellus, Captain of the Palatine Guards, and demanded his
opinion if he should reveal it to the Emperor: Marcellus was a grave, austere
man, of few words, an Enemy to jestings, and loose fashions, of a rigid life,
and a stranger to all pleasures; but precisely just, and a zealous Lover of
Truth. He would not have the matter revealed to the Emperor as yet. You (quoth
he) to be the Informer, is not convenient. Upon your least private conference
with the Emperor, Artabanes will suspect his plot to be discovered, and then
Arsaces running away, you will remain without proof. And my self never use to
believe any thing before punctually examining it, nor to report it to the
Emperor. I would gladly hear the discourse my self, or that some of mine might
hear the men speaking clearly in this subject. This advise Germanus bade his
Son Justinus to put in Execution: Who having so flatly denied Arsaces, would
not speak of it to him again; But he asked Chanaranges, if by the privity of
Artabanes, Arsaces lately came to him. I durst not, quoth he, to such a man,
open my self; but if you have any thing to say in it, we will advise, and
happily may do something. Chanaranges after conferring with Artabanes, told
Justinus as much as Arsaces had done, and Justinus promised all he desired, and
to draw in his Father. And a day was appointed for Germanus to conferr with
Chanaranges, and Germanus entreated Marcellus for some confident of his to be
an ear witness of Chanaranges. He sent Leontius who married the daughter of
Athanasius, a right honest man, who would be sure to report the truth. Him
Germanus placed in his dining room behind the hangings, and himself with his
Son Justinus staid in the room, where Leontius heard Chanaranges plainly
declaring the conspiracy between himself, Artabanes, and Arsaces. Then they
fell to discourse, that if they should kill the Emperor while Belisarius was
upon his way, their design would not succeed; for if they should make Germanus
Emperor; it was likely that Belisarius would come against them with an army,
which he might levy in Thrace, and they should not be able to keep him off. It
were better to defer the action till the coming of Belisarius, who being in
Constantinople, and with the Emperor in his Palace, they might enter at
evening suddenly with their daggers, and kill Marcellus and Belisarius,
together with the Emperor, and so manage their business as they pleased.
Marcellus being hereof advertized by Leontius, yet forbear to report it to the
Emperor, least with too much haste he might unadvisedly ruin Artabanes. But
Germanus revealed it to Buzes and Constantianus, fearing, that which happened, to
be suspected for his delay. But Belisarius afterward being reported to be near
at hand, Marcellus revealed the Treason to the Emperor; who caused Artabanes
and his Accomplices to be committed to the common Prison, and to be examined by
some principal Officers. The conspiracy being manifest, and reduced into
writing, the Emperor summoned the Senate to the place within the Palace
appointed for hearing causes. They, albeit they heard the plain confessions of
the Prisoners, yet had involved Germanus, and Justinus in the crime; if the
Testimonies of Marcellus and Leontius had not cleared them: who deposed, and
Buzes also and Constantianus, that Germanus had hid nothing from them, but
demeaned himself, as aforesaid. So that the Senate aquitted him and his Son, as
having in nothing offended the State: But coming to the Emperors chamber, the
Emperor stormed, and was much inflamed against Germanus, for his slownesse in
the discovery; and two principal Officers seconded his opinion to please him,
and they seemed much offended with Germanus, and to kindle more the Emperors
anger, being officious to ingratiate themselves by other men's miseries. The
rest stood amazed without a word speaking; yiedling, by not opposing. Marcellus
only saved him by speaking truth, taking the blame upon himself, and urging
vehemently, that Germanus discovered it to him timely, but himself searching
more narrowly into it, revealed it with the latest. And thus he pacified the
Emperor, and got a great fame for using his virtue in a time of so great need.
Artabanes the Emperor removed from his office, and did him no other harm, nor
any of the rest; they were restrained, but not dishonorably, nor in the common
prison, but in the Palace.

The Barbarians at this time were clearly masters of all the West, and this
Gothic war was now come to this, that the Romans who at first won all before
them, had now consumed their men and money to no purpose, had lost Italy, and
stood looking upon Illyrium and Thrace, shamefully wasted by Barbarians their
next borderers. In the beginning of this war, the Goths gave to the Francks all
Gallia, subject to them, being not able to fight with both, as I have said.
This the Romans hindered not, but Justinian confirmed the Gift, that he might
not be crossed by a war from these Barbarians; nor would the Francks have thought
their possession sure, if the Emperor had not put his Seal to the Act.
Hereupon the Kings of the Francks got Marseilles, a colony of the Phocaeans,
and all the Sea towns, and were Masters of that Sea: And now they sit in
Arles, beholding the horse races there, they coin Gold Staters out of the Gold
mines in Gaul, not with the stamp of the Roman Emperor (as the custom is)
but with their own Images. The King of Persia coins silver moneys as he
pleases, but it is not lawful for him, nor any King of Barbarians to put his
own stamp upon a Gold Stater, though he be a greater Master of Gold; for such
money they cannot put away, though they trade with Barbarian Merchants. But the
Francks seeing Totilas prevail, seized the most part of Venetia; the Romans
had no power to resist, nor the Goths to make war upon both.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE Gepaedes also took Syrmium, and almost all Dacia, so soon as Justinian had
taken them from the Goths; making the Romans their Captives, and going still
onward spoiling the Roman Provinces; so that the Emperor paid them no more the
Pensions they anciently received of the Romans. To the Lombards also he gave
the City of Noricum, and the strong places in Pannonia, and other Towns, and
great sums of Money, who thereupon left their own Country, and planted by the
River Ister near unto the Gepaedes: and pillaged likewise Dalmatia, and
Illyrium, to Epidamnus; leading the People Captive: of whom if any chanced to
run away, and get home, these Lombards being in league with us, freely ranging
in the Roman Provinces, and discovering any of these Fugitives, laid hold of
them as their Slaves, and haling them from their Parents, led them back with
them without any opposition. The Herulians also had given them by the Emperor
places in Dacia, near the City of Singidon where now they inhabit, and from
thence overrun and spoil Illyrium and Thrace: Some of them turned Roman
Soldiers, and were rancked with the Confederates. And these Herulian
Ambassadors, when they come to Constantinople, receive their full Pensions,
without much attendance, notwithstanding they ransack daily the Roman Subjects.
And thus all these Barbarians shared among them the spoil of the Empire.

Not long after the Gepaedes, and Lombards, being Neighbors, became Enemies,
and a day was appointed for a pitch-field between them. The Lombards inferior
in numbers, and holding themselves to be over-matcht, resolved to invite the
Romans to aid them in the Battle; the Gepaedes also having truce with us,
were desirous the Romans would join with them, or stand neutrall: And both of
them sent Ambassadors to Justinian for aid. Thorisin was then Prince of the
Gepaedes, and Audouin of the Lombards. The Emperor heard their Propositions,
not together, but severally. The Lombards having first access, spoke thus.

Great Emperor, we are amazed at the impertinency of these Gepaedes; who
having acted so many great wrongs upon your Dominions, come here to offer the
foulest scorn that can be, in thinking you easy to be deceived, and so coming
to make use of your simplicity. But we desire you Sir, to consider their
intentions in this friendship; so will you deal the more securely for your
Empire, and judge more safely of the Future by what is past. If their
ingratitude had been shown only to other Nations, you might expect from us long
discourses, and foreign testimonies to convince them thereof. But you have
the experiment now even in your own selves. The Goths formerly held all Dacia
tributary, whom the Gepaedes dwelling on the further side of the Ister so
feared, that they never durst attempt to pass over the River. But being in
truce with the Romans, and their great Friends, and in that Title receiving
large yearly Pensions, as well from former Emperors, as your self; what
Services have they done you for the same? They can allege not one. When they
knew not how to wrong you, their disability, not good intent, kept them quiet.
Beyond the Ister you would not meddle, and from this side the fear of the
Goths restrained them. And can disability be called gratitude, or good nature?
Can a firm Friend be known, while he wants power to transgress? No Sir, It is
a man's power only that expresses his nature and intentions, good or bad; his
ability to do what he list, laying his disposition to the public view. For
these Gepaedes no sooner saw the Goths gone out of Dacia, and you busy with
your Enemies, but the wicked wretches intruded every where upon your
territories. Their baseness herein what words can express? Have they not
despised the Roman Empire? broken the sacred Laws of Truces, put scorns upon
their Benefactors, and violated that Empire, whose Slaves they would be proud
to be, if you had any leisure for them. They hold Syrmium, and vaunt all Dacia
to be theirs; in what War having been ever victorious, either for you, with
you, or against you? or of what Battle having made that Province the prize?
Nay, being ancient Mercenaries, and receiving your Moneys, as has been said.
Then, a more lewd proceeding then this Embassage of theirs was never. Now when
they see us quarrelling with them, they have the face to come to
Constantinople, and to the Emperors presence, whom they have so much abused;
and peradventure in their abundant impudence will entreat your aid against
us, who have showed our selves so affectionate to you. If they come to restore
what they have unjustly intruded into, you must impute it to the Lombards, the
chief Causers of their repentance; a constrained fear of whom, has put on
them this form of gratitude: And if you receive the benefit, you must thank
those who made the doing it necessary. But if now neither they will part with
what belongs not to them, what an excess of ill nature is this? Let this
suffice, O Emperor, to be spoken in a Barbarian simplicity, with words not
reaching the matter. And do you, Sir, weigh well, what has been uttered more
scantly then the occasion requires; and do that which may be best for the
Romans, and your own Lombards; considering also, that you shall do well to
join with us, who are of the same Orthodoxall Religion; and to oppose these,
being Arians. The Lombards so spoke, and the next day the Gepaedes Ambassadors
were brought to the Emperor, and said in this manner. It is right and fit, O
Emperor, for men demanding aides, first to show, that they ask things
reasonable and just, and good for those who are to aid them, and so to speak
what concerns their Embassage. It is plain therefore, that we are wronged by
the Lombards, in that we have endeavored to end our differences in a course of
justice; and we striving to have a legal way, cannot be said to use violence.
And that the Gepaedes exceed the Lombards in multitude and goodness of men,
what need many words to them that know it? And we think no wise man will run
into evident danger, by siding with the weaker, when he may get a Victory by
joining with the stronger. The Gepaedes moreover will assist you against your
Enemies, upon obligation of gratitude for what you now shall do for them, and
with the greatness of their power are likely to make you Masters of your Foes.
Consider also, that the Lombards are but lately in amity with you; but the
Gepaedes are of your ancient acquaintance and alliance; and Friend-ship grown
with time is not easily dissolved. It is good for you therefore to make us your
Confederates, being both powerful, and firm to you. These just reasons may
draw you to this Confederacy; but see the dispositions of these Lombards. Being
entreated to end the quarrel legally, by no means they will consent, out of a
groundless overweening. But the War being ready for a Battle, now they
shrink, being conscious of their own weakness, and fly to you, importuning you
without reason to fight for them. And these Thieves allege, to provoke you to
a War, our holding Syrmium, and some other places in Dacia: Whereas in your
Empire are so many Cities and Countries, that you seek for men upon whom to
bestow some of them to dwell in. To the Francks, to the Herulians, and these
Lombards you have given so many Towns and proportions of Land, that they
cannot be numbered. And we being bold in your Friend-ship and Favor, have done
what your self would have to be done. And whosoever has a mind to part with a
thing, esteems him the worthier man, who from a free Spirit is aforehand, and
of himself takes the benefit, them him that gets it as a courtesy; if the
Giver set the valuation of the thing so, as not to insult upon the Receiver;
but as being bold upon him, as of an assured Friend: Which is the case of the
Gepaedes with the Romans. And which you taking into consideration, we desire
you in the first place to join your powers to ours against the Lombards,
according to the Leagues with us; and if not, to stand neutrall. By thus
advising you shall do justly, and expediently for the Roman Empire.

CHAP. XIX.
BUT Justinian after a long consultation herein, dismissed the Gepaedes with a
refusal, and swore a League with the Lombards; And he sent them 10000. Horse
under Constantianus, Buzes and Aratius, assisted by John lately come out of
Italy, who by the Emperors direction was to return into Italy with his Troops,
so soon as the Battle with the Gepaedes was fought. There were also with them
1500. Herulians, commanded by Philimuth and others. The rest of the Herulian
Forces being 3000. and lately revolted from the Romans (as I have said
formerly) were on the part of the Gepaedes. Some of these led by Aordus their
Princes Brother, a party of the Romans marching to the aid of the Lombards
met, routed them, and killed Aordus, and many more. But the Gepaedes
understanding the Roman Army to be near, compounded the quarrel with the
Lombards, and a Truce was concluded without the Romans; who being thereof
advertised, were troubled, being not able to go on, nor to return back: and
they feared least the Gepaedes and Herulians should make a joint in-road into
Illyrium, and spoil it. So they lay still, and advertised the Emperor. Thus
much by way of digression, concerning these ocurrents.

But Belisarius was now returning to Constantinople, with no honor. In five
years space he never marched up into the land of Italy, made no expedition, but
was all the while in a perpetual flight, sailing from one strong Sea-Town to
another, which gave the Enemy means to captivate Rome, and all the rest. He
abandoned Perusia, the chief City of Tuscany, which was taken by assault while
he was in his way home. Being come to Constantinople, and now grown extreme
rich, and much respected for his former Victories, he made his continual abode
there. Before his Voyage into Africa, God gave him a clear presage of his good
Fortunes. He had Land in Panteichion, the Suburb of Constantinople, right over
against the City; where immediately before his expedition against Gelimer, and
Africa, his Vines were very full taken, and many Vessels were silled with the
Wine thereof, which had their bottomes buried in the ground, and their tops
fast closed with Clay in the Wine-Cellar. Eight months after the Wine workt out
of the Vessels, forcing out the Clay, and made the Cellar a puddle. The
Servants wondered at it, filled many Flaggons with it, and stopped up the
Vessels again, and concealed the Accident. But the same happening often, they
acquainted their Master with it; and he showed it to diverse of his Friends, who
divined from thence much happiness to be coming to his House. This thus
happened to Belisarius. But now Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, and the Italians at
Court being many, and of good quality, besought the Emperor to vindicate Italy
with all his power. Above all Gothigus pressed him, being a Patrician, and late
Consul, and newly arrived at Constantinople for this purpose. The Emperor
promised to take care of Italy, but he spent the most of his time about the
Christians Controversies, endeavoring to settle the same.

During this War Ildiges, a Lombard, came with forces as far as to Venetia,
upon this occasion. Vaces, late Prince of the Lombards, had Risiulphus his
Brothers Son, who by the Law was to succeed him; but Vaces plotting the
Succession for his own Son, charged Risiulphus with some groundless Crime, and
banished him. Risiulphus fled to the Varnians, leaving two Sons behind him:
These Barbarians Vaces hired to kill Risiulpus; and one of his two Sons dyed:
but Ildeges, the other, fled to the Slavonians. Not long after Vaces dyed, and
the Government came to Valdarus, his Son; who being a Child, Audovin was made
his Protector, and attaining thereby to great power, he got the absolute
Government to himself: And shortly after the Child dyed. When the Lombards and
Gepaedes were in War, Ildiges brought to the Gepaedes such Lombards as followed
him; and many Slavonians, hoping that the Gepaedes would restore him to the
Government. But when the Truce was made, Audouin demanded Ildiges of the
Gepaedes, now his Friends. They would not betray him, but they bad him be gone,
and save himself. He with his own followers and some few Gepaedes went again
to the Slavonians, and from thence marched toward Totilas with about 6000. men;
And in Venetia meeting Romans led by Lazarus, he killed many of them; yet would
not join with the Goths, but passed the Ister again, and retired to the
Slavonians. About the same time also Ilauf, one of the Lifeguard to
Belisarius, and Valiant, being left in Italy, revolted to Totilas, who sent him
immediately with a Navy, and Forces into Dalmatia. He at Monecurus, a Town
upon the Sea near Salonae, at first was familiar with the Townes-men, as a
Roman, and appertaining to Belisarius: But suddenly he put them all to the
Sword, and sacked the Town. The like he did at Laureata, a Castle upon the Sea
Coast. Claudianus, Governor of Salonae, sent Forces against him in Pinnaces;
who at Laureata fought with the Enemy, and had the worse, ran away, and left
their Pinnaces in the Haven; which Ilauf took, together with other Ships laden
with Corn and Provisions; and having killed and spoiled all they found, he
returned to Totilas: When the Winter ended, and the 14. year of this War,
written by Procopius.

Afterward Totilas with his whole Army besieged Rome, Incipit Annus 15. bell.
Goth. in ann. 23. Justiniani and An. Dom. 549.
where Belisarius had left three thousand of his best men under Diogenes, one
of his Lifeguard, a discreet man, and a good Soldier. And the siege lasted
long; the besieged with the advantage of their valor matching the whole Goths
Army: Diogenes also diligently attending his Guards, and by sowing corn within
the Walls, preventing want of Victual; and valiantly repelling the many
assaults of the Goths, who being masters of Portus, absolutely blockt up Rome.
Justinian also ( Belisarius being returned to Constantinople) intended to send
another General with an Army; which if he had done, he had certainly vanquished
the Goths; Rome being in his obedience, and having an Army there to join with
his Succors from Constantinople. First he commanded Liberius, a Patrician, to
be in readiness; then other business intervening, he grew cold. After a long
time spent in the siege of Rome, some Isaurians, who guarded Saint Paul's Gate,
discontented for want of pay for many years, and seeing the advancement of
their Countrymen, who formerly betrayed Rome to the Goths, and the wealth they
had gotten, came to a secret conference with Totilas, and agreed at a day
assigned to betray the City to him. At the day Totilas launched into the Tiber,
about the first watch of the night, two small Vessels with Trumpetters aboard;
whom he directed, having rowed up near the City walls, to sound their Trumpets.
Himself closely put his Army in readiness near unto Saint Paul's Gate; and to
prevent the Romans slipping away to Centumcellae (the only Fortress they had
left thereabout) he laid ambushes upon the way, to cut them off as they fled.

CHAP. XX.
THEY in the small Vessels being come near to Rome, sounded their Trumpets, as
they were directed: wherewith the Romans amazed, suddenly in fear and tumult
left each man his Guard, and ran to succor there, where they suspected the
Enemy would assault. Only the Isaurian Traitors continued upon their Guard,
opened the Gate, and received in the Enemy. Much slaughter there was; and many
ran out at other Gates, and in their way to Centumcellae fell upon the Enemies
ambushes, and were cut in pieces. Some few hardly escaped; and Diogenes
himself, after receiving a hurt. Paulus a Cilician, who had at first commanded
Belisarius his Retinue, and now commanded a Party of Horse, had the guarding of
Rome committed to him with Diogenes; and the City being taken, ran with four
hundred Horse to Adrians Tomb, and possessed the Bridge leading to Saint Peter's
Church. The Goths Army at break of day gave on upon these men; whom the Romans
sustained, had the better, and killed many, being crowded in a narrow place.
Totilas hereupon stayed the fight, and besieged them, thinking to take them by
Famine. Paul and his four hundred endured that day, and all night without
eating. The next day they thought of feeding on their Horses, but being loath
to meddle with such uncouth food (though much pincht with hunger) late in the
evening they fell to debate it, and exhorted one another valiantly rather to
end their lives by an honorable death; charging the Enemy suddenly, and
killing as many as they could: So they embraced and kissed one another, as
being instantly all to perish. Totilas was afraid of men resolute to dye,
least dispairing of their own safety, they might do some desperate mischeife;
and he sent to them, of two Propositions to choose, either to quit their Horses
and Arms, and to swear never more to serve against the Goths, and so to
return to Constantinople; or keeping what they had, to serve with the Goths in
equal condition. The Romans glad of the Proposition, at first chose to go to
Constantinople; but afterward, as ashamed to march away on foot, and unarmed,
and fearing to be cut off by ambushes in their way, murmuring also for their
many years arreares owing to them by the Roman Treasury, they joined with the
Goths Army. Paul only, and one Minds, an Isaurian, besought Totilas to send
them to Constantinople, having Wives and Children in their Countries, without
whom they could not live. Whom Totilas commended for dealing plainly, and gave
them provision for their journey, and a Convoy. The rest of the Army being in
Churches about three hundred, took assurances and yielded to Totilas. Who would
not now demolish any more of Rome, nor quit it, but intended to plant there
Goths and Romans together, both Senators and others, upon this occasion. He had
lately demanded of the King of the Francks his Daughter in marriage; who
rejected the motion, saying, That he neither was, nor ever would be King of
Italy, having taken Rome, but not able to keep it, having demolished part, and
quitted the rest to his Enemies. So that now he brought in Provisions, and
commanded to re-edifie what was beaten down at his first taking of Rome. And
he sent for the Roman Senators, and other Romans confined in Campania; held the
solemnity of the Circensian Games, and then prepared for a Voyage into Sicily:
He put in readiness four hundred small Vessels for a Sea Fight, and many great
Ships sent out of the East by the Emperor, and taken by him with their men and
ladings. He sent also Stephanus a Roman his Ambassador to the Emperor,
desiring Truce, upon condition, that the Goths should serve him against any
other Nation. But Justinian suffered not the Ambassador to come into his
presence, nor regarded the Proposition: Which Totilas understanding, prepared
first to attempt Centumcellae, and then to go into Sicily. Diogenes commanded
the Garrison there, being reasonably strong. The Goths besieged it, and Totilas
sent to Diogenes, either to put it to a Battle instantly, there being no hope
of succors from the Emperor; of whose disability to continue War with the
Goths, the success at Rome, after so long space given, was a sufficient
Argument; or else to choose either to join with the Goths Army upon equal
terms, or to quit Centumcellae, and to go safe to Constantinople. Diogenes
and the Romans refused the Battle, neither would mingle with the Goths Army,
nor live without their Wives and Children; And choosing to be sent to the
Emperor, they said, they had yet no honest excuse to surrender the Town; and
therefore desired time to signify their Estate to the Emperor, that receiving
no succor from him, they might render the Town, and be gone, not without some
pretense. Totilas approving this, a day was assigned, and 30. Hostages were
given on both sides; and the Goths raised the Siege and went for Sicily. Before
they passed the straits there, they attempted Rhegium, where the Garrison was
commanded by Thurimuth and Himerius, left by Belisarius; who having many good
men within, kept off the Enemy assaulting, and sallying had the better; but
being inferior in numbers, they afterward lay still. Totilas blockt up the
Town with part of his Army, hoping in time to take it for want of Victual. He
sent also Forces, who took the Castle of Tarentum: And at the same time the
Goths in Picenia had Ariminum betrayed to them. Justinias hereof advertised,
made Germanus his Brothers Son, absolute General in the War against the
Goths, commanding him to be in readiness. The Goths in Italy were much
troubled at the report of it, ( Germanus being very famous in the World.) And
the Romans, especially the Army, getting heart and hope, held out more firmly
against their toiles and dangers. But the Emperor (I know not why) changed his
mind, and appointed Liberius a Citizen of Rome for the Service; who made
himself ready, add was expected instantly to sail away with the Army. But the
Emperor changed again, so that he too staid at home. Then also Verus having
gotten together many of the valiantest Soldiers, had a Battle with the Goths
in Picenia, not far from Ravenna; wherein after the loss of many, and doing
valiantly, himself was slain.

CHAP. XXI.
ABOUT this time a party of some three thousand Slavonians came over the River
Ister, none opposing them, and past the river of Eurus: then they severed
eighteen hundred in one party, and the rest in another. The Roman commanders in
Illyrium, and Thrace fought with them severally, and were beaten, with loss of
some men, the rest shamefully running away, though the Barbarians were far the
fewer. They incountred also Asbades, who had been of the Emperors Lifeguard,
and advanced to the place of a Candidate, and who commanded now troops of horse
anciently Garrisoned in Tzurulum, a Castle of Thrace, good men. Him the
Slavonians defeated, and killed most of his men shamefully running away: They
took him prisoner, and soon after cut thongs from the skin of his back, and
threw him into a flame of fire: Then without control they pillaged all
Thrace, and Illyrium, and took many castles, having never before assaulted a
wall, nor presumed to come to an open field. They never durst before this time
forage the Roman Territory, nor ever past the Ister before. But after their
victory against Asbades, they pillaged all to the Sea, and took Topirum, the
first Sea Town of Thrace, by assault, having a Garrison in it, being distant
twelve days journey from Constantinople. They took it thus. The most of them
hid themselves in the fastnesses near the Town; and some few alarmed the Romans
upon the battlements; who thinking them no more then they saw, sallied: The
Barbarians seemed afraid, and ran away; and the Romans being far from the
Walls, the Ambushes rose, and put themselves between them and the Town: and the
flyers turning head, the Romans were charged on all sides, and all cut in
pieces.

The inhabitants deprived of the Soldiers, yet resisted the Enemies assault,
as they could, pouring down boiling oil and pitch, and throwing down great
stones, that they had almost beat off the danger: But the Barbarians with a
multitude of arrows forced them from the battlements, and with their scaling
ladders took the City by assault. They killed fifteen thousand men in it, and
sacked it. The women and children they made slaves, having formerly spared no
age nor sex but killing still all they met from the time they entered Roman
Land. So that all Thrace and Illyrium was scattered with dead bodies unburied;
they killed not the people with Swords nor Lances, nor in any usual manner;
but they pitched stakes into the Ground with sharp ends upward, and set the poor
wretches upon the same at their fundaments; then forced them downwards, and the
stakes up into their Entrails. They stuck into the Ground also four posts, to
which they tied their prisoners hands and feet then knocked their heads with
clubs, and killed them like so many Dogs, or Snakes. Others they shut up in
houses with such cattle as they could not drive home into their country, and
without mercy burned them together. In the end, being drunck with abundance of
blood, both the parties of these Slavonians were pleased to make prisoners of
those they met, and so returned home with innumerable captives.

In the mean time the Goths assaulting Rhegium, were bravely beaten off by the
Garrison, Thurimuth doing very valiantly. Totilas understanding that their
victual grew scarce, left part of his army to block it from provisions, and so
to compel the Garrison to yield in time; and himself crossed the straits into
Sicily, and set upon Messina. Domentiolus the commander, sisters Son to Buzes,
sallied, and had not the worse in fight; but afterward kept themselves quiet
within the walls, and the Goths plundered all Sicily, none resisting them. In
the mean time Thurimuth and Himerius in Rhegium, (when their victual was all
gone) yielded themselves and the Castle by composition to the Enemy. The
Emperor, at the news of these successes, gathered a fleet, and put an army
aboard of foot, under Liberius, whom he required to sail with speed for Sicily,
and to save the Island. But Liberius being an extreme old man, and no soldier,
the Emperor repented, and sent Artabanes for Sicily, remitting his crimes, and
making him General of Thrace. He gave him no great forces, but directed him to
command the fleet with Liberius. Magistrum militum pei Th^aciam, An ordnary
officer: his employment now was for the time only.
Afterward he sent to call home Liberius, and again made his Nephew Germanus
absolute General against the Goths, giving him no great army; but furnishing
money for him to raise an Army of good importance in Thrace and Illyrium, and
from thence to march into Italy. He commanded Philimuth, Leader of the
Herulians, to accompany him into Italy, and John, Vitalianus his Nephew, who
had married the daughter of Germanus, and was General of Illyrium, where then
he resided.

Germanus was ambitious to get the honor of vanquishing, the Goths and the
good fortune to recover both Afric and Italy to the Empire. In Africa where
Stotzas had usurped, he overcame him and the mutiners unexpectedly, and reduced
the Province as it is in my former relations. And Italy being now reduced to
the Estate I have described, he desired the Glory of recovering that also. His
wife Passara being long since deceased, he married Mattasuntha, Daughter of
Amalasuntha, the daughter of Theoderick, her former husband Vitigis being
lately dead. He hoped that the Goths would be ashamed to lift their arms
against this Lady, remembering the Reigns of Theoderick and Atalarick. Moreover
freely disbursing the Emperors money, and his own more, he levied quickly, and
unexpectedly a very gallant army. The best Roman Soldiers left their ordinary
commanders (whose Lanciers and Targettiers they were) and followed Germanus;
together with many Constantinopolitans, Thracians, and Illyrians; wherein
Justinus and Justinianus his Sons used much care and diligence. He picked the
best out of the horse Troops, garrisoned in Thrace, and many Barbarians about
the Ister were drawn by the same of Germanus, and brought much money with them,
and joined with the Roman army. The Prince of the Lombards promised to send him
a thousand men well armed. Report as in all human things, made all this in
Italy much more, and the Goths were afraid, and troubled withal to make war
now against the posterity of Theoderick: And the Roman soldiers there, sent to
signify to Germanus, that so soon as they saw him in Italy, and his army
entrenched, they would immediately join with him. The remainder also of the
Emperors army in Ravenna, and some other Towns, took courage, and resolved to
guard their Towns firmly for the Emperor. Nay, those who had been beaten with
Verus and others, and went now straggling, hearing that Germanus was upon his
way, they rallied themselves in Istria, and staid for the said army. Totilas
then at the day assigned, sent to Diogenes to surrender Centumcellae, according
to the capitulation. Diogenes answered that he had no power now, Germanus being
declared absolute General, and not far off with his army; and he desired him
to send him his hostages, and he would restore those given by the Goths, and so
he dismissed the messenger, and carefully guarded the town, expecting Germanus
and his army. And thus the winter ended, and the 15 year of this war, written
by Procopius.

While Germanus was drawing his army together, and exercising his Troops at
Sardice, Incipit annus 16 bell. Goth. in an. 24 Juniani and ann. dom. 550.
a City in Illyrium, and making a powerful preparation for this war, a Troop
of Slavonians, greater then ever formerly, past the Ister into the Roman
territory, and came to Naysum: The Romans took some few straglers of them,
bound them, and asked them upon what design these Slavonians were come over the
River? They said it was to sack Thessalonica, and the Towns about it. The
Emperor upon this advertizement, wrote to Germanus to defer his Journey into
Italy, and to defend Thessalonica, and to beat away the Slavonians; who grew
afraid when they heard from their prisoners that Germanus upon this staid still
at Sardice, whose fame was great among all the Barbarians upon this occasion.
During the Reign of Justine, his great Uncle, the Antians, who inhabit next
unto the Slavonians, past the Ister, and invaded the Roman territories with a
great army. Germanus was lately made General of Thrace, and in a battle with
these Enemies killed them almost all, which got him a great reputation,
especially among these people. So that fearing him now, and supposing him to
have a very great army, as being sent against the Goths, they forbear their
intents against Thessalonica, and went over the mountains of Illyrium into
Dalmatia, not daring to appear in the Champian. And Germanus despising them,
directed his army to be in readiness, within three days, to begin the journey
into Italy; but he suddenly fell into a sickness, which made an end of him.
And so was Germanus quickly lost; a virtuous man and very valiant; both an
excellent, General, and a daring Soldier. In peace and prosperity a constant
observer of Laws and good Government: He was a most upright Judge, and to men
in need he lent great Sums, without so much as talking of any Interest. In the
Palace and in the Forum severe and stern, but at home and at his Table
pleasant, free, and gracious, where he had power: he prevented the Errors and
innovations of the Emperors Court: And he never consented nor conversed with
the mutinous Veneti, and Prasini, Constantinople, though many great men ran
into that absurdity. The Emperor was much grieved at this sudden. Accident,
and commanded John Vitalianus his Sisters Son, with Justinianus, one of the
Sons of Germanus, to lead the Army into Italy. They went into Dalmatia, meaning
to winter at Salonae, it being not possible in that season to compass the
Jonian Gulf into Italy; and they wanted Ships to cross it.

CHAP. XXII.
LIBERIVS, who heard nothing of these alterations, put in at Syracuse, besieged
by the Enemy. He forced his way into the Haven, and put his Army into the City.
Artabanes also at Cephalenia, hearing how the Fleet with Liberius was gone for
Sicily, crossed the Adriatique Sea thither-ward; and near the Coast of Calabria,
met with a great storm full in his teeth, which so scattered the Fleet, that he
thought most of his Ships to be cast upon that Coast, and in the hands of the
Enemy. But a strong gale turned them back into Peloponesus, and some were cast
away, others escaped. The Ship wherein Artabanes was, lost her main Mast, and
being abandoned to the Tide, and Waves, and in much danger, put in at the
Island of Malta, and by this means he was unexpectedly preserved. But Liberius
being not in case to sally, nor fight with the Enemy, and the Victual in
Syracuse failing, stole from thence into Panormus. Totilas in the mean time
ransackt all Sicily, carried away great quantities of Corn, Horses, and
Cattle, and putting the same aboard his Ships, and the whole wealth of the
Island, returned suddenly into Italy upon this motive. He had made one Spinus
of Spoletum his Assessor, who residing in Catana, an unfortified Town, was
taken by the Romans. Totilas desirous to ransom him, offered for him an
eminent Roman Lady; but they refused to take a woman in exchange for a man,
holding the Dignity of Quaestor. Spinus, fearing to perish among the Romans,
promised them for his liberty to persuade Totilas to leave Sicily, and to
transport his Army into Italy. They upon his Oath for true performance,
restored him to the Goths, and accepted of the Lady. He being come to Totilas,
said; That the Goths further stay in Sicily was to no purpose, having already
pillaged the Island: That he understood for certain among the Enemy, that
Germanus was dead; and that John his Son-in-Law, and Justinianus his Son were
in Dalmatia with the Army, levied by Germanus, and immediately to come into
Liguria, who might take all the Goths Wives and Children Prisoners, and pillage
their Goods; whom they should do well to oppose, by wintring securely at home,
and if they vanquish them, they shall with more ease fall again in the next
Spring upon Sicily, not expecting hostility. Totilas upon this advise left
Garrisons in four strong Towns, and past into Italy with all his Booty.

John and the Emperors Army meant to winter at Salonae, and from thence with
the first of the Spring to march by Land to Ravenna. But the Slavonians, both
those who formerly forraged the Empire, and others, spoiled again with full
liberty the Provinces. Some suspected Totilas to have hired them, to divert the
Emperor with new business from putting the Gothic War into a better order.
But whether to gratify Totilas, or otherwise, certainly these Slavonians did
desperate mischiefs in Europe, dividing themselves into three parties, and not
sacking Towns, but wintring in them, as in some Province of their own, and
fearing no Enemy. The Emperor sent at last an Army against them, under
Constantianus, Aratius, Nazares, and Justinus the Son of Germanus, and John
Phagas, and other Captains; and made Scholasticus an Eunuch of his Palace,
Commander in chief. This Army met one of the Barbarian parties about
Adrianopolis in the mid-land of Thrace, five days journey from Constantinople.
The Barbarians being clogged with an innumerable booty of men, Cattle; and
other Wealth, durst not come on; And the Romans, though eager to fight,
dissembled it. The Slavonians were encamped up on a Mountain, and the Romans in
the plain; who there besieged them; till the Soldiers murmuring at their
Generals, that they had plenty of Provisions themselves, while the Common
Soldier wanted Food, and so they delayed to fight with the Enemy; the Generals
were constrained to come to a fight: which was hotly fought; But the Romans
were beaten, and many of their best men slain; and the Generals escaped
narrowly with the rest. The Ensign of Constantianus the Slavonians took. And
now despising the Roman Army, they went on, and forraged the Province called
Astica, or Suburbuna, which was never forraged before; So that they found great
Booty in it. They pillaged in many places of the Country, and came up to the
Long walls, a days journey from Constantinople. But the Romans fought
afterward with part of them, routed them, and after much slaughter rescued
great numbers of Roman Captives, and recovered the Ensign of Constantianus.
The rest with the remainder of their Booty went home-ward.

Finis Lib. 3. Bell. Goth.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE GOTHIC WAR.
Chap. I. THIS Book is a supplement of the former History. Pontus Euxinus.
Honey bitter in Trapesond. The River Boas takes the name of Acampsis in the
Sea. Absarus, or Apsyrtus, Christians. Scunia, Suania The Phasis: Jason's
fleece. Chap. II. Mount Caucasus. The Hunnes about it. The Alans. Portae
Caspiae. No Amazons, but Hunnish wives, accompanying their husbands to war. The
Abasgians cruel covetous Kings; they turn Christians. The Bruchians,
Zecchians, Sagines. Sebastopolis, and Pityuntium demolished. Gothi Tetraxitae
anciently Christians: Justinian sends them a Bishop, as to the Abasgians. Their
first Issue upon the Empire by occasion of hunting a stagg. Chap. III. The
Caturgurian Hunnes join with the Goths called Tetraxites, to infest the
Empire. The description from the Cimmerian straits to the mouth of the River
Ister. Phasis, not Tanais, divides Europe and Asia. The Lake of Maeotis not the
Mother of the Euxine Sea. Chap. IV. Cosroes desires to have Lazica, from thence
to invade the Romans of Europe by land. A battle in Lazica, where Dagisthaeus
defeats the Persian army, with the death of Chorsanes their Cenerall. Chap. V.
The revolt of the Abasgians, Bessas is made General of Armenia. Sends John
Guzes against the Abasgians; who subdues them, Apsilia revolts, and is reduced
by John Guzes. Chap. VI. Anatozadus punished by Chosroes his Father with
deformity. Tribunus an honest Phifytian. Isdigunas the proud Persian is again
sent Ambassador. The siege of Petra: And of the leather Rams devised by
Sabirian Hunnes. Chap. VII. Petra is taken by the valor and counsel of
Bessas, and John Guzes, and by an accident of fire. The obstinate valor of the
Persians in the Cittadell, where all are consumed. Bessas by this recovers his
lost Reputation at Rome. Chap. VIII. Mermeroes seizes upon Lazica with an army,
through the negligence and Avarice of Bessas. He frights away a Roman army, and
sits down before Archaeopolis: The Romans are persuaded by their Commanders to
sally. Chap. IX. The Romans by a brave sally beat the Persians from
Archaeopolis, and kill 4000 men. The Castle of C^taesis. Justinian buys
another five years peace by making the Romans in a manner Tributaries.
Isdigunas, the Persian Ambassador, has excessive presents. Extraordinary heats
in the Winter. Chap. X. Uchimerium is betrayed to Mermeroes, when is absolute
Master of the Field; and invites Gubazes to yield, who refuses. Silk Worms are
brought first by Monks out of India in their Bags. Mermeroes is reinforced in
Lazica, but does nothing. Chap. XI. Africa quiet. A Panick fear makes a Truce
between the Gepaedes and Lombards. Caturgurian Hunnes invade the Empire; And
the Uturgurians their Country, which draws them home; and some of them are
planted in the Empire, which the Uturgurians take ill. Chap. XII. Of the
Brittians, and Varnians, who were vanquished in Fight, and their King taken
Prisoner by a valiant Maid, whom he married. A Fable of the transporting Souls
into Brittia. I suppose this Brittia to be that peninsule of Cimbrica
Chersonesus, where the Angles did inhabit before their invading Brittany. Chap.
XIII. Narses is made General against the Goths, which was presaged by an Ox.
Totilas repents his defacing Rome. Of the Ship of Aenaeas, then a Monument in
Rome. Corcyra is Phaeacia. The Ship of Ulisses, and that placed by Agamemnon at
Geraestum. Chap. XIV. The Goths plunder Corcyra, and Epirus. The Sea Fight at
Ancona, and Victory of John. Sicily is recovered by Artabanes. Justinian will
hear of no accord with the Goths. Chap. XV. Theobald, the Son of Theodebert,
King of the Francks, will not abandon the Goths. The Goths take Corsica, and
Sardinia. The Slavonians spoil the Empire. Justinian has a double treaty
with the Lombards, and Gepaedes. Chap. XVI. Great Earthquakes in Greece. The
Siege of Crotona is raised. Narses marches from Salonae into Italy, and comes
to Ravenna His gallant Army, and his own Virtue is described. The Fancks
refuse his Army passage through Venetia; so he resolves to march by the Italian
Coast, having Boats to make Bridges for his men to pass. Chap. XVII. A
Digression of Ildigisal a Lombard, basely murdered, where they fled for
refuge. Usdrilas, after his bragging Letter, is slain; and Narses passes the
River at Ariminum, to meet Totilas. Chap. XVIII. The Armies of Totilas and
Narses meet. Gallant Service done by 50. Romans, defending a Hill. The
Captains make Speeches to their Soldiers, and order the Battle. Chap. XIX.
Cocas is slain in Duel by a Roman. Totilas after some Gllantry, to spin out
the ^ime (his 2000. men he staid for, being come up) baegins the fight, wherein
the Goths are defeated, and Totilas slain. Chap. XX. The Lombards are sent
home. Teias is made King of the Goths. The Vengeance against Ulithus at
Perusia. Rome taken by Dagistthaeus. The Victory of Narses banefull to the
Roman Citizens. Ragnaris breaks his Faith concerning the yiedling of Tarentum,
and is overthrown by Bacurius. Portus, Nepa, Petra-pertusa taken in. The
Francks will join with neither side. Chap. XXI. The Armies prepare to fight.
Of mount Vesuvius, and the torrent of fire there. The Goths fly to Mons
Lactis: but being from thence starved, they give Battle, which lasted two
whole days. The miraculous Valor of Teias, who is slain. And the Goths
compounded for their Lives, and Goods, and to quit Italy.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS of the Emperor JUSTINIAN.
Of the GOTHJCK War, the Fourth BOOK:
CHAP. I.
MY discourse has hitherto been distributed and accommodated to the several
places where the actions were done, and is published throughout the whole Roman
Empire. But now I cannot compile the same in that manner, nor insert into a
History already published succeeding Occurrents; but must write in this Tract
apart, touching these Enemies, and the Persians, what has happened since the
Edition of my History; and so the discourse thereof cannot be but mixed. The
Occurrents until the fourth year of the Quinquenniall Cessation between the
Romans and the Persians, were formerly related. The year following a Persian
Army invaded Lazica, under Chorsanes a Persian, and an experienced Commander,
accompanied with Alans. This Army encamped it self in a Province of Lazica,
named Mucheirisis, by which the River of Phasis runns, not navigable there, but
to be past by Men and Horses; and they entrencht to the right hand of it some
distance off.

But that the Readers may have a clear notion of Lazica, and of the people
about it, and not converse with things obscure to them, like men fighting with
shadows: I have thought it seasonable here to discourse, what kind of people
dwell upon the Euxine Sea; conceiving, that the Ancients who have written
thereof, have not handled it exactly; speaking of Tzanians, whom they make to
border with the Trapezuntians, and name Colchians; and calling the now Lazians
by another name; being in both mistaken. For the Tzanians are high in the Land,
and border upon Armenia, having steep Mountains in the way to it, a vast and
desert Country, deep Torrents, and Hills thick with Wood, and unaccessible
Valleys; all which are between them and the Sea. Nor can the Colchians be other
then the Lazians, seeing they dwell now upon the Phasis. They have only
changed their name, as many other Nations. And since those Writers many ages
have innovated much, by the transplantations of people, and successions of
Princes, and altered their names. All which I am to take notice of, omitting
both fabulous and old obsolete things; as upon what part of the Euxine Sea the
Poets bound Prometheus, (Histories and Fables being different works) but to
set down punctually both names and things notorious in those parts.

This Sea begins at Constantinople, and Chalcedon, and ends in Lazica. Within
it on the right hand is Bithynia; then Honorias, and Paphlagonia, where stand
Heraclea and Amastris, Maritime Towns. Next to them are the Pontick Nations,
to the borders of Trapezond, where are Sinope and Amisus, Sea towns; not far
from Amisus is Themiscyrus, and the River Thermodon, where they say was the
Amazons Camp; of whom more anon. The territory of Trapezond reaches to
Susurmaena, and Rizaeum, which stands upon the coast in the way to Lazica, two
days journey from Trapezond. In all the Territory of that City of Trapezond
the Honey is bitter: To the right hand of these Cities are the Mountains of
Tzanica, beyond which is the Roman Armenia. From those Mountains descends the
River of Boas, through infinite Thickets, and a Woodland Country, into Lazica,
and disimbogues into the Euxine Sea; then it quits the name of Boas, and takes
that of Acampsis, because it bends not, nor yields to the current of the Sea.
For the stream is so strong and troublous, that running far into the Sea, the
Ships sailing that way keep off at Sea, not able to hold on their course, and
cut thorough that swift stream.

Next to Rizaeum are Mountains dividing Lazica from Roman Land, and inhabited
by free Nations, and a Village called Athens; not so called from a Colony of
Athenians (as some suppose) but from Athenaea, in ancient time Lady of that
Country, whose Tomb remains to this day. Next to Athens is Archabis, and
Apsarus an ancient City, three days journey from Rizaeum, in old time named
Apsyrtus, from a man of that name slain by the plots of Medea and Jason near
unto that place; but many ages and successions of men have corrupted the memory
of that act, and changed the name into Absarus; on the East side of which City
stands yet the Tomb of that Apsyrtus. It was anciently very populous, and had
excellent Walls, and a Circus, and a Theater, and such other Ornaments of a
great City. But of those antiquities nothing now remains but the Pavements: By
this it appears strange, that any should affirm that the Colchians were
borderers to the Trapazuntians. For so may Jason be thought not to have fled
home into Greece with Medea and the Golden fleece, but to have gone the quite
contrary way to the Phasis and furthest Barbarians. In the Reign of Tra^an
some say a Roman Legion was there garrisoned even to Lazica, and Suania. But
now the Inhabitants are subject neither to the Roman Emperor, nor King of
Lazica: But only that being Christians, the Bishops of Lazica, appoint them Or
Bishops (...).
Priests. They are in amity with both, and convoy their Ambassadors to each in
small Barks, which they use; but to this hour they will pay tribute to
neither. To the right hand of this Country are steep craggy Mountains, and a
Desert reaching very far: Above it is Persarmenia, and the Roman Armenia,
reaching as far as Iberia. From the said Absarus to the City of Petra, and
Marches of Lazica, is one days journey, where the Euxine Sea ends; which Sea
makes there a half Moon, and the passage crossing the same is about sixty nine
miles.

All behind the end of the Euxine is Lazica, next to which is Scumia, and
Suania, both subject to the Lazians. They have Princes still of their own
Nation; but when any of them dye, the King of Lazica appoints another in his
room. On one side of this Country are the M^s^hians, reaching almost to
Iberia, to which they have been anciently Subjects, and dwell upon the
Mountains, which are not wild nor barren, but abound with all commodities,
and the people are good husbands, especially for Vines. Over this Country hang
very high Mountains, thick with Wood, and hard to be past, extending almost to
the Caucascan. Mountains. Beyond them Eastward is Iberia, reaching to
Persarmenia. Between these Mountains descends the Phasis, springing from Mount
Caucasus, and disimboguing into the middle of the said half Moon at the end of
the Euxine, whereupon some hold that it divides the two Continents, having Asia
on the left hand, and Europe on the right. On Europe side are the Lazians
dwellings, having on the other side no Town nor Fortress but Petra, lately
built by the Romans. The Country people hold that the Golden Fleece was kept
on Europe side, but in my opinion they are mistaken: For Jason had never gotten
away with Medea and the golden Fleece unespyed by Aeetes; if the Kings Palace,
and Houses of the Colchians had not been separated by the River from the place
where the Fleece was kept; which may appear also by the Poems written on that
subject. The Phasis (as I have said) thus enters into the further end of the
Euxine, and at one point of the said half Moon stands Petra on Asia side:
Over against which, on Europe side, is Apsilia, a Country of the Lazians; the
people whereof are Christians, as all the rest before mentioned.

CHAP. II.
ABout Apsilia stands Mount Caucasus, so high, that neither Raines, nor Snowes
touch the top of it, being higher then any Clouds. From the midst to the foot,
it is perpetually covered with the Snow; the foot of this Mountain being as
high as the very ridges of other Mountains: Some parts of the said foot of
Caucasus run out to the West, and Northward, even to Illyrium and Thrace;
other parts of it to the East and Southward, reach to the two straits, which
let in the Hunnish Nations upon the Romans and Persians: The one of the straits
is called Tzur, the other is called the Caspian Gates. The Country extending
from Mount Caucasus to the Caspian Gates the Alans hold, subject to none, but
as Confederates they serve the Persians, against the Romans, and all the World.
Under Mount Caucasus dwell the Sabirian Hunnes, and some other Hunnish Nations.
From hence, they say, issued the Amazons, and made a Camp at Themiscyrus, by
the River of Thermodon; near where now stands the City of Amisus. But now no
Monument is left of any Amazons in the Countries about Mount Caucasus. Strabo
and some others have spent much discourse about them: But they seem to speak
most truly, who think that there was never any such Mannish race of Women; nor
that Nature, in Mount Caucasus only, swerves from its sacred Laws; but that
the Barbarians of those parts, making an expedition against Asia, brought their
Wives with them, whom they left in a Camp near Thermodon: And that themselves
overrunning much of Asia, were encountered, and so defeated, that none escaped
to the Camp; and that there the Wives being put to it by the fear of the
People adjoining, and by their want of Victual, put on men's faces, and armed
themselves with furniture left behind by their Husbands, and with the same
performed some commendable Actions, compelled by necessity, till they were all
slain. This is my Opinion, and that the Amazons were Wives who went to War with
their Husbands; the experiment whereof has happened in our time. And commonly
the addictions which descend to Posterity, are the Images of those which were
before. For the Hunnes, in their in-roads upon the Romans often coming to a
Battle, wherein some of them were slain; and the Romans searching the dead
bodies, have found Women among them. Other Armies of Women were never, neither
infesting Asia nor Europe. Neither was it ever heard that the Caucasian
Mountains had all their men wasted at any time. And so much touching the
Amazons.

Beyond Apsilia, and the other point of the aforesaid half Moon, is Abasgia,
to the Caucasian Mountains. The Abasgians were formerly subject to the
Lazians, and had two Princes of their own Nation; one seated in the West, and
the other toward the East. They did worship, till my time, Groves, and Woods,
and in a Barbarian simplicity esteemed Trees to be Gods. But they suffered much
from the covetousness of their Princes; who took violently from the Parents
such Children as were beautiful, and made them Eunuchs, and sold them to the
Romans at great prices; then killed the Fathers, least they might revenge their
Children^ abusing, and that they might not have suspected Subjects. And thus
the poor Wretches were ruined by the fatal handsomeness of their Children:
And hereby most of the Eunuchs of the Imperial Palace were Abasgians. But in
the now Reign of Justinian all has been changed for the Abasgians to the
milder and more civil. They have received the Christian Religion; And the
Emperor sent Euphratas his Eunuch expressly to admonish their Princes, to force
out no more the virility of humane nature with Iron, and the Abasgians, bold
upon this injunction of the Emperor, have opposed that course; which made it
formerly their greatest fear to be Fathers of handsome Sons. The Emperor also
built for them a Church dedicated to the Mother of God, appointing them Or
Bishops.
Priests, and causing them to be instructed in the Christian rites. They also
deposed both their Princes, and became a free State. Beyond the Abasgians
toward Mount Caucasus are the Bruchians, and the Alamans. Toward the Sea
Coast are the Zecchians, to whom anciently the Roman Emperor gave their King,
but now in nothing they obey the Romans. The Country of the Sagines is next,
wherein formerly the Romans built two Castles upon the Seacoast; Sebastopolis
and Pityus, distant from each other two days journey, and there put the first
Garrison of Soldiers in those parts. Before, the Roman Coho^ts were Garrisoned
by the Seaside, from Trapezond to the Sagines, but then held only these
Castles, where were Garrisons till my time. But Chosroes, King of Persia (the
Lazians having drawn him into Petra) intended to send an Army to surprise those
Castles; and the Romans within them hearing it, burnt them, and threw down the
Walls, and fled to the opposite continent by Sea to Trapezond, whereby they
damnified indeed the Romans, by demolishing those Castles, but they prevented
the Persians from being Masters of the Country; who forthwith went back to
Petra, without doing any thing.

Beyond the Sagines are many Hunnish Nations in a Country called Eulysia,
possessed by those Barbarians in the Maritime and mid-land parts thereof to the
Lake of Maeotis, and River of Tanais, which disembogues into the said Lake, and
the Lake into the Euxine Sea. Anciently the Inhabitants were called Cimmerians,
but now Vturgurians. Beyond whom to the Northward are innumerable races of
Antians: where the Lake begins to disembogue, are the Goths, called Tetraxites,
observers of the Christian Religion, no men more. The Natives call this
disembogure, Tanais, which reaches from Maeotis to the Euxine, and running
along 20. days journey; and they call the wind which blows from thence,
Tanaites. These Goths whether they were Arrians, as the other Gothish Nations,
or otherwise instructed in Christianity, I cannot say, nor do themselves know;
but they profess the same with much simplicity, and without disputes. Lately
they sent four Ambassadors to Justinian, for a Bishop to be given them, as to
the Abasgians: And the Emperor dismissed them with satisfaction in what they
desired. The said Ambassadors in their public audience, expressed no other
cause them that, for fear of the Hunnes: But being admitted privately, they
acquainted the Emperor with what might advantage the Romans (all 'Barbarians
having ever some piques with their Neighbors.) The planting of these
Tetraxites in that Country was thus. Anciently multitudes of Hunnes, then
called Cimmerians, kept their Herds in the same, and were governed by a King.
One of their Kings had two Sons, named Vturgur, and Caturgur, who after their
Fathers decease, divided the Kingdom; and gave their names to their several
Subjects; and they are yet called Vturgurians, and Caturgurians. They have all
the same addictions, and converse not with the Nations dwelling on the other
side of the Lake of Maeotis, and the Cimmerian straits, fearing the passage,
though very easy, because they never had tried it. On the said other side near
unto the shore of the said Lake and straits, were formerly seated the Tetraxite
Goths, and not far from them the Goths, and Visigoths, and Vandales, and all
the other Gothic Nations, anciently named Scythians, as all the other Nations
of those parts, with some difference in some of Sarmatians, Melanclaenians, and
other names. These People have a tradition, if it be true, that some Cimmerian
young men hunting a Stag, it took the water; and that they either eager upon
their sport, or driven by some Spirit, followed the Stage to the opposite
shore: where the same (whatsoever it were) suddenly vanished, as having
appeared to no other end, but to bring a mischief upon the Inhabitants there.
The young men, (they say) though they mist their game, found matter for war
and booty. And returning home told the Cimmerians, how the passage was
fordable; who instantly took arms, and in multitudes past over to the other
side. The Vandales were gone before, and seated in Africa; and the Visigoths
were in Spain. So they fell upon the Goths, who dwelt in the Champian, killed
many, and chased away the rest. Such as escaped past the river Ister with their
wives and children into the Roman territory, where they did much mischief.
Afterward the Emperor planted them in a country of Thrace; and sometimes they
aided the Romans in the quality of Confederates, receiving yearly pensions:
whereby it appears, that the Goths came not as men conquered, but upon the
articles of a League, (The Romans calling Leagues after a war, Foedera.)
Sometime also they made causeless war upon the Romans, till under Theoderick
they removed into Italy.

CHAP. III.
BUt (as I said) the Hunnes having slain many of them, and driven away more,
possessed their country: And the Caturgurians sent for their wives and children,
and are planted there to this day; receiving from the Emperor yearly pensions,
yet passing continually the River Ister, and overrunning the Empire, being
both confederates, and Enemies. The Vturgurians returned home with their
Prince, where still they remain. They past the Cimmerian straits again against
the Goths, wasted, as aforesaid: Who at first stood fenced with their sheilds
against the Enemy in battle being confident in their power, and the strength
of their country: And themselves are the valiantest Barbarians in those parts;
and the straits (where about dwell these Goths) from the Entrance out of the
Lake of Maeotis presently spreads into a Bay, embracing most of those people,
and has one only narrow passage over. The Hunnes meant not to spend much time
there; and the Goths could not hope to hold out long against such a multitude;
so they came to a Capitulation, that the Goths should go over and dwell with
them in the opposite Continent, (where now they are) and be in perpetual
League with the Vturgurians upon equal terms. Thus the Caturgurians hold the
other side of the Lake, and the Vturgurians their former country, never
troubling the Romans; but secluded by many nations, they observe an unwilling
peace. Beyond the Lake, and the River Tanais, the Caturgurian Hunnes have a
large country, all beyond that way, is possessed by the Scythians and Taurians:
part whereof is yet named Taurica, where stood the Temple of Diana, of which
Iphigenia, Agamemnons daughter, was chief Priest. The Armenians say, that that
Temple stood in Celesene, a country adjoining to them; and that the Inhabitants
thereof were then called Scythians; grounding themselves upon that which I
related formerly concerning Orestes, and the city of Comana. Thus many things
happening other-where, or peradventure no where, men are fond to attribute to
their own countries, and are angry if all men yield not to their conceits.

Next to the aforesaid Nations is Bosporus, a maritime city, lately become
subject to the Romans. From Bosporus to Chersone a maritime City also, and
formerly subject to the Romans, all between is possessed by Hunnish nations. Cepi
also, and Phanaguris, two cities, were formerly under the Romans, almost until
our time; but the neighboring Barbarians took, them and utterly ruined them.
From Cherson to the mouth of the Danuby, or Ister, is ten days journey, all
inhabited by Barbarians.

The River Ister springs from the mountains in Gaul, and skirting by Italy,
and descending through Dacia, Illyrium, and Thrace; it disembogues into the
Euxine Sea. From the mouth of the River Ister unto Constantinople all belongs
to the Roman Emperor. This is the whole circuit of the Euxine Sea, from
Chalcedon to Constantinople. How many miles it contains, I cannot say; so many
Barbarians inhabiting the coasts (with whom the Romans have no commerce,
unless it be upon Ambassages) and they who formerly pretend to have taken the
measure of it, not speaking exactly. Certain it is, that from Chalcedon on the
right hand side of the Euxine, to the River Phasis is two and fifty days
journey; and one may conjecture that the other side differs not much.

And here I think it not unseasonable to set down the dispute among the
Learned, concerning the bounds of Asia and Europe. Some think the River of
Tanais does sever these two continents, and allege that division to be
natural. For the Sea coming from the western lands to the Eastern; the Tanais,
from the North crosses between Europe and Asia; and the Egyptian Nile, from the
South between Asia and Afric; others reject this reason as weak, saying, that
the straits of Caliz distinguishes at first these two continents, and that the
Mediterranian still leaves Africa and Asia on the right hand, and Europe on the
left, till it come to the Ends of the Euxine Sea. But the Tanais springs in
Europe, and disembogues into the Lake of Maeotis, and the lake falls into the
Euxine, not into the end of it, nor into the middle; but further. Now all to
the right hand of the Euxine is attributed to Asia. Moreover the River Tanais
springing from the Riphaan mountains, which are confessed by themselves and the
ancients to be in Europe; and the Ocean being far distant from these mountains,
the land behind them on both sides must necessarily be Europ^an. Where then
begins the River Tanais to distinguish the continents? If some River must
divide them, it can be no other then the river Phasis; which descending
directly oposite to the straits of Caliz, cuts between those two continents,;
as those straits also have them on each side of it; opening from the Ocean to
the midland Seas. And the Phasis likewise entering at the end of that part of
the midland Seas, called Pontus Euxinus, manifestly receives from the Sea the
continuation of dividing the Earth. This last opinion challenges antiquity,
as well as the other. For indeed, men possessed of some ancient learning in a
thing, commonly have not the patience to search long touching the truth of it,
nor will endure new opinions. To them ever the ancienter the things are, the
truer they seem, and they deride all of their own time as despicable. But the
question now is not about Intelligences, and Intelligibles, nor such
obscurites; but of a River and a country, which time could neither change nor
conceal: Neither herein is there any thing can hinder a diligent searcher from
finding the truth. And yet Herodotus, an ancient writer L. 4. says, that the
Earth is in one piece; but distinguished in three parts and names, viz, Afric,
Asia, Europe; and that the Egyptian Nile cuts Asia, Africa; and the Colchian
Phasis, Asia, and Europe; and he taking notice also of the other opinion
concerning Tanais, has these words. I cannot guess from whence three names
are given to the Earth, (being one piece) and those of women. Nor why the
bounds thereof are set to be, the Egyptian Nile, and the Colchian Phasis, or
(as some say) the River of ^anais, Lake of Maeotis, and Cimmerian straits. The
Tragedian Aelcylus also in beginning of his Tragedy called (...)calls Phasis,
the boundary of the land of Asia, and Europe. Another opinion there is among
the Learned, that the Lake of Maeotis does make the Euxin^ sea, spreading part
to the right side of it, part to the left; and is therefore called the mother
of the Euxine The ground of their conjectureis, because a current of this sea
comes from the place called Hieron like a River, to Constantinople; and so they
think the Euxine to end at Hieron. But against this down is alleged, that the
Ocean is still the same, and ends no where before it arrive at Lazica; unless
men will argue from variety of names, the one being called Pontus, the other
Thalassa, both signifying the Sea, And the current from Hieron to
Constantinople is no proof, many things happen in Straits of the Sea, not
subject to common reason, and none can express the causes of them. Aristotle
himself, a most learned man, went purposely to Chalchis in Euboea, to consider
the straits called Euripus, and the natural reason, why the tide there comes
sometimes from the west and sometime from the East, according to which all
ships made their course: and if with a tide from the East, the ships steered
on, and then the stream came against them (as often happens there) instantly
they were driven back again, and others came on from the West with the tide,
though they had no wind at all. The Stagirite revolving this long in his mind,
grew weary of his life, and there they say ended it. In the straits likewise
between Italy and Sicily, with a seeming contrariety to reason, a current puts
in from the Adriatique sea, where as the tide is from the ocean and Caliz, and
sudden Eddi^s without any apparent reason cast away many ships. Whence the
Poets fain the swallowing up of ships by Charybdis. And all this happens thus
strangely in Straits, because the tide is contracted in a narrow passage
between two lands, and so falls into those necessities, whereof no reason
appears: And so the coming of a current from Hieron to Constantinople is no
argument that the Mediterranean and Euxine Seas have there their endings. The
said reason has no natural foundation; but there also the narrowness of the
straits must carry it: And the fishermen of that coast find that current to
Constantinople, to be only upon the upper part of the water (which is seen by
us) and toward the bottom quite contrary: Where finking their Drags, they
find them carried up to Hieron by the tide below. But in Lazica the Land beats
the tide directly back again (whereas by all other shores it passes on
side-long) and there only causes it both to stay its course, and to retire; as
if the Creator had there sets its limits. The Sea touching that shore runs no
further, and rises no higher, though from all sides supplied with numberless
Rivers, and some great ones; but back it goes, as being extended to its just
measure, and keeping its bounds and limits in (as it were) by the awful
necessity of some Law, the articles whereof it is careful not to transgress.
These are their arguments, whereof every man may judge as he pleases.

CHAP. IV.
BUT why Chosroes was so desiroust of Lazica, having said something before, I
will now relate what most induced him, having thus described the aforesaid
Countries, and thereby made my discourse more clear. The Persians often had
invaded the Roman Territories under Chosroes, and done mischeifes there not to
be expressed: But they got little by it, but came home still with much loss of
their men and estates, whereupon at their return into Persia they murmured
against Chosroes, calling him the ruiner of their Nation. Once coming home out
of Lazica, and being fallen into some desperate extremities, they were ready to
mutiny; and had slain him, if he had not foreseen it, and warded it, by
gaining the principal of them with fair words. And being desirous to find
some real Apology, he was studious to procure some notable advantage to the
Persian Empire. He attempted the City of Daras, but was repulsed (as I have
said) and he despaired to get it, either by surprise, the Guards being well
kept, or by a siege. There being still in Daras all Provisions laid up in store
for a long time: And besides near it rises a Spring in a Rocky ground, which
makes a pretty River, descending directly into the City: an no Enemy can divert
it, nor force it another way, by reason of the Rocks. Being within the City it
goes round about it, and having filled their Ponds and Cisternes, it goes out
again, and close unto the Town-wals falls into a bottomless pit, and is seen
no more, nor hitherto knows any man where it rises again. This pit was not
always there, but it happened thus, long after the building of Doras by
Anastasius the Emperor. By reason of this natural situation of the place,
they who besiege it are afflicted with much want of water: So that Chosroes
failing in this attempt, thought of taking some other Roman Town; but far
within the Roman Territories to sit down before any City, leaving so many
strong places at his back, he thought it impossible. For this reason he laid
Antioch flat with the ground, and quitted the Roman-Territories, so that his
thoughts mounted after hopes further off, and full of difficulty. For hearing
how the Barbarians seated on the left hand of the Euxine Sea, about the Lake of
Maeotis, do without control overrun the Roman Provinces; he thought also by
having Lazica to pass unto Constantinople it self, without crossing the Sea,
as well as those Barbarians. And for this cause the Persians strive to get
Lazica. But to return from whence I digressed.

Corianes with the Persian army encamped by the River of Hippis, and against
them Gubazes King of Lazica, and Dagisthaeus commander of the Roman army, led
their forces of Romans and Lazians. They past the said River, and being there
encamped, they consulted whether they should stay there, or receive the Enemy
marching them, or should march against the Enemy, and by giving demonstration
of the courage and by beginning the fight, charge them with less apprehension
of danger themselves, and abate the Enemies spirits. This counsel prevailed
that they should charge them, and on they went: But the Lazians refused to
join with the Roman Troops, who, they said, were not to fight for their
Country and dearest pledges, themselves adventuring for Wives and Children,
and their native soil: So that being overcome, they should be ashamed to look
upon their Wives; by which necessity, valor (in case they had none) would grow
in them. And they would have the first charge, least the Romans, who could not
have an equal eagerness to theirs, should in the fight break their orders.
Gubazes being glad to see his Lazians so gallant, called them together at some
distance from the Romans, and spoke thus.

Contrymen! I know nor whether it be sit to use exhortations to courage,
your forwardness provoked by necessity not ne^ding any: The danger is about
Wives and Children, and your Country, and for (...) which the Persians now
invade you. And none will willingly suffer others to take their estates from
them by force, nature compelling men to contend for their right. You know how
nothing will stop the Persians avarice, if once they get power. They will not
now rule over you only, and lay tributes, and in other things make you
subject; but ruin and transplant you, if they have the better in this War. We
cannot forget what Chosroes lately attempted against us: And let me not so much
as mention the trial of the Persians in that kind nor let ever the name of the
Laz^ans be extinguished. Our fight with them will not be difficult; we have
often fought with them, and vanquished them. And there is no hardness in
things, we have been used to; the toilsomenesse thereof being spent in our
former practice. So that we must not apprehend an Enemy often beaten; as being
now not so valiant as they were before; and a spirit once dejected, commonly
neve rising again. With these considerations therefore, encounter the Enemy
with courage. Having thus said, he led them on. The army was thus ordered. The
Lazian horse were set in the front, and a good distance behind them came on the
Roman horse, commanded by Philegagus a Gepaede, a valiant man, and by John the
Armenian, surnamed Guzes, formerly spoken of by me, an extraordinary good
soldier. In the rear came Gubazes, and the King of the Lazians, and
Dagisthaeus, the Roman General, with their foot; that if the horse were
routed, they might escape unto them. Corianes on the other side sent a thousand
choice men well armed to discover, himself marching after them, and leaving
only some few to guard the camp. The Lazians being foremost, and coming to the
business, gave the lie to their former confidence. For lighting suddenly upon
the Enemies Avant-coureurs, they being unable to withstand them, came
gallopping all back in confusion, and mingled with the Roman Horse; glad to fly
to those, with whom before they made scruple to be ranckt. Both the Cavalleries
being near, they joined not battle, but each, when the Enemy came on, gave
back, and set on them retiring, and so spent much time in renewing charges, and
in quick turns and returns. In the Roman army was one Artabanes a
Persarmenian, revolted lately to the Roman army, having secured his faith by
the killing of a hundred and twenty Persian Soldiers. He got access to
Valerianus, then General of Armenia, and desired of him fifty Romans, with
whom he went to a Castle in Persarmenia, guarded by a hundred and twenty
Persians; who received him with his men, not knowing of his revolt. This
Garrison they killed, and returned to Valerianus; and Artabanes appearing by
this sure and firm to the Romans, served them in their wars. In this encounter
he put himself between the armies accompanied with two Romans; against them
came some Enemies, whom Artabanes charging killed a Persian, valiant, and of a
strong body, and threw him from his Horse to the ground. A Barbarian standing
next, struck Artabanes with his Sword upon the head, but no mortal blow. One
of Artabanes two Companions, a Goth, while the Persians hand was yet over the
head of Artabanes, thrust him into the left flanck and killed him. The thousand
that were sent out at this retired, and stayed for Corianes, and the rest of the
Army of Persians and Alans, and soon after they joined: Then came up the
Infantry both of Gubazes and Dagisthaeus to the Horse, and the fight came to
handy blows. Philegagus and John finding themselves too weak for the Enemies
horse, and having seen what the Lazians could do, lighted, and caused the
Romans and Lazians to do the like; and with the foot they stood in a deep
battallion opposite to the Enemy and charging with their Lances. The Persians
being not able to charge the Enemy being on foot, nor to break their
Battallion, and their Horses flying back, troubled with the heads of the Lances
and noise of the sheilds, they trusted with the multitude of their arrows to
break them. The Romans also, and the Lazians let fly their arrows, and they
coming thick, many were slain on both sides. The Persians and Alans discharged
oftener; but the arrows for the most part rebounded from the Romans sheilds.
Corianes, the Persian General, was shot into the neck' (by whom it was not
known) of which he dyed instantly; and his death swayed the victory to the
Romans side: For the falling from his horse, forthwith the Persians ran away to
their camp. The Romans pursued, killed many, and hoped to take the Enemies camp
at first assault; But an Alan a strong man, and very expert to shoot backward
and forward, put himself into the narrowest entrance into the Trenches, and
stopped the invaders a long time; until John Guzes killed him with his Lance,
and then the Romans took the Camp. Many Persians there perished, the rest
returned home as they could. This was the success of that Persian invasion of
Lazica. Another army also came, and victualled the Garrison in Petra; and then
retired home.

CHAP. V.
IN the mean time the Lazians at Constantinople accused Dagisthaeus of
Treachery, and favoring the Persians; and that by the persuasions of the
Persians he forbear to assault that part of the Walls of Petra, which fell
down, and that the while the Enemy fortified the breach with sack-fuls of Sand
laid one upon another: And that for money, or negligently he lost his
opportunity, by putting of the assault, which he could never after recover. The
Emperor upon this confined Dagisthaeus to his house, and made Bessas, lately
come out of Italy, General of Armenia; whom he directed also to command the
Army in Lazica, sent thither before under Venilus, Brother to Buzes, and
Odonachus, and Babas the Thracian, and Vligangus an Herulian. Nabedes also came
into Lazica with an Army, but effected nothing worth the mentioning; save only
a defection of the Abasgians from the Romans and Lazians; and upon the occasion
of being there with an Army, the taking of sixty Sons of their principal men
for Hostages; and the taking Prisoner in his way Theodora in Apsilia, the Widow
of Opsites, late Uncle to Gubazes, and King of Lazica. She was by birth a
Roman, the Kings of Lazica having long used by the Emperors consent, to take
Wives in Constantinople, and to make allyances with sundry Senators: And
Gubazes himself was the Son of a Roman Lady. The reason moving the Abasgians
to revolt, was this. After they had (as I said before) deposed their Kings,
some Roman Garrisons were by the Emperor laid upon the Country, who sought to
reduce it under the Roman Dominion, and exacted new things, using violent
ways, which discontented the Abasgians; And least they should be brought into
slavery to the Romans, they set up Kings again: Opsites of the Eastern part of
the Country and Scaparnas of the Western. They were grown desperate of any
good, and so chose rather to resume their former condition, though bad, then to
retain the worse which succeeded; and fearing the Romans power, revolted
secretly to the Persian. But the Emperor perceiving it, commanded Bessas to
march against them: who sent some choice numbers of his Army under Vligangus,
and John Guzes. One of the new Kings of Abasgia had been lately sent for into
Persia by Chosroes, where he then was. The other drew the Abasgians together,
and opposed the Roman invasion. Upon the confines of Apsilia and way to
Abasgia, is a high Mountain, beginning at Caucasus, and by degrees growing
lower, till it ends in the Euxine Sea. At the foot of this Mountain the
Abasgians have an ancient Castle of a considerable bigness, where they beat
off any Enemy invading, the place being a great fastness, not possible to
force. It has one passage only, leading to this Castle, and into Abasgia, not
passable but by one man at once a foot. Under the said foot-path, is a deep
Valley reaching to the Sea, and very stony; which has gotten a name suitable for
the roughness, being called Trachea. The Roman Fleet came to the confines of
Abasgia, and Apsilia, where John and Vligangus landed their Forces, leaving the
Seamen to wait on them near the Shore. They marched afoot unto Trachea, and
seeing the Abasgians in Arms, and guarding the foot path, they were troubled.
In the end John left there Vligangus with half the Army, and himself with the
rest went aboard the Barks, and compassed the Trachea, so that he got the
Backs of the Enemy. With Ensigns displayed he marched against them, who
perceiving themselves charged on both sides, resisted not, but retired in
confusion, so hamperd with their fear and amazement, that they hardly found
their own Country ways, nor easily got clear of them. The Romans on both
sides had the execution, and killed many; and came running to the Castle, where
they found the Guards shutting the Gates; but not able to put them to, and so
still receiving in the pursued and Pursuers, pell-mell, and not discerning
Abasgians from Enemies, and by reason of the crowd being not able to close the
Gates, the Abasgians, who were so glad to get within the walls, were taken with
the castle. Yet the Romans, when they thought themselves masters of the Enemy,
found a difficulty: for the houses standing close to one another, the Abasgians
mounted the same, and shot down upon their heads, and defended themselves
stoutly, out of fear and pity of their wives and children, till the Romans set
the houses on fire, and so became absolute victors. Opsites, King of the
Abasgians, fled with some few to the neighboring Hunnes, and to mount
Caucasus: The rest were consumed to ashes, or made prisoners. The Romans took
both the Kings wives, and all their children, demolisht the Castle, and almost
emptied the country: This was the success of the Abasgians revolt.

But the Apsilians, being anciently subject to the Lazians, have in their
country a strong Castle called Tzibulum; which Terdites, Master of the Palace
in Lazica, having offended the King, and being discontented, agreed to betray
to the Persians; and getting some Persian forces ready, he went into Apsilia.
Being near the Castle, he rode before with his company of Lazians, and got in,
the Garrison not distrusting a principal Officer of Lazica. And thus Terdites,
so soon as the Persian forces came up, received them into the Castle; and the
Persians now held themselves Masters, not only of Lazica, but of Apsilia also;
while the Romans being busy about Petra, and to encounter the Persian army,
had no means to send succors. But the Governor of that Castle had a fair
wife, by birth an Apsilian, with whom the commander of the Persian forces fell
fondly in love; and when with his temptations he could not gain her, he
attempted to force her; which so enraged her husband, that he killed him, and
sacrificed also his Company to their commanders lust, and took the Castle to
himself. Hereupon the Apsilians took occasion to revolt from the Lazians,
charging them for not coming to their succors against the Persians. Gubazes
sent against them a thousand Romans, and John Guzes; who with fair words
brought them back to their former obedience to the Lazians. And thus was it
concerning the Apsilians, and the castle of Tzibulum.

CHAP. VI.
ABOUT the same time, the cruelty of Chosroes touched even upon his own blood.
His eldest Son Anatozadus (which in the Persian language signifies, Immortal)
had much offended him with his lewd courses, making no scruple to lie with his
Fathers Wives. At first Chosroes chastised him with Banishment, and confined
him to the City of Lapato, seven days journey from Ctesiphon, in a Province of
Persia called Vazaine, a very good country; and soon after fell sick so
dangerously, that he was reported to be dead; being of a sickly constitution:
and having Physicians about him still of all countries, and among others
Tribunus of Palaestina; a man famous for his art, and inferior to none of his
time, and moreover a wise and a godly man, and very honest. He had formerly
cured Chosroes and came out of Persia with many great presents; but at the
making of the Quinquenniall cessation, Chosroes entreated the Emperor, to let
him have Tribunus with him for one year; Who having performed his attendance,
Chosroes bade him ask what he had a mind to. Tribunus instead of wealth, asked
of him the liberty of some Roman captives; and got 3000 freed; besides some men
of quality, whom he demanded by name. By this act Tribunus got a great
reputation among all men. Anatozadus hearing of his Fathers sickness, usurped,
and rebelled; and though his Father were recovered, yet he put the City into
revolt, and keenly pursued the War. Chosroes sent against him an army under
Fabrizus, who won the battle; took Anatozadus Prisoner, and brought him to his
Father. Chosroes blemished the young man's eyes, not by taking away the sight;
but by distorting the eyelids into much ugliness, with irons red hot, applied
to the out side of the Eyelids being shut. This Chosroes did, to cut off his
hope of his Kingdom, the Law permitting not any man with any blemish to be
King of Persia, as I have said before.

Now also was the fifth year of the Cessation expired, and Justinian sent unto
Chosroes, Peter a Patritian, and his Master of the Palace with commission to
conclude an absolute truce for the East. Chosroes dismissed him with promise to
send one shortly to finish all, as should be best for both: And soon after he
sent Isdigunas again; a man supercilious and arrogant, and whose insolent
puffing, and swelling was not tolerable to any Roman. He brought his wife and
Brother with him, and a train so great, as if he were marching to a battle: He
had also with him two principal Persians, who wore Diadems of Gold upon their
heads. The Constantinopolitans murmured to see the Emperor honor him
something more then according to the quality of an Ambassador. Bradicius the
interpreter was not with him, whom they say Chosroes put to death, for
presuming to sit at the same Table with the Emperor Justinian, who (said he)
would not have admitted an Interpreter to such an honor, if he had not
betrayed the Persian affairs. Some say, that Isdigunas charged him with secret
conferences with the Romans. Isdigunas now at his audience, said not a word of
the peace; but complained of Transgressions against the Cessation; That
Arethas, and the Saracen Confederates of the Romans committed spoils upon
Alamundarus, during the truce, and some other things of small importance.

In the mean time Bessas sat down before Petra with the whole Army. The
Romans mined in the same place where Dagisthaeus formerly had done, and for the
same reason: For the Walls are for the most part founded upon a Rock; but in
some places upon earth. Toward the West they are upon an impenetrable Rock,
but not very thick, a piece whereof Dagisthaeus then, and now Bessas dug
into; but the nature of the ground bounded their Mine, not permitting it to
proceed further then it self. After the retreat of Dagisthaeus, the Persians
had mended the fallen piece of their Wall there, by filling up that which had
been dug into, with pebble stones, and placing over it great beams,
smoothed and tied together to a pretty breadth. This basis of Timber was in
stead of a foundation, and upon it was the Wall set: Which the Romans not
knowing, thought their Mine to be quite under the foundation; and having voyded
away much earth from beneath those timbers, they shook indeed the Wall, and a
part of it suddenly sunk, but it inclined not to either side, nor had one stone
disordered, but settled upright, whole and entire upon the dug ground, as if
it had been let down with an Engine; only it was lower then before: And so
the Romans could not assault the Town; Mermeroes having formerly also with
many hands raised all the Walls higher then ever. The Romans seeing the piece
that sunck, and stood upright so, were much troubled. Mine they could no more,
neither could they bring the Ram to the Wall, the ground being steep, and the
Ram not being to be drawn but in even ground. In the Army then chanced to be
Sabirian Hunnes, who inhabit about the Caucasian Mountains, and are populous,
and divided into many Principalities. Some of their Princes are ancient friends
to the Roman Emperor, some to the King of Persia; who give Pensions in Gold to
their several Confederates, not yearly, but upon occasions. The Emperor to
his Confederates had lately sent Gold for their aid in this War: But the
Messenger finding it unsafe to pass the Caucasian Mountains, and by an Enemy
with Money, came to Bessas before Petra, and from thence sent to the Sabirians,
to send some to receive the Money, who presently-sent three of their Princes
into Lezica, and these were with the Army at the assault. When they saw the
Romans despairing, they devised a new Engine, never thought of by the Romans
nor Persians, who notwithstanding have had excellent Artists, and have often
needed such an Engine to assault places in stony and steep ground: But it never
came into their minds; Man's nature ever proceeding with time to new inventions.
As these Barbarians suddenly made a new fashioned Ram, using no timbers upript,
nor lying a cross, but in stead of them small Poles tied and sitted together.
They covered the whole Engine with Hides, and observed the perfect form of an
ordinary Ram, and in the midst placed the usual Beam, with a topp headed with
Iron, to batter the Walls: It was made so light that it needed no men or
cattle to draw and thrust it forward; only forty men within it covered by the
Hides, carried the Engine with ease upon their shoulders, and winded up the Ram
and let it go against the Walls. Such Engines now were framed by these three
Barbarians, taking Beams and Iron work from the Romans Ramms, which they
could not bring near the Walls, and forty men being put under each, they set it
close to the Walls. On either side of each stood men well armed with Corslets
and Morions, and with long Poles in their hands topt with great Iron Hooks, to
draw off from the Walls the stones loosened and unjoynted by the strokes of the
Ram. The Romans with many pushes of the same shook the Wall, and they with
their Poles pulled down the loose stones, and quickly the Town was in the
point of being taken. But the Persians upon the Wall set a wooden Tower (which
they had long before prepared) full of their best men, having their heads and
bodies all covered with Iron and with Corslets, and vessels full of Brimstone,
and Babylonian Pitch, and Naptha, a Drug used by the Persians, and by the
Gracians called Medean oil: These Vessels they sired and threw upon the
Romans Rams, which failed little to be all set on fire, and were saved by the
men having the long Poles, who cleared away the fire still; but long they could
not think so to hold out, the fire being such, that where it touched it
instantly burnt, if not instantly cast off.

CHAP. VII.
BUT Bessas putting his Forces in Arms, caused scaling Ladders to be set to
that part of the Wall which was sunck; And himself using no other exhortation
but the example of his own Valor, being an old man above 70. years of age, he
first mounted the Ladder. Here was a Fight so valiantly performed by both
Romans, and Persians, as the like has not been seen. The Persians amounted to
about 2300 men, and the Romans were some 6000. On both sides almost all were
hurt, that were not slain: the Romans forced their ascent with all their
power, and the Persians with much toil, and after the killing of many on both
sides, were very near to have quite beaten off the danger. Many Romans were
slain at the tops of the Ladders, the Enemy standing above them; and Bessas
himself fell from the Ladder, whereat a great shout was made, the Persians
from all parts shooting at him, and his Lanciers standing all close about him,
covering him, having their Murrions and Corselets on, and with their Shields,
making the form of a Roof over him, and keeping off the Arrows, which clasht
upon their Armor, and snapt asunder. And all was full of clamor, panting, and
toil. The Romans, eager to bring off their General, shot thick at the Walls,
and represt the Enemy. Bessas could not get up for the Shields that were hold
over him, and being an old man, fat and unweildly. Yet he lost not his Spirits,
but in that great danger suddenly advised that which preserved himself, and
the Romans Affairs. He directed his Lanciers to drag him off by the legs,
which they did, and went off with him, holding their Shields over one another,
and drawing him away so far at once only, as not to be subject to the Enemies
shot. Bessas, so soon as he was in a safe place, rose, and encouraging his
Soldiers, gave on again, mounting again the Ladder himself; and the Romans
following him did very valiantly. The Persians hereupon demanded time to quit
the place, and to yield it. But Bessas suspecting it to be cunning, in the mean
time to fortify the Walls, said, that he could not stay the Fight; but he
pointed to another part of the Walls, whether they might go with him, and parley
while the Armies fought. They not entertaining the motion, the Fight was hotly
pursued: Which continuing equal, another part of the Wall, where the Romans
had formerly min'd, suddenly fell down. Many of both parts ran thither; The
Romans, though divided, exceeded the Enemy in numbers, and pressed hard upon
them: And the Persians being charged in both places, and their fewness by
being divided appearing, did not equally endure the charge. While the Armies
were toyling, and the Persians unable to repel the eagerness of the Romans,
and the Romans absolutely to force their entry; John Guzes left them fighting
upon the ruined Wall, and with some Armenians his Countrymen, mounted the Rock
where the City was esteemed impregnable; and forcing upon the Guards there,
killed with his Lance one of the gallantest Persians, and made the place
accessible. In the mean time the Persians in the wooden Tower, kindled many
Fire-vessels, by flinging the same thick, to burn the Engines and men in them,
notwithstanding their long Poles. But a strong Southern wind blew against them,
and withal let afire one of the boards of the Tower: They within it, being
overtoyled, and full of tumult and disorder, perceived not the Accident soon
enough, (their business taking from them their senses,) and the flame kindling
by little, and little, and with the Medean Oil, and the other materials, burnt
all the Tower, and the Persians in it; who consumed into Coals, fell down,
some within the Town, some among the Roman Engines. At the ruined Wall also the
Enemy grew faint, and gave back, and the Romans entered, and then was Petra
absolutely taken; only some 500. Persians retired to the Cittadell. The rest
the Romans took, being 730 men, of whom 18. only were unhurt in the Fight. Many
Romans also fell, brave men, and among them John Guzes, valiantly entering the
Town, was killed with a stone. The next morning the Romans besieged the
Persians in the Cittadell, and propounded offers of safety unto them, and to
give assurances for the same: But they rejected them, and resolved to oppose,
though they had no thought of subsisting long; but they chose to dye bravely.
Bessas was desirous to draw them from this Opinion, and to persuade them to
live. He commanded a Roman Soldier to speak to them to that purpose, as he
dictated it unto him; who being near, said thus.

Valiant Persians, what mean you thus to pull on your own destruction? using a
senseless endeavor to dye, and shaming the profession of Valor; which never
opposes unresistible necessities, but wisely yields to the Conqueror. It is
not dishonorable to obey your Fortune, and Live; Necessity having left no
hope, excuses the dishonor, although one be put to the poorest Actions; pardon
ever attending that which cannot be avoided. Insoevident a danger, affect not
therefore pride, nor sacrifice your lives for a little vainglory. Think how
men once dead revive not again; but that the living may in time recompose
themselves. Consult therefore your last consultation, and study your own good:
Those Counsels are ever best, wherein the advisers have left it in their power
to repent. We pity this your struggling under the Yoke, and spare you, so fond
to dye. And while you are wanton and foolish in a case of life; we, as Romans,
and Christians, commiserate you. If you live, the worst that shall befall you,
will be to change your Commonwealth for a better, and to have Justinian your
Lord instead of Chosroes; and for this we give you our Faith. Murder not
therefore your selves, having means to live; It is not excusable thus to no
purpose to be in love with dismal things, which is not to be valiant, but to
be weary of life. The valiant man endures, while from his sufferings he expects
advantage. Men commend a willing death, when some gallant hope is built upon
it; But a precipitate end, is a rash and useless folly, and a vaineglorious
dying foolish: Wise men condemning such a fond pretext of brave spirit.
Consider moreover, if herein you be not unthankful to God; who if he Would
have you destroyed, would not have delivered you to men, who desire your
preservation. Thus it is; and do you advise, whether you be worthy to live or
no.

The Persians would not so much as afford attention to this Counsel, as men
willingly deaf. By the Generals direction therefore the Romans threw fire into
the Cittadell, thinking so to bring them to yield. But they, though beholding
the mischief, and knowing that certainly they would be all consumed, and
having no hope by resisting to escape, yet would not come into their Enemies
hands; but perished all with the Cittadell; the Romans wondering at it. How
serious a business Chosroes held Lazica to be, appeared by this his putting
into Petra the choice and the bravest of his men, and by storing the same with
so great a proportion of arms, that to every Roman soldiers share upon the
pillage fell five men's furnitures, besides much burnt in the Cittadell. There
was also found corn, and other salted provisions for five years siege: Wine
there was none; but some Beveridge, and store of beans. The Romans wondered to
find water coming from the Aquaeduct, till they understood the mystery. For
Chosroes having taken Petra, and placed a Garrison in it; foreseeing the siege,
and that doubtless the Romans would attempt the Aquaeduct, divided the water,
brought from it to the City, into three parts, by making a deep Sewer, and by
building three several Aquaeducts; the one at the bottom of the Sewer up to
the middle of it, covered with stones and Earth; above that a second covered
also, and a third above Ground and visible. The Romans not understanding those
close conveiances, spoiled the uppermost at the beginning of the siege, not
working downward to the other, thinking the water did fail the City by what
they had done; and from their loathnesse to work, their wits failed them. The
siege continuing, the Romans understood by some prisoners, that the besieged
had water from the Aquaeduct still; whereupon digging, they found the second
Conduit and cut it, and in their second Error were not admonished by their
first. But now the city being taken, and finding the water still coming in, and
from their Prisoners, hearing how it was done; they saw too late their Enemies
providence, and their own negligence. The Prisoners Bessas sent all to the
Emperor, and threw down the Walls of Petra, that the Enemy might put them to
no more business about it: which the Emperor approved, and commended him both
for his valor, and this wise counsel of his. Thus Bessas, by his good
fortune, and the great valor showed in this action, grew into a great
reputation again: when he commanded Rome, there was great hope of him, having
done very valiantly in former employments. After his ill fortune at Rome (the
same being sacked by the Goths, and the whole strength of the Romans there being
well nigh destroyed) yet at his return to Constantinople, the Emperor made him
General against the Persians; though the world flouted the Emperors
resolution herein, in committing the Persian war to an old man almost in his
Grave, and one who had been so grossly beaten by the Goths; but notwithstanding
this general opinion, Bessas used the valor, and found the good fortune, I
have said. So are humane affairs determined, not as men imagine; but as God
swayes the Balance: And this men call Fortune; finding accidental things to
succeed in a way by them not discerned, and so attributing a name of Fortune to
things above their own reason.

CHAP. VIII.
IN the mean time Mermeroes, afraid of Petra, was coming with his army thither
so soon as the winter was done, and the season was sit; but hearing what was
become of it, he staid his journey, knowing how on that side of the Phasis the
Lazians had no Town, but Petra. So that he marched homeward, having pre-possest
the passages in Lazica, from Iberia: and he past over the Phasis, where he
found it fordable, and over another River called Reon. Having now the Phasis to
his right hand, be led his army to Archaeopolis (the chief city of Lazica)
being most horse, and with eight Elephants, which the Persians use as a Tower
to stand upon, and shoot upon the Enemies heads. The Persians industry also is
worthy admiration; having made the way between Iberia and Lazica (which was
unpassable for rocky places, covered with thick woods and bushes; that there
was no going for a man a foot) now so plain and easy, that not only their
Horses, but their Elephants may pass. There came also 12000 Sabirian Hunnes to
Mermeroes; who fearing least their multitude would not obey him, but might do
him some mischief rather, he kept 4000 of them, and sent the rest home with
good store of money: The Roman army ^ounted in all to 12000, whereof Odonachus
and Babas two expert Commanders, had 3000. and the rest encamped near the
Phasis (with intention to succor any place where the Enemy should fall on)
commanded by Bonilus and Vligangus: there was also Varazes the Persamenian with
them, wholate came out of Italy followed by 800 Tzanians. Bessas was retired
into Pontus and Armenia, his Government, meaning to toil no more, but to get
what he could by his place; and by his avariciousnesse he again ruined the
Roman affairs. After his victory at Petra, if he had made haste to fortify
the passages into Lazica from Iberia, the Persians had not entered Lazica, which
he even as good as delivered to the Enemy by his neglect, and carelessness of
the Emperors indignation. Who indeed used much to connive at the Errors of
his chief Ministers, and they from thence committed many, both in the courses
of their lives, and in their Governments. The two Castles of Scanda and
Sarapanis, in Lazica, about the frontier of Iberia, standing upon two passages
very hard to get through, the Lazians had demolisht. These Castles Justinian in
the beginning of the War guarded with Romans, taking out the Lazians formerly
in it; but the Romans wanting victual, and being not able like the Lazians to
live long upon Elymus, a kind of pulse like mill-seed; the Lazians also being
weary of bringing Provision upon their backs (there being no passage for
horses) the Romans there abandoned them, and the Persians took them; but upon
the truce restored them to Justinian for the Forts of Bolum and Pharangium, as
I have said before. But the Lazians having demolisht them now, the Persians
repaired Scanda, and held it at this coming of Mermeroes into Lazica. And
entering the same from Iberia, the first Town you meet with in the Plain, is
Rodopolis, very assaultable; whereupon the Lazians demolisht it, fearing the
Persian Invasion; so that now Mermeroes marched on to Archaeopolis. But he would
not sit down before it, fearing the Romans Army at his back, encamping near
the Phasis. Toward them he went first, and passing by Archaeopolis told them,
That he meant to make a visit to the Romans upon the Phasis, and that done,
would come to them again. They answered him bravely, and bade him go, and that
if he spoke once with the Romans there, he would never come back to them. But
the Commanders of the Roman Army hearing the news, and finding themselves too
weak, went aboard their Darks, carrying with them what they could, and throwing
the rest into the River. Soon after came Mermeroes, and was very melancholy to
see the Romans Camp with not a man in it; he burnt the same, and in much anger
led his Army back to Archaeopolis.

This City stands upon a kind of Rock, and by it runs a River descending from
the next Mountains. The Low Gate opens near the foot of the Rock, and the
ground to it from the Plain rises only, but makes no difficulty of access.
The Gate opening toward the Rock is very hard to approach, having also for a
great way thereabout great Thickets. The town Walls were built up to the
River, that they may draw up their water, having none within the Town.
Mermcroes was eager to assault, and finding it rising ground, not to be meddled
with by ordinary Rams, he caused his Sabirians to make Rams portable on men's
shoulders, using the advantage of his Enemies experiment thereof at Petra,
which he had heard of. And these Sabirians made such Rams as their Contrymen
in league with the Romans made then. Mermeroes set against the rocky part of
the City the Delomites, a people dwelling in the midst of Persia, among
unaccessable Mountains, and so not subject to the Persian, but free; and in
the Persians wars they serve them for pay, being all foot men, with sword and
shield and two Javelins; and are nimble to climb rocks, and to run along the
sides of mountains, as upon plain Ground. These being there ordered, Mermeroes
with the rest of his army assaulted at the lower gate, and with his new Rams,
and his Elephants. Where the Persians and Sabirians galled the Romans with
their shot, making them almost to quit the Battlements, and the Delomites did
as much on their side with their Javelins, that the Romans were in much
extremity. Odonachus and Babas (were it to show their own, or try the Romans
resolution, or by some instinct) leaving some few upon the Battlements, drew
together the rest, and said thus to them.

Fellow Soldiers! you see our danger; but nevertheless you must nor yield to
it: Nothing preserves men despairing of life, but not to be in love with life:
which sond love is commonly attended with destruction. Consider how in such a
difficulty as this, it is not safe to resist an Enemy from the Battlements of a
Town: We may do it bravely, but the distance of place will not permit us to
use our valor: The best we can get, is, to get off and retire: But if we fight
body, to body, courage is it gets the better there, and the Victory goes with
valor. They who get the better from a Wall, gain not much; for the next day
the danger renues as fresh as ever, and so they perish by little and little,
and loose at last their defended Fortresses. But who overcome in a standing
fight, are ever after secure. Taking this into our thoughts, let us make a
brave sally, trusting in Gods assistance, and hoping well even from the
despair we are in. God preserves those most, who have no hope left in
themselves.

CHAP. IX.
ODONACHVS and Babas having thus fayd, led out the Army: Some they left
behind, having suspicion of one of the chief Inhabitants of the City, a
Lazian; who had been treated with by Mermeroes in the heat of the assault, to
set the City-Magazines on fire. Mermeroes by this thought either to enter the
Town with less opposition, the Romans being busy to quench the fire, or if,
being eager to defend the Town, they neglected the fire, he should deprive
them of their stores, and so easily in time get the Town by Famine. The Lazian
according to his promise to Mermeroes, when he saw the assault at the hottest,
fired the Storehouses. The Romans left behind, seeing the flame rise, ran to
it, and with much toil, and some hurt, put it out. Those who sallyed, frighted
the Enemy with the suddenness, and killed them without resistance. For the
Persians suspected no sally from so few Defendants, and were scatterd, and in
disorder as upon an assault: Some with the Ramms upon their shoulders, and
without their arms: others could do no Execution with their bows, the Romans
at the first running up close unto them; who slasht with their Swords on all
sides, and cut them in pieces. One of their Elephants also, either wounded, or
otherwise starting, flew back, and cast his riders, breaking the rancks, and
driving the Persians backward; whise the Romans securely cut off all in their
way. It may seem strange, that the Romans knowing so well the means of
resisting Elephants, did nothing now; confounded (it seems) with the present
business. The means is that, which was practiced upon Chosroes at Edessa: an
Elephant there was brought close to the walls, with many of the gallantest
Persians upon it: and appearing like a Tower, and the shot from it being made
directly upon the Defendants heads, the taking of the town was certainly
expected: when the Romans escaped this danger, only by hanging out a Hog from
the Bulwark, which with his squeaking scared the Elephant so, that he turned
about and retired fair and softly home. This now was omitted by the Romans; but
their good fortune supplied their negligence. Having mentioned here Edessa, let
me tell a strange prodigy which happened in that City a little before the
breaking of the Perpetual Peace; which was, the delivering of a woman with a
child having two heads: the events since have made the meaning manifest. For
the East, and much of the Roman Empire besides, have been disputed by two
Emperors; but to return to the fight. The Persians being thus disordered, and
they in the rear seeing the confusion in the van, and not knowing the matter,
ran away in fear. The Dolomites also, who were upon high Ground, and saw all,
ran away shamefully, and the overthrow was clear. Four thousand Persians were
slain, and three principal commanders, and four Ensigns were taken, which
were sent to Constantinople. They lost 20000 horses, not all in fight; but
being spent with running away, and not getting a belly full of meat in Lazica,
they dyed with famine and weakness

Mermeroes having failed at Archaeopolis, was nevertheless master of the field
in Lazica, and led his army into Muchirisis, a country distant from
Archaeopolis a days journey, having many populous villages, and the best land
of Lazica, full of vines and other fruits, through which runs the River of
Reon, upon which anciently the Lazians had a Castle; but they demolisht it,
because standing in a plain it was easy to be taken. The Castle was called by
the Grecians Cotyaeum, but now by the Lazians Cotaesis, as Arrianus in his
history. Others say, it was anciently a City named- Coitaeum; where Aeaetes was
born, whom the Poets call Coitaeensis, and Lazica, Coytaitis. This Castle
Mermerces was desirous to re-edifie, and wanting materials, he staid till the
winter was past, purposing to repair it with Timber. Near unto Cotaesis,
stands Vchimerium, a strong Castle, guarded by Lazians with some Roman
soldiers intermingled: Hereabout Mermeroes lay with his army, possessing the
best land of Lazica, and cutting off the Romans from bringing victual to
Vchimerium, and from marching into the countries of Suania, and Scymnia,
subject to the Persians; an Army in Muchirisis, crossing the passage into those
countries. These were the successes of the armies in Lazica.

In Constantinople, in the mean time Isdigunas the Persian Ambassador, had many
conferences with the Emperor touching a peace. And after a long time spent in
disputes, at last they came to this agreement: That in their proper Dominions
there should be a cessation of arms for five years, and during the same, that
sending to each other they should endeavor to compose the differences
concerning Lazica and the Saracens; and that the Romans should pay to the
Persians twenty Centenaries of Gold for this Cessation of five years, and for
the eighteen months passed between the end of the first Quinquenniall
Cessation, and their sending Ambassadors to each other six Centenaries more;
the Persians alleging, that they yielded to a conference for truce upon that
Condition. These twenty Centenaries, Isdigunas would have presently paid, and
the Emperor demanded to pay them by four Centenaries every year, and thereof
to give caution; but in the end the Romans paid down the whole sum, that they
might not seem to pay a yearly Tribute to the Persians.

Thus men are ashamed more of the dishonor of names, then things. Barsabes
also, a Persian of great quality, and much favored by Chosroes, whom
Valerianus had taken prisoner in a fight in Armenia, and sent to
Constantionople, and for whom Chosroes had offered a great ransom, was now set
at liberty upon the suit of Isdigunas, who promised to persuade Chosroes to
remove his army out of Lazica. This Cessation concluded in the twenty fifth
year of Justinians Reign, much discontented the Romans, whether unreasonable
or no, (as Subjects use to censure the actions of their Princes) I will not
determine. But they alleged, that the Persians being now strong in Lazica,
they might securely without the interruption of any, for five years to come,
hold the fairest pieces of it, and that the Romans would never afterward be
able to drive them out of it, but the Persians have easy access even to
Constantinople it self. These considerations troubled most men, but they could
not help it; and likewise to see the ancient endeavor of the Persians, to make
the Romans tributary, which by war they could never hope to effect, now
established by the color of a cessation of arms; Chosroes now taxing the
Romans with a tribute of four annual Centenaries upon this fair pretense,
until his forty six Centenaries were paid, calling his Tax a Truce, and
showing apparently to have plotted it from the beginning of the War. And yet
still he used hostility in Lazica, as has been said. From this Taxation the
Romans had no hope ever to be freed, but saw themselves in the quality of plain
Tributaries to the Persians. Isdigunas also having gotten more wealth then ever
Ambassador did, and received the highest honors from the Emperor, together
with immense gifts, was sent home the richest man (I think) in Persia. This
only Ambassador had no Guard put upon him; himself and his followers freely
conferred, and kept company with whom they would; and in the city bought and
sold, and made any contracts, and were present at them, with all manner of
license, no Roman attending them to observe their doing, as was wont to be.

At this time also were Heats, such as none ever remembered the like, the Roses
toward the winter growing in abundance, as in the spring, with no manner of
difference, and the weather as hot as at midsummer: And the vintage being long
past, new Grapes came up. Some divined from hence at great accidents likely to
succeed; but the natural cause of it was the continuance of the Southerly
winds, longer then was ordinary, from whence came those unusual heats. If any
strange matters were signified by them, we shall know the certainty by the
Event.

CHAP. X.
DUring the said Negotiation at Constantinople for a truce; in Lazica King
Gubazes affected the Romans, because he found Chosroes to plot his death; but
the generality of the Lazians offended with the Romans oppressions; and
discontented with their Commanders, did for the most part favor the Persians,
not for love of the Persian Government, but to be rid of the other, of two ills
choosing that rather which they felt not. And Theophobius a chief man among
them, treated with Mermeroes to deliver to him the Castle of Vchimerium, who
animated him to the action with large hopes of being a Favorite of Chosroes,
and naturalized a Persian, and of getting great wealth and preferments. There
were no Forces joined of Romans and Lazians, and the Persians visited all the
Towns at their pleasure. The Emperialists lay concealed, some near the Phasis,
others in Archeopolis, and other Fortresses; and King Gubazes lay quiet upon
the tops of Mountains: So that Theophobius without any difficulty appearing,
came to the Castle and told the Imperial Garrison there, That the Roman Army
was cut in pieces, King Gubazes ruined, and Lazica wholly under the Persians,
without any hope of recovering the same for the Romans or Gubazes. Mermeroes
with seventy thousand Persians had done all this, and with great numbers of
Sabirians; And that Chosroes was now also joined suddenly with an innumerable
Army, that all Lazica would scarce contain them. With this terrible news
Theophohius so frighted the Garrison, that they besought him even by the God of
their Fathers to find some accommodation for them. He promised to procure
their safety from Chosroes; and returning immediately to Mermeroes, obtained of
him some principal Persians with Commission to repair to Vchimerium, and
having given assurances to the Garrison for their lives and Goods, to take
possession of the Castle; by the having whereof the Persians were absolute
Masters of Lazica. They subdued also Scymnia and Suania, that all places from
Muchirisis to Iberia were unaccessible to the Romans and King Gubazes. And nor
Romans nor Lazians durst meddle with the Enemy, nor come, the one from their
Fortresses, the other down from the Mountains. Mermeroes during the Winter,
repaired with timber the Walls of Coitaesis, and placed in it three thousand
Persians; he put also a competent Garrison in Vchimerium, and repaired another
Castle called Sarapalis, upon the Frontier of Lazica. Then he martcht toward
the Phasis, where he understood that the Romans and Lazians had newly made head
and were encamped. But Gubazes and the Roman Commanders at the first news of
his coming disbanded, and every man saved himself as he could. Gubazes ran up
again to the Mountains, and there with his Wife and Children made an end of
the Winter, fighting it out with poverty and the hard weather, and comforting
himself (as men use) with hopes from Constantinople. And the other chief
Lazians in their respect to their King were contented, as he, with hard winter
lodgings in the holes of Rocks. Enemy they feared none in those Mountains,
being (especially in the Winter) not to be meddled with; but famine and other
misery made them weary of their lives. Mermero^s in the mean time built
Storehouses in the Villages of Muchirisis, and furnished the same with
Victual; and by sending Fugitives to the foot of the Mountains, and promising
conditions of safety, he drew many down, supplied them plentifully with what
they most wanted, and used them as his own people. In all things else he ruled
the Country at his pleasure, and to Gubazes wrote this Letter.

Power and wisdom are the two composers of humane affairs; and they who in
power excel others, live as they list, and bring the weaker to what terms
they please, who being slaves to the stronger cure their want of power with
wisdom, and by soothing their Conquerours, hold that with comfort, whereof
their infirmity deprives them. This is generally in all Nations, and is fixed
in the nature of men. So that gentle Gubazes! if you think you can vanquish
the Persians, delay not your own good, but come to Battle, you shall find us
in what part of Lazica you please, ready to fight with you for the Country.
With us you may now try your power, who can never think afterward to oppose
the whole power of Persia. Or you may take the second course, which is to know
your self, and to adore Chosroes as your Master, King, and Conqueror; by
supplications you may be rid of your present miseries; I undertake that the
King will be gracious to you, and will give you of the best Hostages in Persia
for the perpetual assurance of your life and Kingdom. If neither of these
please, suffer the Lazians, made miserable by your bad counsels, to raise
themselves from the difficulties that press them; and see them not crushed with
an endless ruin, while you trust to the slippery hopes of Roman Succors, who
can vindicate you no more then hitherto they have done.

Gubazes was not persuaded by this Letter, but still stayed upon the Mountains;
his hatred of Chosroes not suffering him to despair in the Roman Succors.
Men's judgments ever thus tune to that which pleases their wills, admitting all
reasons of that side, without examination of the soundness of them; and
obstinately not crediting, nor weighing the arguments which cross their
desires.

About this time certain Monks came out of India, and getting access to the
Emperor, promised to effect his long desire, that the Romans should no more
buy the Metaxa, or Raw-silke from the Persians their Enemies, nor any other
Nations. For having remained long in those Countries, they had learnt the way
how the same might be had in the Roman Provinces. They told him that certain
Worms, taught by nature, did spin this Raw-silke; to bring the Worms alive,
that it was not possible, but easy to get their Bags, wherein were innumerable
Eggs, which being covered in Dung, and thereby heated, produced the Worms. The
Emperor promised them a great reward to bring their undertaking to effect; who
returned into India, brought those Eggs to Constartinaple, and being by the
means aforesaid grown to Worms, fed them with Mulbery leaves, and so caused
the making of Raw-silke in the Roman Territories.

The Winter being ended, Isdigunas came to Chosroes with the Money, and the
Treaty agreed upon, who sealed the same and took the Money; wherewith levying
agreat Army of Hunnes, he sent them to Mermeroes, resolving not to quit Lazica.
Mermeroes with these Hunnes and his Persians and Elephants marched against the
Towns of Lazica, whom the Romans encountered not, but under the command of
Martinus fortified themselves about the mouth of the Phasis; and lay quiet, in
the company of King Gubazes. Mermeroes led the Army first against a Castle
where he understood the Sister of Gubazes to be; but the Garrison; and the
strength of the place beat him from thence, and caused him to retire without
doing any hurt in that journey either to Romans or Lazians. Marching into
Abasgia, he found the narrow and rocky passage into the same possessed by a Roman
Garrison, who opposed his entrance. So that he drew back, and went against
Archaecpolis; and not prevailing there neither, he retired with his Army: which
the Romans followed, and in that fast Country intercepted many, and killed the
chief Commander of the Sabirian Hunnes. But fighting about the dead body, the
Persians forced away the Enemy, and retired to Coitaisis in Mucheirisis. Such
were the successes of the Armies in Lazica.

CHAP. XI.
IN Asrica all things proceeded fairly for the Romans, by the incredible
successes of John the General, who had drawn to his party Cutzinas, a Prince
of Numidia, then vanquished all the other Numidians in a battle, and soon after
brought Antalas and Jabdas, (who were Princes of Moors in Byzacium and
Numidia) to follow him in the quality of slaves. So that in Africa the Romans
had no Enemies, and not many subjects, whom the former wars and mutinies had
almost wasted.

In the mean time in Europe, the Gepades, who (as I said formerly) made a truce
with the Lombards, not ending their differences, resolved upon a war again,
which grew as hot as ever: The Gepades being led by Thorisin, and the Lombards
by Anauin; followed by great multitudes on both sides. They came near, but the
armies discerned not one another; when a sudden Panick fear, without any cause
appearing, frighted both the armies so, that they ran away, leaving their
Commanders with some few only behind: who neither with fair words nor threats
could stopp them. Auduin not knowing the Enemy was in the same case, sent an
Embassage to the Enemy for truce. The Ambassadors, finding the Gepades to have
had the same fortune with themselves, demanded of Thorisin, whether his people
were gone; they are fled (quoth Thorisin) none pursuing, and so are the
Lombards, said they: since you deal truly with us, we will conceal nothing from
you. And since God is pleased that these nations shall not perish, and has cast
on us both this saving fear, let us concur with that gracious sentence, and
make an end of the war. Be it so, quoth Thorisin, and so a Cessation was
concluded for two years, and in the mean time to send their Heralds, mutually
and fully to compose the differences: but not being able to end the same, they
fell again to the way of hostility. The Gepados feared that the Romans would
join with the Lombards, and therefore they sent to the Cuturgurians, Hunnes
inhabiting on this side the Lake of Maeotis, to assist them in this war against
the Lombards. They sent them twelve thousand men, commanded by Chinialus, an
experienced Soldier. But one year of the Cessation being yet to come, and the
Gepaedes having no occasion to use such a multitude, persuaded them in the
interim, as upon the by, to invade the Romans, who keeping no exact Guards upon
the Ister, into Illyrium and Thrace, the Gepaedes transported the Hunnes into
the Empire; who spoiled the country, and sacked the Towns. The Emperor hereupon
sent to the Vfurgurians, Hunnes planted beyond the Lake of Maotis, blaming
their unjust lying still, it being most unjust to neglect their friends
perishing; alleging how the Cuturgurians being their neighbors, and
receiving great pensions yearly from Constantinople, ceased not to wrong them,
but made daily inroades and spoils upon them: and they, the Cuturgurians
getting no share of the same, were careless of the Romans their ancient
friends, and saw them spoiled and ransackt by the Cuturgurians, without
vindicating them from those oppressions. The Vturgurians upon this remonstrance
of the Emperor, and of the many presents they had received from him, and upon
receipt of more money now, were won to invade the Cuturgurians country. They
passed the Tanais, accompanied with two thousand Tetraxite Goths, who dwelt
near them, and the army was commanded by Sandill, a wise and a valiant man, and
experienced in many wars. The Cuturgurians incountred them in a battle long
fought; but were routed, and many were slain. And the Vturgurians took their
wives and children captives, and went home. During the battle, some thousands
of Romans, who had been taken captives by the Cuturgurians, slipped away, and
recovered their native countries unfollowed, and getting so in that which most
concerned them, the benifit of the others victory. The Emperor sent Aratius to
Chinialus, General of the Cuturgurians, to tell him the news of his own
country, and to persuade them with money to quit the Roman territory, who
hearing what the Vturgurians had done, took the money, and came to this accord:
That without killing, or taking prisoners, or other hurt doing, they should
retire home through the Roman Subjects, as friends: That if they could continue
in their country, they should observe says to the Romans, if they could not,
they should come back, and have towns given them by the Emperor in Thrace;
and being Confederates with the Romans, should guard the provinces from all
Barbarians whatsoever. Of them already two thousand were come into Roman Land
with their wives and children, after receiving that overthrow, from the
Vturgurians; and were led by Sisinnion, who served formerly under Belisarius,
against Gelimer, and the Vandales. They became servants to the Emperor, and
were seated in Thrace. Sandill, King of the Vturgurians grew angry at this;
that he should punish the Cuturgurians of the same Race, and expel them for
wrongs done to the Romans, and that now the Emperor should entertain them to
live among the Romans, and better then ever they did. He sent Ambassadors to
the Emperor to expostulate; but without Letters: for the Hunnes know no
letters, nor Grammar, nor breed their Children in the toiles about learning.
The Ambassadors having access to the Emperor, told him as they were directed.

That their King Sandill bade them say, that he heard an old saying, when he
was a boy, how a Woolfe may change the color of his hair, but not his nature,
which will never be mended: that he knew by his own experience also, as a
rusticall Barbarian could observe it, how shepherds breed their Dogs in their
houses from little Puppies, who have the good nature to remember the kindness
of them who seed them: and the Shepherds do this, that they may have the Dogs
to chase away the Wolves, and to protect the poor sheep. That this is used
every where, no where Dogs invading the stock, nor Wolves defending it. And he
does not think that in the Emperors Dominions, (though abounding with so many
strange things) there is any varying from this constant Law of nature; which
se^ing it is universally the same, that he conceives it not good for the
Emperor to harbor this wolvish race of Cuturgurians, nor to bring in such
turbulent neighbors; nor to take them as sojourners, whom he could not bear
being strangers, and that they will shortly snew their nature to the Romans.
That the Romans shall never want Enemies to destroy them, when even those who
shall be beaten may hope to be in a better Condition; nor will their friends
hinder inreads into their country, when the vanquished shall have more respect
from them then they, after the best they can do. As themselves live now in a
barren country, while the Cuturgurians have plenty of corn, and surset in their
Wine sellars, and seed upon every dish. The wanderers are now admitted to the
Bathes, and have their Jewels, their silks and imbroyderies of gold to wear,
and yet they carried innumerable Romans into their country captives; where they
inflicted on them the basest abuses, scourging them, nay killing them without
any offense committed, and in other things acting upon them the humor and
power of Barbarian Masters; but that the Uturgurians set them at Liberty, and
restored them to their country by the sweat and ^^ile of a war. And now that
the rewards of them both are very unequal; while themseives still enjoy the
miseries of their poor country; but the Cuturgurians share a part of the
country of those very men, who by the valor of the Uturgurians were delivered
from thraldom under the other.

Thus spoke the Vturgurian Ambassadors, whom the Emperor soothed with store of
gifts, and shortly sent them home.

CHAP. XII.
IN these times was a great War between the Varnians and the Islanders of
Brittia: The Varnians are seated beyond the River Isler, and extend to the
Northern Ocean, and the Rhyne, which River divides them, and the Francks, and
the other Nations inhabiting those parts. All which Nations on both sides the
Rhyne are named Germans. Brittia lies on the Ocean Sea, distant from the
Continent but twenty five miles, opposite to the mouth of the Rhyne, and lying
between Brittany and * Thule. Brittany lies to the West of Spain five hundred
miles, Thule with this Author is Norway and part of Denmark.
but Brittia lies at the bottom of Gaul upon the Ocean, Northward to Spain
and Brittany: And Thule lies in the uttermost bounds of the Ocean, Northward.
This Island of Brittia is possessed by three populous Nations, and over each is a
King, and they are named Angli, Frisons, and Brittians. The people are so
fruitful, that yearly they transport many Families to the Francks, who plant
them in desert Countries, and upon that ground pretend an interest to the
Island; and lately in an Embassage to the Emperor Justinian, sent some Angli
in company, as if the Island were theirs. Over the Varnians one Hermegis^lus
lately reigned, who took to Wife a Sister of Theodebert King of the Francks,
his former Wife being dead; by whom he had a Son named Radisis, betroathed to
the Sister of the King of the Angli in Brittia: This Hermegliscus riding to
take the avre, a Raven from a tree croaked at him; he told his Noble men
attending him, that the Bird in her language did foretell his death to be
within forty days after: And I (quoth he) for your peace and security made an
alliance with the Francks by mine own Wife, and contracted a Brittian Lady to
my Son: But now being suddenly to dye without Issue from my now Wife, and my
Son being yet without his Bride, let me communicate my thoughts to you, and
when I am dead, if you like my advise, put it in execution. I hold it more
advantageous for you, to have alliance with the Francks then with the
Brittians; who being Islanders, cannot join with you in time, nor easily:
whereas nothing severs the Francks, but the Rhyne, from you. And being so near
and so powerful, they are at hand both to help and hurt you; and hurt they
will, if this alliance restrain them not: An overgrowne neighbor proves
heavy, and apt to do wrong, and the means of a War are easy against men at
the next door. Quit therefore that betroathed Islander, and the Money she
has received restore, according to the Law of Nations, for a reparation of the
refusal of her: and let my Son Radisis marry his Mother-in-law, which our
Laws permit.

Hermegisclus gave this advise, and at the fortieth day dyed; and his Son
taking the Kingdom, renounced his betroathed Spouse by the persuasion of his
Nobles, and took his Mother-in-law to Wife. The contracted Lady could not
brook the scorn done her, but was eager to revenge it. For so tender of their
honor are the Barbarians of those parts, that after the name only of a
marriage without consummation, if the woman be refused, she thinks her self
professed a Strumpet. First she sent Messengers to demand the reason of this
rejection, seeing he could not charge her with incontinence, nor any other
offense; but that way prevailing nothing, with a manly courage she resolved
upon a War: She got four hundred Ships and an hundred thousand men, whom her
self led, with one of her Brothers to assist her. The Brittians are the
bravest Infantry we know, but so unexercised in Horsemanship, that they know
not what a Horse is, nor ever saw in Brittia the Picture of any, where never
any was bred.

When upon Ambassages they come abroad among the Romans, or Francks, and are
put to necessity of riding, men lift them up, and set them upon their Horses;
and so take them down again when they are to alight. The Varaians also are
all Footmen. Aboard the aforesaid Fleet were none but rowers, for the Brittians
have no Sails: Being landed upon the Continent, the Virgin-Generall encamped
at the mouth of the Rhyne, where staying her self, she sent out her Brother
against the Enemy: He finding the Varnians near the Sea shore encamped, had a
battle with them and defeated them, where many fell, and the rest with their
King fled, and were followed by the Angles as far as footmen could; who
retyring to the Camp, were by the Lady chid, and especially her Brother, for
having nothing worthy such an Army, seeing he brought not Radisis to her alive.
She selected then her best men, and charged them to bring the man to her: who
in the end found him concealed in a Wood, and brought him bound to the Lady. He
stood before her trembling, expecting some cruel death: But she only
reproaching to him the unjust affront he had done her, asked him why he would
neglect his Vow, and bed another Woman, his own Spouse not having committed
whoredom. He excused all upon the injunctions of a Father, and the importunity
of his Nobles, mingling his apology with supplications, and imputing the crime
to necessity, promising now, if it were her pleasure, to live with her, and by
his future services to cure his former injury. The Lady was pleased, and
Radisis loosed from his bonds was vouchsafed all manner of courtesy: And
immediately he sent home the Sister of Theodebert, and married this Brittian
Lady,

In Brittia also is a Wall dividing a great part of the Island in two; the
reason of it is, because to the Eastward is good air according to the seasons,
and many civil Inhabitants, and they have Corn and Fruit Trees in abundance,
and are well stored with waters. But to the Westward all is so contrary, that a
man cannot live there half an hour, the Country being possessed with Adders
and Snakes, and all sorts of venomous creatures. The natives affirm, that so
soon as a man passes to the other side of the Wall, he instantly falls dead
with the pestilentiall air; and the like happens to Beasts.

In this description I am to mention a Story, or rather a Fable; I cannot think
it true, though many men affirm to have seen it and been actors in it, neither
must I absolutely reject it, least professing to write of the particularities
of this Island, I be thought ignorant of the things done in it. They report
that to this part of the Island are transported the Souls of the departed, by
a means, which though I have heard in very good earnest related, yet I
conceive that the first rumor of it sprung from some dreaming heads. Along the
Ocean shore, over against Brittia, are many Villages, inhabited by Fishermen,
Husbandmen, and Boatmen, who traffic in the Island; subjects they are to the
Francks, but pay no Tribute, the exemption from which is granted unto them for
a service which I will now relate. They have the employment of conducting
Souls departed imposed on them by turns; when any man's turn comes, they go
home to bed toward night, expecting their fellow conductor; and at midnight
they find the door opened, and hear a softly voice calling them to the
business: Instantly they rise, and go down to the Seaside, finding themselves
constrained to go on, but they perceive not by whom: Boats they find ready,
with no men in them, and aboard they go and sit to their Oars. They perceive
the Boats loaded with Passengers even to the Deck; and the place of their Oars
not an inch from the water: They see nothing, but after an hours rowing, come
a Land in Brittia, whereas in their own Boats they have much ado to pass
over in a day and a night, having no Sails, but rowing only. They instantly
land their Fare, and are gone away with their Boats suddenly grown light, and
swimming with the current, and having all save the Keele above water: They see
no men leaveing the Boat, but they hear a voice, relating to some, who it
seems stays there for them, the names of the Passengers, with their Titles,
and additions of what Fathers they were; and (if women) of what Husbands. But
to return to my History, and to the Gothic War, having already spoken of the
successes of other Provinces.

CHAP. XIII.
THE Emperor, as I said before, had sent for Belisarius home, where he held
him in honor, upon the death of Germanus: yet he would not send him into
Italy; and though he were General of the East, he made him Commander of the
Guards of his body, and kept him at Constantinople: And Belisarius was the
chief of all the Romans in dignity; some indeed had the priority of being made
Patricians and Consulls before him but yet they yielded the precedence to him,
and were ashamed to make use of the Law, and to assume the right, which that
gave them, against so eminent a virtue; and the Emperor took it well of them.
But John, Sisters son of Vitalianns, past that Winter in Salonae, whom the
Roman Commanders in Italy expecting daily, forbear any action. And the Winter
ended, and the sixteenth year of this War wrirten by Procopius.

The next year John resolving to lead the Army from Salonae against Totilas,
In^ipit Annus 17 bell Goth man 25 Justice Anno dom. 551.
the Emperor commanded him to stay the coming of Narses the Eunuch, whom he
had made his absolute General in this war. The reason of this determination
of the Emperor was not known; for who can declare the counsels of his heart
without his consent? But men did conjecture that his Majesty did consider how
the rest of the Commanders would grudge to have their power lessened, and to be
made subordinate to John; whereupon either by contrary opinions, or through
envy, they might purposely prejudice his affairs. I heard also this story at
my former being at Rome from one of the Senators, That in the Reign of
Atalaricus, a heard of Cattle about evening came into Rome, and past through
the Market place, called Forum pacis, where stood the ancient Temple of peace,
and was thunder-strucken. Over against this Market place stands an ancient
Conduit, and upon it a brazen Bullock, the work of Phidias the Athenian, or of
Lysippus; there being in the same place many Statues of their making, and upon
one the name of Phidias is engraven. There is here also the Bullock made by
Myron: The ancient Romans being most studious to make all the fairest pieces of
Greece the ornaments of Rome. But the Senator told me, that an Ox of this
Heard was left behind the rest, and got up to the Conduit, and stood above by
the brazen Bullock; and that a Tulcan passing by, a plain country fellow in
appearance, but a pretended Soothsayer (as all the Tuscan are) said, That one
day an Eunuch should depose the Prince of Rome. The Tuscan and his Divination
was then laughed at, as all predictions are, before they be justified by the
event, seeming till then ridiculous and fabulous: But now all men admire that
his interpretation, being convinced by the event. So that Narses was chosen
General against Totilas, either the Emperor wisely foreseeing the success,
or fortune determining the same: And Narses with a Gallant Army, and store of
Treasure was dispatched. He stayed a while in Thrace at Phillippopolis. his way
being stopped by an army of Hunnes, who drove and carried all away without
opposition; but they being gone some toward Thessalonica, some toward
Constantinaple, he marched on, being hardly disengaged from them.

While John thus staid for Narses at S^ilonae and Narses entangled with those
Hunns marched slowly: T^tilas looking for Narses coming, placed in Rome some of
the Senators, confined in Campania, and other Romans, Commanding them to guard
the City, and professing to repent for what he had done to it. He had burnt the
most part of it, especially beyond the Tiber; and these men being grown little
better then Slaves, and stripped of all they had, were so unable to vindicate the
public, that they could not get every man his ownpeculiar right: and yet are
the Romans the best patriots in the world, studying to recover from all parts,
what belongs to their City, and to save all the ancient Ornaments of Rome from
perishing. During so long a subjection to Barbarians, how did they preserve
their public buildings and ornaments of their City! Even the orginall
monuments of their race do yet last, the sufficiency of those ancient workmen
holding out against the ruins of time, and the negligence of men Among which
there yet stands a miraculous spectacle, which my self have seen; the ship of
Aenaeas the founder of their City: it is for one row of oars only, and of a
huge length, being 120 foot long, and 25. broad. It is so high only, as that
men may row in it. The Timbers in it are not mortessed into one another, nor
fastened by iron; but are every one of a piece, such as were never heard of, and
are only found in this ship, that we can learn. For the keele being all one
piece, reaches from the stern to the foreship, and bows by little and little
into a convenient crookedness, then strangely turns straight again, and most
aptly in proportion. The ribs also of the ship reach from side to side,
crooking downwards, and bowing so handsomely, that one would think the hollow
bulk of the Ship to be made round and turned with instruments; either nature
providing such a crookedness in the Timber for the present use, or else those
uneven ribs were fitted by men's hands, or Engines. Every planck also reaches
from the stern to the foreship, being all of a piece, and have only spikes of
iron to fasten them to the ships ribs, and to make up her sides. Thus does
this ship affoard a sight beyond expression; strange workman-ships naturally
rising above discourse, and as they subdue common things by thenew invention,
so over-mastring evenspeech it self. And the ship is strong and lusty yet, and
sound all through, none of the Timbers having any rottenness appearing; as if
the ship-wright (whatsoever he were) had lately built it.

Totilas also manned 300 Galleys with Goths, whom he commanded to pillage, and
spoil the coast of Greece. This fleet hurt nothing, till it came to Corcyra,
anciently the country of the Phaeacians; being the only inhabited Island in
this passage from the straits of Scylla. Having been often upon that Sea, I was
curious where the Island of Calypso was: I found only three small islands, some
thirty seven miles from Phaeacia, (now Corcyra) called Othonae, from whence one
may imagine Ulysses to have past to Corcyra, being no farther off, either in a
boat made of a sudden, or otherwise; this is but my conjecture only. It is
hard to discourse exactly of things so ancient: Time changes the names of
places, and the opinion formerly held of them. Upon the Sea shore in Corcyra
stands the model of a ship made of white stone, compounded of many several
stones, which some suppose to be the model of that which transported Ulysses
into Ithaca, after his entertainment with the Phaeacians. Neptune turned the
ship worch carried home Ulisses into a rock, so that it must be of on pu^^.
But * the being not of one stone, and the Letters engraven upon it, proclaim
the same to have been set there by some Merchant in ancient time, and dedicated
to Jupiter Casius; the town also where this ship stands being yet called
Cas^^pe. In Euboea at Geraestum, there is also such a model of a ship,
dedicated by Agamemnon to Diana, to please her with this also, as he had, by
the sacrifice of his Daughter Iphigenia, obtained of her a passage for the
Grecian army to Troy. Which is testisied by Letters engraven upon it either
then or afterward; the most of which time has defaced, but at the beginning of
the verses, they appear thus.

-- (...)
(...),
(...).
Here Agamemnon placed this black-pitcht Bark,
Of the Greeks Army now at Sea a Mark.
And the Inscription thus, (...).
(...) --
Tenichus built
This to Diana Bolosia. --


For so anciently they called Eileithuia, or Lucina; terming the Throws and
pangs of Childbirth, (...). But I return from whence I digressed.

CHAP. XIV.
THE Goths with their fleet came to Corcyra, and forraged the Island, and the
Islands also of Syntae. They landed also upon the main land of Epirus, and
pillaged the towns about Dodona and Nicopolis it self, and Anchialus, where
Anchises, the Father of Aenaeas sailing from Troy dyed, and gave the name to
the Town. They took upon the coast also many Greek ships, and some
transporting Provisions to Narses Army. Totilas likewise sent an army into
Picenia to take Ancona, commanded by Skipuar, and Giblas and Gundulse, (called
by some Indulfe) formerly of the lifeguard to Belisarius. He gave them forty
seven galleys to block up the Castle by sea also. The Seige lasting long, and
the besieged wanting victual, Valerianus being at Ravenna, and unable alone to
succor it, wrote this Letter to John, Vitalianus his Sisters Son, at Salonae.

Ancona you know is only left us within the Jonian Gulf, if it be left us: it
is so sharply besieged, that I fear our succors will come too late, and we
shall use our endeavor after our opportunity. I forbear to write more; the
necessity of the besieged claims all our time, and their danger permits not a
long Epistle, requiring succor swifter then speech.

John, though the Emperor had forbidden him to stir, adventured to go,
conceiving the necessity, whereinto fortune had cast them, to dispense with the
Emperors instructions: He chose his best soldiers, and put them aboard forty
Galleys, swift of Sail, and well built for a Sea fight; and having furnished
them with all necessaries, came with them before Ancona. Whether soon after
came Valerianus with twelve ships: Upon conference together they rose from
thence, and Anchored at a place called Senogallia, not far from Ancona. The
Goths General also manned forty seven ships with their choice men, leaving the
rest to block up the Castle: and sailed against the Romans. Skipuar commanded
the men left behind, and Giblas and Gundulfe those in the Ships. The Fleets
being near, each drew their ships as close together as might be and exhorted
their men. John and Valerianus spoke thus.

Think not fellow Soldiers! that you are to fight now only for the Castle of
Ancona, and the Romans in it; but that the main of the war depends upon this
battle; and that the conclusion of our fortune is to be drawn in the same Lot
with it. Consider, how the chief moment of war consists in the expenses of it,
and that they who want supplies, are of necessity to be beaten in the End.
Valor and hunger cannot dwell long together, nature not enduring to pine with
famine, and to fight bravely too: And other fortress we have none between
Otranto and Ravenna, where we can lay in any provisions for our selves or our
Horses. And the Enemy being Master of the Country we have no place our friend,
from whence to furnish any small proportion of victual. In Ancona is our only
hope, where such as come from the opposite land may put in and ride safely. So
that if we win this battle, and thereby assure Ancona, we may hope well of all
the rest of this war; but if we be defeated, I will not speak any thing that is
harsh, God grant unto the Romans the perpetual Dominion of Italy. And consider
too, that if you speed ill now, you cannot so much as run away; the Enemy
possessing all the land, and being also absolute master of the Sea. Our only
hope of living now is in our arms, and depends upon our actions in this fight.
Fight bravely therefore, having this in your minds, that if you now be beaten,
it will be your last beating; if you conquer, you will be rancked with honor
among the most happy.

Thus John and Valerianus; and the Goths Commander spoke thus. These wretched
men expulsed out of Italy, and long hid in some corners of the Sea and Land,
seeing now they dare to sight with us again; it is our parts to check their
unadvised presumption, least it grow higher being let alone. Folly, not
restrained in the beginning, proceeds to endless daring, and at last ruins
those it incounters. Show them then quickly, that they are Greeks, and
naturally cowards, and now grown desperate with being beaten. Take heed least
they prosper upon this Experiment; Cowardice despised, becomes bold, and
fool-hardinesse in the end may grow to be incapable of fear. And if you do
valiantly, think not that they can stand long. A spirit not measured out
proportionably to the power of him that uses it, commonly rises before the
business; but when the battle is begun, it suckes. Remember therefore the
often trials this Enemy has made of your valor; and from their then success,
argue, that they are not now suddenly become better men; but have rashly
undertaken as then, and will go off with the like fortune.

After these exhortations, the battle began, and was stoutly sought, and
something like a land fight. They stood with all their ships in front against
each other; and plied their Bows. The forwardest grapled, and fought from the
decks with Javelin and sword, as in a field. But the Goths unexperienced in
Sea-sights maintained the encounter with much disorder. Some stood aloof,
whereby the Romans set on them single: Some came on so thick, that they fell,
foul with their fellows for want of Room. Their ships stood jumbled together
like so many baskets that they could neither shoot at the Enemy, nor manage
their Javelins nor swords; but were perpetually employed in getting clear of
one another, with loud clamours, and confused pushing off with their long
poles; intangling their front for want of room, and then getting aloof, and
both to their own mischeise: their cries and hollowings were not against the
Enemy, but to their own men to keep off; and thus puzzelling one another, they
were the chiefest cause of the Enemies victory. Who in their close fights did
valiantly, and in their Sea fights skillfully; keeping their ships in front,
not too far asunder, nor more close then was convenient; And still joining and
severing in good proportion, when they saw an Enemies ship scattered, they
struck at her, and with ease sunck her; and where they saw the Enemy in
confusion, thither they sent clouds of arrows; then seeing them wearied with
the toil of their disorder, they fell on them and cut them in pieces. The
Goths desponding, did neither consider their cross fortune, nor their own
Errors; and being not able either to use their ships, nor to fight from their
decks they left fighting and fell to a dangerous quietness, committing
themselves to fortune; and then betook themselves to a shameful and disorderly
retreat, having no remembrance either of resisting, or of handesomly flying;
but being scattered among their Enemies, they stood amazed. Eleven ships got
away; the rest the Romans took, or sunck with the men in them. Giblas was taken
Prisoner; but Gundulse escaped in the eleven ships, and the men being landed,
he set them on fire, that they might not come into the Enemies hands. Then they
went a foot to Ancona, where relating the accident to their companions, they
all retired from thence, leaving their camp for the Romans, and they ran
tumultuously into Auximum. The Romans came to the Goths camp before Ancona, and
took it, then put provisions into the Castle, and sailed away, Valerianus to
Ravenna, and John to Salonae. This overthrow much abated the power of Totilas.

In Sicily at the same time thus it was. Liberius was sent for home to
Constantin^ple, and Artabanes by the Emperor was made sole Commander of the
army in Sicily; Who took in all the Castles from the few Goths left in the
Island, after some sieges and overthrowes given them. The Goths were terrified
therewith, and with the late defeat at Sea, and their hearts with these losses
were so dejected, that if any succors should come to the Romans, they had no
thought of subsisting, or of keeping their footing in Italy; nor could they
hope to obtain any thing from the Emperor. For Totilas had sent many
Ambassadors to the Emperor, showing how the Francks had seized upon a great
share of Italy, and how the rest was become wast: That the Goths should quit to
him Sicily and Dalmatia, which only remained unspoyled; and should pay tribute
for the wasted Lands in Italy, and serve the Emperor against all the World,
and in other things be obedient to him. But the Emperor would take no notice
of these overtures, but still sent away the Ambassadors, being distasted at
the very name of Goths, and purposing to chase them out of the Roman Empire.

CHAP. XV.
NOT long before dyed Theodebert King of the Francks, having unjustly made
tributary some Towns in Liguria, and the Cottian Alps, and a great part of
Venetia: The Francks thus getting without blows, what the two Antagonists were
busily fighting for. In Venetia the Goths had little; the Sea-townes the Romans
had, and the Francks seized upon the rest, while neither the Goths nor Romans
had leisure to make new Enemies. The Goths also came to this agreement with the
Francks; that during the War with the Emperor, both should hold what they had,
and forbear hostility. If Totilas conquer, that then the said acquisitions of
the Francks be disposed, as should be agreed between the parties. But in the
Kingdom of Theodebert succeeded Theudibald his Son, to whom the Emperor sent
Leontius a Senator, and Son-in-law to Athanasius, his Ambassador, to persuade
a League against Totilas, and to demand the Towns in Italy, unjustly held by
Theodebert, and surprised during the Truce. The Ambassador spoke thus to
Theudibald. Others, Sir, (it may be) have had Accidents which they expected
not, but no men (I think) such as the Romans have had from you. The Emperor
entered not into this War, nay not into any expostulation with the Goths,
before the Francks had received great sums of money of him, and had promised
aides, and the conjunction of their Forces: Which Accord they have not only
not performed, but have done us injuries, which none could imagine. Your Father
Theodebert has intruded into a Province by the Emperor, acquired with much
toil and hazard, and with the Francks consent. But I come not to chide, nor
complain, but to demand only, and therewithal to give you this advise; to
establish the prosperity you have, and to let the Romans have that which is
theirs. Some small thing often times unjustly gotten, is the occasion of losing
great and powerful acquisitions; stable happiness, and injustice never
meeting in one point. I advise you likewise to join in this War, according to
your Fathers engagement to the Emperor. Nothing becomes good Sons better,
then to rectify their Fathers erroneous Proceedings, and to ratify what they
have well done.

The wish of a wise man is, that his Son may emulate his virtuous Actions, and
if he have done any thing amiss, he wishes another may rather imitate it, then
his Son. Indeed you should not have needed invitation to this War against the
Goths, originally your Enemies, and false to you of old, and ever in War with
you, without truce or quarter. Now for fear of us they fawn upon you, but
being rid of us, they will soon show their intentions. Wicked men change not
their Natures with their Fortunes; in adversities indeed they hide them,
especially when they have need of a Neighbor. Consider this, and renew your
Amity with the Emperor, and take a revenge against your ancient Enemies.
Theudibald answered this Speech in this manner.

It is not now just in you, to demand our assistance against the Goths, now in
Amity with us; If we prove unsure to them, we shall not be trusty to you. A bad
disposition to Friends being once discovered, puts a man for fear out of the
right way. Concerning the Towns you mention, my Father Theodebert was no
oppressor of his Neighbors, nor intruder: And it appears so, for I am not
rich; And he took not the Towns from the Emperor, but got them fairly from
Totilas, the then owner of them, which should please the Emperor, to see one
who wronged him, disseised by another, and thereby justly punished, unless
because he would have them himself, and cannot get them, he will envy him
that can. But let us refer the examination of these things to Arbitrators: If
it shall appear that my Father has taken any thing unjustly from the Romans,
there is reason we should give satisfaction: And we will shortly send our
Ambassadors to Constantinople, touching the same. With this he dismissed
Leontius, and sent Leudard a Franck his Ambassador to Justinian, with three
others; who at Constantinople effected what they came about.

Totilas desired to get the Islands belonging to Africa, and he sent an Army to
Corsica, and Sardinia, which he made tributary to him. John the General of
Africa, sent presently to Sardinia some Forces, who besieged the City of
Carnalis; blocking it up only but not able to assault it, having a very
sufficient Garrison of Goths within, which sallied suddenly, and routed the
Romans; who having lost many, ran to their Ships, and returned to Carthage,
where they wintered, purposing in the Spring to renew the Voyage with greater
preparations. There grows an Herb in this Island of Sardinia, which being
tasted, puts men into fatal Convulsions, wherein they seem to laugh, and
quickly dye of it; whence is called the Sardonian laughter. Corsica was
anciently named Cyrnus, and in it, as there is a Generation of Dwarfes, so
there are races of horses not much bigger then sheep.

A mighty troup at that time of Slavonians, fell upon Illyrium, committing
mischeifs not to be expressed. Justinian sent against them an army commanded by
the Sons of Germanus, and others. Who being much fewer then the Enemy, durst
not fight; but infested their Rear, and cut off some, and sent of them some
prisoners to the Emperor. These Barbarians did infinite hurt, long pillaging
the Country, and strewing the high ways with dead bodies, and then went home
with innumerable prisoners, and all their booty, none incountring them. The
Romans could not infest them in their passage over the Ister, because the
Gaepedes transported them, and had for every head a gold stater for their fare:
This troubled the Emperor, having no means to restrain their passage over the
River Ister, to spoil the Empire, nor their sudden retreat, which made him
resolve to make a League with the Gaepedes who were then again quarrelling with
the Lombards, and fearing the power of the Romans. (who had lately sworn a
league with the Lombards) they endeavored to be admitted friends and
Auxiliaries. They sent Ambassadors accordingly, and the Emperor swore a league
with them also, and upon the demand of the Ambassadors, twelve Senatots swear
it likewise. Shortly after, the Emperor sent an army to aid the Lombards
against the Gaepedes, whom he charged since the League, to have transported
Slavonians over the River Ister against the Romans. The Army was commanded by
Iustine and Justinian the Sons of Germanus, and Aratius and Swartwall, formerly
made Prince of the Herulians by the Emperor, but banished (as I said before) by
the Herulians of Thule, and returning to Constantinople made General of the
Cohorts there. There was likewise Amalafridas a Goth, the Daughters Son of
Amalafridas (who was Sister to Theoderick) by Hermenifrid Prince of the
Thuringians, who being brought to Constantinople by Belisarius with Vitigis,
the Emperor made him Commander of Roman troops, and betrothed his Sister to
Auduin Prince of the Lombards. Of the aforesaid army only, that Amalafridas
with his troops, came to the Lombards, the rest by the Emperors direction
staid about the City of Vlpiana, in Illyrium, where was a mutiny among the
inhabitants about things, wherein Christians contend among themselves, as shall
be set down in my relations concerning the same. The Lombards with Amalafridas
invaded the Gaepedes, and in a battle defeated them, and killed many: And
Auduin their King sent the good news to the Emperor of his victory; but
complained of the not coming up of the Emperors army according to the League;
so great numbers of Lombards having been so lately sent by him to aid Narses
against Totilas.

CHAP. XVI.
GReat Earthquakes at that time happened in Boeotia; and Achaia, and other
parts of Greece, about the Gulf of Crisaeum, overthrowing many Cities, as
Chaeronea, Corone, Patra, and Naupactus. Many men perished, and in many places,
by the renting of the Earth, were made bottomless holes; some whereof closed
again afterward, some continue still so, that the people are to compass much
Ground to come to one another. The arm of the Sea between Thessaly and
Boeotia, flowed up into the land about the City of Echinae, and Scarphia in
Boeotia, and overwhelmed all the Towns there: The waters lay long, and men went
into the Island lying upon that arm of the Sea on dry land; while the Sea
leaving her ancient current covered the firm land even to the mountains.
Afterward it returned to the channels again, leaving the fishes upon the land;
a strange and prodigious accident; For some tried to sees and eat them; but no
sooner heated, but they turned to a slymy matter, extremely putrified. In one
town, where the greatest breach was, the people being assembled at a great
festival, more men perished then in all Greece beside.

But in Italy, the Crotonians, and the Garrison commanded by Palladius, being
sharply besieged by the Goths, and wanting food, had sent to Artabanes in
Sicily, protesting, if they were not instantly succored, to yield the Town and
themselves too. But no succor was sent; and so ended the winter, and the
seventeenth year of this war, written by Procopius.

The Emperor commanded the Garrison at Thermopylae, in Greece, Incipit Annus
18. Bell. Goth. in an. 26. Justiniani. Et An. Dom. 552.
to sail for Italy and to relieve Crotona. Who getting a fair wind, came
unexpected into the Haven of Crotona. The Goths upon sight of the fleet rose
from their siege in much fear and tumult, and fled some by sea to Tarentum,
others ran from their trenches up to the mountain of Scyllaeum. These things
much dejected the Goths: And Ragnaris Commander of the Garrison in Tarentum,
and Morras of that in Archerontia, two principal Goths, with their Soldiers
assent, had a treaty with Bacurius, the Son of Peranius, Commander of the
Romans in Otranto, for receiving assurances from the Emperor, and thereupon to
deliver up the towns in their Guard: the Capitulation Bacurius took with him
to Constantinople. And now Narses marched from Salonae against Totilas, with a
very gallant army; having received much treasure from the Emperor to levy and
furnish the same, and above al to pay to the Soldiers in Italy their arreares,
which were grown great, being due for many years. He was with this money also to
invite the revolted, to return again from the Goths to the Romans. The Emperor
in the beginning of this war, made it very carelessly, but now his preparations
were very great; for Narses seeing him eager to have him to lead the army into
Italy, did like a brave General, protesting herein not to serve the Emperors
commands, unless he might have competent forces; and by this resolution, he
procured money, men, and arms, befitting the Roman Empire. Then with much
alacrity he made up gallant companies out of the Constantinopolitan Guards, and
Garrisons of Thrace,, and many he raised in Illyrium. With him went John with
his own Troops, and those left him by Germanus his Father in Law. Auduin also,
prince of the Lombards, in accomplishment of the league, and for great sums
given him by the Emperor, sent five and twenty hundred selected men for
auxlliaries, accompanied with a retinue of above three thousand men. Narses had
also three thousand Herulians, all horsemen, commanded by Philimuth and others,
and he had many Hunnes. Dagistthaeus also was with him with his troops, being
discharged of his imprisonment for the same purpose. Cabades went also with
many Persian fugitives, who was the Son of Zames, and Grandchild of King
Cabades, and long ago came into the Empire; having by the practice of
Chanaranges escaped his uncle Chosroes; and a young Gepaede very valiant, named
Asbadas, with four hundred Gepaedes, good Soldiers. And Aruth an Herulian,
from a child bred among the Romans, and married to the widow of Mauricius the
Son of Mundus, a gallant man, and accompanied with many old Soldiers of his
Nation; John Phagas also commanding many Romans, good Soldiers. Narses was a
man liberal, and most forward in releiving men in want; using his disposition
the more easily, by reason of his great power with the Emperor, so that he had
obliged many, both commanders and common Soldiers; who all upon his being now
General were eager to serve under him, both in acknowledgement of former
favors, and in expectation of great advancements by him. Above all, the
Herulians, and other Barbarians loved him, having done them many benefits.
Being come upon the Confines of Venetia, he sent to the Captains of the
Francks, to demand passage as for friends. They refused it, and protested to
hinder it, both for the Francks good, and for their amity with the Goths,
pretending also a poor excuse; because Narses had with him Lombards, their
greatest Enemies. Narses was troubled at it; but was told by some Italians,
that if the Francks gave him passage, he could not from thence get to Ravenna,
nor further possibly then to Verona. For Totilas had placed in Verona a choice
number of Goths under Teias, a most valiant General, to lie in the Romans way.
This Tejas had stopped up all the passages with works, and made in some places
with much art and labor thickets, in others, ditches, deep holes, and bogs,
and overflowed the Grounds; and himself lay with his army ready to fight with
the Roman army attempting to force their way. This was done by Totilas
direction, knowing how the Romans would not be able to pass along the
Seacoast, by so many great Rivers mouths, which made the shore unpassable; and
how they had not ships enough to transport the whole army at once over the
Gulf, and coming but few at once, that he might easily hinder their landing.
Narses being herewith much perplexed, John, who knew those parts exactly,
advised him to march with the army by the Seashore, the people there being
their subjects; and to be attended with some ships, and many boats, with which
boats they might make a bridge over the currents of those rivers, and so make
their passages: Narses followed this advise, and got to Ravenna with his whole
army.

CHAP. XVII.
DUring the wars, came to Constantinople Ildigisall, a Lombard. The Kingdom of
the Lombards of right belonged to him, but Anduin forced it from him, whereupon
he fled his country. Justinian entertained him with favor, and made him
Captain of one of the Cohorts, called Scholae, which guard the Palace. He had
three hundred followers his country men, who had been bred sometime with him in
Thrace. Auduin demanded him of the Emperor, as a reward due to his freindship,
and late confederacy; but the Emperor would not deliver him to him. This
Ildigisall afterward grew discontented at the meanness of his entertainments;
which Goar perceived, a Goth, taken in Dalmatia, in the wars of Vitigis, and
sent Prisoner to Dalmatia, being a man proud and valiant, and repining at his
condition, and upon the late revolt of the Goths in Italy, he was discovered to
plot against the Roman State. This Goar persuaded Ildigisall to run from
Constantinople, promising to accompany him; and so with some few with them they
came to Apri, a City in Thrace, joined with some Lombards they found there, and
taking many Horses from the Emperors Horse-pastures in Thrace, they went
forward. The Emperor commanded the Companies in Thrace and Illyrium to oppose
these Fugitives. First they were fought with by Cuturgurian Hunnes, lately
planted in Thrace by the Emperor (as has been said) But they beat these
Hunnes and killed many, and then past through Thrace with their Troops, none
disturbing them. In Illyrium they found an Army levied against them, commanded
by Aratius, Recithangus, Leonianus, Arimuth, and others: Who having rode all
day, resolved in the evening to lodge in a woody ground, and taking with them
each three or four Soldiers, went to drink of the River, being extremely
thirsty. Ildigisall and Goar, understanding of their being there by their
Scouts, sell suddenly upon them, and killed them all; and thenceforward marched
on at their ease, the Soldiers perplexed, and without Commanders ryding back
again. They went then to the Gepaedes: from the Gepaedes was also fled one
Vstrigoth, the only Son of Elimund late King of the Gepaedes, who being
suppressed by Thorisin, and but a Boy, fled to the Lombards: but the Lombards,
Gepaedes, and the Emperor making peace, and swearing a perpetual amity, both
the Emperor and Auduin, Prince of the Lombards, sent to Thorisin to deliver to
them their common Enemy Ildigisall, requiring thus, for an expression of their
new made amity, the betraying of a poor man come for refuge. Thorisin demanded
herein the opinion of the principal Gepaedes; who plainly disadvised it,
protesting to choose rather to perish with their Wives and Children, then to be
guilty of so foul an impiety. The Prince being unable to do it without the
consent of his Subjects; and unwilling to revive the War with the Romans and
Lombards, sent to Auduin, and demanded of him Vstrigoth, the Son of Elimund,
provoking him to a like fault, and to betray servant for servant, that his own
loathnesse in the like absurdity might check his request to another. But Auduin
consented, and they both resolved upon this unjust act, and not daring to
acquaint their Subjects with it publicly, each treacherously killed his
Enemy; I forbear to tell the manner, the reports differing, as happens in all
secret actions. And this was the fortune of Ildigisall and Vstrigoth.

But in Ravenna, Valerianus and Justinus the Generals, and the remainder of
the Roman Army joined with Narses. Nine days after Vsdrilas a Goth, Commander
of the Garrison at Ariminum, wrote this Letter to Valerianus:

After you had filled the World with rumors, and possessed Italy with
phantasmes, thinking to scare away the Goths with your bigg looks; now you have
enclosed your selves in Ravenna, that an Enemy may not see your faint hearts,
which you cover with the same brave countenance, and lie with your mingled
multitude of Barbarians upon a Country, wherein you have no right: For shame
rise from thence and fight, show your selves; keep us not thus under a tedious
expectation: We attend you like spectators in a Theater to see a sight.

Narses laughed at the Letter, and the vanity of the Goths, and forthwith began
his journey, leaving Justinus in Ravenna with a Garrison. At Ariminum he found
the Bridge newly taken up by the Goths, and his passage not easy; by the
Bridge it self was never any passage but by one man a breast, unarmed and a
foot, with much ado, though none disturbed; but now numbers opposing, it was
not possible to ferry over. Narses came to the place where the Bridge had been,
and studied upon some expedient in this difficulty. Thither came also Vsdrilas
with some Horse, to observe the Romans proceeding. A Soldier of Narses let
fly an Arrow amongst them, and killed a Horseman; whereat Vsdrilas removed in
some haste, and put himself within the Town, and immediately at another Gate
sallyed with others of his best men; thinking to take Narses suddenly, and to
cut him in pieces, being now searching in another part of the River for a
passage. But some Herulians by accident encountered, and killed him; and a Roman
knowing him, brought his head to Narses; which filled them with courage, to see
God fight for them, and the Goths having a plot upon their General, to lose
their own Commander suddenly, not by any humane design or providence. But
Narses meddled not with Ariminum, though Vsdrilas were slain, nor with any
other Enemy-towne, that he might not retard his maine design, nor distract it
by any by-businesse. And the Enemy in Ariminum, having lost their Commander,
gave no impediment to him in the making a Bridge, by which he past the River at
his ease. He left Via Flaminia, and took the left hand way; for the Enemy had
taken the strong Rock of Petra pertusa, described by me before, and all other
pieces upon Via Flaminia, which made it unpassable for the Romans; and
therefore he left the shorter, and went the quieter way.

CHAP. XVIII.
TOTILAS, hearing what had happened in Venetia, stayed for the Army with Teias
about Rome. Who being all come up save two thousand Horse, without staying
longer for them, he martcht away with the rest, purposing to fight with the
Romans at his best convenience. In his way, hearing the news of Vsdrilas, and
how the Enemy was past the River at Ariminum, he marched through Tuscany to the
Appennine, and in a Village there called Tagi^^ encamped. Afterward came
Narses, and sat down upon the Apennine also, in an even piece of ground,
twelve miles and a half from the Enemy. About the place were many little round
Hills, being the Tombs of the Gauls slain by Camillus and the Romans, and
they are to this day called Busta Gallorum; Busta in Latin being the
remainders and relics of a funeral Pile. Narses sent some unto Totilas to
desire him to to lay aside Hostility, and to entertain at last peaceable
counsels, representing how impossible it was for him, having under him but few
men, and them not held together by any Law, to contend long with the whole
Roman Empire. And he directed his Ambassadors, if they saw Totilas resolved
upon War, to bid him instantly appoint a day for a pitched Battle. They did
acccordingly, and Totilas with a brave countenance told them, that by any means
they must have War. Noble Sir, then quoth they, what time appoint you for the
Battle? Eight days hence, quoth he, we will meet you. Narses hearing this
report from the Ambassadors, suspecting some cunning in Totilas, prepared, as
to fight the next day: And he was in the right; for the next day Totilas came
with his whole Army. And they lay one against the other about a flight shot
off: Both parts had a mind to possess a little Hill, to gain advantage of
upper ground to shoot down on the Enemy, and there being also no beaten way to
the Roman Camp but by that Hill (the Camp being compassed by those round
Hills I mentioned) they esteemed it an important place, for the Goths to gaul
the Romans every way, and for the Romans to prevent that inconvenience. Narses
in the night time sent fifty choice men, who surprised the place, none
opposing. Before the Hill, and near the beaten way opposite to the Goths
Quarters runs a Brook; by this the fifty Romans stood close, body to body,
putting themselves into a square form. In the morning Totilas perceiving them,
sent a Troop of Horse to beat them away; who rode against them furiously and
with clamor, as if they would drive them away at the first onset: But they
stood thick and firm, and fenced close with their Sheilds, which clashing
together, and charging their Lances in sit time, all at once in order, they
bravely resisted the Goths hot assault; frighting their Horses with the noise
of their Sheilds, and the men with the points of their Lances. The Horses flew
back, having space enough to retire, and the men crying aloud to them, could
not be heard; but were thus beaten off. They came on again, and found the same
entertainment, and went off; and failing often, in the end they gave it over.
Totilas commanded out another Troop of Horse, who sped as the former, and so
did others after that; and Totilas having tried many Troops, and doing no good,
in the end quitted the business; whereby these fifty men got much reputation,
but especially Paul and Ausilas; who drawing their Cimiters, laid them before
them; then made many shots upon the Enemy, which killed many both men and
Horses; and their Quivers being empty, they took up their Swords and Sheilds,
and alone opposed the assailants, cutting off with their Swords their Lances
heads. And Paul having bowed his Sword with cutting the Lances, he threw it
away, and snatched from the Enemy four Lances, and by his valor was the
greatest cause of their despairing. Narses for this service made him one of his
Targeteirs. In the mean time both parts prepared for the Battle. Narses spoke
thus to his Soldiers.

When a Battle is to be with equal powers, happily it is necessary with
encouragements to get some advantage of the Enemy for the Victory: But you,
fellow Soldiers! being to fight with men inferior in valor, numbers, all
kind of preparations, need no more but with Gods propitious to begin this
Battle. Ever then with your prayers making him your assistant, march on with a
noble scorn against these thieves, the ancient Slaves of our Emperor, and now
Fugitives; though for a time they have troubled us, having gotten to themselves
a Tyrant picked out of their multitude. Indeed reasoning probably, it is most
strange that these men should so much as stand in rank against us. They are
weary of living, and like brutes and mad men run upon a manifest death; and
from that reasonlesse resolution, as they can have no hopes, so they care not
what befalls them, being men brought hither by God to be punished for their ill
government. When men have a sentence against them above, they run themselves
into their just chastisement You do likewise hazard in this Battle for a
lawful State, but they are Rebels, and struggle against the Laws. They think
not to leave their estates to their Posterity, and therefore live in momentany
comforts, which they know will be lost with their own breath: So that they are
to be despised. Men without Law and Government all good hopes fail, and
Victory abandons, which uses not to forsake the good cause.

Totilas also, seeing his Troops apprehensive of the Roman Army, used this
exhortation.

I am now, fellow Soldiers! to make to you my last Speech; we shall need no
more after this day, which certainly will conclude the fortune of the War.
Both our selves and the Emperor are even so spent with toils, fights, and
other necessities, that he that beats his Enemy, shall have need to fight no
more, and he that is beaten will have a fair excuse to be quiet. When men reap
from their affairs miserable fruits, they dare no more return to them, but
even in occasions vehemently pressing, their judgments start back upon the
memory of their former misfortunes. So that now it is you must fight, reserve
nor your valor for any other time, and endure now the labor, not preserving
your bodies for another hazard; and spare not Arms nor Horses, as things that
will no more be useful to you. Fortune having ruined all the rest, has left
us this day as the utmost of our hopes. Use now your courage, venture boldly;
our hopes hanging upon such a hair, we must not be remiss for the least
moment of time. The point of opportunity being past, the greatest endeavors
afterward fail; the nature of these affairs not admitting stale valor; all
must be unseasonable that comes after the occasion. So that let us do
effectually now, that we may find the benefit of what we do, and assure our
selves that running away is most ruinous. Men leave their rancks and fly, that
they may live; but when flying brings certain destruction, he that stands the
danger is safer then he that flies. And let us despise our Enemies, a mingled
multitude of many Nations. Such Auxiliaries are neither faithful, nor
powerful. As they are of several Nations, they have several intentions also;
and think not that the Hunnes, Herulians, and Lombards will hazard to the
death, or esteem their lives at a less rate then the Romans Money. They make
a countenance of fighting, but will turn cowards when they please; either
after receite of their pays, or upon their Commanders direction. The most
agreeable things not done freely, but upon the necessity either of compulsion
or hire, please not, but become grievous at last. Consider all this, and fight
with alacrity.

The Battles were thus put in order: they stood both in front, as deep and as
long as they could make it. The left wing of the Romans Narses and John had,
near the Hill, with the choicest men of the Army, being both followed with many
Lanciers and Targettiers, and excellent Hunnes, besides their Soldiers on the
List. In the right wing were Valerianus, John Phagas, and Dagisthaeus, with the
rest of the Roman Soldiers. The Battalion was of eight thousand foot, and the
Archers of the List; and between the same and both the wings were placed the
Lombards, Herulians, and other Barbarians; all whom Narses caused to alight
from their Horses, and to serve as footmen, that if they should turn willing
Cowards, they might fly but slowly. The left wing he put into the form of a
Wedge, and he set there fifteen hundred Horsemen, whereof five hundred were to
relieve the Romans, in case they should be put to the worst; and the other
thousand in the fight to get the backs of the Enemies foot, and to gaul them.
Totilas placed his Army in like manner, and rode about, with his countenance
and words animating his Soldiers. Narses did the like, holding out to them
gilt Chains and Bridles, as the Prizes of their valor that day.

CHAP. XIX.
BOth the Armies a while stood still, expecting each their Enemies assault:
Then a Goth named Cocas, much esteemed for valor, rode up to the Roman Army,
challenging any to fight with him. He had been a Roman Soldier, and revolted
to Totilas; to whom Anzalas an Armenian, and Lancier to Narses rode out. Cocas
spurd on to give the first blow with his Lance, aiming at his belly; Anzalas
turned his Horse aside, and avoided the blow, then thrust his Lance into his
left side, at which the Goth fell down dead, and the Romans shouted. Then
Totilas put himself between the Armies, not to fight a Duel, but to dally out
the time, understanding the two thousand Horse to be at hand, until whose
coming he would put off the Battle. He concealed who he was, wearing a Gilt
Armor, and from his Headpeice and Lance hung down streamers of purple; and he
was a gallant sigh, being bravely horst. He acted his feats of Arms skilfully,
winding his Horse round in a circle; then turning short, and making many such
circular passages: He tossed his Lance into the air in his full carriere, then
caught it as it came down again, and removing it skilfully from one hand to
another, he took much pride in his dexterity therein; lying upon his back, and
putting himself upon his Buttocks and bowing this way and that way, like a
Youth exactly taught all the tricks of a Dancing school. He spent a great part
of the afternoon in these exercises; then to gain more time, sent to the
Roman Army, offering a Parley. Narses said, he juggled, being before all for
War, and now making Propositions when the Battles were to join. In the mean
time came the two thousand Horse, which when Totilas understood, and it being
Dinner time, he caused the Army to draw off, and he went to his Tent; where in
his own quarter he found the two thousand Horse. He commanded his Troops to
dine, and himself put on another Armor, then led out suddenly against the
Enemy, thinking to surprise them unprepared: But Narses fearing what happened,
forbade his men to retire to their Dinner, or afternoons repose, or to put off
their Corslets, or to unbridle their Horses; commanding them in their rancks,
with their Armor on, to take a bit, and to have a perpetual eye upon the
Enemies return. They stood in the same order still, saving that Narses put
both the wings, with an addition of four thousand Foot, into the form of a
half moon.

The Goths Infantry stood behind their Horse, to receive them being routed
within their rancks, and jointly to renew the charge. Totilas commanded his
men, not to use their Arrows but their Lances; which senseless stratagem ruined
him, making hereby his Army inferior in their offensive weapons, as in all
things else. For the Romans used, according to the occasion, their Arrows and
Lances, and came up to the Sword, and did all which the present occasion
required, either charging on Horseback, or on foot, to their best advantage;
and sometimes compassing the Enemy, sometimes standing his charges. But the
Goths Horse, without their Foot, came on with unadvised fury, trusting only to
their Lances; and being in the midst of the Romans, they found their error,
being engaged among eight thousand Foot: By whom being gaulled on all sides,
they despaired: Our Archers drawing home the two ends of their Bows even to
their foreheads, and round like a half moon; so that the Goths, before they
could touch the Romans Horse, had lost many men and Horses. And after much
mischeife sustained, they came late up to the Romans Battalion of Horse; where
the Romans and Auxiliaries strove with equal valor, each one receiving the
Enemy bravely, and repelling them. Then the Evening coming on, the Goths began
to retire, and the Romans to pursue; the Goths being not able to stand after
their first furious charge, but turning about in confusion, daunted with the
Romans numbers and good order: And they gave over fighting; thinking that some
Spirits fell upon them, and that Heaven it self fought against them. When they
came to their Foot, there their mischeife increased; for they came not in any
orderly retreat, as to take breath for a new charge, or for any other point of
War, but ran in among them so confusedly, spoiling many, that they opened not
their rancks to receive them, but ran away with them for company, and it
growing dark they destroyed one another. The Romans killed them in this fear,
sparing none, and none daring to look them in the faces, who exposing
themselves to their Enemies, were pursued with terrors, and mastered with
cowardice. Six thousand were slain, and many taken Prisoners, and not long
after put to the Sword. Among them perished many Roman Soldiers, who had
revolted to Totilas. And now the darkness concluded the fight. Totilas fled in
the dark with five men, of whom Skipuar was one; he was pursued by some
Romans, who knew him not; among whom was Asbades a Gepaede, who had overtaken
him, and was making a blow at him: but a Gothish Boy following his flying
Master, cried out, Thou Dog! Do thou run after thine own Master to kill
him? But Asbades thrust his Lance forcibly into Totilas, and was himself hurt
in the foot by Skipuar, that he could follow no further; Skipuar also being
wounded, stood still: And the four men with Asbades followed no further, but
carried off Asbades. Those who accompanied Totilas rode on amain (thinking the
Enemy pursued still) and drew him after them, mortally wounded, and ready to
expire. Having run about ten miles, they came to a Town called Caprae; there
they rested, and dressed the wound of Totilas, who soon after gave up the
ghost: There they buried him and went away. Such a conclusion of his life and
reign had Totilas, having been King of the Goths eleven years; an end not
suitable to his former actions and successes. Fortune in him insulted upon the
frail condition of man, showing her strange proceeding, and absolute will.
She had without any apparent merit bestowed on Totilas a long time of
happiness; and now upon the sudden she hurryed him at her own pleasure into
cowardice, and an ignoble death. These are things to men incomprehensible, but
in all ages have been discoursed of according to men's conceits and fancies, to
comfort their ignorance with some seeming probabilities. But the Romans knew
not of the death of Totilas, till a Gothish woman told it, and showed his
Grave; who distrusting the report, opened the Grave, dug up the Coffin, and
took out the body, and finding it to be Totilas, they put him into the ground
again, and reported all to Narses. Some report this overthrow otherwise, that
the Goths did not make that unadvised retreat; but that in the first
skirmishing with the Romans, suddenly an Arrow, and by chance lighted upon
Totilas. For being armed like a common Soldier, and rancked among them in the
Battalion to conceal himself, he could not be known, nor purposely shot at.
But that being mortally wounded, in great pain he gallopt away with some few
with him to Caprae, and, after much misery and languishing, dyed under the
cure. And that the Goths amazed to see their King thus mortally wounded, and
gone off, being otherwise too weak, then became wholly out of heart, and fell
into that astonishment and shameful running away.

CHAP. XX.
BUT howsoever this fell out; Narses rejoicing at the success, took the True
course, to attribute all unto God: And he took order in the present occasions;
and first, to be rid of his unrulely Lombards, who were infinitely disorderly,
and burned houses, and ravished Women that fled into Churches. He bestowed
store of money on them for their Service, and sent them home; commanding
Valerianus, and Damianus, his Sisters Son, with their Troops to conduct them
out of the Roman Confines, that they might do no mischief in their way
home-ward. And so soon as these were out of the Roman Territories, Valerianus
besieged Verona; and the Garrison in it came to some Capitulation with him for
rendering the Town: But the Francks Garrisoned in the Towns of Venetia hindered
it, seeking with all their endeavor to get the whole Country to themselves;
whereupon Valerianus retired without effecting any thing.

The Goths who fled from the overthrow, went over the River Poe, and put
themselves into the City of Picenum, and other Towns about it, and made Teias
their King. He with the Treasures left by Totilas in Picenum, sought to draw
the Francks to his aid, and governed the Goths as he could in that Estate,
assembling them together. Narses advertised thereof, commanded Valerianus to
keep his Troops about the River Poe, to make the Goths rallying difficult:
Himself with the rest of the Army marched toward Rome. In Tuscany he took in
Narnia, and put a Garrison into Spoletum, with direction to reedifie the Walls
demolished by the Goths. He sent Troops also to attempt Perusia, commanded by
two Fugitive Romans, Meligedius, and Vlithus; who being one of the Lifeguard
to Cyprianus, was won by the allurements of Totilas to murder him, Commander
of the Roman Garrison there. Melegedius accepted the offers of Narses, and
consulted with his own Followers to yield the Town; which Vlithus with his
Friends openly opposing, was slain in the Fight, and the Town was rendered to
the Romans. Thus by Gods just Vengeance was Vlithus slain in the very place,
where he had murdered his Commander Cyprianus.

The Goths Garrisoned in Rome, hearing of the approach of Narses, put in
readiness to encounter him, as they could. At his first taking Rome, Totilas
had burnt most of the Buildings of the City; and then considering how the Goths
had not men enough left to Guard the whole Circuit of it, he took in with a
lesser Wall a small part thereof, about Adrians Tomb, joined it to the City
Walls, and so made it as a Castle; wherein the Goths laid their things of
Value, and guarded it carefully, neglecting the rest of the Walls. Yet then
desirous to try the Enemy, they left a few to guard that Castle, and put
themselves upon the Battlements. The Circuit of Rome so vast neither could the
Romans encompasse, nor the Goths guard; so that the assaults, and defenses were
accidentally in several places, as the occasions were. Narses charged one part
with multitudes of Archers; in another John, Sisters Son to Vitalianus, fell on
with his Troops. Another part Philimuth and his Herulians infested, and they
were far distant from one another: the Goths bravely resisting their Charges;
and being assembled all where the Romans fell on, the rest of the Walls were
empty. Dagisthaeus, with Narses consent, took some Troops with the Ensigns of
Narses, and John, and scaling Ladders, and set upon a part quite destitute of
Guards, and at his ease he mounted by his Ladders, none resisting; and then set
upon the Gates: the Goths seeing this, left their Guards and ran all away; some
to their new Castle, others to Portus. Writing this, it comes into my thoughts,
how Fortune plays with poor men; changing her looks with the times and places,
and varying suddenly not only her own humor, but even the value and worth of
the men. Bessas formerly lost Rome unworthily, and afterward recovered Petra in
Lazica very bravely. And on the contrary, Dagisthaeus poorly ran away from
Petra, and now soon after recovers Rome it self to the Emperor. These things
have been done from the beginning, and will be, while there is Fortune among
men. Narses then marched against the new Castle; But the Goths yielded it and
themselves, Anno 26. Just. Rome now had been taken five times in his Reign.
upon assurances for their Persons; Justinian being now in the 26th. year of
his Reign. Thus was Rome taken five times in his Reign, and Narses sent the
Keys of it to the Emperor. To the Roman Senate and People, this Victory
proved an extreme ruin; So to men that must have a mischief, even their
seeming good Fortunes turn to their destruction; that having had a fair
course, they both lose it, and undo themselves. For the Goths, now despairing
of the Dominion of Italy, in their flight killed all the Romans they found; And
the Barbarians of the Roman Army also, at their entering the City, used them all
as Enemies. Many Senators also confined by Totilas in Campania, and now
repairing to Rome (when they heard it to be in the Emperors possession) the
Goths quartered in the Towns of those parts, killed, and left not one
Patritian alive. Maximus was then slain, whom I have mentioned formerly.
Totilas also, going against Narses, called for all the Sons of the principal
Romans, and choosing out 300. of the goodliest of them, pretending to breed
them, but indeed holding them for Hostages: And he sent them beyond the River
Poe; whom Teias now finding there, killed them all.

Moreover, Ragnaris a Goth, who commanded in Tarentum, and had compounded with
Bacurius, (as I have said) to yield the City to the Emperor, and given six
Goths for Hostages: Now hearing of the Election of Teias, and that the Francks
were desired to aid him, and he immediately to march against the Romans, he
refused to perform the composition; and to get his Hostages again, he sent one
to Bacurius for a convoy of Soldiers to Otranto, from whence (he said) he
would go to Constantinople. Bacurius, not suspecting his plot, sent him 50.
men, whom Ragnaris imprisoned, and sent word to Bacurius, that if he meant to
have his Soulders, he must restore to him his Gothish Hostages. Bacurius led
out his Forces against him, leaving some few to guard Otranto. Upon this
Ragnaris killed the 50. Soldiers, and sallied out against the Romans, and in
fight was defeated, lost many men, and ran away into Acherontia, Tarentum being
blockt up by the Romans. The Romans soon after took Portus by composition, and
Nepa in Tuscany, and Petra Pertusa. Teias finding his Goths too weak for the
Romans, sent to Theudebald King of the Francks, importuning him with the offer
of great sums of Money to join with him. But the Francks took the resolution
best for themselves, not to bestow their lives upon Goths nor Romans, but to
adventure them only in the Conquest of Italy for themselves.

CHAP. XXI.
BUT Narses (hearing how Totilas had laid the most part of his Treasures in
the Castle of Cuma in Campania, with a strong Garrison under his own Brother
and Herodian) sent to besiege the said Castle, staying himself at Rome to
repair the ruins, and sent others to besiege Centumcellae. Teias fearing the
loss of this Castle, and the Treasures; and having no hope from the Francks,
commanded his Troops to be ready for a Battle with the Romans. Narses finding
his intention, commanded John and Philemuth, to martch with their Forces into
Tuscany, to stop the Enemies passage into Campania, and to assist in the taking
of Cuma. But Teias left his nearer way, which was to the right hand, and made a
huge compass; passing along the Sea coast of the Jonian Gulf into Campania.
Narses thereof advertised, remanded John and Philemuth, and sent for
Valerianus, who besieged Petra-Pertusa, and with his whole Army, in order to
fight, martcht into Campania. Mount Vesuvius in Campania (as I have said
before) often sends out a noise like the lowing of Oxen, which is ever
accompanied with a vomiting out of huge quantity of Cynders. Besides (as Mount
Aetna in Sicily) in the middle it has made it self hollow from the top to the
bottom, and below the fire burns perpetually: The fire is so deep, that
peeping in from the top, you cannot easily discern it. When the Mountain
vomits, the flame forces off pieces of rocks from the highest ridges of it,
shooting up the smaller pieces far above the Mountain, and scattering the
greater round about. From the top also of this Mountain runs a Torrent of fire
to the foot of it, and something further, as in Mount Aetna. This fiery stream
on either side makes high bancks, undermining the ground below; and when the
flame comes upon it, it looks like a flood of water set on fire. So soon as
the flame is quenched the stream stops its course; and the Sediment or Lees of
that fiery substance looks like dry Mud, and heaps of Cynders. At the foot of
the Mountain are wholesome Springs, from which comes the River Draco close to
the City of Nuceria: On either side of this River both Armies encamped; it has
a small stream but not to be past, being deep, as having worn out the ground
under the bancks very low. The Bridge which is upon it the Goths had gotten,
and being encamped near it, they had made upon it wooden Towers, and many
Engines, and set up Balistas to shoot down upon the Enemy. This River being
such, there was no possibility for a close standing Battle. So that each part
got as near as they durst to the banks, and plied one another with Arrows. Some
Duels there were also, sometimes Romans and sometimes Goths pasting over the
Bridge, and challenging all comers. Two months were thus consumed; and while
the Goths were Masters of the Sea, their Camp being near the Sea, was supplied
with provisions: But after the Romans had gotten their Ships by the Treason of
the Commander of them a Goth, and were re-enforced also with many other Ships
out of Sicily and other Roman Dominions; and that Narses had set up wooden
Towers upon the Rivers bank, the Goths hearts were absolutely dejected; and for
fear and famine were feign to fly up to a Mountain near there, called Mons
Lactis. The Romans for the fastnesses could not come at them: But the Goths
being there in more want, and having no way to get any provision for themselves
or their Horses, repenting their coming up, and choosing rather to dye by fight
then to starve, came suddenly upon the Romans, who stood against them as they
could, being taken unexpectedly, not being embattailed, nor under their
several Captains; not any way in order, nor at all observing what was
commanded them. The Goths quitted their Horses, and stood in a deep Battalion;
the Romans left their Horses and stood in front likewise. This fight, and the
valor of Teias in it, deserves a long discourse; being equal to that of the
ancient Heroes. Despair made the Goths venture all, and the Romans stood them,
though seeing them mad, yet ashamed to yield to beaten men; and so the one
weary of their lives, the other for demonstration of valor, fought with much
fury, beginning in the morning betimes. Teias accompanied with some few stood
in the first rank in open view, holding out his Shield and shaking his Lance.
A great number of Romans knowing that by his fall the Battle would be ended,
combined themselves against him, some charging, some throwing their darts at
him. Which he received all upon his Shield, and then slew out, and killed many.
His Shield being stuck thick with Darts, he gave it to one of his Targetiers
and took another. He continued thus a third part of the day, when he had twelve
Darts sticking on his Shield, that he could not move it as he would, nor beat
off the Assailants. Yet he quitted not his rank, nor gave the Enemy an inch of
ground; he did not so much as turn his body, or rest his back upon his Shield;
but stood upright, as if he were pitched into the ground, killing with his right
hand, and warding with his Shield; and calling by name his Targetier to give
him a new Shield, for his old was loaded with Darts. And in that instant, his
breast lying open, was hit with a Javelin, upon which he immediately dyed. The
Soldiers put his head upon a long Pole, and showed it to encourage the Romans,
and to cause the Goths to despair, and to quit the fight. But the Goths,
though they saw their King slain, yet gave it not over, and at night both
retired, and lay in their Armor. Early the next day they began again, and
fought till night, not turning to any side, nor giving back; and though many
were lost, yet their savage hatred held them still buckled to one another: The
Goths knowing it to be their last fight, and the Romans disdaining to be
overmatcht. At last the Goths sent Agents to Narses, to tell him; That they
perceived their fight to be with God himself, and saw the power which stood
against them; and their true estate now, by their former success; that they
would lay aside desperate resolutions, upon condition not to be put under the
subjection of the Emperor, but to live free with some other Barbarian Nation.
They entreated the Romans also to afford them a peaceable retreat, and in a
moderate consideration of their fortune, to bestow their own Goods upon them
for their journey, such as they had left in any Castles of Italy. Narses held a
consultation hereupon, where John advised him to grant the Petition, and to
contend no more with men weary of their lives, nor to stir a courage growing
from desperation, which commonly proves fatal, both to the men possessed with
it, and to such as encounter them. To moderate men (quoth he) it is enough to
be Victorious, whereas the desire of too much may end in some inconvenience.
Narses allowing the advice, they agreed upon conditions. That the Goths should
have their Goods, and immediately go out of Italy; and that they should never
bear Arms against the Romans. About a thousand Goths of this Company went away
to Picenum, and the parts beyond the River Poe, commanded by Ildulph and some
others; the residue stayed and ratified this agreement by their oaths: And the
Romans took in Cuma and all the rest. And so ended the eighteenth year of the
Gothic War, written by Precopius.

Finis Lib. 4. ^ell. Goth.

Dxa so THen m, dxa so
FINIS.

