SIGILUM^ PRAESID^ and^ CONCIL^ DOM^ REG^ IN^NOV^ ANGLIA


A PROCLAMATION
BY The PRESIDENT and COUNCIL of his Majestly's Territory and Dominion of
NEW ENGLAND in AMERICA.
WHEREAS We have received from His most Excellent Majesty our Sovereign Lord
JAMES the Second, KING of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of
the Faith etc. The Exemplification of a Judgment in His High Court of Chauncery
under His Majesty's Great Se^l of England, hearing Date the T(...) of October
in the first year of His Maj^^^ies Reign; against the Governor and Company of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England: whereby the Government thereof and at the
Members thereunto belonging is now in His Majesties-hands.

And His Majesty having been graciously pleased to declare that He is minded to
give all Protection and Encouragement to all His good Subjects therein, and to
provide in the most effectual Manner that due and Impartial Justice may be
administered in all Cases Civil and Criminal and all Care taken for the quiet
and orderly Government of the same.

And in order thereunto it having pleased His most Excellent Majesty by His
Commission bearing Date the eight Day of October, in the first year of His
Reign under the great Seal of England to erect and constitute a PRESIDENT and
COUNCIL to take Care of all that His Territory and Dominion of New England
called the Massathusets Bay, the Provinces of New Hampshire and Main, and the
Narraganset Country, otherwise called the Kings-Province, with all the
Islands, Rights and Members thereunto appertaining; and to Order, Rule and
Govern the fame according to the Rules, Methods and Regulations specified and
declared in the said Commission: Together with His Majesty's Gracious
Indulgence in matters of RELIGION.

And for the E^^^ution of His Royal pleasure in that behalf, His Majesty has
been pleased to appoint Joseph Dudley Esquire to be the first PRESIDEN^ of His
Majesty's said Council, and VICE ADMIRAL of these Seas. And to Continue in the
said Offices until His Majesty shall otherwise direct, and also to nominate and
appoint Simon Bradstreet, William Stoughton, Petter Bulkley, John Pynchon,
Robert Mason, Richard Wharton, Wait Winthrope, Nathaniel Saltonstal,
Bartholomew Gidney, Jonathan Tyng, John Usher, Dudley Bradstreet, John Hinks,
Francis Champernoon, Edward Tyng, John Fitz-Winthrope, and Edward Randolph
Esq's to be His Majesty's Council in the said Colony and Territories.

The President and Council therefore being convened according to the Direction
and Form in the faid Commission, and having taken the Oaths in the said
Commission required, and finding it primarily needful, that speedy and
effectual Care be taken for the Maintenance and Preservation of the Peace; Have
accordingly appointed and authorized Justices of the Peace in the several
Counties, Praecincts, and principal Towns throughout the said several
Provinces; and do also hereby continue all and every the Grand Juryes of the
several Counties, Constables, Select Townsmen, and such as have lately had the
Charge of Watches, in their several and respective Offices, Charge and Trast,
till others be orderly appointed to succed them.

And the said Pr^sident and Council do hereby in His Majesty's Name strictly
Charge and require the several Justices of the Peace, Select Townsmen,
Overseers of the Poor, Surveyers of the High Ways, Constables and other
inferior Officers who have had the Care of Watches, and who are now
Commissioned or Continued as aforesaid, diligently and faithfully to intend,
pursue, and execute their several and respective Offices, Charges and Trusts,
for the Presevation of the Peace, and for Suppressing and Discountenancing all
Disorder and Vice.

And We do hereby require all His Majesty's Subjects within the said Colony and
Territories to be Obedient, Aiding, and Assisting to all such ^ustices of the
Peace, Constables, and other Officers in the Execution of their several Offices
and Places, at their utmost peril. And order that this Proclamation be
forthwith Published.

Given from the Council-house in Boston this 25th Day of May Anno Domini 1686.
Annoq: Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi secundo. By the President and Council, Edward
Randolph Secr


