The Proceedings AT THE ASSIZES IN SOVTHWARK, For the County of Surry.

Begun on Thursday the 21th, of March, and not ended till Tuesday the 26 of the
same month, 1678.

BEING An Account of the Trial of the Woman for murdering her Husband; with the
exact proof that came in against her, and her Confession and Pleas at the Bar:
Upon which she was found guilty, and condemned to be Burnt to Ashes.

As likewise, The Trials and Condemnation of Two Notorious HIGH-WAY-MEN.

Of a Woman for murdering her Bastard-childe: And of a Man for another Murder.

Together, With a full Relation of all other remarkable passages there. And the
number how many are to die, with their several Facts; how many burnt in the
hand, and how many to be Transported, and to be Whipped.

With Allowance. To. L'Estrange.

London: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Proceedings at the Assizes in SOVTHWARK, etc.
THe most sad and remarkable Trial at this Assizes, was that of a Woman
dwelling lately in Fishmongers-ally in the Borough of Southwark; she was
indicted, that not having the fear of God before her eyes, but moved by the
instigation of the Devil, on the 25 day of September last, wickedly,
traitorously, and of her malice forethought, with a pair of Sizzars which she
held in her right hand, she had killed and murdered her Husband, giving unto
him one mortal wound on the left side of his Breast near the left Pap, of the
breadth of half an Inch, and the depth of 3 Inches, of which he immediately
died.

The Case appeared to be thus, as well by the Evidence, as by her own voluntary
confession at the Bar. This woman and her Husband had been together at the Ale
house; and she now alleged, that though she drank not above a pint and a
half, yet she was lightheaded. Some dispute arose between them there
concerning a silver Seal, and a Grater, and some other toys which he had taken
from her, and refusing to return them, said, he would give them to another
woman: When they came home she demanded them again, and said she would go look
above stairs where he had hid them; hereupon a Quarrel begun, and he was seen
by some of the opposite Neighbors to strike her with a Fire shovel, insomuch
that she pretends he knocked her down, and that she lay in a trance: From which
being recovered, she got up these Sizzars intending to go to work with them
according to her custom at the Ally-gate till his fury were over; but he
catching up a Fryingpan to beat her again, she held them forth to keep him off,
who was so violent, that, having his Bosom all open to the skin, he run upon
them, and thereby got this mischief; which she no sooner perceived, but she
endeavored when she saw him fall to give him some Syrrups; but finding him
ready to die, was frighted, and went forth, leaving him lying on the Stairs,
going into White-chappel, where she declared that she had unfortunately killed
her Husband: she now protested very passionately her innocence as to any
intention of murdering him; but that he died by her means, freely acknowledged.
'Twas proved by several that she had often threatened to do his business; and
one swore that she once heard the Prisoner say she would poison him. A young
Maiden stepped into the house after the mischief done, and seeing the man lie on
the Stairs, asked the now Prisoner if her Husband were in a Swoon; to which she
replied surlily, bidding her meddle with her own business, and forthwith went
out; but the Girl telling Neighbors, some of them entered, and found the man
just a dying, being only seen to stir one hand. Whereupon soon after the
Prisoner was taken, and confessed as you have heard. Upon consideration of all
circumstances the Jury found her guilty of the Petty-Treason; for which she
received Sentence to be Burnt to death.

The next we shall mention, were two Highway-men: One of them disgracing his
Education and Profession with those wicked and abominable practices of villainy
and mischief. For on the 10th of May last, he and one of his Companions being
off of Putney, set upon a Gentleman, threatening his life if he did not speedily
deliver: whereupon he delivered them Twenty pound; besides which they took from
him a Rapier, but did not search him, for he had more money about him which he
saved: however, they cut his horse bridle and turned him loose. As soon as they
were gone, he got to a house and raised the Hue and Cry; whereupon they were
taken before they got to London, for their horses were poor sorry Hackneys: so
that at last they be took themselves to their own heels, and fired Pistols
without execution. One of them, to prevent their being pursued, flung down the
money; but the Country being up, took them notwithstanding: and upon full
evidence, being now Convicted, they received Sentence of Death.

There was a person arraigned upon two several Indictments for stealing a bay
Guelding from one man, and a chestnut Mare from another. He had lately been
married, and went down into the Country pretending to fetch money; but instead
thereof, brought up these Horses, and got his Brother-in-law to vouch them in
Smithfield: but they being soon after found, and he discovered, he offered to
pay Eighteen pounds for them; a new trick of a Jocky to steal horses first, and
enquire the prices afterward. Upon such pregnant Evidence he was found guilty
and received Sentence.

A fellow was found guilty of Felony, for stealing Five pounds in money, two
Shirts, and other things, from one that had lately been his Master. He was soon
taken, and part of the things with him, and now was burnt in the hand.

On Monday there were Four tried upon Indictments for Murder; but none found
guilty. One, a wench for killing her Bastard-childe at Horslydown; it was
proved she had been delivered, and was heard to groan and make a great noise in
the night; but her Mistress thinking it common sickness, took no notice of it.
Upon the whole she was acquitted. So was a Waterman for killing a young man of
the same Trade, who quarrelling with him about money for a Fare, he did strike
him one box on the Ear, and gave him one kick, but as 'twas proved not
violently; yet so fatally, that the fellow sickned and shortly after died.
However, no murderous intention appearing, he was discharged. The third was a
Bailiffs follower, who going to arrest one, and a scuffle arising, to secure
their prisoner they used some blows, and with much ado carried him to Jayl,
where soon after he died; upon which he was prosecuted, but found not guilty.
The fourth was a man for the supposed Murder of a child of Nine years of age,
his wives son: She having been abroad, at her reutrn found the child ill and
bloody, but it did not complain the Father had hurt it, nor would tell bow it
came; but growing worse and worse, died the next morning. The Grandfather and
Grandmother willing to know how it came by its End, bound the Father over; but
no Witness appearing of his striking or injuring the Lad, there was no color
for the Indictment.

A young wench was found guilty for robbing her Master twice; once of 6 s. and
afterward getting his Breeches and her Mistriss's Petticoat off their Bed, and
taking the Keys of his Counting House, carried away some small parcel of money,
a Diamond ring, a plain Ring, a piece of Gold given by his Majesty for curing
the Evil, and other things of value; but was soon taken, and now Convicted.

A fellow having snatched away a Sword from one in Southwark-Fair, partly in
jest and more in earnest, was now found guilty of stealing it: And since he was
so fond of a Sword, may have occasion shortly to use one, being ordered for
Transportation.

Several other petty Trials we omit.

There were in all Four Condemned to die; that is, Two Highway-men and One
Horsestealer to be Hanged, and One woman to be Burnt; Seven burnt in the hand,
Seven to be transported, and five to be whipped.

FINIS.

