THE PROCEEDINGS To Execution of the Sentence Awarded against Captain Thomas
Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse; FOR High Treason: Who were, on Friday the
20th. of this Instant July, Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered AT TYBURN, For
Conspiring the Death of the KING, and to raise War and Rebellion; in order to
subvert the Government, etc. Containing a Relation of what happened during
their Imprisonment; As also their last Speech and Confession At the Place of
EXECUTION.
THomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse, having been Accused to the King's
most Honorable Privy Council, etc. by the Discoverer of the Plot, contrived,
and carried on against the Life of His Sacred Majesty; and upon Warrants issued
ou^ for that purpose, Apprehended the were, and on the 12th. of this Instant
July; brought (...) the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly and there Arraigned
upon an Indictment of High Treason, found against them by the Grand Ju^y of
London, for Conspiring, and Designing to compass the Death of the King, to
raise Wa^ and Rebellion, and in order there to, procuring and providing Arms;
(...) Mus^^e^s, Blunderbus^es, Pistols, etc. Whereupon they pleading not
guilty, and putting themselves upon their Country, Thomas Walcot was ordered to
look to his Challenges, in excepting against such of the Panil of Jurors, as he
thought fit, to the number of a peremptory Challenge, which is 35; when having
made acceptions against all such as any ways appertained to the Lieutenancy, at
length a Jury of 12 Men were Sworn, and Charged with the Prisoner, to try the
Issue between the King and him, in Case of his Life and Death. Whereupon
Colonel John Rumsey, Mr. West, Mr. Keeling, Mr. Bourn, and others, Swore him to
be present at diverse Conspiracies, Consults, and Traiterous Contrivances, and
that he was to Command a Party, to destroy the Guards, whilst others of his
Accomplices, Assassinated the KING and Duke of of York, etc. In February last,
at what time they were to return from New Market, and that a Consult was held
to inquire into the day of their return, and that they differed about the
particular time, though they afterward came to a Result, but were frustrated
in their Bloody Design, by the Fire that happened at the place aforesaid. These
and such like Contrivances and Conspiracies Sworn against Walcot and Will. Hone,
on Friday following being the 13th. Instant, together with John Rouse, were
Tried for the like Treason, in Conspiring against the Life of His Majesty, Him
to Death and final Destruction to put, etc. against whom the Kings Evidence
deposed, First, that Hone had consented to be one of the intended Assassinates,
and was to have a Sum of Money to buy him Furniture, as Horse and Arms, etc.
and that he declared he was to be one that was to seize the Captain and
Lieutenant; and at another time, That it would never be well with England till
the Blackbird and Gold-finch were knocked on the head, and that he by those
Mysterious Expressions meant the King and Duke of York, according to his own
Explanation. These and many more, were the Circumstances that occured upon this
and the former Trial; as also upon that of John Rouse, who was Tried the same
day upon an Indictment of High Treason, in Conspiring against the Life of the
King, etc. so that in the end they were after diverse Arguments found Guilty,
and the day following received Sentance to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, as
the Law, in Case of Conviction for High Treason, requires; when desiring their
Friends might visit them, and time for Repentance be allowed, they were
remanded to Prison, where, as Men sensible of the near approach of their
dissolution, they continued, being often visited by their Friends and
Relations, who came to condole and comfort them with seasonable admonitions to
prepare for a future state, seeing their lives were forfeited to the Law, and
that execution of the Sentence pronounced would not be long deferr^d; forasmuch
as all hopes of Pardon was vanished; and whether a Reprieve for longer life
would be granted to them, remained doubtful, the former and the latter
remaining at the pleasure of His Majesty, whom they had so highly offended.
Whereupon taking the cordial advice of those that regarded their happiness (as
to the life to come) seriously considered in what state they remained, and what
a large account they were shortly to give before the dreadful Tribunal of all
their actions; insomuch that at times that they were not molested with
Visitants, their serious thoughts were for the most part employed in confessing
their sins, and begging pardon of God for their offenses: during their abode in
Newgate, the Sherriffs of London and Middlesex came to Visit them, and to
persuade them to confess the truth of the Conspiracy as far as their knowledge
would permit, as likewise diverse other loyal persons; but they seemed much
reserved, saying, That they had been drawn into disgrace, and consequently to
an untimely end by giving too much credit to the words of some persons; and
that it was now too late to retrieve what was past, but earnestly begged pardon
of those they had oftended: Captain Walcot seldom appeared publicly, but kept
himself to his retirement, either Reading or Conversing with such Friends as
came to visit him. John Rouse was often observed in busy, as is supposed
Writing, but to what Effect remains yet uncertain, unless a Petition to humbly
beseech his Majesty; that his dead Body might be restored to his Wife. William
Hone was the most dejected, the fear of death, having almost stupefied him; so
that he was hardly induced to answer to the Questions demanded of him, by such
as came to Examine him. This and such like being their Behavior, till they had
notice that the* Warrant was Signed for their Execution, and that they must
prepare to dye as this day, which heavy News they received with different
passions, and continued as Men who expected no other than death, till the
morning, at which time being put into Sledges, they were drawn to the place of
Execution, attended by a strong Guard of the Sheriffs Men, Hamlets, and
Warders. About 10 in the Morning, Thomas Walcot, John Rouse, and Willam Hone,
were brought to Tyburn, the former in a Sledge by himself and the 2 latter in
another Sledge, when being unbound, they were helped into the Cart prepared for
that purpose, and there for a while conversed with the Ministers, who were Dr.
Cartwrite and Mr. Ordinary, both of them persuading them to make an Ingenious
Confession according to the best of their knowledge: whereupon Captain Walcot
drew out two Papers and showed them to the Ministers and those that were in the
Cart, saying, That he had written them to Read publicly, which when he was
ordered to do, he, with a composed Countenance did Audibly; the first was in
nature of a Confession of his Enormities to God, wherein he desired forgiveness
of his Sins; declaring, that he been a great Sinner; and for that cause God had
suffered him to fall into those Crimes that had rendered him worthy of death;
desiring God of his mercy to forgive him his manifold offenses; and that all
the world would forgive him whom he had offended, putting up diverse
Ejaculations, desiring that he might be an Example to warn others from daring
to attempt any Treasonable Design or Conspiracy against the Life of the King:
After which, another Paper he held in his hand, sometimes looking on it, and
other times not, whilst he was speaking or making his Confession to the people,
declaring that he was Guilty of the Conspiracy as to the knowledge thereof, and
that he was drawn into the Conspiracy by people that promised him great things,
but that now he plainly perceived there was no Faith in Man: As to the matter
of the Assassination, he confessed to have knowledge of it, and that he had
been incited thereto by Evil-affected Persons, whom he desired God to forgive,
praying that his and his Fellows present, might be the last Blood that might be
shed upon the Occasion of the Conspiracy: He confessed he had been at diverse
Consults, and that once and no more, to his remembrance, he had been in the
company of two Lords, naming diverse of the Persons fled upon the Discovery of
the Plot and Conspiracy, saying, They had drawn him unexpectedly into the
mischief, he having not long been arrived in England, and that too late he was
Conscious of his too much Credulity, which had brought him to his deserved,
though shameful and unexpected end; desiring God to prosper and preserve the
King, or to this purpose. He also said, That when the Conspiracy was
discovered, he was promised by some, who had drawn him into it, to be safely
conveyed into Holland; and that when they had taken him, and were conveying him
to Prisonward, they told him they designed to Ship him, etc. And so continued
with Penitential Tears, to bewail his Crimes, and unhappy end; but would not
own that he was actually to kill the King; though he was to be assisting
therein; desiring the people to obey and in all Cordial sincerity in dear
themselves to His Majesty, who well deserved the love and tenderest respect of
his Subjects. This being the substance of Walcots Speech, John Rouse began to
make his Confession, when having desired God to forgive him his Sins, he
confessed that he had been at diverse Consults, and that he was to have acted,
but as to each particular he was ignorant; but that he had been privy to many
Treasonable Discoveries, tending to an Insurrection or the like, desiring God
to forgive him his many Sins, which he said had been multiplied; but that he
was above all, sorrowful for offending against such great Light, saying, The
cries of a Wife and Children were the chiefest Instigations to make him engage
in the Wicked Design, of which he heartily repented, and for which he had
justly deserved to dye; declaring that he had been drawn into it by the Earl of
Shaftsbury and others who were now fled; and that he did not, when first he
entered into it, think the Design had any ways tended to the touching the Life
of His Majesty, or that the Conspiracy would have arrived to the height it at
last did; and continued to express his sorrow and Repentance for his being so
long Conscious of so Notorious a Wickedness, and not revealing it; which he
Attributed to the fear of his own safety, by reason he had for some time past,
been under evil Circumstances, and been rendered Obnoxious to many persons of
known Loyalty. And in fine, he confessed most of the Charge, Evidenced against
him at his Trial in the Old-Bayly, on the 13th. Instant, grievously complaining
against those that had drawn him into the mischievous Conspiracy, begging
forgiveness of all he offended in thought or deed, desiring God to continue the
King's Life, and long Reign, etc. Hone spoke little as to particulars, but in
general, confessed that he was guilty of the Conspiracy, and was to have been
one of the number, that was to have Assassinated the King, in his return from
New Market; and that Goodenough and others, had by many persuasions prevailed
with him, to undertake what he did. He likewise confessed, he had told Mr.
West, he had spoke with Goodenough, and related to him the measures that he was
to take; saying, That he had agreed to be one in the Assassination, with diverse
other Circumstances, of which these are the most material; though indeed his
discourse was but short, in respect to the two former.

The Confessions thus made, or as near as could be taken; thus, or to this
Effect the Ministers prayed with them, and sung a Psalm, after which, they
severally desired to say a Prayer of themselves, which was granted: Captain
Walcot being first, who prayed fervently, as being thoroughly sensible of his
Offense, desiring the prayers of all good men. Next, Hone made a prayer, and
afterward Rouse, each of them seeming greatly to bewail the greatness of their
Offenses, asking forgiveness, especially of His Majesty, against whom they had
so highly offended; when being asked what further they had to say, they only
desired that God would forgive them, and that all people would take Example by
them, and not be enticed, or persuaded to enterprise so great a Wickedness, as
had brought them to ruin; Temporal though as they hoped God would accept of
their late Repentance, and those that heard them, and beheld their untimely
end, would take warning thereby, and avoid the like Temptations.

Thus, or to this Effect, they having confessed and declared, the Cart was
drawn away, and after they had Hung three quarters of an hour, they were cut
down, and Quarterred one by one, their Bowels burnt; etc. According to the
Sentance pronounced against them.

FINIS.
Printed for Langely Curtis, near Fleet-Bridges: 1683.


