THE PROCESSION: OR, THE Burning of the Pope In EFFIGY, IN SMITH FIELD-ROVNDS,
On the 17th of November 1681. BEING Queen ELIZABETH'S Birthday.
DESCRIBING The several Pageants, and rare Devices of the Pope, Cardinals,
Jesuits, Friars, and many others. As likewise a Pageant of several Effigies in
a Pillory drawn by Horses upon a Sledge. Several painted Pieces, and
Fireworks, etc. Far exceeding whatever has been exposed in this nature. With
the signification of the several Hieroglyphics. Humbly dedicated to his
Holiness.
November 17.
THis day being usually observed as the Anniversary or Birthday of the ever
Renowned Princess Queen Elizabeth, the burning of the Pope in Effigy has for
some years past been observed, especially in the City of London; this present
year several new Pageants and Devices have been prepared at the cost of such
Loyal Citizens and others as have thereby shown their Aversation and
Detestation against Popery, and all the superstitious Trumpery of Rome, the
manner and form being as follows.

First, Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey on Horseback all besprinkled with Blood,
having a Jesuit behind him to support him, in the same manner as he was carried
to Primerose-hill, after he was basely and cowardly murdered by Hells
Incendiaries, having a twisted Napkin about his neck, and his head hanging on
one side.

After him the Effigies of a monstrous Animal with his face reverst, making
Observations upon the Horse-tail; or an amphibious Creature made up of
Ribaldry, having a Paper pinned upon his Sleeve, to be the better known when he
comes near Sam's Coffee-house, inscribed, I am an Observator.

The next a certain Typographer, with his Holiness Cross-Keys at his Girdle,
and a bundle of Popish Catechisms under his right Arm, making a thousand wry
faces at the sight of a Pillory.

After him a discarded Reformado, or scandal to his Function, who indeed looked
very thin, as having been obliged to feed upon Queries and Scrupulosity for
Three Months, and to this hour lives upon the Extraction of Questions and
Answers; and therefore the better to be known, he is marked upon the back with
large Characters, viz. Tookeship, and thereby noted to be the Laughing
Philosophers Fool, or the Popes drudge. These being the Forlorn-hope, about
eight Horsemen more, usher on his Holiness. As for the Foot, first six Friars
going two and two, bearing Crosses, Beads, and other Popish Trumpery, being
dressed in their proper Habit. After them a like number in Jesuits Habit, with
Daggers in their hands, being dressed up in black Gowns, and Three-corner'd
Caps, having their Crucifixes hanging by their sides. After them Four Popish
Bishops, with Miters and Croziers, Copes and Sleeves, according to the
Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, or Synagogue of Satan, which you please. Then
several Cardinals in Red Hats, Rowls of paper, pretended Bulls, Pardons, and
Indulgences. Then a Pillory high erected upon a Sledge, and in it the Effigies
of Two Outlandish-men, and two others, three of them standing in the Pillory,
and one fitting upon a Chair, having a paper pinned upon his Breast, with this
Inscription, I am not P. Then Music, with several Pictures.

In fine, the Pageant of his Holiness fixed upon a Sledge, and drawn by Four
Horses, as the former, he having as it were for his Charioteer a Jesuit, who
carries great bundles of Papers; and behind him for his Tutor or
Privy-Counsellor a Devil, the fittest Companion that he can be coupled with,
had been at the choosing of his Mate, he having in one hand the pretended Keys
to Hell and Purgatory, and in the other a Tripple Crosier, his Robes being
Crimson-silk, Laced with Tinsel, and Lined with Ermyns, upon his Head a
Tripple-Crown; upon the Canopy of his Holinesses Chair are placed several
Streamers of White Silk, and on them written in Bloody Characters, Murder,
Treason, Massacres, Assassination, Adultery, Subornation, Perjury, etc. upon
the seats before him two sit displaying of Banners, on which in large
Characters are Inscribed, the Popes Titles, and Babylon the Mother of Harlots;
between his legs a large Spanneldog, with a Fiddle between his fore-feet; and
most affirm, before he was Hanged, he was called by the well-known name of
Touzer. Before his Holiness was a Bloody-heart carried upon a Dagger; all the
way the Devil bobs him, and takes him by the Nose with a pair of Pincers; and
this after the most decent order of a Popish Procession, set forwards from
Cattern-wheel-alley in White-Chappel, attended by many thousands of people, and
at least Three hundred Links carried before them, to pass through Aldgate, so
through Leaden-hall-street, up Cornhill, through the Poultery, and Cheapside,
then through Ludgate to Temple Bar, and from thence to Smithfield; where a
large fire being prepared by the Gentlemen of the Loyal Inns of Court, his
Holiness in all his Pontificalibus, together with the rest of the Effigies, 18
Edmond-bury Godfrey excepted, will be Sacrificed up to Moloc, in the view of a
number of persons of Honor, who will be spectators of his downfall. Nor will
there be wanting Fireworks, according as has formerly been used, both upon
Lines and in the Air, where several new Inventions will be experimented;
insomuch, that the design of this day exceeds whatever has been of the like
nature, the which past doubt, may occasion some simple Bigots to laugh on the
wrong side of their Mouths till their heart aches. Nor is it less imagined, but
the news will quickly fly to Rome; though many conjecture, that his Holiness is
not ignorant of the Project, and that he will give order to his Lubbers to
Curse the promoters of it with Bell, Book, and Candle; as he is wont to serve
damned Souls, who make their escapes from Purgatory without paying their Fees.
And thus much shall suffice for this time, only let me admonish his Holiness to
keep on the other side the Herring-pool, lest if he fall into the hands of
those that burnt him in Effigies, they serve him the same sauce, and turn it
into a real Tragedy.

For Englishmen that love their King, dare still
Cross Romes dire Plots, and maugre all her Ill.

FINIS.
Printed for William Coble. 1681.


