A PROCLAMATION By the Lords of the Council in the City of Amsterdam, for the
Apprehending of diverse Ruffians who endeavored to Assassinate their
Burghemaster Van Beuningen, on the 16th of March, offering a Reward of a 1000
Duckatoons to any that shall discover one or more of those Desperate Villains.
Notification.
WHereas after several Rumors that have been spread abroad sometime since of a
Design against the Life of the Here Burghemaster Van Beuningen, it has been
made fully apparent to the Lords of the Justiciary of this City by several well
agreeing Informations and Circumstances, that some wicked Men, to the number of
six, seven, or more, having Thursday last, being the 16th of this Month N. S.
T. at night, met about the House of the aforesaid Here Van Beuningen, and
endeavored, (though God be praised, uneffectuallly) to execute the abovesaid
Design: and it being of the highest importance to every one, and especially to
those that have any share in the Government, that the Persons concerned in so
abominable, and bloody an Enterprise, be speedily detected, and punished for
the same according to the greatness of the Crime, and provision made, that the
accomplishing of the abovesaid detestable Undertaking be yet prevented,
especially since it does appear to the abovesaid Lords of the Justiciary by
very good Informations, that after the aforesaid 16th of this month, there have
been found some Villains in this City, who have given to understand that it
would yet be effected. Therefore to provide against the same, the abovesaid
Lords have found convenient to charge and require every one of the Inhabitants
of this City, to make known with all speed to the High Schout of this City, all
his or their Knowledge concerning this Bloody Enterprise, or any other the like
upon Arbitrary Correction, in case any be found to have been negligent therein,
and they do further make known and promise, that if any one can discover one or
more of the Accomplices of this bloody Design, in such a manner, that he be
Apprehended and Convicted of the said Crime, for this good Service done to
Justice, and to the Public; shall receive a recompense of a thousand Ducatoons
of Silver, and that his Name shall be kept secret, and in case the Discoverer
be himself one of the Accomplices, they promise all that is in their Power to
procure his Pardon and Impunity, and that he shall likewise receive the
aforesaid recompense of a thousand Ducatoons of Silver, in case as abovesaid,
one or more of the Accomplices be Apprehended, and Convicted of the Crime;
charging further expressly, all Innkeepers, Hosts, or any others lodging People
that come from abroad, to keep no body in their Houses, for whose innocence
they cannot, or will not answer, without presently making his Name and Quality
known to the Captain, or in his absence to the next chief Officer of the Ward
wherein they dwell; And it is further Statuted and Ordered, That all
Innkeepers, Hosts, and all others that take Lodgers coming from abroad, shall
de die in diem give notice of their Lodgers to the Captains, or in their
absence to the next chief Officers under them, and deliver a Note, containing
their Names and Quality; and in case the aforesaid Captains, or in their
absence the next commanding Officers of the Ward have any the least suspicion
about the declared Persons, that they shall immediately give notice thereof to
the High Schout of this City, and if any body be found to have been negligent
in declaring his Lodgers, he shall forfeit a sum of a 100 Gilders, and besides
incur severe punishment; and serious warning is given to every body to use all
circumspection in receiving Lodgers that may be any ways suspected of bad
Conversation and Manners.

This 21 of March, 1684. being present the Lords Burghemasters, John Hudde, and
John Huyde Kooper, etc.

Translated from the Dutch Copy, as it was lately Printed at Amsterdam.
London, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1684.


