THE PROCEEDINGS ON THE King's Commissions Of the PEACE, And Oyer and Terminer,
and Jail-deliver of Newgate, Held for the City of London, and County of
Middlesex, at JVSTICE-HALL, in the OLD-BAYLY, The 16th, 17th, and 18th. of
July, 1685. And in the First Year of His Majesty's Reign.
THE Quarter Sessions of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver of
Newgate, being held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, on Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday, being the 16, 17, and 18 days of July, 1685. Before the Right
Honorable Sir James Smith Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir Thomas
Jenner Knight. One of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, and Recorder of the said
City: Together with others of His Majesty's Justices of the City of London, and
Country of Middlesex. The Jurors were, as follow:

London Jury.
Thomas Anger Philip Perry Philip Stocks Luke Poe John Warfeild Christopher
Johnson Stephen Coleman Henry Cremer Stephen Gibons Simon Chapman Joseph Speed
Richard Shaw.
Middlesex Jury.
Thomas Whitfeild John Smallbone John Singleton Thomas Pattle Ralph Hutchingson
Robert Brock Thomas Harris Edward Hempstead Samuel Lin Francis Edmons John
Bailey Zacariah Grant.
The Trials of the Prisoners were as follow:

Peter Lary, in the Parish of St. Dunstans, Indicted for stealing two silver
Tankards, value 12 l. on June. 2. from Thomas Fido. The Evidence against the
Prisoner was, That he coming into Fido's House, took the two Tankards, and
running out, the Boy of the House saw him, upon which crying out, Stop Thief,
the said Lary was presently seized: The proof being clear, he was found Guilty.

Alice Wilson, of the Parish of Hackney, Indicted for stealing one pewter
Dish, value 1 s. on June 6. from Joseph Rand. The Prisoner confessing the Fact,
was found guilty to the value of 10 d.

Edward Hickman, and Thomas Cross, of the Parish of Finchley, Indicted for
stealing one Game Cock, value 20 s. and one Game Hen, value 2 s. 6 d. on June
24. from -- Shenton Esquire; 3 Hens, and one Cock, from Edward Tewerson, value 3 s.
The whole being proved upon them, they were found guilty of both Indictments;
Hickman to the value of 10 d. in each, and Cross to the value of 9 d. in each.

Thomas Dixon, Indicted for uttering scandalous words against the Government:
The Prosecution seeming to be malicious, and the Prisoner producing Evidence in
his behalf, who spoke very well of his Conversation, that he was Loyal, and a
good Churchman, the Jury brought him in Not Guilty.

Eleanor Brin, Indicted for feloniously breaking open the House of Timothy
Roberts, July 10. and stealing from thence one silk Gown, value twenty
shillings; three holland sheets, value fifteen shillings; two silk hoods, value
six shillings, with other goods. The Evidence thus: Roberts's Wife going into
the Prisoner's shop she there found her Gown in her custody. The Prisoner in
her defense, said, she bought the Gown of a man who brought it ^er, which she
proved by another person: whereupon the jury brought her in Not Guilty.

Jo Machenny, of the Parish of Saint Michaels Cornhil. Indicted for stirring up
Sedition in the Kingdom, in publishing a scandalous Libel, February 20.
entitled, A seasonable warning to the poor persecuted Church of Scotland, etc.
which Book, tending to very much Sedition, was published, in order to disturb
the Peace of England. It was proved that this, Machenny was a man that for some
time had made it his business to fetch and disperse scandalous and seditions
Books, which he brought from Holland: The Books being taken upon him, and the
matter of Fact appearing very plain upon him, he was thereupon (not being able
to make any considerable defense) brought in Guilty.

Jo. Spencer, Indicted, as Accessory with one Grant, for stealing, April 27.102
yards of Fustian, value 3 l. from Mr. Fitz-Zachery. It appeared on the Trial,
that the Prisoner was seen with part of the Goods that were lost. Spencer, to
evade that, called some Witnesses, who only attested his honesty, but nothing
as to the Crime laid to his charge, whereupon he was found Guilty, as Accessory.

William Sims, of the Parish of Saint Michaels, Indicted for stealing 70 yards
of black Spanish Cloth, value 30 l. and 290 yards more of Cloth, value 90 l.
from Mr. Loveday. Upon the Trial it was proved, That part of the Cloth was
found in Sims his Lodgings, and that he had a Coat made of the same. The
Prisoner appearing to be an old Offender, and Burnt in the Hand, having no
Evidence in his Defense, was thereupon brought in Guilty by the Jury.

Robert Fr^nces Gent Indicted for assaulting Th: Dangerfield it the Parish of
Sr. Andrews Holbourn, with a Bamboo Cane to the value of 6 d. striking it into
his Left Eye, of which wound the said Thomas Dangerfield is since dead. The
Witnesses against the Prisoner were many, and most of them very positive,
deposing. That they saw the said Ro^rt Frances coming to the side of the Coach
in which Mr Da^ge^field was in, and that there he thrust his said Cane into his
Eye, after which running into St. Tha^ Inn in Holbourn, he was presently
seized, and sent to (...) where when he went in, one of the Retinue of the
Prison telling him that Dangerfield would dye; he the said Frances replied,
That if he should die, it would save the HANGMAN a labor. Mr. Dangerfield,
after he ^as carried to the Gaol, cried out very much of the (...) his Eye,
saying, Oh my Eye! Oh my Head! (...) make a Noise. The Physician being brought
to give his advice, whether it was requisite to bleed him, he found him
desperately ill, and vomiting extremely. The Chyrurgion likewise being sent
for, probing the Wound, found it to be mortal; and he, with others did verily
believe that it occasioned his Death. Mr Frances, in his own Defense, alleged.
That coming to the Coach, he asked Dangerfield, If he had not been heated? Upon
which, Mr. Dangerfield calling him Son of a Whore, he, in his passion, gave him
a slight Blow with his Cane, which he verily believed could not kill him; that
he did it not out of any malice. He called some few Witnesses, which spoke very
little to the purpose, whereupon he was found Guilty.

Charles Deering Esquire; in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, Indicted,
That on the first of June he did assault and murder Henry Goring Esquire; with a
Rapier, giving him a mortal wound on the left side of his Neck therewith, of
which wound the said Mr. Goring in a little time dyed. Upon the Trial it
appeared. That Mr. Deering being behind the Scenes one Mrs. Barry, one of the
Actresses, coming to disrobe her self, where the said Mr. Deering was she
desired him to go down for it would not become him to be present whilst she put
off her Clothes. He told her he would stay there, upon which she the said Mrs.
Bary went out, and Mr. Goring coming up seeing Mr. Deering, cries, Who Is here?
Mr. Deering, and desires him to go down; which Mr. Deering refusing, he told
him. If he would not by fair means, he should by foul; and putting too the
Door, and locking it drew upon Mr. Deering, who, defending himself, received
diverse Wounds and, at last, people running up, found both Swords drawn; and
parting them, laying hold of Mr. Deering, Mr. Goring presently fell down, and
dyed. There were very many Witnesses, and most to this effect, which Mr.
Deering himself did no ways deny. He brought diverse who informed the Bench how
Mr. Goring and himself had lived in great friendship together, making it
apparent, he had not the least prejudice or malice against the said Goring; and
likewise produced many persons of good Quality, who gave a very satisfactory
account of his Life and Conversation that he was not in the least apt to be
quarrelsom, but, on the contrary, very obliging on all occasions whatever. He
was found Guilty of Manslaughter.

Elizabeth Davis. in the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, Indicted, for
stealing 40 s. from Mary Stokes Spinster, on Mar 23. The said Mary Stokes
urged, that Elizabeth Davis going into her Shop, whilst her Husband held her at
the Door, stole 40 s. out of a Sugar Box standing in the Chimney in the said
Shop; whereupon addressing her self to the Constable, he came presently to the
said House and demanding why they served her so? the said Elizabeth Davis
replied. The other was indebted to her for Rent; when upon Examination thereof,
it appeared there was none due. The Prisoner produced diverse Witnesses, who
asserted that the said Mary Stokes told many of her Neighbors, that she
designed to go away, and pay her Landlady no Rent; and likewise others, who
attested that she had not moneys in her House some two days before to bay
Provisions. The Jury thereupon found her Not Guilty.

Joseph Pierce of the Parish of St. David's Westminster, Indicted for stealing
a Quart p^t, on May 13. value 2 s. from Peter Hope. It was made app^, that the
said Pierce. coming into the house of Peter Hope, under pretense of having a
quartern of Brandy, runs away with a Quart pot, which being presently misled,
laying hold on the Prisoner, he confessed it, and gave back the Pot. He was
found guilty to the value of 10 d.

John Smith, of the Parish of Stepney, Indicted for stealing from Edward Jones,
on July 25. between 12 and 1 at night, 5 Pewter Dishes, value 12 s. 12 Plates,
value 4 s. The Evidence against the Prisoner was thus: That Smith breaking into
the house of the said Jones, he was apprehended in the Cellar. The Criminal, in
defense of himself, pretended to be in Drink, and the Door being open he went
in: But the Jury not crediting him, found him guilty of Burglary.

William Blower, in the Parish of Alhallows, London, Indicted for High Treason
in Clipping and diminishing the Lawful Coin of this Kingdom, viz. 20 pieces of
Silver called King Edward the 6th Money, 2 s. 6 d. per Piece, and diverse other
Pieces, most Half Crowns, with Sheers and other Instruments thereunto
belonging; there appeared but one Evidence against him, but he was very
Positive, deposing, how that going to the said Blowers House, to Enquire for
some Person and looking into a Chamber, saw the Money in Half Crowns, and
diverse Clipped pieces, with Boxes, Sheets and other things thereunto belonging
which were produced in the Court: The Prisoner could make but very cold Excuses
for himself, pretending he knew nothing of the matter, and that the Room where
they were found, he had let to one Mr. Johnson, who had been his Lodger about
the space of a Month; but being asked where the said Johnson was, he said he
had not seen him since, nor knew not where he was; he produced two or three
Ignorant Women, who endeavored to do him Service, but all to no purpose, for
my Lord Chief Baron laid the Fact so apparent to the Jury, that they found him
guilty of High Treason.

Francis Jorden, of the Parish of Alhallows Dowgate, was Indicted for Stealing,
August 20. ten Ounces of Died Silk, from one Lan^on a Silk Dyer in the said
Parish, The Witnesses were very sharp upon him, one saying, he saw him take the
said ten Ounces of Silk; and another, that the said Prisoner did often bring
Silk to him to Sell, and other times to Weave, which he believed he Stole from
his Master, by reason they every Day Missed Silk: The Prisoner likewise produced
Evidence for his Honesty in his Lively hood, and that he Bought the Silk that
was laid to his Charge; the Jury thereupon brought him in Not Guilty.

Sarah Walker, was Indicted, for feloniously stealing from Mr. Henry Hull, in
the Parish of Saint Martins, June the 15th. in Bell-Court, six pair of Sleeves
value 6 s. five Scarves, value 12 s. and diverse other pieces or Linen, in all
amounting to the value of 5 l. ^ s. The Evidence was not very Positive against
her, only one said she Confessed the Goods to Sir William Turner. The Jury
brought her in Guilty to the value of 10 d.

William Vanderhurst, in the Parish of St. Mary's, Indicted for stealing a
Brown Gelding June 26th. value 5 l. from John Harris. On the Trial it appeared
Vanderhurst was seen upon the Horse, and being Pursued, alighting from his
Horse, he ran away on Foot; but the Horse-keeper following him Close he was
Taken, and being carried before a Justice of Peace in hopes of Releasment,
confessed to the Justice that he had the Horse, and did design to make use of
him in the Kings Service, for he wanted an Horse. He could make little or no
Defense for himself, and was found Guilty.

Francis Barnes, of the Parish of St. Paul's Shadwell, Indicted for Assaulting
George Vickers on June 12th with an Handspike, value 6 d. giving him a Mortal
Wound, on which he Died. The Evidence for the King was very positive, saying,
that Barnes upon some petty Quarrel, beat the said Vickers down with a Club, on
which Blow the said Barnes presently Died; and that Barnes after the Death of
Vickers, being asked if he was sorry, replied No. The Prisoner in his Defense
brought in some Evidence, who said that Vickers was Quarrelsome, which was begun
in taking a Biscuit from Barnes's Partner, a Boy. The Jury found him guilty of
Manslaughter.

George Attwell of the Parish of Hanwell, Indicted for Feloniously Stealing a
brown Gelding, value 3 l. from Richard Walden, on May 30th. It appeared upon
the Trial, that Attwell brought the Horse to Branford, to the Sign of the
Magpye, where the said Horse was found. The Prisoner said he had the Horse at
the Red-Lyon in Holbourn and was there hired for one Shilling six pence to get
the Horse some Grass in the Country, and thereupon he had him to Branford: But
giving very little account of himself, he was found Guilty.

Samuel Anderton in the Parish of Stepney being a Soldier in the King's
Service, was Indicted for deserting his Majesty's Service, July 1. after he had
recieved Pay from his Captain; His Captain attesting that he had Listed the
said Anderton, gave him one Shilling, and his Sergeant thereupon Mustered him,
and ordered him Quarters; and the next Morning the said Anderton recieved Pay
of his Captain, but after that was not seen by his Officer for seven Days. at
which time the said Sergeant accidentally met the Prisoner and seized him. The
Prisoner made very little Defense, only said his Captain gave him no Pay after
he was Listed but one Day: The Jury found him Guilty.

John Williams and John Sparrow, in the Parish of Kensington, Indicted for
Assaulting James Coomes, May 6th. with a Pistol Charged with Bullet, value 2
s. Shooting him upon the Breast; on the sixteenth of the same Month he Died.
The Evidence for the King attested, that upon Complaint made by Mr. Coomes,
they Apprehended the Prisoners on the Road upon suspicion, carrying them before
Mr. Coomes, who said he could not charge them with the Assault, but desired
they might be Examined by a Justice of Peace: They were Taken without Pistol
or the least scent of Powder. The Evidence in general being on supposition, the
Jury brought them in not Guilty.

Thomas Battersby, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, assaulted John
Howell on June 24. robbing him of 24 s. in money. The Evidence attested, that
John Howell said he was Robbed, and that was all: Whereupon the Jury brought in
the Prisoner Not Guilty.

Thomas Hawly, of the Parish of St. Giles Cripplegate, Indicted, for stealing
April 5. a Razor from Thomas Lawrence, value 2 s. Upon Examination appearing it
was lent him, the Jury brought him in Not Guilty.

Robert Tailor, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, Indicted, for
stealing from Daniel Feuver, on May 6. one Pewter Tankard, value 3 s. one
Skillet, value 1 s. with diverse other things. The Prisoner was found selling
the Pewter, upon which apprehending him, he confessed he had the said Pewter;
his Defense only was, that the Owner had them again. The Prisoner was brought
in Guilty to the value of 10 d.

William Scot, of St. Martins in the Fields, Indicted for stealing on June 6.
29 yards of Point lace, value 18 l. from Ann Dare Widow. The matter of Fact
appeared on his Trial thus: That Scot coming in where a Maid was selling Point,
of a sudden the Point was gone: whereupon suspecting Scot, he was apprehended,
and confessed the Fact. Upon which the Prisoner was found Guilty.

Thomas Weal, and Nathaniel Page Accessory, Indicted for breaking up the house
of Robert Lampany, about four in the afternoon, on June 13 and stealing a gold
Ring, value 10 s. 4 pieces of Gold, commonly called Guinea's, with 15 l. of
money in silver, a Canvas Bag value 2 d. The Evidence for the King made it
appear, That the Prisoners being apprehended, and examined, the aforesaid Weal
confessed he took the money, and that Nathaniel Page his Fellow-Prentice was
sharer with him; and Page likewise confessing he had 2 l. 6 s. of the aforesaid
money, whereby he made himself an Accessory to the Fact, they were both found
guilty.

Francis Martin, of St. Martins in the Fields. Indicted for stealing a silver
Tankard, May 30. from Mr. VVig value 5 l. also a silver Cup, value 15 s. The
Evidence thus: That being employed to solicit with Mr. Martin about the Plate,
he told them that Mr. VVig should have the Tankard by Sunday; and that if they
would fetch a Warrant, he would direct them where the Plate was: A Servant of
Mr. VVigs affirmed, that the Tankard was gone, and no Body had been there but
Martin. Upon which the Prisoner was found guilty.

Jo. Henly, of Hackney Parish, Indicted for stealing a black colored Mare,
value 4 l. on June 26. from Mr. Be^kin. The Evidence for the King was a
Collar-maker, who affirmed that Henly brought him the Hide of the Mare that was
stole, which was found upon him. The Prisoner confessing he had the Mare, and
bought her for 3 s. the Jury found him guilty.

William Davis, of the Parish of St Giles's in the Fields, Indicted for a
silver Tankard, val. 4 l. 15 s. June 11 from John Peatly: The Evidence was
thus: Davis coming into the house, called for a Tankard of Drink; it being
brought, and the Maid that drew it going down, the said Davis throwing out the
Drink, ran away with the silver Tankard. The Prisoner having little to say, he
was brought in by the Jury guilty.

Michael Newlan, in the Parish of St. Mary's, Indicted for stealing from one
Mr. Littleton Goldsmith, July 30. one Gold Ring, value 4 s. Upon the Trial it
being proved he had the Ring, and not being able to make defense, he was by the
Jury found Guilty.

Samuel Wardner, Indicted for speaking Seditious Words against the King and
Government; saying, Argile did well in what be did, and it would be happy if
the Nation would Assist him; and saying further, that the King took more upon
him than was Right. The King's Evidence Swore very home to the Indictment, and
the Prisoner making very little Defense, he was found Guilty.

Lewis le Fore, of St. Martins in the Fields, Indicted for assaulting one
Thomas Bridges, on June 7. with a Rapier, value 5 s. thrusting the said Bridges
into the Left Pap, upon which he dyed: But it appearing by the Evidence, 'twas
done in his own defense, the Jury brought him in Not Guilty.

William White, and Henry Morgan, of St. Margarets Westminster, Indicted for
assaulting Ann Hoult with a Rapier, July 5. on the Left Side of her Belly,
insomuch that she dyed. Upon the Trial it appeared that Morgan committed the
Murder, who is since fled, thereupon White was brought in Not Guilty.

John Morgen, of the Parish of St. Leonard Shereditch, Indicted for Breaking up
the House of one Filkins, June 30th and stealing thence two Cloth Coats, value
10 s. a pair of Breeches, value two Shillings, a Crape Gown, value one
Shilling, with other things. It appeared by the Evidence that the Clothes were
found upon him, and he not being able to Excuse himself, was by the Jury
brought in Guilty.

John Somerset, of the Parish of St. Clements Danes. being a Soldier, and under
Pay in His Majesty's Service, Run away from his Colors; which being proved,
and confessed by the Prisoner, he pretending to be sick, was by the Jury found
guilty.

Elizabeth Churchouse, of the Parish of Aldgate, Indicted for stealing from
Mrs. Roderick, June 1. one Coif, to the value of 6 d: The matter being proved
against her, she was found guilty to the value aforesaid.

Eleanor Hilton, Indicted for unlawfully Clipping and cutting the King's Coin,
viz. 20 pieces of King Charles the first his Half Crowns, and 20 pieces of
Queen Elizabeth Shillings: Two Goldsmiths attesting the Prisoner had often
brought Clipped Money to be changed for Guinea's, and produced Moneys they
recieved from her; she giving but a shallow account of her self, was by the
Jury brought in Guilty.

Henry Antony, in the Parish of St. Katherines, Indicted for breaking up the
House of one Travers, on June 23. and stealing 5 gold Rings, value 3 l. 5 s. 6
d. a silk Hood, value 4 s. with other small things. The Prisoner being found in
the Act, and unable to defend himself, was brought in by the Jury guilty.

Jonathan Becket, Indicted for stealing a Velvet Coat, value 5 l. from Michael
Dickenson Esquire; The Evidence thus: A Woman meeting the said Becket with the Coat
in his hand, and Mr. Dickenson charging him with the Felony, he the said Becket
prayed he would forbear to send him to Newgate, and he would pay him the price
of the Coat in money. All the Prisoner could say in his own defense, was But
little; upon which he was found Guilty.

Je^m^ Phillips of St. James Clarkenwell, Indicted for stealing from Richard
Frisby on June 22. 12 glass Bottles, value 3 s. six quarts of Syder, value 4 s.
6 d. 19 plum Cakes, value 3 s. The Prisoner confessing the Fact before a
Justice of Peace, he was brought in Guilty to the value of 10 d.

Mary Hancock of St. Giles. Indicted for assaulting Mary Baker on May 22
putting her in fear of her Life; stole a stuff Petticoat, value 1 s. 6 d. and
diverse other things; as a Necklace, and a Hood, etc. It appeared on her Trial,
that nothing but Suppositions was proved against her, only the said Mary Baker
a Child said that the Prisoner was the Woman that robbed her. Upon which she
was found Guilty by the Jury.

Jo. White, of St. Giles, Indicted for stealing a Mare on December. 14. from
Andrew Butler, value 6 l. It appeared on the Trial, that the Mare being taken
with another man on her back, and seizing her, the Person that then had her,
said that he bought her of Mr. White: It appeared that the Prisoner had the
Mare of one Midleton upon an Attachment: He was brought in Not Guilty.

Jo. Silk, Indicted for stealing on Feb. 11. from Antony le Fountain Goods to
the value of 14 l. pleads Guilty to this and all before; therefore the Jury
brought him in Guilty.

Mary Pall of St. Martins, Indicted for stealing on June 16. one Crape
Petticoat, value 3 s. with diverse other Goods from Mary Be^l: All the Evidence
that appeared against the Prisoner, was the Person that lost the Clothes, who
did believe the said Mary Pall had her Clothes: she was brought in Not Guilty.

Anne Clarke, of St. Martins, Indicted for stealing a pair of Shoes, value 2
s. 6 d. two pair of Flaxen Sheets, value 10 s. with other Linen from one Mrs.
Banks: The Evidence proved, that taking the Prisoner, she had the Shoes on
her Feet: It was likewise proved that Banks going to Church, and leaving the
Prisoner in the House, when she came home the Prisoner was gone, and her Goods
milling; All her defense was, that the Shoes were given her: She was brought
in Not Guilty.

William Goring, in the Parish of St. Clements Danes Gent. was Indicted, for
that he, July 6. was guilty of assaulting one Jaques about eight of the Clock
at Night, giving him a Mortal Wound on the right Eye with a Rapier, of which
Wound the said John Jaques Died. The Evidence for the King being strong, and
Goring making but small Defense, was found guilty of Manslaughter.

Jo. T^acker, Indicted for stealing a Dever Hat, value twenty shillings, on
July 8, from Mr. B^ckwood. The Prisoner confessed he had the Hat, but that he
bought it: He was found guilty to the value of 10 d.

William Gare and William Cole, Indicted for breaking up El. Brooks shop on
June 17. and getting false Keys and Pick locks into their Possession: It was
proved very apparent against the Prisoners, who were brought in by the Jury
Guilty.

Mary Cox, alias Holden, of the Parish of Saint Martins in the Fields. Indicted
for stealing a piece of coined Gold, called half a Guinea, value ten shillings
nine pence, on June 9. from Ann E^muet. All the Evidence that appeared, was,
that the half Guinea was lost, and she suspected the Prisoner to have it: The
Jury found her Not Guilty.

William Armstrong, of St. Martins, Indicted for stealing from the Right
Honorable Henry Duke of Grafton, on Pallet bed value 10 s. a Feather-bolster,
value 5. s. with Blankets: The Evidence for the King say, that the Prisoner
confessed the Fact, and farther, that the Goods were found in Armstrong's
custody: He was brought in Guilty.

Nicholas Apleton, and Joan Anderson, of the Parish of Stepney, Indicted for
stealing a gray Gelding, value thirty shillings, on July 4. from John We^ford.
On the Trial it appeared that both the Prisoners were taken on Horse back;
Apleton affirmed, that the aforesaid Joan brought the Horse to him, and desired
him to get up before her, to direct her in her way: The Woman confessing the
same, the Jury brought them in Not Guilty.

Mary Brown, of St. Paul's Covent Garden, Indicted for stealing from Morday
Cracklow on July 11. eleven Yards of Cloth, value 13 s. 6 d. It was proved
against the Prisoner, that she coming to buy Cloth in Cracklow's shop, and
going out into another shop, she was found upon the enquiry of the Cloth, to
throw the Cloth behind a Counter; she was brought in Guilty to the value of 10
d.

Thomas Golesburrow, of St. James Midd. had two Indictments against him, one
for stealing a Sheep, value 20 s. on July 4. from John Towe; another for
stealing one Sheep, value 20 s. from Mark Bows: The Prisoner confessed he had
the Sheep, and so was brought in Guilty.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Judgment, as follows:

Four Ordered to be Transported, viz.

Jonathan Becket, John Spencer, Francis Martin, Thomas Golesburrow.

Nine burnt in the Hand, viz.

Thomas Battin, William Sims, William Goring, Francis Barnes, William Scot;
William Davis, Mithael Newlan, Peter Lary, William Armstrong.

Seventeen to be Whipped, viz.

Sarah Walker, Joseph Pierce, Robert Tailor, Edward Hickman, Thomas Cross,
Allice Wilson, Elizabeth Churchouse, Mary Brown, Jeremiab Phillips, John
Thacker, Elianor Hilton.

Samuel Wardner for speaking Seditious words against the King and Government,
is to be whipped from Aldgate to Temple Bar, fined four Marks, and find Security
for seven years.

William Gare and William Cole whipped from Aldgate to Temple Bar, fined 3 s. 4
d. a piece.

Philips and Shaller are to be whipped, for being guilty of a Riot in Ludgate
Prison, from Newgate-street round St. Paul's Churchyard, to Ludgate, and so to
Newgate again. Also one Gosmer was Fined for the same Fact.

John Machenny, to be severely whipped, for dispersing seditions Books, on
Wednesday and Friday next.

Thirteen received Sentence of Death, viz.

William Blower for High Treason, Robert Frances; William Vanderhurst, George
Attwell, Samuel Anderton, Thomas Weal, Nathaniel Page, John Smith, John Henly,
John Somerset, John Morgen, Henry Antony, Mary Hancock; after Sentence she was
Reprieved.

The Proceedings having been thus far, the Court adjourned to Guildhall on
Monday the 24th of August, by Seven a Clock in the Forenoon: Appointed the next
Sessions to be held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, on Wednesday, Aug. 26.
next ensuing.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
This may be Printed,

R. L. S.

London, Printed by G. Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, over against
Baynardi-Castle. 1685.


