THE PROCEEDINGS ON THE King and Queens Commissions OF THE Peace, and Oyer and
Terminer, and Jail-deliver of Newgate, held for the CITY of London, and COUNTY
of Middlesex, at Justice-Hall in the OLD-BAYLY.
On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, being the 9th, 10th, and 11th. Days of
December, 1691. And in the Third Year of their MAJESTY'S Reign.
THE Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, Goal Delivery of Newgate, held at
Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, being the
9th. 10th. and 11th. Days of December, 1691. before the Right Honorable Sir
Thomas Stamp, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London, and Mr. Deputy Recorder,
with severral others of Their Majesty's Justices for the City of London, and
County of Middlesex.
The Jurors were as follows.
London Jury. Anthony Lawsom. John Hamden. Thomas Fletcher. John Perry. John
Mayen. Jeremiah Lammas. John Andrews. Henry Watts. Robert Dunn. John Sanford.
Thomas Ford. Samuel Webb. Middlesex Jury. Thomas Harris. Henry Gerrard. William
Parkinson. Francis Gotobed. Richard Smith. Michael Lucas. Ambrose Hemborrow.
Henry Jones. John Collins. John Preston. William Silkcock. Thomas Nichols.
The Proceedings were these:

Francis Exhall, was Tried for Stealing Three Black Cows, from one William
Greentree, on the 13th. of November Last; out of his Grounds at Bagshot; which
the Prisoner confessed when taken, being found in Water Lane, but he denied it at
his Trial; saying that he met a Man upon the Road, who gave him half a Crown to
drive them to London; but that was but a Frivilous Excuse; so he was found
Guilty of Felony.

Elizabeth Smith, was Indicted, for Stealing, Twenty two Yards of Bone Lace,
Value 3 l. 4 s. from Rose Jeeve; on the 3 d. of September last; she came to
Mrs. Jeeves Shop, in Bow-Lane, to Cheapen some Goods, and took away the Lace;
and she coming by the Prosecutors Door about a Week after, was taken; The
Prisoner denied the Fact; and called some Witnesses, and there was but one
evidence against her, who might be mistaken in the party, she was acquitted.

B -- G --, of the County of Denbigh Gentlewoman, Anne Richardson, and Jane
Bromley of Westminster, were all three Indicted; B -- G -- as Principle, and
the two latter as Accessory, for the Murder of Mrs. B -- G -- 's Female
Infant, on the 4th. of November last: The Evidence for the King Deposed, that
the Child was found Dead, lying in a Vault, in some Old Ruined Houses, in
Park-Street at Westminster, being a most amazing Spectacle, having no Covering
about it; and its Tongue forced out of the Mouth, which was done by great
Violence; it was further declared, by a person of Quality, with whom Mrs. B.
had lived, that she complained of the Gripes, and took a Coach and went abroad,
and after this it was proved by others, that she was Delivered at Richardsons
House, at: Westminster, and that Richardson and Bromley carried the Child after
it was Born, to the place abovesaid, and that B. -- owned it to be hers; but
there was no Evidence, that could Charge her to have offered and Violence to
the Child, and Richardson and Bromley came to her after she was Delivered, and
found the Child Dead, but whether born alive or no, could not be found; and the
Prisoner Mrs B -- had made provision for her lying in; So in the End they were
all Acquitted.

Mary Mott, Tried for killing her Male Infant Bastard Child, at Stepney, on the
21th. day of October last; the Evidence Swore, that the Child was found Dead,
lying in a Gutter, on (...) of one Richard Br^ who declared, that he being
Topping some Chimneys, saw the Child lying in the Gutter, on the Top of the
house; and she owned the Child to be hers, and could not prove that it was
still born, as she alleged; so she was found Guilty of willful Murder.

William Good of Stepney, was Tried for a Robbery on the High Way, committed
upon the body of one Austin Wilson, on the 3 d. of this instant December,
taking from him a Diaper Napkin Value 12 d. Twelve Larks, Two Ducks, and an
Embroidered Wastcoat: The Prisoner, and one Richard White not taken, met the
Prosecutor, between Hackney and London, about seven a Clock at Night; and
violently seized him and took away the Goods, which was very plainly proved;
and by the Assistance of another person, that happened to come by; the Prisoner
was taken, but White got away: The Prisoner denied it, and said he was in Drink
but that was nothing for his Credit; he was found Guilty of the Robbery.

Anne Sampson, alias Parker, was Tried for Felony and Burglary, in breaking the
house of Zacharia Wisdom, on the first of November last, taking away Four Loins
of Pock, one Plot of Brandy, and two Quart Glass Bottles of Ale: The prisoner
was a Servant to Mr. Wisdom, and the Collar Window was broke open, the Goods
gone; and she was found afterward in the Round house: She confessed the taking
the Goods when before the Justice; but the Law being tender, where the person
Steals any manner of Victuals for mere necessity, she was not found Guilty of
any Burglary; besides the Prosecutor could not be positive that the Collar
Window was Lock; so she was only found guilty of the Felony, to the Value of 10
d.

C -- J was tried for stealing 29 yards of stripped Silk, value 7 d. and 24 yards
of other stripped Silk; value 5 s. 8. d. on the 13 day of October last, the Goods
of William Waller, who said, that he lost the Silk out of his Shop at
Ludgate Hill, and afterward it was sold to the Mr. Walley in Southwark, where
it was found and owned by the Prosecutor to be his Silk; the Prisoner said,
that he bought the Silk of a Woman, near Tower Hill, but cound not prove it, so
he was found Guilty.

Mary Jones of St. Giles Cripple-gate, was tried for stealing 42 yards of Gold
and Silver Lace, value 18 l. on the 26 day of November last, the Prisoner (to
put a better color upon her design) came to the Prosecutor's Shop in a Sodan;
and after having cheapened several pieces of Lace, she took away the piece of
Lace abovesaid, and the next day she was found in another Shop, playing the
same prank, when being apprehended, she confessed the Fact, but denied it upon
the Trial: she was found guilty of Felony.

Jane Bridgeman was Indicted for that she together with Mary Rubey, Mary Davies
and Elizabeth Renolds did make an Assault upon one John Farmer, in the Kings
Highway, and robbed him of a Silver Spoon, a Razer and diverse other small
things, besides 5. s. in Money; but no Evidence appearing against her, she was
Acquitted.

John Alsop of the Parish of St. James Westminster, Butcher, was indicted and
tried for the Murder of Ralph Treley, a boy about 8 or 9 years old, on the 16
of November last, giving him several desperate stripes with a whip and a Ropes
end; upon the Face, Neck, Head, Breast, Back, Shoulders, short Ribs and Belly,
etc. of which beating and unnatural Usage, he lived languishing till the 24.
day of the same Month, and then dyed; The Evidence declared, That the Boy was
beaten in a most horrid manner, and much bruised with the violence of the
strokes, and his Head was swelled almost as big as two; the occasion of this
cruel Usage of him that did it, was grounded upon some suspicion he had, that
the Boy had stole a Silver Spoon from him, the Boy, being poor, used to wait in
Clare-Market, to run of Errands, where the Prisoner kept his stall; but no
Evidence could swear, that the Prisoner was the Person, that beat him; for the
Boy only said, that it was a Butcher in Clare-Market, next door to one Mrs.
Moor, but he did not know him, it did not appear to be the Prisoner; for he had
always been very kind to the Boy, so he was Acquitted.

John Alarms of St. Andrews Holbourn, was tried for stealing a black Golding,
value 8 l. from Thomas Tipping Esquire the Evidence was, That the Horse was brought
to the Prisoners shop, he being a Farrier, to be dressed, having a sore shoulder,
by a stranger, who said, that the Horse was sent by the Lady Etheridge, which
was a feigned story in the Person, that brought the Horse; for she sent no such
Horse, and the Person afterward absented himself, and left the horse in the
Prisoners hands; the Prisoner gave a fair Account of his honesty, and what he
did was through Ignorance: So he was Acquitted,

Anne Miller was indicted for breaking the house of the Anne Badger of Stepney
Widow on the 3. of November last, taking away 6 Holland Coives, value 2 s. a
Wastcoat value 10. s. and some other Goods; the Prisoner broke open the door,
and took away the things, and there was a Man sat by the fire in the mean
time, who catched her in the Fact, the Prisoner said, that she was troubled
with the Falling Sickness, and so fell into the house, the door being open, but
that was but a frivilous Excuse, so she was found Guilty of Folony and Burglary.

James Bruce, a Scotchman, was tried for stealing 14 yards of Linen, Cloth out
of the shop of Mr. Charles Murray on the 17 of November last; he came into the
shop, and took the Cloth, and run a little way with it, and then was taken with
the Cloth about him, which he could not contradict; so he was found Guilty.

Thomas Mercy, a Bayliff's Follower, was tried upon two Indictments, for that
he together with John Laurence, not taken, did rob Nicholas Barebone Esquire at
Hilston on the 30 of November last, of a Pea-hen value 20 d. three Turkeys
price each 18 d. the Evidence was, that the Prisoner was in possession of the
Goods of a person, near Mr. Barebones house, and Laurence was seen to take up
the Pea hen and Turkeys, which were afterward found in both their custodys;
and it was further proved by a Boy, who was an Evidence against him, that the
Prisoner gave him 6 d. to conceal the matter; he was found Guilty of the
Indictment.

The second Indictment was against him and Laurence for robing one Thomas
Bushel of the abovesaid Parish, of a pair of Holland sheers, some Table Cloths,
and other Linen, and Household Goods of good value; the Evidence against him
was, that he being in execution with Laurence of Bushel's goods, did make sale
of them, and after that they did convert some of them to their own use, which
was a misapplying of their Warrant, and looked upon to be Felony in the
Prisoner: so he was found Guilty of this Indictment also.

Mary Horsepool was tried for robing William Russel of the Parish of St. Brides
on the 30 of November last of a Cloth Cloak value 4 d. 3 yards of Velvet, value
30 s. Mr. Russel swore, that the Prisoner was his Servant, and that he had lost
several goods before, and the goods charged in the Indictment were found at a
Pawn-Brokers (one Mr. Dormers) in. Field-Lane, the Prisoner confessed the Fact,
when taken, and did not much deny it at her Trial; so she was found Guilty.

Dorothy. Lord, alias Atkyns was tried for breaking the house of Charles Rogers
in the Farish of Anlgate of one Watch with a silver Case, value 30 s. one Cloak
value 20 s. twenty pieces of broad Gold, value 23 s. each, twenty Guinear, and
160 l. in Money Mr. Rogers swore, that the Prisoner was a Chare woman in his
house, and tubing under the Bed, the Prosecutors Keys fell down from a private
place, at the Bedshead, which she saw, a little after this three Fellows, who
lodged where the Prisoner lived, came into Mr. Rogers Chamber, about two a
clock in the Morning with Candles in their hands, and swore most horrible Oaths
at him, that he was a dead Man, if he did offer to molest them, and then bound
him, and robed him, and are since fled. The Prisoner was further heard to say,
that Mr. Rogers had good feathers to pulls, and therefore she would not leave
his Service, or to that effect; but this being but circumstantial Evidence, she
was Acquitted.

Robert Chatfield and John Beamore, alias Pemore, were both Indicted for
stealing a Barrow Hog, value 20 s. a Sow value 20 s. on the 9th. of November
last, the Goods of Simon Newel; Mr. Newel said that he lost 9. Hogs in all,
which were stole out of his Yard, at Hornchurch in Essex; and afterward he
found them all again, where the Prisoners had sold them, and they were taken as
they were driving some of the Hogs along the Road, the Prisoners could not
gainsay it; so they were both found Guilty of Felony.

Blizabeth Clark was tried for stealing on the 3 d. of July last, 1. Silver
Cup, value 3 l. 2. Tasters 6 s. 2. Thimbles, 2 Pair of Clasps, some Hoods and
Scarves, etc. the Goods of Francis Pennington; the Evidence was Pennington
himself, who said that the Prisoner lodged in his House, and took his Goods and
pawned them in East Smithfield, whore he had them again; the Prisoner said that
the Prosecutor gave her the Clasps and the other Things; but that was but a
Sham, so she was found Guilty of Felony.

Daniel Bransbury, a Boy was Indicted for Robbing one Phillip Weston, on the
7th. instant of a black Cloak, value 10 s. a Cloth Coat, value 5 s. the Boy
took them out of a Coach-box, and run away with them; but being stopped, they
were taken upon his back; The Prisoner said, that they were delivered to him by
another Boy, who was sled; but could not prove it, so he was found Guilty.

Richard Tailor of Stepney, was tried for stealing a wooden Gate, with Iron
Hinges, value 5 s. on the 17th. day of October last; the Prisoner was taken
with the Iron in his Custody; but he said he bought it aboard a Ship, and the
Evidence being not positive that he stole it, he was acquitted.

Thomas Clench and George Clench Brothers, of White Chapel, were Indicted for
that they, together with one Thomas Curry, not taken, did murder one Susanah
Cox a Girl, on the 21th.

August, with a Stone, throwing it at the Head of the Girl, gave her a Bruise,
of which Wound she died within Six Weeks afterward. The Evidence swore that
the Prisoners, and one more were going along Goodmans-fields, where the Girl
was; and one of them threw a Stone at some Boys that were flying a Kite, and
the Girl standing in the Way, received the Wound in her Head, which the
Chyrurgeon declared was the Cause of her Death. The Prisoners were heard to
confess, that they did throw Stones at the Boys, but they denied it at their
Trial; and there was no Malice proved, yet the Matter seemed to affect Thomas
Clench most: So he was found Guilty of Manslaughter; but George was acquitted:

George Casewell of St. Martins in the Fields, Gent. was tried for the Murder
of one Andrew Hickson, on the 11th. of November last, giving him one mortal
Wound in the Bolly of the depth of Six Inches, of which he dyed on the morrow;
The Prisoner came into an Alehouse with Hickson, in Bonn-street; and called
for a Pot of Drink, and immediately he drew his Sword, and run the said Hickson
into the Belly: And the Prisoner confessed before the Justice, that there was an
old grudge betwixt them; and that the Prisoner had urged the Deceased for 24.
hours before to sight him; and because he refused it, he took his Sword and
stuck him: the Matter was very plain against him, and he had nothing to say
matterial for himself, so; he was found Guilty of willful Murder.

John Barret of White Chapel, was tried for Felony and Burglary, in breaking
the House of one John Smith, with an intention to steal his Goods, on the 20th.
of October last; the Prisoner was found in the House about seven a Clock at
Night, the Door being open; but was fast locked before: The Prisoner denied it,
and faulter'd in his Allegations, and there was no one else found in the House
but the Prisoner, So he was found Guilty, both of Felony and Burglary.

Susan Stanley of Stepney, was tried for stealing a Silver Seal, value 12 d. a
Key, value 1 d. and 17 s. in Money, the Goods of one John Metcalfe, on the
13th. of November, who said that he met the Prisoner in the Street, and went
into a House to drink, where she picked his Pocket of the above said Money, but
the Prosecutor could swear but to One half Crown, that the Woman had, which he
might easily mistake, so she was acquitted.

Thomas Tailor was arraigned, and tried upon two several Indictments, the first
for robbing one Ralph Azowby of Islington, of 2 Cloth Coats, value 45 s. 2 Silk
Scarves, value 14 s. a Laced Tippet, and diverse other small Goods. The second
for setting Fire on the Barn, and burning the Hay therein, value, 30 s. being
the Barn and Hay of one Thomas. Sedgwick of Islington above said. The Evidence
against him him was, that the Barn being near the House; on a sudden it sell a
Fire, and the Prisoner was seen near it, Crying out, Fire, fire, after which
whilst the Family went out of the House, to quench the Fire; he went up Stairs
into the Chamber, where the Prosecutor's Wife was, and pretending to help her
away with the Goods, to save them from the Fire, he run away with the Parcels
beforementioned; he denied the Facts, but that was to no purpose; for it was
fully proved, so he was found Guilty of both Indictments.

Immediately after this, he was tried upon a Third Indictment, for breaking the
House of Seth Bunckley of Hackney, about Twelve a Clock at Night, on the 23 day
of November last, and carrying thence, a Diaper Table-Cloth, value 3 s. 6 d.
and some Napkins: The Evidence declared that the House was broke open, and the
Goods were took in the Prisoner's custody; besides the same Night, the Robbery
was done, there was another Barn burnt, near the same place. The Prisoner said
he found the Goods; but that did not avail him, for the Court resented it as a
most Notorious, Newfound, base way of stealing, so he was found guilty of the
Indictment.

John Wright, alias Randale was tried for stealing 2 Silver Tankards, value 10
l. on the 5th. of this instant December, The Tankards were found about him, by
the Watch being stopped, when he was running away with them; he denied it and
said that he found them, but that was but a lame Excuse, so he was found guilty
of Felony.

William Harsey was tried for the Murder of one William Sillock, in St.
Katharines Parish, the manner thus: The Prisoner was found by the VVatch, lying
upon the Ground, with a Knife all bloody in his Hand, with which he had stabbed
the said Sillock; it happened that a scuffle arose between the Prisoner and the
Deceased, at they were drinking, in the midst of which, Sillock was stabbed;
but none faw him give the VVound, but Sillock was seen to fall down dead in the
place: It was further Deposed, that the Prisoner stobbed two Persons more at
the same time, viz. one Thomas Kates, and one John Smith, the former of which
recovered, and was an Evidence against the Prisoner in Court; but Smith died
the next day, one thing may be Noted, that Smith was the Prisoner's friend; but
the business being done in the Street, in the dark, he mistook, and stabbed his
own Friend instead of another Man: The Prisoner urged that he knew not what he
did being in drink; and that the deceased Sillock struck him first; but none
could prove that, and it was looked upon to be no less than a base and wilful
Murder, so he was found guilty of the same.

Thomas Thomas of St. Brides Parish, was tried for robbing one John Watkins of
the same, of a Looking-glass, value 2 s. One old Perriwig, value 6 d. two
Pewter Plates, etc. The prosecutor swore, that his House was broken open in the
Night, and that the Prisoner was met, running without his Hat, from the Door,
crying out, Stop him, stop him; but nothing was found about him, he was only
Indicted upon Suspicion; and the Evidence was something short, so he was
acquitted.

William Harsey was a second time indicted, on London side, for the Murder of
John Smith, his friend mentioned in his former Tyral; It was deposed, that
Smith and the Prisoner were drinking till Twelve a Clock, at the end of the
Minories, as also Thomas Kates; and he stobb'd him in the Belly four Inches
deep; The Prisoner pleaded that he was in drink, and could not remember any
thing that he had done as he said before, he had very little to say, so in the
end he was found guilty of willful Murder.

John Wright was Indicted for that he, together with one Edward Shelton and
William Hilsey, not taken, did rob one Anthony Goodman of a black Cloth Coat,
value 13 s. 1 Shirt, One Woman's Cloth Gown, value 3 l. 1 Petticoat, value 20 s.
another Petticoat, value 35 s. 2 Pair of Boddice, value 3 l. 1 Satin Gown,
value 3. d. etc. The Prisoner hired a Lodging of the Prosecutor, and lay three
Nights there; and then brought the other Persons to lie with him, and took away
the Goods, as was suspected by the prosecutor; but the Prisoner had some of his
Friends in Court, who gave a very good Account of-his former behavior, and the
Matter really savored of Malice in the bottom, so he was at length acquitted.

P -- K --, the Wife of one P -- of St. Dunstans in the West, was Indicted for
high Treason in Clipping, Filing and Diminishing the current Coin of this
Kingdom: The discovery was made by the Apprentice, who finding the Closet Door
open, in the Chamber, out of curiosity, went into it to see it; and there found
several parcels of Clippings, after which, he made it known, and search being
further made into the Closet, there was found several parcels of Clippings,
with Shears, and all other things necessary for that Trade. The Evidence
further was, that she was wont to send melted Silver abroad to sell by the
Apprentice, etc. The Prisoner said that the Closet was her Husbands, who was
gone away, and she knew not how the things came there; and as for sending
melted Silver abroad to sell, she said it was usual for their Trade so to do;
and she did did it by her Husband's Order: And her Husband being fled, the
Court Maturely considered of the Matter of Fact, how that it was probable
enough that P -- himself was really the Clipper, so in fine she was discharged.

Richard Jackson was Indicted for stealing from Julian Moss Widow of
Whitechappel, on the 26th day of November last, two Suits of Hangings stuffs,
value 5 l. a Suit of Cloth Hangings, value 8 l. a Chest of Drawers, value 30 s.
four Pictures, value 12 s. one other Picture, value 30 s. an Iron-grate, value
40 s. 9. d. two Rat-Traps, value 12 d. some Pot-Racks and Hangers, and a Frying
pan and some Knives, and other small household goods, etc. of good value, the
Evidence for the King swore, that several of the Goods were found in a place,
where the Prisoner had sold them, as a Chest of Drawers, and some Hangings,
etc. which Mrs. Moss owned to be hers, the Prisoner feignedly excused himself,
by telling the Court, that he bought them of another Man, and paid 23 s. for
them, which he could not prove, so he was found Guilty of Felony.

Mary Cock Wife of Patrick Cock was Indicted first for robing Nicholas Smithson
of a Mare, value 5 l. 2dly. For robing Michael Hobbs of a Gelding, value 5. l.
the Evidence against her for stealing the Mare, was that she sold the Mare to
Patrick Cock at Royston. (who went for her Husband) where she tolled them by
the Name of Mary Edwards, that being her Maiden-Name, confessing since, that
her Husband stole them; but this was Accounted no Evidence, so she was
Acquitted.

The Evidence against her concerning the Gelding was to the same effect; and no
positive proof could be brought against her for it; so she was Acquitted
likewise of this second Indictment.

Thomas Franks, a reputed Jesuit, was Indicted for a high Misdemeanor, for
that he being an evil disposed Person, and of very ill Fame, intending to
disquiet and disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom of England, and
to deter Their Majesty's Liege people from their Obedience to our most Gracious
Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary. Did on the 5th. day of February
last, hire a Ship to convey several persons into France, who were open and
professed Enemies to our King and Queen; whose Names were particularly mentioned
in the Charge against him, being Colonel Graham (the Lord Preston's Brother)
Mr. William Penn, Sir William Wallis, and the late Lord Bishop of Ely, who were
all to be conveyed in the Ship aforesaid, which he the said Franks hired of one
Mr. Low, at a House where he met him in Fullers Rents, where he bargained with
him for 16 Guineas, out of which he was to have one for himself, and because
Colonel Grymes and the Bishop of Ely were pusilanimous Men, there were Blinds
to be contrived in the Rounds of the same Ship, to keep them from being
discovered, and to give them Air, and one was to be on the one side, and the
other on the other side; and furthermore, the King's Council gave the Jury to
understand, that the prisoner was guilty of speaking very Scandalous and
Seditious Words against the Government, viz. That Sir William Wallis, was to
be a leading Man, and after he had been with King James and the French King. He
was to return into Scotland, and there to head an Army, against our King and
Queeen; and one Major Holmes, he said, was to head an Army of(...)


