THE PROCEEDINGS To EXECUTION of the Sentence awarded against Capt. Thomas
Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse; FOR High Treason.
Who were on Friday the 20th. of this Instant July Drawn, Hanged and Quartered
at Tyburn, for Conspiring against the Life of the KING, and to raise War and
Rebellion, in order to Subvert the Government, etc. Containing a Relation of
what happened during their Imprisonment, and at the place of Execution. With
their Confessions at Tyburn.
THomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse, having been Accused to the Kings
most Honorable Council, by the Discoverers of the Plot against the Life of His
Majesty, of many Treasonable purposes and intentions, and upon Warrant Issued
out for that purpose Apprehended, they were on the 12th. of this instant July
brought to the Sessions house in the Old Bailey, and their Arraigned upon the
Indictments of High Treason found against them by the Grand Jury for Conspiring
the Death of the King, and designing to raise War and Rebellion, and in order
thereto procuring Arms, as Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols and the like, to
which Indictments they Pleading Not Guilty; whereupon Thomas Walcot being
ordered to look to his Challenges, in order to excepting against the Preemptory
number, which is 35, of the Jurors, he made exceptions against all such as
belonged to the Lieutenancy, but in the end a Jury of 12. Men being sworn, they
were charged with, to try the Issue between the King and him, in case of his
Life and Death: Whereupon Colonel Rumsie, M. Well, Mr. Keeling, Mr. Bourn and
others, swore him present at diverse Treasonable Conspiracies, Consults, and
Traitorous Contrivancies, that he was to Command a Party to destroy the Kings
Guards, whilst others Assassinated the King and Duke, etc. in February last, at
what time they were to return from Newmarket, and that a Consult was held to
inquire into the day of their return, and that they differed about the
particular time, tho afterward they came to a Result, but that the Fire that
happened at Newmarket frustrated the Intention, etc. On the Friday following
being the 13th. instant, William Hone, and John Rouse, were Tried for the Like
Treason in Conspiring against His Majesty, him to Death, and final Destruction
to put, etc. against whom the Kings Evidence deposed, first, that Hone had
agreed to be one of the Assassinates, and was to have a sum of Money to buy
him Furniture for that purpose, as Horse and Arms, etc. and that he had
declared he was to be one that should seize the Captain and Lieutenant, and
that at another time he declared it would never be well till the Blackbird and
Gold-Finch were knocked on the Head, and that both those Mysterious
Expressions, he explained himself to mean the King and Duke of York; these and
many more were the circumstances that occurred upon this and the former Trial,
under the like circumstances was John Rouse Indicted for High Treason and
Conspiracy against the Life of the King tending to the subversion of the
Government, so that in the end after diverse Arguments they were found Guilty,
and the day following received Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, as
the Law in case of Conviction for High Treason requires, when desiring their
Friends might visit them, and time for Repentance allowed, they were remanded
to Prison, where as Men sensible of the near approach of their dissolution they
continued, being often visited by their Friends and Relations who came to
condole their misfortunes, and to comfort them with seasonable admonitions to
prepare for a future state, seeing their Lives were forfeited by the Law, and
that Execution of the Sentence passed upon them would not be long deferred,
forasmuch as all hopes of pardon was vanished, and whether a Reprieve for
longer Life would be granted to them remained doubtful; the former and the
latter being at the pleasure of His Majesty, whom they had so highly offended;
whereupon they taking the cordial advice of those that regarded their happiness
as to the Life to come, seriously considering in what estate they remain, and
what a large account they were shortly to give before the Dreadful Tribunal of
all their Actions, insomuch that at times they were not interrupted by
Visitants, their serious thoughts were for the most part employed in Confessing
their Sins, and begging pardon of God for their Offenses, during their abode in
Newgate, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex came to visit them, in order to
persuade them to an ingenious Confession, as far as they were conscious of the
Conspiracy of which they stood Convicted, the same Arguments used diverse other
Loyal Persons, but they seemed much reserved, saying, they had been brought to
disgrace, and consequently to an untimely end, by their too much credulity, and
that it was now too late to retrieve what was past, but earnestly begged pardon
of those they had Offended.

Captain Walcot seldom appeared publicly, but kept himself to his retirement,
either Reading or Conversing with particular Friends that came to take their
last farewell of him. John Rouse was often observed busy as is supposed writing
for the most part, but to what effect remains yet uncertain, unless a Petition
humbly to beseech His Majesty to bestow his dead Body on his Wife. William Hone
was most dejected of the three, the fear of death having in a manner stupefied
him, in so much that he was hardly induced to answer to the questions demanded
of him by such as came to Examine or Discourse him. This and such like was
their behavior, till they had notice that the Warrant was Signed for their
Execution, and that they must prepare to dye as this day, which heavy tho
expected news they received with different passions, continuing as Men that
devoted to the Grave till this Morning, at what time being put into a Sledg,
they were drawn to the place of Execution, attended by a strong Guard of the
Sheriffs Men, and Hamblet Wonders.

About 10 in the Morning Thomas Walcot, John Rouse, and William Hone were
brought to Tyburn, the former in a Sledg by himself, and the 2 latter in an
other Sledg, when being unbound, they were helped into the Cart prepared for
that purpose, and there for a while conversed with the Ministers, who were Dr.
Cartwhite, and Mr. Ordinary, both of them persuading them to make an ingenious
Confession, according to the best of their Knowledge: Whereupon Captain Walcot
drew out two Papers and showed them to the Ministers, and those that were in
the Cart, saying, that he had written them to read publicly, which when he was
ordered to do, he with a composed Countenance did it Audibly, the first was in
Nature of a Confession of his Enormities to God, wherein he desired
forgiveness, declaring that he had been a great Sinner, and for that cause, God
had suffered him to perpetrate those Crimes, that had rendered him worthy of
Death; desiring God of his Mercy to forgive him his manifold Offenses, and that
all the World would forgive him, whom he had offended, putting up diverse
Ejaculations, desiring that he might be an Example to warn others from daring
to Attempt any Treasonable Design or Conspiracy against the Life of the King,
after which another Paper he held in his hand, sometimes looking on it, and
other times not while he was speaking or making his Confession to the People,
declaring, that he was Guilty of the Conspiracy, as to the knowledge thereof,
and that he was drawn into the said Conspiracy by People that promised him
great things, but that now he plainly perceived there was no Faith in Man, as
to the matter of the Assassination, he confessed to have knowledge of it, and
that he had been Incited thereto by Evil-affected Persons, whom he desired God
to forgive, Praying that his and his Fellows present, might be the last Blood
that might be shed upon the occasion of the Conspiracy he confessed he had been
at diverse Consults, and that once and no more to his remembrance, he had been
in the Company of two Lords, naming diverse of the Persons fled upon the
Discovery of the Plot, and Conspiracy, saying, they had drawn him unexpectedly
into the mischief, he having not long before arrived in England, and that too
late, he was conscious of his too much credulity, which had brought him to his
deserved though shameful and unexpected End, desiring of God to prosper, and
preserve the King or to this purpose, he also said, that when the Conspiracy
was discovered, he was promised by some who had drawn him into it, to be safely
conveyed into Holland, and that when they had decoyed him and were conveying
him to Prison-ward, they told him they designed to Ship him, etc. and so
continued with penitential tears to bewail his Crimes and unhappy End, but
would not own that he was actually to Kill the King, tho he was to be assisting
therein, desiring the People to obey, and in all Cordial sincerity endeared
themselves to His Majesty, who well deserved the love and tenderest respect of
his Subjects, this being the substance of Walcots Speech.

John Rouse began to make his Confession, when having desired God to forgive
him his Sins, he confessed that he had been at diverse Consults, and that he was
to have Acted, but as to each particular he was Ignorant, but that (...) had
been privy to many Treasonable Discourses, tending to an Insurrection the like,
desiring God to forgive him his many Sins, which he said had been multiplied,
but that he was above all sorrowful for offending against such ^^eat Light,
saying, the cries of a Wife and Children, were the chiefest Instigat^ to make
him Engage in the Wicked Design of which he heartily repented (...) for which
he had justly deserved to dye, declaring, that he had been drawn into it by the
Earl of Shaftesbury and others, who were now fled, and that he did not when
first he entered into it, think the design had any ways tended to the touching
the Life of His Majesty, or that the Conspiracy would have arrived to the
height it at last did, and continued to express his sorrow and Repentance for
his being so long concious of so Notorious a Wickedness, and not revealing it,
which he attributed to the fear of his own Safety, by reason he had for some
time past, been under Evil Circumstances, and been rendered obnoxious to many
Persons of known Loyalty, and in Fine he confessed most of the Charge Evidenced
against him, at his Trial in the Old-Bayly on the 13 Instant, grievously
complaining against those that had drawn him into the Mischievous Conspiracy,
begging forgiveness of all he had Offended in thought or deed, desiring God to
continue the Kings Life and long Reign, etc.

Hone spoke little as to particulars, but in all general confessed that he was
Guilty of the Conspiracy, and was to have been one of the number that was to
have Assassinated the King in his return from New Market, and that Goodenough
and others had by many persuasions prevailed with him, to undertake what he
did, he likewise confessed he had told Mr. West, he had spoke with Goodenough,
and related to him the measures that he was to take, saying, that he had agreed
to be one in the Assassination with diverse other Circumstances of which these
are the most material, tho indeed his Discourse was but short in respect to the
two former.

The Confessions thus made or as near as could be taken, thus or to this effect
the Ministers Prayed with them, and sung a Psalm after which, they severally
desired to say a Prayer of themselves, which was granted, Captain Walcot
beginning first, who prayed fervently, as being thoroughly sensibly of his
Offense, desiring the Prayers of all good Men, next Hone made a Prayer, and
afterward Rouse: Each of them seducing greatly to bewail the greatness of
their Offenses, asking forgiveness, especially of His Majesty, against whom
they had so highly Offended, when being asked what further they had to say,
they only desired, that God would forgive them, and that all People would take
Example by them, and not be Enticed or persuaded to enterprise so great a
wickedness as had brought them to ruin, though as they hoped God would accept
of their late Repentance, and those that heard them, and beheld their untimely
end would take warning thereby, and avoid the like Temptations.

These or to this effect they having confessed and declared, the Cart was drawn
away, and after they had hung 3 quarters of an hour, they were cut down and
Quartered one by one, their Bowels Burnt etc. according to the Sentance
pronounced against them.

FINIS.
Printed for Langley Curtis, at the Sign of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's Head,
near Fleet-Bridge.


