THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions of the Peace HELD AT HICKS-HALL, FOR THE
County of Middlesex, December. 5. 1681.

With His MAJESTY'S Two ORDERS, and Sir WILLIAM SMITH's SPEECH to the Grand
Jury, concerning putting the Laws in Execution against Popish Recusants and
Conventicles: Together with his Discourse upon the Statute of 3d. of Hen. 8.
(herewith printed) concerning the Power of the Justices of the Peace to
Impannel JURIES.

Printed and Published by the Order of the said Justices.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Davies in Amen-Corner. 1682.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Ad general. Midd. ss.
Sessionem pacis Domini Regis tent. per Adjornament pro Com. Midd. apud
Hicks-hall in St. John-street, in Com. praedict. die Lunae, scil. Quinto die
Decembris, Anno Regni Caroli Regis Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. Tricesimo tertio.
The Justices then assembled, directed Sir William Smith to speak to the
Grand Jury to some Points, which he did as follows.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is not usual to give a Charge at this Sessions, but something I am to say
to you; Sir George Jeofferies is your Chairman, but a Duty incumbent upon him,
to be at another Place at this time, would not permit his Attendance upon this
Service. I must confess when he first engaged in it, I promised to relieve him,
if at any time he was under a necessity of being absent, I am sorry there was
any such at this time; It is very unhappy for you, and as unhappy for me; for
you, because you might have been assisted by his great Abilities, and directed
in those things, which possibly may be too hard for me; For me, because by my
discourse I shall discover that weakness, which by my silence I might have
concealed. But before I say any thing, I will recommend my self to you, by a
Character which I hope will give me credit with you; I am an Englishman, who
in all the public Administrations of my Life, never had any other design, but
the Honor and Safety of the King, and the Peace and Prosperity of my Country,
abstracted from all private Considerations of Profit or Advantage whatsoever.
That I may prove this to you, I will accquaint you that I have had the Honor
to Sit in two Parliaments, that in the year 1640. and this last Long Parliament
from the beginning to the end of it; No question you have heard of Pensioners,
I do declare before God and you, that I never received, nor any one for me, one
Shilling from the King or Crown, or any Minister of State in Money, Place,
Office, Employment, or any other matter or thing whatsoever, directly or
indirectly to this day. I have been a Justice of the Peace this Twenty years, I
have been and am a Deputy-Lieutenant: And have been made use of in other
public Affairs, (none of Profit) but never made one Penny advantage by them or
any of them. This methinks should persuade you to believe, that what I shall
say to you, is intended for the Good and Welfare of my King and Country.

Gentlemen, A good Physician when he comes to his Patient, endeavors to find
out his Disease, before he applies himself to the Cure; if he does otherwise,
he rather practices to gain Skill, than to make use of what he has. This
Kingdom is at present under very sad Circumstances, God Almighty help us. Pray
let us endeavor to find out the Cause, that a suitable remedy may be applied.
I think I have it: We have lost a Jewel, a Jewel of an inestimable price in the
Judgment of all Wise men; What do you think this is? It is Government; I will
describe it to you, because you may know it when you meet with it: It is where
there be good Laws, and those duly executed; and where the Subjects have a
reverence for, and a due esteem of their Prince. That we have good Laws, all
those who understand them must confess; and if they will take pains to compare
them with those of other Countries, will find they are the best in the World,
the most equal, and therefore the most easy. Is it not then pity they should
not be well executed; If the Laws are good, I am sure the Prince is better;
they are but Just, he is both Just and Merciful; His Justice appears in all his
Actions, and yet his Mercy is more eminent, for he has forgiven his Fathers
Enemies, as well as his own, witness the Act of Oblivion; he takes nothing from
any man, does not oppress the meanest of his Subjects, nor interposeth his
Authority to obstruct Justice. Should we not honor and esteem such a Prince?
Should we not assist him, that he may live with Honor, at Ease, and be enabled
to defend us from his and our Enemies? Should we not for our own sakes,
endeavor to preserve his Life, and punish those who shall contrive designs
against it? This ought to be done, it is our Duty, it is our Interest.

Gentlemen, I told you Government was a most precious Jewel, without it a
Kingdom is but a Wilderness or Forest of Wild Beasts, who prey upon each other.
Where there is no Government, do you think a Poor man will walk barefoot by a
Shooe-makers Shop, and not take a pair of Shoes? Or go from a Cooks with an
empty Belly? Or pass through Lombard Street, and not supply his Pockets?
Without Government mankind would live in Statu Belli; not that I am of Mr.
Hobbs his Opinion, we were created so, but by known frailty and the Devils
subtilty we are so; and therefore without Government and a due Subjection to
Law, every man must stand upon his Guard, and keep a Garrison in his House to
defend his Goods, and when he walks abroad, must maintain a Guard to defend his
Person; and yet this will not make him safe neither, for his own Garrison and
Guard may, if their Appetite or Interest leads them to it, betray him.

Gentlemen, God Almighty knew this when he created Man, and therefore gave him
a Law by which he should live and govern himself, and printed it in his heart,
called the Law of Nature, which is, That Man should reverence and adore God
which gave him his Being, that he should honor his Parents, and those are both
Natural and Civil: That he should live justly and peaceably with those of his
own Kind, and this is truly called the Law of Nature. Is it not both natural
and reasonable, that we should adore God who made us, and not Birds and Beasts,
or the works of our own hands? Is it not natural to Honor our Parents, who
gave us Life? and our Princes, who by their Care and Power preserve it? Is it
not natural to live justly and peaceably with all men, and not injure them in
their Lives and Estates, or good Names, by Violence, Fraud, or Perjury? This
was not a State of War; for if man had minded and attended to this Law as he
ought to have done, there would have been no Contentions or Quarrels, no nor
Fears or Jealousies, which are the Devils Engines to Batter down the Peace of
the World: But the Devil, that subtle Adversary of Mankind, was too hard for
poor Man; he put a mist before his eyes, made him forget his Maker, neglect
yhis Duty to his Parents, and filled him full of Ambition, and unruly
Appetites, by which the World was grown to that height of Wickedness, that God
swept them away by an universal Deluge, and only left Noah and his Family to
replenish it, by whose Instructions and good example, the Law of Nature
revived, and for some time duly executed amongst men; but at last the Devil,
that subtle Serpent, crept into the Hearts of men, and stifled the Law of
Nature, and brought the World into the old State of Ambition, Violence, Rapine,
and all manner of Oppression. Yet infinite Goodness had still Compassion for
man; and that that Law might be better seen and regarded, was pleased to write
it in two Tables with his own Finger: This did prevail a while in the time of
Moses and Joshua, and some of the Judges, only now and then the Devil would put
in for his share, in the time of Moses, who was a very meek Prince, and
governed the Israelites by God's immediate Direction; the Devil had filled
Corah full of Ambition, which hurried him into a Rebellion, that cost him his
Life: He confederated with some of the Princes and People, and gathered
themselves together against Moses and Aaron, and said, You take too much upon
you, seeing all the Congregation is Holy, and the Lord is amongst them,
wherefore then life you up your selves above the Congregation? This Rebellion
you may observe, as all other Rebellions almost that I have heard of, began
upon pretense of Religion and Liberty. The Congregation is Holy, and why lift
you up your selves? Sovereignty is the design, and Godliness the Pretense, and
the People and easily taken in a snare, for the appeal is usually made to them;
that pleases, and cheats them of their Loyalty. Excellent Arbiters in Matters
relating to Government, who the Crafty and Disloyal make use of, but the Wife
and Prudent never trust. The Israelites, as I told you, lived in great
observance to this Law, until they were corrupted by the Canaanites, and
embraced their senceless Idols, instead of the Ever-living God, who suffered
the World to remain in sin and darkness for many years. At last God had
compassion upon Man, made one Essay more to try if he could reclaim him, and
sent his only Son, not only to save, but likewise to instruct, and by his
Precepts to restore that Law, which man had lost. If you observe the Doctrine
of our Blessed Savior, it is no other than to explain and enforce the Practice
of the Law of Nature. The Religion in our Savior's days, was to be obedient
to Princes, to do Justice, love Merey, and walk humbly before God. To visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and live unspotted from the World.
His Precepts were Humility, Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Brotherly-kindness
and Charity, and to do as we would be done unto, and all this is but the Law of
Nature. I have read the Laws of other Countries as well as our own, and to my
understanding, their Laws are no other, than the Law of Nature drawn out in
length, with an Addition of Penalties to the Prohibitions, for the better
enforcing Man's Duty and Obedience. And because this excellent Law should not
again be lost, he was pleased to put it into a way of Practice, as the best
means to preserve it: He chose Twelve Apostles, who after Christ left the
World, were inspired by the Holy Spirit, and great power given unto them. Then
for the better, and more sure establishing of the Religion which their Master
had taught them, sent Overseers, which they called (...), or Bishops, to
several Parts and Places to propagate that Religion, and establish God's
Church. But we do not find that these Bishops had any Superintendency or
Supremacy one over another; and therefore it is to be admired from whence the
Bishop of Rome derives his Supremacy, and with so much confidence justify it.
There is as little ground for his pretended Infallibility; for was not St.
Peter himself reproved? which he would not have been if he had been infallible.
Upon these two Pillars of Supremacy and Infallibility, the Romish Church is
chiefly built; a very weak Foundation, upon which it is to be wondered that any
wise or learned man can build his Faith. These Bishops in their several Places
and Churches, appointed Methods for the decency of Divine Worship; and this
Church Government by Bishops, is brought down to us of England by a continued
Succession; and these Methods which are called Ceremonies, and the Liturgy of
our Church, which comprehends the Government of it, is not only directed by the
Bishops, but has the Sanction of a Parliament; so that it has the Consent and
Agreement both of the King and People: Which when I have seriously thought
upon, raises my admiration, how any man can think himself hardly dealt with,
when he is required to comply with that, to which he has before agreed; or
that he should think it reasonable, that separate Assemblies, or public
Conventicles, should be permitted, in opposition to the said established
Government. I cannot understand it otherwise, but that those persons who
frequent these Conventicles, and give themselves up to be ruled and directed by
their Teachers, allow those Teachers both Infallibility and Supremacy; and not
only so, but also a Legislative Power, to make what Orders they think fit,
which is to make a Prince and a Pope in every Congregation. These public
Conventicles and separate Congregations well considered, will appear yet more
unreasonable, for they weaken the Interest both of Church and State. The Romish
Church is an united Body, and not to be withstood but by another united Body,
where there is strength and truth, which must be the Church of England, which
certainly comes the nearest to the Apostolic and Primitive Institution of
Church Government, of any Church in the World; and if the People were united
and reconciled to this true Protestant Church, it was not possible that Popery
should prevail here. Our Divisions give boldness to that common Enemy to make
Attempts upon us. Besides, these public Conventicles which proclaim our
Divisions to the World, at the same time discover our weakness, and must cause
a potent neighbour-Prince to cast his Eye upon us, who will not want the
Suggestions of Ambition and Interest to try his Fortune here; and if he should,
what can withstand him, we being thus divided? The Luxury and Security of Asia
gave Alexander the great hopes of Conquest; he went thither with 40000 men well
disciplined and in order; Darius met him with ten times the number, but they
consisted of many Nations, not well united nor ordered as they ought to have
been: This small Army found little resistance from that great number, and did
little more than walk through them to Conquest. Methinks the ill Consequences
which may be easily foreseen to arise from such plain demonstrations of a
divided Nation, should prevail upon the most tender Conscience, not to be
guilty of any thing that should bring such certain ruin upon his King,
Country, and Protestant Religion, especially having liberty according to Law,
to exercise his Religion in his own way, in his own House, with his own Family,
and an addition under sive more. I have made it my business to preserve
Dissenters from being prosecuted upon the Penal Laws, for not coming to Church,
because I had a regard to tender Consciences; but since the King and Parliament
have been so kind, to indulge them the Toleration I have mentioned, I cannot
but esteem it rather Humor than Conscience, when they will yet offend against
the Law by these public Conventicles, which are so destructive to the Peace
and Safety of the Kingdom, and are not suffered in any Countries or Kingdoms
that I know of. I cannot tell what to say more to you upon this Matter; but if
I had the Tongue of Men and Angels, I would make use of it to persuade and
adjure you for Gods sake and your own, to lay aside these public Conventicles,
and keep to your own Houses, and serve God there in your own way. These public
Separations, I must confess, I take to be one Cause, and that a great one, of
our present Troubles; and if you Gentlemen of the Bench and Grand Jury be of
that opinion, I hope we shall kindly agree together in the remedy of this Evil.
The Law of Nature which I have recommended to you, teaches us to unite and
live sociably together, and to do those things which may contribute to
Self-preservation.

Gentlemen, The next thing which I am to recommend unto you, is the
consideration of Juries, I mean, Grand Juries: I shall desire the Statute of
the 3d. of Henry the 8th. for the regulating those Juries, may be read.

The Clerk of the Peace did read it.

The Act the Justices may return Impannels for the King by their discretions.
WHereas great extortions and oppressions be, and have been within the more
party of all the Counties and Shires within this Realm of England, by the
subtilty and untrue demeanor of Sheriffs, and their Ministers, committed and
done unto many persons in great number of the Kings Subjects, by mean and
making and returning at every Sessions holden within the said Counties and
Shires, for the body of the Shire, in taking and putting in, and returning of
names of such persons, as for the singular advantage, benefit, and gain of the
said Sheriffs and their Ministers, will be wilfully forsworn and perjured, by
the sinister labor of the said Sheriffs and their Ministers: by reason whereof
many and diverse substantial persons (the Kings true Subjects) contrary to good
equity and rightwiseness, have diverse times and many wrongfully been indicted
of diverse Murders, Felonies, and other Misbehaviour, by their covin and
falsehood, to the utter undoing of their Lives, loss of their Goods and their
Lands: by reason whereof they and every of them, in avoiding the untrue trouble
and vexation which to them might come and ensue by reason and occasion of the
same false Indictments; and also sometime by labor of the said Sheriffs,
diverse great Felonies and Murders concealed, and by the said persons also by
the said Sheriffs and their Ministers partially returned, not presented, be and
have been compelled to make Fines and give rewards to the said Sheriffs and
their Ministers: Wherefore be it enacted, ordained, and established by the King
our Sovereign Lord, and by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same,
That all Pannels to be returned, which be not at the Suit of any party, that
shall be made, and put in by every Sheriff and their Ministers before any
Justice of Jail-delivery, or Justice of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
in their open Sessions to enquire for the King, shall be reformed by putting
to, and taking out of the names of the persons which so be empanelled by every
Sheriff and their Ministers, by discretion of the same Justice before whom such
Panels shall be returned: And that the same Justice and Justices shall command
every Sheriff and their Ministers in his absence, to put other persons in the
same Panel by their discretions: and that the same Panels so resormed by the
said Justices, be good and lawful: And that if any Sheriff, or any their
Minister, at any time do not return the same Panel so reformed, that then every
such Sheriff or Minister so offending, for every such offense shall forfeit xx.
li. Sterling Maney of England: the one half thereof to our Sovereign Lord the
King or his Heirs, and the other half to him or them of his Subjects that will
Sue for the same by Action of Debt at the Common Law, or Bill, or Complaint,
where it shall fortune any such to fall and be: and that none Essoin ne
Protection be allowed for the Defendant or Defendants in that Action or Plaint,
nor that the said Defendant nor Defendants therein be admitted to wage their
Law: And that the Kings Pardon shall be no bar against the party and parties in
the same, that any such Action shall Sue.

Gentlemen, Juries are a Hedge about our Liberties and Lives, and the Wisdom of
our Ancestors took great care they may be such as they ought to be, as you may
see by this Statute. It Is not reasonable that the Lives and Fortunes of the
People should be at the dispose of an Undersheriff, certainly all men must
think them more safe in the hands of Judges who are sworn, and are Learned in
the Laws, and Justices of the Peace, who are men of Estates and Interests in
their Country. An Undersheriff, as the Statute expresses, may be corrupted;
how can then either the King or his Subjects depend upon the Justice of the
Law, if the Undersheriff shall have the absolute power to return Juries, and
no room left to reform the Panel after the Sheriff has returned it? Certainly
the Statute never intended this; but so it would be, if the Sheriffs refusal to
alter it be a bar to the alteration of it: For what signifies the Penalty of
20 l. nothing at all: The Statute never could intend the Matter should rest
there; for if so, it is useless, and the mischief recited in the Preamble
remains. When a Sheriff has returned a Panel into the Court, the Court is
then possessed of it, and the Hand to put out any returned, and put in others,
is but a Circumstance in my opinion, and to be done by any the Court shall
direct, if the Sheriff should refuse. I hope the Judges (who are Expositors of
the Law) will consider this Point, which is so important both for the King and
all his Subjects. I never heard that any Sheriff ever refused to alter the
Panel, when the Court directed it, until of late. It has been always done: I
my self, with diverse other Gentlemen, by the direction of the Judge, have gone
off the Bench, to serve upon the Grand Jury, although we have not been
returned, and our Names put into the Panel in the Court. If it should not be
in the power of a Court to do this, farewell the Security and Liberty of the
People of England. But we in this County are yet in a worse condition than any
other; we cannot say we have a Sheriff. The Bench last Sessions desired the
Sheriffs company and assistance, to do that Right which belongs to that Office;
they refused, and sent word by Mr. Recorder, that they were obliged to attend
the Lord Mayor, and could not stir out of the City. If this be so, what a
melancholy posture is this County in, where there are so many of the Nobility
and Gentry, and where, for the most part, the King himself resides with his
whole Court? If there should be a Tumult or Rebellion, who could raise the
Posse Comitatus to suppress it? As sometime since there was in Naples, where
the Persons, Houses and Estates of the Inhabitants, were subject to the Rage
and Violence of the meanest of the People: Very ill Masters! I hope both you
and we shall consider this; and since we can have no other relief, more closely
apply our selves to those legal ways and means, which may prevent Riots and
Tumults. We have a common Enemy, the Papists, which notwithstanding all the
Care which has been taken, we are informed, still swarm about this part of the
Town. His Majesty has been pleased to send Order to us about them, which we
shall communicate to you; Mr. Clerk of the Peace, pray read the Orders of the
King in Council, which were read, viz.

At the Council Chamger WHITE HALL, the 5th of October, 1681.
Present His Highness Prince Rupert. Lord Archibishop of Canterbury. Lord Privy
Seal. Earl of Bathe. Earl of Craven. Viscount Fauconberg. Lord Bishop of
London. Mr. Secretary Jenkins.

Whereas there was this day presented at the Board a List of the Names of
several Tradesmen, who are Papists residing in the Parishes of St. Martins in
the Fields, St. Giles in the Fields, St. Paul's Covent Garden, and places
adjacent, contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom, and his Majesty's Proclamations
for reinforcing the same. It was thereupon Ordered by their Lordships, That the
said List be forthwith sent to his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
County of Middlesex, and the City and Liberties of Westminster; who at this
present Sessions of Peace are to proceed against the said Popish Tradesmen
according to Law, and to give the Board an account of what they shall do
thereupon.

John Nicholas.

At the Court at WHITE HALL, this 11th day of November, 1681.
By the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords of his Majesty's Honorable
Privy Council.
IT was this day Ordered by his Majesty in Council that the Justices of Peace
of Middlesex, and the City and Liberties of Westminster, do give an account as
soon as conveniently may be to this Board of their proceedings, in pursuance of
an Order of Council heretofore transmitted to them, together with a List of
several Papists, who inhabit and keep Shops, and exercise Trades hereabouts
contrary to Law.

Francis Gwyn.

Gentlemen, You see what Care the King and Council take of us, I hope we shall
take some Care of our selves. The Papists are our known and common Enemy, and
watch all opportunities to disturb the Peace of this Kingdom; pray be
industrious to find them out, and present them, that they may be dealt with
according to Law.

Gentlemen, At the Command of the Bench, I have (as well as I can) delivered
you their Sense and Commands, and my own Opinion, who (God Almighty knows) have
no other design than the Safety and Honor of the King, the Preservation of the
true Protestant Religion, as it is established by Law in the Church of England,
and the Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom, in the preservation of their
Liberties and Properties. I doubt not but you and all men will join with us to
these Ends, which cannot be effected, unless these Conventicles, which add
presumption to our Enemies, be laid aside, and the King, who by his Power is to
preserve us, be with due Reverence obeyed, and kindly assisted by us.

Gentlemen of the Bench, I am but your Servant, and I hope I have spoke your
Sense; to which the Court unanimously agreed.

Note, That the Justices observing a person in Court to write, sent for him to
see what he writ, which was in Shorthand: They commanded him to transcribe in
length; which being read to them, they finding it to be truly took, declared
it their Sense, and ordered it to be printed and published, to the intent the
whole Kingdom may see their Opinion.

Per Cur. Adderley.


