The Proceedings AT THE GUILD HALL IN LONDON, On Thursday July the 29th, 1680.
THe Poll having been cast up on Monday the 26th, before Sir Jonathan Raymond
and Sir Simeon Jews, the present Sheriffs, and Henry Crispe Esquire Common
Sergeant; together with Sir Thomas Player Knight, John Ellis, Nicholas Delue,
Thomas Papillon Esquires, and Mr. Peter Houblon, Mr. Lucy Knightley, and Mr.
Samuel Swinnock Merchants, all eight on behalf of Slingsby Bethel, and Henry
Cornish.

Sir William Dodson Knight. Nicholas Charleton Esquire, George Toriano, and Henry
Loads Merchants, on behalf of Mr. Ralph Box and Mr. Nicholson, it did appear
before them, that Mr. Slingsby Bethel had Votes -- 2276. Mr. Henry Cornish had
Votes -- 2483. Mr. Ralph Box had Votes -- 1428. Mr. Humph. Nicholson had Votes
-- 1230.


Upon which a Common Hall was Summoned on Thursday July 29, which being met,
made a very numerous Assembly, crowding one another from Ten until half an hour
past Twelve, at which time the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen came upon the
Hustings, and being sat, and silence commanded, the Common-Sergeant thus
declared the occasion of the Meeting.

Gentlemen,
MY Lord Mayor has met you here to day, that the Sheriffs may declare to you
how they have found it upon the Poll, and that they may make the same return to
my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen according to Custom.

Having so said, and Sir Thomas Player, Mr. Pilkington, Mr. Papillon and
others, standing without the Hustings Bar, directly opposite to the Lord Mayor,
Mr. Papillon delivered into the Common-Sergeants hand the following paper with
these words.

Mr. Papillon. My Lord Mayor, The Commons of London do make a request to your
Lordship, in reference to their own just vindication.


To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
LONDON.
WE the Commons of this City now in Common Hall assembled, cannot but take
notice how our last meeting here on this occasion, has by some of this City
been misrepresented to His Majesty as Tumultuous and disorderly; and though we
did not observe any thing of that kind, but what might commonly happen in such
great Assemblies on like occasions, yet not knowing how far the indiscretion of
the Informers may have carried that scandal in prejudice of us, we hold our
selves bound in duty to declare, (as hereby we do) That the heat that then
appeared among us, was no other than the effect of emulation for His Majesty's
S^rvice, and the preservation of our own just Rights; and therefore we do
utterly detest any thought of violating our Allegiance to our Sovereign, or of
doing the least thing that may bear the Interpretation of an affront to His
Government, or a dis-affection to His Royal Person.

We pray your Lordship to represent us as such to the King, that he may be no
longer deceived in that matter, nor His gracious intentions toward us be in
any sort diverted; and withal humbly to assure His Majesty, that we will with
one heart and one hand, to the uttermost peril of all that is dear to us, join
in the defense of His Royal Person, and the Protestant Religion, against all
Attempts and Plots to the contrary, though never so often repeated upon us.

And being deeply sensible it has been the design of the Popish Party for many
years, and still is, for to destroy him and it: And that there is under God no
way so effectual to prevent these their cruel and bloody purposes, as by His
Majesty's Authority in Parliament. We therefore further pray your Lordship,
humbly to beseech His Majesty in our Names, That for the preservation of His
Royal Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion to us and our
Posterity, he would graciously please to order that this Parliament, his great
Council, may assemble and sit, that the most speedy and effectual course may be
taken, to search into, and prevent those grievous cruelties, desolations, and
destructions, which the Councils of Rome have determined, and are still
endeavoring to execute on this Kingdom* and as by that means we have hopes we
shall be secured against all our fears, so we shall have cause to thank your
Lordship for thus representing us to His Majesty, and humbly to pray for His
long Life and happy Reign over us, as becomes us who profess our selves to be
His Majesty's Obedient, Loyal, and Dutiful Subjects.

This was assented to, and strengthened by the unanimous shouts and
acclamations of all the assembled Citizens, as generally holding up their hands
in farther testimony of their Approbation. After which, the Lord Major and
Aldermen went off the Hustings into the Council Chamger, leaving the two
present Sheriffs and the Common-Serjeant behind, who then delivered himself
again in these words.

Common-Serjeant. Gentlemen, Julylast for the choice of Sheriffs to serve you
for the year ensuing, these persons were put in nomination, Sir William Russel
Knight. Slingsby Bethel, Henry Cornish, Ralph Box, Humphrey Nicolson; and the
Sheriffs declared the choice to fall on Slingsby Bethell, and Henry Cornish,
but there was a Poll demanded for Mr. Ralph Box, and Humphrey Nicholson, and
upon the Poll the Sheriffs do find, that Slingsby Bethell has -- 2276 Votes.
Henry Cornish -- 2483. Ralph Box -- 1428, Humphrey Nicholson -- 1230.
and so the majority is for Mr. Slingsby Bethell, and Mr. Henry Cornish.


Whereupon the whole Hall gave a second acclamation as before. Immediately
after this, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen returned again to the
Hustings, at which time the Common-Serjeant expressed himself to the Citizens
as follows.

Common-Serjeant. Gentlemen, July last, several persons were put in nomination
to be Sheriffs of the City of London, and County of Middlesex for the year
ensuing; that there was a Poll demanded, and that upon the Poll Mr. Slingsby
Bethell, and Mr. Henry Cornish had the majority of Votes; and I am commanded by
the Court to declare, That Slingsby Bethel, and Henry Cornish, are your
Sheriffs for the year ensuing: and this is your free choice.


Upon the words Free Choice, there was a third acclamation, by which nothing
more of general consent and unanimity could be expressed.

THE Lord MAYOR's Speech.
Gentlemen,
I Must confess I have always had this apprehension, that nohing could
contribute more to the safety of His Majesty's Person, and the Welfare of his
people, than a right understanding between the King and His People, and more
immediately between the King and this his great City. If there have been any
such misrepresentations as you seem to intimate in your Petition, I call God to
witness I am free from it, and I do not easily believe any body else would be
guilty of such a thing; however, as to that matter, Gentlemen, I shall readily
comply with your request, and inform the King truly of the fact. For the other
matter, I am obliged to say so much to you, that I had the honor not long
since to wait upon His Majesty, when he was pleased to declare to me and assure
me, that this Parliament should sit in November next; and I am informed
likewise, that he has acquainted all his Judges with the same thing, for them
to satisfy the Countries in their several Circuits. If that be so, I hope your
great concern for that matter might have been spared, being anticipated by His
Majesty's gracious intention. However, I shall not be wanting with all humility
to lay the whole matter before him.

My Lord having ended his Speech, the whole Hall returned their humble thanks
to his Lordship by a fourth acclamation, not inferior to the rest, testifying
their full satisfaction in what his Lordship had declared.

FINIS.

