THE PROCEEDINGS At the Assizes holden at YORK. the 24 th. day of July, 1680.
Before the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM DOLBEN Knight. One of the Justices of the
Court of Kings Bench AND Sir EDWARD ATKYNS Knight. One of the BARONS of the Court
of Exchequer, then Judges of Assize for the Northern Circuit, against several
Prisoners then Indicted for the Horrid Popish Plot against the Life of the
KING, and for Subversion of the Government and Protestant Religion.

With an Account at large of the Arraignment of Sir Miles Stapleton Baronet,
and of the Trial, Condemnation and Execution of Mr. Thomas Thwing for the same
Plot.

Published by Virtue of an order of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, made upon the 9th. day of November, 1680.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes-Arms in Ludgate Street,
MDCLXXXI

TO THE READER.
THE following Narrative comprising at large only the Evidence given against
Mr. Thomas Thwing, and Mrs. Mary Pressicks, (who was tried by the same Jury
with him) it may be expected that some reason should be given why the trials of
the Lady Anne Tempest, (Daughter of Sir Thomas Gascoyne,) and of Mr. Charles
Inglesby, who were tried by other Juryes and acquitted, are not also published;
and therefore to answer that expectation we shall say.

1. That the Evidence, though differing, and that materially in some
circumstances, was in great part, especially in what related to the Prisoners
defense the same that was given in Mr. Thwings trial; and therefore that this
Narrative might not be swelled to too great a bulk, the Evidence is not
repeated so often here as it was upon the several trials.

2. That English Protestants inclining rather to mercy than to Justice, and so
not being forward curiously to examine or to censure a tenderness of proceeding
in case of blood, it may be as acceptable (as necessary for the vindication of
the Justice of the Nation) to give a particular account of the trial of Mr.
Thwing, who was executed.

And because the Papists do endeavor to disparage the Evidence of this most
Hellish Plot by boasting that the Witnesses are such as have revolted from
their Church, we shall take this occasion of relating the Evidence given of the
Plot in general, upon the trial of the Lady Tempest by one Captain Baines, who
then owned himself to be a Roman Catholic, and declared that he intended to
live and die so, but that he came in as a witness out of an abhorrence of the
Plot. This Gentleman testified that the Lady Tempest discoursing with him at
Sir Thomas Gascoyne's House, in 1677, about his purpose of going to the Indies,
dissuaded him from it, by telling him that he might have a Commission, and work
enough in England shortly; that the Papists had resolved the Destruction of the
King, and that they declared him an Heretic, and that the Pope had
excommunicated him, and therefore he was to be cut off.

ERRATA.
Page 3. line 11 last word read to for of. Page 5. line 17 for Priest read
Papist. Page 12 line 25 read had a warrant. Page 20 line 11 for Servant read
Senior. Wherever you meet with the word Barnboro read Barnbow.

THE TRIALS OF Thomas Thwing AND Mary Pressicks, FOR HIGH TREASON, At the
Assizes begun at YORK the 24th. of July, 1680.
THomas Thwing late of Heworth in the County of York Clerk, and Mary Pressicks
wife of Thomas Pressicks late of the Parish of Barwick in Elmet, Gent. stand
indicted, for that they as false Traitorsagainst the most illustrious, and most
excellent Prince, King Charles the second, that now is, their natural Lord; God
before their eyes not having, nor their due Allegiance weighing, but by the
instigation of the Devil being seduced and moved, the cordial Love, and true
and natural Obedience, which true and faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign
Lord the King toward his said Majesty ought to bear, altogether withdrawing
and imagining, and with all their strengths intending the Peace and common
Tranquillity of his Kingdom of England to disturb* and his said Majesty that now
is, to Death and final Destruction to bring and put, and the true Worship of
God in this Kingdom of England, established and used, to alter to the
Superstition of the Church of Rome, and war against his said Majesty in this
Kingdom of England to move and raise, and the Government of this Kingdom of
England to subvert, the 30 th. day of May in the 31 th. year of his Majesty's
Reign, that now is, at the Parish of Barwick in Elmet aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, with diverse other false Traitors to the Jurors unknown, did
traiteterously compass, imagine, and intend, and every of them did compass,
imagine, and intend the Death and final Destruction of his said Majesty, and
the ancient Government of this Realm of England to change alter and utterly
subvert, and his said Majesty of the Crown and Rule of this Kingdom to depose
and wholly to deprive, and the true Protestant Religion to extirpate, and to
effect and acomplish their said wicked Treasons and traitorous imaginations and
purposes aforesaid, the said Thomas Thwing, and Mary Pressicks, and other false
Traitors to the Jurors unknown, the said 30 th. day of May in the 31 th. year
abovesaid, with force and arms at the Parish of Barwick in Elmet aforesaid,
advisedly, devillishly, maliciously, and traitorously did assemble and gather
themselves together, and then and there did devillishly, advisedly,
maliciously, subtlely, and traitorously consult and agree, and every of them
did then and there traitorously consult and agree to bring to Death and final
Destruction our said Sovereign Lord the King, and to depose and deprive him of
his Crown and Rule aforesaid, and the Religion of the Church of Rome into this
Kingdom to introduce and establish, and the sooner to fulfill and effect the
said wicked treasons, and traitorous imaginations and purposes aforesaid, the
said Thomas Thwing and Mary Pressicks, and other false Traitors to the Jurors
unknown, did then and there pay and expend, and every of them did then and
there pay and expend diverse sums of money of diverse other Traitors to the Jurors
unknown, to carry on the Treasons aforesaid, and then and there the said Thomas
Thwing and Mary Pressicks did subscribe, and either of them did subscribe a
certain Note in writing for the payment of diverse Sums of money, for making a
contribution for completing their traitorous purposes aforesaid, against the
Duty of their Allegiance, and against the Kings Peace, his Crown and Dignity,
and also against the Statute in that case made and provided.

To this Indictment having pleaded Not Guilty, and put themselves upon their
Country for Trial.

Upon the 29 th. of July, Sir Thomas Daniel High Sheriff of the County having
returned many Gentlemen for Jurors. The Trial proceeded thus; After the Jury
called, Thomas Thwing and Mary Pressicks, being brought to the Bar.

Clerk of Assize. Thomas Thwing, hold up thy hand, Mary Pressicks, hold up thy
hand, (which being done.)


Clerk of Assize. This understand ye, that these Gentlemen that are now to be
Sworn are returned by the Sheriff of this County, to pass between our Sovereign
Lord the King and you for your lives, therefore if you will challenge any of
them, you are to challenge them as they come to be Sworn, and before they be
Sworn.


Clerk of Assize. Sir David Fowls Baronet.


Thwing. I challenge him, and so as they were called challenged these 25
Gentlemen following (viz.) John Eastoft, Esquire Hugh Savil, Gent. William Bethel,
Esquire Nivian Collins, Gent. Towns Drisfeild, Esquire Thomas Green, Gent. William
Osbaldeston, Esquire Nathaniel Elliotson, Gent. Marmaduke Trueman, Gent. Nathaniel
Harrison, Gent. Robert Bell, Gent. John Tomlinson, Gent. Thomas Fletcher, Gent.
Thomas Riccaby, Gent. Thomas Wood, Gent. John Vllithorne, Gent. Thomas
Faireside, Gent. Thomas Hincks, Gent. Roger Fretwel, Gent. William Mastin,
Gent. Simon Warrener, Gent. George Ellis, Gent. Edward Carvil, Gent. Thomas
Whaley, Gent. John Coats, Gent.

In the calling of the Jury after several challenges made and some of the Jury
Sworn, Thwing spoke thus, My Lord, I shall willingly stand to other the Jury.


Mr. Just. Dol. What Jury?


Thwing. My Lady Tempests Jury.


Mr. Just. Dol. Oh your Servant, you either are very foolish, or take me to be
so. The Jury being Sworn.


Clerk of Assize. Crier count these. Sir George Cook, Bar. Henry Pinckney,
Gent. Thomas Worsley, Esquire John Blackston, Gent. William Caley, Esquire William
Hardcastle. Gent. Roger Lee, Gent. Nicholas Stone, Gent. John Dixon, Gent.
George Westerby, Gent. George Wray, Gent. Charles Tucker, Gent.


Crier. Twelve good men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence.


Clerk of Assize. Thomas Thwing, hold up thy hand, (which he did) Mary
Pressicks, hold up thy hand, (which she did) Gentlemen, you of the Jury that
are Sworn, look upon the Prisoners and hearken to their charge; you shall
understand that they stand Indicted by the names of Thomas Thwing, etc. and
Mary Pressicks, etc. Pro ut in the Indictment; upon this Indictment they have
been arrained and thereunto pleaded, Not guilty, and for their Trial have put
themselves upon their Country, which Country you are, etc.


Then Proclamation was made for Evidence, and the Indictment being opened and
the Treasons therein aggravated by the Kings Council. Mr. Baron Atkyns came
into the Court to assist in the Trial.

The Witnesses were called, Robert Bolron was first Sworn.

Rob. Bolr. My Lord, In the year, 1674. I came to live with Sir Thomas Gascoyne
and was Steward of his Colepits, and in 1675. I turned Priest, and about
January, 1676. Mr. Thwing, Father Rushton, and several others came to my house
at Shippon, and did there examine me how I stood affected to the Roman
Catholic Religion, and whether I was resolved to venture my life and estate in
it, if there were any occasion, to which I agreed, and was resolved to obey my
Ghostly Father in all things.


Just. Dol. Taking Notice of a Gentleman near the Prisoners, demanded, what is
that Gentleman? we are all beset, he was one of the Jury Yesterday. He being
removed, Bolron proceeded: Father Rushton my Confessor gave me the Oath of
secrecy, and in the year 1677, Sir Thomas Gascoyne, Sir Miles Stapleton, Mr.
Thwing, the Prisoner, and several other persons met at Barnboro-Hall, Sir
Thomas Gascoynes House, and there they agreed that in hopes the Plot of killing
the King would take effect, they would erect a Nunnery, at Dolebank, but the
real intention was to have it at Heworth (within a Mile of York) after the King
was killed, and to avoid suspicion my Lady Tempest told them, she would let
them have Broughton for the present. Note that upon Sir Thomas Gascoynes Trial
it appeared in his Almanac, that he had made this memorial there with his own
hand, (viz.) The 15th. of April, 1676 Memorand. acquaint Mr. Thomas Thwing,
with the whole design.
It was there agreed that the King should be killed, and Mr. Thwing said, that
if they missed this opportunity, they should ne ver have the like again, and
the effecting of it would be very beneficial to the Church of Rome.


Mr. Baron Atkyns. Repeat it in the same words.


Bolr. He said, if we miss this opportunity of killing the King, we shall never
have the like again, and Mr. Thwing was to be the Confessor of the Nunnery for
the present.


Mr. Bar. Atkyns. Where were these these words spoken?


Bolr. In the old Dineing room.


Mr. Just. Dol. Who were present?


Bolr. Sir Miles Stapleton, Sir Thomas Gascoyne, my Lady Tempest, Mr. Thwing,
Mr. Rushton and some others.


Mr. Just. Dol. Was it agreed that the King should be killed?


Bolr. It was my Lord.


Mr. Baron Atkyns. Consider seriously, you speak in the presence of God, and of
a great Assembly, and that a persons life is at stake, tell it again; what were
the words?


Mr. Bolr. It was agreed that the King should be killed, and that it was for
the good of the Catholic Religion, and I paid, 10 l. to Mr. Rushton in Mr.
Thwings presence toward killing the King, and saw a List in Mr. Rushtons and
Mr. Thwings hands, of the names of several that engaged for promoting the Roman
Catholic Religion, which was to be by killing the King.


Mr. Baron Atkyns. Was it a List of those that were to kill the King?


Bolr. The List I saw was of money raised to kill the King.


Mr. Baron Atkyns. What was the title of that List?


Bolr. A List of the names of the Actors and contributers engaged in the design
of promoting the Roman Catholic Religion, and also of establishing a Nunnery,
which was raising money for the killing of the King, and besides the 10 l. I
paid toward it, I paid 5 l. to have my Soul prayed for. Thwing told me
afterward at my house, that in York shire, Lancashire and Derbyshire, 30000,
l. was raised for the killing of the King, and that the List was sent
Beyond Sea.


Mr. Just. Dol. What can you say against the Woman?


Mr. Bolr. Mrs. Pressicks told me, that in 1678 presently after the Plot was
discovered, she being in London did hear a Woman cry after her stop the Papist,
stop the Plotter, but she got away, and afterward durst not appear publicly
in London: I had discourse with her at my house about the Plot, and she told
me, that Father Harcourt was her Confessor, and first engaged her in it, and
that Pickering told her, that he was to have killed the King, and she said, she
was sorry he did not do it, and that Oats and Bedloe, were two Rogues, and the
Plot had not been discovered but for them, who were the cause of so much
mischief. And she further told me, that the Gun wherewith he was to have killed
the King, was found with Pickering, and she did believe that was the cause of
his loosing his life; And she said, the King was an Ass and not fit to Govern,
that what money the Parliament gave him he spent on Whores and Concubines.


Mr. Just. Dol. Well, is this all you have against her?


Bolr. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dol. He has done, you may crosse-examine him if you will.


Thwing. Who was at your house when I was there?


Bolr. Father Rushton.


Thwing. How often was I there?


Bolr. Several times, I know not how often.


Thwing. When was it you accused me first of the Plot?


Bolr. When I went to the Council; I accused him.


Thwing. He did not accuse me of the Plot in several months.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Come Mr. Mowbray tell your knowledge.


Mowbray was Sworn.

Mr. Mowb. My Lord, what I have to say is only against M^ Thwing. At an
Assembly of diverse Priests at Barnboro-Hall, amonst the rest, there were Father
Rushton and Mr. Thwing, and there they determined to kill the King.


Mr. Bar. Atkyns. When was this?


Mr. Mowb. This was near Michalmass, 1676, and they declared it was not only
lawful but meritorious to do it; They also declared that London and York were
to be fired, and that force was to be made use of against the King, and all
other Heretics, that should oppose the advancement of their Religion; and Mr.
Thwing and Rushton declared the King was an Heretic, and excommunicated by the
Pope, and had not kept his promise with the Jesuits to bring in their
Religion, and therefore deserved to be killed, and it was not only lawful but
meritorious so to do.


Mr. Belwood of Council for the King. Was there not a List?


Mr. Mowb. Yes, a List of those engaged in the design of killing the King, and
of promoting the Catholic Religion; and it was declared the King should be
killed, because he had not kept his promise made to the Jesuits, when he was
beyond Sea.


Mr. Just. Dol. Did the Prisoner declare it?


Mr. Mowb. Mr. Thwing declared it, and Rushton and he managed it.


Thwing. Who was there?


Mowb. It was at Father Rushtons Chamber, that I saw you, and there was another
Thwing there, and also Addison a Priest.


Thwing. I went once or twice a year to Sir Thomas Gascoynes and thought it my
duty to wait on him, and that I might without offense do it, he being my Uncle.


Mr. Just. Dol. No, the offense is Plotting.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Mr. Thwing, do you know Rushton?


Thwing. Yes, but I had no great acquaintance with him.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Mr. Mowbray, how came you to be entrusted in so great a
business?


Mr. Mowb. I assisted Father Rushton at the Alter at Mass, and so came into
great favor with him, and was permitted to be in his Chamber when the Priests
were in private with him.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Mr. Mowbrary, did you take an Oath of secrecy?


Mowb. Yes, I took it from Father Rushton.


Thwing. How long since did you change your Religion?


Mowb. Presently after the Plot broke out.


Thwing. Who where you examined before first of all?


Mowb. Before Mr. Lowther and Mr. Tindal.


Mr. Just. Dol. Did you at the first accuse him?


Mowb. I only charged Sir Tho. Gascoyne, Esquire Gascoyne, my Lady Tempest, Sir
Miles Stapleton, and Father Rushton in my first, and in my second deposition I
accused Mr. Thwing and that was before Justice Warcup.


Mr. Bar. Atk yns. Did Thwing abscond at the first?


Mowb. He was apprehended at the same time Sir Tho. Gascoyne was apprehended,
and at his house.


Mr. Just. Dol. Well what say you to Mary Pressicks?


Mowb. My Lord, I have nothing to say against her.


Mr. Just. Dol. Mr. Thwing, you have heard the Evidence, what do you say for
your self?


Thwing. I shall produce Witnesses I was never with him at Barnboro; first I
shall show he never mentioned me when he first mentioned the Plot, and he never
said any thing against me, when he accused Sir Tho. Gascoyne before Mr. Lowther
and Mr. Tindal.


But Mr. Bonithen of Counsel for the King offering other witnesses for the King
against Mrs. Pressicks, they were called, viz. Mrs. Bolron Senior, Mrs. Bolron
Junior and John Hutchinson.

Mr. Bolron Senior Sworn.

Mr. Just. Dol. What do you know of Pressicks the Prisoner at the Bar?


Mrs. Bolr. Sen. My Lord, she said she knew of the Plot, and that Pickering was
to have killed the King.


Mr. Bonithen. Do yon mean shoot the King?


Mrs. Bolr. Yes, I do.


Mr. Just. Dol. Where did she tell you this?


Mrs. Bolr. At Shippon, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dol. At his house (pointing to Mr. Bolron?)


Mrs. Bolr. Yes, and she said that she was very sorry, that Pickering did not
do it, and that he had done it if it had not been for Oats and Bedloe.


Mr. Just. Dol. Was this the very same time, that Mr. Bolron speaks of?


Mrs. Bolr. Sen. Yes, my Lord, and she said there would never be quiet in
England, until the Roman Catholics had got the upper hand, and there was not
a Protestant left in England; and she said, the King spent his money amongst
his Concubines, and his other Women, so that he was not worthy to be King, and
she hoped an Army of Catholics would be raised to set up Popery.


Mr. Just, Dolb. That is indeed the principle of the Papists, and according to
it, within forty years past they murdered 200000 innocent Protestants in
Ireland: Did she say it often?


Mrs. Bolr. Yes, several times, more than once or twice.


Mrs. Bolron junior was then sworn and examined.

Mrs. Bolr. jun. I heard her say there was a conspiracy carrying on about
altering the Government, and establishing the Roman Catholic Religion.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Where heard you this?


Mrs. Bolr. jun. In my Husbands house.


Mr. Bar. Atkyns. And what were her hopes in the Conspiracy?


Mr. Bolr. My Lord, I cannot tell.


Mrs. Pressicks. I ask Mr. Bolron when we had this discourse?


Mr. Bolr. At several times, about Candlemas, 1678, and at Easter and
Whitsontide, and several times after the Plot was discovered, we discoursed it
several times at the porch at my house.


Mr. Just. Dol. Who was present?


Mr. Bol. My Grandmother.


Mr. Just. Dol. Where was it, Old-woman, that you heard these words?


Mrs. Bol. Sen. At Shippon, in the Hall porch, my Lord.


Mrs. Pressicks. Had we any discourse of Sir Thomas?


Mr. Bolr. Sen. None.


John Hutchinson was then Sworn.

Mr. Just. Dol. Do you know any thing concerning Mrs. Pressicks.


Hutch. May it please you, my Lord, I came to Mr. Bolrons house, and Mrs.
Pressicks asked me what news in our Country, and what became of the Papists; I
told her some had given bond, and some were gone to prison; then she said, we
shall never be at peace until we are all of the Roman Catholic Religion; for
the King is an Heretic and spends more money upon his Whores, then upon his
Queen, and we shall never be at quiet until the Duke of York is King.


Mr. Just. Dol. What say you to this? you have seen him?


Mary Pressicks. I never saw him but twice there.


Mr. Just. Dol. Where was she when she said this?


Hutch. She first talked with me in the Kitchen, and at the Hall door, as she
was just going into the Parlour, she told me, that we should never be at quiet
until the Duke of York was made King.


Mr. Just. Dol. Mr. Bolron, when came she to your House?


Bolr. She came to our house about Christmas, and stayed about six months
there.


Mr. Just. Dol. Six months in your House, then you are well enough acquainted
with her?


Bolr. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dol. Did you charge Mr. Thwing before the Justice?


Bolr. My Lord, I gave Justice Tindal only a short note that Sir Tho. Gascoyne
promised me a 1000 l. to kill the King, but what I had to say against Thwing, I
gave to the King and Council.


Thwing. My Lord, this is malice to Sir Tho. Gascoynes Family to which I am
related, it is out of revenge.


Mr. Just. Dol, It was a Family quarrel them.


Thwing. Yes, my Lord, this I can prove by several witnesses.


Mr. Just. Dol. Call your witnesses then.


Thwing. Nathaniel Wilson.


Mr. Just. Dol. Mr. Babington, why don't you appear, we know well enough that
you are Solicitor in the cause, call your witnesses.


Then Nathaniel Wilson was examined.

Mr. Just. Dol. Come, what is it you have to say?


Nath. Wilson. I went to Bolron to look on a Cow that he had gifted for his
cousin Bargues and desired to have the Cow away, but he would not let me have
her, without paying for her gift, so I tendered him his money and we went to
talk in the house, and Bolron sent for a groats worth of Ale, and asked me if I
could tell any thing of Father Rushton, and I told him I could not, and he bid
me keep his secrets, and he would give me more then I could Earn.
addle in seven years, and he said unless he could shed theblood of some of
them, he should get nothing.


Mr. Just. Dol. When was this?


Wilson. This was about next Michaelmas a twelvemonth.


Mr. Just. Dol. This is quite other then you told yesterday. Wilson was a
witness the day before for the Lady Tempest.



Wilson. I had not time.


Thwing. I desire to know whether Bolron named me to Mr. Lowther as a plotter.


Then Mr. Lowther was called.

Mr. Lowther. I do not remember that Mr. Bolron named Mr. Thwing to me when he
was before me.


Mr. Just. Dol. When did he come to make the discovery to you; give an account
of it.


Mr. Lowther. I think it was the 24 th. or 25 th. of June 1679 that he came to
me, and he told me he had some secrets to impart to me, and he began to tell me
a story of the Jesuits and Priests, what they designed against the government,
because the King did not keep his word with them, when he was beyond Sea, and
then I called for my man and a Bible to take his examination, and said, pray
friend, be very careful what you do, for here your own concern is at stake as
well as the Lives and fortunes of the Gentlemen you speak against, and upon
that he began to be very fearful and timorous, and looked pale; whereupon I asked
him, what that fear was for, it is said he because I have concealed it so long,
and if that were upon you, it may be you would be as fearful as I am; Then I
was going to take his Information, and he said, I have done it before Mr.
Tindal; why came you to me then, said I? he said Mr. Tindal desired it; well
said I, Mr. Tindal and I are to meet to morrow and we will do it jointly.


Mr. Just. Dol. Did he say he told you all he knew?


Mr. Lowther. He did not name Thwing, but said he should recollect more, and
would go to London and give it in to the King and Council; and then I said why
may not we take it here as well as trouble them at London?


Mr. Just. Dol. It may be he thought it better to do it there.


Mrs. Pres. He did not accuse me before Mr. Lowther.


Bolr. Yes, my Lord, I did and a Warrant to take her.


Mr. Lowther. She was taken the same day Sir Thomas Gascoyne was taken.


Mr. Just. Dol. We will be just between you.


Then the Prisoners called Obediah Moore.

Mr. Just. Dol. Come tell your knowledge in this business.


Moor. I say that Mr. Bolron said that Sir Thomas Gascoyne was not concerned in
the Plot, nor none of his Family, and that he believed there was no Plot.


Mr. Just. Dol. When was this?


Moor. This was about Candlemas was Twelvemonths.


Mr. Just. Dol. He was then a Papist, but did not he tell you otherwise
afterward?


Moor. In August after he told me he had but equivocated with me, in what he
said before, and that there was a real Plot, and if he had swore a thousand
lies he could have been forgiven them.


Then Stephen Thompson was called and examined.

Stephen Thompson. Mr. Bolron was servant to Sir Thomas Gascoyne, and being in
his Debt, Sir Thomas did Arrest him, and he agreed with Sir Thomas to give him
60 l. and got me to be bound with him, and when the Plot came out, I thought
Bolron being his servant might know, whether Sir Thomas had any hand in it, and
if so that we were in no danger of being sued, and I enquired of Bolron, and he
said, Sir Thomas was as sackless of it, as the Child that was unborn; and on
Holy Thursday I went to him, and got him out on the backside to Sir Thomas's,
and all along he told me, if he sued him, he would do him a greater mischief,
and I pleaded earnestly with Sir Thomas not to sue the Bond, and he said he
would have his Money, but would stay a Fortnight, and I prevailed with him to
give three Weeks time, that Bolron might go to sell his House at New Castle,
and in that time he went to London and Accused him of Treason; And as to Mrs.
Pressicks, I asked his Grandmother, what she could say against her, and she
said, alas, alas, I can say nothing to it, but Bolron said she must say so and
so.


Mr. Justice Dolben. What mean you Friend by so and so.


Thompson. It was about Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and that the King was an
Whoremaster, and such things.


Then Zachary Thorpe was called and Examined.

Thorpe. I met with Mr. Bolron in Long-Acre before the last Assizes, and asked
him concerning Sir Thomas Gascoyne my Countryman, and he said he was cleared,
but God Damn the Jury they were Rogues, then he asked me if I had read Harris's
Intelligence of that day, and I told him, yes, and he then ask't me, if I had
seen his Wive's name in it; he then told me, that he was going down to the
Assizes at York, against my Lady Tempest, and said God damn me I will ruin
them, if one thing will not do it, another shall.


Mr. Justice Dolben. What are you, God damn me comes very nimbly out of your
mouth?


Thorpe. I live at the White Heart in Charter-house-lane, with the Gentleman of
the House, I married his Daughter.


Mr. Justice Dolben. And draw Pots of Ale, that is your Trade, how comes Bolron
to talk thus to you, is he so mad a Fellow to talk thus to every one, this is
not likely that he should thus Accuse himself to you, your Father in Law is a
poor Ale-house-keeper.


Mr. Baron Atkins. Are not you a Papist?


Thorpe. No, My Lord, a Protestant of the Church of England.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Have you never been in Newgate, your Lane is full of such
People, and your House suspected.


Thorpe. No, my Lord.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Come have you done?


Thorpe. Bolron came to my Lodgings at the Plow on Holborn-Hill before the last
Assizes, and told me if I would Swear that Peter Shipton knew no harm by
Bolron, he would do any thing for me.


Mr. Justice Dolben. This is a Fable, for Bolron bound Shipton over at the
Sessions before the last Assizes.


Bolron. Yes, my Lord, it was for scandalous words against his Majesty.


Thorpe. He ask't me what Shipton was, I answered, he is an honest man for
ought that I know, I have taken his own Bond, said Bolron, but I will have him
from Court to Court, I will teach him to meddle with me.


Mr. Justice Dolben. How came he to speak to thee.


Thorpe. I know not why, but it was his discourse to me.


Mr. Baron Atkins. What acquaintance was there between you.


Thorpe. I have seen him several times in Yorkshire.


Mr. Justice Dolben. You live in Charter-House-lane, how came you together in
Long-Acre.


Thorpe. I met him accidentally in the Street.


Mr. Justice Dolben. It is a wonderful thing, that he should meet one in the
Street with whom he had very small acquaintance, and discover such things to
him, as he did to you.


Then William Hardwick was Examined.

Hardwick. I was to carry Mrs. Pressicks before Justice Lowther, and Bolron's
Wife said she was sorry for it, for she believed her to be an honest Woman, and
had been a good Neighbor amongst them.


Mr. Baron Atkins. Who was sorry?


Hardwick, Mrs. Bolron.


Mr. Baron Atkins. What did Bolron himself say?


Hardwick. He said nothing to me, he was in another Room with his Grandmother.

Mr. Justice Dolben taking notice of Thwing's speaking to Mr. Hobart, demanded
what he said.


Hobart. My Lord, he ask't me, whether Bolron did not say that Sir Thomas
Gascoyne offered him a 1000 l. I only say that he swore at Sir Thomas
Gascoyne's Trial.


Mr. Justice Dolben. How does it appear, what he swore there?


Bolron. I acquainted Mr. Lowther, and Mr. Tindal with it.


Mary Walker was called.

Mr. Justice Dolben. Mary Walker, what do you say?


Mary Walker. Robert Bolron came after Mr. Thwing was taken Prisoner, to my
Mistresse's.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Who is your Mistress?


Mary Walker. Mrs. Lassell's; and he asked me, if I knew Mr. Thwing to be a
Priest, and I told him, No, my Lord, he told me that if I would swear that he
was a Priest, he would give me 10 l. for he would be revenged of him for Sir
Thomas Gascoyne's cause; for he was near of kin to him, and he proffered me 10
l. again.


Bolron. Where were you, you were not here Yesterday?


Mary Walker. I was in the Court yesterday.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Where spoke he this?


Mary Walker. At Mr. Lassel's.


Sir Thomas Stringer. My Lord, he was then searching for Priests at that House,
and it is improbable that he should endeavor at that time to suborn Thwing's
Sisters servant.


Mr. Baron Atkins. Is Mrs. Lassell's of kin to Mr. Thwing?


Walker. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Who can believe he would come to Thwing's Sisters-House,
to suborn her servant to be a Witness against Mr. Thwing?


Walker. Yes my Lord, I have Witness of it, both a Man and a Woman.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Where are they?


Walker. In Town.


Mr. Justice Dolben. That makes it more improbable that he would offer you 10
l. in the presence of two Witnesses to swear that Mr. Thwing was a Priest.


Sir Thomas Stringer. Let us ask her a Question. Whether are you a Papist or No?


Walker. Yes, I am a Catholic.


Sir Thomas Stringer. Since it must be probable, that he would ask you such a
thing, and knew you to be a Papist; Is Thwing a Priest or no?


Walker. No Marry is he not.


Sir Thomas Stringer. Have you not heard him say Mass.


Walker. No, if I were to dye.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Indeed you are an excellent Witness.


Mr. Legget One of the Kings Messengers produced as a Witness by the Prisoners,
was next Examined.

Mr. Legget. In August last, Mr. Bolron told me He would call his Grandmother
in and examine her before me, and he then ask't her, if she did not say, that
she knew such and such things, and she said, she could not tell, but if she
did, 'twas true.


Mr. Baron Atkins. What was it he asked her?


Legget. About Harcourt, and I know not what, I took little notice of it, it
seemed to be a thing so Idle, that I went away: And meeting me afterward said,
you thought my Grandmother knew nothing, but at the bar, when Sir Tho. Gascoyne
was tried, they said they never heard one swear a thing more plainly.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Legget, did not you desire Money yesterday of the Clerk of
the Assizes as a Witness for the King?


Legget. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Did you so? you are a fine Fellow.


Then one William Bacchus was Examined.

Bacchus. All that I can say is that I served a Warrant upon Mrs. Bolron to go
before Esquire Lowther, and Bolron's Wise and Grandmother said, they could say
nothing against Sir Thomas Gascoyne, nor any of the Family.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Well they say nothing against them now, but what did she
say against Mrs. Pressicks?


Bacchus. She said that Mary Pressicks should say that the King was an
Whoremaster, and maintained his Whores better then he did the Queen.


Cuthbert Hamsworth was then called.

Hamsworth being produced as a Witness for Sir Thomas Gascoyne owned that he
had been a Papist.

Hamsworth. My Lord, Robert Bolron did Swear revenge against my Lady Tempest
for prosecuting a suit against him.


Mr. Justice Dolben. What is that to the matter in hand? do you know that he
swore Revenge against Thwing and Pressicks?


Hamsworth. No, my Lord.


Mr. Bar. Atkins (to the Prisoners) what have you more to say?


Thwing. My Lord, he says, I was at Barnbow-Hall, 1677. I have Witnesses to
prove otherwise.


Mr. Baron Atkins. Call them then.


George Twisley Groom to Sir Thomas Gascoyne.

Twisley. Mr. Thwing was never at our house above a night or two in the year.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Whose house is yours?


Twisley. Sir Thomas Gascoyne 's.


Mr. Just. Dolben. He was there but a night or two at a time.


Twisley. No, and please your Lordship.


Mr. Justice Dolben. But was he there in 1677?


Twisley. About a year or two since, I saw him there.


Mr. Justice Dolben. But how often in a 12 Months time?


Twisley. Not above once or twice.


Mr. Baron Atkins. Did you never go out of your Masters house in 1677?


Twisley. I have, my Lord, but I was there both night and morning.


Mr. Baron Atkins. How do you know but he might be there in the time that you
were not there?


Bolron. And please your Lordship, this man was but the Groom.


Twisley. I was the Groom, my Lord, and took the horses.


Mr. Justice Dolben. But were you never absent?


Twisley. No, my Lord, and he was not there above once or twice in the Year.


Thwing. Ask him what Company was then there?


Twisley. No Company at all, my Lord, when he was there.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Was not he there about Easter?


Twisley. No, not that I know of.


Mr. Justice Dolben. What time of the year was he there?


Twisley. About Michaelmas, not Easter.


Mr. Baron Atkins. How came you to take such particular notice at what time men
come, did you take an account of all the Gentlemen that came to Sir Thomas's
house, how often there, and when they came?


Twisley. There were none that stayed any time when they came thither.


Mr. Baron Atkins. What time of the year was he there?


Twisley. It was about a Month before Michaelmas.


Mr. Justice Dolben. You bring Witnesses to stretch things even to
impossibilities.


Bolron. He was drunk, my Lord, at Leeds the same Night the Consult was.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Will you speak Truth before Almighty God?


Twisley. Yes.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Pray then are you a Papist?


Twisley. No.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Were you never a Papist?


Twisley. Yes.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Have you heard Mass, at Sir Tho. Gascoyne's when you were
a Papist?


Twisley. No.


Sir Thomas Stringer. That Is very strange, that you lived there and never heard
Mass, and yet were a Papist.


Twisley. Yes, I heard Mass in his house, but not by this man.


Sir Tho. Stringer. How long have you been turned Protestant?


Twisley. About 2 years.


Thwing. Thomas Areton did you ever see me at Barnbow-hall.


Areton. I have nothing for nor against him, I never saw him before in my life.


Thwing. Mr. Mowbray has declared he never knew any thing of the Plot.


Mr. Justice Dolben To whom did he declare it?


Thwing. There is Witness of it, my Lord.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Call them.


Thwing. He Accused not me of the Plot.


Mr. Justice Dolben. He was no Protestant then.


Thwing. I never knew any thing of the Plot till I came from London.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Well if you have any more Witnesses call them.


Thwing. Mr. Cooper.


Joseph Cooper. I have nothing to say in this business about this Gentleman, it
is concerning Sir Thomas Gascoyne.


Thwing. Yes he declared before these Witnesses he knew nothing of the Plot.


Cooper. We were coming from Atherton Fair, and my Father began to discourse
with Mr. Mowbray, and ask't him, if he knew any thing of the Plot, that Sir
Thomas was called to London for, he said, he knew nothing of the Plot, and he
thought Sir Thomas was guilty of no such thing, for if he had, he should have
known it as soon as Bolron, and he was a Rogue and a Knave, for saying any such
thing.


Mr. Justice Dolben. When was this?


Cooper. It was about this time 12 month.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Were you upon the Road then?


Cooper. Yes.


Sir Tho. Stringer. Had Mowbray then made any discovery of the Plot?


Cooper. Yes, That was the reason we ask't him about it.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Yesterday (upon Lady Tempest's Trial) you said, that
Mowbray had not then made any discovery.


Cooper. Yes, my Lord, I mean Bolron.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Really methinks you that are Priests should be more
dexterous, my Lady Tempest managed her business much better, and had her
Witnesses in more readiness.


Thwing. My Lord, I call upon the Witnesses and they will not come in, I cannot
help it.


Edward Cooper sen. was then called.

Edward Cooper. I know nothing; I met Mr. Mowbray coming from Atherton Fair,
and he said he thought Sir Thomas was not guilty of the Plot.


Thwing. Mr. Mowbray declared for 8 or 10 months together in 77 he knew nothing
of the Plot; call Mr. Hobart.


Hobart. I know nothing of it.


Thwing. I am innocent, I know nothing as I hope for Salvation.


Then Isabell Heyward a Girl that lived with Bolron as a Servant, was called.

Isabel Heyward. My Master and Mistress fell out about going to London, and she
said, she would not go, and he said he would make her go, and she said, if he
did she would Swear that what he had sworn against Mrs. Pressicks, was out of
malice.


Alice Dawson was next Examined.

A. Dawson. The day after New Years day was 12 month, Mrs. Bolron, said she was
sorry for nothing, but that her Husband had meddled with Mrs. Pressicks.


Then Mrs. Pressicks called for John Pepper.

Mr. Justice Dolben. What do you say to him Mistress.


Pressicks. I ask about my going to Parlington at Whitsuntide.


Mr. Justice Dolben. No it was at Candlemas, and they said it was Cold Weather
to sit in the Hall Porch.


Pressicks. It was also said at Whitsuntide.


John Pepper. About Whitsun-Munday (my Lord) I went to Barnbow, and I met there
with Mr. Pressicks, and Mrs. Pressicks; and he desired me to tarry and carry
his Wife to Mrs. Harrisons at Parlington, and she and I went down to Shippon,
and I carried her from Bolron's on Whitsun-Munday and stayed till Thursday.


Mr. Justice Dolben. And what is all this to the purpose, she was however as it
was sworn against her at Shippon at Whitsontide.


Pepper. This is all I can say my Lord.


Zachary Thorpe was again called by Thwing.

Thorpe. Bolron said he was going to swear against my Lady Tempest, and if one
thing would not do another should, and would have had me to give Evidence
against Shipton.


Mrs. Baynes (Mother to Mr. Bolron) called.

Mr. Baron Atkins. What do you say Mrs. Baynes?


Mrs. Baynes. Indeed (my Lord) I know nothing of this, I know not Thorpe,
Shipton I know, and he told me that if he had not fallen into my Lord of
Shrewbury's service, he and Thorpe would have turned Highway-Men.


Mr. Babington called by Pressicks.

Mr. Justice Dolben. Can you say any thing for Mrs. Presssicks?


Babington. I can say no thing but what I said yesterday concerning Sir Thomas
Gascoyne.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Can you say any thing for Pressicks?


Babington. No my Lord, I can say nothing for Mrs. Presssicks, yes, thus much I
must say that when I came to have the writings sealed by Bolron, his Wife
refused to Seal them without delivering up of the bonds. I told her, it would
be an additional security to Sir Thomas Gascoyne, he said he did believe, that
Mr. Pressick and his Wife were his Enemies, and that they did instigate Sir
Thomas to sue him.


Mr. Justice Dolben. (To Thwing) Come what have you more to say?


Thwing. I have no Witnesses to call, but I hope it will be considered what
kind of Witnesses these are, what lives they have led, they bring me in amongst
the rest, we are all of a Family; I hope (my Lord) you will consider that those
ill men that will, may take away an honest man's life unjustly.


Mr. Justice Dolben. I hear no Body speak again their lives, and this I must
tell you, till men be convicted of some crime that may disable them, you cannot
take away their testimony.


Thwing. My Lord, Witnesses should be men of Credit and Reputation.


Mr. Justice Dolben. The Jury is to consider of that.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Look you Gentlemen, these two Prisoners stand Indicted of
High Treason, and it is for conspiring the Death of the King, and other heinous
Crimes; As Designing the Subverting the Government, and bringing in the Popish
Religion.

Now the Witnesses that have been produced against Thwing, are Bolron and
Mowbray; and against Pressicks, Mr. Bolron, Mrs. Bolron senior and junior, and
one Hutchinson, and the Evidence against Thwing, is one thing, and against the
Woman quite another; there is no Evidence against her but what they heard her
say others were to do, there is no Evidence of any action of hers, or that she
was present at any Consultation, nor acting any thing there, but that she said
so and so. Now Mr. Bolron and his Grandmother do both say that she said,
Pickering was to have killed the King, and that she was sorry that he did not
do it. That the Gun with which he should have done it, was found, and she was
afraid that was the cause of his Death, and they all say she said, that it
would be never well with England, till the Catholics had got the upper hand,
and the Duke of York were King. Now I must tell you, that my opinion is, that a
bare saying of this does not amount to High Treason, unless you do believe from
these words, that she knew otherwise then by hearsay, that Pickering was to
have killed the King, and that she was Privy and Consenting to the design of
Killing the King, then she is guilty of Treason, but if she only knew it by
hearsay, the bare knowledge and concealing of it will make her guilty of
Misprision of Treason; but knowing of it barely by Report does not make her
guilty of High Treason. My Brother will tell you his opinion herein. Now for
Mr. Thwing, the Evidence against him is very home; for they both Swear against
himone to one Meeting, and the other to another, that he was present at their
Consulttaion to Kill the King, Subvert the Government, and to bring in the
Popish Religion; that he did agree at the meeting to the Killing of the King,
they do both Swear, and this they say was at Sir Thomas Gascoynes, and that at
the several meetings there was a List produced, but Bolron says, that the List
when he was present was a List of those that were engaged toward the carrying
on of the Nunnery; that which the other speaks of, was a List of those that
were engaged about the killing the King, about the whole design which was to be
effected by killing the King, this he Swears, that Thwing did produce this
List; and Mowbray says, that three or four Priests were present at that time,
and that Thwing said, the King was an Heretic, and Excommunicated by the Pope,
and it was not only lawful but meritorious to kill Him. So that admitting this
Evidence be true, it is a full Evidence of High Treason against him; here is an
imagining the Death of the King, and here is an overt Act, here is a setting
hands to it; so that if this be true, Thwing is guilty of High Treason. Now
against this, they have produced many Witnesses, and none of them does go about
to prove this impossible but only improbable, but one that is a Groom of Sir
Thomas Gascoyne's, who says, he was but once or twice that year there, and not
at Easter but about Michaelmas, is that enough to answer the Testimony of these
two Men, Gentlemen, for a Groom to take upon him, to say two years after who
was at his Masters House, and how often, and what time of the year, is to me a
very strange thing; unless it were one that was never used to to come there:
But this man, he says, did use to come there, but that I must leave to you.
The Rest of the Witnesses were the same that were Examined yesterday. First
They insist concerning Mr. Lowther, they say, that when Mr. Bolron first went
to Mr. Lowther, he said nothing of Mr. Thwing, but it appears, he said then,
that afterward he might remember more, then the man was under a great
Consternation, and told him, the great and dangerous consequences of having so
long concealed it, was the occasion of that disorder upon him, but he said, he
should remember more afterward, and so he did; the rest of the Witnesses do
all go this purpose, that either Bolron or Mowbray should tell them at one time
or other, they did know nothing of the Plot, nor against Sir Thomas Gascoyne;
and some of them say, that it is out of Malice to Sir Thomas's Family, for so
Thwing would have it, he being his Nephew; that the Malice should reach to Mr.
Thwing; that they would have it, and something to the same purpose they do
offer against Mr. Mowbray. Now here is one Walker, that swears, that Bolron
ask't her if she knew Thwing to be a Priest, and offered her 10 l. to swear him
a Priest, she is a Servant of one Mrs. Lassel's, Mr. Thwing's Sister, he came
to Mrs. Lassel's to search for Priests. It is something strange, that he should
offer to persuade her to Swear against Thwing, who was Servant to his own
Sister, and at the time when he came to search for Priests, the Truth of it is,
the thing does depend purely upon the Credit of Witnesses. The Kings Witnesses
are upon their Oaths, but on the other hand the others are not on their Oaths,
but Credit is to be given to what they say; if you consider their Evidence and
do find a clearness in their Testimony, which you must weigh, for certainly he
that solemnly in the presence of God will say a false thing, will also dare to
Swear it, how far their Principles will carry them I know not, I can see
nothing but Bolron and Mowbray are good Witnesses, I do not see but what they
say, is coherent, and that they speak the Truth: And if you believe what they
say to be true, then Thwing is guilty of High Treason, but if do not believe,
what they say is true, but out of malice you must acquit him. They do object
the other Juries did not believe Bolron and Mowbray, the case with the
Prisoners at the Bar is not the same with theirs, but you are to give your
Verdict according to the Evidence that you have heard, and according to your
Consciences.


Mr. Baron Atkyns. Gentlemen of the Jury, I shall be very short; The Crimes
that are laid in this Indictment, and charged upon these persons, are the
designing to take away the Kings Life, Subverting the Government, and
Introduing Popery; you observe the nature of the Evidence which has been given
against the Prisoners. And first, I shall speak but one word concerning Mary
Pressicks; I do fully agree with what my Brother has said; you do take notice,
that the Evidence that has been given against her, has been what came out of
her own mouth; the Witnesses are Mr. Bolron and his Grandmother, and likewise
one Hutchinson: Mr. Bolron says, she did tell him that Harcourt was her
Confessor, and that he had engaged her in the Plot; she likewise told him that
Pickering was to kill the King, that the Gun was found with him, and was the
cause of his death; this is some Evidence of High Treason, I must leave it to
you of what weight it is, and how far by this you will conclude her privy to
the Plot: It is true, were she an Actor in it, it is plain, she is guilty of
High Treason. As to what Hutchinson said, that she told him, we should never be
at peace, till we were all of the Roman Catholic Religion, and the Duke of
York was made King, that will not amount to High Treason: This I take to be the
sum of the Evidence against her. Then as to Mr. Thwing, there are two Witnesses
that have sworn against him, that is Mr. Bolron and Mr. Mowbray: Bolron tells
you, that in 1677, there came to him several Priests, to his House at Shipton;
and amongst the rest Thwing the Prisoner, who asked him how he stood affected to
the Roman Catholic Religion, and he then expressed his zeal for it, and they
thought him a person fit to impart their secrets to; then he says, that in
1677 there was a Meeting at Barnbow-Hall, which is Sir Thomas Gascoyne's House,
and at that Meeting there were Sir Thomas Gascoyne, Esquire Gascoyne, Sir Miles
Stapleton, and amongst the rest this Prisoner Thwing; and that there was a
Consult held at that time, and Design of killing the King, and that this person
did agree to it, and declared, that if they should miss that opportunity, they
should never have such another; and that it was for the good of the
Roman Catholic Religion. The next was Mowbray, and he says to the same effect
that in 1676. Thwing and others declared they did design to kill the King, for
he was an Heretic, and Excommunicated, and had not kept his word with the
Jesuits, and therefore they thought it not only Lawful, but a Meritorious Act:
And this is what both Bolron and Mowbray do restifie; this they swear
positively against the Prisoner; if you believe what they have Sworn to be
true, I must declare that it will amount to High Treason. You are likewise to
consider the Evidence he has produced for himself; the Law, it is true, does
not allow us to give them an Oath; yet if they be Persons of credit and
honesty, it is Evidence which you are to consider of. The Prisoner has called
several Witnesses: The first was Nath. Wilson, I shall not repeat what he
says, being of no import. Thwing says Mr. Bolron was before Mr. Lowther and
Mr. Tindall, two Justices of Peace, who did take his Oath, and then he said, he
did not Accuse him of the Plot at that time; and by that would infer, that he
would have said what he had against him, as well then as now, if he had had any
thing whereof to Accuse him: But Bolron answers, He did declare to these two
Gentlemen, he was not able at that time to Recollect his whole Knowledge, but
gave it in afterward to the King and Council: The next are Moore and Thorpe,
the effect of their Evidence is to strike at the Reputation of Bolron, that it
was an Act of Malice and Revenge; for they say, that Bolron told them, that Sir
Thomas was innocent, and knew nothing of the Plot. Thorpe says, he met with
Bolron in Long-Acre, and that he told him, that though Sir Thomas were quitted,
he would ruin some of them: I say, these things, if true, are* some Evidence
of a Malicious Prosecution; but it seems something improbable that Bolron
should so openly make a discovery of himself, when it appears he was not
greatly acquainted with them, especially with Thorpe. There are several other
Witnesses that speak much to the same purpose. Gentlemen, In matters of Fact,
which depend upon the Testimony of Witnesses, the Credit of the Witnesses is
greatly to be considered; if you believe what Bolron and Mowbray have both
positively Sworn, the Treason is plain; you must take all the parts of your
Evidence together, you must weigh all the Circumstances; you must, as I said
before, consider the Credit of the Witnesses of the one side and of the other,
and by these steps you will be the better guided in the giving of your Verdict.
I must leave it to you: and I pray God direct you therein.


The Jury having withdrawn, after some Consultation together, brought in their
Verdct, That Thomas Thwing was Guilty, and Mary Pressiks Not-Guilty.

August the 2. 1680. Thomas Thwing being brought to the Bar, the Clerk spoke
thus:

Clerk. Thomas Thwing hold up thy Hand, thou have been Indicted, that thou as a
false Traitor did Conspire the death of the King, etc. and thereof have been
found Guilty, what can thou say wherefore Judgment of Death should not be
pronounced against thee?


Thwing. My Lord, as I am now upon my life, I know nothing of these things, in
the least, that these men have sworn against me; and on the other side, I say,
that before Sir Thomas Gascoyne had his Trial these Men said nothing against
me, so I hope your Lordship will take it into consideration.


Mr. Justice Dolben. For your Innocence the Gentlemen of the Jury are Judges of
that, and they have found you Guilty, so that it is not in my power either to
acquit or condemn you, I am only to pass Sentence according to that Conviction.
If you have any thing to say wherefore Judgment should not be pronounced, I am
ready to hear you.


Thwing. All that I can say is to declare my innocence, and that these men are
of no credit and reputation. It is very hard I should be Guilty, and none of
the rest that were Arraigned for the same Crimes.


Mr. Justice Dolben. No, it is not impossible; it is possible you may be
Guilty, and the rest Innocent.


Thwing. For my part, I told your Lordship that I was but once or twice in a
Year at Sir Thomas Gascoynes, being my Uncle; and I do protest I know nothing
of the Consult these men do charge me with.


Mr. Justice Dolben. You say one thing, they swear another; and for ought I
know they are honest men; they are lawful men, and not convicted in the main:
for I do believe there were many great and dangerous Consults held at Sir
Thomas Gascoynes by several Persons, and that there have been many horrid and
treasonable things acted there. You have been Indicted for High Treason, the
highest Treason that ever any Subject was guilty of, for attempting to Kill the
King, for resolving so to do upon deliberate advice and consultation, and this
for no other end or purpose, but that you might have your Religion set up; for
that was your Design, to change this Religion here, and to settle Popery in
England; and the better to bring that to pass, you thought to take away the
Kings life, knowing you could not otherwise accomplish it. You are I am
satisfied a Priest of the Romish Church, therefore all that I can say to you in
reference to your future state you will not value, for you account me an
Heretic as you do the King, and I am content to be so esteemed in so good
Company, therefore I shall wave it. As you are a Gentleman I will give some
respect to you, and I will not pass Sentence on you among the rest of the
Prisoners that are found Guilty of Felony and Murder, but will do it by your
self.

The Law does command the Court, and the Court does award, That you be carried
from hence to the place from whence you came, that is the Prison, and from
thence you are to be drawn to the place of Execution; you are there to be
hanged by the Neck, you are to be cut down before you are dead, and your
Intrails are to be taken out of your Body, and thrown into the Fire before your
face, and your Head is to be parted from your Body, and your Body separated
into four Quarters, and your Head and your Quarters are to be disposed
according to the Kings pleasure: And the Lord have mercy on your Soul.


Thwing. Innocens ego sum.


The Proceedings against Sir Miles Stapleton, Baronet.
SIR Miles Stapleton, Baronet, was Indicted at a Sessions of Oyer and Terminer
in the West Riding of the County of York, and the Indictment was removed by
Certiorari to the King's Bench, where Sir Miles Stapleton having been Arraigned
and pleaded to the same Not-Guilty, was sent down by Nisi prius to be tried in
the County of York.

The Indictment was, For that he as a false Traitor against our most
illustrious and excellent Prince, King Charles the Second, his natural Lord,
not having God before his eyes, nor weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but by
the instigation of the Devil being moved and soduced, the cordial Love, and
true due and natural Obedience, which true and faithful Subjects of our said
Lord the King should bear to him, and of right are bound to bear, wholly
withdrawing, devising and with all his power intending to disturb the peace and
common tranquillity of this Realm, and to bring and put our* said. Lord the King
to death and final destruction, and the true Worship of God in this Kingdom by
Law established and used, to alter to the Superstition of the Church of Rome,
and to move and stir up War against our said Lord the King in this Realm, and
to subvert the Government of this Kingdom, the 30th day of May, in the 31th
year of our said Lord the Kings Reign, at the Parish of Barwiek in Ellmet in
the said County of York, in the West Riding of the same County, with diverse
other false Traitors unknown* did traitorously compass, imagine, and intend the
Death and final Destruction of our said Lord the King, and to change and alter
and wholly to subvert the Ancient Government of this Realm, and to depose and
wholly to deprive the King of the Crown and Government of the said Kingdom, and
to root out the true Protestant Religion: And to fulfill and accomplish the
same most wicked Treasons and traiterous Imaginations and Purposes, the said
Sir Miles Stapleton, and other false Traitors unknown, on the said 30th day of
May in the 31th year aforesaid, with Force and Arms, at the Parish of Barwick
aforesaid, advisedly, devillishly, maliciously and traitorously did assemble,
unite and gather themselves together, and then and there did devillishly,
advisedly, maliciously, craftily and traitorously consult and agree to bring
our said Lord the King to death and final destruction, and to depose and
deprive him of his Crown and Government, and to introduce and establish the
Religion of the Roman Church in this Realm; and the sooner to fulfill and
accomplish the said most wicked Treasons and traiterous Imaginations and
Purposes, the said Sir Miles Stapleton, and other unknown Traitors, then and
there advisedly, maliciously and traitorously did further consult and agree to
contribute, pay, and expend diverse large Sums of Money to diverse of the Kings
Subjects, and other persons unknown, to procure those persons unknown
traitorously to kill our said Lord the King, and to introduce the Roman
Religion into this Realm, against the Duty of his Allegiance, against the Peace
of our said Lord the King his Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the
Statute in such case made and provided.

The Jury being called, Mr. Justice Dolben took notice to Sir Miles that there
were but few appeared, and therefore told him he would do well not to challenge
too many of them: Sir Miles thereupon said he should not challenge Many; and
enquired whether those that served on the Lady Tempests, Mr. Thwings, and Mr.
Inglebyes Juries did now appear? And the Judge answered him, that if they did,
care should be taken that they should not be sworn.

Then the Jury being called to the Book, Sir Miles challenged these, viz.

Sir David Fowls, Barronet. Robert Bell, Genesis John Eastoft, Esquire. John
Dixon, Genesis William Bethell, Esquire. Thomas Wood, Genesis William Caley, Esquire.
Robert Turner, Genesis Towers Driffield, Esquire. John Beckwith, Genesis Marmad.
Trueman, Esquire. Sim. Warrener, Genesis John Wright, Esquire. Gervase Hatfeild,
Genesis John Green, Esquire. John Coats, Genesis

And only two of the Jury returned, viz. Thomas Fletcher, Genesis and Robert
Gudgeon, Genesis
were sworn.

Mr. Justice Dolben. Sir Miles I see you must stay till the next Assizes, for
you challenge so many, here will not be a Jury gotten.


Sir Miles. If your Lordship please, I shall be content, and do desire the Jury
may be called that served the first day; nay all the three Juries if you please.


Mr. Justice Dolben. That is, you would choose all of one way, and leave the
others; where is the indifferency of the Trial then? But come call them, I
cannot deny it.


The three Juries called, and five challenged: viz. Thomas Worsley, Esquire.
Roger Fretwell, Genesis Samuel Tenant, Genesis Roger Lee, Esquire. Robert Bushel,
Genesis

And these sworn: viz. Sir Thomas Pennyman, Baronet. Thomas Rooksby, Esquire.
William Stone. Thomas Conyers. Christopher Tankerd, Esquire, who was excepted
against by Sir Tho. Stringer, as one that disparaged the Evidence of the Plot,
and called his Dogs by the Names of Oats and Bedloe; which the Judge allowed
to be a good Exception, but there being no Witnesses in the Court to prove it,
he was sworn.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Sir Miles, you must stay till next Assizes, we have not a
full Jury.


Sir Miles. Here are Gentlemen in the Court, your Lordship may take whom you
please.


Mr. Justice Dolben. I cannot do it without the Kings Counsel move for a Tales,
which as this case stands they will not do. And so he was remanded to Prison,
and Remanet pro defectu Juratorum entered upon the Record.


A Reprieve being obtained for Mr. Thwing, he remained Condemned in the Castle
of York until about the middle of October. Mr. Justice Dolben attended his
Majesty in Council, and gave a full Account of the several Trials, and of his
satisfaction in the Evidence. Whereupon an Order of Council was made for the
Execution of Mr. Thwing, and upon the 23. of October, according to the
Sentence, he was Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered at York, having first protested
his Innocence of all that was sworn against him, but gloried that he was a
Priest, and had performed the Priestly Function about 15 years, and desiring
all true Catholics, if any such were there, to pray for him, and begging God
to bless and preserve the King, his Queen, the Duke of York, and all other good
Christians, he yielded himself to the Executioner.

FINIS.

