TO The Right Reverend, THE MINISTERS OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND, Of the
PRESBYTERIAN Persuasion.
The following DEFENSE, of the RIGHTS and LIBERTIES of the CHURCH, against the
pretended Right and Usurpations of PATRONAGE; is most humbly Dedicated, by

ROBERT PARK.

To the READER.
THe substance of the following sheets, was written many Years ago, mainly for
the satisfying some scruples, of a worthy friend of the Authors. But the press
has for a long time, been so well guarded from the least breathing, against
the grievances, this poor Church, and Nation groaned under, that the
publication was but little thought of.

It having now pleased God, to raise up some worthy Instruments, to appear for
the interests and Liberties of this broken Church and People, and to endeavor
a redress of their manifold oppressions; It was thought convenient, to offer
these Papers, to the public view and consideration. I stand in too near a
Relation, to the Author, to be thought impartial in his commendation. And though
I could wish this discourse had got his own last hand, and that it had not been
left to run the common fate of other posthumous works; yet I hope the main
Subject will be found satisfyingly handled. There are besides some other
purposes incidently touched, and many sountains for solution of several
important debates of the time, solidly and succinctly opened; which if well
considered, may be serviceable, for advancing a Reformation of many more Abuses,
than the particular design of these Papers Intends.

I shall offer no Apology for the style. I hope it will be found distinct,
plain and easy, and suitable to the Nature of the Subject. I know nothing a
style serves for, but to express Men's Conceptions distinctly and without
harshness: And if that may be attained, without forced and strained
Rhetorications, which for the most part, produce no other effect, but a
Darkning of knowledge with words; I cannot see, how a neglect of such useless
Trifles can be blamed. The native beauty of truth, stands no way in need of
these artificial disguises, that are used to set off adulterate wares. There
are but too many in this Age, who have rendered both themselves and their
discourses Ridiculous, by affecting new strains of Eloquence* as they take it.
The thinking part of mankind, is very sensible, that the neglect of a good old
form, of sound Words and safe Expressions, has made People forget and
mistake, many Ancient and solid truths. It is Pitifully mean and unbecoming to
see the Clergy (as they must be termed) turn the Pulpit to a Theater, and to
hear Divines, Trick up and illustrate their discourses with the similies and
Expressions of a Comedy or Romance, going down, (as it were) to the
Uncircumcised, for sharpning of their Tools, as if there were no Smith in
Israel.

The subject of these Papers, is but very little treated of by any, especially
in this way* And therefore the publication may perhaps be as necessary as
seasonable. If it can in the least be servicable, for freeing the Church, of
any part of her bondage; I am sure the design, both of it is Writing and
Publication, will be fully attained.

I hope there will be few found so fond, of the Rights of Patronage, as to be
of the Opinion of Diego Lainez, one of the Fathers at Trent, who asserted, That
it was a motion of the Devil, to offer to reduce Elections to the Ancient
course: And that the Antiquity of that method, was a bad Argument for Reviving
of it: ^ut that on the contrary, it ought to be suppressed, because it was the
Ancient custom. For if the Church (as he Ridiculously enough pretends) had not
found it inconvenient, she would not have quite it.

I shall only wish, that People in their several Capacities, may seriously
consider, what the present conduct, of providence; seems to call them to: And
that they may Act, both in this and other matters, so, as not to be wanting to
themselves and their Posterity, in the settling of affairs, upon the solid and
lasting foundations, of Truth and Peace: lest they verify the Proverb, Sero
sapiunt Phryges. (which I need not translate) And repent when it is too late,
the loss of such a Golden opportunity, so wonderfully and unexpectedly, brought
to their hand: And give the present and succeeding Generations cause to say,
why was there a price, put in the hand of a Fool to get Wisdom, seeing he had
no heart to it?

Edinburgh, Febr. 16^9.
The CONTENTS.
Sect. I. Of the Original of Patronage Page 1 Sect. II. A general View of the
Rights of Patronage. 17. Sect. III. The Opinion of our Reformers, etc.
concerning Patronage. 26. Sect. IV. The Ground and Argument for Patronage, from
a Reservation by the first Founders examined. 31. Sect. V. A farther
examination, of this Reservation, from its own nature, and from the Nature of
Pious and Charitable Deeds. 38. Sect. VI. The Reservation pretended, can be no
ground, for the Jus utile of Patronage. 53. Sect. VII. The denial of It, can be
no discouragement in gratifying of the Church: something obiter, of the
Dilapidation of the Churches Patrimony. 56. Sect. VIII. The ground of
Patronage, from a grant or Concession of the Church, examined. 63. Sect. IX.
Afarther examination of this pretended Concession. 69 Sect. X. Another ground
for the Foundation of Patronage, from the necessity, of a Jus Onerosum,
examined. 73. Sect. XI. Patronage is no Institution of Divine Appointment, but
a mannifest Usurpation. 81. Sect. XII. The power of Patronage, is destructive
of the Institutions of Christ, for the Election of the Pastors of his Church.
97. Sect. XIII. The power of Patronage, is against the Freedom and Interest of
Common Society. 113. Sect. XIV. The power of Patronage, has been grossly
Abused, and Scandalously offensive, without any Necessity or use. 120. Sect.
XV. Patronage is a Symbolizing with Idolaters, and against the Doctrine and
Discipline of this Church. 142. Sect. XVI A pretense that the Patron meddles
with nothing of Election, or what is properly Ecclesiastical. 146. Sect. XVII.
Another pretense, that the Church may reject the Person presented in case of
insufficiency. 157. Sect. XVIII. Another pretense, from the distinction of
Laick and Ecclesiastic Patronages. 162. Sect. XIX. Apretence, from the
Failings and Mistakes of Church Judicatories. etc. 167.
ERRATA.
Page 17, line 14, for the Vandals, read and since the Vandals. p. 28. l. 21
for Prelacy it was, r. Prelacy. I say, it was. p. 80. l. 14. for all Civil.
read all other Civil. p. 82. l. 22. for as a most, r. is a most. p. 115. l. 26.
for there, r. other. p. 160. l. 11, for much, r. as much.

A DEFENSE OF THE RIGHTS and LIBERTIES Of the CHURCH, In the Election and
Maintenance of Her PASTORS: AGAINST The Negative Interests of PATRONAGE.
SECTION. I. An Account of the Original of Patronage.
I. THE Design I have in these few Pages, is to Demonstrate from Grounds of
Scripture and Principles of Reason; the unwarrantablness and injustice of these
Privileges, Claimed and Exerted, in, and over the Church and People of God by
the Patrons of Kirks and Benefices, in reference to the Call and Maintenance of
the Ministers of the Gospel.

This I shall endeavor to perform, as distinctly, and with all the plainness,
and Brevity. I can find the subject will admit: And that so much the rather,
That I know, those for whose satisfaction I principally Write, are sufficiently
capable to discover, the weight of Truth and Reason, without the attendance of
any Rhetorical Excursion, or Embellishment of Expression. And if I Err in any
thing* especially in matters, that are out of my common Road, I expect the
Reader will be Candide and Favorable in his Censure.

II. The Method which I shall observe in the prosecution of this Design, shall
be,

1 To give some short account, of what seems to have been the first Rise and
Original of the Rights of Patronage; with a view of its several Branches, as it
has been Exercised, in and over the Church of Scotland, in Relation to the
Ministerial Call and Maintenance.

2 I shall endeavor to discover the Emptiness of these Grounds, that are, or
may be adduced for a Foundation, to the Institution of Patronage: whereby it
will appear, how groundless and unjust the Claims and Practices of Patrons, in
this matter have been.

3. I shall offer some positive Reasons, against the pretended Right it self.

4. And lastly, I shall examine some Pretenses, that may be alleged, for
clearing that Patronage is not so injurious to the Interests of the Church, as
it is represented to be.

To these Heads, as being the most material and needful, to be handled in a
Subject of this Nature, I shall confine what I have to say; and thence it is
hoped, any thing else that might be expected in Relation to this argument, will
receive sufficient light.

III. The right of Patronage may be defined, to be a Power to present and
nominat, a person to be institute in a vacant Church, Office and Benefice, by
those who are, or pretend to be, the Founders or Doters, of Kirks or Benefices.
Potestas praesentandi, aut Nominandi instituendum, ad Vacans Beneficium aut
Officium Sacrum. etc.

I know There are many useless Debates, among the Canonists, concerning the
Definition of Patronage, which I shall not insist upon; seeing the Thing it self
is by the sad experience of this Church and Nation, but too well known.

IV. Only I cannot omit to observe, that the very Name and Title, of Patron, is
somewhat ominous and unlucky, as Importing a kind of Servitude and Bondage,
upon the Church. For as in the Roman Laws and Customs, a Patron (albeit the
Name import Favor and Protection) was still understood, to retain a very hard
Interest, in the Persons and Estates, of such Servants, as he had manumitted,
and set free from their Bondage; and a Right of Reducing them to their former
condition of Slavery, upon pretenses of Ingratitude, or a Carriage any way
unsuitable, to the favor of Freedom they had received; so sure I am, this
pretended Right of Patronage, (of which we are to treat) has in these
respects, been very answerable to its Name, in restraining and impeding, (under
the fair Color of Protection) the Church and People of God, from the Free and
Lawful Exercise of their Spiritual Liberties, and Privileges, as we shall
fully clear in the progress of this Discourse.

V. To come then to the first part of the method proposed, I shall not
determine the Time when this Corruption, (for so I must call it, since Vetustas
Erroris non Consuetudo sed Corruptela dicenda est) entered into the Christian
Church, The Canonists themselves are not fully agreed as to this. It may be
very clear in the General. That it was the work of some time and Pains, to
bring the rights of Patronage, to that Form and Consistence in which they have
been exercised over the Christian Church. Patronage was not an Institution,
That was framed and received and perfected at one dash. It is also very certain
that ab Initio non fuit. It was not so much as heard of, in the pure and
primitive times, but has been by small and insensible degrees dropped and sown,
in the field of the Church by the Enemy, among other Tares, while men were
Asleep, that is while the Church was unawars, Matthew. 13, 25.
and not so watchful as need was; so that 'its little wonder the particular
time of the Entry of this power be hard enough to be condescended upon.

VI. It may likewise be very clear, That since the foundation of Patronage, was
the Building or doting of Kirks, and that the liberty, of such Building and
Doting, was not much allowed, and perhaps less practiced, before the times of
Constantine the Great, which was about the beginning of the fourth Century; I
say, from this it may be clear that before Constantine's time, the privilege
of Patronage could not be introduced.

VII. And though some may allege that in the year of Christ CCCC. The fifth
Council of Carthage, Council. 5. carthag. Can. 9. Council. Mile. vitan. Can. 16.
and thereafter in the year CCCCII. The Council of Millan, both in the times of
the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius, did desire of the Emperors, that there
might be some Persons considerable for wealth and Piety, appointed for defense
of the Church, in her Rights, and goods or patrimony* against such as should
attempt, any Invasion upon them; and that those Persons, came afterward to get
the name of Patrons or defenders of the Church: Yet these are not the Patrons
we are Inquiring after.

VIII For as this sort of Patronage was to be managed cum provisione
Episcoporum, by the Advice and Consent of the Pastors and Office-bearers of the
Church; so it was nothing else but a branch of the Magistrates Cumulative
Power, circa Sacra, and only for defense of the Churches Patrimony, against
Sacrilegious Misapplications, and no way concerned with the Call and Election
of the Ministry: nor had this sort of Patronage any Privative, or Negative
Interest, in their Stipends or Maintenance Neither were these Patrons,
accounted Church Officers* as the Canonists will have the Patrons we are
enquiring after to be* nor were those Bishops then Patrons themselves, because
they were a part of the Church that was to be defended. Et nemo potest esse
sibi patronus. Their trust was with the Church's consent, Elective and not
Hereditary, and much less purchasable for money as a part of a man's private
patrimony, and Fortune. I conceive it will be needless, to add any thing
farther, upon the difference, that is so palpably evident betwixt these and our
pretended Patronages, though it may be said, that this Institution was in some
respect the foundation of these patronages we are in search of, if we consider
that as at the first appearance, this was a trust in it self not
discommendable* but rather in some cases necessar and useful; so in after times
it did by little and little degenerat into this pretended right of Patronage we
are to treat of, to the subversion of the Liberties of the Christian Church,
for whose defense in the Lawful enjoymen^ of her Patrimony, it was at first
introduced* And it may likewise be observed that those persons at the time of
the Councils cited, were not called Patrons, but only Ecclesiarum Defensores,
Vide Caranz sum Council. folio 126. and folio 146.
and Ecclesiarum Exequutores, vel Advocati; which clearly shows the Nature of
that trust, to have been vastly different from the right of patronage, as it
was afterward practiced.

IX. But in the time of the Emperor Justinian, about the middle of the sixth
Century there appears some clearer Lineaments of the rights of Patronage; as in
the Novel 57. Novel. 57. and Novel. 123.
and Novel. 123 yet even at this time, it is vastly short of that (...), it
afterward came to, under the protection of the Canon Law, and many are of
opinion that at this time, this Power did not extend any farther, than to the
presentation of the Minores Clerici (as they were called) and that it had no
interest, in the Election of the Pastors and Governors of the Church (who were
then (...) termed Episcopi) as they think is clear from the 123 Novel, where it
is appointed, ut ad Electionem Episcopi convenirent omnes Clerici and Primores
Civitatis: So that if by the Rules of Analogy, we may be allowed to draw this
power of presentation or Commendation, as it was called, but not a jus
etigendi: and apply it to our times, it will have place, in the Election of
none of the Office bearers of the Church, but only in that of Readers,
Precentors, Schoolmasters, Beddels and the like: For these are the Officers
that correspond to the Minores Clerici of that time* And thence they conclude,
that it can never be proven, that before the year DC. Patronage had any
interest in the Call of the Pastors of the Church.

X. But be this as it will, it is pretty clear, that before these Novels, there
was nothing like the privileges of patronage in use: that right being not so
much as once named, in all the former Laws of the Roman Empire, which were
reduced and Compyled into a Body, by the same Emperor. And all the mention that
is made of it in the Novels, is but in some few, to wit in the 1. 57. 67. 123.
and 131. This may yet farther appear, from the very terms of praesentatio,
advocatio, guardias habere etc. which have not the least scent of the Saecula
purioris latinitatis.

XI And as the privileges of Patronage, were late of entering into the Empire,
so certainly they have been some considerable time in use in the Empire and
Church of Rome, before they have been brought thence, and settled in Scotland.

XII But be the time of the entry of Patronage what it will, that which seems
to have given the first rise and occasion to it, was, the building of Kirks and
Meeting-places for the public worship of God, or the allocating and giving
ground to build them on, or lastly the Mortification or settlement of a
Benefice or constant maintenance on such as should serve the Cure thereat: for
upon such acts the Founders of Kirks and Benefices did assume, or as others
pretend, did Reserve to themselves and their heirs in all time thereafter, a
privilege and power, to nominat and present those who should serve as Pastors
at such a Kirk, and a sole Power of giving them a legal Right and Title, to the
Rents and profits of the Living during their Incumbency And that even albeit
such founders had not built the whole Kirk, or settled the whole benefice, but
only a part of them: for the Canonists maintain, that he who builds but One
corner of a Kirk, has a right to the patronage, as well as he that builds the
other Three.

XIII. Many of the Canonists do grant, and it is very clear from the Canon law
it self, that the patrons did at first assume this privilege, Decretal. l. 3.
Tit. 38. Ca. 3.
rather by the Connivance of the Church, than by her express and deliberate
Consent, and far less by her positive appointment and Institution. And even the
Council of Trent does acknowledge, that in many cases. Jus patronatus ex
usurpatione quaesitumest. The Patron on the one hand, counting this privilege
to be his due, Council. Trident. sess. 25. decret. de Reform. cap. 9.
in point of merit and desert, and looking upon it as no small degree of
unthankfulness, in the Church, to gain say or oppose his claim to it. And the
Church it may be also, thinking it hard on the other hand, in point of
gratitude, to refuse it: since the design of this privilege, primo intuitu,
might appear to reach no farther, but to preserve some memory of such good and
pious deeds, that the Benefactors might not seem to have utterly lost, what
they devoted for pious uses: it being indeed hard enough, at the first sight,
to discern, betwixt plausible corruptions, and truly useful institutions Inter
triticum and lolium (says Jerome) Quamdiu in herbaest; and nondum culmus venit
ad Spicam, grandis Similitudo and in discernendo aut nulla, aut peraifficilis
distantia.

So that by such concurring circumstances of ambition, on the Patrons part, and
of indeliberate favor on the part of the Church, at a time, when, the mystery
of iniquity, had already wrought to some sort of perfection, (for even in the
Apostles days it had begun to work) and when Superstition and Corruption, as
well in Worship and Doctrine, 2. These. 2.7.
as in Morals, was much advanced, and humane Inventions were creeping in apace,
into the room of the ordinances of Jesus Christ; The Church was by degrees
robbed of her Spiritual Privileges, that the aspiring humors of the great
ones, might be Gratified with her spoils, and that their greatness might, under
the specious and plausible Title of the Churches Patrons and Defenders, appear
with the more luster and splendour before Men: It being esteemed no small
Addition to their Honor, and to the Interest they had over People, as to their
Bodies and Temporal Concerns, to be likewise invested with a privilege, that
in a manner gave them a pre-eminence, over Peopl's Souls and Spiritual
interests; to that degree, that no Minister, without the Patrons express and
positive wartand and appointment, might have access to serve in Sacris, at such
a Kirk, or have a legal Right and Title, to the rents and profits of a
Benefice, though all others interessed, were satisfied to the full, with his
sufficiency, good Behavior and faithful discharge of the duties of his
function.

XIV. These and many other Corruptions of this Nature, the Lord in his
righteous Judgment, did permit in the times of Darkness, as tending to
introduce and keep up, an Ignorant fruitless and Idle Ministry, that studied to
be pleasers of men and servants of their Lusts, (especially of those of their
Patrons) that thereby, he might justly punish the World, for not receiving the
love of the truth. And Particularly to punish, the unlawful invasions, made by
the corrupt Churchmen and Clergy of these times, upon the civil Powers;
permitting them, to prey on each others Rights and Privileges, Jure quasi
Belli, ac lege talionis, till at length the whole frame of Church and state,
was turned to a Babel of Confusion, and Egyptian Darkness. And though the
practicing of such usurpations, over the liberties of the Church, might in a
time of darkness, be looked upon, as a sin of Ignorance or weakness, yet in
such times of light, as God has set us in, it must certainly be a sin of a
higher nature and Degree.

XV. The Superstition of these times, still advancing, and particularly, that
Anti-evangelical Opinion of Merit, taking daily deeper root, the Clergy (as
they must be styled) were not a wanting, to fish in these muddie Waters, and to
make their best use of that occasion, by insinuating themselves, upon weak and
well meaning People, (especially in the time of their Sickness) to make them
part very liberally, with their goods and possessions, for the service of the
Church, and pious uses, as they termed it. And they did so terrify them, with
the fears of Purgatory and Damnation for their Sins, on the one hand; and
flatter them, with the hopes of Indulgences, pardon of sins and Prayers for
their Souls, and the honor they would acquire to themselves and their
Posterity, by such good Deeds, on the other hand; that in a short time, the
poor Peoples blind and superstitious zeal, was screwed to such a pitch, as
nothing was sooner asked (especially if not to take effect till after their
Death) than it was given: So that as the Apostle says in a different case,
Gal. 4.15.
they would have plucked out their very eyes, for the service of these rapacious
Vultures.

XVI. This is a Truth so incontestable, that the civil Powers in the most of
all Christian States, found themselves under an absolute necessity, to put some
stop to such a Torrent of ill disposed Charity, as was likely to terminate in
the Settling of the whole Lands and Poslessions, within their Territories, In
the hands of a sort of Men, that depended upon a Foraign Power, and pretended
to an exemption and independencie, from the Civil Authority of the States they
lived in: As among many other Instances, that might be given, may appear from
that one Law in our own Nation, prohibiting the disposal of Lands or Heritages
by Persons on Deathbed.

XVII. It is well observed by the Noble du Plessis, Mornay, in his mysterium
iniquitatis.
that when the Christian Doctrine and Religion began to be corrupted in the
Substance, People endeavored to cover their defection by retaining the Shadow,
and to seem as Religious as ever, by building of Kirks, Chapels etc And that
in Actions of this nature, the worst of Men, were ordinarily the most forward
and devout, that thereby they might obliterat the memory of their former
vicious Lives and Practices, both in themselves and others. This is indeed a
clear Paraphrase, upon our Blessed Savior's charge against the Scribes and
Pharisees, That they tithed the Mint and the Annise, and omitted the weighter
Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, Matt. 23.
and Faith.

XVIII. Things being brought to this pass, it is little wonder, that the humor
of building and doting of Kirks, began to increase; and the number of
Patronages by consequence, to multiply: so that in a short time, few Kirks or
Congregations, wanted some one or other for their patron. And many times when
Patronage could not be claimed, upon the account of the building or doting of
Kirks, there was still some body found, who under the least shadow of
Reparations or otherwise, and in default of all, the Pope of Rome, as
pretending himself, to be patron Supreme, Paramount and Universal of all Kirks;
and since the Reformation in this Church, our own Kings, as coming into the
Pop's place (which by the way, is none of the most honorable Successions)
assumed and usurped this Privilege. So that in a small time, the Corruption
was little less than universally spread.

XIX. Before we leave this Head, we may observe, that as that Antichristian
Church of Rome, has in most of her Institutions, still endeavored to advance
her own splendour and greatness, and her usurped Dominion, over the Church and
Consciences of God's People, by an affected imitation of these interests, which
the Secular powers of the Earth, have over the civil rights of their Subjects,
expressly contrare to the Precepts of our blessed Lord, Luke, 22. Which in this
case deserve a very serious and special consideration; Luke, 22.25. to the 31.
Matt. 20 25.
so particularly, this institution of Patronage, has been fixed or continued
and improven, to make some sort of a resemblance and parallel, in the Church,
to that of Feudal Superiority and Vassalage, in use betwixt great Men and their
followers. This seems to be pretty clearly intimate, by the very word
Beneficium, which in its more proper acceptance, signifies the same thing with
Feudum, or a grant of Lands, by a Superior to his vassal, for military
services; though by a kind of Antinomasia, that first signification, be in a
manner now wholly disused, and the other of a Spiritual or Church living,
commonly if nor only, understood thereby. And hence it may be observed, that as
Patronage was fixed, or continued and improven, in imitation of Feudal
Superiorities, so as to order of time, its first vigor was not, till after the
feudal Institution: For the Vandals (who gave the rise to the Feudal Contract)
took the City of Rome, after the middle of the fifth Century. This may likewise
confirm what was formerly hinted, that till the year DC. the Interests of
Patronage, in the Election and Maintenance of the Pastors of the Church was not
known.

SECT. II. A general View of the Rights of PATRONAGE.
THe Canonists write of Patrons, as persons in some kind of office, and having
right to a sort of Stipend. The rights they ascribe to them are shortly these

I. First a Jus Honorificum, whereby the patron, had power to nominate the
Pastor, and give him right to the Benefice, and to have a splendid and Stately
Seat, and a Burial place, in the Kirk; and a right of precedence, among the
Clergy, in solemn processions, visitations etc* In which they could not lay
aside, their Pride and Vanity, in their very nearest approaches to God, in
going about the Duties of his worship and service: Nor in the most humbling
Circumstances of Death and Burial. And how suitable such practices are, to the
faults, of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.6. Mark 12.38. James 2.1, 2, 3,
4.
who did all their works to be seen of men, and loved the uppermost Rooms at
feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the market
place, and to be called of men Rabbi Rabbi; for which, our Savior so sharply
rebukes them, any man may easily see. By this Jus honorificum, The Patron had
also his name and Arms, and other badges of Honor, cut, engraven, or painted
upon the entry, or walls of the Kirk, And upon the Bells, Chalices and other
Utensils. And also was nominatim mentioned in the public Prayers of the
Church, which are all pharisaical Fancies of the same Nature.

II. Secondly, they ascribe to the Patron, a Jus Vtile, whereby if he, or his
Posterity became poor, and could not live aliunde, they were to be entertained
and alimented, out of the Church Revenues, as some sort of a recompense and
retribution, for their having gratified the Church, by building and Erecting of
a Kirk, or mortifying a maintenance for the Incumbents.

III. Thirdly a Jus Onerosum, whereby the Patron (as the Canonists tell us) was
oblidged, to repair the Kirk, and defend its Rents, from Dilapidations and
Misapplications.

IV. To have yet a more Distinct view, of this pretended Right of Patronage,
especially as it has been practiced in this Church, these particulars, among
others, may be considered.

First, that the Right of Patronage, Imported a privilege to look out (as the
Apostles phrase it) Nominat and Elect, Acts 6: 3
the Person who should be Pastor, at such a Kirk. I say, to Elect, for all that
preceeds Trial and Admission, Is that which is properly called Election, as we
shall see in the sequel of this discourse.

V. Next it Imported a power, to make this nomination and Election, without
being tied or oblidged, to acquaint, or consult with either paroch or
Presbitry, or even (during prelacy) with the Bishops themselves, who were
Ordinars of the Diocy, in which the Kirklay. And even, though the Lord in his
providence, were offering the occasion of a Person more worthy, and better
qualified for the charge, yet the Patron might nominat, and present, the
Person, whom he at his pleasure had looked out, to the Presbitry or Prelates
when in power, And require them by Law, yea charge them under the pain of
Rebellion, (as the term is) To try and admit him, Vide parl: 1612. cap 1.
as Minister of that Kirk, if he were but found, in the least measure
Externally qualified, according to the letter of the Church Laws and Canons,
for the Office of a Pastor in general; without any reguard of his being fit and
proper for that particular People, or any other consideration: and that though
the whole Congregation concerned should expresry declare their dissent, from
the Patron's Nomination and Election, and had their eye upon another,
indisputably more worthy and proper for the place, and much more acceptable to
them.

VI. The right of Patronage, did also import the Privilege of giving the only
Legal Right and Title, to the Pastors maintenance, for serving the Cure at such
a Kirk; so that if a Minister lawfully Called and ordained, had entered to the
Kirk, and had proved never so laborious, faithful and successful, in the
discharge of his Duty; Yet unless his entry had been by the Patrons express
nomination and election, he might still claim and exerce a negative interest,
to stop and interrupt the Minister, in the peacable possession and enjoyment of
his maintenance, till he took and obtained a presentation from him; and that
the Patron was not oblidged to give him, but at his own pleasure, and on his
own conditions.

VII. Thirdly, the privileges of patronage, descended from those who were the
first Founders or Doters of a Kirk, or had otherwise right to the patronage,
from Father to Son, etc, according to the common Degrees of Blood, and Rules of
Succession, without the least distinction, whether the next Heir were capable
to manage such a Trust, and to make a right choice of pastors or not: yea, though
the next Heir were a Woman, whose Sex, and many Infirmities, both of Body and
Mind, debarr her (for the most part,) from any meddling in public Affairs, even
of a Secular and Temporal Concernment, and much more in Ecclesiastical matters,
in which the word of God expressly discharges her to be admitted to any voice:
yea, though the next Heirs should be more than one, as in the case of Heirs
portioners, in which, and many other cases, 1 Timothy 2.12. 1 Cor. 14.35.
where the patrons happened to be many, they were either to concur (at least
the major part of them) in the presentation, or otherwise they were to present
alternis vicibus, conform to the Canon Law. Transmittitur hoc jus ad Haeredes,
c. 1. de jure patronatus in 6.
nec interest an plures Patroni sint, sive unus; dummodo si plures sint, in
praesentando omnes, velcerte major eorum pars, in Eundem conveniant; ac possunt
patroni inter se pacisci, ut alternis vicibus singuli praesentent. This Right
being accounted, a part of a man's private Patrimony, which he enjoyed, and had
secured and conveyed to him, and his Heirs, in the same manner as he had the
rest of his Fortune and Estate.

VIII. Next, not only was this privilege Transmitted, to such as were the
Patrons nearest heirs, but also, those that were invested, in the present Right
of it, might and did, sell and make over the same, to whom soever they pleased,
in the same manner, as they might dispose, of any other thing, that fell within
the Compass of their Private Patrimony. And that without making any Distinction
betwixt the selling of the Right of Patronage, alone, and by it self (which the
Canonists themselves acknowledge to be grossly Simoniacal) and the selling of
the lands, to which the Patronage is annexed; in which case the Canonists
declare, it is Simony, to take any Addition of price, for the Lands, upon the
account of the Patronage annexed: which our Patrons did not in the least
notice. And the very Council of Trent it self prohibiteth such Sales, under the
pain of Excommunication, and forfeiture of the Right of Patronage, to be
incurred ipso facto. Council: Trident: sess: 25 decret de reform: cap: 9.
In this (to our shame it must be said) the Papists show more Conscience and
tenderness, than our own Laws, and the most of our Patrons do. They also
discover more tenderness, in respect of the persons capable to be invested with
the right of Patronage, when they maintain, that the patron loses his Right,
and the Kirk becomes free of the servitude, sipatronus sit haereticus: whereas
on the contrar our patrons, might and did sell their Rights, to any they
pleased, yea even to Papists, and such as were under the highest Church
censures.

IX. Farther, (as I have already hinted) all the Patronages, that before the
reformation, did belong to any Religious houses (as they are termed) or to the
Pope, as patron Supreme, Paramount and Universal, and all other Patronages, to
which, another person, could not instruct a sufficient right, were taken into
the Kings hands, as succeeding to, and coming in their places, and were by him
disposed upon, to whom he pleased, by rights under the Great Seal etc And the
truth is, this is a sort of succession. very suitable to the Kings other
pretenses of Supremacy, and Headship of the Church, which in effect make him a
new Pope, in a reformed Church, Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos, as if the
design of the Reformation had not been, to separate our selves from the unjust
and antichristian power, usurped over the Church, by the Popes; but merely, to
transfer it, from Italy and the Bishop of Rome, and lodge it, in the person of
the Prince, among ourselves. And hence it is clear, that though there be an
ordinar distinction of Kirks, into elective and pat^onate, which some urge for
a connivance at Patronage; yet with us, there remains not the least shadow, of
an elective Kirk, in the whole nation.

X. Seventhly the Canonists tell us, that the right of Patronage, was often
granted, to such as had not in the least been Benefactors to the Church, in the
Erection or doting of Kirks; And that per modum specialis privilegii, granted
be the Pope, solent enim pontifices, nonunnquam se aecretorum Dominos, ac
Conditores ostendere. That they may let the World see, they are the absolute
Masters, and unaccountable Arbiters, alse well as the Makers of the Canons.

XI. Eighthly, the Canonists also tell us, that the patron may commit and
Entrust, his power of presentation, to any other specially authorized for that
end. And thus we have frequently seen among our selves, the Factors and
Chamberlanes of Noblemen and others, act by virtue of such Commissions, in
these matters.

XII. And lastly, they also tell us, that such patrons, as are precisely past
seven years of age, and far more such as are within minority, may present by
themselves, without the advice or concurse of their Tutors and Curators, though
some of the Canonists do require, that Tutors and Curators do it in their Name.

SECT. III. The Opinion of our Reformers etc. concerning PATRONAGE.
I AS this corrupt custom of Patronage, spread over the Church in general, so
we find the Church of Scotland in particular, wanted not her share in the
common Calamity. And accordingly we find this pretended Privilege, zealously
witnessed against, by our worthy Reformers, who vigorously pressed, for the
removal of it. And we find also that other Foreign Churches, were sensible of
the bondage, the Church lay under, by these privileges. I cannot stay to
insert testimonies at large, the Reader may fully satisfy himself, in the
matter, if he will be at the pains to look over the first and second Books of
Discipline, I Book of Difciplia head. 4 2 Book of Discipline cap. 3. and 12.
Genesis assemb. 1562. sess, 3 Genesis assemb. 1586. sess. 5. Synod Dordracen
of this Church, the Acts of our general Assemblies, and the Acts of the Famous
Synod of Dort. As for the opinion of particular Divines though they have but very
little meddled with these Matters, yet when ever they touch them, they declare
them to be a very grievous and burdensome usurpation, as in some measure we may
have occasion to see, in the following part of this Discourse.

II. And truly no less could be expected from men of so much Piety and Zeal,
for the Glory of God, Conc. Triden. Sess. 25 decret. de Refor. cap. 9. sess.
14. decret. de Refor. cap. 12 and 13 and sess. 24. decret. de Reform cap. 18
Conc. Mogunt. cap. 68.
and the Interests of his Church, since even the most corrupt assembly that
ever met, I mean the Council of Trent, is forced to acknowledge, the great
prejudice, the Church sustains, by the Rights of Patronage, as is clear from
what is already hinted and from their other decrees, in the years 1551 and
1563. And before them the provincial Council at Mentz in Germany, in the year
1549, was very sensible of the injustice and oppression, of these Privileges:
as we may have occasion to mention hereafter.

III. But after the Shaking that these Rights of Patronage got, at our
Reformation from Popery, the alteration of that comely and orderly Church
Government, instituted by Jesus Christ, and which we received both with
Christianity it self, and in a special manner, with our first Reformation from
Antichristian darkness, and under which, so many abuses, both in Church and
State, were so happily taken away, and so much of the purity and plenty of
Gospel Ordinances, with a most wonderful Success established; The alteration. I
say, of this our Presbiterial Government, into Prelacy, gave this Corruption,
and many others new Root. For under prelacy a Government first and last
violently obtruded upon this Church, contrary to the inclinations of the
Nation, without any warrant from the word of God, or example either in pure
antiquity, or other reformed Churches abroad, for no other end, but to bear
down, the just and necessary Liberties of the Church, in the reproof of sin,
and in the Exercise of discipline, and to be subservient for carrying on, the
bad designs of a corrupt court party, for enslaving of both Church and State,
and constantly attended, with a most Visible and General defection, both in
Worship and Morals. Under this Prelacy it was, that this and many other
corruptions, and superstitions, were vigorously advanced and supported. The
Prelates leaving no means unessayed, to inhaunce all the Patronages they could
in their own hands, or in the hands of such, as would contribute their power
and interest, to promote the designs then on foot, for enslaving this Church
and Nation, under a yoke of Bondage and Superstition, and to keep out all such,
from any access to the Work of the Ministry, as were in the least suspected, of
a desire to cross these ill designs: so that at length, the Right of Patronage,
became so rooted and fixed, and so twisted and inter woven, with other secular
and civil interests, that it was expressly avowed and pleaded for, as a part of
a Man's private Patrimony, the Rights whereof he had settled and confirmed to
him and his heirs after him, as these of his other estate, by Charters under
the Seals etc. And might Lawfully sell and dispose of it, to whom he thought
fit, as well as the rest of his Fortune: And from which he could not be
excluded, without the highest injury and injustice.

IV. These Exorbitancies of patronage, already mentioned, with many others too
tedious to relate, (wherein our Patronages, are many times very different to
the worse, from these in the Canon Law) a man in reason would think, might be
sufficient without any farther enquiry or debate, to determine us against such
a Privilege. But since this (as well as other corruptions) is to this day, by
some persons, with so much heat and vehemence asserted, and defended, though the
justice of the public Authority of the Nation, in abolishing these privileges
was in the year 1649, and several years thereafter very cordially acquiesced
unto by the most of those, who had the largest share of them: I shall therefore
in the next place, according to the method proposed, with all the plainness and
brevity I can, enquite into, and examine the Grounds, which are, or may be
adduced, for a Foundation to the Rights of Patronage, which will yet farther
discover the injustice and unwarrantable burdensomness of this privilege.

V. I hope I need not advertise the Reader, that it is not my design to fix the
guilt of all the abuses, with which I charge this pretended Privilege, upon
all the Patrons in the Nation: I know many of them are, and have been, very
pious and worthy Persons, and have been honored, even in that capacity to do
the Church very good service, by looking out of honest and faithful Ministers,
in some times of defection. But after all I must in this distinguish, betwixt
the intentio Rei, and the intentio Personae, or betwixt the tendency of the
Institution it self, and the honesty of some Men, that have managed the same;
it being the Law of God, and the Principles of Justice and Reason, and not
men's Intentions, that specify their Actions to be good, or bad, as is very
evident (to instance no farther) in the case of Aaron's Golden Calf, and
Jeroboam's Calves at Dan and Bethel, which they intended for the true Worship
of the God of Israel; Exodus 32.45. Romans 1.23, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 10.7. Acts 7.41. 1
Kings 12.28. 2 Chronicles. 11.15.
and yet the Spirit of God tells us, it was for the Worship of Devils, (which
clearly overthrows all the Jesuitick quibbles, about a right intention) And I
must also say, that all the good that ever the Church had, or can have by the
Right of Patronage, can never countervail the trouble and damage it has
occasioned.

SECT. IV. The Ground and Argument for Patronage, from a Reservation by the
first Founders, Examined.
I. THe first, and main, if not the only Ground, that with any color of reason
can be urged, for a Foundation to the Rights of Patronage, is this; That it
seems most undutiful and unreasonable to deny that Privilege, to such as have
deserved so well of the Church, by building of Kirks, and bestowing of a
constant Maintenance, on such as should serve the Cure thereat, and which
privilege at the time of the grant, they expressly reserved to themselves, and
their heirs after them, and whereof they accordingly have been so long in
possession: and that, if this privilege be denied, it will prove a great
discouragement, for any to gratify the Church, with such favors, for the
future.

II. This being as I have said, the main ground, that can be urged in this
matter, I shall take the more pains distinctly to discuss it.

For answer then to the first part of the pretense, from the Reservation of
Patronage, by the first Founders, and Doters of Kirks and Benefices, These
things may be considered.

III. First, that if the Patrons will needs stand upon this pretense, of a
reservation, may we not on much better ground, retort, that the Patrons have
forfeited their rights, if they had any, by their not performing these
conditions, on which only (if we may believe the Canonists) the Pope, and other
Bishops, granted, and the patrons accepted, the rights of Patronage? viz That
the patron should be oblidged, to uphold and repair the Kirk, when it is like
to fall, or proves ruinous. 2. That he should be oblidged to rebuild it, if it
were burnt or shaken down by an Earthquake etc. 3. That he should be oblidged
to defend the benifice from being dilapidat or misapplyed, and that he should
take care, that on all occasions the Pastors were furnished, with a due
maintenance. And as it is sufficiently known, how unsutably the Patrons have
acted to all these obligations, so the burden of the most, if not the whole of
this charge, is by Law laid upon the heretors and People of the respective
paroches.

IV. Next, I shall but mention what I have formerly marked of the Patrons
forfeitur of their rights, by the sale of their Patronages, contrare to the
Prohibitions of the Canon Law and the Council of Trent it self.

V. The Patrons must not take it ill to be told that the pretense of a
reservation, unless it be produced, is but gratis dictum, and can never be
sustained, as being against the general presumption of liberty; whereas all
Servituds, such as Patronage is acknowledged to be, are never presumed, but
most be positively and evidently instructed. And therefore let them pretend
what they will. I must make bold to ask them, Quomodo constat that ever such a
Reservation was made; If they cannot produce somewhat else, beside their own
assertion, we must tell them, that de non existentibus, and de non apparentibus
idem est Judicium: a thing that is not at all, and a thing that appears not by
evident proof, are in the same case. And there is no right or claim can be
founded or sustained upon either of them.

VI Fourthly, it is very improbable, that at a time in which Ignorance did so
much abound, and that the most part of all Transactions and Conveyances, even
of the most important rights, were performed, without the Interposing of any
act or deed in Writting: use and wont, and a sort of moral honesty, being, the
best securities any man had; I say, it is very improbable, that at such a time,
the building and doting of Kirks, was managed in so good form, as to have any
written act or Instrument, either for the building or the doting, or for the
Reservation of the right of Patronage, upon that account. And consequently it
is highly improbable, that ever such Reservations can be instructed, or
produced. And it is most certain, that in these times when Kirks were first
built, and benefices settled, the Ignorance, or if you will the simplicity, both
of this, and many other Nations, was such, as we have described, and in some
places continues so to this day, as (to instance no farther) may be seen, in
some of the remot corners of Scotland, especially these of the northern
Islands, of Orknay and Zetland, where the Vdal Rights (as they term them) are
in use, and where Civility. Learning and good policy have not yet so far
prevailed, as to wear out that old custom, albeit it be worn out of most of the
other parts of the Land.

VII. Fifthly, as we have formerly observed, the Right of Patronage at first,
was rather an after-Game, that creept in clandestinly, and by stealth, upon the
Church, than the effect of any positive institution, or of any express
reservation, made at the time of the founding or doting of Kirks. And though
there may be some Kirks and benefices, that in latter times, have been built
and settled, since Learning and policy began to flourish in some greater measure
than formerly, whereof the first and original foundations, bear such a
reservation; yet as the number of such will be found to be very small, so these
can say nothing, for a ground to the Rights of Patronage, in general.

VIII. Sixthly it is undeniable, that the most part of Patronages are grounded
upon mere custom, and frequent acts of presentation, without the least
pretense, to any reservation of this nature; or they are founded on ancient
prescription past memory of man (and perhaps declaratory sentences may be
obtained thereon) as both our own Lawyers and the Council of Trent do
acknowledge: and thence that Council, Council: Trident sess: 25. decret. de
reform. cap 9.
does rationally enough conclude, that in many cases Jus patronatus plerumque
ex usurpatione quaesitum est, that is, that for the most part it is usurped
without any warrant. And upon the same ground perhaps it is, that one of the
most judicious of our own Lawyers, does so much insist upon ane express
reservation, Sir, T: Hope. 2.
as necessar to the Constitution of Patronage; though perhaps he may allow
presumptions of long possession, frequent Acts of presentation and Infestments
from the King, to be sufficient in foro Juridico, to infer that reservation,
and to sustain the right of Patronage, according to the course of our customs,
which in this case were founded upon the Canon Law, before the Reformation, and
were not antiquat by any public constitution long after that time.

IX. Seventhly, the Patrons shifting to old Characters and Impressions, upon
the Kirk walls, Bells, Chalices and other Utenciles, for probation of their
Rights, does clearly acknowledge, they can instruct no such Reservation.

X. Eighthly, the Canonists do grant, that the Right of Patronage was ordinarily
constitute otherways than by such Reservations, when they tell us, that the
Pope per modum privilegii, conferred this Right on whom he thought fit, though
they had never bestowed a Farthing upon the Church, as we have marked in the
beginning of this discourse.

XI. And lastly, the same Canonists do also acknowledge, that the Right of
Patronage, has been obtained many otherways, than by such reservations: for
though the founders had never claimed the Right of Patronage in their own time,
nor their Children after them; yet they tell us, that the founders posterity,
for some Generations after, might, and frequently did, obtain a grant of the
Right of Patronage, with the clause ex nunc, ut ex tunc etc. And it is little
to be doubted, but that in re antiqua such as this necessarly behoved to be,
the Pope and Roman Chancery were frequently influenced by the interest and
power of parties, and other By-considerations, to content themselves with very
slender proofs, either as to the persons who were the Founders, or as to the
Relation of those who claimed the Right, upon the account of their propinquity
to them, especially when no other person appeared to oppose their claim: and
it is very probable that ^ as in many other cases where Rights or sentences are
exped absente Reo, they might be satisfied with a naked alledgance, as to both
these points, without any farther, if there was but the least pretense of a
general Citation etc, to infer contumacy for not compearing.

SECT. V. A farther examination of this Reservation, from its own Nature, and
from the Nature of Pious and Charitable Deeds,
I. BUT not to insist any farther on these grounds, we may observe in the next
place, that such Reservations, though they were clearly Instructed in all
Patronages, and that other methods of constituting these Rights had not been
used; yet these Reservations cannot be here regarded. For as Lawyers tell us,
unlawful Conditions adjected to a grant of any thing are null and ineffectual;
and they deliver it as a rule that conditio illicita habetur pro non adjecta.
And therefore such a Reservation as this of the Right of Patronage, in the
foundation of a Kirk or Benefice, being in it self a Sinful and unlawful
condition, without any warrant from the word of God, contrare to the Churches
true Freedom and Interest, and inconsistent with, and destructive of these
Spiritual Liberties and Privileges conferred upon her, by Jesus Christ, her
only Head and Law giver (as we shall fully demonstrate in the sequel of this
discourse) it must be looked upon, as if it had never been made, not intended
either to be claimed or practiced. Et quod ab initio non valuit, tractu
temporis convalescere nequit. That which was void and null from the beginning,
can never be made effectual, by any tract or course of time, how long so ever.
So that ancient possession, can be no better Plea in this case, than it could
be for many other unquestionably unlawful and superstitious customs.

II. But in the next place, it may be observed, that who ever builds a Kirk, or
gives ground for thur^^se, or settles a maintenance on the the Incumbents he
does it either.

1. Per modum debiti, by way of debt or duty, or

2. He does it per modum Eleemosynae, That is by way of Alms or free Charity.
or

3. He does it, partly per modum debiti and partly per modum Eleemosynae,
partly the one way, and partly the other or,

4. Which is worse, he does it from a Pharisaical principle of Vain glory, and
to be seen of Men. or,

5. Which is worst of all, he does it out of an Opinion of Merit, thinking that
he can thereby deserve Life and Happiness at the Hands of God.

III. To apply this distinction to our present purpose, let us consider.

1. These who has conferred such good offices on the Church, as the building or
doting of Kirks, per modum debiti, are such as are Heretors or Proprietars of
the whole Lands and Rents, within that bounds, in which the Kirk is situat, and
for the benefit and convenience of the Inhabitants whereof. The Kirk is built,
or the Benefice settled. And this sort of Benefactors do no more in this, but
what by the Light of Nature, and Law of Nations, and much more, by the Revealed
Will and Law of God, and the Municipal Laws and Customs, of the Christian state
in which they live, they are oblidged, and might be legally compelled to do.

IV. For as it is a Principle acknowledged all the World over, that all
reasonable Creatures, and much more Christians ought not only privately and in
secret, by themselves and in their Families, but also, jointly, solemnly and in
public, to worship and adore, that Almighty God, who is the first fountain and
author, and the Sovereign Lord and Arbiter, of their lives and beings, and
their Sole and only Savior from the guilt and punishment of Sin: and on whom
they must necessarly depend for every minutes preservation, and for all their
Temporal Happiness here, and Eternal Happiness hereafter: so in consequence of
this Natural and moral duty, they are also oblidged to have Temples, or large
and convenient Meeting places (as the word signifies Templum quasi tectum
amplum) for that end, where they may be covered and sheltered from the injuries
of the weather, in going about these duties. As also in consequence of the same
duty, They are likewise oblidged, to settle a suitable maintenance, on such as
are sequest rate and set a part from all other Employments, to attend this
Worship and Service, and to instruct their People in the Mysteries of Religion.
Quando enim aliquid conceditur, id etiam concedi videtur, sine quo concessum
subsistere non potest.

And accordingly we find the practice of all Nations, in all ages, how
barbarous so ever has been suitable hereunto.

V. And therefore this being a Natural and acknowledged duty, the burden of it
must necessarly be charged upon such as have the only interest and property in
the Lands and Rents, within that bounds: so that we may safely conclude, that
such Benefactors as these, are so far from deserving such a Privilege over the
Church, and her Liberties thereby, that (as our Blessed Savior says) when they
have done all that is Commanded them to do, Luke. 17.
they must acknowledge themselves, to be unprofitable Servants, and that they
have done nothing but what was their duty

VI Next, such Heretors and Proprietars, though the whole charge does Naturally
ly upon them, yet they have always the concurrence, of the rest of the
Inhabitants of the bounds (though these have no interest of property in the
Lands) And thereby a Proportional and perhaps a greater releife of the burden:
So that such Benefactors do not in that case so much as their duty oblidges
them to do, and therefore they do still less deserve such a privilege

VII. Lastly we do not find that any of the People or Princes of Israel such as
David, Solomon etc; for all the vast expense of treasure, they laid out, upon
the building and repairing of the Temple at Jerusalem once and again, or upon
the many Synagogues, that were spread up and down the Land, some whereof were
built, at the private charge of single persons, Luke 7th.
And those Strangers and Foraigners too, who were under no obligation, by being
born within the Land so to do; I say, we do not find, that any of those Princes
or people, for all the vast expense they were at, did ever lay claim to the
least shadow, of such a privilege, in reference to the Call and Maintenance
of the Officers of the Chnrch

VIII. And under the new Testament, we find as little mention of such a
privilege; for all the large possessions and donatives that were bestowed by
the faithful, upon pious uses, Acts 4.32: to the end 2 Cor: 8: Philip: 4: Romans
15.1. Cor: 4. Gal: 6.
were given freely and frankly, without reserve. The practice of Ananias and
Saphira, and of Simon Magus, do indeed look another way; But sure I am, neither
their actions nor approbation, will incline any man that is not altogether
deserted of God, to an imitation of their example. The native use we are to
make of these Beacons, so early set up in the Christian Church, is to Caution
us from Steiring near these rocks, on which they Split.

IX. The second sort of Benefactors mentioned, viz those who confer favors on
the Church, per modum Eleemosynae, or by way of pure alms and free Charity,
are such persons as having no civil interest or estate within the bounds, do
build a Kirk, or dote the same with a maintenance more or less, merely from a
principle of Compassion to the people, who dwell therein, and perhaps ly at a
great distance, or otherwise inconveniently, for other meeting places of
public worship; with a single heart for advancing the Glory of God, and for
promoting the spiritual interest and welfare of the Souls of his people. These
though they be the only persons, that can be said to confer real favor on the
Church, and to do true acts of Charity, and so may seem to have a much fairer
pretense to claim the Right of patronage, than any of the other Benefactors, I
mean the first Donors themselves (for as to heirs and successors, they are
terms very unsuitable in this affair, as I have already hinted, and shall yet
farther clear) yet withal, we must still conclude, that even those can be
allowed no such privilege.

X. First, because the design and nature of such good deeds, can never be
constructed so, as to deprive the Church of her freedom of Election, which she
enjoyed before such a grant: For this would truly bring those Benefactors
under the guilt of a design of Robbery, which is absolutely inconsistent with,
and destructive of the nature and design of Charity.

XI. For if such favors be really conferred on the Church per modum purae
Eleemosynae, or by way of pure Charity, there can be nothing more unsuitable, to
the nature or design of almsgiving, or more destructive of it than either to
assume, or expect, a recompense of gain, applause or any other temporal reward;
and much less can such an enslaving privilege, as this of Patronage be
expected: For alms as alms, look for no recompense or reward, from those on
whom they are bestowed, Job 31.16 to 24 Job: 29.13. proverbs 19: 7. mat: 6
save that of a blessing from the Lord, to whom Gifts of that nature are said
to be lent, and who has engaged to repay them accordingly. And the ordinar
reddendo of pia animarum suffragia, from those who receive the Alms, cannot be
otherways understood, in any sound sense. Thus Job glories, that the Blessing
of him that was ready to perish, came upon him: And surely, he that takes or
expects any other return has his reward (as our Savior says) and can expect
no other. So that he who by such good Deeds, expects to obtain either a Jus
Vtile, or a Jus Honorificum, especially that part of it, which is so
prejudicial to the Church, viz. the Patron's negative Interests, in the
Election and Maintenance of the Ministry, seems to say as much as that he
neither is that cheerful and liberal Giver, whom the Lord loves: nor that he
looks upon God, who has promised to pay and requite him, to be a sufficient
Play Master, and therefore that he will betake himself to a recompense, by this
unsuitable reserve.

XII. Secondly, That which is once given away, and consecrate to the Lord for
pious Uses, is no more his that gave it, as is clear from the case of Ananias
and Saphira, Acts 5.
and therefore no man can expect to retain any private Interest in it. It is
elegantly said by Emanuel Comnenus the Emperor, Novel 1. de execus. Test.
Christum haereden scribere quis videtur, cum pauper ibus substantias suas
dividi praecipit: cum enim Mendicans accipit Christus astat, ac una cum illo
manu^ porrigit: Quatenus namque inquit uni ex minim^^ hisce meis fratribus
fecistis, mihi fecistis, etc. That is a man seems to design Jesus Christ for
his Heir, when he ordains his goods to be distribute to the poor, for when a
beggar receives Alms, Christ himself stands by, and stretches forth his own
hand with him, for in as much (says he) as you did it to the least of my
Brethren, you did it to me, etc.

XIII. But to clear this yet farther, it may be observed, that any Right a
Patron can pretend to give a Pastor, to his maintenance, is quoad the Pastor,
but a groundless pretense, and so a super vacaneous and useless grant, the
Pastors Right to his maintenance, being fully established in his person, by his
lawful Call to the Ministry, and his faithful discharge of it: So that unless
the Patron will pretend, that he can put a Minister in a spiritual capacity,
and so claim the power of Ordination, (which is indeed Christ's Power committed
to his Ministers) as well as that of Election, he can give him no right to his
maintenance, but such as will be superfluous: For as abundantia non vitiat, so
neither does it strengthen or confirm a right: And though what the Patron gives,
should be granted to be a confirmation, yet it can give no new right,
(confirmatio enim nihil novi juris addit, sed antiquum jus tantum roborat) it
being the Pastors spiritual capacity, Mat. 10.10. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.18.
and faithful discharge of his duty, and that only, which gives him a full and
unquestionable Title to his Wages.

XIV. Next it may be observed very Naturally, that if what a man has once
given away and devoted to the Lord, for pious uses, be no more his that gave
it, then certainly the founder of a benefice, cannot expect to retain to
himself, and much less to his heirs and successors, a negative Interest in the
maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, with so little use and advantage,
and so much prejudice, to the Church. And therefore though such Acts of Favor
and Charity, as are freely and gratuitously bestowed on the Church, seem to
plead more for the Rights of Patronage, than such as are done, per modum
debiti, or for satisfyng of a Moral duty, and obligation, to which the Donor or
Founder was previously engaged; yet there is none who perform such Acts, out of
the singleness of their Heart, and from a true principle of advancing the Glory
of God, and a sincere motive of Compassion, to their poor Brethren, that will
sciens volens, wittingly and willingly, desire or expect a Privilege, so
useless and yet so hurtful to the interest of the Church, and the good of
Souls. This were indeed a Fly in the Appothecaries Ointment.

XV. The third sort of Benefactors, to wit, those who confer Favors on the
Church, partly per modum debiti, and partly per modum Eleemosynae, partly by
way of debt, and partly by way of alms, and free Charity, are such persons as
have some civil interest and estate, within the bounds where the Kirk lies, but
not the whole. And therefore their building or doting of a Kirk, is neither
wholly Duty, nor wholly Charity, but part of both. They being indeed previously
oblidged thereto, but are not oblidged to do it alone, and without the
Concurrence of the rest of that bounds, for bearing their share of the common
Burden; seeing he that so dots or builds is but one of many having interest. And
those Benefactors can as little as the former, expect to be gratified with the
Privilege of Patronage, for the Reasons already mentioned. For if neither he
who acts in such matters wholly per modum debiti, nor he who acts wholly and
entirely per modum Eleemosynae, can with any reason assume or expect such a
privilege; Then also by a necessary consequence, he who Acts in bestowing such
favors on the Church, partly the one way, and partly the other, has as
little, if not less ground than either of them, to expect or assume the same.

XVI. There is a fourth sort of Benefactors (if they deserve the Name) and
those are such, as do their good deeds, merely out of ostentation, and from a
Pharisaical principle of Vain glory, and to be seen of Men, to gain the
applause of the World, and not to advance the Glory of God, or the good of his
Church. And for the most part those Men bestow their Favors, where there is
little or no need, seldom or never consulting, how, or where, they may place
them, with most advantage for the public good, but satisfy themselves, if
they can place them in such a way, as they may bear most bulk in the eyes of
the World. This is a truth so undeniable that it was certainly from this
vanity, that the Monastries, Nunneries, Abbacies, Pryories, Cloisters, etc.
both in this and other Nations, before the Reformation from Popery; and in
other Popish Countries to this day, were endowed with so many rich livings,
that in some places they possessed near, or above a third of the whole Land, in
others near a full half, as the devotion (as it was then termed) or rather the
superstitious folly, of a simple and ignorant People, and the influence and
interest of a cheating and idle Clergy, inclined them. Thus many Churchmen
turned in effect to be Temporal Princes: And generally the interest of the
Clergy in the Legislative Power, and Exercise of the Government of these
Nations, became very large upon the account of the great Interest and Authority
they enjoyed, by such ample Revenues and Possessions, which was the true
Original, of making the Clergy the third Estate in the Conventions and General
Councils of State, both in these Lands, and else where. But those Benefactors,
if they may be so named, are so fully exposed by our Blessed Lord, in that 6.
of Matthew. and elsewhere, Matthew. 6.
that it will be needless to insist any farther upon them. And certainly this
sort of men less than any of the former, deserve any trust or privilege in the
Church of God; Their vanity and self-seeking, which is the principal, or rather
the only Motive and Design of all their Actions deserves much rather the
Censures of the Church, than any encouragment, by trusting them with a power,
that they are utterly incapable to manage with any measure of Wisdom or
Discretion, which are Qualities that men of such a vain and ostentive humor,
are seldom or never blessed with.

XVII. As for the last sort of Benefactors, To wit, such as from an opinion of
Merit, confer such good Offices on the Church, thinking thereby to deserve life
and happiness at the hands of God, and going about to establish their own
righteousness by the works of the Law; it is little wonder that such men, who
do so highly injure and rob our blessed Lord and only Savior, of the honor of
that complete ransom and satisfaction, paid by him to divine Justice, for the
sins of his elect, as to think that they can merit eternal felicity by their
own works, which is to say in effect, that they will be their own Saviors, and
that Christ died in vain; I say it is but little wonder that such men should
expect to be gratified, with a power to encroach upon the rights of the Church,
and to rob the members of Christ, of their spiritual liberties and privileges,
as well as they have robbed the Glorious head of his due honor. But sure I am,
there is no sincere Christian in the Church of God, but will think a privilege
of this nature, worse bestowed upon those, than upon the worst of the former
sort of Benefactors, And therefore I shall say no farther as to them,

XVIII. Last of all, as this pretense of a Reservation, is of no weight in
favors of the first Founders or Donors themselves, whether they confer such
good offices gratuitously or otherways, to give them the acclaimed rights of
Patronage, in Retribution and recompense; so it has much less force, to
continue the same in favors of their heirs, or others who succeed them on a
singular title of Donation, Sale, Permutation, etc. For as those may be very
far from being endowed, with the merits and qualifications, of the first Donor;
so for the most part, they are so far from tracing his footsteps, and example,
by gratifying the Church, that with all their hearts, they would be content, if
it were in their power, to void and nullify, their Predecessors deeds. And as
in civil offices, it is, or ought to be, the merits or qualifications, of the
Office bearer himself, that is respected in giving him the trust, nam in
officiis Personae industria respicitur, which also is the main reason, why
regularly, a Judge or Magistrate, transmits not his office to his Heirs after
him, nor substitutes another in his place: So much less in Ecclesiastical
offices (such as the Canonists pretend the power of Patronage to be) and trusts
that concern the Spiritual interests of the Kingdom of Christ, and the good of
Souls, ought the same to descend to heirs or others acquiring right upon a
singular title.

SECT. VI. The Reservation pretended can be no ground, for the Jus Utile of
Patronage.
I. AS to what may be alleged from this pretended Reservation, for founding of
the Jus Vtile of Patronage, or rather the utilitas hujus Juris, whereby the
Canonists pretend, that if the Patron or his Children become poor, so as they
cannot live another way, they must be alimented out of the Rents of the
Benefice, as some sort of a Retribution, for their having gratifyed the Church,
when they were in power, though this may be sufficiently cleared by application
of the Grounds already mentioned, yet I shall desire the Reader farther to
consider these things.

II. First, that if this Jus utile, be a right to which the Patron will needs
pretend a valid and legal Title, so as he may pursue for it, by an ordinar
action at Law, before the civil Magistrate, as he may do for other interests,
that fall within his private patrimony, I do not see, how any such right can be
allowed: For that which is once consecrat, and devoted to God for pious uses,
is no more his that gave it, as we have cleared from the fore cited instance of
Ananias and Saphira etc. And therefore no man can retain any private interest in
it.

III. Next, if the Patron or his Children be really in necessity, and restrict
the right pretended to a claim in point of Charity, I think no man will deny,
but there lies an obligation upon the Church, to extend their Charity to them,
in giving them a portion of these goods that belong to the poor, as far as she
can, without prejudging of others, who may deserve her Charity, as well, and
perhaps better, though on a different account. But in such a case this Claim must
not be allowed so far, as to exhaust what was given at first; for this were
indeed to drain the fountain of Charity; which would be a misericordia crudelis
(so to speak) an unjust and cruel mercy. It is a general rule in the disposal
of Charity, to do good to all men in need, Galat: 6: 10:
but still with a preference in, favors of such as are of the household of
Faith: one part of duty, must not shoulder out an other, Christian prudence
must be adhibit as much in this, as in other matters. And as the Canonists them
selves do grant, that the Patron is not to be alimented, except when he is
truly in necessity; so many of them acknowledge, that even then he is only to
be entertained out of such goods as are destinate for the use of the poor, and
so as his part of Charity do not prejudge others. Patronus non est alendus,
niside residuis duntaxat quae alias sunt pauperum.

IV. Lastly, this is a right so personal to the Patron himself and his family,
that it can never be bought and sold, or be transmitted to others, who acquire
right upon a singular Title: And so many of the Canonists determine this Jus
utile, to be a right merely personal, et adeo Iuhaerens ossibus Patroni, ut in
alium transferri nequeat: for otherwise the Church upon this account, might be
oblidged many times, to aliment both the Patron himself, and those who acquire
right from him, if both should happen to fall poor at the same time.

SECT. VII. The denial of Patronage can be no discouragement in gratifying of
the Church: something obiter of the Dilapidation of the Church's Patrimony.
I. AS to the latter part of the Ground proposed, for a Foundation to the
Rights of Patronage, to wit, that the denial of the Privileges acclaimed, will
prove discouraging for any to gratify the Church for the future, though by what
is already said, it be sufficiently answered, yet I shall add,

First, That it is most certain, that such as look for no higher reward and
encouragment, than what a Privilege within time can give them, and set not
their Hearts on the promises of God, for the reward of a more enduring
Substance, than what a present World can furnish them with, will never be
capable to perform the least Act of pure and cleanly Charity, which those only
who betake themselves to the true grounds of encouragment, in the promises and
word of God, and are free of low and selfish ends, can practice.

II. Next, the assuming of such a privilege as this, over the Church, will be
so far from being an encouragment, that upon a serious and considerat
Reflection, we shall find, that as such an usurpation does highly injure the
interests of the Church; so it will much more endamage those that are guilty of
it. by making a Forfeiture of the rewards that the Lord has promised to true
Acts of Love and Charity, flowing from sincere principles and motives, and for
single and honest ends: and may provock the divine Justice, to pour out his
wrath upon them, and their families, for keeping up humane inventions in the
matters of God, so prejudicial to the true privileges and interests of his
Church. But this we shall have occasion to clear farther, in the progress of
this discourse.

III. Next, if these be the only terms and conditions, on which men will
gratify the Church, that she subject her self and her spiritual Liberties, to
such a yoke of Slavery, as this Privilege imports, I am sure the Church will
be better without such Favors, than with them.

IV. If there were once a reasonable competency settled upon the Church, for
the maintenance of her Pastors, and other pious and necessary uses, or if what
was once settled, and sacrilegiously taken from her, were again restored, and
that faithfully administrat without dilapidation, and misapplication; there
would be but little need of encouragement, for any farther additions. It has
been observed in all Ages, That excess in this matter, has been more fatal to
the true interests of the Church, than any defect could be. Too much tends to
introduce a depravation of Life and Manners in Churchmen, and by a necessar
connection, also a Corruption in Worship and Doctrine: If Wordly riches, had
been proper for advancing the work of the Gospel, our Lord Jesus Christ, who
was Lord of all, had never been so scant in his allowance to his Disciples and
Apostles. It is an old observation, that when the Church had but Lignei
calices, she had aurei Episcopi, and when she got golden chalices, she got
wooden Bishops or Pastors. The sense is easily understood, though it be not
exactly literal. So true it is that Religio peper it divitias, and Filia Matrem
devoravit. Religion brought forth Riches and the daughter devoured the Mother.

V. Lastly, to say that the denial of the privileges of Patronage, is the
cause of this discouragement, Is but the Fallacia non causae pro causa; for the
truth is, that which is the only cause of Peoples discouragement, in the
bestowing of their goods for pious uses, is the scandalous and sacrilegious
mismanagment, of the uncontraverted Patrimony of the Church, by misapplying it
contrary to its design and nature, of which there are no sort of Men under
Heaven, so guilty, as many of the Patrons are. The Lord himself tells his
Servant Moses, no devouted thing, that a man shall devout unto the Lord of all
that he has both of Man and Beast, Levit. 27 28.
and of the field of his possession, shall be sold and redeemed, (and much less
sacrilegiously robbed) every devouted thing is most holy unto the Lord. Deo
dicata (says Amandus Polanus) Ei Sacra maneant, Polanus in Danel. cap. 1. v. 2.
nam si Is zelus in Rege idololatrico (scilicet Nebuchadnezare) fuit, ut
censuerit vasa Deo Israelis Sancta; non alio quam in sui Dei, seu potius Idoli
fanum, infereuda, multo magis Christiani Magistratus, bona illa quae tempore
Papatus Deo dicata fuerunt, usibus Ecclesiae relinquere debent: Imo quanto
magis Episcopos id facere decet. i. e. That which is once devouted to God,
ought to remain Holy to him, for if the zeal of an Idolatrous Prince, (to wit
Nebuchadnezar) oblidged him to believe that the Holy Vessels of the God of
Israel, were not to be otherways disposed of, but for the service of his own
God, or rather his Idols temple, much more ought a Christian Magistrate, to
leave these goods for the use of the Church, which in the time of Popery were
consecrat for pious uses, etc. see and compare this with Ezra, 1.7.8, where all
these Vessels are returned to their right and proper use.

Our own Rollock, inveighs very sharply, against the sacrilege of this Nation,
in his time, in misapplying to the use of private Persons, what was taken from
the Popish Church, and cites such as are guilty, to answer it, before the
Tribunal of the Sovereign and Impartial Judge of all the Earth: Rollock in Dan.
and he tells them that though they slight and neglect his warning, it shall be a
standing witness against them, to render them Inexcusable etc. And our famous
and worthy Reformer Mr. Knox, (whose testimony I value above a thousand others)
In a letter dated, in August, 1571. direct to the general Assembly at Stirling,
speaks his mind very freely on this subject, with all the earnestness and
sincerity of a Person, that was looking very shortly to step over the Threshold
of time, into Eternity. Take his own words, Because (says he) the daily decay
of my Natural strength, threatens me with a sudden departure, from this valley
of misery, therefore of Love and Conscience I exhort you, yea in the fear of
God, I Charge and Command you, that you take heed to your selves and to the
flock of God -- And that with the like uprightness, and strength in God, ye
gainstand the merciless Devourers, of the Patrimony of the Church. If Men will
spoil, let them do it to their own Peril and condemnation. But communicate ye
not with their Sins, of whatsoever state they be, neither by consent, nor by
silence, but with public protestation, make known to the World, that ye are
innocent of such robbery, which will er'e it be long, provock God's vengence on
the Committers of it etc* And I am sure the experience of many Families in
Scotland may confirm this. Religione mutata says a learned Lawyer) and sic
statu priori inverso, Finkel hoc.t.
Patronus curabit ut bona Ecclesiae, and piis usibus legata, non tantum
preserventur, and augeantur, sed ad usum alium aeque pium, convertantur: puta
ad cultum alium divinum, ad salutem Rei publicae, ad conservandum Ministerium,
ad sum Scholarum, pauperes juvandos, Nosocomia condenda etc. i. e. When there
is an alteration of Religion, and by consequence an inversion of the former
state of Affairs, a Patron ought to take care, that the goods of the Church,
and what is left for pious uses, be not only preserved and augmented, but that
they be applied to other as pious uses: as for the worship of God in a lawful
manner, for the safety of the Common wealth, for the maintaining of the
Ministry, for the use of Schools, the help of the poor, the building of
Hospitals. etc.

VI. I might add the joint Testimony of our own Church, in her Books of
Discipline etc. and many other things. But this being a head that I have but
accidentally fallen upon, and a Subject that would lead me out a great length
and much farther than the design of this discourse will allow, I shall leave
it. Such as desire farther information, may find enough, and too much, to
satisfy their curiosity, in the public records of the Nation. They may also
consult the learned Sir Henry Spelman's tractat de non temerandis Ecclesits,
and his larger work of Teiths. They may also see D. Forbes's gemitus Ecclesiae.

SECT. VIII. The Ground of Patronage, from a Grant or Concession of the Church,
examined.
I. THe next ground that is urged, for a foundation to the rights of Patronage,
is, that the Patrons of Kirks and Benefices, enjoy the privilege acclaimed, in
reference to the Call and Maintenance of the Ministry, by a grant and
concession from the Church, and that consequently, it is a Lawful institution
and no usurpation, volenti enim non fit injuria. In explication of the meaning
of this grant and concession, some take one course and some another. For some
by this grant do understand, that the Church has alienat and transferred her
right of Election, and divested her self of it, in favors of the Patrons.
Other again do understand by this concession, that the Patron acts by virtue of
a Commission from, and as Empowered by the Church, without founding on any
higher ground of Property, in the privilege, by virtue of ane alienation of
the right of Election made by the Church to him. I shall examine this concession
distinctly in both senses, the first in this, and the other in the next Section.

II. Before we pass any farther, it may be observed, that this ground adduced
for a foundation of the right of Patronage does, evidently acknowledge, that
the right and privilege acclaimed, is primarly and originally, a Church power,
which were enough without any farther to take off this pretense.

III. But to come particularly to the first sense, in which this pretended
Concession may be understood, viz. that the Church has a lienat her right of
Election, and divested her self of it, in the Patrons favors, it is to be
considered,

First, that the Church is utterly incapable to alienat or transfer her
Spiritual rights, and privileges, or to divest her self of them: these are
interests that are not at her desposal, she being only entrusted by Jesus
Christ her sole King and Lawgiver, with the custody and administration of them,
for the good and edification, of the present and succeeding generations. These
rights are founded upon a higher Title, than that they can be altered and
transmitted from hand to hand, by pactions or promises betwixt man and man. In
such cases the Church can do nothing against the truth, she is not therein sui
juris, 1 Cor. 6, 20, and 7; 23.
ye are not your own, (says the Apostle,) ye are bought with a price, be not ye
the servants of men, do not enslave your selves, by losing your Rights and
Liberties. The Church can no more make over her Spiritual Rights and
Privileges, or subject herself to st^^^ge Lords and new Lawgivers therein,
than a woman can make over the right of her Body, which only belongs to her
Lawful Husband, or an Innocent person, the right of his life, to a Murderer,
nemoest Dominus suae vitae aut suorum membrorum, or than a Prince, the rights
of his Crown and Kingdom, and the liberties of his People to a foraign power,
or a person in Nonage, the right of his estate (as the Apostle expressly tells
us, That the heir differs nothing here from a servant:) or in a word, then the
Administrators, and Governors of a City and Community, can Alienat the Rights
of their Constituents. All these and many other acts of the like nature, as to
the translation of property are but frustraneous and ineffectual endeavors,
like a man's attempt to raise a weight that is without, and above the compass
of his natural strength, Grave saxum Sysyphon urget.

IV. And though de facto, such attempts may often be made, yet de jure, they are
void and without effect. And let the conveyance be expressed under what terms,
and carried under what cover or disguise you will, the right stands still
Immovable, and remains where it was at first, nemo potest nisi quod de Jure
potest, we can do nothing against the truth but for the truth.

V. It is our Lord Jesus Christ and he alone (who is the Church's only Head and
Lawgiver) that has power, to settle the rights and privileges of his Church,
in such hands and such order, as his infinite love and wisdom thinks fit. All
the right and power the Church has in these, is only a naked Trust, to keep
and manage them, according to the appointment, and instructions of her Lord and
Master. And when she exceeds that, she debords and goes beyond her Commission,
so that all the transmission she can make, is but Jus a non habente potestatem,
like a grant of the property of an estate, by a person, that has no other
right to it, but a naked commission to uplift and collect the rents, for the
use of the true Proprietar: And therefore the Church without her Lord and
Head's consent, can alienate or divest her self, of none of her rights and
privileges, that have been purchased to her, at no less rate then the precious
Blood of the eternal Son of God. And as there is not the least ground to
pretend, that ever Jesus Christ, has given such a consent; so there is far
less ground to expect, that ever he will give it now, after he has sealed his
last will and testament, in all things that concern the Kingdom of God, by his
own death: and has declared, that he will have it stand firm and unalterable,
by men or Angels, till he come again. The Church can no more divest her self of
the right she has to elect her own Office-bearers, than she can transfert the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of Christ, to which that liberty is annexed. And
happy is it for the Church and Saints of God, that their stock and Inheritance,
is not in their own hand, and at their own disposal. math: 6.13.20 luk: 12: 33.
It is far better secured, their treasure is lodged, where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, nor theives break through and steal.

VI. And as our Lord Jesus Christ, has the only right of property and power of
disposal of the Church's rights and privileges, so he is the only just and
true Proprietar of her rents and patrimony: and when an office vaiks, the rents
return to the Church her self, as Proprietar under Christ, to be disposed of
for other pious uses. And therefore if the ancient Canons have not only
discharged the alienation of the Church's goods or temporal patrimony, but has
expressly declared all contracts relative to such alienations utterly void and
null, and have declared that the goods so alienat are still the Church's own,
Council: ancyrom. can. 15 etc.
notwithstanding of such Bargains and Transactions; how much more must the
Church be incapable, to alienat or divest her self, of these Spiritual Rights
and Privileges, conferred upon her by her Head and King, and by him purchased,
at no less Rate, than the price of his own most precious blood.

VII. And as de jure, The Church cannot make any such alienation of her Rights
and Liberties, so it is positively denied, that ever she has de facto made the
same. But on the contrare, it is most evident, that like the betrothed, deuteronomy.
22: 25.
and yet ravished Damsel under the Law, she cries and groans to the Lord, under
the burden of such an unjust force, and grievous usurpation, as this pretended
privilege of Patronage is, and shall be demonstrat to be.

SECT. IX. A farther Examination of this pretended Concession.
I. THe second sense, in which this pretended Grant, or Concession of the
Church, as to the Right of Patronage, may be understood, is, that the patron
acts by virtue of a Commission from, and as Empowered, by the Church: without
founding upon a right of property, in the power of Election, by virtue of an
Alienation of it, made by the Church. As to which, these things may be
considered.

II. First, that in this sense also, the asserters of this concession, do
clearly acknowledge, that the patron acts not, in reference to the Call and
Maintenance of the Ministry, Jure proprio, and by an intrinsic power, but by a
power derived from the Church, and that therefore, it is the Church and not he,
that has the proper and original right, to meddle in these matters. And
consequently that the fountain, of the patron's power, is no civil, but a
Spiritual and Ecclesiastic right. And the true and natural consequence of all,
is, that therefore the Patron ought to follow the Church's inclinations, and
not his own, in the management and administration of this power; and ought not
to tie and oblidge the Church to follow his will and pleasure in it. And next
it follows as natively, that since the power, by which the Patron acts, is
acknowledged to be a Spiritual, and Ecclesiastic power, therefore he cannot
without the grossest Symony, fell and make Merchandice of it, as he may do of
other things, that fall within the compass of his private Patrimony.

III. In the next place, it is to be considered, that the Church has as little
warrant, to bestow such constant, general, perpetual, and unaccountable
Commissions (especially upon such as are none of the ordinar Officer-bearers of
the Church) in reference to the Election and Maintenance of a Gospel Ministry,
as she has to alienat, and divest herself, of the Rights and privileges she
has, to act therein. For both these methods of conveyance, do upon the matter,
differ only in degree, which does not change the Kind or Species, but only the
gradus ejusdem speciei: or to speak more properly, they are truly one and the
same, under different terms. For in effect, a Man may ex natura rei, as fully
and effectually alienate, and divest himself of his estate, under the terms and
disguise, of a perpetual lease or tack, or under the terms of a constant and
unaccountable Commission, as he can do by the most formal Right, under the name
and terms, of a full and absolute Sale and Alienation. There being nothing more
clear than that in both cases, the same design of transmitting the property,
and of divesting the first owner, Is made equally effectual in different
Notions and Terms.

IV. But thirdly, if by a power derived from the Church, and by acting in her
name, the Patrons understand an acting in the Nature of an ordinar Mandatar and
Commissioner, they must give up the cause. For 1. In this case, the Patron must
be content (as all Mandatars must) to subject himself to give an account to the
Church as his Constituent, how he behaves himself in that trust.

V. Next, he must likewise be content to submit to what censures, the Church
shall think fit to impose upon him, in case he be found to malverss.

VI. Again, he must be content to follow the Instructions of the Church in his
actings, and must not pretend to Oblidge the Church, to what he thinks fit, in
the management of that Trust.

VII. Fourthly, the Patron must likewise be content, to quit, and lay down his
Commission, and to give it up, into the hands of the Church, when ever she shall
think fit to reassume the power into her own hand, and to manage it by her
self, without the assistance of such a Deputy.

VIII. He must also be content to let this Power and Trust expire with himself,
and so exclude his Heirs, and much more such as acquire Right from him, titulo
singulari, from any interest in it.

IX. And lastly, he must pass from the very Name, and Title of Patron, seeing
that (as has been formerly observed) still implies a Superiority in the
Patron, and a Subordination or rather a Subjection and Slavery, upon the
Church, over which the Power is claimed and exercised, which is a thing
absolutely inconsistent with the nature of a Mandat or Commission. For that on
the contrare does clearly imply, an Inferiority and Subordination of the Person
Entrusted, to those from whom he receives his Commission. And therefore we may
confidently conclude, that if the Asserters of Patronage, can find no better
foundation, than this, to ground it upon, the least breath will be able to
overturn it.

X. And as in the former sense, of this pretended Concession, so in this also,
It is positively denied, that ever the Church has granted such a Commission.
And the Patrons will find themselves equally straightened to prove, that ever the
Church gave such a general and perpetual Commission, as they will be to prove,
that ever she made an Absolute alienation of her Rights. It is as certain that
she has never made any such conveyance, as it is evidently unreasonable, that
she should make such a Grant, in either of the senses pretended.

SECT. X. Another ground adduced for the foundation of Patronage from the
Necessity of the Jus Onerosum, examined.
I. THe Jus Onerosum ascribed by the Canonists, to Patrons, is adduced as a
ground, to found both that and the other Rights of Patronage upon. For seeing it
is very necessar, that some persons of credit and interest, should be entrusted
with a power to oversee and take care, that Ecclesiastical Benefices and
Livings, be not dilapidate and misapplyed, but that the rents and profits of
them be rightly employed for their proper uses; it may be presumed there can no
man be found so fit, and qualified, for such a charge, or who will more
narrowly, zealously and carefully, notice the matter, than such as have been so
piously inclined, as to bestow a Maintenance and Living upon the Pastors of the
Church: especially if the Pastors be such as are Nominat and Elected by
themselves: every Man being Naturally very careful, to defend and preserve,
that which in a manner is the work of his own hands.

II. Though this ground may be sufficiently taken off, by what is already
represented, yet we shall add some other considerations.

And first, it may be considered that what ever force this ground may have as
to the first Founders and Donors themselves, and as to this Particular point of
preserving and defending the Church's Patrimony; yet it has no force as to
their Heirs, or others succeeding them upon a singular right and Title who for
the most part (if it were in their power) would be content to have their
Predeceslors Deeds and Grants, made in favors of the Church, declared null and
void. And far less can this pretense conclude any thing, to found the other
Privileges of Patronage, relating to their Negative Interests, in the Call and
Maintenance of the Ministry.

III. Next it is but too evident, that whatever be pretended, this care for
Defense of the Church's Patrimony, from Dilapidation and Misapplications, is
the least part of the Patron's business, or concernment. All the care he takes
in this affair, being merely, that no Body shall have Power to Dilapidate, or
Misapply the Church's Rents and Livings, but Himself. And certainly in this
respect, the Power of Patronage, may most justly and deservedly, be termed a
Jus onerosum, a very grievous and burdensome power to the Church of God: so
that if there were a particular Office, appointed for preventing the
Dilapidation and Mismanagement or Misapplying of the Church's Patrimony, and
for punishing of such as should be found guilty of it, I am sure, there is no
sort of Men in the Nation, that would feell the weight of Justice, more
deservedly, upon that account, than the most part of the Patrons themselves,
who, as they are de Facto, guilty, with many other Sacrilegious Impropriators,
of the Dilapidating and Misapplication of the Church's Livings and Patrimony,
without the least color of Material Right, so they do pretend (as we may have
farther occasion to observe) that de Jure, they may lawfully retain in their
own hands, whatever part of the Benefice, they can agree with the Intrant to
allow: And that in the cases of vacancy, the Fruits and Profits of the
Benefice, must return to their own private use.

IV. But thirdly, the defense of the Church, in her Rights and Patrimony, and
in her Liberties and Privileges also, Is indeed a thing very necessar, and
desirable, and therefore it is a duty incumbent, not only on every Christian
in power, in their several stations; but in a special manner, upon the civil
Magistrate, who by his office is the Church's Nursing Father. And not only is it
the duty of all Magistrates, but their Honor and Profit also, and it will
likewise be their Comfort, that they have employed all their Power and
Interest, and brought all their Honor and Authority, to the New Jerusalem, for
whose good our blessed Lord took upon him, the state of a Servant, and sends
forth his Angels as ministering Spirits. But any power the civil Magistrate has
in these matters, is only a power circa Sacra, and no power in Sacris, with
reference to a Negative Interest in the Maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel, to which, they have a full and better Right, by virtue of their
Spiritual capacity, and faithful Discharge of their duty therein, than all the
Powers on Earth can give them. The Magistrates power is only Cumulative, whereby
he may confirm and maintain, the Rights and Liberties of the Church, but no way
privative of them. He may, and ought to interpose his Interest and Authority,
for her defense in the enjoyment of her Rights, but can neither deprive her of
them, not confer or confirm the same, in favors of any other, that usurps or
invads them, to her prejudice.

V. Fourthly, it is the constant opinion of Divines, that the Church herself,
has power to censure, such as are guilty of Symoniacal or Sacrilegious
Dilapidations and Misapplications of het Patrimony* And this they gather by due
Analogy, from the Apostle Peter's inflicting, Acts 5, Acts 8.
of the punishment of Death upon Ananias and Saphira, for their Sacrilegious
Concealments, of what they had Consecrate to God for the use of his Church: and
from the carriage of the same Apostle in the case of Simon Magus, from whom the
crime of Simony derives it is Name.

VI. But beside all this, the word of God as it is completely perfect in every
thing, so it is noways deficient, in settling institutions properly
Ecclesiastical, for the oversight of these matters. For in the Primitive and
Apostolic times, we find, that the care of the Collecting and Distributing of
the goods of the Church, was committed to the Deacons, who being ordinar and
standing Office-bearers in the Church, were countable to her, for their
Administration, and Censurable by her, in case they were found to Maleverse.
These Officebearers had truly a kind of power in Sacris, or a lawful warrant to
meddle with a thing Consecrated and Devoted to God, for pious uses. And as this
office was in it self most useful, and necessary in the Church, and founded
upon a lawful warrant, so it was ordinarily exerced by Men of Credit and
Interest; Acts, 6. 1 Cor. 12, 23, 24, 25, 28.
and such as were Eminent for Piety, as is clear from, 1 Cor. 12. And it is to
be regrated, that the Church, for want of a Maintenance to such Officers,
stands deprived for the most part of their patrociny and protection

VII. They are styled in the Scripture (...), a word Importing the standing
over against a Man for help in the lifting of a burden, that is too weighty for
him alone. And is a term that very properly, and more fully and significantly,
expresses the Nature and Design of this Office, than any word in our Language
can. For without such helps. (so our Translation renders the word) who may take
upon them, the care of collecting, and dispensing, what was bestowed upon the
Church for pious uses, the work of the Ministry could not but meet with many
Hindrances and Obstructions. For when the Pastors of the Church, like the
neglected Levits, Nehem. 13.
must flee every one to his field, and be entangled in Secular Affairs, and Law
suits, for recovery of their Livings, how is it possible that they can wait
upon the duties of their function, as they ought? the diligent and Faithful
discharge of the Ministerial Office is of it self, without the unnecessar
addition of other civil Affairs, of so great a weight, and requires so much
assiduity, and application, that it made even the Apostle Paul himself, one of
the greatest and most eminent Ministers, that ever the Christian Church had,
cry out, who is sufficient for these things? or how is it possible when the
Pastors of the Church, 2 Cor. 2: 16.
are so inveigled in civil business, and debates, but they must turn cold and
faint in that edge and zeal, that renders them useful and profitable Laborers
in the Lord's Vineyard?

VIII. And though this office of Deacons, may seem to be among the lowest, yet in
the primitive times, it was of no mean account; Men of the best note and
consideration, for piety and wealth, were ordinarily entrusted with it, as is
clear from that forecited place: And that because of the great use and
necessity, the Church had of them: And therefore in Diaconis, potius quam
Pastoribus, elegendis, curandum ut caeteris paribus, lautioris Fortunae
Homines, qui infimum hoc officium Ornent, eligantur. Our own Church also, in
the second Book of Discipline, Dicks in loc.
treats at large, of this office, and of the charge of the Church's goods
thereto Entrusted.

IX. From all which we may very safely conclude, that though the care of the
Church's Patrimony be no way to be neglected, yet there is no necessity, to
erect a particular office for that end, distinct (as the Canonists would have
it) from all Civil and Ecclesiastical offices of Divine Appointment and
Institution, with which the Church and People of God are abundantly provided,
as far as there is any need, by the infinite Love and Wisdom of Jesus Christ
her only Head and Lawgiver. This were indeed a most direct species of
superstition to devise New and Onerous Institutions supra quod statutum est.
And far less is it necessar to invest any Office bearer of this Nature, with
such an additional Privilege, as is claimed by the Patrons of Kirks and
Benefices, in reference to a negative Interest in the Election and maintenance
of the Ministry.

SECT. XI. Patronage is no institution of Divine appointment, but a manifest
usurpation.
I. BY what has been said, it sufficiently appears, how groundlels this Right
of Patronage is, which might be enough without any farther, to Justify the
proceedings of the Public Authority of the Nation, Anno. 1649, in the
abolishing of this Privilege: But that the Injustice, as well as Groundlesness
of this Right, may yet more appear, I shall in the next place, according to
the method proposed, offer some clear and convincing reasons against it,
wherein I shall shun the repetition of what I have already said, and keep the
same plainness, I have hitherto observed.

II. The assertion we undertake to prove, is clearly this, That the Patron's
pretended Privilege of a negative Interest. etc: about and concerning the Call
and Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, claimed by the Patrons of Kirks
and Benefices, is a sinful and unjust usurpation, without warrant from the word
of God, destructive to the true Liberties and Interests of the Church, and most
scandalously offensive to all ranks of Christians therein: as I think may be
clear from these Grounds.

III. First, this pretended Privilege is no Ordinance nor Institution of our
Blessed Lord, There being no ground from Scripture, either by Promise, Precept,
or Example, for investing any single Person, with such a Privilege, as the
looking out, Nomination and Election, of the Ministers of the Gospel, the
principal Office bearers of the Church of Christ: neither is it so much as
pretended to be founded upon Scripture. It being confessedly of a far later
date and all that is alleged for it, is nothing else but some surreptitious
Edicts, Canons and corrupt Customs, which (as Doctor Forbes of Corss terms it)
non leges sunt, sed labes. And therefore for any man or Angel, to give or
assume such a privilege, In Epist: ante tract: de Simon:
where our Blessed Lord the Church's only King, and Lawgiver, has not given
it, as a most sinful usurpation, over his Crown and Dignity, and a bold
Invasion upon the Rights of his dearly purchased spouse.

IV. In all the Catalogues of the Officebearers of the Church mentioned, Rom:
12. 1 Cor 12 Ephesians: 4.
in the Scripture, there is nothing like a Patronage recorded. And if those
Priests who Married the Daughters of Barzillai, and were called by their name,
Ezra 2: 61.
were Justly counted as polluted, and were removed from the exercise of their
Office (though Lawful in it self) because they could not instruct their descent
from the Record; of genealogies: And their removal ratified by the sentence of
the Tirshatha or Governor, and they discharged to Eat of the most Holy things,
till a Priest with Vrim and Thummim should stand up, and clearly declare God's
mind in the case, and so supply the defect of these records: Then surely, and
with a great deal of more Reason, ought the Christian Magistrate, to remove
such an unwarrantable Institution as this of Patronage, till its Right to meddle
in the affairs of the Church, be clearly instructed, from the Divine records of
the Scripture: which I am sure will never be done.

V. This is a ground that will be opposed by none, who own the Scriptures of
God, to be the perfect Rule and Square, by which the Government of the Church
is to be Regulate. And that our Lord Jesus Christ who is the great and
Wonderful Counselor and, the Father's Wisdom, was Faithful in all his Fathers
House to him that appointed him: Heb: 3: 2.
For as the arrogating of such a privilege, without warrant from the word of
God, is most derogatory to, and a high and injurious reflection upon the
infinite Love, Wisdom and Faithfulness of our Blessed Lord, and directly
implies that he has not sufficiently provided his Church with a complete
method for Furnishing, and Election of her own Office-bearers, without calling
in the weak and Superstitious devices of Men's invention to her assistance; So
such as dare offer to rectify his Institutions as defective, or to call in
question our Lord's Wisdom and Faithfulness in this, may go a great length to
question his ability to save to the uttermost. There is a nearer and firmer
connection betwixt these, than every one thinks: We see it clearly in the Popish
Church: For as there was never a Society in the World, that invented more
superstitious Offices, such as Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans,
Arch-Deans, Chancellors, Officials Commissars, etc. with so much Reflection
upon the Wisdom and Faithfulness of Christ, as King and Head of his Church; so
no Society on Earth, has been more injurious to our Blessed Lord's Office of
Priesthood, in Robbing him of the honor of that complete Satisfaction, paid
by him to Divine Justice, for the sins of his People. And it is undeniable,
that as both this device of Patronage, and that Anti-evangelical Opinion of
Merit, owe their Original, to the same corrupt Fountain, so the Church's sad
experience can testify, that they have still been found, to be mutual Abettors
and Supports of each other, as we hinted before, and may have farther occasion
to observe hereafter.

VI And hence we may safely conclude, that the public Authority of the Nation,
in the year 1649, had all the Reason Imaginable to say, parl. 1649 cap:
that the privilege of Patronage, was an Evil and Bondage, under which, both
Ministers and People in this land had long groaned, and that it is a Popish
custom, brought in upon the Church, in the times of Ignorance and Superstition.
And the Canonists themselves, such as Lambertinus, Panormitan, Pistorius etc.
do expressly acknowledge, that Patronage is a kind of servitude, upon the
Church. Jus vocationis (says Amesius) non potest proprie esse, vel Episcoporum
Dioecesanorum, vel Patronorum, Ame^: ^e cas: con^cien: cap 25. Parl. 24.
vel Magistratuum qua sunt tales, quia Christus qui ministerium instituit, de
istis ordinibus nihil singular praescripsit, nihil novi juris ipsis
communicavit, and Ecclesiane sine iis optime ordinatam reliquit. That is, the
Right of calling Ministers cannot properly belong either to the Diocesan
Bishops, nor to Patrons, nor to Magistrates as such: because Jesus Christ who
appointed and institute the the Ministry, has prescribed nothing singular
concerning these orders, nor has communicated any new Right to them, and has
left his Church very well ordered without them.

VII. And if these privileges of Patronage be without Foundation, either from
the word of God, or from moral use and necessity (as we have already proven,
and shall yet farther clear) They can be nothing else, but unjust and
unreasonable Usurpations: And as usurpations, in all Societies are deservedly
very odious; so a fortiori in the Church of the living God, the most truly free
Society on Earth, whose Liberties and Privileges are purchased at no lower
rate, than the most precious Blood of the Immaculat Lamb, and Eternal Son of
God, they must be much more detestable. Sure I am if the most eminent and
judicious congregation in the Land, should claim such a Privilege, in
reference to the choice and maintenance, of the meanest servant in the Patron's
Family; He would with a great deal of reason look upon it, as a most
intolerable usurpation and oppression. For as our Patrons do maintain, that de
jure, they are not oblidged, to seek the advice of either Presbitry or Paroch,
to the Nomination and Election of a Pastor, but that both are oblidged to
accept the Person whom the Patron presents, if he be found in any measure,
externally qualified, for the Office of a Pastor in* general, without any other
enquiry or consideration; So to do them right, the practice of Patrons in this
matter, has been no way disagreeable to their claims, unless it be to the
worse.

VIII. We have but too much Reason to apprehend, that this unjust and
unwarrantable usurpation, is one of these crying Sins, by which God has been
provoked, in his Justice, to lay wast and desolate most of the great families
of the Land. There are many standing Monuments of God's wrath and displeasure,
against such as meddle in the affairs of his house, without his own warrant and
appointment. Saul, Vzziah, and Vzzah are Recorded among others, not as idle
Stories, but as warnings to Men, in all after-ages of the Church, not to
partake in their sins, left they also partake in their Plagues. Vzzah had a
much fairer and better pretext, 2: Sam: 6: 6 1 Chronicles: 13: 9
to put his Hand to the Ark of the Lord, than any of our Patrons have, for
their acclaimed privileges: He but touched the Ark of God, in a case, where he
thought an extreme and indispensible necessity oblidged him to it: And yet the
Lord will not let his rash and preposteous Zeal, pass unpunished, because he
Acted without a warrant. For though he was a Levite, and as such was commanded to
carry the Ark on his Shoulders, (but not on a Cart) yet being no Priest, it was
unlawful for him to touch it with his Hand. Numb 4: 15.
And therefore the Lord is pleased to single him out, and to make him an
example of his Justice and Displeasure, both for the general Sin of the
Congregation, in carrying the Ark on a Cart, and not upon the Shoulders of the
Levites, and for his own Particular Sin, in stretching forth his Hand, to touch
it without a Lawful call, though his pretext, and the seeming necessity of it,
was such, that even David, a man according to God's own Heart, was tempted to
fret, at so heavy and unproportioned a Punishment, of so slight and trivial a
fault, as he thought this was.

IX. And that this power of Patronage, is no institution of God's appointment,
may yet farther be clear from this, that all Lawful powers that are of God, are
either Civil or Ecclesiastic and Spiritual. For as to mixed powers, that is,
such as are neither purely Civil, nor purely Spiritual and Ecclesiastic, and
such as give the Office-bearers of the Church, an interest in the management of
Secular Affairs, and give Secular powers, an interest in Sacris, we must freely
disown them, as having no foundation, eitherin Divinity, or good Policy, but
expressly contrary to both, and as having ever been found by the Church's dear
bought experience, to be nothing else, but the weak devices of ambitious and
aspiring men, to mar the progress of the Gospel, and to bring the Church in
subjection to a strange head, Plants that are not of our Heavenly Father's
Planting, and most unbecoming the Wisdom of any Christian Church, or State, to
tolerat and allow. And certainly as the Magistrate or Civil powers of a Nation,
have no warrant, to meddle in Sacris, so there is no Conscientious Minister of
the Gospel, but will find his charge so weighty, without any farther addition
of secular Affairs, that he must say from the sense of his own weakness* and
the great extent of the duties of his Function, with the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, who is sufficient for these things? I Ergo tu (says Bernard to
Eugenius) Et usurpare tibi, aut Dominans apostolatum, aut Apostolicus
dominatum. Such a mixture as this, is manifestly contrary to the dictates of
our Blessed Savior, who has expressly told us, That his Kingdom is not of this
World but a poor and contemptible handful (in the Eyes of Men) taken out of the
World. And therefore as our Blessed Lord never gave any Instructions or
precepts, see Luk 22.25. Math 20.25. John 15.19.
to the Civil Powers, to meddle in Sacris; so he never gave any direction, to
the Office-bearers of the Church, for the administration of civil Affairs: But
on the Contrary (as we formerly hinted) expressly discharges the same. And
therefore we may well give such unwarrantable mixtures that suitable Epiphonema,
apage hoc mixtum genus hominum, prolemque biformem.

X And that this power of Patronage, is one of these amphibious and irregular
Inventions, may be clear, not only from these many confused Opinions of these
Canonists themselves on this Head, but also from these undeniable Grounds.

For first, that this power of Patronage, is not a power truly civil, may be
sufficiently evinced from the Nature of these Acts, in which it is exerced, to
wit, the Looking out, Nomination and Election of the Ministry, and the Negative
interests acclaimed therein, and in their maintenance: All which are Actions of
a Spiritual and Ecclesiastic Nature, and such as by the Holy Ghost, are always
given to the Church, and to none other (as we shall see hereafter) And
accordingly in the primitive and apostolic times, and some hundreds of years
thereafter, the Looking out and Election, of the Ministers of the Gospel, was
still managed by the Church her self, without the interposition of Patrons: And
the maintenance of the Ministry, was a part of that trust, in which the
Deacons, an ordinary and standing Office in the Church, were employed, as we
have already seen.

XI. And though the conveyance and confirmation of the most part of Patronages,
has been from the Civil Magistrate, by rights under the great Seal etc. yet
this cannot prove that power to be truly Civil.

For first, no Conveyance or Confirmation of a Right, can alter it is Nature,
which it still retains, come through what hands it will, and let it be disguised
under what terms you please.

Nor 2ly. can any Law or Magistrate, Conferr or Confirm, a power that is
Materially and in it self Unjust and Unlawful: for it is not enough to make a
power Materially Just and Lawful, that it be formally Legal. Shall the Throne
of Iniquity (says the Psalmist) have fellowship with Thee, that frames Mischief
by a Law? Psalm: 94.20. Esa. 10.1.
And woe unto them (says the Spirit of God by the Prophet Esaias) that decree an
unrighteous decree, and who write grievous things that they have prescribed,
and it is an acknowledged principle, Id tantum quis potest, quod de Jure potest.

And 3ly. These Conveyances and Confirmations of Patronage, by grants from the
civil Magistrate were invented for no other end, but to put the Patron's
usurped power under the protection of Civil authority, and to be an apron of
fige leaves, to cover the Stain of Symony, with which the Patrons were most
justly branded, when they Bought and Sold their usurped Privileges over the
Church, with as little Scruple and Remorse, as they would have bargained for a
Yoke of Oxen.

Lastly, this pretense is as Empty and Frivolous, for evincing the pretended
Rights of Patronage, to be a power truly civil, as if the gifted Brethren (as
they are called) should justify their usurpations, in preaching of the Gospel,
and Administrating the Sacraments, by alleging they had a power from the Civil
Magistrate so to do.

XII. But in the next place, neither is this Privilege, a power truly
Ecclesiastic or Spiritual. For though these Acts in which it is exerced, be
Spiritual and in Sacris, yet this can no more make it a truly Spiritual power,
than the like Acts of the gifted Brethren, in preaching the Gospel, and
Administrating the Sacraments, can make their assumed power to be truly
Spiritual: Both these usurpations proceed from the same Antichristian and
Anti-evangelical Spirit.

2ly. If the privilege of Patronage, were a truly Spiritual power, or office,
it could not be conveyed or transmitted, by Birth or Right of Blood. For under
the new Testament, there is no such Conveyance or Transmission of Sacred
Offices. A Minister enjoyes not his office, by the common Rules of Succession
and Birth, and much less a Patron.

3ly. If Patronage were a truly Spiritual office, it could not be bought and
sold, as a part of a Man's private Inheritance and Patrimony.

4ly. Though the pretended right and power of Patronage, in process of time, came
to it is full stature, by being Authorized in the Canon Law; yet if we trace it
back to it is first Original, it will be found to be nothing else, but a
groundless and superstitious usurpation, without any wartand from the word of
God, or consent of the Church, and manifestly contrary to all the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Canons, concerning the Election of Pastors. Annon cuilibet notum
est. Hom. 13. de Resurrect.
(says the reverend Beza) pro electionibus fuisse in Ecclesiam intrusos
Patronatus etc. Tam aperte antiquis Canonibus repugnantes, quam Tenebrae Luci
sunt contrariae? Does not every one know (says he) that Patronages etc, were
obtruded upon the Church, in the place of lawful Elections, as clearly against
the ancient Canons, as Light is contrary to Darkness.

And in his Treatise de notis Ecclesiae, he inveighes yet more sharply against
such abuses, Collationes (inquit) sive Ordinariae, sive Devolutae quas vocant,
and Resignationis Jura, ubi tandem nisi in Satanae Coquina sunt excogitatae
etc. Where (says he) were these Inventions of Collation, either Ordinary or by
Devolution (as they term them) first devised but in the Devil's own Kitchine?

And again, in his Confession of Faith, Beze. confess. fid. Christ. cap. 5.
inter tract. Th^ol.
nunquam receptum est, in Ecclesiis Christianis jam constitutis, ut quis
admitteretur ad functionem Ecclesiae, nisi Libere and Legitime electus, ab
Ecclesia cujus inter-era^. Itaque tota ista nundinatio praesentationum, pleni
Juris Patronatus, Collationum, Resignationum, and aliorum hujusmodi scelerum, a
Satina profecta est; quamvis ambigi non possit, quin ista ab initijs magis
laudabilibus profecta sint. That is, it was never the custom of any Christian
Church already constitute, that any man should be admitted to an Ecclesiastical
Function, unless he were freely and lawfully chosen, by the Church particularly
concerned. And therefore all that Trade and Trafficking of presentations, the
plenum jus of Patronages, Collations, Dimissions and other wicked Corruptions
of that Nature, owe their original entirely to the Devil, though it is not to be
doubted, but there were some plausible pretexts for their first Institution.

XIII. Lastly if Patronage be a power truly Spiritual and Ecclesiastic, then
the Patron must have this power, either as an Office-bearer in the Church, or
as a private Church Member, and that he has it neither of these ways may be
thus evinced.

1. as a Church Officer he has it not, fro in all the Catalogues of Church
Officers, mentioned in the Scripture, Rom, 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
there is not the least shadow of a Patron either as to Name or Thing.

2ly. If he have this power as an Office-bearer in the Church, then he must
either have it, as a Church Officer in general, and so it will belong to all
Church Officers, and not to the Patron alone, though he were a Bishop. Quod enim
convenit tali, qua tali, convenit omm tali: or other ways he must have it as
such a Church Officer in particular, in which case likewise all Church Officers
of that Kind, should have this power also, and not he alone, for the reason
before assigned, a quatenus ad omne. And the truth is, it is very difficult to
conjecture, under what kind of Church Officers, a Patron can have the least
pretense, to list himself: but take him to which of them all he will, the power
must still be common to all the Officers of that kind, and not proper to him
alone.

XIV. And far less can the Patron have this privilege, as a private Church
Member, else every Church Member should have it as well as he; the poorest and
meanest Christian in the Church of God, having no less Right to such common
privileges, as are competent to all Church Members in general, than the
greatest and richest Patron. I shall not determine how far such an unjust
usurpation may stain and blemish the Patron's own Church Membership: Jam. 2 1,
2, 3, 4. Jude v. 16. Gal. 3.28. Col. 3: 11.
but sure I am in matters of common Right, there is no respect of persons, for
in Christ there is neither bond nor free.

Sect. XII. The power of Patronage is destructive of the Institutions of
Christ, for Election of the Pastors of his Church.
1. AS we have asserted, that Patronage is no divine Institution, and that the
Patrons have not the right of Electing the Pastor's of the Church; so we must
also show, to whom this Right of Election does properly belong, lest others
that have as little Right, may lay claim to it, as it has fallen out in the
matter of the Church's Patrimony, which when it was taken from the Popish
Clergy, who had no true Right to it, was not restored to the reformed Church,
but to private persons, who, (to say no worse) I am sure had as little Right,
as the former possessors.

II. And therefore the next ground, that we shall insist upon against
Patronage, shall be this, that as this power is no divine Institution, but a
manifest usurpation, so (which is worse) it clearly destroys and renders
useless, the ordinances appointed by Jesus Christ, the Church's only Head, for
the Election of the Ministers of his Church: And thereby carries with it, the
guilt of Rejecting our Blessed Lord, from being King and Lawgiver in his own
House, and of Establishing strange Lords and new Lawgivers therein. For the
Patrons Looking out, Nomination of, and pitching upon such a determinate
person, to be a Pastor of the Church, without the consent of either Presbitry
or People, does evidently take away the ordinance of a free and unlimited
Election, of such as may be fittest for such a charge, and most acceptable to
the congregation concerned, to be made by the Church Judicatories, and Church
of believers respectively, each of them acting, what is proper for their
several places and stations, as being the only party entrusted with it, by
Jesus Christ, the sole King and Lawgiver in his own Church.

III. And though the Patron may sometimes pitch upon, and present a person of
true worth, yet as this is but merely accidental, and the case does generally
fall out quite otherwise; so nothing should be done, to hinder the Election, of
one more worthy: And a well qualified Pastor may be one among a Thousand, as it
is Job. 33. Is enim eligendus (says Origin) ex omnibus, qui Doctior, qui
Sanctior, qui omni virtute praestantior. That is, he that among all is the
Holiest in Life, the most Learned, and the most Eminent in all manner of
virtue, is the person that ought to be Elected: So likewise the free Election
of such, ought to be entirely left to these entrusted by Jesus Christ therewith.

IV. The discerning of the Spirits, and the knowing of the Voice of Christ, in
his Called and Sent Servants, is the privilege of the Church as such, and does
fit and qualify the Church, and not the Patron, to make a due and suitable
choice of her Pastors, and therefore the Church, and not the Patron as such,
has only right to meddle therein. I say, the Patron as such, has not the right
of Election, for though the Patron as a Churchmember, or as a Church Officer, in
the Congregation where he lives (whether he be Elder or Deacon) may have that
Voice and Concurse in the Election, which the other Members and Office-bearers
have, yet as Patron, and under that Reduplication, he can have no such Right as
the Privilege acclaimed amounts to.

V. And what ever diversity of Judgment, may be found among Divines as to the
seat of this Church power, yet it is agreed upon by all, that write on the
Subject, and clearly evident from the Scriptures, that this Power and Right of
Election, Acts. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14.
belongs only to the Church as such, and consequently it cannot belong to the
Patron, as a Negative Interest due to him in the extent acclaimed. And
accordingly it is clear beyond all debate, that the Church was in the Actual
possession of this power and right of Election, for several hundreds of years,
before such a device as Patronage, was heard of in the Christian World. This is
a truth as evident from Antiquity as any thing can be, for in all the ancient
Councils, Canons, Fathers, and Historians of the Church, there is not the least
mention of such a privilege as this of Patronage. And when ever they have
occasion to speak of the Forms of the Election of Pastors, they still set down
a method wherein the Church it self does freely Elect, in every thing
absolutely inconsistent with the Rights of Patronage.

VI. There is not the least hint in all these Ancient Writers, that with any
shadow can be alleged for the power of Patronage. Some thing there is indeed,
now and then mentioned, for clearing and instructing the power of the Civil
Magistrate circa sacra: But that is an interest quite different from the Rights
of Patronage, and which does not at present fall in our way to debate.

VII. It would be tedious, and to no purpose to offer to prove from Antiquity,
See Padri. Paulo's Hist. of the Council of Trent. Cyprian Epist. 33, 34, 37,
55, 63.

Theodoret Histor. tripart. lib. 2. cap. 12. lib. 4. cap. 22. lib: 6. cap. 9.

Socrat. Hist. Eccles. cap. 28. etc.

Decret. did. 63. can.

Quanto. Can. vota civium and Can. Sacrorum etc.

Chemnit examen Counc. Trident. part page 408. and seq. editionis Francosurt.
in 80. Didoclar, alt. Damascen etc.


the Interest of the Church, in the Election of her Pastors, since it is a
point that I have found very little contraverted. These who are curious may
consult the debates, even of those Men, whom they call the Fathers at Trent,
whereof many (as corrupt as they were) would gladly have had the Church
restored, to her primitive Rights of Election, and many others both Popish and
Protestant Writers, which it would be weariesome to cite.

VIII. But not to insist any farther on these Topics, let us follow Augustin's
rule, Mittamus ea quae ab utraque part dicipossunt, and ad Scripturae judicium
revocetur controversia. Agustin. cont. Jul.
The clearest and fafest Methods, in Debates of this Nature, which concern the
Interest of Christ and his Church, is to decide them by the sentence of the
Scriptures, to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
these, it is because there is no Light in them. Isay. 8.20.
Thus we find the Apostles and multitude of Disciples (for so was the Church of
Believers then termed) meet together, for the Election of an extraordinary
Office-bearer in the Church, viz. an Apostle, And a list made by them both (to
wit the Apostles and Believers) of two, Joseph and Matthias. But the
designation of the particular person for this extraordinary Office, they leave
to the Divine Determination by Lot.

IX. And if the Apostles who were Instructed by Christ, in all things that
concerned his Kingdom, and did accordingly teach the Church practically, and by
their own example, to observe all that was commanded them, Matt. 28.20.
conform to their Lord's farewell command, did proceed with consent and
concurrence of the Church, and people of God, to the Election of so High and
Extraordinary an Officer as an Apostle; It strongly imports that it was their
Master's mind, that they should so do, not only in the particular Election of
that Apostle, but also and much more in the choice of the Inferior and
Ordinary Office-bearers of the Church.

X. Thus we also find, that the Looking out, Nomination and Election, of the
Deacons (whose Office is one of the ordinary though inferior Offices of the
Church) is given by the appointment of the Apostles, to the multitude of the
Disciples or ordinary Believers. In which Action these things are clearly
evident.

1. That the twelve Apostles call the Multitude together, and appoint Deacons
to be chosen, and also appoint their determinate Number. viz seven; being so
many as they judged would serve the Church's need at that time: as also they
ordain and lay hands on these Deacons, after they are chosen, and and so state
and confirm them in their Office.

2. That the multitude of Disciples or Believers, are left by the Apostles, to
their own freedom and discretion, in the Election and choice of those seven,
qualified as the Apostles had directed.

3. That the Looking out, Nomination and Election of those seven, is
accordingly performed, by the multitude of Believers, In prima instantia,
without the prelimitation of a previous Nomination, or Choice.

4. That the same multitude of Beleivers present, or (as the word is) set these
seven before the Apostles, who ordain and lay hand upon them, and so invest and
confirm them in the Office.

XI. And as in all Christ's Institutions, so particularly in this of the
Election of the Office-bearers of his own house, there appears a most Beautiful
and Harmonious order. For as the Election of the first and extarordinary
Officers of the Church, was immediately performed by our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Chief Pastor and Head of the Church, so the Election of the succeeding and
ordinary Officers of the Church, is very consequentially performed, by the
inferior Pastors and Members of the Church respectively, each of them acting,
and keeping within the limits prescribed, by the Chief Pastor and Head of the
Church.

XII Suitable to these excellent Patterns and examples set down in the Holy
Scriptures, the General Assembly of this Church, Gen: assemb 1649 sess. 40
in the directory for Electing of Ministers appoints the order thereof in this
manner.

1. The Presbitry sends one of their own Number, to the Congregation for which
a Minister is to be Elected: and he having preached before them, concerning the
necessity of a well qualified Pastor, and the great need that the People have,
to be diligent and fervent in Prayer to the Lord, for such; He is to signify
to them, that the Presbitry, out of their care for that People, will send them
Preachers whom they may hear. But withal, he advertiseth them, that if they
desire to hear any other, the Presbitry will endeavor to satisfy them, upon
the suit of the Elders of the Congregation for that Effect.

2. Within some competent time thereafter, The Presbitry is again to send a
Minister to that Congregation, on a certain day before appointed for that end;
who having then Preached, and intimat to the People, that they are to go about
the Election of a Pastor, the Session is to proceed to it, the Minister that
Preached moderating therein. And the Election being made, is to be intimate to
the People. And if upon intimation they acquiesce and consent to the Person
chosen, then the Presbitry is to proceed to his trials. But if the People
dissent from the Person Elected by the Session, the Presbitry is to take
cognition thereof, and after they have fully heard and considered the whole
affair, they are to judge and decide in it. And where Congregations are unfit
(as in some cases they may be) to make any Election, the Presbitry is to
provide them with a fit Pastor.

XIII. Our Reverend Brethren, the Ministers of the province of London, incline
to think, that the power of Election does ordinarily belong not so much to the
People, Jus Divin: regim: Eccles: Page 98.99 in margin and Jus Divine: Minist:
evang Page: 12 7.
but rather to such as are in Office when Judicially conveened. As for
extraordinary cases I speak nothing of them For these must have extraordinary
remedies. But certainly, dum suppetit remedium or dinarium, nunquam recurrendum
est ad remedium extraordinarium.

XIV. Master Rutherfoord and others do unanimously agree, that what ever be the
People's share and interest in the Election of their Pastors, it is indeed a
deliberative and approbative, but not an Authoritative Action, yet as is said,
it is an Action truly Ecclesiastical, properly and only belonging to the
Church, as such: And that the People are indeed very nearly concerned, in the
right choice of their Pastors, as being the most special ordinary means,
appointed of God, for their Spiritual and Eternal welfare.

XV. From all which it is abundantly evident, that the Right and power of the
Looking out, Nomination and Election of the Officebearers of the Church of God,
does properly and only belong to the Church as such, and no way to any single
person, upon the account of privilege, or otherways, call him patron or what
you please; and that the negative interests of Patronage, are inconsistent
with, and destructive of, that unlimited freedom and liberty of Election,
granted to, and appointed by Jesus Christ, to his Church, for providing herself
with such, as may be most fit and proper for bearing Office therein.

XVI. I need not add after this, that the method of entering the Pastors of the
Church by Patrons, marrs that beautiful, constant and uniform order, that
appears in all these ordinances and institutions, of which our Blesed Lord, who
is a God of order, and not of confusion, Is the Author: And therefore we may
very Justly conclude, it can be none of his: For by this method of Patronage,
some Pastors are oblidged to enter by Patrons, and some without them, as in
cases where it is doubtful who has right to Present, or where the Heirs of the
last Patron are not entered (as we term it) or as the Civilians term it nondum
adierunt haereditatem, And in many other cases, which often times put both
Presbitry and People to a stand, not knowing how to behave, and in the mean
time the Congregation must unavoidably lie desolate, at lest for half a Year:
for during that time, the Patron, is not oblidged to Present. Again, some must
enter by those they call Ecclesiastical Patrons, as Bishops. etc: others by
Laick Patrons, whereof some are Courtiers, others Soldiers, or mean and
Ignorant Mechanics. etc. Some must enter by Patrons residing at a distance in
the country, others by those that reside neither in the Country nor Nation, yea
and some by Women, as has been formerly observed: Some by one Patron others by
many etc. Ministri (says Doctor Ames) dati sunt Ecclesiae a Chris^o, ut eadem
or dinaria et certa ratione, possint ab omni Ecclesia procurari: sed si ab
alijs penderet vocatio, Ecclesia saepe destitueretur certa ratione sibi
ministros procurandi, et proinde talis Ecclesia esset a Christo Jnstituta, quae
non esset sibimet sufficiens in seipsa. de cas: conscien. L: 4 C: 25 25
That is Ministers are appointed by Christ in his Church, that by the same
certain and ordinary method, they may be procured by every Church: But if the
Call of the Ministry must depend upon others, the Church might ofttimes be
destitute of a certain method of procuring her own Pastors, so that in that
case, such a Church should be institute by Christ, as were not sufficient in it
self to provide for her ordinary Necessities. which is altogether inconsistent
with the infinite Wisdom and Fidelity of Christ. And though this Author, it may
be, understand the Church otherways than we do, yet that makes no difference in
the present case. The Argumentis very cogent in what ever sense the term be
taken.

XVII. Nay which is yet worse, this method of Patronage, destroys, or at least
weakens the very nature of a Ministers Call, for the Call of a Minister must be
Divine, and not humane, it must be of God and not of Men. The Call of the
Apostles indeed, was neither of Men, nor by Men, their Office in the Church
being extraordinary, and long since determined. They were called immediately by
the Lord himself, to be Ear and Eye witnesses of his Doctrine, Miracles and
Resurrection, That they might afterward deliver them to the World. as is clear
from Acts 1.23. In which it was impossible for them to have any Successors:
whence it is that the Apostle Paul, calls himself an Apostle born out of Time,
Though his Call to the Office was immediately by Christ himself, and he reckoned
himself in other respects, to be not a Whit behind the very Chiefest Apostles.
But the calling of the ordinary and standing Officers of the Church, 1 Cor:
15.89 10, 2 Cor: ij: 15.
such as Preaching and Ruling Elders, Doctors, and Deacons, though it be by Men,
that is by the intervention of such men, as have divine warrant and Commission
to Act therein; yet it must not be of Men, that is, it neither has its
Authority from men, nor must it come through the hands of such men, as have no
warrant from Jesus Christ, the Church's only Head and Law, giver to meddle in
it. For this were truly to make them the Servants of Men and not of God.

XVII. And that this method of calling the Ministers of the Gospel by Patrons,
makes their Call to be partly Humane and of Men, I think will need but little
to clear it, it being evident, that the rise of the external Call (at least)
flows from such Men, as the Spirit of God never breathed the call of his sent
Servants by: and to whom the Looking out, Nomination and Election of the
Pastors of the Church, and the Presenting them to the Church Judicatories, for
Trial and Admission, was never entrusted or committed. And therefore a
Minister's Call in that method must at lest in part, be Humane, and not Divine,
And consequently must be of Men, and not of God, Malum enim ex quolibet
defectu, bonum non nisi ex integracausa. And as such an unwarantable Mixture,
cannot but pro tanto, very much weaken (I shall not say nullisie) a
Mininister's Call, so certainly it cannot but very much mar his Confidence,
and obstruct his Comfort, in the exercise of his Ministry: as we shall see
hereafter. To this purpose, Zanchius tells us, after he has been speaking of
the Ministerial call. Ex his autem omnibus apparet, quam nulla sit, vel non
Legitima, eorum Dei Ministrorum, vel Ecclesiae Pastorum vocatio, qui solius
Regis vel Reginae, vel Patroni, vel Episcopi, aut Archiepiscopi, Diplomate,
Bullis, Jussu and Judicio, fiunt vel Eliguntur; id quod dolendum est adhue
fieri in ijs Ecclesiis, qui tamen purum Dei verbum habent, and sequuntur ut in
Ecclesia Anglicana etc. That is, it is very clear how much either Null, or at
lest not Lawsul, the Call of those Ministers of God, or Pastors of the Church
must be, who take their Election, only from the Patents, Bulls, Warrands, or
Appointment of a King, Queen, Patron or Bishop, etc Which yet to our grief, is
done even in these Churches, who have and follow the profession of the true
word of God, as in England etc.

XVIII. And lastly, the Assertors of this pretended power of Patronage, cannot
deny, but it were most absurd and unreasonable, for any single Person, how
pious and judicious soever, to assume and take upon him, the Looking out,
Nomination and Election, of all the Ruling Elders and Deacons of a
Congregations. And to oblidge the Church, to accept and receive, such as he
should so Nominat and Elect, though those ( viz. the Ruling Elders and Deacons)
be but the inferior Officebearers of the Church, and the people of God no way
so nearly concerned, in the right choice of them, as in that of their Pastors,
who are appointed of God, as the most special ordinary means of their
Salvation. And therefore for any Man without Christ's warrant, to assume the
Nomination, and Election of the Pastors of the Church, who are the principal
Office-bearers in the House of God, and in the right and due choice of whom,
the good of Souls is so nearly concerned, must be much more absurd and
unreasonable. And there is no ground that can be urged, for allowing the
Patrons a privilege of Electing the Principal Office-bearers of the Church,
that may not with much more force and advantage, be pressed, for giving him a
power, to Elect the Inferior Office bearers also.

I grant the case is different, but still I see no difference, that with any
appearance of reason, can be assigned, to determine the point in favors of the
Right of Patronage, as to the Principal Office beaters, and not as to others,
save this, that the Patrons settling of a Maintenance, in favors of the
Pastors, must give him a greater Interest, in the choice of those, than he can
have in that of the others, on whom he has conferred no Benefice: And of how
much weight this pretense is, we have already seen, and shall not repeat what
we have said upon this Head.

SECT. XIII. The power of Patronage, is against the Freedom and Interest of
common Society.
I. AS this power of Patronage is no Institution of Jesus Christ, but clearly
inconsistent with, and destructive of his Institutions; so it is against the
Freedom and Interest of the Church, considered as a Common Society: It being a
privilege naturally Inherent in all free Societies, such as Republics,
Cities, Colleges, Corporations etc. To Elect and Choice their own Rulers and
Office bearers, of which Freedom, this privilege of Patronage, does clearly
Robb and Deprive the Church.

II. For if we may be allowed as well as others, to guess at the first
beginings of Society, and to speak what the common sense of Mankind seems to
Dictat, so long as any number of Men are kept together, only by a mutual
consent, express or tacit, to supercede force, and to live quietly, on what
providence brought to their hands; They cannot be said to have been under any
proper Government: It being merely good Humor, and nothing else, that kept them
together, in any kind of Society. Man indeed is a Creature Naturally Social,
and Society is a kind of Life, that they are by God and Nature designed to; as
to mention no other consideration, may be sufficiently manifest, from that one
faculty they have, of Communicating their Thoughts to one another, by speech;
but if they live together only by bonds of good Nature, it cannot be expected
that the Corruptions of Men, would let their Society continue for any long
time: so that when ever that bond of good Nature began to fail, they behoved
either to quit one another's company, or else betake themselves to some sort of
Government; And this could only be established, either voluntarly and by common
consent, whereby a superiority and power, was given over the rest to some one
or more, whom they thought fittest to manage it for the good of all: or
otherways such a Power and Superiority, was Ambitiously usurped, by such whose
Reputarion and Authority for Wisdom and Strength, made them conceive themselves
most Likely and Able to keep it: which neither deserves the Name, nor satisfies
the true ends of Government, and so the Natural Freedom of Election was
subverted.

III. And therefore the like Freedom, in in choosing of such, as are fittest
for bearing Office, cannot without the highest Injury and usurpation, be
denied to, or wrested from the Church, and people of God, the most truly free
born Society on Earth, who with Abraham are Heirs of the World, and Heirs
Annexed with Christ, Rom: 4.13. Rom: 8 17.
by the incomprehensible love and wisdom of whom, as her only Head and
Lawgiver, the Church is most fully and completely provided, with all the true
and necessary freedoms and privileges, of other Societies, I mean free
Societies, and not such as are inslaved to the power of others, where little or
no freedom remains, all things being managed merely for the private interest of
some one or more, particular persons or Families, to the prejudice and
opression of the rest, either by a forced surrender, or an open invasion of
their Liberties, with little respect to any public advantage, except in so
far as may conduce, for that private interest: And what ever may be said of
their Societies, yet the Church is utterly incapable, of making any such
surrender of her liberties, though this pretense (as frivolous as it is) be made
use of by some, for a ground to found the rights of Patronage upon, as we have
already seen.

IV. There is another consideration of a near affinity with this, that may very
properly be made use of, against the interest of Patronage: That as this power
is against the freedom of common Society, so it is also against the interest of
the Church as a Society: For it being uncontroverted, that all pretending to
any trust in a Society, ought both to be qualified for it, and attend upon it,
(as is clear in Church Affairs from the Canons against non-residence) it is as
evident on the other hand, that these things are no ways to be found in this
our Patron: Seeing the Patron by virtue of his pretended power and trust, stands
no ways oblidged, to reside within the paroch, nay nor so much as within the
National Church, nor to be of the same profession of Religion, His right of
Patronage being as consistent with his non-residence, and with his being Popish
or other ways heretical, yea with his being under the highest censures of the
Church, inflicted for his notorious and scandalous wickedness, as the rights he
has to the other parts of his Estate. That being a right in Patrimonio, as
well as the rest of his fortune.

V. And how is it possible for any man in Reason to conceive, that a person in
these cases, should be capable (though the privilege should be otherwise never
so alowable) to act in a matter of so high and tender concernment, to the
welfare of our Lord's Spiritual interests, and the good of the Souls of his
People? For when a Patron does not reside in the Paroch; nor perhaps in the
Nation, it is impossible for him to exerce his privilege upon any rational
grounds and motives, or with any proper Judgment and Discretion of his own.
All the light he has to steer by being at best, but an ignis fatuus of a naked
hear say, either as to the life and qualifications of the person to be
presented, or as to what gifts are most suitable, and proper for such a people;
he being equally and utterly ignorant of the need and condition of both, so
that he must in this, be unavoidably left, to be acted and driven, by the
solistations of his friends or servants, as ignorant, at least as himself, or
by other means less honest, without any Judgment of Discretion, like a beast
of burden, Psalm 49 20.
as the Spirit of God styles the man that is in Honor and understands not.

VI. And if the Patron be Popish, or otherways heretical, or under the censures
of the Church, the matter is still worse, if worse can be. For all the Reason
in the World, will oblidge us to presume, that a Patron in these circumstances,
will neither be able nor desirous, to discern the Spirit of God (as in this
case it is very necessary he should) or to make choice of such Pastors, as may
be according to Gods own heart, and may feed his People with knowledge and
understanding: It being most certain, that on the contrary, such a Patron will
bend his whole force, for Imposing Pastors upon the Church, that may Act most
sutably, to his own corrupt and pernicious principles and designs, for
advancing such interests, as are incompatible with the honor of God, the
Spirit of the Gospel, the welfare of Religion, and the peace and quiet of the
Church and Nation, so that to entrust any man in such a case, with such a
privilege as this of Patronage, were indeed oves lupo committere, to give the
wolf the wedder to keep: as the Proverb says.

VII. These are no remote and airy speculations, but such as deserve the most
serious reflection, especially at such a time as this, wherein there is such a
General and Visible decay of knowledge and Piety; and Popery is not only
tolerate, but in a manner authorized.

VIII. It may also be remembered from former and latter times, how that many of
the Nobility, and others who resided ordinarily at Court, or went abroad upon
Foreign Employments, and had the Patronages of many Kirks, and Benefices in
their hands were wont upon the solistation of Friends and Servants, and many
times from Motives, and to Ends, of a more dangerous and fatal consequence, to
send Presentations, in favors of such as they never saw in the face, nor so
much as ever heard of, either before or after that time, without making the
least shadow of a previous Inquiry, into the qualifications and condition, of
either Preacher or People: They being as unfit and incapable to discern in
either, as they were unable and inconcerned, to improve any discovery they
should make, for the good of the People, by looking out, and presenting a
Pastor, that might be fit and proper for them. Vbi ille Canon (says Athanasius)
ut a palatio mittatur is qui futurus est Episcopus. In Epist. ad vitam Solit.
agentes.
Neither need we forget, how many that entered to the Ministry in this method,
were the occasion of no small trouble to the Church of God in this Nation.

SECT. XIV. The power of Patronage has been grossly abused, and scandalously
offensive, without any necessity or use.
I. THE next Ground I shall insist upon, against the pretended right of
Patronage, is, That as it is no Divine Institution, but clearly destructive of
the Institutions of Christ, and of the Natural Freedom and Interests of the
Church, considered as a society: So it is likewise an useless and unnecessary
Invention, and has been the Fountain and Occasion of many gross abuses, and
most scandalously offensive, to all sorts of Christians in the Church of God.
And therefore ought not to be tolerat and allowed, in any Christian Church or
State.

II. As for its usefulness or necessity, I cannot understand, neither have I
ever heard any thing pretended in its defense, from this Head. And it is
impossible any end or use of it can be thought on, but what may very well, and
far better be attained, by the due and orderly method of Election, set down in
the Scriptures. For as the Church is sufficiently, and much better provided
for, in that method, by her infinitely wise and loving King and Head; so there
needs no other right to give a Minister of the Gospel a lawful Title, to his
Maintenance and Living, but his spiritual Capacity, and faithful discharge of
the duties of his Function. The Workman (says our Lord) is worthy of his wages;
so that unless the Patron will pretend, that he can state a Minister in a
Spiritual Capacity, and so assume a power of Ordination, as well as of Election
(and truly he has as good ground to claim the one as the other) he can give
him no right to his Maintenance, as we have already proven. And therefore such
a power is not to be tolerate in the Church, by any Christian Magistrate, who
ought to use all his Power and Authority for God, and the edification of his
People, by being a terror to evil doers, and removing of such corrupt and
useless Institutions, as put an obstruction in the way of the precious
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, for the Calling of such as may be fittest for the
Ministerial Charge, as being the most special ordinary Means, both of his own,
and his People's Eternal Happiness.

III. And the Church having in her purest times, enjoyed her lawfully called
Pastors, e're such a thing as Patronage was heard of in the World, and when she
had no Christian Magistrate to protect and defend her: It cannot but seem
wonderful, Quorsum, or for what end, such an Invention shall now be maintained,
in, and over the Church, when there are Christian Magistrates, who Virtute
Officij, are bound to plead for, and defend her in her Rights and Liberties:
seeing all that is necessar, in reference to the Call of a Gospel Ministry, and
to their true Right and Maintenance, is far better provided for, by Methods of
Divine Appointment. The right of Patronage is as little, and less useful, and I
am sure far more prejudicial in this cafe, than in the Call and Maintenance of
Men of other Professions, such as Lawyers, Phisicians, and common Mechanics:
Only men have still a greater itch, to be meddling in the matters of God,
without a lawful Call, than in other things, that of their own Nature, are
subject, and by Divine Appointment are left, to a humane Regulation, nitimur in
vetitum. And therefore, as we had once good reason to bless God, that the
public Authority of the Nation, in the Year 1649. had abolished this corrupt
custom, so on the other hand it is to be regrated, that there has not been
that same sense of Justice since with a suitable acquiescence, to their so just
and rational Determination: especially considering, that if there was any
prejudice or loss of Patrimony sustained, it was on the Church's part, and not
on the Patron's: as the Act 1649. will easily clear, to any that will be at the
pains to peruse it.

IV. In this manner do all Protestant Divines, and our own Writers in
particular, argue against the superstitious Corruptions, and Ceremonies of the
Romish and English Churches. And the truth is, if we would but allow our selves
calmly and without heat and prejudice, to consider the matter, it cannot but be
very surprysing, to see, that men who pretend, to act for the good and
edification of the Church, should yet hazard her Peace and Unity, and the
scandalizing and offending, or the marring of the progress of their poor
Brethren, in the ways of God, by forcing and violently imposing upon them, as
the only terms of Communion, under the pain both of Church Censures, and Legal
Punishments, The practice of what themselves confess, to be at best but
indifferent, and no way necessar, either upon the account of a Divine Command,
or Moral Use; And which their Brethren, upon solid and undeniable Grounds,
taken from the Word of God, and the Principles of the Reformation, believe to
be superstitious and sinful: Especially, since they are forced to acknowledge,
that these Institutions, in which they both agree, are not only Lawful, but do
likewise abundantly satisfy, all the necessary ends for which they are
appointed; there being nothing alleged, in favor of these superstitious and
unnecessary additions, but a pityful and empty shadow of worldly decency and
fashionablness, so much decryed by the word of God, Be not ye conform to this
present evil world, (says the Apostle) and which in no equity can ever come in
competition, with the least hazard of losing the Church Unity, or offending the
meanest of Christ's Followers. These Practices must certainly render such men
justly obnoxious, to the heavy charge of Schism, and to that Woe denounced, by
our blessed Lord, against such, as should be instrumental, see Matthew. 18.7.
in bringing divisions and offenses into the Church.

V. But to leave this, and come to the next brench of this consideration, we
may observe, that as there are few, or no institutions, either Civil or
Ecclesiastic but what by reason of the weakness and wickedness of men, are
liable to be abused, and one way or another may become, the cause or occasion,
of scandal and offense, to the people of God, and thereby mar their Spiritual
Progress, in his ways; so the abuse and offensiveness of an institution, of
its own Nature, useless and unnecessary, has always been held, by all sound
Divines, to be a sufficient plea against its farther use. The Apostle Paul
determines this point with, a Zeal and a (...), 1 Cor 8:
very becoming the gravity and importance of the subject matter, that even
things, which extra casum scandali, are in themselves, not only clearly Lawful
and allowed, but in some respect almost necessary, are to be laid aside, and
forborne, in the case of scandal and offense. If meat says he, make my Brother
to offend, I shall eat no Flesh, while the world stands. And therefore, a
fortiori, and much more ought such things as are not only useless and
unnecessary, but clearly unlawful, and prejudicial to the Interest of Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom, and the Liberties of his Church to be forborne, and laid
aside, from farther use, when they become the cause and occasion, of a constant
and continued tract of gross abuses, and most scandalously offensive to all
sort of Christians, in the Church of God. This is a Consideration, which I hope
it will be needless, any farther to illustrat, to such as are any way tender of
the Spiritual Concerns of the Kingdom of God, or the good of Souls.

And that the Right of Patronage has been most grossly abused and most
scandalously offensive, I think will be no hard task to prove. It will be much
more difficult, fully to enumerate, the abuses and offenses it has caused and
occasioned. I shall instance some few of them.

VI. First. That Patronage has been abused to Simony, and sacrilegious
dilapidation and misapplication, of the Church's Patrimony, The sad experience
of the Church in general, and of all the Corners of this land in particular,
can abundantly, and but too much witness. I wish the charge were groundless.
And the Simoniacal pactions, betwixt Patrons and Intrants occasioned by this
useless and corrupt privilege, have been so many, and have been managed and
carried on, in such secret methods, and under such a variety of disguise, that
it has always been found very uneasy to trace them out.

VII. Thus Intrants do sometimes procure themselves presentations, by the means
and interest of their friends. But this is not the worst, though the provincial
Council at Mentz in Germany, was deeply sensible of the prejudice, the Church
sustained by it, threatening the Patrons with the Church censures, and
forfeiture of their Rights, on that account. Take their own words, Res est
perniciosi exempli, and quae pravam saepe Ecclesiae calamitatem affert, quod
Patroni tum Ecclesiastici, tum Laici, propinquitate junctos, aut alijs meritis
et officijs sibi conciliatos, Idoneis praeteritis, ad officia Ecclesiastica
admovent. Quos praesenti constitutione provinciali, in Domino hortamur, et
peremptory monemus, ut a pernicioso hoc conatu, sibi temperent: Alioquin
severitate paenarum, rigide censemus coercendos, ac talis beneficij collatione
vel praesentatione, saltem pro hac vice, aut progravitate excessus etc.
Council: Mogunt: Cap: 68.
per omnem vitam privandos. That is, it is a practice of a most pernicious
Example, and oft-times is the occasion of much trouble and calamity to the
Church, that both Ecclesiastic and Laick Patrons, do advance to Church
Offices, those who are their Relations, or others whom they respect upon the
account of their service or dependence, without respect had of their age, or
indowments passing by such as would be more proper for the charge. Those
Patrons we do by this present provincial constitution, exhort in the Lord, and
peremptorly require, to abstain from these pernicious attempts, otherwise we
appoint them to be restrained by this severity of the Church Censures and to be
deprived of their Rights of Presentation or Collation, either for that time, or
according to the quality of the fault even for their whole Life.

VIII. Sometimes they purchase their Presentations directly for money, and
think the price the best bestowed part of their Patrimony, if they can but so
obtain them: and so the matter was frequently put to a fair Roup, and he that
offered most gained it. Cartwright mentions a remarkable instance of this, P.
595.
And by such courses many times (especially in England) Persons of the meanest
Rank, and most sordid Employments, ex insima plebe, like Jeraboams Priests, and
without the least qualifications of humane literature, if they could but read
the Common Prayer, turned Ministers, and got a benefice, while men that were of
any parts and Integrity, and disdained to be guilty of such baseness, could
obtain no access to the Ministry.

IX. Again, some times the condition upon which Presentations were granted,
was, that the Intrant as soon as in titulo, should consent to the dilapidation
of the benefice, and to the misapplying of its Rents, by giving the Patron or
some other for his behoove, a lease and Tack of it for a rent and duty, far
within the true worth. And it is much to be regrated, that though the Law of the
Land, strike against the Crime of Simony in the General, That yet this species
of it, Parl: 1612. Cap 1.
should be expressly allowed by statute, to be practiced without any Disguise:
Though even many Popish Writers, are ashamed to own such practices: And the
forcited provincial Council, held at Mentz, in the year 1549, prohibites to
give such Intrants institution in the Benefice, and threatens them with
deprivation, if ever such practices be discovered. Alij scilicet Patroni (says
that Council) de censibus beneficiorum, partem sihi retinent, Council. Mogunt.
ubi supra.
aut etiam in totum fructus beneficiorum intercipiunt, his quibus ea, ad
speciem infamis cupiditates suae obvelandae, conferunt, Inanem modo titulum
Reliquentes. -- districte praecipimus, ne quis Praelatus, seu Officialis ejus,
ad quem munus investiendi pertinet, ad beneficium, cui animarum Cura annexa
est, quenquam investire presumat, nisi qui etc. -- Censum istius Ecclesiae, ad
suam sustentationem, sufficientem esse, eumque sibi a Patrono integrum
relinqui, docuerit: Alioquin Investituram talem, inanem et irritam, et Salut
aris hujus inhibitionis temerarium transgressorem, ipso facto ab officio
suspendendum, et arbitrio Ordinarij sui puniendum decernimus. Eum vero qui
praesentationem, seu Collationem alicujus Beneficij. sive Curati sive non
Curati, a Patrono receperit, cum tali pactione, ut Patronus de proventibus
beneficij portionem reservet, ad tale beneficium prohibemus Investiri: Aut si
post investituram, talem pactionem fecisse deprehensus fuerit, beneficio
decernimus privandum, et eidem beneficio alium Idoneum praeficiendum. That is,
some Patrons do retain to themselves a part of the Rents of the Benefice, yea,
and sometimes, they intercept the whole profits of it, leaving nothing to
these, upon whom, for a cover to their infamous avarice they confer the same,
but only a naked and empty Title. And therefore we peremptorly require, that no
prelat nor official in his name, to whom the right of institution pertains,
presume to give any man institution in a benefice, to which the cure of Souls
is annexed, unless he first instruct, that the rents of it are sufficient for
his sustentation, and that they are left entire to him by the Patron: Otherways
we decern the Institution to be void and null, and ordain such Contraveeners of
this wholesome prohibition to be ipso facto suspended, from their office, and to
be punished at the discretion of their Ordinary. And we do likewayes prohibit,
any such person, as has accepted of a presentation, upon such conditions from
the Patron, to a Benefice, either with, or without Cure, to be institute
therein. And if at any time after the Institution such a paction shall be
discovered, we ordain him to be deprived of the Benefice, and another fit
Person to be put in his place.

X. At other times, the Intrants Friends, at trysts or meetings, about Civil
Business, with the Patrons, past from something more or less of their just
rights, In favors of the Patrons, hoc intuitu, that their Friend may be settled
in the Benefice.

XI. Sometimes the Intrants Friends engage for his dependence upon the Patron,
and for his concurrence with him, in his designs for promoting a course of
defection, and promise him the Intrants suffrage for that effect. And the truth
is, Generally, this Right of Patronage, kept the Pastors of the Church, in such
a sneaking and flavish dependence, upon great Men, as was most unworthy the
Dignity and Character, of a Minister of the Gospel, or any man of Spirit to
undergo.

XII. Thus also gifts were bestowed on the Patron's Wife, and Children, or on
some Gehazies about him, wherein the Patron did often times, meanly enough run
his share.

In short there are as many several methods, of practicing Simony, occasioned
by this one device of Patronage, as there are of making up the price or value
of a bargain, betwixt Merchant and Merchant, and some of them dishonest,
dishonorable and base, to that Degree, that it is much safer to pass them over
in silence, than to teach Men to repeat them by a fuller enumeration.

XIII. But 2dly, this corrupt power has not only exposed Patrons and Intrants,
but even the Churche-Judicatories and People themselves, to a multitude of
temptations. The Scandal and Offensiveness of Patronage, in this respect, is
but too well known. For these also very often, partly from a shyness, to top with
the great Ones, partly from the solistations and flatteries, and sometimes the
threats that were used, for procuring the admission of the Person presented:
And finding it hard, to withstand the tide and stream of the times, or to
provide any effectual remedy against a growing evil, have been forced to ly by,
and slight the due inquiry and trial, of the life and qualifications of the
Intrant, and to huddle up the whole matter perfunctorie, et pro more scholae
only.

XIV. And both Presbitry and People were also many times deluded and abused, by
the Patrons droping in of a presentation (which he knew, and designed should be
rejected) once in the half year, that he might thereby preserve his right of
presentation, from falling Jure devoluto, into the hands of the Church: And
that he might promote his own private and base ends, of misapplying the profits
of the benefice, parl. 13. I. 6. p. 135. p. 15. I. 6. p. 163.
during the vacancy to his own use: The poor People in the mean while, being
oblidged, to seek help from other Ministers, and to depend upon the leisure of
such, as were, for the most part, as unable to decern what was requisite, to
make a fit and well qualified Minister, as they were careless and unconcerned,
to provide them with such, to the great hinderance of the planting of Kirks;
whereby the poor people have been unavoidably forced, to ly destitute for a
long time, of the preaching of the Gospel, so necessary a mean of their Eternal
happiness.

XV. Again, the power of Patronage has been most offensive, in being abused to
the bringing in, and keeping up, of a corrupt, Ignorant, Lazy, and
Scandalously profane Ministry, in the Church of God. I need not enlarge upon
this, it is a truth but too well known. The whole Nation can bear witness, That
there was never a more Ignorant Idle and Profane pack of men, that bare the
name of Ministers in any Christian Church, since the first dawning of the
Reformation from Popery, than many of those, that were obtruded upon the
Church, in the time of the late Prelates (to say nothing of the present
Prelates) when Patronage was exercised in its full extent. The good Lord
deliver and preserve his Church from such a Ministry.

XVI. This power of Patronage has also many times been laid hold on, when no
other pretense would serve the turn, to eject Learned, Godly, Painful, and
Successful Ministers, or to disturb them in the peacable Possession of their
livings, if their entry was not by the Patron's Presentation, as being the only
Legal Title that any man could have for the time. To abstract from that strange
Catastrophe, that we see brought about in this Church, in the Years 1661, and
1662. upon the pretense of the want of Presentations, when yet for the time,
Patronages stood abolished.

XVII. It has also been grossly scandalous and offensive, by being an occasion
of bringing, the Blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the Ministers of it, into
contempt: For as on the one hand, there is no secondary mean, that does more
advance the esteem and value of the Gospel, in the hearts of People, than a
suitable and due respect, and a cheerful and cordial submission, to such as are
employed in the Ministry of it, as is very clear both from common Reason, and
from the Apostles earnestness with the Faithful upon that account. we beseech
you, brethren (says he) to know them, 1 These 5.12 13. 1 Timothy: 5 17 1. Cor: 4.
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to
esteem them very highly in love, for their Works sake. And again, Let the
Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they that
labor in word and Doctrine (that is both preaching Presbiters and ruling
Elders) For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that
treads out the Corn: and the Labourer is worthy of his reward: So on the
other hand, there is no stratageme, that ever Satan devised, that has had
worse, and more effectual influence, for destroying that reverence and free
submission, which people owe the Sent Servants of the Lord, than this device of
Patronage has had.

XVIII. And it is morally impossible it should be otherwise for when people see
themselves disappointed, of a person more worthy, and acceptable, on whom they
had set their Eye for a Pastor, and another obtruded upon them in his place,
merely by the Patron's Election, to whom they never consented, and a Legal
Force put upon both them and the Presbitry, to receive the Person Presented,
and to give him the Maintenance due to their lawful Pastor; How is it possible,
so long as men are men, and subject to passion and weakness, but that the
effect of such untoward methods, should be to produce, a very cold, backward,
and unchearful Submission and Obedience, to such Pastors? There being nothing
that more alienates men's minds and affections, than such courses; and Love
being the main ingredient in Reverence, and that the great Ground of a cheerful
and hearty Submission, is it any wonder to see this a mising, where there is so
much pains taken to destroy that which breeds it? or how is it possible that a
People can be persuaded, that a Pastor is sent of God for their good, when they
see, that he has stepped out of God's way, and has not entered by the right
door of Christ's apointment?

XX. Beside all this the whole Nation can witness, that this method of forcing
Ministers upon People, without or against their consent, and inclinations, has
had very sad and scandalous effects, by raising of Riots, and Tumults, to the
great hazard of both parties, as well at the time of the entry as afterward,
besides the loss and trouble the People sustained, by subsequent prosecutions
at Law, upon that account.

Many other instances might be given, of the gross abuses and scandals,
occasioned by this corrupt and useless privilege, but these may suffice. And
the truth is, It is no savory employment to rake into such a Dunghill of
Corruption.

XX. Only I cannot omit to observe, that which is the most Natural Effect, of
the unwarrantable mixture, that appears in such a Call to the Ministry. For
beside the bad influence this may have on People, to raise a just distaste and
prejudice in their minds, against such ministers, It cannot but also be very
hurtful to a Minister himself, in marring his confidence, and obstructing his
comfort in performing the duties of his function, when he sees himself
disabled (especialy in times of trial and persecution) to behave, in the
discharge of his trust, with that vigor and confidence, that becomes a Sent
Servant of Jesus Christ, and a Workman that needs not be ashamed. To this
purpose, 2 Timothy 2 15. 2^ Cor. 4.1.
there is a passage of the Apostle Paul, in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians, very remarkable, where he founds the cause of his not fainting, in
the Work of the Lord, in the midst of difficulties, upon the assurance he had,
of his having received the Call of his Ministry from no other hand, but that
which had been the Fountain of Mercy to him. Having received this Ministry
(says he) as we have received Mercy, therefore we faint not. And hence it is,
that generally in all the Epistles, directed to the several Churches, The
Writer still begins, with his Title of Apostle, Servant of Christ, Elder, etc.
thereby intimating, that their great ground of Confidence, and Comfort, in
delivering the Message of the Gospel, was founded on the assurance they had, of
their Lawful Call to the Ministry.

XXI. This is a Truth that has been confirmed, by the experience of several
Ministers in this Church. For though some of them were both faithful and diligent
in their duty, to the entire satisfaction of their People; yet when they came
to discover the sinfulness of their entry, by this unwarrantable method of
Patronage, they have been kept under long and sad exercise of Spirit, and put
to serious and deep humiliation before the Lord, e're they could attain to any
measure of confidence, that they were authorized of God, to deliver a Message
in his Name, or could get their Conscience brought to any calm and quiet, from
the fears of being under the guilt of such, as run unsent, or could think they
had a good right to that Peace, which our blessed Lord left, as his last and
farewell token, to his Disciples, and in them to all his Sent Servants, John
20.21.
as the natural and kindly Effect, of their Lawful Call to the Ministry. Peace
be unto you, (says our Blessed Lord) as my Father has sent me, so send I you,

XXII. And many Ministers, who have sitten down with too much satisfaction, as
to such a Call, and way of Entry, have been made to see, that such of their
Brethren and People, as had skill to discern the Spirits, and know the Voice of
Christ, in his Sent Servants, had thoughts of them very different, from their
own. These being able to discover in such Pastors, but very little of that
assistance and support, which the Lord ordinarily vouchsafes to bestow, on his
own Ambassadors, sent upon such a weighty and important Errand, as the delivery
of a Message of Reconciliation with God, to a People in his Name

XXIII. Others have but too much endeavored to stiffle, and bear down the
checks of their Conscience, in this matter, but have found themselves very much
straightened, to own and avow (as a Faithful Pastor should) that they had a
Warrant and Commission, to speak to their People, in the Name of Christ, And if
at any time, they ventured upon it, their Conscience would stare them in the
face, and tell them, that their people did with too much reason suspect their
sincerity in it, seeing their entry was not by the right Door, but that in some
one or more steps, they had clumb up another way.

XXIV. And as in times of trial and difficulty, the checks of a man's
Conscience, do ordinarily turn more sharp and uneasy, so at such times
especially; the comfort of such Ministers as entered by Patrons, have proven
very faint and cold: and the truth is, it is but little wonder, That such as
have no sparks to warm them at, in this case, but these of men's kindling, have
this from the Lord's hand, that they shall lie down in sorrow. Esaias. 50.11.
Confidence and Comfort (in these matters especially) are mutual Supports, and
Strengthners of each other, and there is no such ground in the World, for both,
as that calm serenity of Mind, and peace of Conscience, which flows from the
assurance a man has, of having regulate his Actions, (especially when they
relate to the matters of God, and his Church) by the Divine and Unerring Rules
of the Scripture.

XXV. And though many pious and worthy Persons, have entered to the Ministry in
this method, yet it is to be considered, that multa sunt toleranda in
Ecclesiae, aut Reipublicae statu perturbato, quae non sunt approbanda. I shall
not determine, how far such a toleration may be extended, but sure I am, to
argue from their practice at a time, when entry to the Ministry could not be
otherwise had, to the keeping up of such an abuse when it may be taken away, as
it was once well taken away, is a consequence beyond all rational
comprehension. Those Ministers ordinarily, had the voluntar consent, of the
Church and People interessed, which makes up the Substance of Election, And if
they had not this, I do not see how they could have been free of the guilt of
having run unsent, ubi libertas Electionis (says Doctor Ames) ab episcopis, de
casibus Cons. Cap 25 29.
Magistratu, Patronis Imminuitur, quamvis Electio non sit eo modo et gradu
libera, quo oportet, Consensus tamen voluntarius, ut in Conjugio, sic in
Ministerio, licet iniquis rationibus procuretur, essentiam habet Electionis et
vocationis necessario Requisitae. That is, though in such cases, the Election be
not in that manner, and to that degree, so free as it ought to be; yet the
voluntary consent of these interessed, as in the case of Marriage, so in this
of the Ministry, has the necessary Essence and Substance, of ane Election and
Call.

SECT. XV Patronage is a symbolizing with Idolaters, and against the Doctrine
and Discipline of this Church.
I. THE last ground that we shall insist upon, against the interests of
Patronage, is, that it being a Popish device, without any use or necessity,
ought even upon that account to be rejected. I grant indeed, that it is no
sufficient Argument, simply to say, that a thing is devised or practiced by the
Popish Church, if it were founded on any necessity, either of means or precept,
that is, if it were either morally necessary, or positively commanded; But we
may well conclude, that the complying and symbolizing with Idolaters, in things
unnecessary, or even, things simply indifferent, is sinful and unlawful. Thus
we find the Lord prohibiteth his People, from complying with, or imitation of
the Heathen, in cutting the Hair, Lev: 19: 27
or rounding the corners of the Head etc: which are things in themselves, at
worst but indifferent. And therefore, a fortiori, and much more, is it
unjustifiable, to comply with Idolaters, In keeping up and maintaining such
Popish devices, as are not only in themselves, useless and unnecessary, but are
likewayes clearly prejudcial and destructive, to the interests and liberties of
the Church of God; And have moreover a Natural Tendency, to foster
Superstition, and an Antievangelical Opinion of Merit.

II. And that this power of Patronage is of that nature, is abundantly clear,
from what is already said, in the beginning and progress of this Discourse. And
to this day, where ever it is maintained in its ^ull Latitude, as in the Popish
Churches, daily experience confirms the truth of this Charge. For, as
Superstition, and the Opinion of Merit, were the great Principles, that gave
Birth and Life to this corrupt and useless Invention, and have multiplied
Patronages to so vast a number, as will appear to any that will peruse the
Popish Writers: so it is but little wonder, that this power still retain a
native tendency, to foster these breasts, from which it drew its first strength
and aliment: There being nothing more natural, than for a thing both to
preserve, and be preserved, by the same means, by which it began at first to
have a Being. It were easy to enlarge upon this Consideration, but the thing
it self being abundantly clear, I shall leave it to the Reader's own
consideration, That will furnish him with more than is necessar to set down in
this discourse, which has already exceeded the brevity at first designed.

III. There are many other Grounds that might be insisted on, against the
Interest of Patronage, but these already proposed, I hope, upon due
consideration, will be found to be a sufficient proof of our assertion, and the
intended brevity of this Essay will not allow me to enlarge any farther. And
therefore I shall only add, that this power of Patronage, is contrary to the
Doctrine, Discipline, and Government of this Church, received from the first
Dawning of the Reformation from popery (as has been shown in the entry of this
discourse, and shall not now be resumed) which the whole Nation, has so often,
and Solemnly Vowed and engaged to Maintain. And it is hoped, that none, who
have been Born and Baptized in this National Church, will upon serious and
deliberate reflection, think this Device, which is so unwarrantable, useless
and offensive, and so prejudicial and destructive to the worship and service of
God, and the good of the Souls of his People; Of so much worth and value, as to
run themselves and their posterity, by the defense and practice of it, under
the hazard, that the breach of such solemn Eagagments may bring upon them.

IV And what ever disorder may bepretended by the Adversaries of Religion, to
have been in going about the Reformation, either in this (...) other Countries;
yet as it is not much to be admired, if in such a horrid confusion and
darkness, as the affairs of both Church and state were brought to at that time,
there was something of an unavoidable superpurge, upon a Body full of so gross
Humors, and fixed and inveterate Diseases, where it was impossible for the best
Physicians, at the first, to know the Quantum sufficit, and the just and true
Dose requisite for such an untractable patient: Especially after all that they
call Regular and orderly methods, had been so often attempted with out the
least success: Omne enim pharmacum, habet in se aliquid veneni: Et omne
medicum, aliquid violenti, et nullum est magnum exemplum, sine aliqua mixtura
injustitiae. There being no Drug, without some mixture of Poison, no Physic,
without something violent in it, nor any great example or advantage, without
some small loss; which yet our Adversaries will be very much straightened to
instruct. So sure I am in the present case, this corrupt power of Patronage,
was once taken away, not in any disorderly manner, nor so suddenly as it might
have been, but after a long tract of time, and much trouble and pains, was
abolished by public Authority, in the most calm and deliberate method
imaginable.

SECT: XVI. A pretense that the Patron meddles with nothing of Election, or
what is properly Ecclesiastical.
I. I Come now to the last part of the method proposed, which is to examine
such pretenses, as may be offered, to extenuate the injuries, that we have
demonstrate the Church sustains, by occasion of the corrupt and useless
privileges of Patronage, and to clear that the Church's prejudice thereby is
not so great as it is represented to be.

II. The first pretense of this nature we meet with is, that the privilege
acclaimed, in the Call of a Minister, cannot be said to be any right of
Election: For when a Patron Presents a Minister, he makes no formal Election,
but leaves that, and all the rest of the Ecclesiastical part, viz. Trial and
Admission; entirely to the Presbitery. So that after Trial, Election may follow
or not follow, as the Presbitery sees cause. And the Presbitery and Parish, may
reject the person presented, in case he be found insufficient, or unqualified.
And therefore the power of Patronage is not so injurious, to the interests of
the Church, as it is represented to be.

III. This pretense consists of several branches, which I shall handle
severally, the first is, that the Patron makes no formal Election, as to which
it may be considered.

First, that though in a formal, orderly, and Lawful Election, the Looking out,
the Nomination, and the Election, of a Pastor, be distinct Acts; yet, as in
other cases, all usurpations and corruptions, are full of disorder and
confusion, so particularly in this of Patronage also, these distinct Acts, are
absolutely Confounded: For whereas in the orderly way of the Looking out
Nomination and Election of a Pastor, there is a joint concurrence, of all
concerned in it, To wit both of Church-Judicatories and Church of Beleivers
respectively, each of them acting, and keeping within their own Spheres, As 1.
Both concur in the Looking out, of such persons, as may be fit and proper, for
such a Charge. 2. They both concur in the Nomination, of such as they have
looked out. 3. They pitch upon and Elect, one of those whom they have so Looked
out and Nominate. And after all the Church Sets the person thus Elected before,
or Presents him to the Presbitery, for trial and admission.

IV. But upon the contrary, In this method of Patronage, the case is quite
different. For here, the Patron by himself alone, and without, yea and often
against, the advice and concurrence of any interessed, does by one single and
confused Act of Presentation, both Look out, Nominat and Elect, what persons he
pleases, for such a Charge; and Sets them before, or Presents them to the
Presbitery, for trial and admission, passing by all others: Oblidging the
Church to receive and admit those he has presented, if they be found in the
meanest measure, externally Qualified, according to the letter of the Church
Laws, for the Office of a Pastor. So that what the patrons leave to the Church,
is not to make any Election, that being done by himself to their hand, but only
Declaratively, to find, whether the person Elected by the patron, be in any
measure externally Qualified, for the Office in general or not; without respect
to any Inquiry, whether he be fit for such a people, or any other Consideration
whatsoever.

V. Secondly this one single and confused Act, including the Looking out, the
Nomination, the Election, and the Seting, or Presenting of the person Elected,
before the Church Judicatories, puts the person presented, as far forward, in
order to his Admission, as all these distinct Acts, that both the
Church-Judicatories, and Church of Believers in the most orderly and Lawful
Method, can do. For the next step after this, in both cases, is to proceed to
the Trials, of the person pitched upon. And therefore the patrons One single
and confused Act, of Presentation, compleats the Election, as well as all the
other distinct Acts, And by the way, we may notice, what pains and trouble it
cost this Church, in former times to procure from the King, That in cases where
he was Patron, the Presbitery and Parish might send a list of Four to Court,
out of which the King was to Elect One.

VI. Thirdly, though it should fall out (as seldom if ever it does) that after
Trial, both Presbitery and People, should fully approve of, and be satisfied
with, the Person Elected by the Patron, both as to his fitness and
qualifications for the Office of a Pastor in general, and for such a charge and
People in particular, yet the Act of the Church in that case, may well be
termed a subsequent and supervenient consent, to an Election already made by
the Patron, by himself, and without their concurrence; but can never in any
propriety of speech, nor from the Nature of the Act, be termed the Election it
self. All that is here left in the Church's power, being indeed nothing else,
but simply to find and declare, whether the Person Elected by the Patron, be
sufficient, And that only in so far as concerns the merely external
qualifications, that are simply necessary, by the letter of the Church Laws,
for the Office of a Pastor in General. And sure I am there is none that have
any measure of true Piery, or sincerity, but will think, that to say no more,
there is something farther requisite, to be considered, in the Election of a
Pastor, that may be fit and proper for the particular charge, of such and such
a People, who may be One among a Thousand, as it is Job. 33. which in the
method of Election by Patrons, can never fall within the reach of the
cognizance of the Church, (who only are, and can be, the proper and discerning
Judges of it) to inquire into. And though the Church, as she is bound, should
dipp upon these farther considerations, and thereupon find cause, to reject the
Person presented by the Patron; yet her determinations therein, would not be
reguarded, as being absolutely inconsistent with the exercise of the privilege
of Patronage; the Patron being oblidged to stand to the issue of no other
inquiry, but what Concerns the merely external and common qualifications, that
are simply necessary for the office in general, as I have already said.

VII. As to the second branch of this pretense, it is very clear, both from
what has been just now said, and from what is said in the former part of this
discourse, that Trial and Admission, make not up all the Ecclesiastical part of
a Ministers Call. The Church-Judicatories and People, have a farther interest,
in the Election of such as are to be members of the one, and Pastors of the
other, as has been sufficiently cleared. And though this were all the
Ecclesiastical part, yet even that cannot be said to be left untouched by the
Patron: For to say nothing of what the Canonists maintain, that such as are
presented ab Vniversitatibus, seu generalium studiorum Collegijs, are to be
admitted without any trial or Examination; which clearly takes away trial from
the Church, though there can no presumptionly in the case for these Patrons, to
lay aside the trial of the person presented, Except in so far as concerns, his
knowledge in ordinary literature, I say, beside this, it is very clear, that
the Church cannot be free and unlimited, in the trial and admission, so long as
the Patron, leaves not the Church to a free choice, and ties not himself to her
free choice; but on the contrary, binds up the Church to the Election made by
him.

VIII. And though Patron should be tied to the Church's free Election, either by
Law, or by his own consent, yet he would still remain as ane unwarrantable,
useless and unnecessary obstruction, to the planting of the Church, with fit
and well qualified Pastors. They being still oblidged to depend upon an
extrinsick power, for completing of their Call, as if it were defective
without him.

IX. And as the sad experience of the Church in general, (if men would do
themselves the favor, to see things as they are, and without prejudice and
prepossession) has in all Ages, sufficiently demonstrated, that there is no
method under Heaven, that can regular the Inventions of men, in the matters of
God, so as to keep them within any tolerable bounds; so the experience of our
own Church in particular, has confirmed this truth beyond all contradiction.

X. We all know, (to give no other instance) what provisions and limitations,
were made by the Church, by King James the sixth his own consent, in the Year
1600. with all the Caution, that humane foresight or providence, could devise,
for reducing of Episcopacy, to some kind of Moderation, as they term it, to
which the Bishops themselves did consent, subscribe and solemnly swear, and the
King in person, in the General Assembly, did ratify the whole matter: All the
freedoms and liberties of Presbitery being confirmed by parliament. And we know
as well that all the bonds that could be put on the Prelates did in a short
time (as many did then foresee) prove nothing else, but Ropes of Sand, and as
incapable to bridle the lusts of that corrupt and Ambitious party, as a
Fish-book, or a Thorn would be to catch the great Leviathan, Job 41. In short,
all these caveats, and injunctions, solemn Vows, Oaths, and Promises were
broken, and the Bishops mounted to their usual Grandeur and Lordly Dominion
over the Church, notwithstanding of them all. The Church complains and cries
out, on that violent and treacherous alteration of her established Government.
And the Bishops find themselves oblidged to meet and consult, how to vindicate
themselves, from such terrible Imputations. And accordingly they publish an
Apology in Latin, and address it to all Christian Churches, at home and
abroad. An Apology that as it discovers their Treatchery and Perjury, to be a
most detestable and horrid piece of Villainy; so it clearly tells us, what
effect the most wise and prudent regulations, of such humane Inventions in the
matters of God will have: And may serve the Church, for a constant beacon, to
beware of taking the like measurs for the future. Take their own words,
Conditiones istae, Refultatio libelli de regimine Eccles. Scotican.
pro tempore magis, quo contentiosis rixandi ansa praeriperetur, quam animo in
perpetuum observandi acceptae. That is, their design in these solemn Promises
Vows and Oaths, was never to keep them, but only to serve a Turn, and to lull
the People unto some sort of a calm and security against the clamor, that was
raised upon the apparent alteration, of the Established Government of the
Church.

An Apology indeed Ingenuous enough, and very becoming the Faith and
sincerity, of that party, who still incline to follow the Wisdom of the old
Serpent, without any mixture of the Innocence and Simplicity of the Dove, but I
am sure it were scarce credible, that ever any, that pretended, to the name of
a Clergyman, or to the Title of the Reverend, and Spiritual Fathers of the
Church, should make use of it, if they themselves, had not published it to the
World. And there is no Crime their Adversaries could charge them with of
ablacker Nature, than this defense fastens upon them.

XI. But this not being my present design, having only fallen by accident upon
this particular; The true use of it, that at present we intend, is, that it
would be a piece of stupid, and sinful folly, after such a warning, to run
ourselves, upon these Rocks, on which the peace and safety of the Church, has
been so often ready to split. If in such cases we should be-take ourselves, to
rely on our own pitiful and weak Counsels and projects, and reject, the
institutions of the Infinite and unsearchable, Love and Wisdom, of God, we
should truly be guilty of forsaking the Fountain of Living Waters, and of
Hewing out to our selves, Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water,
And should take the most compendious method, that could be, Jerm 2.13 Levit 26
to provoke the Lord, to punish us yet seven times more, for all our iniquities

XII. The true Rule in these cases, is, that since such Institutions, as are
not in themselves, absolutely necessary, either by necessity of Means, or
Precept, and do of their own nature, so much tend to Corruption, Oppression,
Scandal and Superstition, though never so well regulat, are still ready to
deboard, and exceed all bounds; Therefore, the best, and only way, to prevent
their exorbitancies, is altogether to Cashier them, from any other farther use.

XIII. I shall only add, that as the Institution of Visitations, was very fit
and necessary, for enquiring into the lives and carriages of the pastors of the
Church, after they were admitted and settled; so it is sufficiently known, that
the patrons of Kirks and Benefices, have still endeavored, with all their
force, to put a stop to the exercise of these Visitations, as knowing that most
of the pastors of their Nomination, were as little, or less able, to endure
such a scrutiny, as they were unsatisfactory, at their first admission. I shall
not mention, what other Reasons, the patrons had, for such a kindly protection
of those men: they may be easily guessed, though I am sure with little credit, to
either party.

SECT. XVII. Another pretense, that the Church may reject the Person presented,
in case of insufficiency.
I. THE next pretense that may be made use of, to alleviat the guilt of
patronage, in its usurpations over the Liberties of the Church, is this, That
the Parish or Presbitery, may reject, or refuse to admit, the person Elected by
the Patron, in case, that after trial, he be found insufficient, or
unqualified, either as to parts or manners. And therefore the Church can be at
no loss by the Rights of Patronage.

II. It must certainly be an other force, than that of Reason, that can draw
such a consequence. This method of arguing, is just the same, as if a man
should say, it is needless to stop the entry of a Robber into a house, or to
put him out after he is entered, because any harm he can do, may be easily
either diverted, or repaired, sure I am this is very sar from our Blessed
Lord's method of reasoning. Matthew. 29. Luke 12.39.
If (says he) the good man of the house, had known, in what watch the Thief
would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house, to have
been broken up.

III. If evil must not be done, that good may come of it; and if the Jesuitick
Quibbles of a good intention, cannot justify a bad action; much less is evil
to be tolerate and allowed, because it is possible to prevent, or repair its bad
effects, Nam quod possibile est esse, possibile est non esse, one may be
answers another, That which may be, may also not be. There is still a hazard in
the matter, and Christian prudence oblidges us, to shun even the least
appearance of evil, as far as we may. The true rule in such cases, (as I
already marked) is, to abolish an useless and dangerous custom, or rather
corruption, since vetustas erroris non consuetudo, sed corruptela dicenda est;
and then indeed the consequence will be good, that the Church can be at no loss
by it, Mortui non Mordent, says the proverb.

IV. And next, beside that the power of Patronage, does unnecessarly expose
Intrants to discouragement, by being rejected for Insufficiency, and also
exposes the Church-Judicatories, to an unjust and causeless odium and
reproach, of too much rigor and severity, which if the right of Election were
in the Church's own hand, as it ought to be, would be very much prevented, I
say, beside this we have already observed, what true liberty, this power of
Patronage leaves to the Church, in the choice and trial of her Pastors. And
when ever the Presbitery rejects the Person presented, upon any head that is
not grounded, upon his Insufficiency and Scandal, the Patron looks upon his
privilege, as highly injured, he being oblidged to stand to no such
determination: And when ever they reject upon Scandal or insufficiency, unless
it be most palpably and clearly manifest, which is not always necessary, for a
Pastor ought not only to be free of Scandal, 1 Timothy 2.2, 7. Tit. 1.
but as the Apostle positively requires, he ought to be of an entire fame, and
known good report; I say, if such insufficiency be not palpably manifest, there
is presently a terrible outcry, and a constant foundation laid of many tedious
Appeals, and litigious Debates, concerning the quantum sufficit of a Pastors
qualifications, etc. from one Church-Judicatory to another, with little credit
to the Patron, and far less to the Intrant. And upon this consideration alone
though there were no other, the Church's freedom in the trial and admission of
her Pastors, is very much hindered, as the Liberty of Marriage in the case of
waird Vassals, is abridged by the Power and Interest of the Superior, and the
niceties of the feudal customs. And certainly as their is no sort of contract
in the World, wherein a perfect liberty and freedom of choice, ought more to
predomine, (if I may so say) then in that of Marriage; so the Church, by the
appointment of God, has much freedom, in the Election of her Pastors, which
are his Spiritual Husbands. And as any force or undue influence, in the one
case is very odious, so in the other likewise it is no less so. The Simile is
easily understood and therefore I shall urge it no farther. A waird holding in
such cases as this, is certainly a very hard and dangerous Tenure.

V. But besides, when a person presented by the Patron is rejected by the
Presbitery, the Patron's right stands still entire, to Elect and present de
novo, some other person ejusdem farinae, with the former, and so the Church
most of new again, be inviegled in the same troubles and perplexities, and all
to no purpose or use.

VI. Again, in the Election of Pastors by the Patrons, the Church and People
interessed, have little or no power to withstand the admission, or to nullify
the Election, more than any mere Stranger, that will undertake, to prove the
insufficiency, or Scandalous carriage, of the person presented.

VII. And to say, that an institution, under which the Church and People of
God, has so long groaned, and which was forced and obtruded upon her, without
the least shadow of a warrant, from the word of God, or the least pretense of
usefulness, for promotting their Spiritual good and edification, is no way
injurious to the Church, implies a manifest contradiction.

VIII. Lastly, and I shall add no more, though the Patron should present none,
but such as are some way fit; yet the Church's liberty and freedom of Election,
remains still under restraint: For though the Church should have power to reject
never so many; yet a people shall never come to enjoy the Pastor, they chiefly
desire, and that would be most acceptable to them, so long as the patron, and
not the Church her self, retains the right or power of Election. And certainly
the sense of such a grievous oppression, cannot but make all that are any way
tender, or concerned in the interests of the Church of Christ, especially those
that have been witnesses of a far different State of affairs, and of the great
advantages that attended it, to be serious and fervent, in prayer to God, for
removing, and averting such a Bondage and Slavery, from the Church and people
of God, for the future.

SECT. XVIII. Another pretense from the distinction of Laick and Ecclesiastic
Patronages.
I. THere is another pretense made use of, to extenuate the guilt, of the
pretended power of Patronage, that is much boasted of by many (though I confess I
am unable to discover where its strength lies) who grant that indeed there are
many cogent Arguments against Laick Patronages, as they term them, and that
these may be and have been, very injurious, to the interest of the Church, but
that yet Ecclesiastic Patronages, may be very useful. If you ask them what
they mean by these, they cannot tell, but still they tell you, Ecclesiastic
Patronages, are very useful, because they are in the Church's own hand, as the
very word imports. However the plain sense of this, (if it have any) I take to
be this, that it is very fit this privilege should be entrusted, in the hands
of Bishops, who are Ecclesiastic Officers and Governors, but not in the hands
of others.

II. I cannot stay to examine this distinction though I can hardly be persuaded
it is good Sense as it is ordinarily used, since the most part of the
Patronages, that belonged to the Bishops, may truly be termed Laick Patronages,
both in respect of their Original, the most of them having been at first
settled, in the hands of the Laity (as they are termed) and also in respect of
their conveyance, which was by a grant from the Civil Magistrate, by rights
under the Great Seal etc. And besides the true meaning of this distinction,
(passing by the Notion and use that Lawyers have and make of it) is, it seems,
to be taken, not from the quality of the Person, in whose hands a Patronage is
settled, whether they be persons in a Civil or in an Ecclesiastic Capacity; but
from the quality of the stock and fond, out of which the Kirks were built, or
the benefices settled: For ^f the stock was out of the private Patrimony of any
man, whether he was of the Clergy, or of the Laity, the Patronage must be
Laick: and if it be out of the Patrimony of the Church, the Patronage must be
Ecclesiastic.

III. But not to insist on these Topics, this pretense is absolutely
groundless. 1. Because, the Argument adduced, striks equally against all for of
Patronages, and against all such negative interests, in the Election or
Maintenance, of the Ministers of the Gospel, as are not of Divine appointment
and institution.

IV. Next, Bishops have no more warrant from Scripture, for such an interest,
and privilege, than others have. And the power of Patronage has been as
grossly abused, if not more, and as scandalously offensive, and I am sure more
prejudicial to the interests of the Church, and to the thriving of Religion,
when in the hands of the Bishops, than when in the hands of other persons. And
there is no ground from Scripture, either by precept, promise or example, that
any one Church Officer, should ordinarily be entrusted, with such an interest
and privilege, in the Looking out, Nomination and Election, and in the
Maintenance or Living of the Ministers of the Gospel.

V. But to cut of all farther debate, we utterly disclaim any such Officer in
the Church, as a Bishop, in a sense superior to, or distinct from an ordinary
preaching Presbiter or Elder: These terms are of one and the self same
signification in the Scripture, as will appear to any, that will be at the
pains to read the Texts, where ever the word Bishop is mentioned. And I know no
man or Angel, that has power to separate, what the Spirit of God in the
Scripture has joined, and made one and the same. And consequently a Bishop can
have no such privilege. Non entis nulla sunt accidentia, nullae affectiones,
nullae proprietates.

VI. And though prelacy were a Lawful Office, as it is not, and though the Prelates
were Successors to the Apostles, as they most ridiculously pretend, (since as
we already cleared, it was impossible the design of their Office, could admit
of any Succession) yet sure I am in this privilege of Patronage, they never
did, nor do follow the example of the Apostles: For even the Apostles
themselves, in the Election of Matthias, to be one of their number, made use of
the Concurrence of the People: And in the ordination of the Pastors of the
Church, they made use of the concurrence, both of the Presbitry and People. And
if they joined the Presbitry and People, and admitted them to an interest, in
relation to the highest acts of the Ministerial Call, they questionless also
left them a share, 1 Timothy 4.14
in the Looking out, Nomination, and Election, of the ordinary pastors, Nam qui
vult majus, vult etiam minus. Act 15.2: 25.27 Act: 13.1: 2.3. Act. 14 27: 28:
Nay which is more, the ordinary Teachers of the Church, and others did
concur, in sending out of the very Apostles themselves, to some special pieces
of their Ministry. And accordingly the Apostles, think it not below their
Dignity, to give them an account how they had behaved in their Commission. So
that let the Prelates pretend Succession to whom they will, they can never
pretend to be Successors of the Apostles, to whom a Sole power of Jurisdiction
and Ordination, was as much a Stranger, as to any Presbyter in the Church.

VII. But lastly, if by Ecclesiastic Patronages, the Lawful Church
Judicatories, be meant, though in that case, both the Title of Patronage, and the
extent of power thereby understood, must be rejected; yet there is no doubt,
but the Judicatories of the Church, have a very special hand, and interest, in
the Looking out, Nomination and Election, of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
have a power Ministerially to authorize them, for their office, and to send
them forth, to Labor in the Lord's Vine Yard. And by consequence, do also
Ministerially invest them, with a Right to meddle with their Maintenance. A
Ministers only Right thereto, being a Lawful call to the Office, and Faithful
discharge of his duty, in it, as we have formerly marked.

SECT. XIX. A pretense from the failings and mistakes of the Church
Judicatories. etc.
I. THE last pretense that I shall notice, is this, that Presbitries and People
are not infallible, but are subject to Mistake, and Err, in the Election and
Choice of Pastors, as well as the Patrons. And therefore the Patron's Power of
Election, is no more injurious to the Church, than she is to her self.

II. For answer to this, it may be considered, First; That the lawful and
ordinary method, of Electing the Pastors of the Church, being an Ordinance and
Institution, of Divine Appointment; and the power of Patronage, on the
contrary, being nothing else, but an useless Invention of Men, and a most
groundless and unreasonable Usurpation upon the Church, and clearly
inconsistent with, and destructive of, the Institutions of Jesus Christ; The
Church and People of God, may very safely and confidently, rely and depend,
upon the Lord, for his Blessing and direction, in the right choice of the
Ministers of the Gospel, when they Act in a way of his own appointment; which
they who Act in so unjust, and unwarrantable a method, as this of Patronage,
have no ground to expect. And though the Lord, for wise and holy ends, may some
times leave his Church and People, to themselves, and let them fall in errors
and mistakes, in this as well as in other cases; yet duty must not be forsaken,
for fear of failings, in the performance. We must both Pray to God, for a
discovery of what is duty, when it is unclear to us, and when it is discovered,
we must Pray for strength and assistance, to perform it a right, and then set
about it, in the Lord's strength, with a humble confidence, and dependence upon
him, for his blessing and direction, who has never said to the house of Jacob,
seek ye my face in vain.

III. Next, though as is already said, there be no institution, either in Church
or State, but what by Reason of the Weakness, and Corruption of Men, may be
abused; yet this is no sufficient ground, for laying aside an institution, that
is either morally necessary, or positively, enjoined by God The only rule and
remedy in this case, is, Tollatur abusus et maneat usus, let the matter be
regulate by Acting in it, according to the word of God, which fully and clearly
discovers, what both Church-Judicatories and People, may, or may not do in the
case. But ^n the contrary the abuse and offensiveness of unnecessary and
unwarrantable institutions, does strongly militate, against their farther use.
If the Presbitry do at any time miscarry, in a way that they are warranted by
God to follow, we must pray that God may purge his own House, and purify the
Sons of Levi: And the help and assistance of Superior Church-Judicatories, must
be made use of. And in cases of general and public defection, the Civil
Magistrate may employ his power, circa Sacra. But those mistakes, can never
warrant us to leave the institutions of the infinite love and wisdom of God,
and betake our selves to our own weak and witless inventions, in the matters of
God. Christ's promised presence with his Church, may be a sufficient
encouragement for his People, to cleave and adhere to him, in ways of his own
appointment: Whereas those who go astray, and follow crooked Paths, ingyring
themselves, as Officious and Busy Bodies, in the affairs of the Church,
without a Lawful Call; can expect nothing, but that God in his Justice, should
leave them to be a Snare, both to themselves and others Certainly, were these
things really believed (as all profess they do) peoples practice would be very
far different, from what it is. But such is the Atheism of man's heart, th^^
while we confess the truths of God with our Lips, our Hearts are too often far
from him.

IV. I begin now to be weary, of noticeing such trifles. And the truth is, it
might be amazing, to hear men otherways rational, offer such empty pretenses,
instead of Solid and Convincing reasons, if the cause would admit of any
better. But it is Vitium Causae, and so we need no more admire, to see a
weakness inevitably cleave to the ablest Wits, in the defense of what is
unjustifiable, than to see the strongest of men, succumb in raising a weight
that is above his natural strength to undergo. The strength of men's Spirits, as
well as of their Bodies, have their limits, and are not infinite. And since I
mind nothing farther that can be objected, but what with very much ease, may
receive a full solution, from the Grounds already represented. I think it will
be needless, to give either the Reader, or my self, any farther trouble on this
Subject.

V. I shall only add, that it is the duty of all God's People in this land, to
wrestle with God, that he may incline the hearts of all Ranks of Men, in their
several stations and capacities, to return to a hearty and cordial Compliance
with, and a cheerful Acquiescence in the just and rational Determinations, that
were once made by public Authority, in this Nation, both in this, and other
steps of a true Reformation. And that the Lord may not be provoked by a too
open Contempt, of the Gospel of Peace (the Crying Sin of the Nation) and our
sinful slighting of his Mercies, to suffer his Church, after so much wrestling,
to sink under her present Bondage and Captivity, by reason of this, and other
unjust and grievous usurpations, into which after so many, and great
Deliverances, we are again, for our Sins, brought into Subjection.

FINIS.

