THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Citizens of Hereford IN THE Delivery up of their
CHARTER and Renewing of it: Vindicated from the Scurrilous Imputations of
Richard Janeway.
By a Lover of the King, the Government, and the City.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
I Have of late seen a scurrilous Pamphlet, Entitled the Impartial Protestant
Mercury, printed at London for Richard Janeway, Number. 114. in which his
Majesty's Goodness, Justice and Clemency are arraigned, and also the Mayor and
indeed the Corporation of Hereford unjustly charged, as being abused in the
manner of acting in the late delivery up of the Charter, as if the Mayor had
been wrought upon contrary to his Inclination, and had picked out a time
suitable to the purpose; Therefore I take leave to give you a true account out
of the Records, of matter of Fact, that by the prudent, legal and deliberate
proceeding of the Mayor herein, you may see he was not in the least imposed
upon contrary to his Inclination, but rather actually and effectually followed
the good Resolutions he had upon mature deliberation taken up for the good of
the City. For the better effecting hereof it is requisite you have Mr.
Janeway's false and scandalous Relation upon the whole Action in his own words.

[From Hereford we are told that the bringing up of the Charter of that place
some time since by the present Mayor is believed to have been much against his
own Inclination, but that he was wrought upon to call a Common Council, when
diverse of the old Aldermen and Common Council-Men who would have opposed it,
were known to be absent from the Town, and so the same was ordered. But lately
a new Charter is returned with addition of a Fair and the words Quamdiu nobis
placuerit, [as long as it shall be our Pleasure,] The old Mayor is continued,
but diverse Eminent and Loyal Persons fully known to be strict Observers and
great Favorers of the Church as by Law Established who have been Mayors, and
sundry Common Council-Men left out, and the Vacancies supplied by several
Gentlemen and others about the Town; yet we do not hear of any thing pretended
to be alleged against those so omitted, and people are troubled to guess the
Reason, unless it should be that they voted for their late worthy Burgess, Esquire
Foley; but this no discreet Man can believe to be the Cause, especially since
it is not doubted, but whenever his sacred Majesty shall graciously be pleased
to command an election for Parliament, Mr. Foley will yet have as many Electors
as ever.]

As to the Mayor's acting contrary to his inclination, as being wrought upon to
call a Common Council, when diverse of the Old Aldermen and Common Councilmen
who would have opposed it, were known to be absent from the Town; the contrary
does thus plainly appear: The Common Council consists of 31, of which the
Majority conclude, and make all Acts that pass. Upon the 3d of February last a
Common Council was called, at which were present 19. Of these 6 were Justices,
4 had formerly been Mayors, and 9 were of the Common Council; observe and you
shall find in the farther progress of this Matter, that this was the least
Common Council of any from the first Proposal of the danger of the Charter, to
the last Act of Surrender under Seal. At this Common Council, after some
ordinary things debated and settled, the Mayor spoke publicly these words, or
to this effect, as I have it under his own hand.

Gentlemen,
I am informed that a Quo Warranto will be brought against the Charter of the
City; which if it be, for my part I will not contend with the King in it; and
if I hear any thing more concerning it, I will call you together to advise what
is fit to be done in it, for you shall not blame me hereafter for not giving
you notice, that care might have been taken to have had it prevented, and
therefore I pray you to consider of it.

Here is the Mayor's inclination shown, and fair notice of the danger publicly
given: The next Common Council that was called, was on the 7th of February,
where no mention was made of the delivery up of the Charter, but something else
very significant was done, which was very ungrateful to all that favor the
Model of the late dangerous and treasonable Association, An Address of
Abhorrence of the Platform of that horrid Association, that was found in the
Earl of Shaftsbury's Closet, past the House in the presence of the Mayor, 5
Justices, 8 that had been Mayors, and 8 more of the Common Council, in all 22,
unanimously in these words.

Ordered, That the Address now read in Common Council of our Abhorrence of that
Rebellious Association, found and seized upon in the Closet or Study of the
Earl of Shaftsbury be presented unto his Majesty, and the Common Seal of the
Corporation be put thereto, and the said Address to be enrolled in one of the
Books of Records of the said City.

Ordered, That the said Address be presented to his Majesty from the City by
Baron Gregory, Sir John Hoskins, and Thomas Prise, Esquire or any two of them.

Thus things stood till the 14th of February, and then the Mayor (being
sufficiently assured by a Letter showed him from a Person of Honor, that a
Charge was laid against their Charter, and several Breaches assigned, and the
King pressed to grant a Quo Warranto, which His Majesty would not do till he
had first an account, whether the Citizens of Hereford would not trust to his
Bounty and Clemency, rather than stay till they were so attaqu'd) called a
House according to his former promise, where their own danger, hazard and
charge, the King's Gracious Inclinations and Intentions toward them were
freely debated, and the Letter at large read in open Council. At this Common
Council were present 5 Justices, 6 of the ancient Mayors, and 10 of the Common
Council, in all 21, and all other Members of it residing in the County had
notice; After a full Debate they came to these Resolutions Nemine Contradicente.

Ordered, That the present Charter of the City be delivered up unto His
Majesty, and that Richard Gower, Esquire Mayor, Bridstock Harford, Esquire Herbert
Aubrey, Esquire Thomas Clark, Gent. Town Clerk of the said City, and Thomas Clark
Jun. Gent. do surrender the said Charter unto His Majesty, and do deliver the
Petition now read in Common Council unto His Majesty for a new Charter, and to
solicit and follow the procuring the same; and if any other of the Common
Council desire to go with Mr. Mayor, they (if they please) may.

Ordered, That what Money Mr. Thomas Clark, Jun. shall disburse for the
renewing the Charter of the said City, he shall be repaid the same with the
Interest thereof out of the first Money that comes into the Chamber of the said
City, and to have the Common Seal for the same when the Charter is renewed for
performance thereof.

Ordered, That the Petition now read in Common Council being corrected and
amended, be preferred unto His Majesty for the renewing of the Charter of the
City.

Now to assure you that all manner of care was taken for the preservation of
the Rights of the City, you may at large read the Petition it self.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Mayor,
Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Hereford.
Humbly shows,

THat your Petitioners have not only by several Grants of your Renowned
Progenitors of ancient time been a City and Town Incorporate, and obtained and
enjoyed very great Liberties, Franchises and Jurisdictions, but also in the
time of your Royal Father (whose Memory with us is Sacred) received the
indelible Characters of his Grace and Favor for their constant and uncorrupted
Loyalty, which they still retain, being always ready and willing to sacrifice
their Lives and Fortunes for the preservation of Your Sacred Person, the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, the Succession of the Crown in the
Right Line, and all your undoubted Legal Rights: Yet nevertheless by
Inadvertency, Omission or Neglect, (without any the least tincture of
Disloyalty) we apprehend that we have hazarded the Benefits, Liberties,
Franchises and Privileges, which we have enjoyed in the time of Your Sacred
Majesty and all your Royal Progenitors.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Your Majesty would be graciously
pleased of Your Princely Clemency to Grant to your Citizens of Hereford a New
Charter, with such Immunities, Privileges, Franchises and Jurisdictions, as to
Your Royal Wisdom and Goodness shall seem fit, such as may be equal to the
large Grants of Your most Renowned Ancestors, and what more in Your Regal
Bounty (that inexhaustible Exchequer of Mercy and Goodness) shall seem most
agreeable to Your Royal Pleasure.

And your humble Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever pray, etc.
The Charter remained still in the Chest, and here was no snap or surprise; and
to prevent it, time was taken for 6 days to consider what was fit to ask for
the City of so Gracious a Prince, and all that was proposed was to have a New
Charter with the same Privileges as before, and a New Fair.

On the 20th of February the House met again (all the Members thereof in the
County having lawful Summons) the Persons present were the Mayor, 6 of the
Justices, 5 of the Old Mayors, and 9 of the Common Council, in all 21, and then
freely and unanimously passed this Vote.

Ordered, That Mr. Mayor and those Gentlemen that were nominated by the Common
Council to solicit the renewing of the Charter, shall be re-imburst their
Charges and Expenses therein, and that the present Charter and the Claim be by
the Key-Keepers presently delivered unto Mr. Mayor, which was performed
accordingly.

27th The Mayor, Mr. Aubrey and Mr. Clark appointed to attend His Majesty,
began their journey (Mr. Harford and the Town Clerk being staid by sickness)
and came to London March 2d; March the 3d the Mayor was brought to His
Majesty's Presence, attended with many Gentlemen of the County and City of
Hereford, and humbly on his knees, in a short significant Speech, delivered up
to His Majesty the Old Charter, and by Petition prayed a New One; The King most
graciously received it, and all that attended it, and gave them his hand to
kiss, and told them, That as soon as Mr. Attorney General should prepare things
for him to Sign, he should be very ready to do it, in the mean time he desired
the Citizens not in the least to distrust his kindness toward them. Together
with the Charter were delivered also the Acts of the Common Council, which the
Members of the Corporation thought sufficient to evidence how willingly,
unanimously and cheerfully they had acted, but the formality of Law required
something else to be done; There was wanting a Resignation under the City Seal
to make the Surrender legally good: Of this notice enough was given, by Letters
from London to Persons of all Persuasions and Interests, but even this innocent
piece of Ignorance of the Law put the thing past doubt of surprise, or the
suggested want of Inclination in the Mayor, for he (to prosecute his
well-grounded Resolves to effect) goes down and (nothing doubting the joint
Concurrence of that House that had hitherto acted in this Affair with so much
Unity) returns to Hereford the 12th of March, and on the 14th called a Common
Council, and Summoned all as formerly upon their Free-man's Oath to appear; At
this Meeting were present the Mayor and 5 Justices, 6 of the ancient Mayors, 9
more of the Common Council, in all 21; and the Instrument of Resignation was
read in these words.

TO all to whom these Presents shall come, The Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of
the City of Hereford send Greeting; Know ye, That the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens upon good and due considerations them thereunto moving, have
surrendered and yielded up, and by these Presents do surrender and yield up unto
our Sovereign Lord the King's most Excellent Majesty, certain Letters Patents
Granted by our late Sovereign Lord King James of ever-blessed Memory, under the
Great Seal of England, bearing Date the 12th day of July, in the 17th Year of
his Reign, and all and every the Immunities, Privileges, Franchises and
Jurisdictions in and by the said Letters Patents given, granted or confirmed to
the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Hereford aforesaid, and also
all other Letters Patents, Powers, Privileges and Immunities whatsoever, at any
time or times heretofore granted to, or held or enjoyed by the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Hereford, or their, or any of their
Predecessors, by any ways or means, or by what name or names soever, together
with the said Charter and Letters Patents to be cancelled and vacated upon
Record. In witness whereof we have caused our Common Seal to be put at the
Guild Hall of the City of Hereford, to these Presents the 14th day of March, in
the 34th year of His Majesty's Reign, Annoque Dom. 1682.


I thought fit to insert this, not only to prove the Validity of the Act, but
for the better and easier Information of other Cities, that are in the
Circumstances we lately were, to whom (perhaps even to the greatest) it may be
useful (being drawn by a very able Lawyer) when they shall see their Error in
contending with his Majesty, and come humbly to deprecate their greater
Offenses.

The Approbation and Consent of all went along with this Act of Resignation
under Seal, as will appear by the Vote then made in these words.

Ordered, That our Act of Surrender, Resignation, and yielding up our present
Charter unto His Majesty, now read in Common Council, be Sealed with our Common
Seal, (which accordingly was performed) and presented to His Majesty.

Thus having finished with a general consent, and completed the Surrender
under the Common Seal of the City, they sent it to London, and it arrived there
the 18th day of March, and was, according to Order, delivered: But that the
Government of the City might be kept a foot, and Peace preserved in the City
till the New Charter was granted under the Broad Seal, the Surrender was not
enrolled till the New Charter was fully perfected.

By this plain account of matter of fact, so clearly proved by the several
Gradations and distances of time, by the several Meetings from the 3d of
February, to the 14th of March; by the fair Notices and Summons, free Debates,
unanimous Consent; by the even course and fair Method of Proceedings, I suppose
it does manifestly appear to all that are willing to be convinced, and will not
take a false, scandalous Forgery and Fiction for Truth, that the Mayor acted
freely, voluntarily and cheerfully, and his Brethren unanimously, constantly
and steddily. If any Man yet doubt what put the Corporation upon this Action,
and whether a Quo Warranto were sent for or not? Let them know this for their
satisfaction, that the Citizens had reason to be jealous their Franchises were
in danger, when 18 of 31 had not taken the Oaths required by the
Corporation-Act in any Capacity or Employment, they had passed through for 17
years together, and also were every day affronted, imposed upon and slighted,
as Persons that acted extrajudicially by several that were satisfied of their
Legal failings, and disputed the Power and Authority by which they acted. As
for the Quo Warranto, the Persons are yet living that sent for it, and Persons
of Honor who were applied to for the getting of it, and put a stop to it, can
sufficiently evince this; for the Quo Warranto was sent for, and Breaches
assigned in two Sheets of Paper, written of all sides; and those so fatal, (as
from good Authority I had the account) that the Citizens, if they contended,
were morally certain to be overthrown: This was done the 11th of January last,
the Quo Warranto was long expected, and as friendly and happily prevented; for
it is not the nature of the People here to contend with their King, but to
serve him loyally and obediently.

The next base Reflection that is made, is upon His Majesty's Truth, Goodness
and Clemency, in these words.

[ But lately a new Charter is returned with Addition of a Fair, and the words
Quamdiu nobis placuerit: As long as it shall be our Pleasure.]

The false Mercury, (lest the giddy unstable Faction should not understand his
meaning) has taken the pains to translate it for them, but it had been better
he had left them to pick out the English of it, than to have so factious a
falsehood, so plainly detected, by a reciprocal Translation of the Record it
self under the Broad Seal; The Citizens had two Fairs before, the King gives
them a third, and that to begin on Wednesday in Easter-week yearly, and per
tres dies in perpetuum duratur, to endure for three days to perpetuity. As to
the Charter it self, so Gracious and Just has His Majesty been, according to
his Royal Promise at the delivery of it up, that he has not disfranchis'd one
Man; he has confirmed their Privileges, pardoned their Omissions and
Commissions of Non-user or Mis-user of their Franchises in these words, Sive
non usi sive abusi fuerint, Whether they have not used or abused them; He has
left the Government in the same Number, with the same freedom of Electing all
their Officers, and under the same Qualifications, and reserved nothing to
himself and Successors, but (what cannot hurt them,) the Approbation of a High
Steward, Town Clerk, and the six standing Justices upon Vacancies, after they
have been Elected upon that account. There is the same present Mayor, and in
all likelihood the succeeding Mayor that was of course to come in by the former
Charter will be elected; It is true, the King has left out some that were in
before, and put others in their room; a Liberty of preference, which, I
suppose, is denied none that have (in much less matters than this) a power to
do so; and it is sawcily done of the Pamphletier to regret the King this Choice,
which every Steward of a Leet has in making up of a Jury, and which the
Gentlemen in power within the Scribler's view do use frequently and freely,
otherwise the Nation would never have been plagued with so many
Ignoramus-Juries; and it would better become the good Manners of the Secretary
to the Faction (who it is believed himself depends on the making such Juries,)
to acquiesce in His Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure, than to pretend to
guess and insinuate false Causes, and suggest Factious ones, which himself (if
a discreet Man) cannot believe: I cannot deny but the Gentlemen that are
omitted are most of them Observers and Favorers of the Church, as by Law
established; but it is as true, that some of them were in the Common Council in
the time of Rebellion, when 22 honest Men were in one year for their Loyalty
only turned out, and were overlooked in the purging Act: I wonder how Mr.
Janeway comes to urge that as a good Character now, that they love the Church
as by Law established, who is himself so great a Stickler for True-blew
Protestants, and those that live against the known Laws; but now it seems it
serves a turn to inflame the angry, and animate others to an obstinacy against
their Prince, who are now in the same misfortune as to their
Corporation-Delinquencies: I shall now trace the Beast a little farther in his
own words.

[Yet we do not hear of any thing pretended to be alleged against those so
omitted.]

By this it appears plainly, that His Majesty acted freely according to his
Will and Pleasure, which troubles Mr. Janeway sorely, and the Mobile too.

[And people are troubled to guess the Reason.]

Of these I suppose the busy Inflamer is most concerned, but he must make
court to his long-adored Idol the People: But why must the People be said to
regret the King's Actions, or be at a loss to find a Reason for that which they
have nothing to do with? But my Masters, and Friends, and Good People draw
near, and hearken to Vox Populi, which some elder Pamphlets have called Vox
Dei. You see by this, Republican Love cannot be hid; and now farewell to the
strict Observers and Favorers of the Religion as by Law established. For a
Cause; see what other starts up, and is as suddenly like a Mushrome of a Nights
growth by himself destroyed.

[ Unless it should be because they Voted for their late Worthy Burgess, Esquire
Foley.]

So did most of those that are in the New Charter at the Election of Members
for the last Parliament, there being a very short Contest; but you shall hear
him answer himself.

[But this no discreet Man can believe to be the Cause.]

Why then does the Fool urge it? yes, he had a Reason for it, and out it must.

[ Especially since it is not doubted but whenever his Sacred Majesty shall be
Graciously pleased to command an Election for Parliament, Mr. Foley will yet
have as many Electors as ever.]

Here is a touch of his Divination; yet as great a Conjurer as the Gentleman
is, I suppose he knows as little what the Event of the next Election of Members
will be, as he knows the Time of Calling a Parliament, and must be contented,
(Maugre all his great assurance) to leave the issue thereof to time, for many
things may happen before that day, as the Conversion of Thousands of Whiggs,
the downfall of Ignoramus's, that obstruct Justice, the suppression of Faction,
the condign punishment, as well as detection, of the Favorers and Heads of
Division, and Underminers of the Government, the frequent use of the Pillory
for Libellers, and a just value put upon the best of Kings and best of
Governments; however, I suppose this great Undertaker keeps no Ensurance-Office
for Parliament-Adventurers. It is evident to all sober unprejudiced persons,
that Mr. Janeway's Exceptions (though false) against the Proceedings of the
Corporation, are not out of any Pique he has to a^y person now in the same, or
to any defense he is concerned in for any Man that is out; but the Hireling
writes to please a Party, and to ingratiate himself with a Faction, that gives
him Bread, and supports him to amuse the credulous Rabble by reflecting upon
the Government, as he has scurrilously done in his Pamphlet, otherwise he
durst never have so maliciously abused his Majesty with averring and publishing
of things quite contrary to the Record, for in the whole Charter which I have
had occasion often to read over, there are no such words in it as Quamdiu
nobis placuerit; but it is as full in all respects (except in those before
mentioned) as ever; and whereas he seems to keep aloof of, and is for his Necks
sake tender of making mention of his Majesty; yet I would fain know upon whom
that Reflection of displacing the strict Observers and Favorers of the Church,
as by Law established, (which in the Charter is alleged to be done) must
ultimately rest.

Now I suppose I have given you a faithful and full account of this matter, as
to what concerns the Charter, any person yet doubting may have recourse to the
Signet-Office, Privy Seal or Patent-Office for his better satisfaction; I
should be ashamed to mis-recite a Record, but much more to mis-represent it to
the People with false Glosses, nay falsehood it self, as the foul-mouthed
Pamphletier has done: The Gentlemen by the King's favor, new put into
Employment in the new Charter, do not so much think themselves exposed in this
base, vile, false, scurrilous Pamphlet, as they do apprehend the King reflected
on, and the Government injured: It is publicly known to all, that at this time
some considerable Charters are upon the point of Trial, and that many more are
in ill Circumstances, and willing to surrender; At this time to render the King
inconsta^t in his promises, severe in taking advantages of his Subjects (that
were willing to own their Omissions, and to sue for pardon, and a renewal of
their forfeited Franchises, and to lay their Charters humbly at his Majesty's
feet, (which are already under his power) in hopes of being restored to the
same, if not greater Privileges) is to make the best of Kings odious, and the
submissive Subjects stubborn and obdurate to all the Offers of Clemency and
Grace, and rather fond to espouse and contend for a mistaken Right to the
uttermost, than trust or fall into the kind expanded Arms of Royal Mercy, which
never yet failed the penitent Delinquent, and under which (if you will believe
the person that has provoked it often, forfeited it more, and needs it most)
the unfortunate fall gently; and if I be not mistaken, this at last must be the
refuge of this profligate wretch, who is (without the King's Mercy, which he
has often abused) utterly undone; besides, the Actions and Indictments which
he is liable to for the several Libels sent out into the Nation by him, that do
countenance Faction, and discourage and abuse the honest actings of the King's
best Subjects is a load he will hardly be able long to bear the weight of, but
must sink under it; for little Hancock tells us in a late News-Letter sent to
this Town, that the Government is too powerful for Mr. Janeway: It is to be
hoped, that on the one side the discerning part of the Nation will be able to
discover the Cheats put upon them, the Artifices and Tricks of a desperate
Party and Faction, the daring impudence of Mercenary Libellers, and that the
mis-guided and misinformed people will return to their Duty, and be shamm'd
and trepan'd no more into a disesteem of the Prince, a disvalue of his
Government, a good opinion of the Factious, and a prejudice against them that
love the King and his Government in Church and State, as it is now exercised,
and by Law established: I have been forced for the Vindication of the honest
Actions of the Citizens, which have been so manifestly traduced by the
unbounded Liberty of the scurrilous Intelligencer, to stretch this beyond the
due limits of a Letter, to show by undeniable Arguments the fair Method of all
the Proceedings, the Mercy and Goodness of his Majesty in pardoning, and his
Justice and Gracious Favor in re-granting our Liberties when forfeited by Law,
and that with an advantageous addition. You may here see a Generous Prince
holding forth his Scepter of Grace to his loyal, but submissive Subjects,
preventing their fears, meeting their wants, and relieving them with Honor and
Justice; and I do steadfastly believe, that no person, no body of Men, whether
incorporated or not, (if in our late condition or worse, as perhaps now some
expecting Judgment are,) unless they have strangely demerited and disobliged
his Sacred Majesty, but may safer confide in his Mercy and Goodness, than in
all the dark Umbrages and cunning Sophistry of the wrested Law, and all the
thin Cobweb Pretensions of their own Innocence and avowed Right; for we have
such a Prince as none can in Reason ask what he will not in Goodness grant, or
err so far, (and that some happily know) that he cannot with Clemency forgive;
and this is all that can be said in favor of some great disturbers of the
Government, and is all their hopes, that they have not yet in their Crimes
exceeded his Natural Genius of pardoning: In this Rank our Scribler is one, who
will find it the best Game he can play to make an early application to a justly
incensed Prince, and show this one mark of his Christianity, that he is not
obstinate past repenting; a Pardon so gained would prevent those mischiefs
which will justly fall upon his head, from the maliciously abused Lovers of the
King and Government; and it may be in imitation of the Royal Clemency, the
several good Subjects that are so highly and undeservedly provoked, may follow
the grand Exemplar of Goodness and Patience, and Pardon too; If not, I suppose
a sharp and sudden course of Justice will be his Fate and Fortune. I take leave
to subscribe my self

Your faithful humble Servant.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brom. 1682.


