THE PROCEEDINGS ON THE King's Commissions Of the PEACE, AND Oyer and Terminer,
and Jail-delivery of Newgate, held for the City of London, and County of
Middlesex, AT IUSTICE-HALL, In the OLD BAILEY, The 10th. and 13th. days of
October, 1688. And in the Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
AT the Sessions Held at Justice-Hall, in the Old Bailey, on Wednesday and
Saturday the 10th. and 13th. days of October, 1688. before the Right
Honorable, Sir John Chapman, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London, together
with other of His Majesty's Justices of the City of London and County of
Middlesex.

London Jury.
John Clarke Richard Chowne William Skynner Edward Atwood John Passel Robert
Moore Isaac Dyton Richard Gibbs Humphrey Bellamye Charles Ricards Richard
Jobber Edward Goreing.
Middlesex Jury.
Thomas Martin Edward Winford Thomas Howard Nicholas Goddard William Hopper
Edward Nichols Richard Parriott Richard Oakely Joseph Waldoe John Kent Thomas
Frampton Samuel Morris
The Trials of the Prisoners were as follows.
William Ast of the Parish of St. Peter's Paul's- Wharf, was Indicted for the
Murder of one Thomas Raven, on the first day of August last, giving him one
Mortal Wound near his right Eye, with a Hammer, value 6 d. of which he Died on
the 29th. Instant, etc. The Evidence deposed that the Prisoner owned the
striking of Raven: But the Surgeon said that he might not Die so soon with
the Blow, as he might by some irregularities in Drinking, or the like. The
Prisoner called some Witnesses on his side, to prove that he did not strike the
Deceased with the Hammer; and they all said that the Prisoner had no Hammer,
but that he struck him twice, and gave him but a kind of a little Scar near his
right Eye. So upon a full Hearing, he was Acquitted.

Nowell Gawell of the Parish of St. Botolph's Aldgate; was Indicted together
with one Francis Freeman and two others as Accessories, not yet Taken, of
Felony and Burglary, in Breaking the House of John Stone, on the 13th. of
August last past, and taking thence (in the Night about One a Clock,) six
Women's fine Shifts, value 6 l. two pair of Sheets, value 4 l. two
Table-cloaths, value 10 s. two Dozen of Diaper Napkins, value 12 s. one
Handkerchief, value 30 s. one pair of Laced Ruffles, value 20 s. one Green
Cloth Carpet, value 5 s. etc. The Evidence was Mrs. Stone and others; who
deposed that the Prisoner was a kind of a Labourer about the House, and so
might have opportunity to take away the abovesaid Goods; some of which were
left by him at an Ale house, near to Mr. Stone's House. The Prisoner denied it,
and said that the Goods were given him by another Man he met; but they that
were with him were Fled. He made no other Defense for himself; and the Court
looking upon him to be a kind of an Idle Fellow, he was brought in guilty of
the Felony, but Acquitted of the Burglary.

Richard Jones of the Parish of St. Paul's Covent Garden, was Tried for Killing
one Thomas Jones a Chairman, on the 17th. day of September last, with a
Baggonet, value 6 d. giving him one Mortal Wound on the left side of his Body,
of tho length of one Inch, and of the depth of six Inches, etc. of which he
immediately Died. The Evidence declared in the general, that the Prisoner was
found going along Covent Garden Plazza, Swearing that he would Kill the next
Man he met, and was seen to pull his Baggonet from under his Coat, and thrust
it into the Side of the Deceased Jones; and then after he was taken and the
Baggonet being produced, which he had dropped in his pursuit, he owned it to be
his own, shaking his Head and Cursing Brandy and Women, etc. He had not much to
say, but would have insinuated to the Court that the Deceased fell upon his
Baggonet when they were Scuffling together; yet the Jury found him guilty of
willful Murder.

Henry Jeane of the Parish of St. Clement's Danes Gent. and Ann Crisp, were
Indicted, Jeane as Principal, and Crisp as Accessory, for wilfully Murdering
Samuel Moore, on the 20th. day of July in the Strand, at a House near the
Thames side. It appeared upon the Evidence that the Prisoners being at the
House of the Deceased at Anny-seed Clear, there was a Quarrel arose between
Moore and Mr. Jeane, and the Prisoner Crisp, about a Naked Bitch that the
Deceased had of the Prisoners, which was lost; and the Prisoners were heard to
threaten the Deceased that they would have his Blood, or the like: Some time
after the Prisoner Jeane and the Deceased happened to meet in the Strand, and
there they Quarreled afresh, and Mr. Jeane was seen to give the Deceased one
Mortal Wound, of the depth of seven Inches; and that the Deceased was not seen
to strike Mr. Jeane, etc. Although Mr. Jeane called several Witnesses, who
declared that the Deceased and another Man a Black-a-More, were seen to strike
Mr. Jeane the Prisoner several Blows, and that he stood and retired in his own
Defense, being set upon by them as aforesaid. But Jeane had no Bruises nor
Wounds about him to satisfy the Court that he was hurt: Besides the Surgeon
declared in Court that the Deceased Died of the Wound that he received. So upon
a very full and distinct hearing on both sides, Jeane was found guilty of
Manslaughter, but the Woman was Acquitted.

Richard Barber of the Parish of St. Clement's Danes in the County of
Middlesex, was Tried for Felony and Murder, in Killing Ann Stoner, Wife of
William Stoner, on the 8th, day of August last, giving her 3 Mortal Wounds with
a Pistol loaded with three Leaden Bullets, value 5 s. of the depth every one of
them of eight Inches, of which she Died on the 9th. day of the same Month. The
Evidence for the King declared that the Deceased and one or two more were going
along Witch-street, and on a sudden a Pistol was Discharged, and the Deceased
received the abovesaid Wounds, of which she fell down and cried out: But the
Evidence could not be positive that the Prisoner was the Person that Shot her;
only said that there was one on Horseback, and another on Foot went along the
Street when the Deceased was Shot, and that the Prisoner said that he had no
Malice against her after he was in Newgate; and it was further deposed that the
Prisoner removed his Goods and Lodging the same Night the Murder was
committed, and could not be found for a considerable time after. The Prisoner
denied that he knew any thing of the Death of the Woman, But did not deny but
that he was out on Horseback in the Night in the Street; and further said that
he Fled, because he was afraid of Being Arrested, being much in Debt; to prove
which lie called some Witnesses, but none could attest that he was any where
else on the 8th. of August, but at the Place where the Murder was done. He
said that he was at Ratcliffe, but could get none to prove it: Yet the Evidence
being not able to prove that he Shot the Deceased, he was Acquitted by the Jury.

Henry Howel and Mary Harris of the Parish of St. Clement's Danes, in the
County of Middlesex, were both Indicted for the Murder of one Richard Harris
on the 26th. day of September last, giving him one Mortal Wound in his right
Eye, of the depth of four Inches, etc. The Fray was thus; the said Harris
keeping a Brandy-shop, the Prisoner came in, and a Quarrel happened between
them as they were Drinking, and that Howel was seen to Draw his Sword against
Harris, and Swore that he would be the Death of him; and said that he came to
do Mischief, and within one Month he would be the Death of him the said Harris,
with several other desperate Asseverations; all which was confirmed against him
by several of the King's Evidence, but they did not Swear any thing against the
Woman. The Prisoner said that the Deceased set upon him and Drew his Sword
first, and called one Witness on his side, whose Evidence was not much
prevailing on his behalf; and although he urged the Court hard on his own part,
yet the Court told him all he said signified nothing: So being Burnt in the
Hand last Sessions for a Manslaughter, and being known to be an old Offender,
and an idle Fellow, he was found guilty of Manslaughter: But no Evidence
material appearing against the Woman, only that she had kept the said Howel
Company, she was Acquitted.

James Carry, alias Jefferyes, a Dutch Man, of the Parish of Stepney in the
County of Middlesex, was Tried for Robbing John Portlock, of 1 s. in Money, on
the 11th. day of September last, in the King's Highway. The Evidence was
Portlock, who said that the Prisoner and another Person met him in the
Nightime about Eleven a Clock, and bid him Stand and deliver his Money, and
he having but 2 s. gave him one of them, which the Prisoner confessed before
the Justice at his Apprehension by the Constable; and that he spoke so in
English to the Constable, though he pretended he could not speak it at his Trial,
but an Interpreter was Sworn on the Prisoner's account. Another Evidence said
against him that he Fled when he was Pursued: he did not deny the Fact, but
said that his Companion had taken the Shilling; and the Evidence all concurred
that he spoke English. The Interpreter told him the sense of what was Swore
against him, which he could not deny; so he was found Guilty.

William Savadge a Soldier, of the Parish of St. Andrew's Holbourn, in the
County of Middlesex, was Indicted for Picking the Pocket of one Prudence
Cannell, Wife of Mr. Edward Cannell, of one Purse, value 6 d. and 4 s. in
Money, on the 7th. day of October. The Evidence was Mrs. Cannell and others,
who declared that as she was coming along Southhampton Buildings, the Prisoner
and another Justled her, and she lost her Money; but she did not Swear
positively that he was the Man that Robbed her; but other Evidence proved him
to be the Person. The Prisoner had little to say for himself, and being known
to have been an old Offender, and having no Witness on his side, he was found
Guilty.

Josias Best, Doctor of Physic, was Indicted and Tried for High Treason, in
Clipping and Coining of Money, the last Fact being done about January last,
viz. forty Pieces of King Charles the First's Shillings, and forty other Pieces
of the King's Coin called Half Crowns, with certain Sheers and other
Instruments fit for the purpose, diminishing from each Piece the value of 2 d.:
The Counsel for the King opened the Cause to the Jury, and called some
Witnesses against the Prisoner, the chief of which was Stephen Bayley, who was
taken on the First of May last in Red-lyon Fields, who said that he had been a
Dealer with him, and that he had known him to have Clipped Money several times,
and to change Broad Money for Clipped, at the rate of 1 s. 6 d. advantage in
the Pound; and several Filings and other Pieces of Silver were found in his
Custody when he was Taken; and Bayley further said that he had bought several
Lumps of Silver of the Prisoner, and that he owned them to be of his own doing
and Clipping; and that the Lumps were of the value of about 40 or 50 s. and
that he confessed to Bayley further, that he got about 100 l. peranum by it:
All which was very fully and strenuously Evidenced against him, etc. Thus far
was the Evidence for the King against him. But the Prisoner would persuade the
Court that he never knew any thing of what was charged against him, and denied
all the matter of Fact, and argued very weakly in his own Defense. Whilst he
was Trying, the Court ordered Mr. Massey and some others to go to one Turner's
in Milk-street where he had lately Lodged, where was found two bits of Silver
in the Closet, and some Filings were seen upon the Ground, and a Hole made in
the Wall, and the Room left in a kind of a Suspicious sort; all which was
additionally Sworn against him; but he denied it all, and stood as it were one
Stupefied, having nothing material to offer for himself. So upon a very full
and clear Hearing on both sides, he was at last brought in not Guilty; but yet
was ordered to prepare very good Sureties, (at least 300 l. each) for his good
Behavior for the time to come.

Robert Benneson of the Parish of Christ's- Church, was Tried for Stealing from
William Normavill on the 8th, of October, two silver Tankards, value 15 l. two
silver Porringers, value 7 l. Eight silver Spoons, value 4 l. one silver Cup,
value 50 s. one silver Salt, value 8 s. etc. the Goods of William Normavill, as
aforesaid. The Evidence declared that the Goods were lost out of the
Prosecutor's House on a Sunday Night, and Search being made, the Plate was
found in the Custody of the Prisoner, at the Red-Cross Alehouse in
Newgate-street, where he was offering of it to Sale to a Goldsmiths in St.
Ann's Lane, whom he sent for to buy it: But the Prisoner denied it, and said
that he knew not how the Plate came into the Alehouse, neither would he give
any account how he came by it; so upon the whole, he was Acquitted.

He was a Second time Indicted for procuring Sheers and other Instruments fit
for Clipping into his Custody, and for having Clipped Money about him,
intending to put it off, on purpose to Cheat and Deceive the King's Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom of England, etc. The Prisoner told the Court that he
never had any Clipped Money in his Custody to put off for any private Advantage,
etc. And said further that any Person might have Clipped Money about him, and do
no harm with it: So the Jury acquitted him of the Misdemeanor; but withal the
Court ordered him to find good Sureties for his good Behavior for the future.

Robert Foster of the Parish of St. Martin's in the Fields, was Arraigned for
stealing on the 6th. day of September last, one Gray Cloth Suit, value 5 l.
one other Coat, value 3 l. one Waste-coat, value 10 s. and a few other small
Goods, from James Hunter, etc. But the Court told him that he might Plead His
Majesty's most Gracious Pardon; which he did accordingly.

John Nelson of the Parish of St. Mary Savey, was Indicted and Arraigned for
stealing one Feather-bed, value 30 s. with other Goods of small value, the
proper Goods of James Wilson, on the 28th. day of September last; but was
Acquitted by virtue of His Majesty's most Gracious Pardon, etc.

Isabella Constance and Mary Tomson of the Parish of St. Lawrence Jury, were
both Indicted for stealing four Yards of Black Silk, value 10 s. on the 20th.
of September last, from one John Wyatt; but both likewise received the benefit
of His Majesty's Pardon.

William Phips was like wise Arraigned for stealing a Gelding of a considerable
value; but pleaded His Majesty's most Gracious Pardon.

Peter Barbey of the Parish of St. Michael's Cornhil, was Indicted for Stealing
on the 24th. of September, from Ann Gandy Widow, one Brass Snuff box value 10
s. Tortle shell Handled Knife, value 2 s. etc. The Goods of Ann Gandy
aforesaid; but was Acquitted by pleading his Majesty's Gracious Pardon.

Ann Hedger and Ann Wait were Indicted for stealing twelve Yards of Bone-lace,
value 1 l. 10 s. and other Lace, value 5 s. but were presently Advised to plead
as the others did before; which they did accordingly.

William Husey of the Parish of St. Martin's in the Fields, Gent. was
Arraigned, for that he together with Charles Hacket, did Kill and Murder
William Endrick Gent. giving him one Mortal Wound with a Rapier, value 5 s. of
the breadth of one Inch, and of the depth of six Inches, on the 6th. day of
June last, of which he Died on the 14th. day of the same Month. There being no
Evidence against him but only the Widow of the said Endrick, the other
Witnesses being out of the way, the Prisoner was ordered to give in Bail before
the Lord Chief Justice, to appear again next Sessions, and the Widow bound in
a Recognizance of 200 l. to appear also and bring in her Witnesses.

George Wood of the Parish of Stepney, was Indicted as Principal, and one
William Hunt and Mary Rice as Accessories, (not yet Taken) for Breaking the
House of one Thomas Burgan in the Nightime on the 15th. day of August last,
and taking out thence fourteen Else of Holland, value 3 l. a parsel of Muslin,
value 3 s. eight Smocks, value 2 l. 12 s. two Smocks, value 2 s. nine other
Smocks, value 1 l. 11 s. nine Shirts, value 1 l. 1 s. five pair of Holland
Sleeves, value 1 l. four Childrens Frocks, value 18 s. one Suit of Childbed
Linen, value 7 s. seven Yards of Fustion, value 8 s. three Dozen of Childrens
Caps, value 18 s. three Muslin Aprons, value 7 s. 6 d. with several other Goods
of a considerable value, the Goods of Thomas Burgan aforesaid. The Evidence for
the King against the Prisoner was Mr. Burgan and others, who deposed that his
House was Broke open between the Hours of Twelve and three in the Morning, and
the Goods aforesaid were taken away whilst the Family was in Bed: The
Prosecutor afterward making Search and Enquiry after them, he found some of
them in the House of one Sarah Shaw, at the Falcon in Southwark, where they
were left, and offered to Sale by the Prisoner and the other two Accessories,
who are since Fled. The Prisoner said that he knew nothing of the Breaking of
the House, neither was he there; and that he was Innocent. But having no
Evidence on his side, he was found guilty of the Felony, but Acquitted of the
Burglary.

William Chumley of the Parish of St. Clement's Danes in the County of
Middlesex, was Indicted for Feloniously taking away from Peter Dormor Gent. on
the 6th. of April last; two Feather-beds, value 9 l. 10 s. Six Cane-chairs,
value 7 s. one Chest of Drawers, value 20 s. two Trunks, value 5 s. etc. There
was no Evidence appeared in Court against him yet the Court thought sit to
continue him till the next ensuing Sessions, in order to take his Trial for the
same.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Judgment, as follows.
3 Persons received Sentence of Death, viz.

Richard Jones for Murder; James Carry alias Jefferies for Robbing on the
Highway; William Savadge for Robbing in the Kings Highway.

Richard Vauson John Ratteray and Nicholas Beck, Servants to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Salisbury, who were tried the last Sessions, for the
Murder of one Anthony Matson, a Beadle, and found guilty of Manslaughter;
Appeared in Court and Received the benefit of His Majesty's most Gracious
Pardon.

John Chapman, Mayor.
October the 13th. 1688.
His Majesty's Most Gracious and Free PARDON
WAS ordered to be Pleaded by several of the former as well as the present
Convicted Felons in Newgate, whose Names were called over Sucessively, which
are these Underwritten; which they all in General Pleaded, upon their several
and respective Knees, viz. Thomas Passford John Barnes Ann Mills alias Yates
Mary Batters John Avery Charles Hughs John Sutton Elizabeth Mallard Francis
Trasey Margaret Meek a Mary Wotten Armington Poor Solomon Spring John Wyat
Elizabeth Parsons John Overton Henry Prosoley Simon How John Jackson Arrabella
Reeves Anthony Sanderson for a Fine Henry Hurt Tabitha Porter Henry Woodcock
James Nichols William Goddard James Robins Highway-men. Thomas Pursival
Highway-men. John Brown, Highway-men. John George. James Pidgley William
Goodman Samuel Smith Katherine Jones For Clipping. John Collet For Clipping.
Robert Lamborn For Clipping. George Emmet For Clipping. William Palmer For
Clipping. Valentine Cogswell For Clipping. John Edwards For Murder. Nicholas
Salter For Murder. John Stafford For Murder. Latimore Ridley Richard Oxden


These Underwritten received the Benefit of His Majesty's PARDON upon their
being Arraigned.

Robert Foster John Nelson William Philips Ann Hedger Ann Wait Peter Barbey
Nowel Gawell George Wood Isabella Constance Mary Tomson Henry Jean Henry Howel.
AFter His Majesty's Most Gracious PARDON was Read, the Court advised all those
who were Pardoned, to consider how exceeding Merciful and Gracious His Majesty
had showed himself unto them; even to Save them Alive, and take them as it were
out of the Jaws of a deserved Death; wishing every one of them to take good
heed for the future how they spend their Precious Time; and bid them beware of
falling into any the like Errors again: And urged them all to let the King's
Clemency Influence them to live and lead a better Life than ever they had don
before, etc.

GOD Save the KING.
The Ensuing Sessions was ordered to begin at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey on
Wednesday the 5th. day of December next following.

With Allowance.


