THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE TRIAL OF SR. Patience Ward Knight,
Upon an Information of Mr- Attorney General for Perjury who was Tried at the
Kings Bench-Barr-Westminster, on the 19th of this Instant May 1683. Containing
the most material Circumstances according to Evidence etc,
Entered according to ORDER.
AN Information for perjury being preferred against Sir Patience Ward Knight,
for that* he Maliciously and wilfully perjured himself in the Court of
King's Bench, upon the Trial of Thomas Pilkinton Esquire etc. the said Sr- Patience
Ward, pleaded not Guilty to the Information; and on the 19th. of this Instant
May, 1683. took his Trial accordingly. The most Material Proceedings being
these.

After the Information was read, the Kings Council opened the matter in
question, alleging the heinousness of the Fact, and of what dangerous
Consequence it might prove if it should pass unpunished, for that it concerned
the Nation in General, and might give Encouragement to greater mischief if it
should be passed over, or to that effect; after which the Evidence for the King
was called and sworn; who deposed upon Oath, that in the precedent Term at a
Trial between his Royal Highness, Plant^f, and Thomas Pilkinton defendant, upon
an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, the said Sr. Patient Ward, being a Witness
for the Defendant did, upon Oath, depose that the said Thomas Pilkinton was not
present at the time the discourse begun in Relation to his Royal Highness; and
that afterward coming to the Table, in the Matted Gallery, when he began to
speak of burning the City, he the said Sr. Patience Ward clapped his hand on
his Mouth or Breast, and bid him Explain himself; demanding whether he meant not
one Hubert, that fired the City, and was for the Fact Executed, and that many
words laid in the Declaration, in the Action of Scandalum Magnatum, were not
spoken by Mr. Pilkinton to the Plantif, etc. To this or the same Effect, Eight
or Nine Witnesses were sworn, and the matter strongly argued, and managed by
Council. Diverse Interrogatories being put and all doubtful matters amply
Explained and laid open to the Consideration of the Jurors, together with the
Heineousness of the sin of Perjury; which did not only expose men's Fortunes and
Reputations, but lives, to perpetual hazard and danger; the Council likewise
put them in mind that the words laid in the Declaration were sworn to by
persons of unspotted Reputation and not only upon the Trial of Mr. Pilkington,
but even again in their hearing, and that they ought to have regard to the
Possitive Evidence of Credible Affirmatives, for that they swore to what they
had heard and retained in their memory, etc.

After the Kings Evidence had deposed the matter of Fact at large, as was laid
in the Information, the Evidence for the Defendant were called who were many in
number, but the chief, one Mr. Blanie a Barister, who took the Trial between
his Royal Highness, and Mr. Pil^ington in shorthand Notes, who in Court
produced the said Notes, declaring that he had taken them true as to what they
contained, to the best of his Judgment and that he had perused them and could
not conceive any Error therein, as to what he had taken, but withal, declared
that he could not be so possitive, but that he might omit some words, not
withstanding he sat in a place advantageous for his taking of the said Notes,
appealing to those present, whether in his taking several Trials in that
Court, and others, he had omitted any thing material, or falsyfied; against
which some Objections were made. His Evidence as likewise that given by many of
the Defendants Witnesses was that the said Defendant did not; at the Trial,
between his Royal Highness and Mr. Pilkington to their memory swear possitively
to each particular charged against him, but that he deposed, that as he
believed, or to the best of his knowledge, or according to the best of his
memory, or that he did not hear such and such words spoken; or that he was not
possitive as to particulars; which was that which the Council for the King for
the most part insisted on in the Interogatories or Queries put to the
Defendants Evidence, who were not less then 12. or 13. so that after the Trial
had lasted for the space of four hours, or thereabouts and the Witnesses, with
great diliberation, heard what they had to say. First the Kings Council summed
up, what had been repeated, declaring that the matter consisted of these
points, viz. Whether the Defendant did swear positively at the Trial between
his Royal Highness and Mr. Pilkington to such matters, as were swore against
him, or not: for Conformation that he did many worthy Gentlemen had deposed it
upon Oath, who were present at the same Trial: that he only swore dubiously,
some persons had deposed. Therefore if they believed the Kings Evidence they
must find him Guilty, according to the Tenure of the Information.

After which the Council for the Defendant summed up the Evidence, and came to
particulars, but above all alleged the Credit and Reputation of the person, in
question, arguing that he had born the chiefest Office in the City, and other
great Places of Trust, and that he could propose to himself no advantage by
perjury in that Case neither did he by his giving Evidence perjudice, the
Plantif a penny; for that he had his damages to the full, as they were laid in
the Declaration, etc.

After which the Court gave the charge, and as soon as the Jury went out, rose,
leaving them to give a private Verdict to the Puisne Judge: the matter being
tried upon an Information at Common Law, Some hours being spent in debate as is
conceived, the Jury unanimously gave their Verdict that the Defendant was
Guilty of the particulars mentioned in the Information which Virdict on Monday
last was made Public.

LONDON Printed for R. Oswell. 1683.


