ANOTHER TRUMPET SOUNDED In the Ears of the Inhabitants of England, RULERS,
PRIESTS and PEOPLE;

That they might be awakened and raised out of the grave of Sin and Trespasses,
which so long they have lain dead in; That while you have time you might
hearken to the Voice of CHRIST JESUS, and obey Him who is the Light of the
World, who is come, and calling you out of your Sins, that you might be saved
from them; and cease to do Evil, and learn to do well, before your Day be quite
over, and the LORD's Wrath kindle against you, so as there will be no remedy.

Written in tender Love to you all by JAMES PARK, a Servant of Truth and
Righteousness.

London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Another Trumpet sounded, etc.
OH People of England, that have been talking much of Christ's Coming and
Kingdom: He is come a Light into the World; and to them that have sat in
darkness, and under the region of the shadow of death, has the true Light
shined, and shines forth out of the darkness, doing the works in and for them
that believe in it, which none else can do; rooting-out the vain thoughts and
imaginations, and what the Devil has wrought in the heart, Christ's appearance
and coming is to destroy that: and this is the glorious effect of Christ's
coming, to purge that out of the heart in which he takes no pleasure; to purge
out the filthiness of the flesh, and the lustings after evil things: for the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and warreth against the Spirit; and all who
believe in Christ Jesus the Light, and wait in it, a spiritual warring against
the flesh begins to arise in them: for a man's enemies lie near, even the
fleshly part in him, so a spiritual warfare almost none pass through before
they be overcomers of Sin, or know the Devils works destroyed in them: before
any man be a conqueror he must be armed with the Armor of Light, which is Gods
Armor, that must be put on, and then people are fit to war against Sin, this
deadly enemy of their own house: But most people remain altogether strangers to
this spiritual warfare, because they come not to believe in CHRIST the Light,
and so never come to know the house of Saul, or the deadly enemy that lies near
them destroyed, and yet will talk of the coming of Christ, and what he did for
them at Jerusalem without them; and that they are justified (in their wicked
works) by the death of Christ, though they never knew the variance begun in
them against the flesh, but have cried Peace to themselves in the flesh and
deeds of darkness; but Christ said, I come not to send Peace on Earth, but a
Sword: and this none knows but those who are turned to the Light of Christ
within them, which shows them Sin, and that which will cut it down, even all
the roots and branches of it, and sets a man at variance against it. And thus
is the Word of the Lord known as a Sword to cut down sin, and break man's peace
in sin and transgression: and herein is Christ's coming witnessed, who comes
not to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword, and to set a man at variance against
himself, against all his lovers, against all his self-actings and
self-righteousness; and hereby does he work that which none else can do; he
sets a man against himself, to lay down self, and to deny self and his own
will, and they are Disciples indeed: others who love self and their evil deeds,
and will lay down nothing for Christ's sake, they may be Disciples in words and
in tongue, but none in deed and in truth, but those only who can leave all, and
deny all for Christ's sake; as Christ said, Except a man deny himself, and take
up the daily-Cross, he cannot be my Disciple. The Cross must be learnt,
subjected unto, and taken up: for while people despise the Cross of Christ,
they are not his Disciples indeed; whatever they profess him in words, in works
they deny him; and, he that would save his Life shall lose it, but be that will
lay down his Life for Christ's sake shall save it.

So ye People of England, come to Christ the Light of the World, and own his
appearance and coming to break your false peace in your sins; and your
agreement with Death, and covenant with Hell, it shall not stand before him, he
will disanul it, who by Fire and Sword is come to plead with all flesh, and to
break your false fleshly peace, which your Leaders have begotten you into, and
cried to you while you are in your sins, and not in a true variance against
your sin, not in a true war against sin, or striving against it, but rather
into an ease in it, out of which you must be brought, if ever you come to have
peace with God and be saved from your sins; Therefore come away out of Self,
out of Self-love, out of your own wills. O people, return while you have time,
out of folly and transgressions, out of the Devils works, and say not within
your selves, nor one to another, that you are saved by the Death of Christ,
while you are in your Drunkenness, Whoredoms, Covetousness, Lying, Cheating,
Swearing, and Cursed-speaking and Dissembling with God and man; for these are
all the Devils works: And Christ being known a Savior, he faves out of Sin,
the Devils works, and destroys the Devil and all his works; and he died for
that very end, and he rises in all them that fear him for that very end, to
bring down the Man of Sin. Thou Drunkard, Christ died to bring thee off thy
Drunkenness; thou Swearer, to bring thee to fear an Oath; and thou Liar, to
bring thee off thy Lying; and thou Covetous one, to bring thee off thy
Covetousness; and all you Adulterers and Adulteresses, to bring you off the
Lust of the Eye, and the Lust of the flesh, and your Whoredoms and Uncleanness;
and you Proud and Lofty ones, who are lifted up in Pride and the Fashions of
the World, O lay it away; for Christ who was meek and low of heart, of whom you
ought to learn, and who is come a light in you, comes to bring down every high
thought, and all that which is lifted up over the pure Light in you, which
shows you your sins, your pride of life, your highmindedness, being out of the
fear of God, and in rebellion against the true Light, wherewith you are
enlightened, which is manifest to destroy that which is contrary to God; Oh be
not stiffnecked but hearken to the Voice of Christ Jesus, the only way to God,
whose way is out of sin: Thou Drunkard and profane person, do thou not know
the Drunkard shall not inherit Gods Kingdom, nor the Swearer, nor Liar, nor
Covetous Worldling, nor dissembling Hypocrite, nor the Adulterer, nor Unclean
Person, nor the Proud, whose King the Devil is. O People, while you have time
think of this, you that forget God, that are wanton upon the Earth, and that
nourish your hearts as in a day of slaughter: it is no marvel to see the Lord,
who is just in all his ways, and righteous in all his judgments, strike down
many thousands in a short time, by his destroying Angel that is gone forth to
smite the Earth, and to shorten the days of the Wicked. Oh Earth, hear; thou
Nation of England be awakened and warned, for a great Destruction and Calamity
is begun in thee, because of thy great wickedness and sin against God, because
of thy Oaths, Drunkenness, Covetousness and Lying, Cursed speaking and
Whoredoms, and Pride of life, and Persecution of the Innocent which has been
found in thee, the Land is coming into a Desolation, and the Destruction from
the Almighty hangs over it, and hastens to cut off the wicked Persecuters of
the Innocent People that fear God, and have good will toward all men.

If you repent not, O you Inhabitants and People of England, from the highest
to the lowest, that have had any hand in Persecuting, Imprisoning and Banishing
them that fear the Lord, that by you in dirision have been called Quakers, who
made themselves a prey by departing from Iniquity, and the great wickedness
that abounds in the Land; know ye assuredly that Judgment is toward you. O ye
Rulers, Priests and People, consider your ways and your doings, whereby you
have incurred and brought upon your selves and the Nation the great displeasure
of God; and how should the Lord now plead with you but in his Wrath, seeing you
have slighted the tenders of his love and long-suffering toward you? Did not
the Lord visit you, and give you time and space to repent? Did not the Lord by
his Servants warn you in time, and told you what Persecuting of an innocent
People would bring upon you? Are you not left without excuse, if God now break
forth in a way of Indignation and Judgment against you? Is it not just? Can
you say, God did not not call you, and visit, and warn you? Nay verily, the
Lord has called you time after time, and the everlasting Gospel has been
sounded in your ears, Oh People of England, more than any other Nation or
Kingdom whatsoever. But O you Rulers, Priests and People, you have not answered
the Love of the Lord, by breaking off from your sins, but you remain in your
sins; you have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord, nor answered when the Lord
has called you out of your sins, to save you from your sins; he that has shed
his Blood a ransom for all, and tasted death for every man, you have done, and
are doing, evil in his sight; and none of you repents you of your evil deeds,
saying, What have I done? but goes on in evil, and drinks up Iniquity as an Ox
drinks up Water: Therefore now is the fire of God's Jealousy kindled against
you, after a long day of Mercy; and they that have sinned out their day, by
walking despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, and the Visitation of God's
Love, the Indignation of the Lord they must feel; and the Lord will laugh at
their calamity, and bring fearfulness upon them, which all the force and
strength of Armies and Ships cannot keep off.

And O ye Magistrates of England, who live in sin, envying that which is good,
and persecuting them that do well; God has visited you, and warned you in
great love and tenderness, but you have not hearkened unto, nor owned the Lord
in his way of visiting you, but dis-regarded, and have stopped your ears
against those whom God stirred up by his Spirit to visit you, and warn you of
your ungodly ways and practices; therefore must you feel trouble, wrath and
Judgment from God. And remember you are once more warned to take heed how you
partake with any in persecuting of them that fear the Lord, and are real
well-wishers of your Souls.

Oh beware of following a multitude to do evil, and sin against God, for all
who are partakers any way with Persecutors in their fin, mast assuredly drink
of their Plagues, Woes, and Misery, which is come and coming upon this Land;
and some Persecutors God will make signal Examples of his Wrath, because they
have gone in the way of Cain, that wicked one, that slew his Brother for the
Righteous works he did. O People, slow of heart to believe what the Prophets
saw and spoke, though you will talk of their words, touching Christ's coming
into the World to save sinners, but you witness not Christ's coming to put an
end to sin in you, and so you perish in your sins. Oh! why will ye die in your
sins? Oh sinful Nation, a Seed of evil doers, why will you not hear the Law of
God, the Light of Christ, what it speaks in you? Why do not you come to
Christ, in whom is Life, and this Life is the Light of men, which you are to
believe in, that you might be saved from your sins, and come out of all your
dead Ways, Worships, and Sacrifices, and vain Traditions, which profit you not
at all, but keep you in death; herein you long have lain out of the holy pure
Life. Christ is come, and has appeared in you, that you might be partakers of
Life, and therefore desires not your death, but rather that you might live, and
turn from your sins, unto him that cleanses from all sin, that you might know
a life out of sin, out of the fleshly lustings that war against the Soul; and
as you come into the Life of God, the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the Eye,
and the pride of Life will die in you; and Life and Salvation you must witness
through death, by keeping to that which slayes the old man with his deeds; the
Lord has called you again and again, but how have you stopped your ears, and
closed your eyes, and rebelled against his Light? The Lord has stretched forth
his hand all the day long, and Wisdom has cried in your streets, but you have
not regarded, but slighted God's Message to you, and his Arm And Wisdom to
gather you out of the crooked ways, and bypaths; and many years has God
preached Repentance from dead works to you, that ye might turn from the evil of
your ways, and cease to do evil, and learn to do well: But alas, how have you
despised the Messengers of the Lord, whom he sent unto you to preach
Repentance, and to warn you to fly from the Wrath to come? but you have not
brought forth fruits to Repentance, but have hardened your hearts against them,
Stocking, Stoning, Whiping, Imprisoning, Banishing, and despitefully using
them. And oh foolish people, how have many of you mocked, abused, and
shamefully entreated God's People, and peculiar Children, when in pure
obedience to the Lord they were sent amongst you, as Sheep amongst Wolves? How
have they been haled and beaten in your Cities, Towns, and Markets, and the
Priests and Hypocritical Professors have been chief in this work? also
instigating poor blind people to beat and hale out of Steeple Houses, them that
came in Gods fear and dread to pronounce Woes, Vengeance, and Plagues upon them
that had gotten the Sheeps clothing, but inwardly were ravening Wolves, and
upon them that said fair, but did not; and now has the Lord made them of the
Synagogue of Satan, that said, They were Jews, and were not, but did lie in
their hearts, and dissembled with God and Man; and with the Priests God is
pleading, and will yet more and more plead with them in his Wrath, and they
shall have no cover nor cloak for their sins, because Christ is come, and
manifest in our day, doing the works which none else can do, in and for all
them that believe in him; and the chief Priests in this day, as of old, have
appeared against his Work, and coming in ten thousands of his Saints; and how
have they many ways sought to deform God's Work and Image in his People? How
many false slanders and false reports have they invented and raised, seeking
and endeavoring to render the begotten of God odious, and Truth to be error?
And how have they put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light; sweet for
bitter, and bitter for sweet?

Oh people, how have you been cheated by those you call your Ministers and
Leaders? How have you been led into error, and kept in error by them? And how
full of lightness are they? And how are they like to be instrumental to beget
you out of lightness, lying and vanity, who are in it themselves? And how are
they like to beget you out of pride and covetousness, who are in it themselves?
And how are they like to beget you out of Whoredom and Swearing, who are in it
themselves? And these are Ministers God never sent, that profit not the people
at all, but keep them always learning, but laden with corruption, and led away
with diverse lusts; Are they not Ministers of Antichrist, that keep people ever
learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of Truth, which would save,
and set them free from their sins. O people, slow of heart to believe what the
Lord has spoken by his Prophets and Servants unto you, beseeching you in
Christ's stead to come out of your sins, that you might be reconciled to God,
that you might unload your selves of that heavy and dark burden of sin, and
leave your sins, and forsake your sins, and break off from your sins by timely
Repentance. Oh poor shattered people, I do believe you have not all sinned out
your day, though certainly many have, but there is large love and bowels of
pity yerning in my heart toward you: Therefore to you I call, while it is to
day, hear the Voice of Christ Jesus, hear, that your Souls may live; hear, that
you may come out of the Grave of sin and trespasses where you are dead, that
you may come out of the way of evil men, and not walk in the way of the
ungodly, nor any longer stand in the way of sinners; for that brings death, and
keeps you in death. O sit no longer in the seat of the scornful and mockers,
lest your bonds be made strong, so strong in iniquity, that you will never be
able to get out. Oh people come out of Hell, come out of the Graves, come out
of Death, be warned and awakened, stand up from the Dead, where you long have
lain asleep, that Christ you may feel a Light to your feet, and a Lanthorn to
your path, and then he will lead you out of the way of the Wicked, and the
ways of Death, the ways of Hell, if ye hearken to him; ye that have been at
ease from your Youth, at ease in vain thoughts that lodge in you, at ease in
bad wicked words, in cursed speaking, swearing and lying; The Lord is coming to
take your peace and ease from you, and to bring terror and perplexity upon you;
God's hand is lifted up against you, Vials, Vials, Plagues, Plagues; Woe, woe, to
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Sea, and all the wicked that do wickedly,
on them will the Lord pour forth the Vials of his Wrath. He has begun
dreadfully to warn thee, O England, of the evil of thy ways, by Sword and
other Judgments, to the cutting off many of thine Inhabitants; and yet how few
in thee take notice of the Hand of the Lord which is lifted up against thee?
Had thou hearkened to the Counsel of God, through his Servants and
Messengers, which he sent unto thee several years ago, foretelling what woe
would befall thee if thou wentest on in thy sins, which if thou had hearkened
unto, surely these Miseries, Plagues and Calamities, that are come and coming,
would not have come upon thee; but now in way of Judgment is the Lord pleading
with them that would not own his hand of Love; and misery after misery shall
overtake them, unless they speedily repent and turn to the Lord God. Oh! do you
not see the hand of the Lord, which is lifted up to smite and cut down the
wicked workers? Surely you profane wicked ones, you Hypocrites and
Dissemblers, you shall see it, and feel it more and more, if you repent not,
and come out of your wickedness, which abounds in the Nation as in Sodom; and
if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom and
Gomorah, they would have repented of their wickedness.

Truly when I consider thy sins, O England, thy great Abominations wherewith
thou have grieved the Lord, and kindled his displeasure against thee, I could
expect nothing but utter ruin and destruction from the Almighty to come upon
thee and thy Inhabitants, only this stays me in hope, knowing God has raised
a small remnant of Righteous Ones, that are vexed with the filthiness of thine
Inhabitants, and their wicked Conversations; if the Nation be not wholly
ruined, it is for their sakes, whom you, O people of England, have sought to
cast out and banish from amongst you for Christ's sake; but only for their
sakes, I have no ground in me to believe, but that great misery, yea even utter
ruin would come upon this Nation and People. You have been so wicked and
stiffnecked against the Lord, that it may be the Lord will not permit the
Righteous Persons amongst you to interceed for you; but that in this day of
calamity the Righteous Man must only deliver his own Soul, but not be able to
deliver any of you that have sold your selves to work wickedness; it may be, if
Noah, or Daniel, or any of the Apostles or Ministers of Christ should intercede
the Lord for you, yet the Lord will not be heard of them on your behalf, so as
to turn away his Wrath and Judgment which is toward you, O People of England.
So you that have not sinned out your day, be awakened out of your sins, be no
longer partaker with the wicked in sin, nor at ease in your sins, but come to
that which condemns sin, and destroys the Devils works, that you may be saved
and be hid in the day of the Lords Wrath, that you may trust in the Lord, and
stay your selves upon the God of Jacob, who is arising in his might and Power
to punish the wicked for all their ungodly deeds which they have done, and all
the hard speeches which they have spoken against him and his People; and he
will sweep away the refuge of lies; and he will render vengeance on all them
that know him not, and that obey not the Gospel; yea, he will pour fury on his
Adversaries, and just recompense on his Enemies, and all that are at ease in
sin, and waxed wanton on the Earth; terror shall shortly take hold on them, and
fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrite; and they shall call to the Mountains
and Hills to cover them, and hide them from the Wrath of the Lamb, and shall
not be able to dwell with devouring burning, when the Lord appears in his
terrible Majesty, in a way of fierce Wrath, Judgment, and fiery Indignation.

Therefore, O people, take warning if it be not too late; to them that have
sinned out their day it is: but for their sakes that have not quite sinned out
their day is this written, that they may be awakened, and turn to the Lord at
his reproof, before their day be over, and Gods Spirit leave striving with
them, and the door of Mercy be shut against them, so as they shall find no
place of Repentance nor entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, though they cry,
Lord, Lord, open unto us!

THE END.

