A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mrs Mary Dawes, AT Great Bardfield in
Essex, January 15. 1690.

By THOMAS PRITCHARD, M. A. and late Rector of West-Tilbury in Essex.

Imprimatur. C. Alston. Nov. 16. 1692.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1693.

TO THE Lady Dawes.
MADAM,
THO such was the modesty of the Author, and so mean the Opinion which he had
of all his own Performances, as would not suffer him consent to the Publication
of this Discourse. Yet ^e great Usefulness of the Subject, and the extraornary
Virtue and Piety of the Person herein described, those example may influence
others to an imitation of (...) Goodness and Perfections. The consideration I
say, (...) these things, has at length prevailed with those, to ^ose disposal
this Discourse was committed, to send it ^^rth into the World, tho in a plain
and unartificial ^ress.

I must beg your Pardon, Madam, if hereby I con^^ibute any thing to the
renewing of your Ladyships ^^ief, for the loss of so excellent a Daughter,
whom, tho I never had the honor to know, yet I have hea^ my dear Friend Mr.
Pritchard, speak so often (...) so great Things of her, that (considering his
si^cerity and great aversion to Flattery,) I am confide^^ the Character here
given of her, is true. I shall (...) presume to make any addition to it, tho
perhaps it mig^^ be said, that she as far exceeded the Character, (...) others
fall short of it.

All that I shall further add, is to let the World kno^ how much they are
obliged to your Ladyship, who (...) your own good Example, and wise
Instructions, and car^ful Education of your Daughter, in the ways of Religi^^
and Virtue, has furnished them with so excellent a P^^tern, so worthy of their
Imitation; may they all follow here, and be happy hereafter.

I am, MADAM, Your Ladyships most Humble, And most obedient Serva^^ T. (...)

A Funeral Sermon.
Heb. xiii. 14. For here have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come.


THE Great and Allwise God, who is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all
his Works, orders and disposes all Things here below as he pleases,
directing all his providential Occurrences, how harsh or grievous soever they
may seem to us, to very gracious and wise Ends and Purposes. Whence it is our
Duty not to murmur or complain of what God does, but to bear all Adversities
whatever befall us here, all losses, of what kind soever, even those of our
nearest Relations and dearest Friends calmly and patiently, entirely resigning
our Wills to God's Acquiescing in, and submitting to the severest Dispensations
of his Providence, firmly believing that they all proceed from an infinitely
holy, just, and righteous God. It Is this consideration alone, that can restrain
us from breaking out into immoderate and excessive Grief, on so mournful an
occasion as this, the Death of this most excellent and pious Lady, who was
deservedly dear, justly admired and highly honored and esteemed, by all that
were so happy as to know her. All the usual Attractives of Love and Esteem were
in her in the highest Degree, as being complete Mistress of all those gentile
Accomplishments which make up what the World calls a fine Woman; a great
Fortune; handsome and ingenious; modest and humble; cheerful and pleasant;
courteous and obliging; a most entire, faithful, and fast Friend; of a most
incomparably sweet and singularly good Humor; her Conversation very pleasing
and charming: in a word, strictly Virtuous, smcerely Pious. Under this then so
heavy a Stroke, under this (to us) so sad a Providence, nothing is able to
support us, but this consideration only, that it is God's doing. We must
therefore, as David was, be Dumb, and not open our Mouths to complain. God has
taken her from us to himself; to our great Loss indeed, but to her
inexpressible Advantage, she being now with him whom she loved with all her
Heart and with all her Soul, whom she ever duly and constantly served, even
with that God in whose presence is Fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand
there are Pleasures for evermore. God was pleased to allot her but a short time
here upon Earth; (the greater is our nuhappiness) her life was scarce a Span
long, yet she lived a great deal in this little, suffering none of her time to
run wast, but was always busied in some Employment or other suitable to her
Quality and most ingenious Mind. She spent a great part of her time in reading
the holy Scriptures, and other good Books, which might furnish her with the
most necessary and useful Knowledge, esteeming the Knowledge of God and
Religionto be such, chiefly endeavoring after this, which she attained to in a
very great Degree; and made the best and truest Use of her Knowledge in
Religion, by reducing it to good Practice, which is the Life of Religion,
without which the Knowledge of it is not only vain and useless, but dangerous
and hurtful; For he that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes. It Is not the bare Knowledge of our Duty, but the
Practice of it that makes us happy; If ye know these things, then happy are ye
if ye do them. Thus by a conscientious Practice of religious Duties, and by her
daily Walking with God, by a Life (tho short), yet very holy and good, she did
excellently provide for her future eternal Welfare, which was the main Care of
her Life. She was very sensible of her uncertain State and Condition in this
World; knew very well that this World was not her home, that she had here no
continuing City, and therefore made it the great Business of her Life, to seek
one to come; which made me choose these Words to Discourse of at this time;
which I must do very briefly, that I may have some time to say more of her, who
is the sad Occasion of our now meeting here.

In the Words that I have read to you, I shall observe these Two Parts.

I. The State and Condition of all Men in this Life; here we have no continuing
City.

II. Our Hopes and Expectations as to another; we seek one to come.

Was a Christians Hope terminate in this Life, did he expect nothing beyond the
Grave, we might then justly conclude with the Apostle, that Christians were of
all men the most miserable: But, (blessed be our gracious God,) we have a most
sure Word of Prophecy informing us, and giving us the highest Assurances, and
the most convincing Testimonies, that thenature of the Subject is possibly
capable of; That there shall be a Future State, a Life after this, where we
shall, afterthe few short and uncertain days of this our Pilgrimage is ended,
find an abiding and continuing City.

I. The present State and Condition of all Men in this World; we have here no
continuing City.

Man, in this Life, is in an unquiet and troublesome State, in a wandering and
unsettled Condition, but a Pilgrim and a Traveller, a Stranger and a Sojourner
in a foreign Land; a Truth as old as Adam's Fall, who by his Sin disposessed
himself and all his Posterity, and made us at best but Tenants at Will, when we
might have been Inhabitants; and it is well he did, since at the same time he
brought a Curse upon the Country, and from a Garden of Pleasures, converted it
into one of Briers and Thorns, and so left us to eat our Bread in the sweat of
our Brows, till we return to the Dust from whence we were taken. God indeed was
pleased (whether as a Favor or a Punishment, I shall not say,) to grant to him
and the succeeding Patriarchs a longer Lease of Tilling the Ground, than he
does nowadays to us; they had a longer Passage and Pilgrimage, and by
consequence a more tedious one, before they came unto the Country they sought
for; but still they had no continuing City here, they were not immortalized
upon Earth, nor exempted from the tasting of Death, or from the many Miseries
and Calamities incident to Life, but were inured to hardship and labor, evils
and afflictions; and the longest Life of them all, before the Flood, was
concluded within less than a Thousand Years; after the Flood, as Sin increased,
which first shortened our abode, so the days of man's Life were contracted, tho
the evils of it were enlarged; so that Jacob confesses, as his days were full
of evil, so they had been few in in respect of his Forefathers, as he told
Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9. the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and
thirty years, few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have
not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days
of their pilgrimage; but in the time of Moses, for he is generally thought to
be the Author of the, 90th. Psalm, the account of man's Life was much shorter,
much the same with what it now is, Threescore and Ten or Fourscore Years; but
yet such as was attended with Sorrow and Labor, as he tells us ver. 10. of
that Psalm. But now how many Thousands end their Pilgrimage in a far shorter
time; how many now are cut off long before they come at that Age? do we not
daily almost see or hear of many suddenly snatched away in the very midst and
prime of their days? how infinite are the numbers of those whose days are so
far from being a Span long, that they will scarce admit of any measure at all,
tho never so little? how many are carried from the Womb to the Grave? So short,
so uncertain is man's stay in this World, which the Holy Scriptures do fitly
represent to us, telling us, that we are as wind, that passes away and comes
not again, that we come forth like a flower and are soon cut down, flee away,
and continue not; that man even in his best estate is altogether Vanity, man is
like a thing of naught, his time passes away like a Shadow, as for man his
days are as Grass as a Flower of the field so he flourishes, all Flesh is
Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof is as a Flower of the field, the Grass
withers, the Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it,
surely the People is Grass. We are often in Scripture said to be Strangers and
Sojourners in this World, thus the Author of this Epistle says of all those
whom he had reckoned up, Chap. 11. verse 13. that they were strangers and
pilgrims upon earth; and this he does also say of all men in the Text; and the
same did David acknowledge, 1. Chron. 29.15. for we are strangers before thee
and sojourners as all our fathers were, our days on earth are as a shadow, and
there is none abiding. This is the common Fate of all Mankind, after a few days
are past and gone, we must go to the Place from whence we shall not return, we
must leave this World and go to our long home, we must part with all that we
have here possession of, Friends, Riches, Honors, all must be left; we must
take our last Leave, and bid a final Adieu to all our nearest and dearest
Relations, exchange the stateliest Palaces, the goodliest Mansions, the
pleasantest Seats, as well as the poorest and homeliest Cottages, for a dark
cold Grave. Knowing then what our preasent Condition in this World is, that we
are Strangers and Pilgrims here; let us behave our selves as such, since such
we are in this World; here we have no fixed or settled Habitation, we are but
Sojourners, live at another's Table, lodge under another Roof, and may be
dispossessed at his Pleasure. The Years that we have here to continue are at
best but few and short; that man that lived longest, lived but Nine Hundred
Years and upwards, and tho this may seem a long time to us, yet how few are
these if compared with those many Millions of Ages which he shall live in
another state, nay indeed there can be no Comparison between them, no more than
between a Moment and Eternity; this World is but an Inn to receive and lodge us
for a while, and that at best but in Booths and Tabernacles, pitched up only
for a time, passing through this vale of Misery, we are to use it as a Well,
(says the Psalmist), only draw a little Water for our refreshment in our
Journey, but not think to make our abode here, alas! we have another and
farther Journey to take, we are to seek another and better Country, a Christian
is bound for no less than Heaven, thither he must hasten and steer his Course,
if he would find a place of Rest and Safety, if he would find an abiding City,
for it will be but in vain and lost labor to seek it any where else, there and
there only, after all his Labors, he may find a Building of God, a House not
made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens, where he may dwell for ever. Being
then but Sojourners upon Earth, let us as the Apostle exhorts, pass the time of
our sojourning here in this world in fear; let us be careful to live well that
little time we have to stay here, being assured; that upon our present
Demeanor depends our future Condition either of eternal Happiness or Misery;
let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and
let us run with patience the race that is set before us, striving to arrive at
the same happy Country where those ancient Pilgrims who are gone before us,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are, that we may sit down with them in the same
blessed heavenly Kingdom; let us, like the Israelites, who eat the Passover
with their Loins girt, and Staffs in their Hands, to signify their readiness
to depart out of Egypt, where they were Strangers, let us like them be prepared
too in Heart and Mind to leave this foreign Country where the people are ill
affected toward us, for we are all here what our Forefathers were, Strangers
and Sojourners, and absent from our Country. This is the present State and
Condition of all Men in this World, we have here no continuing City.

I come now to the second Thing, which I observed in the Words.

II. Our Hopes an Expectations as to another, we seek one to come.

That there shall be a continuing City, that we shall, after this Life is
ended, enter upon an eternal State, where good Men shall be unspeakably Happy,
and wicked Men unspeakably Miserable, I shall not doubt ye so little Christians
as to stand to prove, Life everlasting being an Article of our Creed, which we
all profess to believe; taking therefore that for granted which Christianity
commands you to believe, and which the time now forbids me to insist on the
Proof of, I shall only deduce this one practical Inference.

Since we have here no continuing City, but look for an abiding City, an
eternal State hereafter, let us prepare for it, and to quicken our diligence in
this so important an Affair, consider that this Life, as short and as uncertain
as it is, is the only time we have to seek this abiding City which we look for;
it is here alone we must seek this City, it is here we must secure to our selves
an happy Eternity or no where; when this life ends, when we are in the Grave,
it will be too late: there, as Solomon assures us, is no work, counsel nor
device in the grave, whither we are going; that, as Job describes it, is a
land of darkness itself, and of the shadow of death without any order, and
where the light is as darkness. No delay therefore is to be admitted; sure I
am, there is nothing so well deserves our Care as this, this is our main
Concern, the chief Business of our Lives, and shall we then neglect it? shall
we drudge, toil and labor, to make Provision for a short frail Life? And shall
we do nothing at all, take no care for a long eternal one? shall we mind Time
and disregard Eternity? This one would think is such egregious Folly, as no
rational Creature could possibly be guilty of: but alas we see how busy Men
generally are about the things of this Life, and how they scarce trouble their
Heads with the Thoughts of another; how vainly do most Men deceive themselves
with the Hopes of a long Life, thinking they shall have time enough hereafter
to seek this abiding City? But to cure if possible such Men's fond Presumption,
let them consider what I before said of the uncertainty of our State in this
World, let 'em consider how short, how frail a thing Life is; What is your
Life, says S. James, it is a vapor that appears for a little time and then
vanishes, quickly does it pass away, soon is it gone: wherefore so weighty an
Affair as this ought not to be put off to so uncertain a thing: flatter not
then thy self, O vain Man, that because thou art now Young and Lusty, in
perfect Health and Soundness, that therefore thou have yet many years to live,
and that it will be time enough in thy old Age, when thy Strength is decayed
and thy Days are almost expired, to seek this City; for thou see many as
Young and as likely to live in the World as thy self, suddenly snatched away,
and carried into the other World in the very midst and prime of their Days; and
how know thou O presumptuous Man! what assurance have thou, it may not be
thy own Condition? When thou see or hear daily of Thousands that fall
besides thee, and Ten Thousands at thy Right Hand; what security have thou that
the Arrows of Death shall not come nigh thee to strike thee? What Seal have
thou upon thy Door, that the destroying Angel should pass by thy Habitation, as
he did those of the Israelites of old, and destroy thee not? Neglect nor then
so great a Concern, hazard not thine eternal State at so great an uncertainty;
thou know not but that this frail life of thine may end, before this Work be
done; and then with what Dread and Horror will thou leave this World, having
nothing to comfort thee at thy dying Hour, no hope of any Happiness in another
Life, but dreadful Apprehensions of those grievous Torments which thou must
there suffer for ever? how will thou then bewail thy Folly, and when it is too
late, wish that thou had taken care to have provided for thy eternal State?
Now them; while thou have time take care of this great Concern, and prevent
what will otherwise undoubtedly be thy dismal Fate; none of us all but must be
sensible that our time passes away apace, that the Day of our Death hastens;
it then greatly concerns us all to prepare for that Eternity which is drawing
nigh; how soon we may launch forth into that vast Ocean we know not, ere long
we are sure we must; let us not then delay our preparing for it, but what we do
let us do quickly and with all our Might.

I have done with the Text; and come now as may most justly be expected, to
speak of this most highly deserving Lady, to whom we are now paying our last
Respects; who is now quickly to be laid in her Bed of Dust, there to repose
'till that great Day comes, when all that sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall
be awakened and called forth, when all the Dead shall be brought to Life again;
then shall she be raised from thence, and her Body being made immortal,
incorruptible and glorious, shall be reunited to her Soul, never to be
separated from it any more, but to continue together both Body and Soul, in
unspeakable Felicity and Glory.

I have ever declared my self no friend to Funeral Encomiums, nor should any
thing have prevailed with me to give one now, but the extraordinary Merit of
this deceased Lady, to whom I should be highly injurious should I refuse it. I
know very well how difficult a thing it is to give a Character of any Person
which some or other will not be displeased with, but this must not discourage
me. I shall say nothing but what I my self knew to be true, or have had from
very credible Hands.

This Lady was descended, as is known to many in this Auditory, from very
worthy Parents, her Father Sir Jonathan Dawes, a wealthy Merchant, an eminent
and well known Citizen, her Mother one of the Daughters of Sir Thomas Bendish,
a very ancient Baronet in this Neighborhood. Her Education was suitable to her
Extraction, which her pious Mother (her Father dying when she was very young)
took great care of, educating her gentilely and virtuously, in all those fine
Accomplishments which became her Sex, which she improved to the utmost; but
that which I chiefly remark, is, her being betimes acquainted with God, her
being early instructed in Religion which grew up with her, which being happily
accustomed to, she made it her daily Employment, finding a great deal of
Pleasure, Satisfaction, and Sweetness in it; experiencing, that all its ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths peace, being trained up when a
Child in the way she should go, she did not depart from it: and this was it
which did exceedingly Adorn and Beautify her far beyond what the finest
Accomplishments could do, tho she had them in as great a degree as any,
Religion giving her a greater Grace and Luster than all things else besides.
She was blessed with great Endowments of Mind; she was a Lady of very great and
extraordinary Parts, highly Ingenious, of quick Apprehension, of firm Memory,
and of most solid Judgment; she had a most curious and fine way both of
Speaking and Writing, the one all know that ever had the Honor to Converse with
her, and she has left lasting Monuments of her great Abilities in the other;
she was a most obedient and dutiful Daughter, she was of a very generous and
charitable Disposition, which she expressed upon all fit Occasions, and
particularly at her Death, by that liberal and considerable Legacy which she
gave to the Poor: All which joined with her great Piety, made her an Ornament
to her Sex, and a Pattern most worthy of Imitation.

I should be tedious if I should but barely mention all those things that were
Commendable in her, but I must contract, and what I have farther to add, I
shall comprise under these Three Heads.

Modesty, Humility, Piety, every one of which she was very eminent for.

First, Modesty. This is a great and becoming Virtue, very commendable in all
of both Sexes, but more especially so in the fair Sex, whom it makes very
amiable and desirable, being highly prized by all sober Persons; with which
Virtue this Lady was most eminently adorned, being extremely Modest; having a
perfect abhorrence, and utter aversion to any thing that might but seem to
trespass upon it; never being able, without the greatest Detestation, to hear
any Discourse that had the least tendency to Levity or Wantonness, which Virtue
is the greater in this loose and dissolute Age, when too many have laid it
aside, as a very unnecessary and troublesome thing. All her Discourses, all her
Behavior, all her Actions were guided by the strictest Rules of Modesty. Such
was her Modesty.

Secondly, Humility. A most excellent Christian Grace which procures to the
Person that has it favor both from God and Man; the humble God bears an
especial Regard to, and has a particular Care of; tho (says the Psalmist) the
Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, but the proud, he knows
afar off; and says the Prophet, Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty One,
he that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy
place; with him also that is of an humble spirit; of which especial Favor we
we have reason to believe this truly humble Soul did partake; who, tho none was
more deserving, yet none had a lower opinion of themselves than she; she always
thought meanly of herself, yet was she free from that abject Meanness of Spirit
which some miscal Humility, none could have more to puff them up than she had,
but she very well knew how great a Folly it is to be proud of any thing, since
all that we have we receive from God; and why then should we boast as tho we
had not received? Her care was to improve well the Talents God entrusted her
with to his Glory, from whom she thankfully acknowledged, she received whatever
good Thing she had; in this, following the great Pattern of Humility, our
Blessed Savior, who, when by the mighty Works he had wrought, he had gained
the Applause and Admiration of the People, he did what he could to avoid them,
ascribing to God the Father the Power by which he wrought them, saying, the
Father that dwells in me, he does the works. So would this humble Soul, not
to take to herself the praise of any thing, but ascribe all to the Grace of
God. There is nothing more peculiar to, or more becoming a Christian, than
Humility; it was this Lesson which our Blessed Lord singled out from all
others, and which he calls upon us to learn of him; learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart: which Lesson she had perfectly learnt; she was, to use the
Apostle's Phrase, clothed with Humility, the humble Disciple of an humble
Savior, the same Mind; that is, the same lowly Frame and Temper of Spirit
which was in Christ Jesus, was, as the Apostle requires should be in us, in
her also. Such was her Humility.

Lastly, Piety. This is that which the Apostle tells us has the Promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come, intitling men to the happiness
of both Worlds; and tho God for very good Reasons, may sometimes give but
little of this world's Happiness to some that are truly Pious, (God's Promises
of temporal Felicity being conditional only), yet they shall be sure to be
abundantly compensated in the other World for what they come short of here in
this; there they shall be sure not to lose their Reward. Oh how great things
(says the Psalmist) are those which thou have prepared for them that fear
thee! such they are as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man to conceive. A fair and sufficient encouragement to
Piety, which this Lady did in a most exemplary manner practice; whose Piety was
of the right Stamp, not formal, but real, not by Fits and Starts only, but
constant and uninterrupted, not partial, picking and choosing some of Gods
Commandments, and disregarding the rest, but universally having Respect to all
God's Commandments. She daily set apart a portion of her time for the service
of God, which she spent in Prayer, reading the holy Scriptures and other good
Books, Meditation, etc. and if she was at any time prevented by Company, or
Diversions, (which were always harmless and innocent,) or by any other
unavoidable Accident, she would be sure to make it up at another, and would not
rob God and her Soul of the time set apart for them: And well were it if all
Persons of Quality, the Plentifulness of whose Estates freeing them from those
mean Employments, which Persons of lower Rank are busied in, and so having more
leisure and time to spare, would devote a greater share of their time to God
and their Souls, as certainly if they consider it they must acknowledge they
ought to do, for the more liberal and bountiful God has been to them, the more
thankful they ought to be unto him. Besides, her private Devotions, which I
believe she never omitted, she never failed to be at the Prayers of the Family;
unless she was hindered by Sickness, or was abroad, which she seldom was at
Prayer time, so that I can scarce remember that ever she was absent, behaving
herself very devoutly and reverently with all imaginable Fervency, and the most
profound Humility, putting up her Prayers to God, presenting them at the Throne
of Grace in such a decent Manner, in such a lowly Posture of Body as becomes
Supplicants, and as the infinite Majesty of that God to whom we pray does
require: and as frequent was she at the Public Prayers of the Church, which
she continually attended, nay would often go when her Health would ill admit of
it, being desirous to omit no opportunity of serving God in his own House, his
House of Prayer, where she was wholly intent on the Duty she was about, joining
with the greatest Devotion and Earnestness; and at Sermon time, as I have
observed when I have occasionally Preached here, she was a very diligent,
serious and attentive Hearer; and as she was thus constant at the Public
Prayers of the Church and Sermon, so was she also at the Holy Communion, which
to the end of her Life she frequented, having received the Holy Sacrament at
Church on Christmas day, the last opportunity she had of receiving those
blessed Viands; which Duty she never went about Heedlesly or Inconsiderately,
but used the greatest Care and Diligence possible to fit herself for it, always
setting apart some time for Preparation, practicing the Apostles Advice,
examining herself, and that strictly too, before she would presume to eat of
that Bread and drink of that Cup, which she did with a Devotion and Reverence
suitable to that great and holy Duty. Such was her Piety.

Which is the more commendable because it was an early one, she remembered her
Creator betimes in the Days of her Youth, devoting the best and prime of her
Days to his Service; a juvenile Piety is most acceptable unto God, I love those
that love me, says God, and they that seek me early shall find me; the truth
of which gracious Promise, I believe this Pious Soul does now experience: the
Comfort which the remembrance of her well-spent Life gave her, supported her
under all her Sickness, which made her not only not afraid to Die, but if it
were Gods Will to desire that she might die; which she desired, not out of any
Impatience for what she suffered, or out of any Discontent or Dissatisfaction,
but as she herself assured me when I visited her in her Sickness, out of a firm
Hope she had, that God would pardon her Sins through the Merits of Christ, by
whose alone Merits she hoped for it; and that God, of whose Favor she had a
well-grounded Assurance, would bestow upon her those great and unconceivable
Felicities of the other World, which she steadfastly believed, and hoped through
the Mercy of God, and Merits of Christ to partake of: it was this which made
her desire to be Dissolved, that she might be with God and Christ, which is
best of all; or to give it you in her own Words, from a Letter which she left
to comfort a dear Relation under this so great a Loss, having spoke in that
with some certainty of her future Happiness, she thus says, I speak not with
this Confidence of my future Felicity, through any opinion of my own Virtue and
Goodness; alas! no, I am deeply sensible of my Deficiency in both, and that I
deserve nothing but eternal Punishment, but all my Dependence is on the Merits
of my Savior, who, I hope will never cast off a Soul to whom he has given the
Grace to trust in him; this is the ground of my Assurance, which (though
perhaps attended with some Fears,) is still maintained, by meditating on the
boundless Clemency of my Creator and Redeemer. These are her own Words; it was
this which made her so willing to die, having that to cheer her, which is the
greatest Comfort we can have when we come to die, that she was exchanging this
short troublesome Life, for a blessed Eternal one.

It pleased God to visit her with a long and tedious Sickness, (so God often
treats his most faithful Servants, whom I love, I rebuke and chasten, and whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives.) tho
her Sickness was severe and long, tho she endured much Pain, and had many weary
and restless Nights, yet did no one ever hear a murmuring and complaining Word
from her, but looking up to God, and considering that it was he that afflicted
her, she quietly and patiently submitted herself to his correcting Hand: God
having thus made trial of her Graces, which in her Sickness she had an
opportunity of exercising, she having now finished her Course, having
faithfully served God, and secured her eternal State, God finding her ripe for
Glory, would no longer delay her Happiness, but took her unto himself, from
Earth to Heaven, from Pain, Misery and Trouble, to Rest, Immortality and Glory:
her Life ended with the Year, and she began the New one in the other better
World, where is no Pain, nor Sorrow, nor Sickness, nor Diseases, nor Death,
where she shall die no more but live in the greatest Happiness for ever. And
now having such just cause to hope, that her Spirit is with God that gave it,
that she is in an eternally happy State, why should we weep? weep for her we
must not, but for our selves who only are the Loosers; yet considering that our
Loss is her Gain, let us moderate our Grief, and dry up our Tears, and sorrow
not, as men without hope for her that sleeps in Jesus, whom God at the last
day will undoubtedly bring with him; it will be an ill expression of our
Kindness to her, immoderately to bewail her Death, which to her is but a
passage into a glorious Eternity; it will look as if we envied her that
Happiness she is is now possessed of; to use her own consolatory Words, let not
her Joy be the cause of our Sorrow, since as she says, she took no Delight in
this World; we ought to esteem it a Mercy rather than a Judgment, that God has
taken her to a better, even to that Worldon which her Affections were wholly
placed, where she frequently was while she was here upon Earth, by her holy
Thoughts and devout Meditations; by these she had her Conversation in Heaven.

And now that these Remains of her are immediately to be laid into the Earth,
and hid from our Eyes for ever; tho she be thus wholly taken from us, yet let
her Memory, as deservedly it ought, be ever precious unto us, let her Name be
always mentioned with Honor and Respect, let us imitate her holy and pious
Life, let us follow her as she followed Christ, that so at that great Day when
we shall all be raised out of our Graves and called to Judgment, we may meet
together again, and take no more sorrowful Farewels of one another, but dwell
for ever without parting any more, spending an Eternity together in singing
Halelujahs and Songs of Praise, to our gracious Creator and Redeemer, who has
brought us to the possession of such unspeakable and endless Felicities.

FINIS.

