THE PROCEEDINGS ON THE King's Commissions Of the PEACE, And Oyer and Terminer,
and Goal Delivery of Newgate, Held for the City of London and County of
Middlesex, at JVSTICE-HALL in the OLD BAILEY, The 9th. 10th. and 11th. of
December, 1685. And in the 1st. Year of His Majesty's Reign.
THe Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-delivery of Newgate; held
at Justice Hall in the Old-Bayly; on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, being the
9th. 10th. and 11th days of December, 1685. Before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Gefferies Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir Thomas Jenner Knight.
one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, and Recorder of the aforesaid City, with
others of His majesty's Justices of the Peace for London and Middlesex. The
Jurors were as follow, London Jury,
Richard Aley, Esquire Richard Williams John Cannum Patrick Barret John Palmer
James Rayner Edward Redish George Lilburn Daniel Fouls Peter Floyer Lawrence
Cole John Cooper.
Middlesex Jury,
John Meredale Benjamin Folthy John Bailey Thomas Barns Richard Bromfield Samuel
Linn Edward Hempstead Robert Longland Samuel Bishop James Fern William Wheatly
Thomas Phelps.


The Proceedings were these;

Charles Bateman, Arraigned upon an Indictment of High Treason, For Conspiring
the Death of the late King, etc. and the Court not thinking sit to consent to
any further delay, put himself upon the Jury, without making any Challenge; and
the Kings Council having opened the nature of the Indictment, Mr. Keeling was
Sworn, who proved the Plot or Conspiracy in General, how designed, and by what
means and methods carried on. After which Mr. Tho. Lee was Sworn, and gave
Evidence, that he had been sundry times with Mr. Bateman, and that the first
time he went to him by Mr. Goodenough's order, and there they discoursed about
carrying on the Traiterous design, of which Bateman approved and promised his
assistance, and was contented to manage ore of the Twenty Parts into which the
City was to be divided in order to an Insurrection, it being agreed that 500
men should be raised in each part, to seize the ^oper, City, Savoy, Whitehall,
and the Persons of the late King and his present Majesty; in order to which he
promised to use his Interest. Further Mr. Lee deposed, that he went with him to
the late D. of Monmeuth's House, and there having discoursed with one of the
late Dukes Servants, the said Bateman, told him the said Lee that the late Duke
was willing to engage in the Design beforementioned, and kept several Horses ^n
the Country for that intent, with much more to the same purpose.

Mr. Goodenough gave Evidence, that the Prisoner did approve of the design to
seize the Tower, City, etc. and then to force ^he Guards, and seize the Person
of the late King, etc. and ^at it was at a meeting with him, to the best of his
remem^rance, at the Kings Head in Swithius Alley near the Royal Exchange. Mr.
Bateman Insisted in defense, how improbable it was that he should discourse so
with Lee or Goodenough, unless he were a Mad Man; and called several persons to
testify for his honesty, and one Baker a Broken person, was upon the request
of the jury, against the opinion of the Court, heard after his Trial was over
and Lee was gone who testified against Lee, that a little before the Plot was
discovered, he would have had him engaged to have talked of State affairs to
Bateman and others, and Join with him, and he would make him a great man. So
that after a full and favorable hearing of all he had to offer materially in
his own defense, he was found Guilty of the Treason, after the Jury had
withdrawn for some time to consider of the same.

John Banwell was Tried for Killing Daniel Walter on the 13th. of October last,
by giving him a Mortal Wound with a Sword near the left Pap, which upon Trial
appeared, that the Prisoner having fallen out with his own Wife, upon coming
out of his House, met the patty deceased, and without any provocation, pushed
him, who thereupon demanded if he had a mind to be Boxed, which occasioning
other words, the Prisoner went into his House and fetched his Sword, with which
he assaulted the Deceased, and after much scuffling, gave him the Wound, of
which the next day he Dyed. The Prisoners plea was, that he stood upon his own
Defense; but the first assault being given by himself and the Deceased
altogether unarmed, he was found Guilty of wilful Murder.

John Chapman of St. Martins in the Fields, was Arraigned and put upon the Jury
for Stealing two Coach Seats, valued at 20 s. the Goods of the Right Honorable
the Vice-Countess Chamly; but no Evidence appearing against him, he was
Acquitted.

Richard Wells, was Tried for taking from one Mr. Jones a Receiver in the
Excise Office Situate in Broad-street London, 62 Guineas and 46 l. 2 s. 6 d.
in Silver, the Evidence against him was Mr. Jones, who deposed, that having
told out 700 l. for the Kings use, he laid them upon the Compter in the Office,
and the Prisoner being a Coachman, coming in to do a Message from a Woman he
had in his Coach; immediately upon, his departure the Money mentioned in the
Indictment, being in a Bag was missing, and that he conceived no other, person
had been there at that time; but there being no positive proof, and the
Prisoner bringing some persons with whom he had. Lived to testify his honesty,
he was Acquitted.

Robert Jones and John Walkinton, were Tried upon the Coroners Inquisition, for
the Murder of John Smith; upon the Trial it appeared, that on November, 22 d.
the Prisoners coming along Column street about 6 in the Evening, jostled the
Deceased and some others in his Company; whereupon many unseemly words passed
in heat between them which occasioned the Deceased to fetch a Stick, saying, He
would be with them, or words to that purpose, and after some further dispute, a
Skirmish happened, and many Blows were struck on either part, when one Mr.
Gervas coming in, seized Walkinton, and held him in his arms till another
person took away his Sword; yet Jones and the party Deceased continued to
strike at each other, till such time as they closed, and the Prisoner being
undermost, found opportunity to draw his Sword, and gave the Deceased the
Mortal Wound on his left side, of which the next Morning h^ Dyed. Jones pleaded
he did it in defense of his Life, but it ^ppearing, the Deceased had no Weapon
about him, he was found Guilty of Manslaughter; but by reason Walkington was
secured and submitted to those that seized him, and by consequence not in
possibility of abetting Jones, at the time when he Killed Tmith. he was
Acquitted.

John Claxton was Tried for Killing George Parish on the 14th of October last,
in the Parish of St. Sepulchers, it appeared on his Trial, that that day being
the Kings Birth day, diverse Youths making Bonefires in or near Smithfield, upon
attempting to take away the Wood one Company had gotten for that purpose, many
were knocked down and amongst others, the Deceased, upon a second attack, had a
Blow upon the hinder part of his Head which broke his Skull. The Evidence
against the Prisoner was, that he threatened to have the Blood of some person,
and that it was verily believed he was the person that had struck and pursued
the Deceased into a House in Cow-lane, under pretense he had lost his Hat etc.
to which he pleaded Innocence, saying he had been much abused himself, which
had occasioned his being Blooded, and keeping his Bed, and to the same purpose
he produced some Witnesses; but it appearing he was engaged in the Action, and
in all probability the person who gave the fatal blow, the Jury brought him in
Guilty of Manslaughter.

John Spurgeon, and Joan Spurgeon his Wife, were Tried for killing John Aires,
on the 19th. of November last: upon the Trial it appeared that the deceased
coming into the Yard of the Prisoner, a quarrel began with words, and
afterward they struck each other diverse blows with their Sticks, and then did
the like with their Swords, when Joan Spurgeon coming to the Assistance of her
Husband, with whom Aires had grapled, she with the pummel of Aires his Sword
broke his head in diverse places, and thereupon with the help of her husband
thrust him out of the Yard, at what time he being advised by one of the
Witnesses to warn him at a pump that stood hard by; upon some provoking words,
Spurgeons Wife fell upon him again with a Stick, and her husband coming to her
assistance, after many blows run him into the Left part of the Head, so that
the sword pierced the Brain, of which he instantly dyed: The Prisoners pleaded
that the deceased made the first Assault, and that they were both much wounded,
etc. Whereupon Spurgeon was found Guilty of Manslaughter, and his Wife
Acquitted.

James Griffen, was Tried for Stealing a silver Taster, valued at two
Shillings, out of the house of David Clark of Westminster, on the 16th of
October last; upon whose Trial it appeared that he and another party coming
into the house of the Prosecutor, calling for two Pots of Drink and a Quartern
of Brandy, took their opportunity to blow out the Candle and run away with the
Taster they had with the latter, and the Servant of the house being positive
that the Prisoner was one of them, he having been formerly a Neighbors man,
notwithstanding he denied being in the house; he was found Guilty to the value
of 10 d.

Zachariah Thompson, of the Parish of St. Botolph Aldgate, was Tried for
breaking open the House of one Elizabeth Gucherfield, in the Night time, and
taking thence a Table-Cloth, value two Shillings, a Mantle, Apron, six Napkins,
and a Sheet, valued at about Twenty Shillings: Upon his Trial it was proved
against him that on the 22th. of October last between Seven and Eight in the
Evening, he was discovered coming out of the house with a Woman in his company,
by a Candle he had in his hand, and that he was in a manner taken upon the
place, though his Companion escaped with the Goods; his plea was that he came
by accidentally, and that the party who pursued him falling down for have, he
upon his calling to him to stay, not only did so, but came back to help him up;
but he was found Guilty of the Felony and Barglary, the Evidence being against
him as aforesaid.

Timothy Scarborough, was Tried for stealing 34 Yards of Paragon, valued at 34
Shillings, and 2 Yards and a half of Crimson Damask, from Richard Beeling of
St. Paul's Convent-Garden, on the 23 d of October last: Upon whose Trial it
appeared that the Prosecutor had often employed him as a Porter, and entrusted
him in his house, whereby he had opportunity to steal the aforementioned Goods,
which he sending a Woman to sell at an under rate, they were seized, and she
producing him, he confessed it before the lustice, and in the Prison,
expressing much sorrow for his offense, and not much denying it in Court, he
was found Guilty to the value of 10 d. This being supposed the first Fact he
ever committed of that nature.

The Proceedings having been thus far, on Wednesday the London Jury was
discharged, and on Thursday, the Jury following were Sworn.

John Wakely George Reeve Joshua Sabine Richard Jagman Martin Simpson Thomas
Ashby Robert Sevens Gilbert East
The Jury Sworn, the Court proceeded to try the Prisoners, etc.

Robert Brooks and Charles Cuckin, were Tried for stealing Ten Gold-Rings from
Robert Russel of St. Giles's Cripple gate, on the 29th. of October, against
whom it appeared, that the Prosecutor and his Wife being abroad, the Prisoner
in company of Three or Four more, came to cheapen a pair of Buckles, and
afterward to offer a Cornelian Ring to sale; but the Prosecuter's Daughter
refusing to sell the one, or buy the other. Brooks held her in discourse till
the other stole the Rings; upon possitive Proof of which, they were found
Guilty of the Felony: They being known to be Notorious Thieves, their plea of
innocence availed them nothing.

Isabel Alison and Sarah Howard, were Tried for breaking the House of Edward
Bovington, in the Parish of Alhollows Staining, on the 29th of June last, about
Five in the Afternoon; and taking thence, Two and Twenty Guineas and Ten
Shillings; but the Prosecutors Evidence not agreeing, and it appearing there
was a Lawsuit depending upon the Account of Defamation; the Credit of the
Prisoners out-weighed it, and in the end, it appeared to be a malicious
Prosecution, and therefore were Acquitted.

Daniel Robinson, was Tried for stealing of Pewter, as Salts, Plates, Spoons,
and the like, to the value of 40 s. from John Hulls, of the Parish of St.
Martins Ludgate, on the 13th. of November, which he disposed of to diverse
people. It appeared that the Prosecutor being a Prewerer, employed the Prisoner
in the nature of a Labourer, which gave him opportunity to purloine the Goods;
some of which being seized where he offered them to sale, and he apprehended,
declared the rest; and making little or no defense for himself in the Court,
was found Guilty to the value of 10 d.

Will. Hansworth, was Tried for stealing a Bag, valued at a Penny, and 7 l. in
Money from the person of Samuel Richardson upon the Royal Exchange in Cornbill;
upon Trial it appeared, that the Prosecutor on the 19. of November last,
received the aforesaid Sum, and soon after lost it out of his Pocket; when
applying himself to one of Majorr Richardson's Men, he brought him to the place
where the Prisoner was, and finding him drunk, they searched him, and found the
Bag with most part of the Money in it about him; he pleaded he found it, but it
being very improbable, he was found Guilty of the Robery.

Ellenor Bettony and Mary Leicester, were Indicted for break^ into the House of
William Harding of St. Sepulchers, on the 1^ of November last, about Five in
the Morning, and taking thence Eleven Pewter Dishes, Four Plates, etc. to the
value of 30 s. the proof was, that they proposed them to sale, but it appearing
they were employed to sell the same by an unknown person, they were Acquitted.

Sarah Watson, was tried for Robing Charles Gum, on the 3 d. of December, in
the Parish of St. Bridgets alias Brides, of 3 s. upon her Trial, it appeared
she accosted him in a very unseemly manner, and picked his Pocket, and being
taken in the Fact was charged with a Constable, upon which, though she denied
it in Court, and pretended the Prosecutor offered rudeness toward her, she was
brought in Guiley to the value of 10 d.

Giles Hancock, was Tried for stealing a Wooden Box and 4 Shillings in money,
from Richard Osman of St. Giles's Cripple-Gate, on the 23 d. of November last;
against whom it appeared that the Prisoner with two others in his Company,
snatched it out of the shop of the Prosecutor over a Grate, and made away with
it as fast as they could, but the Prosecutor following them, found them sharing
the money in the street, and had only the luck to take Hancock, the other two
escaping with part of the money, and the Box: As to a Ninepence of that money he
was positive, and the Prisoner found to be a pilferer, was found Guilty to the
value of 10 d.

Joan Martin, was Tried for stealing two Cloth Coats, valued at 20 s. And a
pair of Breeches valued at 5 s. from Richard Townshend of St. Brides; on the
30th. of October: Upon her Trial it appeared that she being entertained as a
Lodger in the house of the Prosecutor, under pretense of helping his Wife to
make a Bed, found an opportunity to steal the things mentioned, and before the
Week (she had paid for) was expired, absented her self, but being Apprehended
about three Weeks after, and at that time endeavoring to conceal her self by
pulling her Hood over her eyes: She was found Guilty, yet only to the value of
10 d.

Thomas Meers, was Tried for marrying a second Wife, his former Wife being
alive: Upon his Trial it appeared he had married one Ann Meers Spinster, Anno
1672. At St. James Dukes place, and in 1684 one Mary Godsry at the Chapel in
Kentish Town, as for the first marriage he owned it, and the other being proved
by his cohabiting, and the coroborating Evidence of the Clerk of St. Pancras:
he was found Guilty of Felony.

Edward Hide, Edward Smith, and Edward Carter, being Indicted for Robing one
Peregrine Palmer of a Diamond Ring, value 8 l. 12 s. two pieces of Broad Gold,
four Five Shilling Pieces of Gold, a Guinea, two Silver Boxes, three pair of
Silver Clasps, two lvory Boxes, and 5 l. 3 s. in Money, in the Parish of St.
Dunstans in the West, on the 6th. of November last, the former upon his
Arraignment, Confessed the Indictment, but it not appearing upon Trial, that
the other two were concerned therein, they were Acquitted.

William Trueman was Tried as accessory to Edward Hide; after the Felony
Committed; and upon Trial it appearing, part of the Goods were found in his
House, and that he had offered to restore the rest, had there been no noise
made about them; as likewise, that his House was a receptacle of such idle
Fellows, he was found Guilty, as accessory.

Elizabeth Miller, Indicted for stealing a Pullet, value 8 d. from John Hughs
of St. James Clarken-well, on the 12th of July last, and no Evidence appearing
against her, she was acquitted.

John Poor, was tried for stealing a Silver Tankard, value 10 l. on the 29th.
of May last, out of Grocers Hall, in the Mayoralty of the Right Worshipful Sir
James Smith; the Proof against him was, that the Butler missing the Tankard, a
Warrant was issued out to apprehend diverse suspicious Persons, when the
Constable into whose hands it was delivered; going into Berrystreet, upon
search of a House, where such suspected persons were observed to Lodge, after
some opposition he entered the Chamber where the Prisoner was in Bed, and
obliged him to rise, and upon further search in a Closet he found the Tankard
under the Frame of a Chair wrapped up in a Bag and a Stocking, which Bag and
Stocking, the Prisoner owned to be his; but the Tankard being produced, denied
it, as he likewise did in Court, yet he appearing to be an old offender, was
found Guilty of the Felony.

Grace Lloyd, was Tried for stealing 149 Knots of Glaziers Lead, to the value
of 24 s.; against her, it appeared, that she living with one Daniel Ireland, of
the Parish of St. Clements Danes. had disposed of some parcels of Window Lead,
and particularly one piece on the 5th. of November last, upon the sale of which
her Master came to find it out, nor did she deny it, but affirmed it was done
by the order of her Mistress; and it appearing in Court, that she had disposed
of that Kind of Goods by the, order if her Mistress, without, and conse-quently
it being no Felony the Jury Acquitted her.

Alice Baxter, of the Parish of St, Leonards Shoreditch, was Tried for stealing
on the 16th. of October last, a Silver Cup, valued at 56 s. from Henry Cruses
in Court it was proved against her, that the Wife of the Prosecutor had taken
her in out of Charity, and clothing her, lent her Money to buy Cakes, and to
sell them about the streets, but making bad returns of that kindness, she found
opportunity to steal the Plate, and absent her self; but some time after being
apprehended, and carried before the Justice she confessed the Fact, and that
she had sold the Cup in Lumbard-street, but would not tell where, and not being
able to deny it in Court, she was found Guilty; but it appearing to be her
first Fact, the Jury compassionated her by a Mitigation of the value, finding
her Guilty, within the penalty of Petti-larceny.

Hugh Jones, was Tried for stealing 3 Pewter Quart Pots, on the 18th. of
November last, from Elizabeth Standish, of the parish of St. Andrews Holbourn:
upon his Trial it appeared, that he coming into the House of the Prosecutor,
and calling for drink, watched his time to take the pots that stood upon a side
Dresser in the Room where he was drinking, and that he was discovered ever he
could make his escape, one of them being found in his Breeches, and the other
as he had stowed them; to this he pleaded that he had left a thing in pawn for
Drink, and came to redeem his Pledge, not with any intent to steal, nor would
he confess he had the Goods laid to his charge, but the matter being plain, he
was found Guilty to the value of 10 d.

Robert Tailor, Tried for stealing a pair and two odd Shoes, from Andrew
Blanshaw of the Parish o! St. Martins in the Fields, on the 2 d. of October
last. The proof was that the Prosecutor having lost diverse Shoes out of his
shop, upon notice the Prisoner had gotten some odd ones, he went to see them,
and thereupon own'st 'em to be part of those that were lost, and charged them
upon the Prisoner, who alleged he found them upon the pavement in
Leicester-Fields, and that he did not expose them to sale, but brought one of
them to a Shoemaker to make another to it, but giving no account of himself as
to his life and conversation; he was found Guilty to the value of 10 d.

Charles Bateman, presented his humble Petition to the Court, that his Wife and
Children might come to him, and be allowed the use of Pen Ink and Paper, which
request was granted, and that it should be done in the presence of a Keeper etc.

Leonard Bate, a Frenchman, having an Indictment found against him for
Ravishing Dorothy England of St Giles's in the Fields, on the 4th of November
last, a party Jury was Sworn, half Natives, and half Aliens, whose Names were;
John Meridale. Peter Morisco, Benjamin fol by, Nicholas Romain, John Baly,
Charles Lassom, Thomas Barns Giles Legoss, Richard Bromfield, James Monau,
Samuel Linn, Lewis Le-count,


Upon this Jury, having pleaded not Guilty to the Indictment he put himself
upon Trial: The Witness, Dorothy England, gave Evidence that the Prisoner being
a Lodger in her Mistresses house, had before the grand assault and violence,
(for which he stood Indicted) used her very roughly, and attempted to force
her, but was prevented and of that she complained to ^er Mistress the Prisoner
promised to be civil for the future, but on the 4th. of November, her Mistress,
etc. Being to go abroad, she told her, she would not stay in the house with the
Prisoner whereupon he seemingly, as if he intended to go abroad likewise, but
taking his opportunity, came upon her as she was making the Bed, and locked her
in, where after much struggling, by which she was bruised, he over powered and
penetrated her body, etc. Two Midwives were likewise sworn, who affirmed she
had lost her Virginity, and as to her bad usuage, which occasioned a long
sickness or in^isposition, by reason of the many bruises, her Mistress gave
Testimony; to balance which, there risoner pleaded by his Interpreter, that he
never committed that violence, and that it was a design to get money, and that
she had not discovered it in almost a fortnight, which objection being answered
and further testimony of his rudeness in that house appearing, the Charge was
given, the Jury withdrawing, returned within half an hour, and gave in their
Verdict that he was Guilty of that Felony as laid in the Indictment.

John Harris, Arraigned upon an Indictment of High Treason, for that he on the
Fifteenth of June last, in St. Martins Irommongerlane, and that diverse other
times and places, did Conspire with James Scot and others, promising to be
Aiding and Assisting in raising men to assist in the late Rebellion, etc. He
pleaded not Guilty to the Indictment, and afterward put himself upon the Jury
for his Trial, but no Evidence appearing against him he was Acquitted.

Richard Osb^urn, was Trved for Stealing a Silver Tankard valued at 5 l. 8 s.
from William Sta^ton of the Parish of St. Sepulchers on the 26th of August
last, who being Apprehended, confessed he Sold it to one Mr. Dry a Lottery man,
for four pounds fifteen shillings, fifteen shillings of which Money he played
away, but in Court he endeavored to evade his Confession, saying if he had the
Tankard, he Lent Money on it, and not being able to make that appear, he
proceeded to allege that the Tankard was not found in his possession, but
those frivolous Excuses being rendered invaild by positive Evidence, he was
found Guilty of the Felony.

Thomat Wheatly, being Indicted for Stealing a Tankard value three pounds from
a Gentleman, in the Parish of St. Mary Woolln^th on the 7th of December
instant: upon his Arraignment pleaded Guilty to that and all other Indictments
within the Benefit of his Clergy.

Elizabeth Herd alias Racket, was Tried for uttering diverse Irreverent,
Scandalous and Seditious Words against His most Sacred Majesty, on the 17th of
November, last, as also reflecting on the Established Government, etc. (not
sitting in this Caper to be inserted) which words being proved against her, and
she appearing to be a common Prostitute, her denial weighed not with the Jury,
who brought her in Guilty of the Trespass.

Mary Jessers, was Tried as the former, for uttering Irreverent, Scandalous and
Seditious words against His most Sacred Majesty; upon her Trial it appeared,
she was committed by the Steward of Westminster for Picking a Pocket of 3 s. 5
d. to Newgate, when being in the Cellar, with some other company she, spoke the
Words, which being proved against her by two Witnesses, and she making little
defense for her self, the Jury found her Guilty of the Trespass.

Mary Carter, was Indicted for Stealing 3 Diamond Rings value 25 l. and a Gold
Watch on the 4th of November from Mary Meggs in the Parish of St. Marlins in
the Fields, but no Evidence appearing against her, she was Acquitted.

Ann Redman was Tried for Stealing a Cabinet, a Snit of Knots, and a pair of
Buttons, from Mary Diodate of the Parish of St Botolph without Aldgate, on the
12th of June last; but it appearing to be her own Cabinet which the Prosecutor
said she had given her by the Prisoner, and that she was not Conscious any
thing was put into it, it being then Locked, she took it as her proper Goods
where she found it; the Court looking upon it as a malicious prosecution, she
was Acquitted.

Alice Garret, was Tried for Stealing about 30 Pieces of Coined Gold, from John
Gardner of St. Martins in the Fields, on the 8th of October; it appeared upon
Trial, that she being a Lodger in the House, had opportunity to go to the Tunck
where the Money was, and that she was one time surprised, attempting to open
it, as the Prosecutor conjectured, and the Robbery being charged upon her, she
after much shifting, and many evasions confessed she had a Key she supposed
would open the Trunck, and being no ways able to give any good account of her
self, was found Guilty.

Roger Harrington, was Tried for taking 3 Rings from Thomas Lush, of St.
Martins in the Fields on the 25th of October, value 30 s. upon his Trial it
appeared that the Prisoner searching the house of the Prosecutor for stolen
Goods, and suspecting those Rings to be stolen, took them from off his Finger
and afterward produced them to the Justice: whereupon it not appearing to be a
Robbery, he was Acquitted.

Andrew Stapely and Daniel Tailor, were Indicted for stealing two Hoggs, in the
Parish of St Martins in the Fields, value 3 l. On the 17th. of October last,
from James Page: the former of them pleaded Guilty upon his Arraignment, to
that and all other Felonys within the benefit of his Clergy; but the latter
pleading not Guilty, upon his Trial it appeared that he had sold them to one
Blisset of Islington; to which he pleaded that Stapely was his Master and
employed him to sell them; but that not being made out, he was found Guilty,
though favored with the penalty of Petty-Larceny only.

William Savory of St. Paul's Shadwel, was Tried for entering the house of
William Hasleburg, on the 6th. of December Instant, and taking thence 2 pair
of Linen Drawers and 2 Woolen Wastcoats; but he pleading he found the Goods in
the street, and no proof appearing of breaking the house, but that he rather
took them off a Line in the Gallery or Balcony; he was found Guilty to the
value of 10 d.

George Smith was Tried for Stealing a Silver Tankard, value 3 l. from Jane
Philips of the Parish of St. Andrews Holborn on the 20th of November; upon his
Trial it appeared that the Prosecutor being a Servant, was sent out for Drink
in the said Tankard, and calling with it at a Tallow-Chandlers Shop, whilst She
was buying Candles, the Tankard was taken from the Compter by a little Boy whom
the Prisoner had set on work, and that they made their Escap; to this he
pleaded ignorance, but the Evidence being positive as to his being there, and
giving the Boy Money, as it was supposed, for his better encouragement, he was
found Guilty of the Felony.

William Heart, being Arraigned for Stealing four Cocks, and four Pullers,
valued at 14 s. from Thomas Wilkinson on the 14th of October, pleaded Guilty to
the Felony.

James Morgan, was Tried for breaking open the Stable of Richard Johncock, in
the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, on the 20th. of November last; and
taking thence a Buff Coat laced with Gold and Silver, a Scarlet Cloak, a
Carbine Belt, a pair of Pistols, and a Silver Fringe: On his Trial it appeared
he had confessed the Fact, and directed them to the Pied Bull in Castle-Yard,
where part of the Goods were found; yet in Court he alleged, he bought them of
a Man in the Street, but not being capable of proving it, he was found Guilty
of the Felony, and not of the Burglary: there being no proof that the Doors
said to be broke open were Locked.

John Brampston, found guilty of Manslaughter in January last, for killing
Auruiels Peircy Wiseman, pleaded this Sessions his Majesty's Pardon on his
Knees, and gave the Court Papers of Gloves as is usual in such cases.

Charles Miller and Elizabeth Pcor, were Tried for stealing 7 Yards of Silk
Fringe, on the 25th. of June last, from the house of Elizabeth Sucklin at
Billingsgate, valued 2 l. It appeared that the Prisoner coming into the house
about two in the Morning, pretending they came off the Water, refusing to be
below, were showed up stairs, where they continued till Two in the Afternoon,
and were no sooner gone but the Fringe that encompassed the Valans of the Bed
were missing; but the Prisoner producing testimony of their honest Behavior,
and no positive proof a against them, they were Acquitted.

Judith Giles, of the Parish of St. Betolph Aldgate, was Tried for Stealing a
Serge Riding-Hood, value 5 s. from George Dance on the 8th of December instant,
it appeared that the Prosecutor coming into a Goldsmiths Shop with others, to
Buy a Wedding Ring, and the Prisoner being there at the same time, his Wife
laid the Hood upon the Compter, which after the Prisoners going away was
missing, but it neither being found upon her. though she was immediately
apprehended, nor appearing she took it, the Jury Acquitted her.

Dorothy Goreing was Tried for taking privily from the person of Henry Mitchel,
a Bag and 15 d. in Money in the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West on the 28th
of November, upon Trial it appeared that the Prosecutor being picked up by two
prostitutes, was carried to one Morgans in White-Fryers, where they played upon
him so long, that making him Drunk, they picked his pocket and slipped away,
one of which he charged the Prisoner to be; but she denying it, and himself
confessing he was in Drink, and it being proved that he was not positive
therein when he was with her before the Justice, she was acquitted.

Zachariah Smith was Tried for taking a Sword and a Hat from the person of
Hadis Legreen in the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West on the 14th of October
last, value 30 s. it appeared, that upon some words a Scufle happened in Flower
delis Court in Fleet Street between the prosecutor, the prisoner, and diverse
others, in which the Hat and Sword were lost, but it not appearing the prisoner
had either of them, he was Acquitted.

Francis Rawlinson and Elizabeth Rawlinson were Indicted for entering the House
of Edward Bonington on the 11th of September last, with an intent to Steal, to
which upon their Arraignment pleading not Guilty, and no Evidence appearing to
the Jury charged with them, they were Acquitted.

An Indictment being preferred against William Davis, John Holland, Edward
Hays, and William Price, for Conspiracy, violence and falsely imprisoning
William Chanay Mercer in St. Laurence Lane London, and only the two former
being found in the Goal of Newgate, viz. Davis and Holland, they were Arraigned
and Tried; upon whose Trial it appeared, that on the 29th of November, Hays and
Holland sent for him to the Kings-Arms Tavern in the Lane before mentioned.
where Hays in a seeming consternation, informed him that he had repeated some
Treasonable Words that he had heard him speak, and being accused for them was
forced to discover his Author, which was himself; whereupon Holland entering
the Room, Arrested and Hurried him away to the Crown without Temple Bar. from
thence to the Fountain in the Savoy, where Hays pressed him seeing the matter
might be still hushed up, to pacify Holland, (who pretended himself a Captain
of the King's Guard) with money, but he refusing, they hurried him away to
White Hall, pretendingly to the Secretary of State, and after many entreaties
of Hays and threat^ of Holland, brought him back to the Fountain, where meeting
with Davis and Price, who pretended himself a Barrister, they called up a
Scrivener about Midnight, and extorted a Bond and judgment from him, the
Penalty 400 l. to pay 200 l. Which were likewise signed by Hays; but the Cheat
being discovered upon Hollands sending for 20 l. and some Silks, the Prisoners
were Apprehended, and upon this proof (though more at large) found Guilty.

William Davis, and John: Holland, were a second time Indicted together with
Agnes Wearing, for a Burglary and Robery Committed in the House of Leonel
Gatford in Lime street, London, on the 11th. of September, stealing Rings,
plate, and Money, to the value of 300 l. which upon Trial, appeared that two
persons about Seven in the Afternoon, coming to Mr. Gatfords House, who being
let in by VVearing, who was a Servant in the House, and pretending a Letter to
Mrs Gatford, and she scrupling to admit them, one of them who appeared to be
Davis, run up stairs and seizing her with violence, tied her Coat over her
head, and then calling his Companion by the name of Jack; they riffled the
House, and having seized the Maid and Mistress carried them into the Celler,
and there bound them, and so departed with many threats if they stirred; but
soon after, the goods being published in the Gazette: The Thieves were
discovered by the means of a Diomond Ring, which Davis had given to one Mrs.
Walton, and a Wedding Ring he had on his Finger with the posie mentioned in
the Gazette, by one Margeret Harris, a Servant to Mrs. Walton, as also by one
Mr. Hamlin, whom Agnes VVearing taking in the dark for Davis unawares, asked
him if the plate was secure, if they had shared the plate and Money, and if
Helland was safe, demanding how he durst appear, desired him to be gone, least
he ruin both himself and her, so that by this and many other material matters;
it appearing that Davis and Holland were the two men that committed the Robery,
and Agnes VVearing their Confederate; they were all three found Guilty.

These being the Sum of the Trials etc. The Court proceeded to Sentence.

Burnt in the Hand Ten, viz.

Robert Jones, John Claxton, Charles Cuckley, Thomas Meers, Edward Hide, John
Poor, Thomas Wheatley, John Spurgeon, William Heart, and John Morgan.

Ordered to be Tranporsted Four, upon their desiring the same viz. Robert
Brooks, Richard Osbourn. Andrew Staply, and George Smith. Received Sentence of
Death Nine, viz.

Charles Bateman, for High. Treason, William Hainsworth, William Davis, John
Holland, Agnes Wearing, John Banwell, Zachariah Thompson, Leonard Bate, and
Alice Garret; the latter pleading her Belly, proved to be with Child.

Sentenced to be Whipped, as Perilarcenaries, Eleven, viz.

Sarah Watson, who was ordered to be Whipped from Ludgate to Charig-Cross on
Wednesday next. Daniel Robinson, Giles Hancock, Joan Martin, James Griffin,
Hugh Jones, Robert Tailor, Timothy Scarbrugh, Daniel Tailor, Ann Baxter, and
William Savory.

For speaking Scandalous Words, etc.

Mary Jeffers Fined 10 s. and to stay in Bridewel till the next Session,
Elizabeth Herd Fined 10 s. and to be Whipped upon Wednesday next.

The Proceedings having been thus far, The Court Adjourned till the 19th.
Instant.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
This may be Printed,

December tha 17th. 1^85. R. L. S.

London Printed (...)


