THE HISTORY OF FRANCE UNDER THE MINISTRY OF Cardinal MAZARINE. CONTAINING All
the remarkable and curious Passages in the Government of that State, from the
Death of King Lewis XIII. which happened in the Year 1643. to the Death of the
Cardinal, which was in the Year 1664.

Written in Latin by Sieur Benjamin Priolo a Genman to the Duke of Longueville.

Done into English by Christopher Wase.

LONDON, Printed for J. Starkey, at the Mitre in Fleet Street MDCLXXI.

To the Right Worshipful Sir RICHARD BROWN, Eldest Clerk of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
Sir,
IF it be a solid Pleasure to reflect on those Portions of our Life, not only
which have past away in a smooth tenor of uninterrupted Felicity, but rather
on such as have been exercised with conspicuous Sufferings, which have been
undertaken with Justice, sustained with Courage, and crowned with an happy
deliverance: I hope you will not be offended at my presuming to call you to a
review of the twenty years of Cardinal Mazarines Ministry in this Piece
pretending to some more curious Remarks on the late French History. You were
then set to maintain a difficult Station in that Court, during our Civil Wars,
and Tragical Confusions. It was no mean Province to withstand the Corruptions
of a prevailing Faction: to represent an entire King under almost a total
Eclipse of Majesty: amidst the Spoils of your own Fortunes superadded to the
Invasion of your Masters Revenue, to retain Splendor, Hospitality, and
Beneficence, of which I must ever bear an honorable and grateful Testimony.
But, Sir, how you could sue to that Purple which owes nothing to the Welfare of
those Powers that would never adore it; how you could appear before His
Eminence, not having made way by the Tributes paid to Eastern Tyrants; and
could sometimes convince him in a Royal Cause, without cogent Arguments fetched
from both the Indies, is a dexterity of Address above my comprehension. Then
was your House the Roof under which that Ark which was born before our
Sovereign in all his Troubles, sojourned, and you like Obed-Edom found it a
Blessing to your Family. And at length such was the Issue of your Negotiation,
that having seen the Divine Goodness triumph over the opposite Powers and
Policies of men both at home and abroad, in the Restoration of our Rightful
and Natural King, you were by him called home to the reaping the fruits of your
patient continuance in Duty, in the Exercise of your former Charge of being
near his Sacred Person, and attending on his Privy Council.

Here, Sir, although your condition stand upon the most firm Bottom of so tried
a Faith to so gracious a Prince, yet you well comprehend what is a Paradox to
the securely fortunate, that in this Scene of Life, Prosperity is more
fugacious than Adverfity: for, discounting the Period of Death common to all,
the Happy encounter many Enemies, whilst the Miserable find but few Friends; or
rather because our own degenerate Nature is more soft to comply with the Charms
of Pleasure from surrounding Plenty, though they have a tendency to our certain
Ruin; than it is daring to put forth the Efforts of Industry under the
discouragements of Want, which might cooperate toward our Preservation: you
therefore being avised that Sublunary Happiness is not unmovable, arm against
future Contingencies, and stand in a Posture of the same Humility, Self-denial,
Compassion, and all those other amiable Virtues, which are the Fruits of a
well-born Affliction.

Since therefore none is more conscious to the Secret of France, as having been
so long exercised in the Policy and Civility of that Nation, be pleased to
assist at this dissecting of the Soul of Mazarine, and perhaps you may from
thence divine the Fate of Europe. This Author is no Calvinist; for he looks
upon the Reformed Religion as an Innovation of no long Continuance, he means
for the future; but a Venetian Catholic grafted into the Gallican Church. In
the point of Supremacy ever jealous of Power, lest the Secular should Lacquay
whilst the Ecclesiastic rides. The main Subject of this Treatise is an high
Commendation, and without Exception, but upon prevaricating Topics; whilst he
introduces a Churchman successful in embroiling the World, and Victorious over
the most Catholic Arms to advance the most Christian Interest. To say the
truth for or against other Opinions, no Zealot.

Non est de tetricis, non est de magna professis. His Style argues him much a
Cavalier, so Reverent to Superiors, as still without violation of Truth: and
therefore suspense, Oracular, pregnant with two Senses through the Ambiguity of
Phrase, or Distinctions, with a singular Artifice of Context, and certain
Clenches ineffable in any other Language. You may, if your leisure admit,
peruse the Original with some delight. For your whole Family, after your
Example, is an Academy of the Politer Literature: Yet be pleased to defend the
Translation, whereby you will encourage the Endeavors of him, who, as ever
bound, daily prays for an increase of Happiness, and all Blessings upon you and
yours, and accounts it among the highest Satisfactions this World can cast upon
him to be approved

Your entirely faithful and obedient Servant, Chr. Wase

To the Most SERENE DUKE, AND AUGUST SENATE OF THE Republic of VENICE,
BENJAMIN PRIOLO Wishes Prosperity, Victories, Triumphs.
THis is the first Monument of my Wit, Most Serene Prince and High Lords, which
I readily and thankefully consecrate to your renowned Name in that Language,
which was once the Band of Mankind, and now continues the Repertory of
Sciences. It is the Ministry of Mazarine, an Historical Abridgment of our
Affairs from the Decease of Lewis XIII. to this very day, and the Dawn of this
most blessed Age, wherein the Sunshine of Peace has risen upon us. It borrows
Luster and Protection from you against Detraction and Envy. Own it, My Lords,
and communicate of your Brightness to it: For this is within the Verge of your
Power, who are able to extol or depress with the single Reputation of your
Judgments. Upon a manifold Title does this Book lay claim to your Patronage,
who will discover in our late Transactions the Tracks of your Prudence. For
when our Country was embroiled in the Tumults of civil Dissension, that
Commander who recovered us from a most unquiet to a most glorious State, was
Honorably Enfranchised by You, who are so united with us by an eternal League
and common Interest of State, that our Adversities have always been an
Affliction to your Republic; and ye have with joy received the News of this
Empires good successes, ever since the Foundation of both Nations that are
contemporary. This Work being full of Politic Maxims and Presidents, to whom
should it more justly address than to the most Politic Statesmen? Whom does it
better suit than those who are the Pattern to all the World of a perfect
Government? The whole Subject, Virtues, or Sloth. Them we recommend by
relating; and you are a great instance, who have, and always have had them.
This we decry, which in all Ages you have been clear of, either by avoiding, or
redeeming it. Plainly Rivals of those, who having been daunted with no wound of
Fortunc, after Trebia, Thrasymen, and Cannae held out stoutly, you never sunk
under misfortunes; but have obliged the Turk, the m^st Potent of Empires in the
World, so often to retreat before your Forces, and the Providence which attends
your Arms; whilst the chief Monarchs of Europe were bloodily engaged against
one another, upon trivial pretenses, to the ruin of Christendom, whose
Bullwark and Admiration you are. Nor does the matter only invite and solicit
your Authority, to grace the Front of this Labor, being small in Bulk, though
perhaps that shall be eternal in duration; but much more my grateful mind,
which presents you with your own gifts. In like manner, as when we Sacrifice
and bring oblations to God, it is for our own, and not his benefit. For if I am
somebody, my Lords, if a Candidate of Fame, if enrolled in the Catalogue of
them, who do not promise, but confer immortality; thanks be to you, in whose
Bosom I have been educated. First of all, That your City Founded by Antenor,
my Nurse, the sweet Mother of Arts, the Fruitful Seminary of Industry, the Fat
Soil of Virtues, implanted in me her Principles: Which how greatly you esteem,
we collect from hence, because that one University of Padua, has more
Scholars in it, then whole Kingdoms besides. This taught me to look down from
the lofty Tower of a rightly informed judgment, upon Vulgar Errors; and to
discover upon true Grounds, with what gross darkness the seeming light of frail
mortality is Eclipsed. After that I Traveled to Venice, the joy and darling of
Heaven, the Shop of Policy, the School of Wisdom; where I searched into the
Mystery of your Government. This does not deliver a Prince to be made up of
wicked Plots, falsehood, and a dedolent Spirit hardened against all remorse of
Conscience; not of subtle Devices, or Craft, but of Sincerity and Faith; whose
venerable Name holds out among you her right hand, the Security of the Worlds
Peace. A Republic happy in its Orders, with which, as with Ligatures, it
stands unshaken without fear of fall; boasting of its duration for 1300 years.
And what wonder, when so many Virtues are the Poles upon which that Immortal
Frame is rolled? Laws you have few and good; as Medicines, which should neither
be many nor diverse. Suing at Law, which is very subject to abuse, is more
restrained with you, then any where else in the World; none are vexed with long
Suits. You have wonderful Concord one with another, with which Cement your
State holds; and I have confidence will hold to the Worlds end. Superiors
manifest their Greatness only in extending Favors; and Inferiors without
grudging, render Obedience, and rejoice in your Grandeur. Private quarrels you
pass by for the Public, benefit, and remit offenses in view of your Country.
There is no Contention but who shall love, that most which is every Noblemans
Treasure and Inheritance. No where if so great a price set upon faithful
keeping of Counsel, Nor are Secrets any where preserved with such strict
silence; so that as other People have a great itch of spreading reports, at
Venice they have unmovable affectation of holding their peace; which is almost
incredible in their noble Youth, who condemn talking much, as the companion of
lying, by an inward principle of sound judgment, and by the rules of their
Education. Whilst Candidates, they stand at the doors of the Court, and are
admitted to a sight of the Public Counsel, before a Voice in it. From the
first entrance of their Age, they are by degrees used to their Honors, which
you sharing equally, and judging of Virtues, deprive none of their due; nor
under a color of preferment, do you exhaust the worthy Pretendants in the
Purchase. Such as are advanced to Places of Honor, bring in humility, not
scornfulness; and as it proves all the world over, find what they bring: When
private, you obey without Servility; and when advanced, you command with
Moderation. Young Men dive into the depths of Prudence, because they hearken to
the Old; concealing great Abilities, under an obstinate temperance of Words.
Afterward the avocations of youth being cast off, when they must put on after
glory; and being used to improve, they find nothing strange or new. Ye are
covetous for the Public Money, sparing of your own, which you do not get to
scatter, but to maintain your state; In habit, not only indifferent, but plain;
you think it decent so to discover the Modesty of your minds. And in truth,
Silks and Gold Lace are not Ornaments of brave Men, but Arguments of light
Spirits: You excel the common sort in Virtue, in Clothes you conform with them:
Your Household Stuff does not strain the rest of your Estate. Variety of
Offices, and multitud^ (...) Servants does not clamor after you. With Athenian
Severity you punish Luxury, which plundering great Estates, ingenious to
destroy it self, drives on furiously after its own Confusion, being withal the
Bane of Commonwealths, and Ruin of States. Those that are empty of solid
goodness, glister in that borrowed appearance, and bare of Worth spread in
Pomp, and sumptuous Dishes, rather exciting than satisfying the Appetite. How
admirable is it, that you who are (upon more accounts than one) Kings, should
condescend in your whole Furniture to the plainness of Fellow-Citizens, and
should shroud the degree of Princes, as you all bear, under an ordinary Garb.
But that Majesty which you carry about every where, especially by your
Ambassadors, who being Noble in Birth, do every where represent the Dignity of
the Republic, has its Source from your internal Greatness, and is that Mother
of the Honor and Reverence due, and deferred to you; which Glory accompanies,
that inflames gallant Souls, being peculiar to the immortal God, or his
immediate Representatives, as you are. All these things do adorn you, but the
Foundation and Basis of your State is Religion, by which Subjects are made
better, and more peaceful. You have an ancient Doctrine imprinted in you, and
received by Tradition from your Ancestors, that all our Enjoyments are bestowed
upon us by God, and by him continued to us. To believe this is commendable, but
so as you believe it, that is, avoiding Irreligion and Superstition, both of
them great mischiefs. The insultations over men's weakness, which were prevalent
in times of Ignorance, are received by you only in appearance, who do not
compel men to Faith against their wills, but are of opinion, that a right
Judgment in Holy matters is insinuated by God into men's minds, and that the
Devotion which does not proceed from the choice of the heart, is unacceptable
to God; but that false Opinions are subdued by length of time, not by the
violence and commands of such as being chosen into the Sacred Ministry, do
exasperate all things, and retain nothing of that Office besides the Name and
Revenues. You do not take these men into your Counsels, being aware, that such
are for the most part unsound at heart, and for audaciousness formidable: of no
moderation, but dangerously inquisitive into the Designs of Princes, and
Secrets of State. Ye are indeed devout in Religious Worship, but do prescribe
its Ministers a measure of Church-Possessions. There is a Prohibition in your
Laws for the Augmentation of Church Livings without leave from the Senate. For
you think it an irreligious thing, pious Liberalities should be alienated, and
the last Wills of dying Persons turned to ends, for which they did not leave
them. Between an open neglect of Gods Service, and a slavish fear of God, as
between two Rocks, you sail happily. From hence flourishes among you that
unmovable and steadfast Vprightness of Justice in distributing every one his
own, without the trifling delays and captious advantages of the practice in
corrupt Courts of Judicature; by this means so many people are united under
equal Laws into your Empire and Jurisdiction. This you superadd to your noble
Customs; nothing among you is bought and sold. Public Offices are the Rewards
of Virtue; and if there be any contrary instance, it has been introduced
through the necessity of hard times. Your moderate Revenues, without crying up
or down the price of money, almost the highest and lowest equally contribute.
The sum growing from thence is not consumed and lost before the true uses are
answered for which is was levied, by the multitude of Collectors, and by
profuse gratifications; whilst each do stop some as their own, and give away
more lightly, as being none of their own. You cajol them to part with a little
money for great Occasions, never constrain them; which is a handsome slight in
managing matters. So that there are no complaints in the case; or if there be,
the Senate never examines them, having no inclination to convict misinformers.
They neither hear the Accusers, nor punish the accused; thinking it
dishonorable to give satisfaction without occasion: and that it is only the
part of a bad Prince to force the Conscience to Honesty. This is to be
attributed to your singular Policy, with which as it were the Top of your
Virtues, foreseeing so many imminent dangers, ye have driven off the threatening
Clouds; always Vmpires of the disagreeing World, courted even when distressed;
and have in your Adversities persuaded, that there is more relief to be had in
your Friendship, than in the spacious promises of many Kings. And all this who
would not admire to be done with an Outlandish Army and General. It is the Art
of your Government to trust Strangers, not an Evidence of your own Valors,
being decayed. How warily is this provided? it appears, lest any of your Own
puffed up with Martial Glory, should aim at that which heretofore confounded
the Roman, your parallel State, of which in other matters you are close
Followers, especially in instances of Mercy. That was contented with one
Prison, and that often empty: I lived with you seven years, and saw but one
poor Malefactor executed, over whom the Judge groaned, and cried. No Prince
loves to inflict more gentle punishments, and this he does honorably. For it
is not Majesty whose Object is Dread, but Cruelty; and nothing is more gallant
for Men in Dignity, than to grant pardon for many things, to ask and need it
for nothing. We French had happy proof of this. For whoever read or heard of so
much meekness as we have found. It is now above eighteen years ago, since we
have not seen the Sword drawn but against Enemies amidst so many provocations
of severity. He that was supreme Minister among us, and that managed the Reins
of the Public Fate, was ambitious rather to be thought to have found us good,
than to have made us so. Thus did he seal the Public Peace with shedding no
high Blood: nor was he instrumental, that for securing his Dominion, Executions
of rich Delinquents should upon their Attainder be estreated into the
Exchequer. By gentleness he shamed men into Obedience: whereupon prosperous
Fortune did succeed all his Attempts to the Envy of the astonished World. This
is he whose many Victories, many good Services ye have often heard of; but
especially in the blessed Aspect of this time, wherein the security of France,
and so many honorable Advantages are to be acknowledged to have been received
from him next under God; whom as the Top of your Glory you have enrolled in the
List of so many Heroes, whose Names mounted in the Chariot of Fame and Honor,
shall fly through the remotest Regions: who have founded your liberty in the
Waters; who have given Laws to the Sea; who have made the Pelasgi and
Amathuntis, the Court of Alcinous, the Grange of Ulysses, and the Kingdoms
where Jupiter crept, about which at this day there is such stubborn fighting,
tributary to you. O Blood defiled with no sordid Commonalty! and heat of Spirit
allayed with no tincture of a meaner Bed! Though I had a fiery activity of
Fancy, I could not equalize in worthy sort the Honors of that excellent
Nation, which being sprung from a narrow spot of Ground, having entered the Deep
in Galleys, has spread its Fleets parallel with the Course of the Sun. O
Country! O Empress of the vast Gulf! own thy Native, Beloved by thee upon the
sole account of the Name of Priolo. So may thy people eternally possess, and
eternally desire to possess under the best Prince, the best, that is, a quiet
State: so may the Semitars fear the peaceable Gowns: so may thy Fate never ebb:
so never may the triumphing Ottoman, that fierce Potentate, that perpetual
Attaquer of high Virtues increase by thy Ruins, but may thy Empire flourish
without end. Dated at Paris on New Years day. 1665.

The Contents of the Work.
A Thing of singular estimation and the most remarkable in any Story: Among the
French when a King succeeded five years old, that the Queen a Foreigner, and
Mazarine a Stranger should govern, whilst the Provinces were refractory, the
People in Rebellion, the Princes and Parliament opposed greatly, the Spaniard
and the English watching their Advantages. That he breaking through all this,
and having gloriously concluded a Peace, should dye in the Kings Arms, against
whom had been raised so many Designs, so many Plots, so many Slanders. That is
a mighty thing: wherein is to be considered as the rarerness of the matter, so
the difficulty; for in other Stories the very Novelty detains the Readers. Here
is nothing of particular Narrative, all is known and published: whence follows,
that only the Phrase must be attended; wherein, being the only point expected,
it is hard to give content.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE During the Administration of Cardinal
Mazarine, viz. from the Death of Lewis XIII. to the Year 1664.
The CONTENTS. The State of France immediately before and upon the Decease of
Lewis XIII. The Temper of the Princes of the Blood, the Parliament, the
Ecclesiastics, the Provinces, and Armies. The Extent of the Kingdom, Interest
of Allies. Posture of the City. A Parallel between Richlieu and Mazarine.

HAving arrived at rest of mind from many dangers and troubles, I am resolved
to pass the residue of my days free from meddling any more with State Affairs;
and lest I should spend my time in sloth, or be constrained by servile
dependencies to flatter great Ones, and hang upon the Court amidst the lazy and
obsequious Retainers on the Palace, have undertaken to rescue from the injury
of oblivion, or mis-reports, the most memorable occurrents in France, and
record them to posterity, if that privilege may be expected from, my
endeavors as may possibly, the rather because my mind rallying against the
insults of Fortune, is now fully set at liberty from hope and fear, and taking
part with any of the Princes. The retirement that I had determined, could not
appear under a more fair pretext, nor did any subject occur either more copious
for acquiring praise, or more durable to transmit to late memory; besides that
the work appeared suitable to my Age now upon the declining, and some
expectations and favorable opinions of Foreigners concerning me; although I am
not ignorant how odious it is, to repeat these matters whilst grudges are yet
fresh, whereupon I shall be suspected by some for a Flatterer; and offend
others by sullen Truth which always goes to the quick, when it proceeds with
uncorrupted Faith and undaunted freedom of Speech.

Therefore I shall comprise in this Decade with as much indifference and
courage as I shall be able the whole Ministry of Mazarine. For that I appears
to me for variety of Action, sadness of Accidents, strangeness of Dangers, and
at last for successfulness of Events most worthy to be recorded.

1. After that Lewis XIII. took Armand Richlien for prime Minister of State,
the Debates both of Peace and War were carried on more fortunately and with
better faith. The name of Armand was renowned all over Europe: all business
applied to him as Sharer in the Kingdom. He was the only person in the eye of
the City, of the Provinces, of the Armies, not by secret workings but openly,
none contradicting. The better any stood affected to him, he was the more
advanced in Wealth and Honors; and the most eminent, were the forwardest to be
at his devotion. All the world cried never was such a rare Creature, nor ever
would be again. Then were his Actions repeated in particular.

The crushing of the Rebels, the frighting Rochel the Headquarters of the
Sectaries, chaining up the Ocean, and the Kingdom settled: that by the relief of
Casaille, restoring the D. of Mantoua, and bringing the Savoyard to
extremities, Laws were given to Italy: that to the astonishment of the Spaniard
he had ridden in Triumph over the Alps and Pyrenaean: had eased the German
Princes from the encroachments of the Empire, and broken the House of Austria
in many Parts. This was the Tamer of the Danube, this of the Rhyne. The Pale of
France was the Ocean, and remotest Rivers. That the Armies, Provinces, Fleets,
all were compact within themselves by his means; that Justice was planted
amongst the Subjects, and awfulness umidst the Confederates, the City it self
was improved in stately Buildings, and enlarged. Somewhat indeed had been
carried with a high hand, but only to keep the rest in quiet.

All this was reported of Richlieu, and believed by the World. But because
things arrived at the highest pitch, do not long hold there, nor can prosperity
ever support it self, he begun to sink under his own greatness. Then was death
to have been called for when by Providence it came: and by Fate preventing the
turn of Fortune, his last day obviated the dangers that were imminent. A
Fistula in the Fundament presented Armand this timely does. To whose end before
I come, it will not be impertinent to premit a word or two.

Lewis being grown weary of a Favorite that lay so heavy upon him, had without
doubt made many and grievous complaints of the carriage and pride of Richlieu.
There was one Henry D'Effiat de Cinque-Mars in great Vogue at Court for the
Kings special Favor, and certain Qualities resembling Virtues. He was obliging
to his Friends with his interest, and by relieving them with gifts: toward
strangers too affable and courteous. He had also advantages of Fortune in a
graceful presence. But far from gravity of manners, or staidnese. He was airy
and gallant, as is ordinarily incident to that Age which had not yet arrived at
twenty two. Having therefore searched into the Kings jealousies of and distasts
against Richlieu, he several times had an inclination to have made an attempt
upon him, whether unguarded, which was rarely, or amidst attendance, that were
admirers of such a comely personage. These thoughts spurred on his youthful
mind, had not that which is the bane of all great undertakings, a desire of
passing unpunished amidst the sweets of Vice, pulled him back. And beside he
durst not attempt that alone, which some would censure for an heinous act,
others there is would magnify as an excellent service. Therefore he took in to
his Counsel the Duke de Bouillon, a person of an excellent Fame and temper of
Spirit, a mighty aid for so great a design: drew in de Thou and others. In the
first place, it was judged, the safest way to truck with the Spaniard by the
concurrence of whose Arms the Party in France against Richlieu begun greatly to
advance; Now when Affairs proved unsuccessful, it was concluded the King would
soon forsake and throw off a Minister, sufficiently disgusted by him; and there
was no other means to ruin him safely. That Lewis had so great an affection
for his Kingdom, as that he would never move him as long as his Estate
prospered by his Service. This Intrigue was soon discovered, either by the
practices of Richlieu, or because the French can never keep Counsel, and
revealed to the King by Chavigny, a great Creature of the Cardinals. At that
time was the King abroad at Narbo, whither he had traveled in very stormy and
rainy weather, it being but the beginning of February. The pretense was the
Siege of Perpignan, which Richlieu the prime Minister had advised to get the
King out of the way, and for diversion of the Enemy. Close Guards being left at
Paris to watch the Queen and the young Princes. This Plot then was discovered
to His Majesty, when his Eminence not well in body, but worse in mind was upon
his way homeward. The passage is strange, and scarce to be credited by the
Readers, that the King displeased with Richlieu, and bearing affection toward
D'Effiat, when once informed that he held intelligence with die Spaniard,
immediately putting away all tenderness consented to the death of his special
Favorite, such influence had either the love of his Kingdom, or the fear of
the Cardinal.

Thereupon were Cinque-Mars the Grand Constable, and de Thou late Master of
Requests apprehended at Narbo, the very day that the King had but in the
morning, embraced and kissed Cinque-Mars, and had talked very courteously to de
Thou: having naturally that quality, and being practiced to disgust his anger
under fine language. The King being glad when the matter was over, but
perplexed till it was put in execution, parts from Narbo. The same was done to
de Bouillon at ^asailles. The Prisoners are brought to Lions, where by chosen
Judges that were resolved to do Richlieu's work before ever they heard the
impeachment, they are condemned to lose their lives. De Bouillon got off by the
Surrender of Sedan, Cinque-Mars and de thou pay dear for their destructive
friendship with the loss of their lives. Whether Cinque-Mars practiced de Thou
to draw him into the Plot, or whether de Thou was contented enough to be
wrought upon, does not appear. However both were upon a Scaffold beheaded, with
great compassion of the Standers by, and lamentation of all the Country. De
Thou bore his condition not stoutly, but with a Christian sense was long and
earnest at his prayers, which now might receive no comfortable return. No
Criminal has been known to suffer with more pity of the Beholders. D'Effiat
received his Fate resolutely in the prime of his Youth, by his own virtues and
others vices running headlong upon Fame. The King was then onward in his
Journey on the way to Paris, Richlieu that was ever satisfied with punishment,
never with repentance, ordered the execution, and almost looked on to see it
done; and as if he took content to hear their dying groans, was loath to depart
from Lions, certified the King by Letter, that Perpignan was taken, and his
Enemies cut off. Which was an unhandsom expression. Reason indeed there is to
blame for ingratitude and indiscretion D'Effiat especially, who might easily
have compassed by time only, what he attempted with over-hastiness, and by ill
practices against the Laws both of God and man. The two poor men are worthily
condemned for being Traitors: but the principal cause of their death was,
because they could not brook with a slavish tameness to avow the fatal baseness
of their Country. The one was Son to a Mareshal of France: The other received a
great addition to his splendour from James Augustus Thuanus our most eminent
Historian, of an Illustrious Family among those of the long Robe, prime
President of the Parliament of Paris, a person renowned, of great virtue, and
by his ancient Lineage allied to many honorable Houses of France.

Richlieu, either haunted or stung in conscience at the remembrance of so many
Executions, never free from discontent, gives out that the tenderness to his
Country imported him beyond all private affections. And now more like a
Sceleton than his Eminence, being carried upon the shoulders of men, has
houses broken down to make him room to come in at, so much French blood lost at
home, so much shed in the field disquiets and dejects his spirit now imprisoned
in a languishing body. I have but one request to make the Readers of this
Story, that they would not suffer so many Noble men executed to pass off in
oblivion, as though they stole out from the Stage of the World. Let Persons of
Honor challenge this Privilege, that as they are distinguished from the
Vulgar by their Funerals, so they may receive, a peculiar memorial in recording
their fall, I mean the Vendosmes, the Ornani, the Marillaes, the Montmorancies,
upon whom I judge it best not to dilate the Cramaillaes, the Bassompeirres, the
Vistries, the Chastelneufs, with innumerable others basely imprisoned.

At length this scarcely breathing Corpse, nothing benefited by the Waters of
Borbogne, is brought to Paris, carrying about it the incentive of its own pain
in a spirit more exulcerated than the body. Many marks of exasperation,
formerly smothered, then burst out. Distrust of the King: a desire to remove
such as were not Confidents: imposing upon his Masters ear by Chavigny, growing
daily fierce through an habitual and implanted arrogance, whilst Lewis
suspected Armand, Armand did no less suspect Lewis. A matter of Scandal!

In the mean time Richlien's distemper grew upon him. Many discoursed of the
benefits of Liberty. The greatest number past their censure who were likely to
succeed in favor: all called for Peace; cried out against Wars which had been
commenced against the House of Austria, not so much out of desire to enlarge
the Empire, or upon any considerable expectation, as for the establishing the
power of Richlieu. Some few days before his last, His Majesty came to Town to
visit the sick Cardinal. Many tears past on both sides, and tokens of
affection. The King thought it his best course to lay aside his displeasure,
and not to grate the memory of a dying man with any disgustful words. Therefore
during the whole time of his sickness, he visited him by Messengers oftener than
Kings are wont, and sent to him his principal Physicians; were it out of care,
or to observe his condition. The last day frequent intelligence was brought of
his declining. No body imagining he would be so curious to enquire, what he
should be sorry to hear, yet His Majesty put on his Countenance an appearance
of sadness, when he was sure that his grudge was satisfied: and conceiving he
might now be safely kind, constrained himself to let fall a tear, and forced
groans from a joyful breast.

Armand du Plessis Richlieu was born at Paris, of a noble and untainted
Extraction; his Father was Francis du Plessis, his Mother Susanne du Port; he
had a fair Estate which he wasted. First an Abbot, afterward Bishop. No
excellent Preacher, having fed upon the Chimaera's of the Sorbon, unacquainted
with the more polite Learning, while the Marquis d'Ancres was in favor,
Secretary to the Queen Mother. Then confined to Avignon. Recalled from thence
by her means, was made prime Minister of State. Shortly after the poor Lady
found her favors over-hastily heaped upon him; for she being by his means
chased out of the Kingdom, an Exile, having wandered through Holland and England
without any certain abode, at length in Cologne, broken with afflictious,
changed an unhappy life for a desirable death. But this by the way. To return
to Richlieu, whole shape, if Posterity shall be so curious as to enquire, was
comely and tall; nor wanted he gravity tempered with a graceful aspect. He
lived 57 years: was in favor 18. Having passed a middle age, in respect of
glory, and eternal fame may be judged to have run the longest period of life.
For he had obtained whatever could be wished for. What could Fortune heap upon
one so succcssful and accomplished? What was more blessed than for him
continuing in Honor, flourishing in Fame, to secure future Events, seeing that
nothing in Nature is so fickle as Power that depends upon another pleasure?

After the decease of Richlieu the Cabinet-Counsel to the King were Cardinal
Julius Mazarine, a Roman by birth, Leo Bouthillier Chavigny and Soublet Noyer
both Secretaries of State. This Triumvirate did not agree. Some courting by
secret addresses the Queen, others Monsieur, others the Dauphin, as the rising
Sun.

Soublet a passionate man, somewhat fierce, professing the Jesuitical Position,
that virtue requires no other reward but that of a good conscience, which sets
a generous luster upon actions, under that veil disguised his ambition: a man
of blameless conversation; for wisdom and judiciousness but indifferent, having
such an estate, as he did not increase by any unworthy practices, though he
wanted not opportunities to have done it, in that point highly to be commended
that he made not use of them. Greatly in Richlieu's favor for his observance
and industry; one that so respected his friends in prosperity, as never to
forsake them when they declined.

Leo Bouthillier had contracted pride from Richlieu, whose support now failing,
he thought it more seasable to get into be the second, than to aim at the prime
Ministry. Therefore did he put Mazarine forward, but so as himself a while to
pass for his equal, not as acting under him afterward would have supplanted
him; of which hereafter.

Mazarine whether by Fate or some peculiar Genius, won upon Inferiors, upon
Equals, upon Superiors, by variety of applications. He had a comely Personage,
but was most renowned for an acute and subtle wit, for experience in business,
for vast designs, and equal successes; one who never gave Counsel, or laid Plot
that did not prove effectual. To this was joined such a discreetness of
carriage, that though he had got above many, he was equally dear to all,
charming envy by an Art of conversation. From these and such like qualities it
was evident to such as can skill the Court, that he was the one man that must
shortly carry all before him. Nor did it prove otherwise. For being employed in
the managing our State, and consequently almost all Europe, he brought those
Enterprises to pass, which this day put the whole World in admiration.

His Majesty now wholly intending Peace, had resolved to send Cardinal Mazarine
his Commissioner to the Treaty of Munster, whereof I shall speak afterward:
but altering his mind. thought it better to use him as his prime Minister. Then
first of all was Mazarine had in open Honor among us by being admitted to be
Godfather to the Dauphin, whom he named Lewis that is now the Fourteenth, who
shall be the Theme and Subject of our Work.

About this time the King falls sick at S. Germains. Prayers are made for his
recovery. The Princes, the Nobility, and Commons attend the Issue of his
weakness. He being sollicitous at the approach of death, had many debates in
his mind, He thought it unsafe to trust the Queen with the Government, (Madam
Cheureuse, which was her great Confident, then kept in Spain, and secret
Intelligence by Letters passing between them, displeased his Majesty) To
Monsieur he was never truly reconciled. Therefore it is resolved to commit the
Government to neither: but that ten Ministers be chosen to bridle both their
powers. At length His Majesty's Will is made and sealed.

Each presently strive to insinuate themselves into the Queens favor by diverse
practices, especially Noyer that assumed to himself the glory of making the
Will. He is supplanted by Chavigny, quits the Court, and asks leave to retire:
soon after pines and frets himself to death; no Rules of Wisdom sufficing to
still or sustain his Spirit. Chavigny stayed behind but as a shadow or empty
appearance of business, Mazarine leaving no means unassay'd, got the sole
Management. Which Prize having obtained, after much deliberation, having
carefully weighed his own and his Competitors interests, he let slip no kind of
deference possible toward any, either in public or private. All came in,
excepting the Bishop of Beauvais, Beaufort, and Madame Cheureuse now returned
to the French Court, that were afterward turned all out of Favor, having been
the Contrivers of their own disgrace.

His Majesty sometimes a little cheered, then anon spent, when his death
approached, spoke to the Queen, supported by her two Sons, and the Nobles
standing by him, much to this purpose. Seeing that decay of Nature does now
bring my life to an end, I haste the few words that I am to speak will be the
more sacred with you, the nearer I am entering upon those places of which
Divines speak such glorious things. By this right hand which this day lays down
the Scepter and transmits it to this your King ( pointing at his Son and Heir)
I advise and adjure you ever to pay him unspotted Loyalty. Reverence him, and
do your diligence that such a prosperous State may not be impaired by my
untimely death, and his tender age. I leave you a Kingdom firm and flourishing,
and unless it offer, violence to it self by Civil dissensions, that can never
come to other ruin. Not Armies, nor Treasures are the Pillars of this Empire,
but Counsel and Concord.

More he said, which having been then published, I forbear to transcribe
hither. Looking upon Conde, Your Son (said he) has won a brave Battle Now the
D. d'Enguien was General in the Borders of Champaigne, and a little while after
gave the Spaniard, laying an untimely Siege to Rocroy, a great Defeat; and
having raised the Siege, and given them chase, went far up into their Country,
and laid it waste. This glimpse the King gave, before he expired, rather after
a prophetical sort, then that he was not perfect in his senses. He earnestly
advised Gaston Duke of Orleans to amend his life. Turning to the Duke of
Engoulesmes said, that All things leaning only upon pleasure. are but fading;
and repentance would follow speedily, or more late. Many other excellent
sayings he uttered according to the Christian Doctrine of the Hope of a better
life, and such sweet Consolations of Mortality that is very loath to think of
coming to an end; which being so often thundered out in Pulpits, I here wave.
No mortal man, either ancient or late, did so courageously receive the assault
of death.

At length May 15. 1643. he dyed an easy death. Lamented by some of his
intimate friends, but worthy to have been followed with a larger mourning of
all Frenchmen, had he chosen to act by himself what he could well have done,
rather than by Colleagues to whom he was all his life time obnoxious, to his
own and Countries great prejudice. He was singularly courteous to all about
him. Free from pride, yet retained Majesty and Gallantry of Spirit. Moderate in
pleasures; entirely loving his Kingdom: and had he been allowed a longer space
of life, would have proved the best of Kings. Many observed that which perhaps
is of no great importance, that the same day he came to the Empire, was the
last of his life; for his Father Henry was murdered on the very same day of May.

2. The Princes and Nobles came all up to Town: and none made a greater show of
mourning than they that were most glad at it. His Funerals were performed in
such order as is proper for Kings: and the exposing in State being over, his
Corpse is interred amongst his Predecessors at S. Denis, without any pomp, or
but very little. Such directions had he given when he ordered concerning his
Burial.

When Lewis was dead, every one begun to entertain serious thoughts of his own
estate. I judge it therefore seasonable, before I compile the intended story,
to declare how the Princes, the Parliament, the Ecclesiastics, the Provinces,
the Armies stood affected; what were the Bounds of the Empire; how firm the
Allies; and in sum, what was the state of our Affairs; what Parts in the
Government were strong, what again weak; So that not only the Products and
Events of Actions, which ordinarily are but contingent, but the reason too and
causes of them may be known.

The Death of Lewis, as it was joyfully taken at the first heat by those that
were transported with it, so did it stir up diverse thoughts and affections not
only in the City and Parliament, but likewise in the Provinces, and amidst the
Armies and Officers. The Followers and Friends of the Banished and Imprisoned
begun to hold up their heads. The King toward his later days, whether stung in
conscience, or to throw an Odium upon Richlieu, and that he might lay at his
door the cruelty of all proceedings, had recalled the Banished, and release
those that had long lain in prison.

3. The Princes of the Blood were joyful, as is usual upon change of
Government, resuming presently their liberty with intention to use their power
more licentiously, as having to do with, a King but five years old, a Spanish
Woman, and Mazarine an Italian. For the Bishop of Beauvais did not long
continue in favor, as one insufficient to draw in such a yoke, as his Rivals
would make believe.

Gaston Duke of Orleans, the Kings Uncle, who had neither love, nor hatred, but
as they were impressed: all his life time subject to the Tuition of his
Counselors, did at that time lead a life free from cares under the Conduct of
the Abbot of Rivieres, whose Counsels tending to Peace, he did not always
follow to his own great damage. Then spent he his days in jollity, his nights
in dancing, and drew money to bear these expenses out of the Exchequer, which
as long as it stood open to him, he never troubled himself about the Government.

Conde was a profound Politician. He had a strange Art of living. Men coming
new from the Plough, or Ship-broad, might find him neither stately nor guarded,
and he would freely confer with them. He was open to all, and enquired into
every thing, know every thing. He minded all affairs great and small; and so by
these ways, more than the clashing of Arms, raised his Estate to vast Wealth,
which he was the first Conde that every cared to heap up, and in that being
very considerable and abounding, desired that nothing but the Honor of the
Kingdom, and the Public Welfare with his private Gains.

Enguien his Son leaving all care either of State or Family to his Father, then
only affected Martial Glory. And at that age a successful daring had in him the
place of Valor: but when his parts attain to maturity, he shall come to the
highest pitch of perfection. What he came afterward to be, the order of the
Story will inform. His Brother Continewly come from School, did scarce write
man, of an excellent disposition, which afterward inclined to Religion, not
that which consists in disputing, but in living, having the sap of good works:
in seriousness; not out of ostentation.

Longueville Son in Law to Conde sailed in Condes Bottom, yet would meddle with
all, but favored none, save the strongest Party: if they came to be low, would
slip his neck out of the Collar. After the Kings death, he had proposed to get
all the strong Holds in Normandy under his Power, especially Havre de Grace;
that so secured against the Normans, secured against the King, he might play
Rex in that Port.

Vendosme the natural Son of Henry IV. by Gabrielle d'Estres, having his Estate
consumed by so long adversities, solaced his mind grown savage by such
continued Exile, either with the single remembrance of his former Fortune, or
with the hopes of a better: nor did he plot any thing else, but how by all
possible means to repair the Breaches of his decayed Family. The Duke de
Mercoeur, his eldest Son lived in quiet. Beaufort his younger, did upon his own
head prepare himself a way to the prime Ministry, for which attempt he
afterward was imprisoned, besides that he had somewhat to ^o with Mombazon. I
am certainly informed, that his late Majesty before his death, did very
particularly recommend these Youths to the Queen.

The Duke of Guise resembling his Ancestors in Courage and Gallantry (with
different success) came not up; but sacrificed his time in the Low Countries
upon courting and following his Amors to the expense of Reputation. The two
younger Brothers inherited the popularity inherent to their Ancestors. At this
juncture of Affairs, the remaining Progeny of so many Heroes, that heretofore
durst try for the Kingdom by Arms, now finds not place for so much as a wish,
pretending to nothing more at this time than a thing very easy to compass,
that is, not to stir.

A Branch of the House of the Guises, Elboeuf and Harcourt depressed in their
Estates, had no designs. This latter a stout and daring Soldier, afterward
tossed in variety of Fortunes: about whom I shall have occasion hereafter to
speak not a little.

Those of Nemours made French from a Savoy stock, of a numerous male Line were
but two left; the Elder of which had a great spirit in a small body: but his
thread of life being soon cut off, left his Brother Successor, who held nothing
of that famous House but their blameless manners. Such were our Princes, not
any either willing or able to work an Alteration. All of them subscribed to the
present Government, beating their heads about many things to no effect. This is
the Quality of the French, especially Courtier, to make much stir that
presently vanishes in the air. To bind one another in deceitful bonds,
afterward to fly off, and betray one another. A Crafts Master will easily
break through such Cobwels.

4. Now the Parliament of Paris, they do not dislike the present State. This is
a great Body compounded of diverse Humors. At a certain sum of money (which is
undecent) they purchase this Degree, For themselves and their Heirs. Most of
them live above their Estates, and having wasted their means, either by their
Wives, or their Childrens, or their own prodigality long after a Change. Their
Office, if the matter be lightly scanned, is to preserve every man's propriety,
to compose differences, to mitigate the increase of Taxes, and retrench ways of
Oppression that have been invented more grievous than Taxes; to encourage
Trade: above all, to advance the Kings Honor; to teach the people that by
their own good example; never to clash with nor dispute the Kings Commands: but
humbly petition him; and hold the Princes Will for the Supreme Law. This ought
to be the Temper of the Parliament of Paris, which has been heretofore the
Rule of Right, the Bound of Equity, and the Pillar of Law: to which, as to an
Oracle, all Nations came from every part to be resolved: but, as all things
grow worse by length of time, so is that fallen from its ancient Glory. I speak
of the most, not of all. For that Court even to this day, can produce brave
men, who maintaining their State with integrity, do bear up that tottering
Fabric: and who being carried away with the stream of the Seditious, have
groaned over their own Ordinances. That purple Assembly has and will yet add
great weight to the Kings not only Decrees, but Actions also. Therefore after
the decease of Lewis, it was strictly observed which way the Scale would turn.
By the consent of Orleans, Conde, and the Parliament the whole Government was
committed to the Queen under the name of Regent. Then was it not objected
against Mazarine his being an Alien. Nay soon after he is counted worthy to be
chosen, and that with the Applause of the Senate for the man to whom the Hopes
and Helm of the Kingdom should be entrusted, that the Competition among the
Princes might by that expedient be removed. This the Soul of Lewis now in
Heaven intimated: the Queen had fulfilled her Husbands meaning.

5. Mazarine casting with himself what is hurtful and what profitable, past
this Sentence upon the Clergy: These are his words counselling the Queen
Regent. The Sacred Order for these many years has had but a thin harvest of
excellent Persons, however it come to pass. Men follow after nice Questions,
live idly, do not embrace serious Studies. All is done with Pomp, nay if any
Sermons be to be made, and the very venerable Sacrifice offered. Of their
Office they lay claim to nothing, but their Rents: the Duty of Preaching, which
is the principal Dignity of a Bishop, they quit to any one, though never so
insufficient. They think themselves Bishop enough, if they can but ride in fine
Coaches, with their Arms set on, outvy one another in rich Liveries and
Lacquais; and punish with rigor those that transgress in the least matters.
Perpetual Haunters of Ladies Couches, not without undervaluing the Pastoral
Staff. This is for the most part, for there are some that lead holy and
unreproveable lives; He that shall take offense, will own himself not to be
one of these, but ^ those other. So much power has Religion over the minds of
men, that as often as amongst men in holy Orders any eminent Virtue has got
up, and overcome the common seize and the vices of mankind, it is adored
like a Deity. At that time that Company was of no weight nor moment in France,
said Mazarine I am trouble, and in a manner unwilling to write this; but plain
dealing and faithfulness does at present offend those that it meets with,
afterward it is admired and commended.

There was Francis Paul Gondy, by Extraction a Florentine, but born in France,
Abbot of Rhetz, afterward Coadjutor to the Bishop of Paris, Archbishop of
Corinth; one that, if occasion had offered, would have aspired high, as
Cardinal Mazarine confessed he was persuaded. Over and above an honorable
Family, he had Eloquence and Learning, with promptness of Spirit. Very free of
other men's money; not careful to pay his debts, though his Creditors were in
the greatest necessities, but rather forward to bestow courtesies. He regarded
more to engage many, than to seek that any should make him requital; of a lofty
mind: had many designs in his head: catching at opportunities, waited for some
alteration only to advance his Honor.

6. The Provinces being wasted, torn, and harassed with Taxes, Impositions, and
Free-Quarters, cried out for nothing else but Peace; yet in a readiness to
couch under greater burdens. So great is their Obedience and Loyalty to their
Sovereign. Their Governors were men engaged, that would hear the yoke quietly.
There were then no Mountmorencies nor Les Diguieres, which heretofore at their
least motion, would make the Court shake. That Rohan who for fourteen years
together trod upon the Bowels of the State, to maintain by Arms the new
Profession, was long since gone out of the world, and had left none behind him
that could answer the reputation of such a mighty Name.

The Innovators (for that name I shall use) wearied with Wars, their Head being
taken off at the winning of Rochel, the Seat of the Rebellion, panted after
nothing but to be at quiet; which is wonderful at that change. And because that
Religion could abet so much mischief, it were not amiss to lay open the Rise
and Principles of it, lest Posterity should be ignorant thereof.

John Calvin, at first called Chauvin of Noyon, was the Author of the
Innovation, that having quitted France, retired to Geneva whitber such persons
flock and are in high credit. Charles was King, and Katherine Queen Mother, who
yet made no scruple to prosecute the Innovators with fire and sword, as
Criminals and deserving most exquisite torments. Such tortu^es has foolish man
invented against himself upon easiness of persuasion. At S. Bartholomews-day it
was resolved at one stroke to cut off the springing Hydras head, by an action
unworthy of the French name, and such as Seyn with all its waters can never
wash out. The Religion at present checked, burst out again, not only in France,
but over the Suisse, German, and English. Some of the Princes took part: whence
were battles and slaughters in several parts. Calvin set up Rites contrary to
the Divine Institution: and as a principal Doctrine instilled into his
Followers, that the sanctifying Wafer, the sacred Bread is not turned into
Christ by the muttering of the Priest, which I tremble to mention: the supreme
object of their Worship is not kneaded by the Bakers hands, nor changeable, nor
subject to corruption; they vilify the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Prayers for
the Dead. That there is a Heaven and Hell: they are persuaded but not at all
that there is a Purgatory. That the Pope cannot make Saints, and as to them,
that Heaven is never the fuller. They give the Virgin but little honor: and
only such as is far less than her Sons. Prayer, they say, is not to be made to
her. Relics and dead Bones of Saints they make a jest of. Indulgences for
buying of sins at a certain sum of money to be paid: they slight and
confidently affirm men might employ their money better. The Pope they despise,
as a mere Phantosm and empty appearance: do not dread his Bulls the Vatican
Thunderbolts: affirm it to be a Sword whose edge consists in bare imagination.
To empty the sink of sin into the cars of the Priest, they take for a principal
argument of a weak understanding. The load of Confession, they call a Pack of
Humane Constitutions. To displease ones appetite with fish and dry meats in
Lent, Frenzy; as also empty ones self with mortifying Fasts at that time,
because no leaf in the Old or New Testament enjoins it. And when the year
renews, and the floating humors begin again to work, then to be tyrannized over
two whole months, and the youth of the year to be clouded with sadness, and
when Nature designs this that our bodies being purged from unwholesom humors,
should be replenished with new juyces, that to have them corrupted with mere
putrefactions, and s^lt meats, and that by the doting of them, who touch no
such things themselves, but enjoin solemn Fasts, religiously abstaining. This
they say of our Lent. In other things always pretend the Bible, quote
Scriptures; in Disputes tire our strongest, dissatisfie those of middle parts,
catch not a few. Their Teachers they call Ministers, not distinguished in habit
from the Laity. And because they have like passions as other men, they allow
them to marry wives of their own, counting that better than for them to corrupt
other men's; which they malignantly charge upon the unmarried and chaste Order.
Their Temples are naked and censed with Prayers. They have their Communions
with a crust of Bread, and sip of Wine on certain days in memory of the Lords
Supper. That God being a pure Spirit, is to be worshipped with a pure spirit:
not with Beads, which they call in derision the Serpents eggs. They dislike
Monasteries where, they say, innumerable happy Wits are unhappily stifled and
buried alive, which might have been chosen Vessels of the Lord, had they with
judgment taken to a course agreeable to their nature: thus they speak. Geneva
the Head of the Religion, a City of the Allobroges, was under the Government of
their own Bishops, but has now flung off their yoke, and continues as yet a
free State. Under the Walls the Rhosne runs free, and with its own waters
through the Lacus Lemanus. A Lake of a vast compass, like a Sea roars and
raises billows. The City is situate on high, and strengthened with Works and
Banks. The Walls take in two Hills, artificially bending or winding inwards, of
a pleasant prospect, and delightful to the Beholders. In that place men and
women are alike obstinate, and all do construe that they have so great
assurance of God, that they do not turn to truth even in adversity, as if so be
they should be forced to receive the Catholics, they would stand more in fear
of life than death.

I have somewhat the more largely discoursed about that Sect, because an
opportunity has offered, and no others did more largely contribute heretofore
to the Rebellion: by the Example of Tacitus that digresses somewhat freely in
the Religion of the Jews: but especially of Polybius, who being a chief Master
in these cases slackens the reins of History with far greater digressions.
There is no more certain Argument of ignorance and childishness, than to refuse
knowledge, and assume an ability of Judgment after such eminent men.

Therefore that Party which had so often been prevalent to the ruin of France,
after the death of Lewis XIII. either subdued, or quiet of themselves, gave no
disturbance, although they had reason to be proud of Thurenne and Gassion,
being brave men both of whom had a worthy Name, but with different success.

The former would wisely pitch upon the advantage of ground; often gain a
Victory without blood or mourning. Curb the Enemy, by delay seldom venturing a
Battle, with good advice for Peace or War by conduct and providence, insatiable
of glory; and engrossing to himself all the successes of the Battle, would
secretly charge upon his Fellow-Officers all the errors or misfortunes, would
protract Wars out of Art, or design of continuing long in Commission. Having a
natural pride of his Nobility; comparable to ancient Commanders, far the
chiefest of his own age.

Gassion out-^^^ned the Line of his Ancestors, though not mean, with his own
valor, hasty to execute his hopes: never making any long debate upon matters;
nothing could restrain his fiery courage; with unwearied charges day and night
would tire out the Enemy; was able to discharge bdth duties of Soldier and
Captain. Joyful at the very dangers, as others are at the rewards of dangers.
Both affected to the King; neither under color of Religion affected alteration
of State.

7. Our Armies, survivors of so many dangers, swollen with a long train of
Victories, thought nothing difficult. Lewis Bourbon Enguien blazed like a Star
dreadful to the Nations, thwarting the French Interest. Rocroy was the dawn of
his rising Glory, and a presage of his future Greatness. All was prosperous and
quiet. France at concord and united, reached over Almania from the Mazeli^
brink to beyond the Rhine. By the Victory at Norlingue, the parts confining on
the Danube were afterward invaded, and terror struck on all sides In Spain,
by seizing Tortosa and Flix, we were got to the River Iber. Our Fleets ranged
over the Mediterranean and Ocean.

9. All Italy from the Pope, who was then Urban VIII. to the least Princes bore
reverence. The Dukes of Savoy, Mantoua and Modena rather Instruments of French
slavery, than free Princes, In Germany the Kings of Swethland and Denma^
boasted of our friendship; the Pole-sued for it. The Electors thought
themselves hardly used unless they might be admitted to some room in our
favor. Portugal torn from Spain, depended on the looks of France, whose yoke
Catalaunia had willingly put on, being weary of the Spanish Dominion. The
Low Countries stuck close to us. The King of England that now discovered the
seeds of Innovation and Civil War to spring up, did sollicitously oblige us to
him.

Europe with astonishment stood gazing at such a state of our Affairs; nothing
was wanting to complete our happiness besides moderation, and the Art of
enjoying it. Our Princes were in concord, and stood in awe of the Queens look,
who supported by the counsels of Mazarine, did so manage the Reins of the
Public Fate, as that the Kingdom flourished, and all Enterprises at home and
in the field succeeded prosperously, and even to envy. She married young, and
having been bred strictly, bore with an equal temper her Husbands knidness or
slighting. A Woman for holiness of life after the ancient manner. A Queen
courageous, and not to be conquered by adversity; of great judgment; cunning to
dissemble, or to conceal; in alterations would not discover any change. This
was resolved of stoutly to maintain her Children and Kingdom; in the mean time,
during the Kings Minority, not to exasperate the Princes, but hold an even seal
between them. Being but newly abroad from her close mourning, she cast out such
expressions: Faithful Armies shall defend the French Empire; him (point-at the
King) his own Majesty. The Palace was free from those vices which are wont to
grow rank in Courts. The Kings Childhood shot up under the nurture and
admonitions of Mazarine; to whom was also taken on as a second Villeroy, one
well versed in our State Affairs, skilled in the Court, a quick foreseer of
Interests likely to get uppermost.

Our Nobles, all of them wholly set upon what they could rake together, or fish
out before the King should come to be of Age, to restrain their outrageous
greediness. The French have this custom, to think themselves dull and negligent
of their Estates, unless they get some Boon from a new Prince, from whom they
think they are to draw as from a Torrent that will not always run; especially
by reason of the Ministers foreignness, which they were confidently persuaded
they might easily baffle. Even many private persons were craving. Mazarine
granted every one that for which he was importuned, and spared for no cost, so
he might but render them engaged and faithful to the Queen: won whomsoever he
could at that time, by gratifications. In the mean while the poor Exchequer was
pillaged by Court-Leeches.

Mazarine foresaw much, that time would be when the heaping up of money would
occasion mischief. Nothing at that time did so much perplex his thoughts. The
safety and Honor of the Kingdom he desired; could not attain this without
Arms, nor Arms without pay; nor pay without Taxes, nor Taxes without vexation,
nor vexation long without complaints, in a State condemning every thing, and to
be feared for its excess: that is not to be satisfied but by ill practices,
which draw dangerous consequences. Prosperity had already debauched their
minds: Wealth was in Honor, poverty accounted a reproach. After Riches Luxury,
and Covetousness its attendants, with pride had broke in: they tore, they
wasted, they built Houses and Villa's like Cities. What should I go on to
mention that which will be scarce credible to posterity? They so far abused
their ill gotten riches, that very many Receivers, (Partisans they call them)
the Wens of Mankind, have levelled Mountains, and raised Plains to Mountains,
have built them houses, with which for habitation may compare neither Kings nor
Emperors. To furnish their Table, they search all that may be got by Sea or
Land. They purchase luxury by gains, Rapines by luxury: and it is their highest
value for an Estate, to lavish an Estate. Hereupon when their means fail, they
set upon Change of Government, to get more to spend. It was ordinarily pleaded,
That by the increase of the Kingdom private men's Estates were come to fuller
growth. That money is now at another rate than heretofore in the Kingdom, when
small, where the houses were but little; That nothing is overmuch, where is
power; all things are to answer the Possessors fortune. A confession of Vices,
and the likeness of Delinquents easily was consented to under plausible names.

10. Thus was it in the City fruitful for engendring mischiefs, and that is of
so great moment, that whithersoever it lean, thither do all things in a manner
bend; because in it the strength and hopes of the whole Kingdom are placed; and
because the Government divides from them all abroad. It dispenses to all the
Provinces, Officers entrusted with Arms and Laws: it receives into its bosom
all sorts of strangers: and cherishes mankind upon a commonty, not like a
Dame, but Mother, whom it receives, it calls Denizens; and obliges to it self
in a bond of natural affection those that are in the remote parts of the world.
Let not ancient Rome compare her self, nor all the Illustrious Cities in the
East. It will issue out four Cities without any loss of the people exhausted,
it will set out 100000 Soldiers: and yet the streets crammed. It will nobly
entertain four Kings coming on a sudden; and the Citizens have plenty, being
cut into parts by its Seine that carries on its back, supplies sufficient to
sustain whole Kingdoms.

Presently upon the death of Lewis, it was quiet and joyful at its own
condition; but it was conjectured by no obscure signs, that from it only a
storm would rise, that should discharge upon the whole Nation.

Mazarine was unable to satisfy so many lusts, the Treasury being almost
already drawn dry. Every one thinks himself considerable for business: and
thereafter expects wages, gaping after reward: hence issue out Spies and
Trapans, the main concern of whose life is to know and to be unknown, that Gang
of Informers swarms in teachy times: a Tribe insatiable, subtle, false, that
will at all times condemn, and at the same times will be cherished. Orleans,
Conde, Mazarine, Longueville, Seguier, Bryenne, Bouthillier, Chauvigny, his
Son, and Servienne went for the Counsel of State: But at that very time Fame
gave out that Mazarine was all in all, the rest but shadows, that went along
with him, and moved at his motions; for the Queen concluded with him all
matters of importance, as with her only Cabinet-Counsellor: the rest taken to
sit at the board for Pomps sake, that they might debate things resolved
beforehand, and might please themselves with an empty appearance of
Government. And to say the truth, Mazarine did then openly present Richlieu
risen from the dead. Which two, because so lucky an occasion is offered, I have
not thought fit to pass over, without declaring the Nature and Qualities of
both, as far as my weak parts can reach.

11. In the much that I have read, and have observed, it is evident from the
first foundations of the Kingdom to these present times, that the excellent
virtue of a few have done all the great Actions. Among them two persons have
been most eminent for their transcendent merits, Armand Richlieu, and this our
Julius Mazarine, differing in qualities, differing in Country: both of the same
rank in the Church, both of Illustrious Extraction. Their Age, Eloquence were
alike, Courage equal; also their Glory: but other advantages each had to
himself in particular. Armand was accounted great for his magnificent Works:
Julius surpassed him in splendor of life. The formers severity made him awful:
The latters gentleness and mercy made him renowned. Richlieu by lavishing and
by punishing; Mazarine by pardoning and wary dispensing obtained glory. The
ones easy and forward bounty was commended: The others slackness in giving was
condemned. Those that offended Richlieu were certain to be destroyed: Mazarines
Enemies took Sanctuary in Mazarine himself. That other carried all with a high
hand: This with an imperious stilness; that was well versed in the French
Kingdom: This acquainted with the States of the World. That dyed in the heat of
Wars, uncertain of events. This after peace settled secure of success. That to
the joy of his King; this, while his King wept over him, expired in his Arms.
However the Relation contained in this Book is necessary, and as I hope not
ungrateful, that What persons the Reader is to see engaged with variety of
Fortune, he may have their conditions also, and temper, and as it were picture
before his eyes.

For whereas all History consists of Men and Actions, I have judged it fit,
more to insist upon them than these; because it has more influence upon humane
life in reference to the example, for one to know what were the several
dispositions of men, than for heads to be filled with insignificant Stories.
The principal matter is, to be read in men. Fortune having taken much away from
me, has left me the conversation of the French Natures, which I do here in a
manner limb. This in truth is more profitable than to be informed of bare
particular occurrents. I compose and write what another Age will read. Our own
disregarding it self, as having left off to do commendable Actions, thinks it
impertinent to be praised or dispraised, and defies Images, because it dreads
them. As to Mazarine, I speak not of his Fortune, but of himself; who was known
to me not for any obligation, but many wrongs, that I received from him; since
my whole family is beholding to him singly for its calamities. Nevertheless
such is the power of truth, that I cannot slothfully suppress the praises of so
great a Personage, but am overruled to give them their due Encomium, leaving to
others to dilate in flattering Discourses.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. Of the Actions at Home, and in the Field, during the happy five
years under the most prudent Conduct as ever was, from the Year 1643. wherein
Lewis dyed, to the Year 1648. when the Civil War was unfortunately commenced,

IN such a State of Affairs, although flourishing, there is no question to be
made, but that the House of Austria, would have lifted up their head, many
amongst us having already plotted a Rebellion, and got together by diverse
practices, fuel for the Combustion, had not Mazarine (his Envyers carp at it,
the ends being secret) obviated the imminent dangers, by entertaining the
quieter sort of men with hope, gifts, and the sweetness of ease; and by
scattering the active and military men through Germany, Flanders, Italy, and
Spain upon hard and desperate Services towaste and repel the Enemy, lest he
should be hindered by intestine dissensions to carry on his Plot at home and
abroad.

[What would have been the consequent if such a multitude of idle persons
having got head under a minor King, and casting of the Princes awe, should have
been solicited to raise Civil Disturbances: Before the pledges of the Kingdom
were grown to full age, and the dearness of their Sovereign which is made
habitual by time, had cemented their spirits? The Estate not yet firmly settled,
would have been broke to pieces with discord, which his gentle moderation did
cherish for five years, and brought to such perfection, that being grown to
full strength, it could bear any shock, though the malignancy of the French
Fate should charge it never so furiously.]

Therefore waving Occurrents rather ordinary than worthy the relating, I shall
write only those passages, whose knowledge has influence upon life, counting
it more eligible to edify the Understanding, than to feed the Fancy with an
empty Narrative of Proceedings. Here is not to be expected any Journal to give
a particular account of Actions with their Circumstances: but you will find
secret Advices refined from vulgar Errors, short and mystical: so that I
confess he had need have a piercing Judgment that can reach and fathom my
meaning. He that is not provided of that, let him not offer to meddle with my
Book, but go about some other business.

The first Essay of the new King was the Expedition of Rocroy. Roc-Roy, (or the
Royal Rock) is a Garrison at the Entrance of the Forest of Ardenne, fortified
with strong Works. Hardly any foot of arable Land is near it. All the parts
round about it are overrun with Heath and Briars. The place is of such
importance, that the Garrison which holds it, may freely march up as far as
Paris, and the vast Plain of Champaigne lies open to be scoured over by the
Scouts from Rocroy. Nothing was accounted more advisable among the Officers of
the Army in the Low Country, after the death of Lewis, than to reduce that
Frontier: Therefore May 12. 1643. Rocroy is closely beleaguered, the Outworks
are presently stormed, the Defendents which were about 500, not being able to
make good such a Line against so furious an Attaque. The Spaniards lodge in the
neighboring Quarters, more like Conquerors than Combatants, Don Francisco Melo
was Captain General. The Count Issemburgh, Duke Albuquerque, and Count
Fuentanon Lieutenants. The Army consisted of 20000 men. Intelligence being
brought of this, Enguien who was quartered in Picardy, united his Infantry
which lay upon the Ause with his Cavalry lying upon the Oyse, and immediately
sent away Gassion with 500 Horse to scout, and do such farther Execution as the
matter should require. Gassion giving the Enemy perpetual Alarms, whilst he and
a Party are engaged, conveys a 100 choice Musketeers into the besieged Castle,
no small relief to the Garrison, that was now sorely distressed. Enguien with
hard marches having drawn together the whole of his strength on the 17. of May,
quarters at Bossue, a Town four miles distant from Roc-Roy. Hither comes also
Gassion. A Counsel of War is called about the relieving of Rocroy. There were
some of opinion, that they needed not give Battle, but only send in succor:
the prevailing advice was to put it to a pitched Field. There were narrow Lanes
and Bypaths to be got over before the Forces could come to draw up on even
ground. That part is gallantly performed, and with notable success. The French
could hardly be kept in from running upon the Enemy, even at the very break of
day. That was the fiery courage of the French: yet there was this farther
consideration: that a Frenchman coming over from the Enemy, had informed that
Beke was upon his march, drawing near with a Recruit to reinforce the
Spaniards. (Now Beke was of no mean esteem among both Wallons and French. Such
reward being given the Informer, as his condition required, all things are
prepared for the hazard of a final decision. And now the whole order of the
future Engagement is brought under the eye. All things are marshalled with
exquisite care and providence on both sides: and such preparations made that
night, as though a Battle had been bid against the next day. Enguien judging it
better to stay till broad daylight, encouraged them, and afterward sent them
to refresh themselves. when this was done, he went about the Companies standing
to their Arms, with the Field-Officers and his Attendants, inspiring into the
Troops of Soldiers a fortitude worthy of their ancient Glory and past
Monuments. He could neither endure to stand still, nor would relieve his
wearied body with sleep. The Army had at no time seen the General so sprightly:
and did readily draw from his undaunted looks an assured conjecture of Victory.
At length when the clear light discovered ours and the Enemies Battalia,
Enguien rejecting the advice of his cautious friends, clapped on a slight
Breast Plate, and no Helmet, that his face might be open, and manifest to the
Soldiers during the whole Engagement.

The Battle was thus set in array, Gasston to command the right Wing, Hospital
the left, with Seneterre. The Wings were enforced with the reserve of Espenan.
Enguien turned his quick eyes to the right and to the left, presuming upon
Victory, while the Event was yet in suspense. Never was Fortune braved with a
more forward joy: yet there were called to prayers for obtaining Victory, the
Priests a generation, believed by alas! too many a useless burden of the earth.
The Conflict was sharp, and the Dispute maintained with a stiff obstinacy. Our
left Wing came to a sad misfortune. Seneterre discharging manfully the part
both of Commander and Soldier, was shot and cut. He having had his Horse
killed under him, was carried off, and soon after came in again. The Enemies
too were possessed of our Ordnance, which the excelling valor or Hospital
recovered: but when he was wounded in the Arm, were lost again, and turned upon
us: the fortune of the day was changed by Syrot who charged gallantly, and came
to succor the left Wing that was in apparent danger, and almost trampled down.
The Wallons, Germans, and Italians being slain, the hardest part of the work
was behind to deal with a Regiment of Castillians stout and invincible. The
Infantry of the right Wing had often charged, but always without any success.
At length Gassion being not ignorant of what importance that Regiment was,
bringing up with him the Horse of the right Wing, broke in upon the close
Ranks, and routed them. Presently the Enemies Army was totally defeated. The
cruel rage of our Switzars discharged their fury upon the Spaniards, who
counted it brave to die before the face of their Commanders, rather than to
take Quarter. Fuentes the Master of the Ordnance in the Enemies Camp avoided
the disgrace of flight, by dying in the Bed of Honor. Their Switzars affected
the reputation of having their Colonel killed: who, during the Engagement, was
carried about in a Sedan: he had made oath never to fight against the French,
neither on Horseback, nor on foot. The Count of Issemberg accounting that
there was less danger in running away, than in being made Prisoner, escaped
away wounded, and a little after dyed of his wound. Melo (leaving behind him
his Commanders staff, which came afterward into the victorious hands of
Enguien, having rid full eight miles by the swiftness of his Steed, hid himself
within the Town of Mariemburgh, attended by a few that bore him company in his
flight, having abandoned his whole Army; and it was a confessed truth, that the
Soldier that day fought like a most valiant General: and the General run away
like a most cowardly Soldier; only the renown of Enguien gave him the glory of
having been vanquished by so great a Person. It was now no longer a fight, but
a mixed Carnage. A slaughter here of one, there of whole Companies. Limbs of men
lie scattered about upon the ground: Soldiers maimed and disabled, yet would
not leave grasping their Arms; till through the expense of much blood, they
sunk down and dyed. Some fled the shortest way; others got into the opposite
Wood, and paths unknown to the Pursuers. Naked men encounter with such as are
armed, and the wounded with such as are whole. As is the fashion when fear
possesses the spirit. Enguien would no longer pursue them upon the flight, but
commanded their weary hands, their thirsty bodies, their blunted Arms to be
quiet: and having gone through a business of singular danger, entered Roc-Roy in
Triumph. Now he owed this Victory more to his Valor than Fortune. For he both
drew up his Army most skilfully, fought courageously, and with excellent
judgment despised the loss of his great Guns, knowing that the main concern was
the keeping the Army in order, and holding the field. Then what is rare in that
heat of Passion, and Age. He pursued them upon the flight, with more prudence
than eagerness. All that were present confessed that Hospital, Seneterre,
Gassion, Syrot, Espenan deserved to have Enguien for their General, and Enguien
to have such Officers. This has been too large in the Relation, but so many
following Engagements shall be all comprehended under this one.

Roc-Roy being relieved, Thionvilles Attaque is resolved upon. [It is a City of
the Dukedom of Luxemburgh, cut by the Mazelyn in two parts; the one looks
toward Metz, the other Triers: for it has two Gates, situated in a Valley,
fortified with Trenches and Bulwarks incomparably well.] At that time judged to
have been of great importance, not so much to expiate the slaughter of Fequier,
by putting it to the Sword (which had been a quarrel suiting our bravery) but
that the French Territory might be enlarged by such an Acquist. Therefore
having wasted the Country, and reduced some few Villages, on the thirtieth day
after the Battle at Rocroy, the French Army came within view of Thionville,
with the same push of fortune carried. Guere and Gassion went before to take up
the Armies Quarters. Conde with prodigious swiftness by the fourth days march
came to Metz, and a Recruit of new-raised men being taken on there, his Army
was completed in numbers. By the Counsels of the Commanders, by the works,
activity, and patience of the Soldiers, by the valor of Enguien, within four
months time after the Siege was laid, there came into our hands that City
famous to the memory of posterity, for the antiquity of its Original, and
frequent varieties of Fortune, which having escaped many casualties, now as it
were restored, the new Peace cherishing all, does rest quietly under the
protection of the French clemency. Because there had been assaults with variety
of success, and many men lost before it, when News came to Paris, that
Thionville was taken, there was infinite rejoicing; the Churches were full of
those that give God thanks for the Victory: the Entry too of Enguien being more
celebrated than is the custom by the people, running in multitudes out of Town
to meet him, exceeded the usual measure, of Honor.

The League that we had struck with Gustav^^ Adolphus, the great King of
Sweden, lasted as long as he lived. When he was dead, it was renewed with, his
Successors, amongst whom Duke Bernard of Weymar, a Branch of the House of.
Saxony, or rather the very stock, was eminent for his great merits. Our Arms
were joined with the Gothic under that renowned Duke: who dying of the Plague,
not being poisoned, as was malignantly given out, that he might not oppose
Richlieu's designs, the Command^ in chief over the Army was committed to
Weybrantz: who was already acquainted with the German Soldiers and Discipline
a name well known to the Hercynian and Rhyne. His Engagements proved very
fortunate, by a victory over Lamboy, and diverse Enterprises still successful:
At length as is the usual Fate of Martial men, having his Arm broken with a
Canon bullet before the Walls at the Siege of Rothuel, he lived to come into
the City. Those that accompanied him weeping, gave an appearance to the Army
looking on, as if they had been following not Weybrantz, but his Corpse. His
mind continued unshaken, and after he had given all his orders, as though he
had discharged the duty of his life and command, he fell speechless. The
Germans contend in lamenting and mourning with the French, nor could it be
decided who were the Victors, or who were conquered; there was an open prize of
grief: whilst ^he Soldiers dwelt sometimes on the want, and sometimes on the
respect of the deceased. That he should be taken out of the world so lusty, and
in the flower of his age and fortune, was a just cause of indignation. John
Baptista Bude a Breton, took the name of Weybrantz into his Family. Having
followed the Court in his youth, as Captain of the Guards; afterward out of a
desire of glory, which ^he excessively thirsted after, led part of the Duke of
Robans Army, which left the Grisons into Germany, where he served Weymar to his
satisfaction. He was the first Frenchman that understood the way of Commanding
after the German fashion; one comparable to the chiefest Captains of his Age.
And all our pretensions upon the Rhyne and Dona^ had been quite extinguished,
unless Thurenne had succeeded him.

Weybrantz Funeral was ordered with no mean Pomp; his body was interred in
Nostre Dame Church; which is an unusual honor: and was granted, not so much to
the man's merit, as extorted by the importunity of his Wife Renee Beke. An
ambitious Woman, rather excessive in vainglory than grief, would draw the
Obsequies paid to her Husband to an ostentation of her own greatness.

Margaret de Lorraine comes to the Court out of the Low Countries. She had
married Gaston, that was seduced by ill Counsels, against the Kings will,
(which is irregular in France) at the special instance of her Brother Charles
petty King of Lorraine; who breaking Covenant so often by an unsearchable
method of living, has ruined himself and his Estate more than once. King Lewis
hating the Contract of Marriage, in vain endeavored to disannul it. Gastons
temper in other matters variable (so frail a humor having now committed this
third error) was resolute in the love of Margaret only. By her example and
persuasions he restrained his licentious affections to keep within the bounds
of conjugal Chastity; and having been remiss in the Worship of God, wheeled
about to superstition, that is, a slavish fear of God: a grievous error which
has two inseparable concomitants: the being implacably mischievous, and a
perpetual easiness in believing untruths. The Lorraine Lady was at first dear
and honored by all; being for person and beauty, not degenerate; for chastity
above the French temper; a commendable President: afterward continuing in
greatness altered to pride, and was judged to swell with the glory of her
Ancestors, and an excess of devotion. No cunning Woman, but one that ruled her
Husband.

The Queen of England, Henriette Bourbon, Daughter of Henry IV. having left the
Island full of growing troubles, retires into France, where she is entertained
with splendor; at first highly courted, disregarded at last. The afflicted
Lady refused the Honors offered, alleging that Pomp did not suit with her
present Fortune.

Carignac Bourbon Soissons, Wife of Thomas Prince of Savoy, who had long
resided in Spain (whose party her Husband had taken, and at last came back to
ours) not enduring the constraint of so long silence among those that were
ignorant of her Language, returned into her Country. A Princess of a fluent
tongue, but also virtuous.

Elizabeth Bourbon the Daughter and Glory of Henry IV. Queen of Spain, dies.
The King her Husband, by reason of absence, could not sit by her on her
sickbed; so that her departing eyes lacked the sight of her beloved Husband in
the last glimpse. She had not exceeded the 42 year of her Age, having comprised
so many virtues within so narrow a period of time. French Courtesy, Spanish
Gravity, each in equal weight. A Prudence worthy of the stronger Sex, an
assistance of her Husbands care; oftentimes mounting on Horseback to restrain
Mutiniers. Not with Beads, or an empty ostentation of piety in kneeling before
Altars, but with a stout heart. Did not equal, but exceed her Husbands cares.
She loved the happy, defended the miserable; and if she exceeded in any thing,
it was in Bounty. (Now what is more honorable than an excess of bounty?)
Philip, not moderating his grief, does extend his love to the Deceased, by
dwelling on her memory, and the comfort he takes in his Therese left behind
her; who, as the Fates have disposed, is come to be our Queen.

I have joined these matters together, although they fell not all out at one
time, lest if they had been separated, they might not have been equally
portable in the memory.

That was not unsuitable to a Woman's levity; for a Woman occasioned what at
this time fell out. In the Kings Minority, when the French think they may do
any thing, Collins presumed to challenge the Duke of Guise to a Duel; which,
after his Ancestors Gallantry, he did not refuse. In an eminent place of the
City he disarmed his Challenger, and gave him his life (Clemency is hereditary
to the Guises, and Courage) Collins ended his life with melancholy and
discontent, leaving but one Brother behind, who fell at the Town of Charenton;
by which means the right Line of the great Gaspa^ Collins, who filled the World
with the Fame of his Actions, was extinguished. Collins was condemned for
having presumed to engage with one that was not his equal, at the instigation
of a Woman, who not contenting her self with so little bloodshed; afterward
stained France to her power with Civil slaughter. Conde resented the matter
ill, and lest Divisions should thereby break out, presently hushed it up, and
reproved the Occasioners of it.

Paul Gondy designed Archbishop of Paris, is consecrated of Corinth (it is the
Bishop of Rome's practice, that so the whole World may be thought depending on
the Vatican Oracle, to exercise his Authority even upon the dissenting parts.)
That day was the first occasion of death and all destructions.

Casimire, Prince of Poland, Son and Brother of (...) King, not regarding his
Scepter, but laying asid^ his High Quality, nor hearkening to the disswasions
of Majesty, turned Loiolite. Embracing (...) Rome an Order wherein, by a
peculiar habit, and mystical rule of life, is made a Profession of Wisdom.
Praised by the Pope, who always promote such Changes, although they indicate
discontent of the spirit: the way, as they word it, to a bette^ Kingdom, being
by that means discovered. Short after his fit of Jesuitism went off; his fancy
roving after Purple, after the Throne, and after Marriage, even with his
Brothers Wife, and an indispensable Match. (If he ever had been to meddle with
such matters, he could never have done if with less indecency, since the
approved Society has first brought Civility and Literature into Monkery (the
Jesuits scorn that name.) But whether they have so adulterated it with a
mixture of Secular Affairs, that they can be styled neither wise Politicians,
nor pure Monks, there will be a more convenient place to dispute it elsewhere.

That other Casimire was also remarkable, the King of Poland's Son too, whose
name was Miecrilaus. In the Year 1040. a Benedictine Monk professed. To him
already engaged by oath were Ambassadors sent, demanding their Prince. The Pope
dispenses with his Vows, allowing him also^licence to marry, upon condition
that the Polanders for the time to come, should slave their Crowns with a
Monachal Tonsure; and should also yearly contribute Pence, toward S. Peter's
Wax-Tapers, as a Monument of the Indulgence. Thus was Casimire attended into
his Kingdom, received with consent and joy: married a Wife, begot Children of
her; propagating the Kingdom to his Posterity. So did a Fugitive, Monk, Deacon
possess Country, Crown, nay Wife, with Favor, Praise, and Pardon.

Ferrario Pallavicini, a Canon Regular, a Parmesan of a Noble House, sharply
inweighing in libellous Pamphets against the Practices of the Roman Court, lost
his Head at Avignon, and gave instance how unsafe a thing it is to touch upon
the Roman State in Writing, though never so truly.

Harcourt having performed his Embassy in Britain, matters as he thought,
tending to an Accommodation, taught, as the Event afterward informed him, that
the highest Martialists are not the deepest Politicians.

Orleans more greedy after glory, than qualified for it; (never attainted for
plotting Treason, nor under suspicion of aspiring hopes; nor Adviser of putting
any to death, nor Abetter, although he wanted not occasion of taking revenge)
whether weary of lying still, or excited by the Victories of Enguien; or at the
instigation of those under whose Tuition he was all his life time, resolved to
put himself too upon the Fortune of War. Gravelin the strongest Garrison of
that Seacoast among the Picards, heretofore the Worlds end, seemed an
expedition worthy of so great a Prince. Orange at that time besieged the Sasse
of Gant, sending in Tromp as an Auxiliary to block up the Port of Gravelin with
the Holland Fleet. Meilleray and Gassion were joined with Orleans, no mean
Assistants. They marched several ways to distract and amuse the Enemy in three
Parties: yet the Spaniard had some jealousies of the design to be upon
Gravelin; for the Sluices were drawn up, and the Country lying about, laid under
water. By the same Art was the Plain drained by ours, as it had been drowned by
them. At the first days, the labor seemed tolerable: upon continuance the
ground being dry and parched with the Suns vehemence, not a few dyed for
drought: the low Springs scarcely supplying the running Streams; and the Beasts
seeking for the Rivers, which they had lately swam over. Orleans appearing in
the Head of his Army, from break of day till late at night, without meat or
drink, showed by his own example, how sweet it is to suffer gloriously. At the
sixth days march, he appeared in the Camp before the Walls of Gravelin.
Meilleray, Gassion, Rantzow, Ferte Imbausse (afterward called Marshall
d'Estampes) perform gallant Service. The Approaches are made regularly, that
is, by Bulwarks, Trenches, Fagots, Mines, Ambushes. The Soldiers suffered
hardships, were killed. The Officers vapor and brag of their Acts, as is
usual; not a few slain, innumerable wounded. The General visits the Leagure
more than once, rejoicing at the dangers, extols the gallant performances,
bestows money, relieves the afflicted, comforts the sick. There was no weak
Soldier, whose life and recovery was not so assisted by Gastons care, as if
that mind most distracted with so great a load of cares, had attended upon this
business only. Such as were not in due order, as far as the President was not
of ill consequence, he pardoned, using frequently admonitions, rarely
chastisement.

Piccolomini attempts the relief, not only without success, but with loss.
Orange that lay against Melo, plyes his work, in taking the Sasse of Gant:
promises Orleans his assistance, in case, that he need^d it. Tromp played his
part stoutly; at length on (...). Anne's day, the Articles of Surrender being
sign^^d on both sides, Gravelin came into the hands of ^rleans; as he entered
the City, this Divine saying was marked to have fallen from him. Let us try
this way, if we can, to gain the affections of all, and to pursue a lasting
Victory. Let this be the new French mode of Vanquishing brought up by me, to
fortify ourselves by mercy and bounty.

In the mean time, being even revoked by the King, upon occasion of
congratulating his success, when he might have pursued the Victory, he chose
rather to enjoy it: nor yet did there follow any small breathing time.

By the League made with the Swedes and Weymor: those petty Cities upon the
Rhyne about Brisacque, were left under our Jurisdiction, which was an eyesore
to the Enemy. Thereupon Friburg of Briscow is first besieged by them. The
flower and strength of the Austrian Party, the Bavarian Forces* and their
Leader Merck an old Commander and stout Soldier furiously batter the Town.
Enguien that was then come to Saverne, certified by Thurenne of the Enemies
Attempt, hastens to Benfield and thence to Brisack, where having conferred
with, Thurenne, he made no resolution till he had first viewed the state of the
matter upon the place. But by this time the Bavarians had reduced Friburg to
necessity of Surrender, having come upon them before they were expected.
Afterward having drawn up their Army upon a rugged and steep Mountain, and
barricado'd within felled Trees, and entrenched round, they consulted in
security what course they should take. Enguien in that boystrous Current of
Age, boiling with an ardent desire to fight, was of opinion to fall downright
upon the Enemy; some judged that an oblique Compass should be fetched. He
insisted that, Artifices should be let alone, and they must conquer with valor
that conquers all things. Never was, scarce ever will be a more eager ardour of
fighting. Enguien himself, leaping off his Horse, pushed amidst the thickest of
the Enemies. Thurenne fell upon the Rear. It was judged more advantageous to be
united: so the two Camps were made one. They fought eight hours, which is rare,
with doubtful success, by reason of the continual rain. The night came in good
time to the Soldiers that were wearied with their Coats soaked through with
wet. By the break of the next day, they are alarmed again: the Bavarian not
knowing to give ground, but still renewing the fight. At length it was
observed, that the Enemy endeavored not a flight, but Retreat. No men ever
sold their lives at so dear a rate. That day opened the French a Road into
Germany, which Enguien so ranged over with Victories, that by the attendance of
Fortune, and guidance of Valor, he reckoned so many successes as days. After
Merck was conquered, no body was ashamed to be conquered: only Flesburg gave a
check to his rapid course. The first storm discharged it self like a clap of
Thunder, with a violent fury upon that, which being taken, the French Troops
pouring along upon both Banks of the Rhyne, brought under their power Spira,
the place of the Imperial Diet, Mentz the Electors Seat, and the pleasant
Worms. Hitherto ours dealt but with single Cities: afterward fell upon all
that lay in their way in general, without so much as regarding the situation of
Places. This War proved unproportionable. to the expectation of the German
Nation, whose valor heretofore victorious over the Romans, at this juncture
appeared to have been superannuated. At the same time Enguien, scarcely having
a beard, and but newly writing man, seemed both to have dispatched Germany, and
to enter upon Triumphs in all places, rowing along the conquered Rhyne. Like
fire, which having preyed upon the obvious Wood, is checked by the intervention
of a River.

The Inroad a while stopped at Mariandale (the neighboring Inhabitants call it
Mergenstheim.) There Thurenne, [ Enguien was a great way off] being straightned
for provision, had dispersed his Forces for Forage: whilst himself secure of
the Enemies, consulted what was to be done. The Austrians and Bavarians under
the Conduct of Merck, and Hans Werth, suddenly assault him. He gathering
together what Forces the pressing necessity would permit, refused not to stand
the utmost trial. Thurenne acting the part both of Commander and Soldier,
stoutly seconded by Rosa, withstood the Enemy, charging with desperate rage,
and at length when he could not be safe, even in Merindol, leaving behind him
his Baggage and Artillary, retired to the parts about the Main with his Horse.
Trac did gallant service, in heartning the Soldiers. The rest of ours escaped
toward Flesburg, and having passed the Rhyne at Spire, got safe to Mentz, to
join with Thurenne. Enguien being certified of this unfortunate Engagement,
obliged Conismark, the Swede and Guez, Colonel of the Hessians (although they
were averse, and pressed after returning home into their Country) to tarry but
so long with him, till he had got a pass upon the Nicer. Glen was come up to
reinforce the Enemies Army, not a little puffed up with their success at
Merindol. Enguien having left all his Baggage at Wisloque, designed to surprise
Hailbrun between the Danube and Rhyne. The Enemies which had a suspicion of
some such intention, march with unwearied haste; and pitch upon a Hill not far
off from the Walls of Hailbrun, lying so, that the Nicer running before them,
ours could neither enter Hailbrun, nor assail the Enemy. Therefore it is
resolved to march on toward Frankendale and the Danube. Conismark left our
Army, and followed his own designs. The Hessians endeavoring to do the like,
but being restrained and countermanded by the Landgravinne, stayed with us.
After many Proposals debated on all sides, it is resolved to beat the Enemy up
as far as the Danube: and return to Hailbrun, but both Armies each day marching
in a parallel line, there were not wanting light Skirmishes. A long time they
shot their Guns off in view of each other. A Moor lying between hindered their
engaging. Ours bent their course toward Norling, the Enemies toward Donavert.
Enguien had an intention to turn for Hailbrun, when of a sudden he is informed
that the Enemy came on eager upon fighting, and was between the River of Weran
and our Army. Enguien might easily have avoided it, had he not been resolved
for the Encounter.

His cheerfulness filled the hearts of all with hope. Never was he more
undaunted, never more secure: both Armies fell to prayers after a laudable
custom, to encourage the Soldiers, who having performed this duty, appear to
fall on more courageously: although God called upon in due order, does not
always come in to assistance. Grammont led the light Wing, Thurenne the left:
the Foot in the main Body was commanded by Marsin, Chastea^n^^f, and Bellenauw:
the Hessians with their Guez and Heems, in the Rear. Chabot brought on the
Reserve. Moussay delivered Enguiens orders on every part. But what shall I
speak of the presages in the minds of mortal men. At Paris before the ^ight,
the Victory was published, nor were there hidden the imminent signs of the
destined success. The like has been heretofore remarked among the Romans. A
Village with a Castle lying between both Armies, was furiously battered with
our Canon. Thither came down the Enemies from the top of the Hill, and ours at
the same time. The Dispute seemed to have been about the surprising a paultry
Dorp. Enguien was every where conspicuous in his most noted Coat of Armor: and
rid among his Troops commending or reproving, as every one merited, and stoutly
enforced what parts were weakened by the Enemies execution. When our Army seemed
to decline, Grammont comes in, who having restored the day, is with Chatre
taken Prisoner, and carried to Muncken, the Metropolis of Bavaria. The right
Wing had bin utterly lost, unless new courage had been infused into the
Soldiers by the valor of Thurenne, who commanded the left. Thither also comes
up Enguien, twice wounded, and having had two Horses killed under him. The
Enemy having showed what stubbornness they could, were compelled to retire
toward Donavert, which Town having plundered, they past the Danube; never
thinking themselves safe, till they had got on the other side. It was not
judged prudential to pursue: Their Guns and Baggage were taken, the evidence of
a complete Victory. Merck the General was slain. Glen taken, and the Duke of
Holsten: 4000 destroyed, 2000 taken. Enguien having transferred the whole glory
upon Thurenne, possessed Norling. [How should ^onismark be vexed at our
prosperity, to have been absent, because he had not appeased with Austrain
blood the Swedes, that is, his Country-mens Ghosts, and had not washed the
field a few years before stained with so much gore! for our Army stood upon the
same ground, as the Swedes had done before. The same furrows were once more
watered. Once more Norlingue saw Armies drawn up in Battalia, and that petty
City in it self ignoble, was ennobled by having its Plains scoured over with a
double pitched fight: but the news of the success was carried with such speed,
that the King knew his having vanquished, before his having been engaged: and
the news of the Victory outrun the message of the danger: but in truth, as
has been already said, it was presage, not the swiftness of the Post.]

After Enguien had wearied his body with so many toils, he fell into a
sickness, but being soon recovered of that, he returned to Paris. The City rung
of nothing but Enguien, his excellent accomplishments of mind, that ripeness
wherein he^ so early surpassed great Commanders, his resolution in running
through dangers, his expedition in laying, and executing designs, his faith in
keeping Articles; clemency toward Prisoners; temperance even in lawful
pleasures. His maligners gave out, that all these good qualities were spoiled
by his harkening to paultry Counselors, his following debauched Treats, his
deriding virtuous and grave men with bitter jests, his being more penurious
than his Father. Such were the rash speeches of some men. [It was believed by
the wiser, that his accumulated successes were the causes of all the Troubles
that afterward he fell into, to his great prejudice: the Princes mind having
been depraved by Flatterers, who presuming too much upon himself and false
Counsel, thought that all reward was too little to answer his merits, and that
he must be denied nothing. But of this, and the like, fully and truly
elsewhere.]

Having left the work of Germany done, he turned his haughty heart to the
Low Countries, where joining with Orange and Orleans, he performed those
Exploits, which being particularly related, would require to be treated of in
many Volumes; but these are the Subject of a complete History, not of so
concise and compendious an Abridgment as this is, wherein I am resolved, rather
to omit necessaries, than to comprise superfluities. It may suffice to glance
upon these few things, although neither in proper place nor time, that Orleans
having subdued the Seacoast of Flanders, and reduced not a few Cities of that
Quarter, under the French obedience, returned to Paris to enjoy the Reputation
of his Acts, with a firm resolution of never meddling any more with such
employments, which he held in good earnest, having eternally hung up his Arms
in his great Hall.

Thurenne in Germany, after the departure of Con^de, sole Commander of the
French Troops, took Triers, forcing the Austrian Garrison to surrender. From
hence our Richlieu had heretofore taken up a pretense of engaging in a
troublesome and dear War, it seems for the Archbishop Electors having been ill
used by the Spaniard, with the damnifying of his whole Country: but what
havocks ensued upon that, with the prejudicial coming in of succors, that is,
by remedies worse than the disease? The prudence of the Electors, especially of
Triers and Mentz, ought to aim at this mark, of composing, to their power, the
Feuds between the French and the House of Austria, which will last eternally,
as being assured, that those two Poles of Europe cannot clash, but they must be
crushed, not being able to sustain their double weight. Not to flatter them who
are in Empire, nor yet to exasperate or provoke them; but to hold on a way safe
from ambition and danger, cutting between stubborn ruggedness and servile
flattery, abandoning all appearance of proud liberty: with the good leave of
the German Nation, be it said there is a decay in their strength, in their
Wealth, and almost in their Courage: one would no longer call them the Chickens
of the Eagle. They have been, nor in old times, and the Roman Age only, but in
Charles the Great his days, and lower in the times of the Fredericks, Othos,
and Henrys, how many works of gallant Courage have been, which are now declined.

But the order of the story does long since call me to the Affairs of Italy,
where all things were prosperous and to the envy of the world. This is that
season wherein France Most flourished, as (...) were in the prime of its
valor. Is there be such a thing as youth, as strength, then began it to (...)
strong in truth, then a match, to fight with all the World.

Now did the end of Vrbans sitting in the Pap^ Chair draw near, when a War
broke out in Italy Paul III. Farnese advanced the profits of his Family, as
much as ever any Pope did, only minding this one thing to raise his Kindred in
Estate an^ Dignity above the quality of private men. Then upon he conferred
upon them, and to their use (...) Dukedoms of Parma, and Piacenza, and Cast^
Castro standing not far off from the City, has bee^ always regarded with a
liquorish and envious (...) by the Kinsmen and Nephews of the Pope (for (...)
must be ingenuously confessed, that there is not hi^ which their Nephewship
does more court, than (...) be advanced above the common fortune. From that
height of State to relapse into ones form^ condition, is intolerable.)
Perchance Urban (...) the flower of his age, might have moderated t^^ ardour of
his Nephews, who easily obtained of t^ weak old man to have War proclaimed
against t^ Duke of Parma, for Castro mortgaged to Credito^ whom the Barberini
abetted, and that had bee^ forfeited to them. There was another cause und^^
board, and that somewhat unhandsom, and where with the gravity of History would
be smutte^ which shall therefore be suppressed. In the Not^ upon these Books it
shall be explained, as man other things now for expedition sake, left in
obscurity. Therefore Arms are provided, the Treasures of the Church set open,
and Soldiers listed. What was their meaning? Not to enjoy their possessions,
but commit themselves and their Estates into Fortune, draw the ill will of all
Italy upon them, and set the most potent Princes in Hostility against them:
(for the Venetians always with good ^ause, opposing the Popes Greatness, joined
with ^he Dukes of Florence and Modena, to maintain cou^agiously the Duke of
Parmas interest.) Thus ^he Princes of the Church not being used to Arms, were
plunged in a pernicious War. Which was ^lmost continually managed with
prosperous suc^ess: But when the continuance of the War was ^ot to the
advantage of either Party, matters were ^ccommodated for the present, but broke
out again ^fterwards under Innocent.

The Divisions of Italy being closed up, Urban ^he VIII. dyed full of years,
Honors, and Wealth ^aving tasted almost the years of Peter. Urban ^eing dead,
there was great dissension among the Cardinals in the Conclave, to the
detriment, (I had ^lmost said scandal) of Religion. The Election ^vavering and
irresolute, was cast upon Pamphilio, ^erhaps not the better choice. The
Barberini had what influence they would upon Urban their Uncle; and they would
have more than was right and fit. The wind continued fair with them, whilst
their ^tar shined, after he was set, it was turned about unto an opposite
Quarter. For Innocent. (So was ^amphilio pleased to be called) although he was
^uch beholding to the Barberini for their activeness and interest, amongst his
first public Actions, endeavored to ruin them; and as good as effect^ it,
had not the French interposed. (Where the was Rome? Many accused the Pope of
severity an^ ingratitude: the wiser did contemplate the uncertainties of this
world under Illustrious Examples that they have ordinarily come to base ends,
wh^ were not long before the uppermost in Dignity an^ Wealth of the Roman
State.) France seemed the^^ safest Sanctuary. They came Suppliants for refuge,
and fell at the knees of Mazarine, whom the^ had so often slighted, when having
a value only for themselves, they looked down upon the rest (...) the world as
from a lofty Throne. (They could put up no appearance of wrong; but let
themselves be depraved only with the soothing of tho^^ who sought rewards of
their flatteries.)

It is an usual thing with Popes to hate their Pred^cessors kinsmen, as having
pillaged all. (Yet it is observed, that riches so got, through the just
Judgment (...) God, have not long lasted.) None of them take wan^ing, but are
still all dissolute: Nor contented to eni^^ what they can get. They mind not
strictly the publi^ Concern; for why should they a matter that continu^ not
long, and afterward comes to none of theirs. Th^^ are greedy of sudden
casualties, and making haste (...) midst things uncertain, gape after the
Present. Ca^^ at money upon all occasions; so is Justice less observe^ and
offenses they connive at; for favor and f^^ granting Indulgences.

The Barberini were entertained in France cou^teously. Mazarine that had found
them prou^ helped them in distress. But the Election of Panphilio did so
displease him, that having grievously censured Antonio Barberini for it out of
discontent, he fell dangerously sick, so as to keep his Bed. Whereupon many
conceived greedy hopes, especially Chavigny. Some would obtrude upon the Queen
Cardinal Grimaldi. The Queen inclined to neither, but waited how the Cardinal
should do: who recovering, searched into the designs of his Rivals, and kept
them close in his memory, especially for Chavigny, whom for that time he always
secretly undermined: which when Chavigny perceived, it was the occasion of
putting him on to precipitate his Plots not fully ripe.

When the grave Brow of Innocent would not easily endure the presumptuous
encroachments of the young Duke of Parma, Arms are again taken up. But the
Forces of Parma were at the first Encounter totally cut off. Their General
Geoffray a Frenchman, and Doctor of Physic, who had insinuated into the late
Prince Edwards favor, it is uncertain by what practices, the Incendiary of the
division, was put to death at Piacenza, and made a State-sacrifice to repair
the disgrace. The Pacificator was the King of France by Bichi the Senese, with
Donghi a Genovese the Popes Commissioner for arbitrating the difference. Which
was Mazarines glory, that the French Arms should triumph over Flanders,
Germany, Catalaunia, Turin, and Piedmont, as farther, that the interposition of
a King but six years old, under the Guardianship of a foreign Woman, should
repress disquiets, always working at home, and prevail to establish Peace
abroad.

France was, if ever, prudently governed: yet those Secrets of State were taxed
and carped at by the whispers and censures of men. (The truth it, we are loath
to be under Superiors, and let one act never so well and faithfully to the
Public Interest, yet this and that is condemned; and there is ever somewhat
which does not please every body.) Thereupon were words thrown out amongst the
Vulgar, and i^ Meetings. But there is no more certain sign of Gallantry, than
to despise them when one is placed i^ Power above the reach of Injury, and in
Glory above the Eclipse of Infamy. Calmness of spirit becomes men in Authority,
and a patient bearing of reproaches, is a great preservative of a Kingdoms
Peace. Mazarine that took satisfaction in repentance only, never in punishment,
preferred and enriched those that had laid the greatest load of infamy upon
him: oftentimes using this language to the Queen. Madam, we have not time
enough to busy our selves with these examinations: if you once leave this door
open, you will have no other business, and all men's quarrels, under this
color, will be made matter of information.

Enguien receiving the Command of Orleans, and sent again into Flanders,
presentl^ lays cloese Seige to Dunkirk, Gassion and Rantzow being his
Lieutenants. Dunkirk heretofore a Town of Fishermen, afterward of Pirates,
having ever been an unsafe Road for Ships, is become a most famous Harbor from
whence Ancors are weighed for all parts of the World. The terror of the Sea;
moated on the one side by the Ocean; on the other by a Moor: renowned for
Caesar's Triumphs, and proud of having been the place from whence he took Sh
ipping, when he went for Britain, and at which he landed upon his return. The
Siege was obstinate, by reason of the stout defense, and strong situation; all
which the valor of Conde subdued. The Government of the City, after it was
taken, was committed to Rantzow, which seemed impolitick. [ Rantzow was by
birth a Dane, of the Country of Holstein; of great personal valor, and
excellent conduct. None could with more Eloquence advance his military Action.
But, intemperate in drink; thereupon, desperate in fighting: we have seen him
cut all over, no member without its wound.] When our State fell into Troubles
afterward, the Danes faith faultred: who was quietly conveyed out of Dunkirk,
and cast into prison; (a warning that strangers are not to be trusted.)

Mary Gonzaga, the eldest Daughter of Charles of Nevers, after Duke of Mantua,
espoused to the King of Poland, parts from the City, and is conducted to her
Husband through the Low Countries and Germany, in Royal State. The King of
Polands Ambassadors and their Followers, in a long Train made a Cavaleade
through Paris upon Horses with stately Trappings. One might have seen the
people running forth to gaze upon the Getes in Furs with Sable Caps, as they
passed along the crowded streets; great matter for the discourse and vanity of
Paris.

Charles Duke of Lorraine having more than once fallen from us, and so often
followed the Austrian Eagles, and unhappy Standard, at last left his Dukedom to
our disposal: when, as Lorraine lying it seems near France, was reduced into a
Province: but one fortified Town held out, which was Motte^ this must be
reduced, that nothing might remai^ unsubdued. This Charge after the untimely
death^ of Magalot, was committed to the Marquess Villeroy; that so he might
grow into Reputation by such a Seige, and acquire the Dignity of Marshall, the
better to be qualified for the being the young Kings Governor. The Prize was
easy; all hopes of succor being cut off from the Garrison of Motte.

About the expiring of the year 1646. Henry Bourbon, Prince of Conde, not yet
sixty years old, dyed an easy death. Lamented by France in such a juncture of
Affairs, as one who by his Prudence and equal Justice, did stay the State
running into Confusions. [He was born at S. Egers in Xantoigne, after his
Fathers death, who was poisoned, by ill practices. Henry IV. having no Issue,
had trained him up with all diligence, as his future Heir, having weaned his
Spirit in his tender years from the new Religion, which he had sucked in with
his milk* from his Father and Grandfather, in hereditary descent: He was so
nurtured in the Catholic Rites, that afterward when he was grown up, he
affected the reputation of being a Capital Enemy to the Innovators, in an empty
ostentation; which would have been useful, as he conceived, if occasion had
served. But this is always beneath a great Prince, who ought not to love, nor
yet hate any such thing too much, and whom a lofty and gallant Spirit becomes,
slighting matters of that nature. His Marriage with Charlotte Mommorancy had
almost been his ruin. For to avoid the being rivalled by King Henry, he fled
into the Low Countries for a Sanctuary of his Wives chastity. From hence
through Germany he travels to Millan, with a small Retinue, to Count Fuentes.
After that Henry was killed, when the impious World did justly fear an eternal
night, Conde returning into France, unhappily took the part of the Mutiners.
(It is an ordinary practice in France thus to disturb the Minority of Kings; by
Rebellion unpunished, and therefore frequent. The disorders being composed,
which Conde had headed, when he suspected not the Kings vengeance, he is
hastily thrown first in the Bastille, and then into Vincennes. The tiresom
condition of imprisonment lasted five years, in which his wife bore him
company, of whom he had Anne, married to the Duke of Longueville, then after
his release from this place Enguien and Conti. First Governor of Guyenne, then
of Burgundy and Bourges, he changed his course of life, and minded the raising
his Estate. The Families of Princes formerly rich, and honorable, fell into
decay by a delight in magnificency: the richer Furniture and Attendance any one
had, the more reputation and respect he found in his Country and among his
Tenants. That Gallantry, and Fame for Generosity, proving ruinous to the
Nobility, turned Conde to a wiser course: who having been formerly pinched with
want, brought into his house good husbandry, having been the first Horder of
his Family; and arrived at old age, improving his money. Some did believe that
he was not sordid, but only made as though he had been sordid. No better
Master, no better Servant, that is, more obsequious to such as were in power.
He was most lively and spirituous: a mavelous sweetness, mavelous gayety in
his humor: Would season his pleasures with the interposition of studies,
lengthen his entertainments with cheerful discourse, and be pleased with
trifles, but not taken: having laid upon his carriage this law of humility,
that he would never seem to command. He conversed with others, not so as to
require them to think that he left an obligation upon them in condescending to
admit them into his company. Nothing was more methodical than the whole course
of Condes life: Every action had its proper season; and each year they returned
in their due periods, as by a Calendar. Naturally courageous, when under
apprehensions from the Court, timorous.]

The King fell dangerously sick, which gave no unjust ground of fear. The small
Pox came out, a sad contagion; an humor boils with a fiery Fever; that preys
upon all the graces of the face. He recovered, preserving his Majesty, and with
only a few prints of the disease left. In the mean time he grew up under the
Instructions of Hardovin Perefix, Abbot of Beaumont, a man of a pleasant
gravity and wisdom, afterward Archbishop of Paris, who might have been styled
the Kings Seneca, but that he happened upon a Trajan.

Naples followed that malignant Star of Rebellion. The Duke of Arcos governed
as Viceroy, after the Castillian fashion, proudly. The people complain, that
are not satisfied. The Sedition was raised upon a slight pretense. A Tribute:
laid upon fruit, which that Nation love excessively. The Youth raising ranging
about, and with Arms, shout in the City, threaten, raise the Citizens, beset
the Palace. The Riot at Naples increasing by mere accident, the Duke of Guise
was then at Rome, thinking of nothing less than of getting a Kingdom. He is
invited by the Republic of Naples, being but newly come into the World (for so
it would be named.) He making a show of indignation, that he should be sought
to, posting away with all his might, broke out of Town, and committed himself
and all his Fortunes, to a small Bark. [How much Fate did that little Plank
carry! that is the remnant of the House of Guise* then which nothing on earth
is more noble. Worthy were it to reign, unless they had rashly aimed at it in
France.] Guise arrives happily, although through a thousand dangers; received
with popular, that is, immoderate applause, (for in such things they have no
measure.) The vastness of the swelling Sedition passes all bounds; they
flourish in their Trophies, that they may appear not to be more huge than
forward The new General having been tossed with variety of Fates, rejoices at
the unusual Honor. Now he estimates what is his power, but especially what is
the pleasure of France, whose aid more than once he in vain implores (whether
that that Kingdom were encumbred with other occasions, or upon diffidence of
the peoples fickleness, or because it was too much to be allowed a Subject,
whilst the ambition of his Ancestors yet continues.)

( Naples is the work of that Phalaris who pressed men to perjuries, by setting
before them a brazen Bull, in which, upon refusal, he threatened to roast them
alive. At first a Republic, as other Greek Towns. Augustus first added it to
the Roman Empire; after the division of which, it was in subjection to Dukes of
its own. Roger King of Sicily brought it under his Government. After him the
Goths, the Vandals, the Alani, and Saracens, nay the Emperors of Germany also.
At length it fell to our Dukes of Anjou, by the Will of Queen Jone: after that
by another Jone to the Aragonese, between whom and our Lewis the XII. were
dreadful Wars for so great a Prize. By the falsehood of the Aragonese, the
Kingdom divided into two parts, equal moities fell to their shares only, and to
this present so abides: that most beautiful Coast of all, not only in Italy,
but of the whole Universe. Nothing is more gentle than the air, nothing more
fruitful than the soil; nothing more harbor some than the Sea; every tree and
beast bears double; the Reaper rejoices at his sudden harvest: The flocks grow
to the astonishment of the Shepherd; and si^ high is the temper of health, that
it seems to have been the work of teeming Nature.)

The Duke of Guise continued not long in the most blessed light. For Don Juan
d'Austria drawing near (he was the King of Spains Bastard Son) the people
return to their obedience. Guise is taken the designed Prince of the Republic,
and carried Prisoner into Spain. [What wonder? the Royal Authority always
prevails in time. The anger of Subjects consumes with delay. He that relies
upon Commotions is deceived, and will eternally be deceived. From the Populus
or people, what is there hut unsetledness? as in the Populus or Aspen Tru^
there is no shade, but the leaves are always playing. To trust himself to the
Vulgar, is to pass a rapid Torrent upon a rotten Plank.]

At the head and tail of the Rhyne are the only two Nations that have held firm
in Revolt. The Switzars and Hollanders, both having shaken off the Austrian
yoke. These have found their liberty in the Waters; those other in the
Mountains. These the Barricadoes of the Waters secure; those the Clefts of
Rocks; riches these, poverty those; those having taken away all Supremacy,
these having assumed Orange and his Successors for their Head, There every one
obeys every other. Here the Assembly represents the high and mighty Lords the
States General.

In the mean while Prince Thomaso with our Praslin, restored those things into
their former state, which seemed running to confusion by diverse expostulations,
whilst the Duke was in his Infancy, and Christina a Widow. Thomaso having left
the Spaniards, and espoused our Party, in diverse Battles (having taken Sant and
Trine, with other Cities) had at length effected it, that the French Arms were
masters in all parts there. The Infant King of Savoy is by our consent
restored, with his Mother, to Turin, out of which she had been long exiled. (
Whatsoever the Dukes of Savoy do, they reign but by permission; being invested
on this side by the French, on that by the Spaniard. It is the question, to
which side they should render their service; yet had they better to the French,
since the Country of Savoy and Piemont almost lies within his Empire; and he
being the chief King who presently posts thither in person, and not by
Viceroys. The account of the Duchy of Millan is different: that Power is less
to be feared, because less, and managed by Deputies.

It was then judged convenient to carry up War not far from Rome (not for the
avenging of the Barberines, as the common people thought, nor for enlarging our
Bounds, but for the affrighting Innocent, who had come surreptitiously into the
Papacy, against Mazarines will.) Therefore Thomaso with the French Army, comes
before Orvitello. All things at the beginning prove lucky, but the end sell out
dishonorable: for the Siege was raised, Carlo Gatta, making a stout defense.
Our Fleet under Breze their Admiral, having happily scoured the Seas, came
thither to countenance the proceedings of Thomaso: but Breze having the thread
of his life cut off by a shot, dies; one of the two eyes of Richlien's Family
being thus put out.

It is strange, that the King being of an age unfit for the War, and the
discord of the Princes growing stronger, Mazarine could of himself assume so
much authority, as that soon after he sent thithera new Army, under the Command
of Meilleray, who obliged Piombino and Porto-Longone in the Island of Helbe, to
a Surrender within few days. ( The Issand of Helbe is celebrated by the
Ancients, for having Mines of Lead, Tin, and Vitriol; but especially producing
Iron; famous for its Spring, which rates the measure of the days with its
water, being dry at the Winter Solstice, and overflowing at Midsummer.)

Catalaunia is a Principality in the hither Spain, heretofore annexed to the
Kingdom of Arragon; that too following the Planet which then reigned, but off
its yoke, and upon certain Conditions subjected it self to our King. In the
very times of Richlieu's, the Marshall la Motte was sent thither to be the
first Governor of that Province: many brave Services were done by him, not only
the whole Catalaunia having been subdued to us, (excepting Larida, the bastle
of Harcourt and Conde) but also in having entered the Kingdom of Arragon, by the
seizing of Flix. La Motte complaining that he was with too much difficulty
supplied, and thereupon could hardly hold out against the Castillian Assaults,
when our condition there began to decline, was revoked; being come to Lions,
was secured in the Roche-Taillee (which is a Castle there) and afterward upon
occasion of the Civil disorders enlarged.

Harcourt substituted in his room, lays a close Siege to Lerida: and when the
King of Spain approached the Borders of Catalaunia in Person, attended by the
Grandees of his Kingdoms, the Siege was raised, which disgraced Harcourt, after
so many glorious Actions. Such is the Fate of Sieges, that none are certain of
the event. So Alexander the Great hazarded his Fame before Tire. So Charles the
Fifth at Metz received an utter rebuke: So Soliman the Magnificent raised the
Siege of Vienna, not without a blot upon his Name.

The French Court accustomed to Victories and Triumphs, ill resented the rebuke
of Harcourt, and to refund the disgrace upon the Spaniards, deputed Conde his
Successor, as thinking he must conquer all by his bare Name. Conde had the same
luck as Harcourt. He attempted Lerida, and being obliged to withdraw, then
first took out the lesson of being Vincible. (Yet he gloriously chased away the
Spaniards from the Siege of Constantine: this is the only piece of Service that
he performed in Catalaunia.) The King of Spain was in the neighboring parts,
reclaiming the Rebels by promises and fair words, and some by terror. Amidst
all this Joseph Margaret, who having been the Author of the defection, did the
French gallant Service, was the only peremptory Refuser of returning to his
Allegiance. What was the man's fortune afterward, I shall elsewhere in short
touch upon. Envy it self cannot deny but that he was a stout and courageous man.

Flanders having been left by Orleans and Conde, Gassion did readily command
all that Tract; having for the most part his Headquarters at Courtray, almost
always prosperous in his Attempts. Vanquished by the impetuousness of his
Courage, he would very often fling off the bridle of Reason, but being puffed
up with a happy multitude of successes, thought nothing too hard for him to
venture upon. As he besieges Lentz, and goes to set a Palisado, stuck loosly
into the ground more fast, his head was battered with a Canon bullet; and not
long after he died. (He was born in Bearn, of no mean parentage; having left
France, he went into Germany, upon the fame of Gustavus: and amongst his
Volunteers, having served to the death of that great King, not without Honor,
under the Conduct of Weymar, returned home to us; where he was taken into
employment, first by Richlieu, then by Mazarine; he left no means unassay'd to
advance his Fame. Of a noble heart, but unanswerable fortunes, which yet he did
openly aver, honest men never want, being himself remarkable for ancient
indigence. He ennobled his new-raised Dignity with making great enemies, owning
all the steps of his fortune to himself. Toward the later end of his life, he
grew to be disgusted by the Court. Taxed of Cromwellism, as though he had
thoughts of passing into England, and offering his Service to that Tyrant. Some
said, to the Hollanders At last he died of his wound. Perhaps it is better to
die once in the atchieving of honorable Enterprises, than to live longer at
the mercy of others, loaded with injuries.)

About that time the Venetian Republic oppressed by the Great Turk, in vain
implored the succors of Christian Princes. This was the occasion of the War. A
Knight of Malta met a Galley of Rhodes in the Archipelago, and made Prize of
it. In this there was a Sultaness, who being carried off to Malta, was original
of these mischiefs. The Musulman stormed, complaining to our Ambassadors of the
Affront received, as though the Order of Malta. were at our control. But his
especial Complaint was to the Venetian Ambassador, because the Venetian Galleys
had not relieved his, when it was in extremity. He debates about invading
Malta; and when the difficulty of the Enterprise was suggested, he thought of
Sicily, then of Calabria: at length the fury of his vengeance flamed out upon
poor Candy.

That Island heretofore called Creet, was reduced by Metellus into a Province,
afterward obeyed the Greek Emperors, then the Saracens: at last coming to be
in the possession of Baldwin Count of Flanders and Emperor of Constantinople,
was given to Boniface Marquess of Monte Ferrato; of whom the Venetians bought
it, and to this present hold the Domini^ of it under the Title of a Kingdom. It
receives the Name from its principal City called Candy. ^ Country famous for
the Cradle of the fabulous Jupiter the unnatural lust of Pasiphac, the
inextricable man of the Labyrinth, and the presumptuous Wings of Do^dalus, not
allowed mankind. The Venetians do y^ hold it out without any help, whilst the
Kings of En^rope fight about a little dust. What Fate has ^store for the
Venetians, or designs upon them, I kn^ not. No Nation since the Creation of the
World hi^ maintained uprightness besides that; and I profess th^^ I never saw
on earth any thing more just than the^ Government.) Rhodes extorted from the
Knigh^ of Malta, and Cyprus taken from the same Vene^^ans. That fortunate Isle,
that place blessed so sweetness of air, for the birth and retirement (...)
Venus, was an invitation of the Ottoman Empero^ to the taking of Candy.

This year Whores and Bawds of all sort we^ banished out of Town, not by Act of
Parliamen^ but by order of the Provost Marshall. The han^ somer part of the
City judged. Some affirm, the not a few Priests groaned over such sourness.
(...) was scarce evidenced by any more cruel Law, say the^^ that the Magistrate
has no regard of the public, ^^vertisement; this is malice and morosity. That
the^ can no president be alleged, wherein by any publi^^ Acts, restraint has
been laid upon the affections (...) women, simple fornication having been in
all plac^ tolerated among the Greeks and Romans, nay, even by the High Priest.
And that the Commonwealth never concerned it self what this or that body did
with her skin; that there is punishment enough in the making such a scandalous
profession. Thus was pleaded among the idler sort. Some more insolent proceeded
thus far: That therefore were Priests maintained, and so many crews of
Cordeliers, and Capucins to atone God for incurrent sins. That such necessary
evils were useful to mankind, for avoiding worse consequents. That a Whore, if
the question be rightly stated, is nothing else but a kind, innocent Creature,
ready to bring men content, that long after them at all hours. That they think
this a more happy life, than to work in Shops, or toil in the fields. But that
by Bawds the hearts of mortals were linked; that young men are not called off
from their business, by their interposing, but are set forward in a quicker
dispatch. These and such like speeches were given out in the City, and Court
especially. But as falls out usually amongst us, these Laws severely executed
at first, at the conclusion vanished into neglect, through a slack inquisition.
For Lovers are not cruel, nor do men most grievously punish what they most
commonly practice. (I think such to be the most perfect, who so pardon others,
as though themselves did daily offend: and so abstain from offending, as though
thy pardoned no body. Therefore it is a good rule to hold through the whole
course of our life, the being implacable to our selves, and exorable to all
others. He that hates vices, hates men. The excursions of lust, and the like
furies, are with great watchfulness and special endeavor to be restrained by
counsel and persuasion, from the breasts of Noblemen and Women: Because
certainly that House, that State, that Kingdom will easily be maintained in
eternal Honor, where the disorderly love of Women bears the least sway.
Whithersoever that most assured bane of mankind insinuates it self, there
infamy rings, and injury reigns. Therefore we must keep at a great distance
from these, and pursue courses contrary to so dreadful vices. It was a shameful
thing to stir those matters, which having been stirred, would have stunk
filthily; and to be fierce against poor Whores, when noble Ladies did
prostitute themselves without punishment.)

There was then in proposal, whether for the abating the floods caused by the
Seyne, the neighboring streams by which that River is swelled, should be
diverted another way; or whether by cutting a Chanel himself, should be abated.
At length, either because the difficulty of the work deferred, or to avoid
charges, nothing was altered: (Nor ever will be altered, till the French are
out of their Wits. Nature the common Mother, has best provided for man's use,
in laying out the months of Rivers, their courses, their home, and source,
after a due line.) Thus does the Seyne, neither (straightened in his Chanel, nor
robbed of his auxiliary waters, not ungloriously flow with his former Pomp.

Mazarine, that he might not be thought to mind the Wars only; furnished a
Library in favor of the Studious, with Books to be read over in many Ages:
amongst all which, none will be more eminent than that which shall contain the
man's own Acts. One might behold shelves raised up to the top of the Roof, where
through a luxury of Literature, was set up a learned Pile, not as Ornaments of
a Palais, but Instruments of Wisdom, not ranked for a show, but for use; to
which the Repositories of so many Volumes, set up by the Kings of Pergamus and
Alexandria, with great emulation may not compare; nor that of Pollio, who first
setting up a Library at Rome, made men's Wits a matter of public Commerce. He
provided farther all sorts of Horses; one might have seen standing at the rich
Mangers whatsoever breeds the most generous Studds had produced in a long Race.
Being sumptuous in Building, as in other matters, he furnished a Palais with
Household Stuff, incomparably rich; with Pictures, Images, Statues, as though he
would have transported Rome to Paris. In a Royal conversation, neatness, and
Spirit, following the Paterns of great Kings. But in the procuring and
purchasing such things, left France should return to its old rudeness, he
expended those means, which others hoard up for their particular uses, to the
entertainment of the present Age, and Posterity. But who would have thought
that so dismal times would ever have overtaken us, as that all these things,
through ignoble envy, should by Act of Parliament be sold at a public Outcry.
Nor are Jewels to be passed over, in heaping up of which, I know not whether he
had more Bravery or Fortune. To be sure the Fame of them spread through the
remote Countries of the World, moved the Grand Mogol, who is Lord over all the
Northern Indies, to give out by his Merchants in this place, that he was ready
to purchase whatsoever precious stones should be transported from Paris To Agra
(after that Mazarines occasions were fully satisfied) that is the Metropolis of
that great Potentate. The Mogor envying the celebrated Vineyard of Prester John
the Emperor of the farther Aethiopia, that is of the Abissines, would himself
also be glorious in a like Gallantry, so that the winding branches of his
likewise might twine about beaten massy gold: and that not on dwarfed stakes,
at is the Abissines, but high Poles; the clusters might shine with Saphirs and
Carbuncles: the Walks paved with bright Diamonds, and bordered with the Green
of Emraulds. From the barren Land comes no Vintage; but without bearing
increase, it blesses the Vine-dresser, and never fails his hope, being content
with being gleaned by the eye only. There was at this time a Staple, so that
many of our Merchants went over to Agra, and came back in a blessed condition.

There were also Operas for Comical Scenes, splendidly built, and Actors
fetched from all parts. Nothing was happier than Paris at that time. It
triumphed abroad, fearing nothing at home. Nomischiefs of Factions, no cruelty
of Plots, the serenity of the Court being clouded by no discontent. The
Queen Mother not yet exercised by the Fates, through their clemency, found by
experience, that nothing was more delightful than her Government. Mazarines
Justice appeared in determining of Causes, and his singular affability toward
those who brought their Complaints and Requests to him. Every hour he admitted
to Audience without any surly Introducer: would never interrupt any one in his
Speech, till the modesty of the Suitor warned him to be silent. His glory was
yet unspotted with any slander. He healed whatever was wounded, not ripped up:
nor would examine strictly every trivial matter, that he might be thought to
have found, and not made us good. Money flew about him plentifully in the City;
for Julius was not yet given out to think of the hoarding up of it; who though
he were naturally tenacious, acquired a reputation of bounty by a niggardly way
of giving. He had not as yet avowedly abandoned himself to a desire after
Wealth. He seemed to possess, not to be possessed.(As malice and envy
afterward spoke falsely of the man.) Public Charges, Ecclesiastical and
Secular Dignities, not dismembered, not with a large portion of them intercepted
were the rewards of only virtue. The faith of the Courtiers was not yet engaged
by Bribes. Who would think of such a sudden, that all should change, and this
Summer-calm turn into storms more grievous than Winter-tempests.

First of all the Tribe of the Scholars to whom yet he had founded and
dedicated his Library, jear and defame Mazarine in diverse Pamphlets, but such
as are not long-lived, as most pieces of the French. This has been observed,
that almost nothing has proceeded from the Wits of that Nation, which promises
immortality: whereas in other things France is one of the most famous Countries
of the whole World, and fruitful in so many Commodities; it is barren in this
only. Spirits naturally inclined to Drollery and Jest: a faculty of talking
extempore, with some appearance perhaps of raillery. They haunt great men's
Tables, wander about their Academies, trick and trim their native tongue
without end, and boast of having refined their Language: they trot about this
way and that way to make Visits, do not delight in secret solitude, which is
the only ferment of studies. They contend in most barbarous Emulations,
whereupon arises unhandsom detraction and ridiculous saucines. They are the
very Ophiogenes and Psilli that (...) out only the poison of Books.) The Women
following Scholars in tongue, would use detraction upon their Couches, and in
their Circles; they would curiously unravel the Government, watch the words and
actions of Mazarine, study his Nature, and more and more question the man's
Honesty. Some of them prostitute themselves, to search our some State-secret,
infect their Husbands unawares with the malignancy. These were the means that
gave birth, these that gave growth to the distempe^ spreading through the
Provinces; for after our Example the Kingdom is fashioned.

At that time four not ill-humor'd, but such as did more hurt by their life,
than good by their Wit, set all France in a Combustion. ( The far extended
ugliness of the scandal should have been redressed by severity: and had they
been duly punished, they would have brought as much credit to the State, as by
their ill government they wrought shame.) They afterward, when their designs
failed, as is usual, precondemning themselves, turned Nuns by a false
dissembling of Religion, and a gross superstition, the door being shut to their
vices grown out of season; when rotten old age, condemned by the Looking-glass,
by its own peremptory sentence, does dread it self. It is a high task not to
fight with, but fly from sin; nor to moderate, but mortify lusts.

The Parliament, not of Paris only, but of Rouen, Bourdeaux, and Britanny, with
others even murmured. The people watching for Changes and Troubles follow their
Examples, as is common. Openly, that Mazarine must be removed, by whom the work
of Peace was obstructed: that the subtle man loved War, that so he might
conceal his Robberies.

The Princes underhand abetted him, yet did the like by their Creatures and
Emissaries; nay, even gave out, that they would not have Mazarine removed, but
awed, that so they might fish from him, kept in fear, what they listed, that
they could not have a more able Minister: they must take heed, lest banishing
away the Italian, they should come into the hands of some bold Frenchman, who
would restrain their unreasonable Suits, which were infinite.

Mazarine took no notice of all this, and by a prudent moderation withstood the
storm: Scattered all about embers covered with ashes, upon which they like
blind men, and not well versed in Politics walked, as the issue proved. I do
not think that ever any Insurrection, supported by so great preparation and
strength, did ever so vanish away ^n smoke; nor a Faction discussed with such
dexerity. So many Nobles, so many Princes, the Parliaments of the whole
Kingdom, all the Capital Cities, a great part of the Armies, all not able to
^on-plus a Stranger. ( Either must that man have ^xcelled in the Art of
Government, or sloth and Cowar^ise have reigned in these.)

There were not wanting that took encouragement to enter upon these troubles
from the English, who prospered, although they had revolted from their King.
Charles I. King of England ruled over three Kingdoms, with the affections of
his Subjects. Not being contented with this happy state of Affairs, he would
innovate some things in Worship, that so Calvinism, which is sapless and
slovenly, might look fine in a handsome dress, trimmed up with the Ceremonies.
Scotland first opposes the new Liturgy, which the Parliament of England
affirmed, was bending toward the Catholic Religion, ( Popery they call it;)
the same way also did the Scotch Parliament lean. These were the first
beginnings of the Trouble. Nothing is more certain, then that neither the King,
nor Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, had any inclination toward
the turning Catholics; but, leaving the Doctrine unaltered, would have put a
Pale of Reverence about the Church of England. There had been thoughts perhaps
about retaining the solemn Sacrifice, as we call it, retrenching the multitude
of Masses, which through the unpreparedness of the people, and impurity of the
Priests, bring Scandal to Religion; especially of barring it out of private
Houses: since it is clearly observed, the oftener there is Massing in private,
the more hard and hasty the Master of the House grows, and the whole Family the
worse. This has been the s^nse of James, and before him famous men have ha^
the same thoughts, Erasmus, Cassander, Melancthon^ and the latest de Dominis,
Archbishop of Spalatto^ ( It has always been dangerous to touch holy thing^^
as those who in the Old Testament are punished for a rash touch. For what
matter is it how the profession of Religion stand, so that people by it worship
God the giver of all good, and be obedient to the Supreme Powers?). But lest I
should against my resolution insensibly wind my self into a Whirl-pool, my
Boat shall coast along the shore, leaving that best King of England, as the
following Book declares, among the Essexes, Fairfaxes, and at length Cromwells,
brought to extremities, impeached not only to have innovated in the Worship,
but under that pretense to have altered the established Form of Government,
that he might get no less absolute Authority, than the King of France:
concerning whom, what is his Power, were a crime to question: He only reigns
truly.

What a malignant Star did then in all places influence Kingdoms! You see at
the same time the Fates of France; you see of England, Naples, Catalaunia, and
Portugal, which having broken its Allegiance, hitherto kept to the Philips, by
instinct, in a heat, chose for their King the Duke of Braganza, throwing off
the Castillians. How was it but by Fate that Philip. II. came into that
Kingdom, which seemed so established in multitude of Successors, that there was
no room, nor crevise even for the most presumptuous hope. Mark Emmanuel King of
Portugal had married three Wives: Thee first Isabella, the eldest of the
Daughters of Ferdinand, and Isabella King and Queen of Spain. His Issue by her
Michael, who if he had lived, had been the undoubted Heir of Spain in the whole
extent of his Empire: he dyed a Child, and his Mother in Childbed. Therefore
he then took to Wife another Mary, the third Daughter of Ferdinando and
Isabella. (For Joan who was the second, was given to Philip of Austria, of
which Match are the present Kings of Spain.) Of her Emmanued begets in truth a
numerous Issue, six Sons, two Daughters. Lastly, of a third Match also, which
he contracted with Leonora, Daughter of Philip of Austria and Joan, he had two
Children, a Son and a Daughter. This House was grounded upon so many Props.
Non^ to come to their Children; what a Train, twenty two were before Philip and
the Succession, and hindered the accrewment of this adventitious Estate. And
yet, see whether the Fates invites us! He came and succeeded in right of
Isabella his Mother, the Wife of Charles the V. which was the elder of
Emmanuels Daughters, passing by Catharine, Daughter of Edward Duke of
Guimarance (who was the sixth Son of the same Emmanuel) and Wife of John Duke
of Braganza. B^ the same Fates tacking about, it is returned to the right Lords
the Dukes of Braganza. (I know not by what secret cause, besides the manifest,
these things thus fall out, that whereas in other Arts men grow perfect by
practice, in this of Government it proves ordinarily quite contrary, and
Princes, swerve, rarely hold out in a straight path to the Goal. From the
Compliances of all, they gather scornfulness: Even that mighty weight of Empire
may for some tim^^ hardly always, be sustained with an upright neck. Men tire,
and bend where there is no other thing to restrain, but the regard of a good
Name, and naked Virtue, and especially Religion. To this Corrupters (...)
contribute, an evil connatural with Courts, and such as commending ill actions,
give a biass that way, (...) turn Power into Licentiousness. But there is some
occasion too given by Subjects, who are refractory, and perverse, and
unthankeful toward the best. Princes resent that with trouble and disdain, and
so by degrees take off their affections; the more, if there be Sedition, or
Rebellion, or Plottings: Then they think they have just title to oppress and
afflict, All smart for the guilt of the major part. Blessed we, who after so
many provocations of severity, have not seen the Sword drawn but against the
Enemy! For this reason the Public Felicity seems to have singled out Mazarine
to bring him to this Government, who has so principled the young King. For how
great mildness have we found in his life time, how great do we enjoy since his
death, from the best and most just of Kings!

But neither did favors, nor clemency work upon men to alter their minds. The
storm every day more furiously discharged upon Mazarine. The Grandees rejoiced,
provided to be still craving, who accounted former concessions, not a stop, but
a step to farther Petitions. A man of great importance, and then admitted with
favor to the Cardinals ear, advised him to fortify his Interest with potent
Friendships and Alliances; that he was therefore undervalued, because he had
not sure footing in France; that he seemed as though he had thoughts of
returning into his Country, when he had made his Fortunes: that these and the
like words were given abroad; that great sums of money were transmitted to
Rome; he had there bought and furnished a House; forgetting our Estate, had
Banks of money out at use in Venice and Genoua. Mazarine hearkened to the
Counsel, as appeared, beneficial, as the issue proved, afflictive.

Therefore first of all he thought of matching his Nephew Mancini with the only
Daughter of the Count d'Ales, the Cousin Germain of Conde. [How much spirit did
he think was in Conde, whose Alliance he esteemed the remedy of his Troubles!
In truth Conde stood in Condes own light, or else he might have carried all in
France before him. I am assured, that it was the top of Mazarines ambition, to
have been serviceable to him as his Master.] The Princes mind, in this
particular mistaken, refused the offer; being able to acquire, as he thought,
of himself more glory, than if he should seem to depend on an odious Minister.
(Not in this point only, but every where else he forfeited great opportunities,
and equalled not his vast Successes with any prudence.) Conde seemed to slight
such a Match, which Mazarine made use of me to sue for. Longueville being
certified of the whole business, as he was greedy to find occasions,
voluntarily interposes himself; promising his effectual assistance, not without
a reward. [For he, that needed nothing but quiet, thought it a disparagement in
troublesome times to get nothing: and when a fire was kindled not to warm his
own fingers. And being seriously advised, that in a bad Age he would dare to be
good, could never be brought to put off that humor of trassicking.] Whereas no
sort dispositon stands upon so unsteady ground, looking over with a readiness
to precipitate into folly and vanity, but it may easily be managed by the rein
of prudence, to return into the straight path; only our Princes, incapable of
any, but suborned advice, draw against it.)

Therefore did Longueville require the Command of Havre de Grace, as the reward
of Mancinis Match, against all conscience and reason: whereas upon that sole
account of having the Government of Normandy, he ought to be debarred from the
Command of a Castle, purposely built to bridle that Governor. The Cardinal
answered me, when I requird Havre de Grace, that it was not at his disposal;
and he wondered in this state of Public Affairs, he would press such an
unseasonable Proposition, that was declined by Orleans and Conde, as
diametrically opposite to the Kings Interests. Longueville replies, he would
not have the strong Hold for his own use, but that it might be a Sanctuary for
the King in distress, and Mazarine himself would shortly be obliged to quit
Paris, and fly into Normandy, which unless the Castle of Havre de Grace
restrained it, would be apt to run out into Sedition. Well, said Mazarine, go
carry the Duke word, that I will do my endeavor to give him abundant
satisfaction. This I related word for word. Then, says Longueville, I shall
have Havre de Grace: Mazarine, say I, said not so: but pray, go to his Eminence
your self, and there your Grace may perceive his full meaning. I will not do
it, replies Longueville, I like the ambiguousness of the promise. In the mean
time he boasts, that Havre de Grace was promised him. This Mazarine denies;
Longueville affirms. I am called in as Witness in presence of Orleans and
Conde. I report the matter faithfully as it was. Both of them are condemned by
Orleans, Longueville, that he had taken in too strict a sense words of a large
import. Mazarine, that he had deluded Longueville with vain hopes in using
suspense, terms of which he had always infinite in store. The injury of
scorning his Alliance, and this contest occasioned a difference, from whence
afterward grew distaste, malice, and at last imprisonment, and innumerable
troubles, of which I shall speak in the next Book.

Here follow the Civil Commotions, whose causes were therefore the more
violent, because unjust. The Nation valiant in Arms, of a vast Bulk within it
self, not to be managed, only able to effect its own destruction, happy if it
could endure to expect with patience, as it is forward to conceive sudden
hopes, without the disturbance of an unadvised and easy inclination to change,
could no longer rest in the Harbor of Happiness. This must be farther added,
that Families exhausted with Luxury, Debts contracted, Estate and Credit
consumed, and decays of Fortunes neither reparable by empty Titles, nor Gifts
extorted from the Court, were the effectual incentive of Civil war.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. What disturbed the Peace of France, falling into Troubles: What
pushed the People to the madness of taking up Arms: What Accidents followed
upon that calamitous night: from the first Eruption of the Disorders till the
Peace unsoundly concluded at S. Germans.

FOrtune was at this time contriving in several parts of the Kingdom, but
especially in the City, the grounds and causes of Civil Commotions; which
arising upon several occasions, were delightful to our Enemies, successuful to
our Princes, and their Party, but almost destructive to the King. France made
of it self a sad spectacle* Here Mazarine making head against the assaults of
Fate, laid all his hopes to stake: and bearing in his mind the whole Scheme of
the Government, so maintained the Authority of the young and innocent King,
that in five years time the stoutest Opposers were subdued, and he received the
State wearied with Civil dissensions under his peaceful Ministry. The truth of
History will be questioned, when it shall persuade Posterity, that this Peace
was ratified without any great Execution: and that only gentleness wrought a
blushing to offend. This Book with the five following, will be full of variety
of Events, cruel in Battles, and jarring with Seditions. You will every where
meet with Informers or Flatterers. No soundness, no plain dealing, nor any
safety in trusting the entirest friends.

It was 1648. which year the Astrologers did prognosticate would prove unlucky
to the State of France. [Whether their predictions be vain, and it is but our
credulity to invade future Events; or whether it be our error to misinterpret
the great design of the Fates: to be sure many Prodigies on Earth and in the
Heavens, were some denunciations of the celestial wrath.] France being
transported with its high successes, had turned the eye of the astonished World
upon it. The more prosperously our Aflairs succeeded, the more speedily the
disaffected thought their intentions of raising Civil Commotions were to be
executed; pretending what is ordinary in such cases, the Public good. That the
grievances of the people were intolerable; The Provinces were pilled, by
Excise-men; and the City it self groaned under the burden of Taxes: That the
Treasury was drained; and the French money to the astonishment of the Spaniard
conveyed into Italy.

Michael Particelli, a Lucese by birth, called Monsieur Emery, was
Superintendent of the Finances, or Receiver General. An able person, and
especially an expert Chequer man, but voluptuous. He had used himself to ease;
tender over his body; but never minding Religion, as an unnecessary business.
His body, clogged the vigor of his mind, which by his intemperance he brought
to the grave before its time. The public storm fell hard upon him. It was not
Emery was sought after, but under him an occasion of rising. I cannot deny but
that he, like a subtle man, transferred the public mischiefs upon Cardinal
Mazarine, to save himself from the imminent dangers: would cry up his prudence
and wit; he only wanted Experience of the French State. Such sort of Praisers,
are the most pernicious Tribe. Then Particelli was of advice, that the Statute
of Paulet should be repealed, that is, a Privilege for Parliament men, paying
the King a certain annual Rent, to continue that Office in their Families.
[Paulet under Henry IV. was the Inventor of that device. Before Francis I.
Public Charges were not bought and sold, but were the rewards of Virtue.] That
Law being nulled, Emery thought the Parliament would be bridled, and ranged
within its duty. But by threatening this from time to time, he provoked the
Parliament, that was greedy after Changes, and incensed it against himself.
From hence arose Complaints, Reproaches, Debates, and Mazarine was struck at
through the sides of Emery.

There arose another mischief no less destructi^ to the Public Quiet. The
Masters of Reques^ eminent men, after they have for some time serve in
Parliament, purchase this place at no small su^ of money. By that means they
have an access ^ be Lieutenants and Justices of Peace in the Country or
Agitants in the Armies. They see to the Collection of Taxes, and certify up
every thing to the Privy Counsel. Emery had a purpose to augmen their number,
upon design of scraping more money by that means. The Masters of Requests
startled at it, were put into great passion (such influence has the Interest
of private advantage upon the minds of men.) They complain grievously t^
Mazarine, whom they did now obliquely reflect upon. For the Grandees and
Leading-men in the House drove at this, to cast all the blame upon him out of a
mischievous and bad design, not to expe^ him (which was then scarce thought of
by any) but to overawe him, and render him subservient to their Interests. I
do not deny that some there were, who wished him turned off through the frai^
temper of humane Spirit, that always judges that best, which it wants.

There was one Peter Broussel, a Member of the Parliament of Paris most single
in his carriage, easy of access, a virtuous and most honest man; of no ill
Principles, but easy to be led by the designing party. Therefore he seemed fit
to be made the subject of the tinkling Cymbal to sound for the public
discontent. The seeds of Civil discord are fomented every day more than other.
The Masters of Requests publish a Libel very derogatory to the Kings Authority.
They unite with the Parliament, and join together in disobedience to the Kings
Prohibition. They agitate about the maladministration of the Kingdom; That
the public money was misemployed to private uses, thereupon there was no
Treasury, no Commonwealth; that burdens were laid upon the people, such as
they were no longer able to bear; That there was an end of the French Empire:
some person must be found out to relieve the distressed State. Now if any one
thought the Kings Revenue too small, it would have the defect supplied, not by
oppressing the Subject, but by good husbandry, that every one should limit his
expenses, not after his lusts; which are unlimited, but according to his means.
That it was but a pretended complaint, that the Kings Revenue was not
sufficient for his Disbursements: whenas so many former Kings have lived upon
them with credit and splendor, have been renowned in the Field, and terrible
to their Enemies both in Peace and War. The more strictly these Meetings were
prohibited, the more often were they held. Blammeny, Charton, and Broussel,
speak more boldly than the rest. That in the Minority of the King, the Charge
of the Kingdom lay upon the Parliament; time would, come, as, heretofore has
fallen out, that the King coming to Age, and entering himself upon managing the
Government, would call the Parliament to an account for the mis-government of
the State of France. Therefore they should provide to be found such as had the
courage to be good Patriots in bad Times: such would they be, as should pity
the public misery, and prevent future Troubles. How it reflected upon the
French Name, and was scandalous in the face of Europe, that none could be found
within so famous a Kingdom, worthy to be entrusted to set at the Helm of that
State: but they must be put to make use of a strangers head* That it a hard, a
hard case, cry they, Countrymen! and if there were any drop of true French
Blood running in our veins intolerable; that a Spanish Woman and a Foreigner,
Roman be he, or Sicilian, should tread upon her Kingdoms. That the Princes of
the Blood should be so tame, as that none of them should dare to open his
mouth: but let it be stopped with promises. In the mean time the Commonwealth
goes to wrack, no man ventures with the public Fortune, but every one shifts
for himself. They make indeed, say they, many and fair offers: but as soon as a
crust is thrown before them, they are still, and sleep soundly over the public
Sufferings. What have we to do with Italian Fiddlers, with Players, and
Comedians? The Manners of France are of themselves more than enough corrupt,
and do not need Outlandish debaucheries. These carry out our money, and bring
in their vices. To what purpose are there so many Scenes, and Operas to
represent incestuous Amors, whose subjects for the most part contain
adulterous Acts? A custom of seeing such sights grows into a boldness of
imitating such practices. Our young Gentry learns nothing from thence but names
of new lusts, and unbandsom Ribaldry. Our Country-manners are by degrees
abolished, and utterly turned out by taking in lasciviousness from abroad: so
that whatever means of corrupting, or being corrupted, is any where had, may be
seen in the City; and our Youth degenerates into foreign fashions, by having no
business wherein to be employed. Nor is there only a liberty ^o all looseness,
but a kind of constraint: For persons have been taken notice of that did not
come to see Comedies. Are they not likely to prove rare Judges that attend upon
wanton Tunes and Melody of Voices? That nights too farther were taken up with
these disgraceful entertainments, that so no time might be left to modesty; but
in a promiscuous Company, what every debauched Wretch designed in the day, he
might take the boldness to effect in the night. For Mazarine himself, that he
perhaps was of a blameless life, and had a profound Wit: but that it was
through his indulgence that the Court swarmed with Italians; the Streets ^rung
of nothing but their unknown Gibbrish which grates upon our ears. That the
money is spent upon Plays, whilst brave men are left to struggle with extreme
indigence. Where are those ancient Statesmen, that assisted the needy; that did
not count the Church-Revenues their private Possessions, but the reward of
Virtue? What is more shameful than for men of Honor to wait in the
Ante-Chamber without any distinction from the mean Attenders? day and night to
stand to the mercy or scorn of Porters? and discontented to take Coach, left
the babbling Servant should unhappily blaze abroad the misadventure of a Visit
attempted without success? That Biragues the Mila^nite heretofore was entrusted
with the Management of our Affairs, but he was of integrity? no Scholar indeed,
nor trained up to Arts or Sciences, only supported the Person of Chancellor,
and no more. And this practice was in good time used to win the Transalpine
Galls to bear our yoke. The Marquess d' Ancres never presided over our
Counsels, but was tolerated, for the Queens particular favor, which he
enjoyed: and had been longer, if he had not so far forgot himse^^ and us, as to
turn all to his own ends: and within left posterity this Caution, not overmuch
to trust the deceitful Complements of Frenchmen. Now the master sounds far
different abroad the world: that (...) have put our necks under a foreign yoke;
that (...) France depends upon Julius Mazarine; that he keep under the same
Roof, with the King, is called Prime Minister, a name unknown to us, under that
preten^^ that he deals about War and Peace, about the Exchequer, the Dignities
and Revenues of the Church, the Principal Offices of the State, as about his
own Concernment without any control. That the King and Queen are not to be
applied to but by his permission* And, what is more scandalous, that the
Italian Ministers carry them so loftily, as that no man of any understanding
can endure their scornfulness.

All this was said, and much more bitter speeches, which because they were
thrown abroad in common talk, I forbear to set down in this place. At length
the matter came to that pass, as that when the prohibited Meetings were held
against the Kings Will in usual manner, and the discontents daily grew higher:
it was judged convenient to imitate the wisdom of Mariners, who, when a tempest
is risen, lighten the Ship by throwing! overboard the burden which might
endanger all. So it was thought convenient to dismiss Emery, which gave a
President of very ill consequence. From thence did not come the end of their
boldness, but a farther step. Mazarine did not like it at all: but being
overborn with much difficulty, was drawn to comply with such as gave unsound
Counsels. He knew all, but could not act all that he saw needful, waiting for
the proper season, which no man did more wisely employ, than his Eminence: he
would work by gentle means, what others persuaded him to carry by rough.
Bountiful in promises, by which he brought over not a few; rendered others of
mad, stark mad: while they reported to the people, that they had been tampered
withal by Bribes to desert the Kingdom oppressed under a grievous weight; but
would rather lose their lives, than betray their trust. The Commons grow more
and more insolent. The City is rent into Parties. Those which adhered to the
King are called Mazarinists: such as pretended in idle words to maintain the
Public Good, Frondeurs or Slingers. [It has been a constant practice in all
memory, that such as attempt new alterations in State, assume to themselves
some new Nickname, as descretive of their Party.] Slingers they were called,
because they had resolved like David to bring down the Giantlike greatness of
Mazarine. In the mean time the Tumults did not assuage, but grew higher;
because the Grandees having searched into the apprehensions of the Court,
revealed all their intentions to the Faction. No man could be secure of
another. Wherein the supereminent parts of Mazarine did outshine and surpass
all: that being betrayed by his most intimate friends, he could by his proper
Judgment and piercing Counsel scatter such a thick Cloud of Troubles. It was
weighed in the Privy Counsel with a scrupulous scale of debate what course was
test to be taken, whether to yield to the time and rising storm, or to restrain
the Seditious by making some terrible Example. Mazarine was of Judgment: That
they should sail with a side-wind and laveer. That time was the safest
Physician. The small delays often produce great advantages; Meetings, thus
associated, are broken by space of time: N^ cost was to be spared, so the bad
might be separat^^ from the good. They might easily be suppressed single; there
was no standing against a breach; but if it wen^ cut into Rivulets, so it might
be easily mastered. These and such like Votes did Mazarine give. The Queen
having not yet found by experience his sagacity in pressing difficulties,
distrusted his counsel: which being by many disliked, at last proved beneficial
to recover the public Peace.

Chavigny full of the haughtiness of Richlien, bold upon his successes in
advancement (his own temper pushing him forward) but especially being of a
cruel Nature raved; thinking with himself, that one part must take: either that
the violent course, to which he advised, must prosper; or if his advice proved
unsuccessful, and turned to the worse, that Mazarine must down, which was the
thing he most wished for. How long, says he, most gracious Sovereign, will you
endure the dishonorable Gown, and Tyranny of the Parliament? Ye Ghosts of
Lewis XIV. and Richlieu, where are ye? What need so many Treaties, by which
their boldness does but increase* Gibbets should be set up, and the Rascals are
to be to^^ from the despised Lilies. Their Necks should by tied up by Hangmen.
Before all things Broussel should be fetched hither, who no longer acts the
Parliament man, but the Detractor from the King. Let him vote wha^ he would
have reformed or altered: he may be easilier ^orn his charging in particular,
than condemning in general. Does he dislike the Kingdom for five years held in
Peace, or the Victories without expense of Armies? He must needs be of a crazy
mind that disapproves the things which give encouragement to Wits. Can any
Judge think much to lend hit ears to honest studies, and allowable
divertisements? That a few nights be allowed to mirth, not to wantonness: in
which amidst such a number of lights no dishonest act can be concealed. In
truth the shows of Mazarine passed without any notorious scandal. Our France
heretofore barbarous, thus by degrees is civilized. Richlieu introduced the
splendor of Building. Mazarine, to that luster has farther brought in
Gentileness of Carriage and Courtesy: at Rome was heretofore polished by
Descendents from Greek Parentage. Concerning difficulty of access, what wonder
is there among the French, who, if their King expose himself to cheap Visits,
haunt him without any Reverence: and unless they be strictly ordered to keep at
this distance, would unseasonably skip in at every crevise, so that no door
could be sufficient to hold them out? What part of time would be left for
business, if the Minister were at every moment free for entertainments? These
and such like things did Chavigny allege, which yet were not approved: but it
was resolved to oblige Broussel, Charton, and Blammeny to depart out of Town:
and not that in a disgraceful manner, but they must be put into Coaches, and
carried to some places not far out of the City. An opportunity for doing this
must be pitched upon on the solemn Thanksgiving-day, for the Victory at the
Battle of Lentz: then it might conveniently be performed* because on that day,
without giving the people any suspicion the Kings Troops stand drawn up o^ both
sides of the street to attend His Majesty passing along to Nostre Dame to sing
Te Deum for the Victory obtained.

Matters being thus ordered, about noon, when the Guards were at their Duty,
Cominges Captai^ of the Queens Guards enters into the small Habitation of
Broussel. The old man was sitting with his Children about a frugal Table: He is
charge^ in the Kings Name immediately to go into a Coach that waited for him
before the door. This Messag^ he receives with attention; and obeys not in ^
mean submission, as if he had been a Criminal; bu^ retaining a modest gravity,
as a Senator, and turning back to his Children, says; Watch and be patient,
following this Example of Gonstancy. Keep close to that path which I have trod.
Nor fly out hastily to rob me of my only comfort. Do not involve your selves
in dangers through my Fortune. I have purchased you a stock of Glory: see that
you be able to preserve it. The time is coming when all France will remember
Broussel. These few words Broussel having spoken, entered the Coach without any
token of fear. His Page by chance coming home, meets his Master, as he is
carried away: he falls a crying and roaring, and running after the Coach,
cries out to all that he knew: His Master is carrying away: to all that he did
not know, Broussel w^^ made Prisoner. Never did Sedition rage in such menacing
terms: Never was the Vulgar so cruelly inflamed. A Boys crying within a quarter
of an hours time put 100000 men in Arms. [O frail Mortality! frail Mortals,
what are we? A transient Scene, a vain shadow without substance. With ^how
great successes did the French Glory then exalt it self? What blessed times did
shine? How many Gallantries at home, and in the field? To what purpose are
these Commotions of Spirits, and so great Discords? Great happiness cannot
sustain it self, but sinks under its own weight. Such is the Divine pleasure;
when it is decreed to overthrow States and Empires, to send effectual Causes
for humane Errors.] Charton upon some foreknowledge, escaped out of the way:
Blammeny is carried to Vincennes without any noise.

Only Broussel is called after: It was openly talked; That the best Patriots
for standing up for their Laws and Liberties, were hurried away on a day of
Feasting, in times of Peace. That the time designed for public mirth was
stained, the joy of the Townsmen disturbed, the serenity of the City clouded.
Their forwardness to merriment was turned into sadness; before any cause heard,
without legal trial. The King being attended by none of the Princes, only a few
of the Life-Guards: the Parliament incensed, the Commons incensed, with fresh
discontents. All the Court-party were accused of Treason. The most loose men,
were most desirous after Stirs, in hopes to reap their particular Advantages.
The factious Tumult carried along with it the compliance of the bettermeaning
men. Those that resisted the Sedition, were stoned as they went along. The
Streets were ^npaved, the Houses untiled: stones flew about ears; fury turning
every thing that came next to hand into Weapons. It was uncertain, which we^^
best, to tarry and be taken, or to disperse, and (...) away. Sometimes courage
was pretended, ano^ fear discovered, and as it falls out, when mind are stirred
up to sedition they did fear and were feared. The Nobles in all parts laying
aside the^ rich Habits, and forbearing the train of Servants went into remote
streets of the Town, Fe^ would keep in their own houses: but the mo^^ lodged at
their friends, or lay incognito in obscur^ Corners. Many escaped out of Town by
diver^ means; some in Servants Clothes: others conveyed by those that depended
on them. Not a few took courage for their concealment. Meiller^y Marshall of
France, rode stoutly through the City most remarkable amongst all. On every
side we^^ Arms and Threats, the streets being barricado'd by Hogshead* and Iron
Chains. Their minds en^ged with blind fury now against the Nobles: wh^ would
imagine it, anon against the Senate. And because they could not design any one
in particular to their anger: they were bold withal in general. The violence of
the Commons was scarely restrained by the doors of the Royal Palace from
breaking in. They demand to have Broussel showed them: fain they would see the
face and look of Broussel. Lamentable was the face of the City* Every man run
mad, without any Leader; receive Warrant from himself, to forbid whatever is
commanded; to command whatever is forbidden Soon, that which falls out in
desperate cases, every one commands, and none executes. The Life Guards kept
not the use of tongue, nor heart, no ears. The besieged in the Louvre and the
Besiegers had their different fears. The Citizens threatened by their Arms what
the Spaniard durst not have presumed. The Spirits of the honest party were
overwhelmed with pity and care: but, what is always wont to fall out in so
great Consternation, every one would be giving of counsel, few would undertake
what had danger.

This menacing night, and offering to break out into some horrid outrage, the
carefulness of Mazarine did allay. He walked the Rounds undaunted, not in Robes
suited to his Dignity, but having disguised the gracefulness of his looks in a
Perruque: Sets Sentinels and Guards at several places here and there, giving
this charge, Neither to fright, nor be frighted: but watching all motions to
restrain violence, not provoke it.

When it was day Peter Seguier Chancellor of France, is dispatched to the
Parliament, to carry them the Kings Orders: or in truth to try what was their
intention. The Common People did not go forth in duty and respect to meet and
wait upon him: but received him with sour menaces, and looks that declared
more of obstinacy, than repentance. The Chancellor passed on with a
countenance formed to gentleness, beckning all the way as he went to the people
to keep silence. They roared with fierce exclamations: Rascals thronged about
the Coach: sometimes there was a confused murmuring: other times a terrible
outcry, as their passions varied in height: they beset the Coach, examining
him, Whither he was going? that he too might cross the peoples interests after
his old wont? At once they rush upon him, and threaten to tear up the stones
that the streets are paved with. And he was now ready to be crowded to death
with the violence of the press, when he was sheltred, by getting to the Hostel
de Luyne: which as it was the place of his Birth, was his Mother and almost his
Grave. These being concealed from the fury of the Rout, which filled the House
with swaggering and menaces, he escaped through the goodness of God by the
error of the Searcher. How nearly, you may judge by this, that he had no
longer thoughts or coming off with life, but how to die decently. Thus was that
place ennobled by having concealed him who is worthy to be showed to all
posterity. Through the singular favor of Fortune, which permitted the hope of
the Laws, overborn by corrupt Manners to lie hid in safety. When the Court
came to hear of this, the Queen was much concerned, left the life of such an
excellent Person should fall into the hands of base Fellows. So Meilleray on
Horseback with Dort, break through the seditious Crew: and having rescued the
Chancellor from that imminent danger, convey him back safe to the Queen in a
Coach half torn: the Guard being frighted, and some of them slain. The Sedition
breaks out farther, and the madness of the people rises to higher exasperation.

F. Paul Gondy designed Archbishop of Paris, (commonly styled Coadjutor,) in
his Pontifical Robes, carrying with him a Veneration as he passed along the
streets, moderated the people with Language and Gesture; He would treat about
their Proposals; the King was neither without clemency, nor yet severity. Some
there were that taxed Gondy, as if his heart he had been somewhat favoring
Alterations. However the matters were in truth, that was the first day of
Gondy's withdrawing, and the cause of all those evils, which that Prelate
eminent in mind, birth, and merits, fell into afterward; from this time he
shall be ever after called the Archbishop of Corinth.

At length the Parliament sent the choicest part of their Body to his Majesty,
to request the release of their Fellow Members. They proceeded, marshalled two
and two in long Files on foot, graciously nodding upon the Commoners as they
passed along. Mole the prime President of the Parliament (who never wanted a
dextrous application in managing any business) with freedom and gravity thus
addressed to her Majesty. That those had been evil Counsels to rend out of the
Parliament honest men and good Patriots, charged only for maintaining the
Liberties of their Country, and that on a day of most solemn Rejoicing, all
suspicion of it being blinded by occasion of the public Festival. That nothing
is more pernicious, nor to the dishonor of the French Nation, than to handle
violently what with time and gentleness has always found good success in our
State. That those who gave such advice, were the men that raised the Tumults,
and continued so to do day after day. That here was no need of long
deliberation, but the Prisoners to be released: nor must the Kings Honor or
Authority be pretended; but that the safety of the Kingdom is the supreme Law.
That what he says were no illusions or pretenses, that 100000 men in Arms
attended for Monsieur Broussel. That when men had Arms in their hands, they
were allowed anything when before they were denied reason. For Allegiance,
Duty, Reverence there was an end of them. These were all trodden under foot. He
trembled to relate the sad courses that he saw taken. To this the Queen
answered in short; the Chancellor somewhat larger, That the Privy Council would
take care that their Proposals should be satisfied, etc. As they went back in
the same Rank and File as they came, the people meets them, and asks, What was
done in the bussinss. Then Mole nodding, signified all was well. When one
hotheaded Fellow flying out, presents his Sword to his breast, and bids him,
Go back again; Is this the setting Broussel at liberty? Are our Requests thus
disappointed? Are you thus returned without obtaining leave to do us any good?
Some of the Parliament men slipped away for fear: Mole not at all affrighted,
returns back again to the Court, and presses earnestly, that the Prisoners
must be immediately released, or else all given for lost.

Upon so great a distraction, the Queen having summoned her Counsel, inquires
what Expedient could be found in this so great difficulty. It is debated on
both sides by violent speeches, that it would be a dangerous severity, or
pernicious clemency, if either nothing, or if all were granted the people: yet
Reasons being then weighed one against the other, it was resolved to set at
liberty Blammeny and Broussel at that time, the Darling of the common people,
and an empty shadow of their liberty. The Parliament (a thing never before
heard of) being assembled in the Gallery of the Louvre, and giving their Votes,
Letters are written for the releasing Broussel and Blammeny; whereupon the
Rings Coaches are instantly lent to bring them thither; of so great importance
is the safety of the State in extremity. [ Mazarine who had stoutly withstood
the former bad proceedings, did more stoutly oppose these very low concessions.
But what could he do when affairs were in a condition rolling down-hill? Warily
he considers all things, and looks forward upon the future. Maintains the
Honor of his Majesty, as much as the irregularity of the times and ill success
of business admit.] The Sedition was a little pacified; yet they continue to
keep to their Arms out of a proud Bravado; secretly giving out, as if there
were some design in the bottom. [Oh! how miserable are those that live without
the compass of Religion and Law! what once they have deserved, they always
expect.]

That evening Blammeny returned: Broussel came home the next morning with
joyful acclamations, to see his rejoicing Children and dear Friends. From that
day forward he lived as before, in a constant tenor of honest conversation,
innocent in his carriage: that heat of popular affection being somewhat cold:
one bounded within his rank. A person of no ill design, overborn by the stream
of the Factious through the public storm, to run upon Shelves and Sands: [To
teach posterity how vain and failing a stay it is, to lean upon such Props as
will always be condemned, and continued to the perpetual ruin both of high and
low.]

It was a shame for the King, in a manner beleaguered to tarry any longer in
the City. Therefore Mazarine took care to have him conveyed to Ruel, two miles
out of Town, upon pretense of taking the air. The Ringleaders of the Sedition
fretted, and could not digest to have the King rescued from their fury. And now
there began to be a great alteration in the Rout: for after there came certain
news that succors were coming, which had been drawn out of Condes Army, and
were on the way marching thither hastily, many were frighted into their Wits
again. Then they began soberly to reflect how presumptuously they had carried
themselves against the King. An apprehension seized them under this fright,
that there were now come those who would call them to an account for their high
Treason. And this consternation of spirit found grievous tokens of ensuing
misery in all, even those of the meaner sort. What increased these fears, was a
wondrous cheerfulness in Mazarine who had great assurance of his Majesty's
Forces.

Here I first begun to be acquainted with diverse transactions as being employed
in them (but having been carried away by the dissenting Party, did many things
upon which I reflect with grief.) The more credit ought to be given me who
shall offer to Posterity nothing but what I have been an Eye and Ear-Witness
of, free from inclination to flattery as from ill affection to the Governors.
Whatever has been transacted in secret: and colored over with an artificial
gloss, as far as comes within the reach of my knowledge, I shall expose to the
open view of the noonday light. The Ages to come disengaged from hope and
fear, will applaud the good, and hiss out the contrary actions.

That so great a Body of the Mutineers should be shaken by so very few, was the
sport of Fortune. Blammeny and Violet were then the principal Leaders. The
injury of their late Imprisonment sunk deep into their spirits, and
particularly the great fall of their Uncle the Bishop of Beavais. What could
Fortune have added to Violet? He had a plentiful Estate, an honorable place in
the Parliament, although he could not obtain the Office of being the Queens
Chancellor. Only that restless spirit of his strived to compass by means of the
troubles, what he could not presume to hope for in peaceable times.

The first remarkable act of the retirement to Ruel, was the imprisonment and
banishment of Chavigny. He was apprehended at Vincennes, and conveyed over,
through by-Lanes, and wild Forests to Havre de Grace. There a strict Watch
attended upon him when he was asleep. This was hard to one that had never been
pinched with cares or sufferings. while he was yet scarce in the prime of his
youth, he had arrived at those preferments, which would have satisfied many men
of great Name to have held in their old age. For through the high favor of
Richlieu, during his time, he run a race of unimpeached Honor. Incapable of
suffering adversity with patience, because he blushed not at the being
conscious of any former meanness. Thus missing those respects that had been
constantly paid him, he was astonished at the first blow of Flortune, having
fed himself with a strong conceit of being uppermost. He bears Mazarine a
spleen, and never leaves turning all things, till he could overturn him. The
Mutineers catch up a new occasion of complaining in public, That Justice was
perverted, and the Laws trampled upon in the case of Chavigny: That no person
might be held in prison, but for a certain space of time, and that very short,
without declaring his Crime, and having his defense heard in the House; such
new Ordinances, and those that follow. That Strangers should be removed from
bearing Offices in the State: The oppressed Provinces mull be eased, and Paris
groaning under the excessive burden of Taxes: the King (...) be brought home to
his principal City. These are the chief Heads that were diversely controverted,
both at Ruel and at S. Germains, between the Court and Parliament, the
Judgments sometimes of Orleans, sometimes of Conde, leaning either this or that
way: upon secret ends, and that were ready to burst out into farther
dissensions.

Here begins a general storm to gather over Mazarine, against whom openly, as
against a Rock, the seditious Billows break their strength. Orleans steps in as
Mediator between Court and Parliament. He would make up the differences, yet
was heartily glad they were made; supposed by that means to promote the
Interests of the Abbot de Rivieres, that was designed for a Hat at Rome. Conde
returned from the Campaign, elated with his fresh Victory, at first dealt
roughly with the Senate; afterward flattered their Leaders: entertained (...)
moderate thoughts, pretended at least to Constable, or Admiral. Longueville
instigated his Brother in Law, boasting that he had obtained Havre de Grace,
the famous strength of Normandy. Although in truth there were no such promise
made him, yet ^he vapoured after his wonted manner; so taking ^an occasion to
fall from his former Party. The Archbishop of Corinth put Longueville on to
such courses upon a vain expectation: as if he should be declared by an Act of
Parliament, Prince of the Blood, as we call them. And because what the mind
desires, it is easy to persuade it self, shall come to pass. He cherished such
vain dreams in ^his thoughts with a pleasing credulity. Anne Bourbon, the Wife
of Longueville, was of great moment to the Faction: she carried along with her
the Archbishop of Corinth, the Duke of Retz, her Brother Conti, with
Rochefoucault, who was then that Ladies Cabinet-Counsellor. A Woman of a high
Spirit, and shrewd Wit, that could turn her Creatures into a thousand shapes:
could not turn her own violent inclinations. Turbulent without advantage:
expecting nothing from the Confusions, bur the bare confusions. She too
pretended, the public and private Good, as the rest did: that their Tyranny
must be abated with Arms, who had put the King upon cruel Counsels, and rendered
the Princes odious to him, and suspected.

Amidst these matters, the Queen having always a smoother brow than public
state of Affairs did deserve, sees her self manifestly struck at through the
sides of Mazarine. She composeth her face to cheerfulness, recollecting her
thought how to provide for the future. She bridles her grief, nor imparts the
knowledge of it to any confident. The secret loftiness of her spirit over
power'd her look: tempering her gesture and carriage in a conflict between
dissimulation and a j^^ sorrow: still secure in contempt of the Faction
Mazarine knew the affections of the Princes we^^ unsound, and that their
counsels were revealed (...) the Mutineers. Nor was more dangerous plotting in
the Town, than in the Camp. Politickly taking no notice of all this, he applied
his mind to (...) accommodation. Although he believed, that these bold outrages
are to be feared at the first heat, where they have taken time, abate of
themselves: and as the Faction grows stale, utterly fall. That when people are
glutted with perpetual new fancies, they always return to the Reverence of
their lawful Sovereign; and is Repentance extorted from them, though against
their wills. These and the like things being debated in his mind, and seeing
that the Grandees were secretly affected to the Tumults; he thinks it not safe
to make use of hands, suspected of prevarication, in an Engagement that might
ruin all. That there were but a few about the King, and those of ill-affected
and perverse Judgments, that took indeed this Party, but would fight on the
opposite side, if occasion offered. This sense of Mazarine was disliked by many
understanding men, who were of opinion, That the distress of the young King
would be a case raising the detestation of all Nations, whose Governors can
never be quiet, if their Subjects may control them in the choice of their
Ministers, or ensnare them for their honesty. Therefore it were better to press
close upon the Faction now startled: that loyal Subjects have always fought
with more courage for their King, than others will for their evil design.
Mazarine adhered to his resolution, that his Majesty should return to the City,
and their Proposals should be granted: As though greater evils might have bin
feared, had he not yielded to be deceived.

Here were it superfluous to transcribe the Articles set out in the public
Gazette. The substance of them amounts to this, as I have already said; That
many Taxes were to be abated in Towns and Country, the Provinces were to be
eased of them by the Masters of Requests; no man might be kept in prison above
the space of one natural day, without answering to his charge in the House:
which was eagerly disputed, and approved even by the Court-party, every one
thinking his own private Concernment lay in the Case. Chavigny is released and
turns aside to Tours: where looking down upon the vanities of the Court, as
from the lofty Tower of a contented mind, he applied his thoughts to the study
of wisdom: in which resolution how long he persevered, the sequel of the Story
will declare.

Frances de Lorraine, the Duchess of Vandome, exhibited a Petition in the
behalf of her Husbands and her Childrens ill usage; which the Parliament ^udged
improper then and there. Thus the first ^eat of Paris assuaged. I now apply, my
self to future accidents, of a more grievous nature.

These matters being thus composed, about the end of October, his Majesty
returns to Paris: The Faction not at all struck with fear or grief for their
Riot, cannot abandon its unquiet disposition: but having got strength, through
his Majesty's Royal Clemency, and the obtaining their Petitions, as being now
established by Law, makes the former Concessions but a step to higher Demands.
The Parliament not yet fully calmed, boiled up with new designs. The storm of
Envy discharges it self upon Mazarine, who in so suipicious a time, jealous of
every thing, did certainly look for greater Troubles. It is openly cried out,
That the A^ must be laid to the root: the Stranger must be expelled out of the
Kingdom: as though that were the only cure for the public Distemper. Reverence
every day abated more than other, every body would presume to advise, and to be
giving directions how to govern the State. The confusion of impolitick Guides
began to swell as high, as the rage of the common People. Approaching danger
might be read in the faces of the Courtiers.

Violet, a man full of self-confidence, spoke boldly thus in the House. That
Mazarine wanted nothing of being King, but the Title and Crown. What was yet
obtained, was but a Preludium to his future Greatness. He would every day
trample more hard upon the weak years of an undiscerning Child. Wh^^ Peer,
^aith he, will be able to stand against him, after he has run out his full
race of unbounded ambiti^^ and avance? Then looking upon Orleance and Conde,
says he, This is your Concernment. Co^^ disliked such a bold slander.
Chastillon had informed Violet, that such Discourses would please the Prince,
who had already visited Broussel and Longueville, to advance his interest by
popularity. But whether Condes mind were wavering, or whethe^ upon change of
judgment, he esteemed it the better way to vindicate his Sacred Majesty:
whatever were the occasion he frowned at the words that were then thrown out
against Mazarine. That Fate was to be blamed, not Mazarine. He aimed chiefly at
the Kingdoms happiness: nor did proudly vaunt in so high a Fortune. Why should
it be matter of offense to any, that the virtuous qualities of that Eminent
Stranger, might in their passage impart their luster to France? That the Queen
by order of her deceased Husband, had taken him on to sustain part of her
cares: seeing her own neck could not bear up under such a pressing load, unless
she found out this assistance. Nothing could be condemned in him, but his
happiness. He did not ground any strength upon Garrisons, nor upon Castles: did
not interest his Majesty's Treasure. That the Queen did not so much recompense
his past fidelity with Honors and Gifts, as engage it for the future. That the
King could not without reproach abandon him to his Enemies, but might maintain
him with Honor and Conscience, and without any danger to his Estate. Mazarine
answered several times, That he would be gone, so that he were neither waylaid
nor assaulted. That he longed for nothing more after so many obligations, than
a peaceful departure. It began then to be questioned amongst some of the prime
Nobility, which way he might be most safely conveyed away, and in what
disguise. A Lady of great Quality promised she would in the evening furnish him
with a Habit proper to that purpose. But all these passages were but
ridiculous: for he never intended to go away: nor if he had, was there need of
any Mask or Disguise.

The Queen fearing to provoke the fierceness of the Times, Enemies, and Fates,
dealt warily. She cleared Mazarine of all Censure; only doubted this, lest by
his indulgence to the Grandees, he might have exposed his Dignity to contempt
and injuries. It was evident, that he had not occasioned the growing Troubles
of France by any mis-government, or misdemeanour of his. Mazarine at the sight
of the raw and angry sores of the Body Politic, always looking at the main
chance and end, took care that the Kingdom might be restored to perfect and
durable soundness: and upon the breaking out afresh of so many cicatrized
boyls, (having found in the malignant humor the strength of Fortune) relying
upon his skill, never questioned a prosperous issue by patience, gentle usage,
and lenitives. At this time the Slingers press for performance of the promises
made at S. Germans; which being once yielded, farewell his Majesty's
Prerogative. It was weighed in a nice scale, by what Expedient the Court might
save it self from the new Billows that were rising. Meilleray that loved to
have no way, but what was through smoke and Gunpowder, nor cared so much to
enter through open Ports, as to force them, advises, That the King should
reside in the Bastille, and Magazine, and having seized the Isle of the Louvre
with a strong Party, should batter the Town, and invade the principal places of
it; to the executing which design, he proffers his effectual service. Micha^^
Tellier, often to be mentioned, counsels, That the King should go out of Town,
and the passages stopp^ for bringing in the bread from Gonesse: if that were
prevented, the Rout would fall Upon the Heads of the Faction: would pay
obedience to their bellies, not to them, that an hungry people is tamer than a
Victime knocked down. Conde willing to approve his duty to his Majesty, in such
an Exigent of Affairs, votes, That the City should be close besieged, and the
Rebels broke by force. Mazarine first disliking all these courses, as full of
hazardous consequence, declares, That many incurable evils may come from those
courses: That the Granaries, even of private men, were full in Paris: the
innocent too would be destroyed for the fault of the Delinquents: Yet the
Counsel of laying a Siege, was not without apparent probability of good success.

Madame Longueville full of discontent, and unable to endure with any patience,
that Conde was torn from her Party: draws in to her Brother Conti, (free from
Plots, and not having a heart hardened in bad designs) her Husband, the
Archbishop of Corinth with his Followers, and Rochefoucault, newly come from
the Campaign. [This last was her chief Confident. A Genius of Friendship had
inspired them both in the House of the Palais, which was embarked in the same
bottom.] Beaufort, Elboeuf, and innumerable others, came into the Party. The
multitude of Slingers wat great, both in the Parliament, and in the principal
Families of the City. All which particulars, I shall afterward more fully
handle.

It was the fifth day of the new year, consecrated to the Festival of the
Kings, who came from the East to worship Christ lately born: this day the City
kept with great jollity and feasting after the usual manner, when the Queen,
full of public and private cares, sat close with Mazarine in Consultation,
about carrying on the future War. The Kings Majesty was more and more
dishonored by the shameless Rebellion. Mazarine weighing the disgrace, justly
apprehended, lest his Majesty should every day be more undervalued. Many ways
h^ considered, being well assured, such is the French temper, as to measure all
actions by the success, and to attribute for the most part to Fortune, what is
due to Virtue. Defeats are punished with them by contempt. Upon the
Disquisition, at length this Vote appeared the best; to fall on the Faction
while it is unprovided, and immediately to tur^ the Power against them. And
lest words should be rumoured by delay, that very day it was resolved in the
Palais Royal to depart secretly, and at midnight leave the City immersed in
wine and good cheer. Besides the Queen and Mazarine, Orleans, Could, Meilleray,
Villeroy, Grammont, Telleir, and the Abbot of Rivieres agreed in this resolve.
Grammont had given him in charge to convey away the King, Queen, and the Duke
of Anjou, which he carried happily: for with his usual Policy he escaped the
strict Watches of the Faction at a Postern. Orleans, with Mazarine, was got
clear by another byRoad. At the midst of Queens Course, on the way to Chaliot,
was the general Rendez-vous. Through sharp frosts and rugged ways, having
traveled alt the dark night, by break of day they arrive safe at S. Germans.
Conde tarried a little behind, to bring off with him his Mother, Brother, and
Sister. His Mother and Conti sets forth in compliance with him: the Duchess of
Longueville refused, alleging for excuse her fear of miscarrying, in that she
was near her time: but in truth keeping in mind the engagement at the meeting
of Noes, she had far other designs in her head. The Guards early in the morning
march out to overtake and wait upon the King. Not a few Nobles go speedily
after, whether out of Duty, or Policy. Orleans is made General, du Plessis
Praslin takes up Quarters at S. Denis, three miles out of the City. Grammont at
S. Clouds: Corbeil is immediately invaded. The Queen rejoicing that all her
designs, through the Divine blessing succeeded, and that forces to take her
part, were coming up from every place, treats Conde courteously in remembrance
of his past Services, and the sense of her present necessity, to make use of
him, doubling all expressions of kindness toward him. Nor was he wanting to
deserve her good word, behaving himself with all reverence to the Queen in a
becoming modesty.

In the Town of Poissie, and the neighboring places, a strict prohibition is
made, that no Victuals should be carried into the City. The Country about Paris
is made wast by the rude Soldiers. Hostility is acted openly; all dangers and
shapes of Fortune appear terrible. The City is frighted, lest taken in her
actual Rebellion, she should suffer condign punishment: they were constrained
by fear, that had not been wrought upon by favors. The miscarriage of a few
threatening destruction to all, whilst punishment was inflicted upon the far
extended Body of the spreading Delinquency. By the shortened supplies of one
day, it was seen that man's life is sustained by fresh meats: and Cities be the
bringing in provisions from abroad. Troops are in all parts levied. Raising
Soldiers is imposed upon Priests and Magistrates; nothing is excused from
Contributions: the Authors of the disorders being but few, the consequent
destruction involved all.

At the same time the Seyne swelling upon Rains and a sudden Thaw, had
overflowed the flat parts of the City. Several houses were born down, and men
drowned. That inundation was looked upon as a Prodigy, as if the very Rivers
assaulted Paris; [Fools taking that which is Chance or Nature, for Fate, or the
Divine Wrath.]

In the mean time spreading same had dispersed all abroad the News of the
Cities calamity. The most faithful Peers in their mutual Conference, did not
touch upon the wretchedness of the times. Her Majesty keeping all passages
carefully in memory, distinguished from the rest such as were worthy for her to
trust alone. The King by Letter to the Provost of the Merchants (that is an
Office at Paris) recites cursorily the causes of his Retirement; the fickleness
of the Faction, Plots laid against his Person; and that he could not with
safety continue any longer in the City. Orleans and Conde under their hand
profess themselves to have been the Advisers of the Kings Retirement. The
Parliament is charged by the Kings Writ to adjourn to Montargie. The City was
affrighted at that, which is in a night of darkness, unless the King and
Parliament shine upon them. The Archbishop of Corinth summoned by the Kings
Letter, shows himself ready to obey. Gets into his Coach, as if he were just
upon quitting the Town. The common people flock about him offering to stop his
Horses by the reins. He had before engaged the affections of all to him. The
throng was violently moved with earnest passion toward him. All kissed his
Hand, or his Scarlet Gown. He chose rather to follow the Caresses land
Applauses of the common People, than the Kings Commands. [In such distress to
attract the minds of the Vulgar, must needs require Art and Industry.]

Talor, Bignon, and Melian, which are called the Kings Proctors in the
Parliament, are sent Commissioners to his Majesty. They come back again without
having Audience, or so much as being admitted into his Majesty's presence.
Conde chiefly labored it might be so: upon design to advance his glory by the
Troubles then in being. Such things as were suitable to the present occasion,
were conveyed to Paris. It is scarce credible, what a plenty of all manner of
provision flowed in: and with what scarcity they struggled in the Leagure
without. The Peasants run any hazard, so they may but succor the besieged.
Every one had full liberty to come in: all are stopped from going out again; to
the end sure, that the Court might relent at so many pledges and relations.
Several persons in disguises slip away from the destruction of the ruined City,
for they expected no less. The Kings Soldiers and Officers are by express Act
of Parliament, prohibited from entering into Towns, Cities, and Castles: they
are to be repulsed from all parts, as Enemies of their Country. A Proclamation
is put out. That none should relieve the Mazarinists ( so were the Royalists
called) with Provision, Arms, or other Ammunition: or if any should presume so
to do, they should be liable to the same punishment as Mazarine. An
unreconcileable rage of malice appeared upon this turn of Fighting or Treating.

A few days passed on after this rate, still remarkable by some new emergency.
At length the Thunderclap broke over the head of Mazarine., He is voted in a
full House, guilty of high Treason, and the Disturber of the public Peace.
Every Age, Condition, Sex is commanded to assault, shoot, or stab him: whoever
harbored him in the same house with them, should be guilty of the same Crime
with him. He comforted himself in the conscience of his Virtue, which can
neither deserve disgrace, nor it was should happen, can ever be overthrown: but
went on in the practice of his former gentleness, with a resolution impaired by
no violence: always so putting up injuries, that he might be thought not to
have resented them. Never did courage more undauntedly perform her part, then
in that, the height of his Spirit disowning to regard affronts, nay or just
fears. I am certainly informed, it was the advice of some, that four or five of
the prime Ringleaders of the Faction should be executed: and when they were
taken off, that the rest would fall in pieces. Mazarine opposed; affirming that
the common people would contend more earnestly for avenging them, when they
were dead, than to advance their Honor whilst they were alive.

Here they declare in a great Train, that would take the Parliaments part.
First Elbaeuf slips from the Court, and relying on his three Children, offers
the Parliament his Service: not without good hopes, as he gave out, to draw the
Duke of Orleans into his party: which device soon after came to nothing.
Bouillon, laying off his Mask, with a voice pretending to truth, swears to be
at the Parliaments devotion, presents his Wife and Children as Hostages to be
sureties for that word, which was never certain. So much could Madame de
Longueville prevail, that she brought over to the Party her Brother Conti, her
Husband, with Rochefoucault, and Mermont, though to her great danger. The
people triumphed in mirth for the coming of so many Grandees. The Duke of
Longueville was fretted at the Honor so hastily done d'Elboeuf in the
Parliament: and at that very moment, thought of his Government of Normandy,
whither he retired shortly after, having made many fair offers of services;
only with a design of getting somewhat from the King: and left off to stickle
for the Faction, which he never followed with any earnestness. None was more
easily drawn to take up a Party: none did with less regret lay it down again.
Beaufort, who had escaped being imprisoned by keeping secret, rides into the
Town on Horseback: with so great applause, that the common People run along by
his side, as once they flocked after the Duke of Guise. Marshall de la Motte,
either through the instigation of the Duke of Longueville, to whom he was much
obliged; or through the memory of his Imprisonment at Lions, joined with the
Faction. The Archbishop of Corinth was more powerful than any of them in
Dependents, Authority, and Eloquence. His desig^ was to render himself terrible
to them: Elboeufs to rake money: Bouillons to be bought off to the Court-party
at a high rate: Longuevilles to scre^ out somewhat, though never so small:
Contys nothing but to comply with his Sister. Rochefouca^^ gaped after his own
profit, without having bee^ any ways disobliged. The Duchess of Longueville
followed that inclination, which is the most sweet in Nature: her modesty
always survived her affections, though Fame was not afraid to be lie her; which
she afterward enjoyed unstained to the increasing Honor of her Posterity.
Thus past on a few days. Some in the nature of Commissioner^ came from the one
and the other side forward and backward to treat of an Accommodation. Again
troublesome Contests were renewed: some were of advice, that the War should be
soon dispatched; others, that the Rebels should be consumed with (...) longer
harassing. In the City came out diverse Libels against Mazarine. In the Court
men did not confute those reproaches with words, but blows.

The face of preparations on both sides were unequalled matched. Here were a
throng hudled together, and new-raised Forces. All full of confusion, men's
looks either fearing or designing some barbarous attempt. Despair hurried them
into resolutions of horror, whilst they reflected upon the obscurity of their
Soldiery. Far other was the appearance of the Royal Camp. Majesty, the Cause,
so many Princes, so many Dukes Commanders, with more warrantable Commissions
gained reverence. Great hopes in Conde, as one renowned for Martial experience,
and not inferior in Wit, being come to maturity in prudence for counsel, did
advance the reputation of the Royal Party by the Excellency of his Name. Intent
upon every employment, even the meanest, laid claim to nothing of his high
Birth, but his Spirit; hazarding his person for the public safety. The
Mutineers thought they could carry all with more ease, if he were taken off, or
withdrawn. His Sister the Duchess of Longueville within the Town, was as
active and courageous as her Brother in the opposite part. She renders herself
in the Parliament House, and her Boy born in the troubles newly dropped into the
world, as pledges of her faithfulness. Presently restoring a countenance to the
party, which her pangs, whilst she was in labor, had swallowed up. The
Officers and common Soldiers stood promiscuously about the bed where she lay
in: She so artificially dispenses her smiles and glances, that no one in that
great confluence might think himself neglected or disregarded. Their spirits
broken with the public Confusions, yet did not desist from a stubborn defense.
In the mean time the Bastille is taken by, the Faction upon Surrender. De
Trambley the Governor, being not sorely pressed, is supposed to have fought as
one that was not desirous of Victory. Nothing did so much exasperate their
spirits, as the lamentable face of the Country about Paris, depopulated by the
insolency of the Soldiers. No place in the world surpasses it for quality. A
sweet Air: no poisonous Vermin: abundance of Springs, Rivers, and Brooks do
refresh and environ it. The Dog Days do not scorch it with drought, nor the
Winter nip it with frost, but the ju^^ ground does enrich the Husbandman with
a plentiful crop. It is a great relief to the Inhabiters of that fortunate
Isle, that wherever the Palaces and Halls leave any space; there are most rich
pastures, well stocked and wooded. This Country thus fairly planted, the rude
Soldier of a sudden laid wast: to such a pass did discord bring the poor
Citizens. [When will the common People grow wiser, and detest all counsels of
disloyalty?]

In the mean time Normandy was of no small moment to the War with its Governor
Longueville who, although he did ill agree with the ocher Leaders of the
Faction, yet had at that time no small interest in Rouen, and all over that
Country. Harcourt comes there to take possession of it by the Kings order: one
of a hasty resolution, and elevated with his sudden Commission, with his old
Troops engaged the raw and forward Bands of Longueville without success; so
much were all incensed against Mazarine. Part of the Parliament of Rouen went
to Vernon upon the Seyne; part tarried without regard at S. Germans, waiting
for the Kings Orders; the remainder dispersing, not knowing where to render
themselves, waited to see the issue of Affairs, [ The Coast of Normandy does
for the generality lie upon the Ocean. There is great abundance of pastures and
fruit: and so rich a soil, (...) that it satisfies both its Natives and
Neighbors: and much more would it satisfy them, unless they were immoderate
in eating, and such were the condition of the Clime as did require much meat. A
flatulent people is conceited of it self, as if it fed the Imperial City, and
had the famine or plenty of Paris in its power, when as it pays indeed tribute
rather than maintenance, and does not so properly keep, as drudge for the
victorious people. The humor of the Country, addicted to subtili^ties, which
take up the Judgment-Hall with Lawsuits, has there a great door open to the
Judges Tribunal. A people cunning to draw up Instruments, and at every case
that is actionable. He that has to do with such Creatures, had need have his
Wits about him. They compose their differences by Trials at the Bar, seldom by
Duels in the field. They can suit their industry to any course of life; and
have parts not transcendent, but to whatsoever employment they turn themselves
indifferent. There is no where a greater readiness to put up injuries, so they
may be secured from want, and have the least glimmering hope of advantage. The
Nobility burdened with numerous Dependents, cannot long maintain its State in
a-like Equipage; therefore it is greedy after Changes, but such as may prove
beneficial. The Neighborhood of tin Court renders the Normans less at the
dispose of their Governors.] The malignancy of the time overreached this so
wary people. But what Provinces did not this Comet influence? The Duke of
Longueville waited in suspense till by some ouvert Declaration, he might
distinguish whether they were addicted to the King, or the other Party,
accordingly to shape his course by such discovery.

The Court between Paris and Rouen, the two most powerful Cities of the
Kingdom, was distressed with the want of all things, especially of money; the
Aids coming in but slowly from all parts. Amidst these straights, nothing did
so much torme^^ Mazarine as the dispositions of Orleans and Con^^^ The former
not brooking delays, detested the stusbornness of the War, which he had
supposed wou^^ have been dispatched in few days. This other w^^2 thought to
have flown off from his eagerness (...) fighting to policy, and that which is
the most (...) toward of all Policies, to dissemble a joy and lo^ of those
matters which inwardly did most offen^^^ him. Laigne upon the Marne is taken by
Persan; from whence that fruitful Country of Brye is infested by the Inroads of
the Kings Army.

The City Militia grew every day more unwilling to submit to orders. You might
see many murmuring with a slack and proud carriage, and the violence of the
most languishing. Thereupo^ the Archbishop of Corinth gets up into the Pulpit
at S. Paul's, and ^aith: I would have had you in safety; I would have had you
victorious; and the goodness of the Cause had acquitted you, unless your
repentance and tameness did plead guilty. Then having inveighed much against
the Government and Mazarine, he comes down out of the Pulpit: having put off
his Miter and Surplice, he buckles on his Armor. Often he sallied out of Town
to charge the Enemy, without any regard to his Function, which ought to have
been employed in peacemaking (what many affirm they saw, I do not) spending
always generously, and for the most part profusely upon all people. He tired
his own and other men's Estates. Rochefoucault had inveigled the mind of the
Duchess of Longueville with higher Enchantments: (they had promised to run all
Fortunes together.) The Archbishop of Corinth not well contented to be a
Favorite of the second Rank, joins with Beaufort and the Slingers. For the
Faction had more than one Head: nor was it informed by one soul. It is certain
that Madame Longueville and Madame Mombazon, bred up amongst the Weather-cocks
of the Court, were not only admitted to be of their Privy Council, but to the
great pleasure of Fortune, did sway the minds of the Commanders.

Nothing did more anger the Parisians, than that Corbeil was at the first taken
from them by Vxelles coming in to the Kings aid with the Forces of Burgundy.
Beaufort, Rochefoucault, and Nermont are chosen to go and recover the Town,
with a strong Party, but of fresh Soldiers. They go triumphing out of Town.
The people thronging after them as far as S. Victors, wish them a happy
Expedition. They were scarce come to Irviz, four miles out of Town: but they
begun to grow weary or afraid of the danger. Some quit their Colors; some lurk
in holes, many slink away secretly. These halted behind their Fellow Soldiers;
others drew them on. They kept neither Rank nor File, but straggled all abroad.
Sometimes they went to the City, the farthest way about; anon in the beaten
road, and by the shortest cuts; their voices surfeited by excess; and the
hoarse drunkenness of the tippling Rout interrupted the Commanders Orders. The
misgiving mind of this ill-trained Militia escaped from Conde, that was on the
March against them. It Is believed he was unwilling to cast away his valor in
an unglorious fight, with so many drunken men; and to stain his victory with
the baseness of the Combatants: So the King gained a prosperous success without
the price of blood.

Vitry too marched out upon design to clear the Road for Convoys of Provision:
and having in his March home, engaged a Party of German Horse, there was a
sharp Encounter at Vincennes. In that fight Tangred was slain. Marguerite
Bethune gave him out to have been the Son of her Husband Henry Duke of Rohan:
being in truth angry with her Daughter for marrying Chabot against her consent,
That Marguerite was his Mother, is without controversy: who was his Father, is
not very cle^^^. But certain it is, that the Duke of Rohan would never hear of
any such Issue. The doubtful Child lay a long time secret, having had a base
breeding among the Hollanders. Kept to Plow and Cart, from whence of a sudden
he is put into public Employment. Being but eighteen years old, he had a
portly and graceful carriage of his whole body: a sprightful mind, comely look,
and suitable disposition. That business so cleanly carried, was for a long time
the subject of common discourse: when in good time these Civil disorders broke
out, and offered the poor Wretch a fair opportunity of perishing handsomely. His
Mother touched in conscience and affection, admired his Person, all hi^
actions, and his very death, thinking without doubt, to perpetuate the Renown
of her Husban^ by so great a Progeny. The Kings Army gre^^ wanton, would not do
duty, fell a plundering an^ pillaging: waxed dissolute for want of being p^^ on
Service. It is resolved to assault Charenton, and wrest so advantageous a Post
from the City. Clanleil kept with a choice Garrison for the Parliament that
Town that has a Bridge over the Marn. Orleans led the Troops to S. Denis,
where it is concluded in a Counsel of War to storm the Town. Conde was
Commander in chief for the Expedition: Chastillon Lieutenant general makes the
Onset. They cut their way out by the Sword. The Kings Army break through the
Barricadoes, that were but hastily set up. Chastillon carries the Town by on
slacht, purchased at the price of his own blood; for he was mortally shot, and
fell rather after the Fate of his Family, than his own particular Fortune, in
whom the Issue by the right Line of the great Gaspar Colligny was extinct, and
all the remaining blood of so great a Hero shed. Clanleil would not surrender,
but refused to receive quarter, and redeem life at the loss of liberty. The
Paris Troops drew up without the Port of S. Anthoine in an idle Bravado. Conde
did not think fit then to fall upon them; but having secured Charenton with a
Garrison, drew off. Two days after Beaufort and Marsillac go out with a strong
Party to regain the Town. They are presently commanded another way to succor
Noirmont, convoying Provisions, whom Grammont did disturb upon the Rear. He was
come as far as Vitry, not in the high Road, but by Lanes, over Commons and
Vineyards. There was a sharp Encounter of both Parties fighting stoutly: but
upon the coming in of la Motte, who was not far off, Grammont returned to S.
Clouds, having rifled part of the Convoy. When word was brought to Paris of
Beauforts danger, the whole City run out at the Gates to meet him, the minds of
the Commons being transported, either with fear of their hazard, or downright
phrens* Since the times of the Guises, the affections of the Populace have not
been more violently carried forth upon any other. Again the Parliament writes
to Plessis Guenegault, the Kings Secretary and Register of the Council, a
Letter containing and mo^ virulent Libel against Mazarine. The substance of it,
was as of the rest: that they were ready to obey his Majesty, so that Mazarine
might be removed (...) brought to Trial. That his power was unsufferable: he
did alienate the affections of the King from the welfare of his Subjects. All
things must be managed at his will and pleasure. That the public Reven^^^
raised by whatever difficulties, were interverted to (...) private and
particular occasions; and what mean^ had been designed by the cares of our
Ancestors f^^ supporting the common safety and honor, were by a sad
miscarriage lavished out upon certain persons the cannot yet lose the memory of
their former obscurity and the apprehensions, left themselves or their Hei^^
should again relapse into it. That a new broad (...) Nephews is every day
expected from Rome to be obtruded upon us, and their insatiable avarice and
ambition crammed at the public Charge. That the Prince was captivated and
abused by their Enchantments, to injure himself and Subjects with a destructive
indulgence and immoderate profuseness. But y^^ so vigorous a Reverence the
French had toward Maj^^^ imprinted in them; That the very Cradles of such (...)
were born to the Crown, did strike an awe into th^^ with a secret instinct, and
they never presumed to withdraw their Allegiance from them. That Mazarine, to
lay the grounds of his tyrannical Usurpation, did form the young Kings mind
according to his own: and disposed the affections of his Majesty, without any
regard to Persons of Merit, toward his own Creatures; thinking himself a
loser, as often as any besides himself or his Partisans, had any gift bestowed
upon him by the Royal Bounty. That the Queen being deceived by the false
Virtues, or the glittering Vices of him, did certainly, not indeed destine the
wealthiest Citizens to her present passion, but like Victimes, reserve them to
a more safe vengeance. These and suck like expressions the Paper contained,
pretending to be sent by the whole Parliament, whose sounder part complied with
the Mutineers, not so much through their own disaffection, as the malignancy of
the Times. But those who did obstinately carry on the Faction among the people,
were either such as knew in their own conscience, that they were guilty of some
other Crimes, besides the villainy of the Civil War, [and so lent that breath to
the Tumult, which of right belonged to the Halter:] or such whose indigence
feared to beg in peace, and lived upon the Troubles of the State. Many were led
aside by their own simplicity and easiness of belief, who, when the Visors were
thrown off, were not a little troubled, how they might come about again to be
honest; the truth of their Leaders growing every day more suspected: and new
Forces drawing from all parts into the Kings Camp.

So soon as ever Mazarine perceived, (for no disposition was naturally more
averse to cruelty) that the poor City might be pardoned without any dangerous
president of remissness, he was of advice that the opportunity should be laid
hold of, whilst the King on every side victorious, having disarmed the
Rebellion by the blood of a few, might in consistence with his Royal Honor,
make the Peace of his Subjects his own gift. It was resolved to send a Herald
with Letters to the Parliament, the Provost of the Merchants? and Conti, who
were promised an Act of Oblivion for their past miscarriages, so they would
come to ask the King pardon within four days. This was the first light that
sprung toward the quiet of the State, which by what steps it advanced, and at
length arrived to a full Peace, I shall discourse in short. The Herald is not
admitted into the Town, but having laid down his Packet Of Letters upon a
Turn-Pike in the Suburb of S. Honor, went back again. The Parliament proceeds
slowly, and holding a long and uncertain consideration, at length concludes
that the present opportunity of Accommodation should be embraced Thereupon they
request from the Chancellor and Tellier Pass-ports for the Kings Solicitor and
Counsel, to go safely to the Court, and give the Queen satisfaction, why the
Herald was not permitted entrance into the city. But lest, whilst these
Tendencies to Peace proceeded so fairly the City should be distressed for want
of provision, Marsillac goes to meet Noirmont, convoying store of provisions
from the Country of Brye. Granzy, under whose Command the Kings Troops were
that lay quartered at Laigne, and in that Country, prepares to fall upon
Noirmont. He wisely taking advantage of the ground, avoided engaging. The storm
discharged if self upon Marsillac, marching along the Champagne. But the
Mechanic Militia making faint resistance against the tried, that is, veterane
Royal Army, suddenly disperseth. Marsillac wounded, and hardly brought off, is
carried to Paris half dead, having received wounds more than enough quite to
dispatch him.

After safe conduct received, Talon, Melian, and Bignon go for S. Germans with
this instruction, not rashly to obstruct the Overtures of Peace now made. The
King and Queen sat in the middle: the chiefest of the Princes and Nobles on
either side. After that those three Commoners, in nature of Commisioners, had
with due Applications, and decent Behavior testified their respect to the
Assembly, and with a first and second Reverence to the King and Queen Mother,
then a little advancing, had bowed low. When they were come within competent
distance, the Queen gave significations of her favorable Reception of them.
When Talon thus began. It has been long since, Madam, the top of our desires
to lie prostrate at your feet. Under your Regency France is the most happy of
all Nations. Toward Subjects dejected and obnoxious to your Justice, extend
mercy. The only look of your Majesty is able to take vengeance on them being
penitent. We are not afraid of falling under the suspicion to have been
debauched from our Allegiance, although your people, having been harassed by
the oppression of some bad Officers has foolishly endeavored to vent their
passions upon their King and Country. For the pardon of their past license your
City will acquiesce in your Royal Word, and judge it self safe in that as in a
Garrisn. Our obedience, whenever you but please, you may command. This
boldness secured by your Parole, will be no more invited to transgress by the
taking up of Arms. Your Majesty sent us a Herald to try our Allegiance and
honesty. That we sent him back without Audience, must be imputed to our
Reverence, not obstinacy. We had not so far forgot our selves, as to stand upon
even terms with our Liege and Lord. Sovereign Powers send and receive Heralds
one from the other. If you range us in co-ordination with them, we have reason
to desire herein to be excused and disclaim an Honor above our Rank, affecting
only the glory of Loyality, and having no higher pretenses than of being
dutiful. If we have done amiss, we submit, condemn us to what punishment you
please: we are ready to undergo it, as sensible to have deserved it. When he
had done speaking, the Queen, softened with such Language, answered, They should
find none more dear to her than such as did heartily repent: and this the issue
should demonstrate. In the mean time they were referred to hear her farther
pleasure from the Chancellor. He discoursed much and pertinently; bewailed the
misfortunes of the people: yet they must look to it, that there never be
occasion given to repent of the favor in chastising the Faction, rather by Law
than the Sword. In conclusion, he did not incense the Queen, but disposed her
to mercy. Afterward the door was opened, and they were carried to a place of
feasting, and made very welcome. Orleans and Conde seemed earnestly to advise
them to render themselves to the Queens mercy, from whom they might promise
themselves any thing. They returned to Paris with better success than they
expected.

Leopoldus Archduke of Austria, was then Governor in chief over the
Low Countries, not without secret instructions to have an eye over the French
Tumults. [That is the Spaniards old custom to look always obliquely upon our
prosperity, and to rejoice at our misfortunes.] One Arnolfin is sent from
Leopoldus express with Letters to the Parliament and Conti; which he first
discharged himself of, in the house of Elbaoeuf. (The Prince being scarce full
eighteen, had neither hatred nor love but such as were suggested to him by his
Sister and Marsillac, such then was his Junta, by whose instigations Noirmont
and Legue were dispatched to the Archduke.) Leopoldus promised to send Forces
to relieve Paris, so that some fortified Town or Castle of ours, upon the
Frontiers, might be put into his hands for Caution. This discovered that the
Spaniards have not yet left their old Arts. Such was the madness of some, that
they did impudently advise it as reasonable to be done. The more judicious were
utterly against it. There was in company with Leopoldus, when they entered
France, Lewis Trimonille Noirmont carried away by the stream of the Faction,
rather through his Fate, than any inclination he had to the Party from which he
was so averse, that he trembled at the Enemies entrance, and went as
Quartermaster before, more to warn the people to save their Cattle and Goods
from plunder, than any design to farther the Invasion of the Spaniard: yet for
this he was attainted, and innocent man, suffered. When as with the sole memory
of the Battle at Lentz, where being forced upon disadvantage of ground, and the
charge of the whole Enemies Battalia to retreat, at the, pass^^^ over a Brook
that lay between, when he was join with Conde, did such excellent Service, as
might easily erase what he did after, which swerved from Allegiance to the
King. Arnolsin desires to be admitted to the Parliament; and what was to be
admired, or detested rather, he was admitted: an^ presented the Archdukes
Letters to so venerabl^ an Assembly, making brave and great promises i^
Leopoldus his Name. It has hardly been known* that any matter was more nicely
scanned A^ length the well-affected Party reclaimed the seduced Members to
better courses. They scattered the mist of Error, and pierced the Spanish
Artifices and subtle Designs; and resolved it is upon the question, that in
all cases the Spaniard be suspected though he bring Presents. The Parliament of
Paris neither wrought off by the vain preparation of the Commanders, nor the
promises of the Spaniards, choose certain Commissioners to send to the King and
Queen, their prime President Mole, Me^mius, and Violet, with the chiefest of
their Members for honesty and experience.

About the same time, what I must not pass over in silence, the pestilent Star
of Rebellion did influence England with the like Contagion, which forgetting
its Allegiance and Interest, and breaking in upon the Sacred and Venerable
Presence of Majesty, did not spare its own natural and lawful King Charles held
his Kingdom by Succession from his Father. A Prince of a most mild temper, nor
moved with necessary severity against Offenders. Not naturally much addicted to
business, as diverted perchance, by the security of a long Peace, entrusted
Himself and his Estate to some imfaithful Counsel^ors. From whence were all the
mischiefs occasioned which befell that Best King, to the particular Odium and
Infamy, principally of Cromwell, who taking advantage of Charles his temper,
and of the weaknesses and errors in the Government, poisons and corrupts all
the parts of the Kingdom. Hereupon Frenzy and Ambition take up Arms against
the King, and when he was brought low, lay violent hands upon him. The King
awakned too late, began to assert his Honor and Cause, but was now debarred of
his Liberty; a Prince for Gallanty of Spirit inferior to no King; and that
could not have been overreached but by his excess of Goodness; was driven by
the Villainy of others to exert his own Virtues. Cromwell, a Person bold, and of
a deep reach, that had fair words at will to carry on his own designs, second
to no man living in Cruelty and Pride, whenever he might exercise it with
safety: at length went so far, whether by Fate, or the corruption of the Times,
that upon the Scaffold (as is notorious to all) King Charles in a pretended
form of Law, by Sentence of a High Court of Justice, in the view of his
Subjects, had his Head cut off, by the wicked hand of the Hangman. Thus much by
the by, because I have already hinted it in the former Book: there will be
elsewhere a fitter place to dilate upon Cromwell, who yet reaking with the
blood of his Sovereign, soon after invaded his Throne.

The storm seemed now to allay at Paris, when in these condescensions an
Accident about Thurenne had well-nigh disturbed the Treaty of Peace. He was
chief Commander in Alsatia, over an Army compounded partly of French, but
principally of (...) veterane Band of Germans. He being summonel by diverse
Letters of the King, frames dilatory Excuses, then apparently prolonges time in
slow Marches, not without ground judging that to what side soever he should
take, he would turn the scale (...) that side. De Bouillon, upon disgust for
the loss of Sedan, gave his Brother evil counsel. Thuren^^^ that had so often
deserved great matters, did perhaps not untruly complain, that performances had
not come up to promises. Mazarine was aware of Thurennes disaffection;
therefore he sends into his Camp Harwald that should pay the Germans, and
separate them to his Majesty's Service. Those of that Nation being unacquainted
with fraud, preferred solid and massive honor before vain and uncertain
fancies. So Thurenne being deserted by his Army, scarcely escaped with his
life, discomposed with the ill success of his undertakings. Hereupon turning
aside into by-ways, with a small Retinue, he bore the punishment of his
indigested Plot. One that was afterward to countervail a small miscarriage
gloriously with so many gallant Actions; Often happy, always brave. The Troops
were anew sworn to obey the King, and entrusted to the Conduct of Rosa.

Kantzow an Holsteiner, that is next door to (...) Dane, having through all the
steps of military Preferment, gotten also the dignity of being Marescha of
France (which is rare for a Stranger) then Governor of the Town and Fort of
Dunkirk (as has been already specified) a huge Argument of Trust, is believed,
upon occasion of these Troubles, to have held Intelligence with the Spaniard,
to the rendering his ears nocent, but with a mind impenetrable to revolt. In
his drink he poured out many expressions, especially against Conde, whom he
believed not without reason to bear a Pique against him. This was the cause of
Rantzows disgrace. For Conude taking hold of the occasion, thrust the Dane
headlong: who being called, presently comes before the King, without indenting
beforehand, confident because he was not conscious to himself of any crime. He
was conveyed to the Prison at Vincennes, where he contracted an incurable
disease through Melancholy and fretting; so that wellnigh all his limbs cut off
by the Surgeon. The Trunk of his Carcass had more generous indignation, than
the entire bodies of many. His Wife cherishing her grief, instead of an
Husband, takes pleasure in her-tears, and sustains the want of her Lord by
laudable comforts, setting an Example of Honor and Constancy.

At S. Germans the principal Lords of the Kings Council did earnestly treat of
Peace with the Parliaments Commissioners. Mazarine being excluded, as already
pre-condemned by public Acts; some Courtiers most violently drawing that way,
that they might engross to themselves the Honor of having procured the Quiet
of the State. The Queen opposed it strongly; and at length when he was taken
in, March 11. 1649. the Articles were agreed to the great content and joy of
the common People: That an Act of Oblivion for past miscarriages be made: That
all things be restored to their former estate: That the King be brought home
again to Paris: Taxes diminished: a Treaty of Peace with the Spaniard consented
to; and some Member of the House, worshipful for Age and Experience, of the
principal ones, be joined in the Transaction, to see it concluded upon good and
firm Terms. The other Particulars, the Reader that is curious of such matter
may extract out of the Public Journals. So the present Tumult being composed
almost without bloodshed, the Parliament Men returned into the City joyful, as
if through their Dignity and Policy they had made the Conditions better to be
gained* Certain it is, that those Articles were dishonorable to the King, who
being ready by force of Arms to dispatch that Hydra, yielded to it, after it
was lai^ flat, those Concessions, which it would have despaired to obtain, when
it was strong and erect But that any fair issue was put to the business, mu^^
be imputed to the Policy of Mazarine, that perceived all was unsound in the
great Courtiers; and could not set bounds to the Ambition of Conde.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. The Sedition at Paris is hardly quiet. The Faction works in new
Plots. There is a Rising in Provence, and especially in Guyenne, against their
Governors, which Conde underhand abets; Crossing Mazarine openly every way;
defeats all his Designs, and Marriages treated for his Nieces: till at length
growing burdensome to the Court, and more to the Slingers, be procures himself
his own Brother, and hit Brother in Law Imprisonment to the grief of but few.

ALL that time, which immediately followed the Pacification agreed on at S.
Germans, was disquieted with diverse Attempts of stirring up Faction: and such
was the state of the City, as seem^ rather no War, than any Peace. There was
indee^ no fighting, no plundering, no firing of Town* All things were carried
without effusion of blood yet not with a hearty composure of affections. The
City had more plentiful supply of provision, an^ every one was delivered from
fear of an immine^^ Famine. But the minds of men were observed (...) stand
diversely affected, according to their sever^^ Interests: and the inconveniences
of War broke out, though not in ouvert Action, yet by covert designs. Conde,
although he were discovered by many pregnant presumptions, and were looked upon
generally, and discoursed of, as inclining to disaffected party, yet continued
to bear as formerly (...) seeming respect toward Mazarine. Beaufort, the Head
of the Slingers in the Town, delighted in the popular Applause. The Duke of
Vendosme, and Mercoeur his eldest Son, being tired out with trouble that had
lain long and heavy upon them, avowedly courted the Favor and Alliance of
Mazarine, as the only remedy of their distressed estate. The Duchess of
Mancini his Niece, occasioned this disturbance, whilst some were for the
matching her with Mercoeur, others drew against it. From hence came that seed,
which afterward grew into a plentiful crop of troubles. Mazarine perceiving
the affections of all Parties so unsound toward him was resolved to confirm
his interest by some potent Alliance; and that the rather, because the Queens
pleasure stood that way inclined. Here it was judged fit to advance in Offices
and Wealth Mercoeur, that first offered himself, being of the Blood Royal. The
Queen was at the present inverted in the Admiralty, ever since the death of
Breze, for the avoiding of quarrels between the Competitors. She is content to
divest her self of that, in favor of the Match; whether the charge were
bestowed on Vendosme, or his Son Mercoeur. Beaufort the more to endear himself
to the people, decrys the purpose of both the Father, and his eldest Son: the
Father was glad that he had a double support in his two Sons. The Abbot de la
Rivieres prevailed upon Orleans to give his consent to the Match; whereupon
Mazarine carries it on with the confidence; supposing too that he had been
sure of Conde. For he apprehended, that without asking his consent, much less
in despite of him, he might not once aspire to that Match with young Mercoeur:
nay, without Beansorts consent, he refused to proceed any farther, that so he
might curb his youthful spirits apt to fly out, and might carry off from the
Mutineers one of their great Supporters. He had no other design in matching his
Nieces, but that of the French: and did it more to advance the public Peace,
than his private Fortunes; since he might have had better offers at Rome, or in
Italy, than in France. Conde did for some time demur before he would openly
declare his Judgment. Not a few persons, rather imported by their own passions,
than tender of the Princes Honor, did spur him on day and night, advising him
not to let Fortune, which now offered it self so fairly to him, slip out of his
hands, and had rather have all things again thrown into confusion, than that he
should rest satisfied in an offer of certain quietness: nor were there
Flatterers wanting, who would have pushed his generous mind and spirit, raised
up in expectation of great preferment, but unwary of bad Artifices, to pursue
fairer hopes. The general distant of Mazarine, and indignation of being
enthralled to a Foreigners Usurpation, got him many friends The Duke de
Bouillon and Chavigny were the chief: the former immensely greedy after a
Change, that at last he might find some opportunity by our Troubles, to recover
his Town of Sedan. The latter not being able to bear with any patience the loss
of his Greatness, and his being turned out of Favou^. Conde having been long
divided in his thoughts, at length thus resolves to fall upon Mazarine; to
affront him, above board, and no longer underhand to thwart him. That was the
first day of our calamity; that the last of the French concord. Gla^ was the
Sling at Condes falling off, by the Treachery of which, he was afterward
scornfully cast into prison. In the mean time the Spaniards assault S. Venant
and Ypres; whereupon it is resolved that the Court should leave S. Germans, and
go to Co^pingne, that so they might at less distance discover the Enemies
designs, and be nearer to obviate them Paris that is never pleased, complains
that they had carried away the King. From that occasion reproaches are thrown
upon Mazarine, and Libel^ without end. It was judged fit to dispatch Orleans
about the beginning of June, to heal the discontents of the people. The Provost
des Marchand^ with the assistance of some grave Citizens, restrain the
licentiousness of so many dangerous Pamphlets Orleans is most instantly
requested, that his Majesty might be induced to return with all convenient
speed to his Capital City, that this Article was of indispensable necessity to
preserve the public quiet, and the earnest prayer of all the honest party.
Mazarine could not digest that his Majesty should abide there, where at the
turning of the tide, the waves of the late Sedition did yet roll.

At that time Marshall d'Hoquincourt, under color that a Plot had been laid
for him in the Camp, of a sudden withdraws himself from the imminent danger, as
he pretended; and keeping close within Peronne, gave some umbrage, as though he
had been wavering. Mazarine had thoughts of the Government of Picardy; but
whether he could not agree with d'Elboeuf about the price, or whether he were
uncertain of gaining himself the fortified Towns in that Country, waving that
intention, he thought upon some others. Now such a value he had for
Hoquincourt, that he declared himself to have an ambition for his friendship.
Both on a certain day meet at an appointed place: and as if they had been to
engage in a Duel, are both attended with an equal number of Soldiers. There
were strict Articles agreed on, which held for some time, but afterward the
agreement broke, and they fell into extreme dissensions.

During this time the Army growing soft by disuse of Action, and pillaging the
Country where it lay idle, it was resolved speedily to put them upon some
considerable employment; to the end both of giving the Enemy terror, and
getting them reputation amidst the Rebels. The Kings Counsel were divided about
the matter of the Expedition. Some advised Doway; others Aviennes. Mazarine
pressed that Cambray rather than any should be attaqued, having at that time
but 500 men in Garrison, as certain information had been brought. It is a
Frontier Town upon the Border of France, heretofore in a manner a Free State,
but Homager to the Empire; ruled by its Archbishop, under certain Laws:
standing on the right side of the Scaldy or Escault. A City eyed jealously, as
being of great moment to which side soever it belongs. The Generalship is
proffered to the Prince of Conde, upon his refusal Harcourt accepts it: who
beleaguers Cambray, but without any effect; for upon the conveying in of
succors, one night in a fog by the negligence of the Sentinels, the Siege was
raised before it was well laid; at which the Faction laughed, and not a few of
the Courtiers were well pleased. Mazarine was thought to have taken up that
resolution, that he might have made the Town his own, after it had been taken.
So had it been heretofore granted Balagny, and having been lost by his
negligence, is at this day held by the Spaniard in right of Conquest.

Amidst these Affairs, the War not being closely pursued, Convoys past freely
on all parts. The Courtiers spend their time in Feasts, and entertaining one
another. And because there is no cheer without it be made in Paris, thither
Jarcey, Jerzy, San-Megrin, and diverse others post up. These being at Supper
with Candale at Renards were very merry, when of a sudden Beaufort comes in
upon them, as they were in their Jollity, and gives Jerzey threatening language
(nay some say farther, that he bastonado'd him.) The Company dissolves; the
Board is tumbled down; you would have thought it the Fray of the, Lapithae. It
was given out, that the matter could no ways be made up, but in a fair Duel.
But after the French wont, the beginning of the quarrel is hot, but the end
flags, their tempers being easily wrought upon. Much Broth was spilt on the
Table-cloth, but no bloodshed, and after such a sharp bickering, all presently
were made very good friends.

Two things did most afflict Mazarine; the unhappy attempt upon Cambray, and
the Borders laid waste by Free-quarters, where a general dearth was very sore.
Then to delude melancholy, he goes into the French Camp, accompanied with the
chief of the Courtiers, as though he would treat with Pignoranda at
Valenciennes about Peace. It is incredible, with what Art, Eloquence, and
smoothness of Language he assuaged the most unruly; especially the Alemans whom
he promised, and at length gave leave to make an Incursion into the Enemies
Country. All parts were there laid waste, to no less damage, than terror; the
Cattle driven: the Soldier satisfied. Harcourt, that he might not be thought
to have done nothing all that Campaigne storms Conde, a Town situated in a
Plain on the Scheldt, and the Aon. Mazarine returns to Compiegne; where the
Prince is reported to have used many arguments to persuade the Queen Regent,
That his Majesty could not be kept any longer out of the City; that many evil
consequences would come upon it, which must all be imputed to the
maladministration of Mazarine. Orleans came over to give the same advice.
Both of them jointly were not as before when several, submissive, but
imperious. Orleans as the Kings Uncle, bearing great sway. In Conde resided the
supreme Command and Glory of the Martial Power. Therefore it was concluded the
better course to comply with their advice, thaw by drawing Counter, to give the
Faction advantage.

Therefore August 16. in the year 1649. his Majesty is welcomed into the City.
His Entry was remarkable for all expressions of joy. The City in great
Companies went out to meet him: all the adjacent Country rung with
acclamations: Bonfires burnt all night: and drunken Revellings were held in the
several quarters. The King sitting in the one Boot of the Coach, between his
Uncle and Brother, was pleased with the Applauses of his People; in the
opposite, Conde had by his side Cardinal Mazarine, who sat as the multitude
scouled upon him, all the while undaunted. The Queen Regent, with the eldest
Daughter of the Duke of Orleans, and the Mother of the Prince of Conde, sat in
the end of the Co^ch. The more ample Relation of his Majesty's proceeding may
be fetched from diverse Records: what is sufficient for an History, I have
delivered; for I neither write Journals not Gazettes. The face of the City was
then cheerful, all persons returning to the obedience of their Liege Lord. No
longer did the Military right prevail to the contempt of the Magistrate. On S.
Louys his day, the King attended by a great number of Courtiers, rode through
the City on Horseback, that he might gratify his Subjects longing to see him,
all all the way from the Louvre to the Church of S. Louys. A little before him,
Mazarine had gone thither in a Coach without any Attendants though the high
Streets: discovering not any sign of fear, though he had received several
Advices not to stir forth. Guarded by his conscience, and the favor of his
Prince, he dreaded no vain brutes, triumphing in the affections of the honest
party with ^ better Train: hated of none, but such as rejoiced at the public
misery, and thinking they should thereby escaped punishment, laid the
foundations of repairing their private fortunes in the common Delinquency.
Which State Policy of theirs, the issue afterward declared.

The Treaty of Marriage with the Duke de Merc^^ur, that had been intermitted
during this appearance of public Accommodation, began to be set a foot afresh.
The Son compliant to his Fathers pleasure, would voluntarily quit the
Admiralship, so that at the decease of his Father, the charge might devolve
upon him. But the Match is again disturbed, because Mazarine was unwilling to
have it concluded against Condes will. Right and reason might permit that
Conde, the sole Heir of Breze, should be promoted to all the advantages of his
Kinsman: at least that the Father of Breze, Marshall of France, no
contemptible man, should succeed his deceased Son, for the consolation of his
childless condition. These things were commonly given out but in an
unseasonable time. All this while Beaufort does not give off siding with the
disaffected party; yet comes to Court, waits upon his Majesty, pays there his
duty, but never offers to visit Mazarine. The Queen testified how ill she took
that, by her cold reception of him: which again turned to his reputation with
the party. AH the talk is, That whil^^, everyone looks after his private
concern, no body minds the Public Good. Mazarine to no effect tryes diverse
means of winning over the Youths spirit to espouse his party, even by the
persuasion of both his Parents. He haughtily rejects all, choosing rather to
gratify the pleasure of Madam Mombazon, with whose eyes he was enthralled.
Such influence had a Mistress! He thought himself sufficiently happy, so he
were but cried up for a brave Slinger, no Mazarinist (thus were the Royalists
nicknamed.) In the City men's minds stood diversely affected. All Politicians,
and that were Masters in Court-craft, presaged some great alteration in the
State. And because Mazarines power was at that time most restrained, he was
forced to give way to comply with plausible shadows of reason, rather than
adhere to solid connsels. Many were transported by discontent, because they
thought they were not rewarded proportionably to their merits* All excess is
venial in a multitude of Delinquents amidst Tumults that minister confidence.

About the same time Michael Particelli L. of Emeri, that had been turned out
of the Treasurers place, was restored again to his Office; but the especial
meditation of Conde; whether it were to show his greatness, or to procure
matter of new Tumults, or in remembrance of friendly offices formerly performed
him, or upon expectation of any to be performed him hereafter. Many in their
Speeches in the Parliament inveighed against the former life of Emeri, saying:
Pimps and Parasites, Fiddlers and Strumpets were no proper instruments for a
Minister of State: but that persons of lewd and d^bauched conversation ware
troublesome in War, expensive in Peace, detestable to all honest men; and
procured nothing but calamity and destruction. Now the House of Emeri still
roared with such sinks of looseness. This restored charge was fruitless to
Conde, destructive to Emeri, comfortable to neither. For besides that
Particelli having lost his good parts, was now sunk in sottishness, being
restored to his place, he had his mind dissolved, and his body enervated with
the inveigling allurements of pleasure; so that he closed his loathed Ministry,
and loose life with a miserable Catastrophe. As if the Royal Treasure had some
infection of lust; so that the Venereal distemper were fatal to all Treasurers.

Now the same Malignancy raged with an Epidemical Contagion all over Provence
and Guyenne. In Provence this was the state of Affairs. It was resolved for a
new design of getting money to increase a Parliament at Aix, with new
Counselors that were to divide the Jurisdiction, every six months, for a
certain sum, which every one was to give. This was highly offensive to the old
Members, to have their Authority thus divided, and of perpetual made temporary.
From hence was the source of the Troubles, which springing from a small rise,
prevailed almost to the destruction of the Province. The Instructions from
Court were: That way must be given to the popular fury: That the Royal
Authority still gains by delay; but the ill Plots of Subjects are always
defeated by time: That the Innovation of limiting the Authority to six months,
for a while should be kept under Deck; the Mutineers should in due season be
punished: In the execution of all this, there must be a fair carriage and
secre^^^. These private Articles are committed to the single fidelity of the
Governor, who not being able to keep counsel, imparts his Majesty's
Instructions to one, and then another, and they to more; so by spreading
farther, the mystery was revealed: for which openness the Count d'Ales
afterward smarted severely. For of a sudden the Faction takes fire, and that
Parliament votes against Mazari^^; as plotting the ruin of the Province: it
joins with the Parliament of Paris, that Mazarine must be banished; the Count
d'Ales turned out of his Government; and such other particulars as their fury
did dictate. The Count d'Ales does not conceal his resentments, but breathing
out revenge, gives order that the Noblesse which were his friends, and all his
Creatures should take up Arms; casts some of the Mutineers in prison, without
considering, That he should not have disobliged those, whom he could not
destroy. Farther, upon a contest, one of the Parliaments Messengers was killed
by a Soldier of the Governors. Hereupon the Tumult swelled, especially because
upon a Holy Day, when they were going in Procession to S. Sebastians, which
stands without the Town, a Peasant cried out, that the City-gates were a
shutting, to keep the Burgers out from returning to their houses. The Count
d'Ales with 5000 Foot, and 500 Horse, and no small number of the Gentry,
assaults and takes the neighboring Towns. At length draws up to Aix, and of
200 that sallied out, a Piquering cuts off every man. The Kings Proclamation of
Obli^^ion and Amnesty for what has past is seasonably offered; and an
Agreement being made, every one returns to his wonted employment; and the six
months grievance is abolished for ever. Thus many obstructions of the public
Peace, through the discontents of Provence, were removed by the prudent Conduct
of Mazarine: much against the strain of Nostradamus his Prophecies, who by the
contrary event is convicted to have given lying predictions to his Countrymen.
[This Impostor Was born at Sisteron, a City of Provence. There are several
Centuries walk about as his, being indeed dark, and ambiguous: because before
things come to pass, men may hope or fear; or when they become to pass, men may
aver the truth of promises. Besides, they are so couched, as they may
comprehend different events, and are capable of several constructions. Now,
though these are daily interlined and enlarged with new insertions, yet such is
the madness of credulous men, that they stick not to contend for the truth of
what they understand not, and though they be trapped in an evident untruth,
will not be undeceived.

But the Star of the Bourdelois did strangely symbolize with that of tne
Parisian; and no wonder when Paris was mad, for Bourdeaux to be out of its
wits. Now if any one should inquire, what cause did over-cast the serenity of
Guyenne? there will be found no sufficient occasion. Let but any one reflect in
the first place upon all stirs, how much the inconstancy of that Country is
wont to take upon it self, how much disgust of the present State and desire of
Innovation has been, and will be in that Capital City of a warlike Sept.
Where, by reason of the indulgent weather, and Hills clothed with Vineyards, a
small Estate may maintain debauchery: amidst sprightful Wits, that have hands
perpetually bent to fighting. A Country want^^ with their prosperity, having no
Enemy abroad, must seek out one at home; and like the Sympleg^des delights to
dash against themselves. Therefore the Acts of the Parliament of Paris are
magnified by them; and their courage extolled: from whence arises an emulation
of doing the like* Besides there were Ladies too in those quarters that must
rival the Dames of Paris, and were no less amorous. There only needed to dress
up a person upon whom the Faction already kindled in their minds, might
discharge its strength.

The Duke of Espernon, that was deputed Governor over Guyenne, seemed proper to
be made the Ball that should be tossed. His pride joined with covetousness is
condemned. The Court of that Parliament reject his Orders by their own
Ordinances: impeach him before the King, as their Enemy, and contriving the
ruin of Guyenne: chahge all his severity to proceed from ambition, as though
je would erect himself some petty Empire by enslaving Bourdeaux That he
shamefully ingr^ssed their Wheat; the trucking and exporting of which, enhanced
the price of Corn, otherwise plentiful in those parts: and that (...) farther
thought of laying a new Impost upon every T^^ of Wine. That he was building a
Fort at Livorne, with design to bridle Bourdeaux which he was resolved to
disarm; and to batter the innocent Town from the Citadel of Trompet with
Ordnance, brought thither from the old Castle of Ha.

Now the common People hearkened to this, because they hated him: and they hated
him, because at that time such a rebellious Star reigned, as that it was
fitting for the storm of Envy to pour upon any head, so it might fall
somewhere. He, as he was of a lofty pirit, and confident, slighted their
threats and conspiracies, or made show as though he had slighted them, lest it
might seem possible he should be deprest in that City, where through the daring
valor of his Father, an eternal Interest of the House of Espernon was thought
to have been founded. The most remarkable Ringleaders of the dissatisfied party
were Murat, Picon, but above all Dafie, and Lavie, the Kings Advocate, a prime
man among them, their very Captain, and principal Leader.

Several Expedients are tried for composing the difference. All are thrown out
by the violence of the Faction. Espernon, although strong with the Kings
Soldiers, and the assistance of his own Dependents and Friends, retired out of
Town, lest the Royal Majesty might seem to have been violated in the person of
his Lieutenant. The Bourdelois raise Land-Souldiers and Seamen. The Regiments
are recruited with new Levies. All the Youth love to be handling Arms. Every
one strives to be ennobled, though by bad action, rather than to sit idle.
Hostility is acted on both sides. D' Espernon must be turned out as the
occasion of the Troubles: this is the only remedy, all other offers are but
vain.

Mazarine holds earnestly for the contrary* that never were such Demands
yielded to* without apparent prejudice: The President would be dangerous: it
would prove not an end, bu^ step to higher insolences. That Conde would b^
that means take greater boldness; whose care it (...) to engage the Bourdelois,
as appeared by sever^^ discoveries. Nor would he let slip any opportunity of
rising, if it should be offered.

Whilst these things are transacting at Bourde^^^ the Court is rent into
contrary parties, under several pretenses. The Queen was always stiff in
maintaining Mazarine, who plainly appeared the only person in promoting the
Kings Interests, and holding up his Authority shaken on every hand: no^ thus
she judged; that he was most to be regarded* in whose spirit was courage; and
what she foun^ most useful, that must be retained for preservatio^ of their
security. But that Conde who was ope^^^ contrary to the Public Good, must be
represt; all (...) advantages upon the confidence of which he carrie^ himself
so high, were to be retrenched: therefo^^ Espernon must be preserved from
falling under the Rebels; and rather than afterward, Guyenne (...) important
to whatsoever Party it takes, should be (...) wholly at the devotion of Conde.
That the Prove^^zals must not be abandoned to the revenge of Ales, (...) would
join with his Cousin Conde, and grow proud (...) having mastered his
Adversaries. That Orleans (...) to be won over to the Royal Cause, and linked
to it (...) means of the Abbot de la Riviere, that was to be (...) in band with
expectation of a Cardinals Cap (...) Beaufort was to be bought off by Mombazon.
That Corinth was to be inveigled with variety of hopes by Madame Chevreuse. The
Parliament to be preserved in their Allegiance by any means. That some gifts
were to be scattered amongst the busy and turbulent Spirits, to keep them
quiet: that all were to be wrought over by hopes, promises, preferments, and
all that, during this two years, all which time his Majesty could not take the
Government himself, by reason of the established Laws, and his Minority. This
was the Queens sense, who conducted all in safety amidst the high billows, it
is not to be imagined with how calm a spirit, the Divine favor presiding over
her most holy Counsels.

Orleans thath had no design but what was i^sinuated into him, partly by his
Wife, who had taken up an opinion, that the King would marry her Daughter, and
partly by the instinct of the Abbot of Riviere, who expected a Cap by the
favor of the Court, resolved to stick to the Queen: and that mainly for this
reason, to oppose Conde that was tacked about. Conde, Conti, and Longueville
(whose Lady was Condes Sister, and had her Followers too) though dissenting in
other matters, yet concurred in this; That they would not have Mazarine
removed, but taken down, so as to promote their Suits, which were no small
ones. And to have his wings clipped, that he might not sore too high, and that
the beginnings of an immoderate favor and greatness,, might be obviated upon
the remembrance of their slavery under Richlieu.

Without doubt Mazarine might have had such persons at his devotion, so he
could but have stooped to their humors, and have relaxed any thing (...) his
rigorous loyalty toward the King his Master (...) in a constant tenor of
which, he persevered undaunted maugre all Conspiracies and Threats to the
contrary.

The design of Beaufort and Corinth was to acquire a greatness that might make
them dreaded, and considerable; so that which way they should bend, they might
turn the scale: especially of C^rinth, who bore in mind his Predecessors that
had umpired in the State of France. Therefore did he cherish the commotions,
particularly in Bourdeaux* and aimed at bringing the Queen Regent at length to
that pass, as to renouunce Mazarine, and take in either himself or
Chasteaunoeuf to the prime Ministry.

In the mean while poor Guyenne, always averse from quiet courses, was torn
with intestine rage. Nor did the violence of displeasure against Espernon
abate. They fell one upon another with all extremity; and the Kings Soldiers
plundered the neighboring Towns, as if it had been the Spaniards or Enemies
Country. The Bourdelois would restrain them from pillaging, and sometimes
pillage themselves: they engaged oftentimes with success, always courageously,
although the giddy multitude had diverse Leaders. How tough the hatred was, you
may learn by this, that the Peasants upon the places adjacent to the City,
besieged in their Castles, chose rather to be burnt alive, than to come by
Surrender into the hands of the Royalists. Whosover from a moderate principle
bethought themselves how great a crime was acted, were adjudged Enemies of the
State, and banished out of Town. Letters from the Parliament of Paris scattered
seeds of War, who promised all help to the Assembly of the Parliament of
Bourdeaux. Toulouse that was ever unspotted with treasonable designs, being
invited to an Union, stoutly denied, but promised its utmost service to appear
as an Interceder in procuring a Pacification; and that by the approbation too
of Candale. But all this was fruitless: nor was it easy to part men desirous
to fight, and vaunting the strength of their Party. Nor did they any longer
contest with Declarations, but came to blows. Argenson is sent thither to treat
as Commissioner, who after diverse endeavors, when he thought he had brought
all into safe Harbor, was driven back by new billows again into the open Sea.
I will not be prolix, nor dwell any longer upon this Whirlpool of Sedition,
whenas very many have delivered these things out of vanity in too tedious
repetitions.

Argenson first went to visit Espernon at Cardillac (a pleasant Seat of the
Espernons) though Bourdeaux was not well pleased at his so doing. There what
was said in Conference, was to this purpose: That he must relieve the Garrison
at Trompet with provision, which they stood in much need of. [The Bourdelois
had so closely blocked it up, that nothing could be conveyed into it.] That the
Fort begun at Libourne must be completed; from thence sprung the Revolt, and
all those troubles that ensued, were upon that occasion. Argenson passing
between the hostile Troops on the one side and the other begged of them both,
to return home, nor to crush the hopeful beginnings of composing matters with
too hasty counsels. They promise, they will obey his Majesty's Commands;
Espernon declared he required nothing but the settlement of the Country. Not a
word of all which was true. Yet by the consent of both Parties, these Articles
were signed. Neither Party to revenge past wrong: neither to instigate their
followers to fight; neither advisedly to violate the Articles of Peace; no
Quarrels to be permitted between the Townsmen and Soldiers, which ordinarily
break out against the will of their Superiors.

The Bourdelois grown more moderate, kept within the terms prescribed, and,
according to agreement, Meal was conveyed into the Garrison at Trompette.
Espernon thought he had well ordered the present state of Affairs, so that the
Castle of Trompette were preserved from taking, and the Fort at Libourne were
built up to curb the Bourdelois. Therefore he sees that the Work be hastened
forward, a Garrison, and two great Guns, with store of Powder and Bullet be put
in. Whereupon the violence of the Faction which was abating, broke out af^esh.
Nor did Argenson escape censure, being openly cried out against, as one of
Espernons party, and an Enemy of Bourdeaux. Never were Spirits more embittered.
This is observable, that as in the Parliament of Paris the worshipful old men
were carried away with the stream of the young; so on the contrary in that of
Bourdeaux, the Elders in the Assembly hurried away the Youth, implanting ill
principles in them. Espernon having now set the Castle of Trompette in safety,
which was relieved with Provision, supported the courage of his Followers with
small pay, but great promises. Nor seemed he so much to aim that the King
should conquer, as that himself might not be conquered, resolving to stand to
no Articles; but with an hereditary pride, plotted secret means of revenge.
There is no doubt but the Peace had been then firm, had not he been unstedfast
in his promise.

About this time Argenson and his Son fell into manifest danger from the common
People; the Archbishop in vain laboring to appease them: out of whose house,
as not being safe, he went and secured himself in the Garrison of Ha, an old
Castle, either to avoid violence, or to put himself there as an Hostage.
However the matter were, there was he obliged to write a Letter to the Governor
of Libourne, wherein he was required to demolish that building which gave cause
of jealousy. Though Argenson knew this would be ineffectual, as he had reason
to believe; having no authority over the Governor of Libourne; yet he did it to
pacify the Sedition, for a small space stilling with a temporary remedy that
anger which would break out more violently. The Son of Argenson rides to
Libourne, carrying with him his Fathers Orders, which were not obeyed. But
Argenson by some means or other getting free, prefently waited on Espernon, who
promised to do his endeavor, that the Sconce at Libourme might speedily be
razed to the ground.

The Bourdelois not brooking any delay, nor much confiding on the word of
Espernon, levying fresh Forces, draw up again in Arms; and lead out of the City
all the strength they could draw together, to make the greater appearance. I
find there were 7000 men in Arms set in array in the field. They march toward
Libourne; and encamp not far from the Town, without raising any Works.

Espernon rejoicing that he had a desired opportunity of giving Battle to the
Faction, no longer sheltered within Walls, but exposed in vast Plain; directly
leads the Kings Soldiers and his own Followers with the band of the Gentry
against the Rebels. At first there were light Skirmishes engaged with variety
of Fortune. The valor of his Soldiers made for Espernon the number for the
Mutineers, which could not carry it. For upon a charge made after the Rules of
Martial Discipline; the Companies of new-raised Soldiers were routed, and put
to flight. Some slain; others swallowed up in the gulf of the Dordonne. Their
Leader Chambaret sighting stoutly, died; the Prisoners were brought to
Espernon, who not rising his Victory with sufficient moderation, grew much
elevated in his spirit: and drawing toward Bourdeaux, made a halt at Grave,
two miles off the Town. There the Archbishop and certain Commissioners of the
Town treated with him in fair terms of Application, about the submission and
protection of the Town, to which he was invited.

Espernon through the great persuasions of Argenson resolves to enter the City,
so he might have a reception suitable to his Dignity. The Burgers agree to it:
not the Parliament, which always stood off from any treating with Espernon, as
unsafe. Therefore the Barricadoes of the Streets being taken away, and
Lusigniac, who supplied the place of Chambaret lately slain, being turned out
of the Town with his Soldiers, Espernon finds all things at his disposal. No
where did ever appear more evident hopes of composing differences. They seemed
mutually to blame their disaster, which had induced such a necessity of
misunderstanding. Espernon having spent but few days at Bourdeaux with a show
of reconciliation, retired to Cadillac, meditating rather revenge, than to be
quiet. But had he longer continued in person with them that were froward, yet
so as they might have been brought over with fair usage; they would all have
come into their obedience. But as much of those mischiefs is to be imputed to
the unquiet disposition of the people, so more to the arrogance of Espernon:
into whose recesses the Faction prying, could easily discover a bottom,
ulcerated with study of revenge.

Espernon being out of the reach of the storms at Bourdeaux, dispatched
Argenson the Son to the Court, which was then at Amiens, that he might at large
relate the whole matter to get the people pardoned; but the Parliament
suspended. Whilst this is six months debating in the Privy Council, the Faction
gathers strength by delay. [These many past Ages it has been observed, that
amongst the French beneficial Counsels are slow, but hurtful exceeding quick in
their dispatch.] The Court rejoicing at the successes of Espernon, willingly
embraces his advice, and sends Guitald Cominges with two Pursuivants, wearing
the Badge of a Chain, that in the Kings Name should suspend the Parliament of
Bourdeaux from all Jurisdiction.

Espernon, Argenson, and Guitald enter the Palace, keeping close to themselves
the matter about which they came. But as the mind of the Faction was watchful,
they thought that to be which they feared would be, and easily perceived the
matter. Therefore these were denied entrance into the House. Espernon attempts
by his Followers to break open the door; which turned to be unlucky. For the
common People, whether of their own inclination, or by the instigation of any
other, broke out into a sudden rage, and gave an Alarm over all the streets.

Espernon thought it his safer course to go away, than stand the dangers that
were imminent. He quits the Town, and gets him to his Seat of Puipaul, and
afterward went to Cadillac; at last to Agennois, where he lingered,
unhandsomly casting about to work his revenge. I can scarcely reach in words
with what scorns he was vilified, with what reproaches affronted, when he left
Bourdeaux.

Finding all the effects of a popular indignation, in the most outrageous
wreaking of their inveterate spleen. Some secretly pitied him, but their
kindness would do no good. Then surely appeared evidently the truth of that
Maxim; That Honor void of merit vanishes in a moment. Cominges assaying to
make up all breaches, lost his labor. Argenson politickly got leave to be
dismissed, not having found any fit opportunity of doing the service he
desired. The Faction is now no more at variance with it self in diversity of
Judgments. The Corpse of the Parliament and City are united together, and make
it their whole business to contrive way^ whereby the whole Odium may be
retorted upon Espernon, who residing at Agennois, with making Entertainments,
purchased a reputation among his Trencher-companions, that would not long
continue. Now he would make sumptuous Feasts; anon by saving of a little money;
but all the while prodigal of his fame.

Word being brought to Court of this so notable a change of Affairs, it is
resolved by any means to assuage the new Tumult; and to release the
Commissioners of Bourdeaux, that were kept in custody at Senbis, sending them
home to promise in the Kings behalf all just condescensions to the Parliament
and Burgers of their Town, provided they would but heartily return to their
duty.

About this time Guinet, weary of his Office (he was Captain General of the
Forces of Bourdeaux) had resigned up his Commission in favor of Saubeuf. First
he had made offer of it to Bouillon, who presently communicated it to Conde.
Saubeuf being gracious with the people, watched for the opportunity of some
Stirs, that he might come into Honor. Hs was no mean person, who had taken the
party of Orleans with Montmorency; afterward was Lieutenant General to the
Duke of Parma. Under the Conduct therefore of this Saubeuf are new preparations
for War made, both by Sea and Land. Several sorts of Vessels are made, whereby
the Bourdelois might be rendered Masters of the Garonne.

The News of this at Court increased the perplexities of Mazarine, who foresaw
the only remedy of these distractions to be in the Revocation of Espernon: and
he could not be revoked without the substituting Conde in his place; of whom
the whole Faction was fond, as a person suitable to the present state of
Affairs. Therefore Mazarine, as has been already said, could by no means ^e
brought to it: reasonably fearing worse consequences from their excessive
affection to Conde, than their hatred of Espernon. Some thoughts were of
sending Orleans thither, who carried so much dignity, as might serve to appease
the disorders. The Proposal did not please Orleans, whether it were that he
doubted of the issue, or out of an inbred affection to his ease. Nay it was
debated, whether the Kings Majesty should go thither in Person: but the State
of Paris required his Royal presence. At length Praslin du Plessis received
this difficult Employment.

He did not go straight to Bourdeaux, lest he should distaste Espernon, nor to
Cadillac, lest he might offend the Bourdelois: but made a stop at Lormont:
where in Conference with the Commissioners both from the City and the
Parliament, he endeavors to restore the City and Guyenne to its ancient quiet.
Then was the Fort at Trompet closely beleaguered, from the Siege of which he
could by no Arguments prevail to withdraw the Bourdelois: nay, the more he
insisted upon that unseasonable Article, the more eager was the Siege pressed,
till at length it had that success, as we shall afterward mention. The issue
of the Treaty, was Espernon must be removed; or the incensed City would stand
it out to the last. And when Praslin spoke of Moderation, he was hissed by the
most, and called in derision Argenson, as though he trod in his steps.

Lavieu returns again to the Court, to relate his own and his Countries
Adventures: That neither the Parliament nor Bourdeaux did deny to discharge
their duty; that the Townsmen were all ready to approve their Loyalty, so they
might not be in subjection to Espernon, whom they called the Stone of stumbling.

Lavieu promised his faithful Service, in reclaiming them at the Council board;
when he was got to Bourdeaux, his performances were not agreeable to his
promises. Certain it is, he always suggested turbulent insinuations, and
opposed any accommodation, secretly practicing Conde above others to stand by
Bourdeaux in this Juncture of Affairs; to undertake the Patronage of the
distressed City, which chose him as the Protector and Recoverer of its Liberty.
He bids Lavien be of good courage, he would stand or fall with them. Which
afterward Lavieu when he came home, reported with more ample circumstances to
put his Townsmen in hope, and encourage the Faction with vain promises, wherein
he was always a main Instrument.

When Candale did by a certain Confident move Conde, that he would not abet the
disorderly Riots to create a feud between himself and the House of Espernon;
they report that the Prince should make answer, He would do all that lay in his
power to gratify the Espernons, so he might be secured of their assistance,
and faithfulness to him, which waysoever matters should turn. Candale rightly
interpreting that speech to tend toward the diminution of his Faith, that was
due to his Sovereign only, neglected to purchase Conde at such a rate. These
passages coming to light, and reported at Bourdeaux, might have been sufficient
to have removed any hopes on Conde, had not an unbridled rage blinded the poor
Burgers: who, though they had often received warning, that nothing was to be
expected from Cande, yet would always place their confidence of being protected
on him. So easy and obvious a thing is it under any Mask to bewitch the
multitude. All this time the Castle of Trompette being distressed with the want
of all necessaries, could no longer hold out upon hopes of relief: from whence
it came, that those of the Garrison being pinched with hunger, drove certain
beasts that grazed thereabouts, into their Works. Which proved not their
succor, but their ruin; for presently the Castle was straightly begirt, and
battered with Artillery of all sort. Those of the Garrison discharge their
Guns. Open Hostility is acted on every side. Saubeuf with Lusignan quarter
Soldiers in the adjacent parts, from whence the Garrison being in extremity,
might have been succored, and fill the Churches too with Guards. They seize
upon Podensac, and S. Georges Isle. They rifle the Houses and Farms of such as
out of moderation would not join with the Faction.

Espernon with as great strength as he could make, standing on the other side
of the River, appeared to give the besieged some flattering hopes of relief:
for thinking it not safe to march forward, he retreated. Hereupon the besieged,
reduced to some 80 tattered and torn men, were put into extreme desperation;
having their Turrets battered, provision consumed, and water corrupted. After
two months defense, Haulmont the Governor surrendered the Castle to Saubeuf,
upon condition of bare quarter for himself and the remnant of Soldiers that
survived with him; rendering the rest to discretion. Presently the common
People, like wild beasts, fly upon the rubbish and ruins of the battered
Castle. The rich Furniture of Espernon, lodged there for security, being put to
sale by order, is made away at inconsiderable prizes. The Ordnance are drawn
away to the Parliament House door; not only with the applause of the people,
but also the principal Citizens, provoking every one to share in the Public
rejoicing. Men were invited all about the streets to make merry. Monsieur
Fajard, an eminent Counselor, sat astride upon one of the great Guns, having
on his head a Garland of Ivy and Vine-leaves, resembling a Bacchus bearing such
branches, in manner not at all becoming the gravity of his Gown; and drinking
himself, served all comers with wine. The Bourdelois with strong sallies lay
the Country waste far and near. There were four thousand Foot (most of them
that had left the Kings Colors) and eighteen hundred Horse in the Rebels pay.
Having taken Pondensac, they threaten to ruin Cadillac; but in vain, for there
was the flower of Espernons Forces. They batter Langon, assail S. Macaire. The
neighboring Towns fall under the same condition. Then does Doignon, the
Governor of Brouage, enter the Garonne with eight Men of War, most of them
Fireships, and not a few lesser Vessels filled with old Soldiers; and lands
at Roche Lormont. Saubeuf with Girart attaque him so vigorously, that the Kings
Soldiers were forced to get again a Shipboard, hardly saving their Ordnance.
After this were Skirmishes with various success. The Bourdelois were forced to
retire, by reason of strong succors sent in from all parts to the Kings Army,
the only effectual persuasive to induce the Faction to more sober courses.

Therefore they come to a serious Treaty of Peace. Alvimar had brought
Articles, which Praslin sweetened; as he was wont in Peace and War to advise to
a prudent moderation. The Treaty proceeding, of a sudden the high swellings and
great Conflicts were composed upon these terms, That the Castle of Trompet
should abide in the state wherein it was at present, that is, demolished, till
the Kings coming to be of Age: That the public Taxes should be abated;
especially that the (...) Crowns Impost upon every Tun of Wine carried out of
the City, should be abolished: that the Consuls of every Borough-Town have free
liberty of Appeal to the Parliament of Bourdeaux. All these Concessions were of
no great weight; but had they been denied, perhaps poor Bourdeaux must have
been ruined: the Court-prudence granted the Requests.

Nor yet was their factiousness satisfied, who made their own advantages of the
public Troubles, or designed so to do. One of which sort was Mottadelais,
dispatched to Madrid, to sue for assistance against the Royal Forces, and the
Tyarnny of Espernon. There were diverse opinions in the Spanish Council: of
which this was the prevailing, That Vattevil Governor of the Province:
Guipuscoa, should in person go to Bourdeaux, to view all matters, and after
inquiry, report upon what bottom the Spanish Providence might safely build.
Vattevil embarques at S. Sebastians, and after a prosperous Voyage, arrives at
Bourdeaux, a very few days after the Peace was proclaimed. He walking abroad,
openly guarded with a Spanish Train, would assist at the Public Councils,
Prasline much protesting to the contrary, but in vain, for all Ages, Sexes,
Ranks were Hispaniolized. Nor seemed this a Cessation of Arms, but a passing
forward to more desperate Councils. There was no end of reviling Espernon.
Those that had been banished for their moderation, were not readmitted.
Villemont that came thither by the Kings Order, is assaulted. His Coach torn:
and had he not stepped into the Fort at Libourne, in his return from Agennois,
that prudent man had perished. The Kings money is seized; and the Debenters
contracted for carrying on the seditious War, are paid off. Thus was ashes
raked over the ^embers, which must shortly break forth again into flames. Thus
much may more than suffice to have spoken of Bourdeaux: where was a respit
indeed from Hostility and Arms; but an unfound Peace, and a grudging
indignation breaking out of minds full swollen, which seemed to be hatching
some farther unexpected mischief.

During this time the Abbot de la Riviere minding his Purple Gown, as if that
had been the only concern of the State, put the Court in trouble. Now what was
more difficult than to compass that without the good will of Mazarine, who
though he promised to do him all good offices imaginable, yet by certain
counterworking springs in the mind of the Pope, undid again all that he seemed
to be so earnestly a doing. The Abbot of Riviere, either never sounded those
depths, or made as if he had not. He allowed of Congratulations, as though he
had been Cock-sure of the Promotion; which no body thought of but himself, nor
the Tailor born, who should cut out his Cardinals Gown; yet was he admitted
among the Ministers of the Conclave, a consolation of the Robe long in coming:
and to the end that Orleans might be brought home again to Court, from his Seat
at Limors, whither Riviere had carried the Duke, making anger a color for his
lust: who threatened worse matters, as to retire to Oxitan, unless the promises
were made good to Riviere.

Conti at the same moment openly testified, that he was resolved to take
Orders, and ask a Cap of the Pope: begged of the Queen, that she would please
to intercede for him; whether out of a design to cut the Queen out work; or
whether these were the Artifices of his Sister Longueville, and Rochefoucault
to oblige Riviere to them, if he should stand by. All these Incidents greatly
perplexed the Court. And the industry of Mazarine most eminently appeared, in
that he so neatly could extricate such growing intanglements.

The cause of all these dissafections was Conde, who at every turn fell foul
upon Mazarine. Though he had given consent to the Match of Merc^^^r, would
again cross it: would draw off Vendosme with fair promises to his party; he
would see that he should get the Admiralship without stooping to such an
unequal affinity, that was wholly unworthy a Prince of the Blood: would tamper
to win Cadile too over to his Party, who courted the other Niece of Mazarine,
so that he might put him off from the Match: he would encourage the Bourdelois
not to recede at all from the rejection of Espernon: the Marriage of Candale
could not be contracted, unless Espernon were maintained in the Government of
Guyenne, and the Bourdelois ranged under obedience; whom Conde did openly
favor in the Privy Council. Then on the other side, he contended that the
Provenzals were to be severely chastised, and the Count d'Ales his Cousin
German not to be deserted in a just cause. And when as nothing could so
effectually put Vendosme off from that Alliance, as the denial of the
Admiralship: Conde sets his Father in Law Breze to set his own pretense on foot
to sue for the Admiralship for himself; as though he had not been more than
satisfied to comfort himself in the loss of his Child with that piece of money
which had been on that account bestowed on him. He induces him too now drawing
toward death, to sell the Government of Anjou to Chahot Rohan, a Dependent of
his, that so at the decease of his Father in Law, he might dispose of that
Province at his pleasure.

Whenas Conde was by many arguments discovered to aspire, it seemed a wonder to
such as dived into the secrets of the Court, that he did not earnestly espouse
the Slingers Interests. Especially since that after his coming from Compeigne
to Paris, the minds of all were strangely affected to him. In truth, then, if
ever, he had fortune at his disposal, so that he might have reached with his
hand the top of Authority; and there seemed to have been nothing wanting to the
obtaining the supreme Power, but the taking in the Slingers party; by the awe
of whom he might have commanded the Parliament and City, being the only man
then magnified in the Armies and Provinces. The Prince let go this opportunity;
either questioning the constancy of the Slingers, or through the gallantry of
his Spirit, disliked craft, nor thought it necessary to take such a compass;
being a despiser of falsehood, as of all dangers. His Heroical Spirit, slighting
Mazarine, as well as Corinth, expected all good successes from the Event of
Affairs, which he thought could not turn but to his advantage. Corinth, who
took himself to be capable of any Fortune, and plainly was Head of a Party,
courted Mazarine secretly, and Conde openly, with a design of crushing one by
the other, that so himself might at length arrive at the height of preferment.
Mazarine, that more subtly than any man living, pierced into those
Cabinet-counsels, would cleanly elude those Corinthian Arts, yet so as he
seemed not to understand them. Corinth perceived the Policies of Mazarine:
therefore he was seriously intended to join with Conde, by his means to pull
down Mazarine, that so he might the easier proceed to the ruining Conde
himself. And herein Conde is not to be blamed, who, whatever himself was, still
had a jealousy of Corinth, though he made large proffers. Whilst this
Triumvirate plot the destruction of one another, yet the face of the Court
seemed calm, when of sudden this feigned serenity over-casts, and breaks out
into a storm.

It was a small occasion. There is four miles off Rouen a kind of a slight
Sconce, which goes over the Seyne with an arched Bridge, and is thence called
Pont arche: proper for the exacting a paultry Tell upon Bolts and Barges that
go down, or are rowed and towed up the River with Horses. When the Pacification
was concluded at S. Germans, Longueville pretended this Fort was promised him,
and that by Conde, who had requested it of Mazarine, in favor of his Brother
in Law Longueville. [The Cardinal had this wont, that when he was loath to deny
importunate Petitions, he would give his assent, either by a nod, or for the
most part in suspense terms; which afterward, when he saw his opportunity, he
would more plainly deliver. In the mean time purchasing thus much as to be
disengaged from the present pressure. Whenever he promised downright, without
any circumlocution, he never was worse than his word, if ever plain. But in
such a confused state, every one interpreted the least look of Mazarine for a
promise. From which misunderstanding diverse sorts of inconveniemces arose: till
having got the quiet possession of the Government, he taught the French
afterward better to understand his meaning.] Therefore Conde requires that
Pontarche, as promised to him: Mazarine asks day. Longueville presses Conde,
Conde Mazarine. This was a fair opportunity to him that desired to break. The
business was not of any moment to Longueville, but he sought to get ^t, only to
have it said in Normandy, that there never was any stir in France, but that he
got some advan^age by it. Farther the matter was of no value to ^he Cardinal,
unless it were to gratify some poor Suitor with it. Conde avows himself an
Enemy to Mazarine; and that he will never come to wait upon his Majesty, nor
enter into the Court as long as that Stranger was over the French State. The
confluence of all the Nobles is at Condes House, after the humor of the French,
that always hunt after novelties. At the apartment of Mazarine in the Kings
Palace, no body appearing near it. None made any question, but that the breach
was incurable. The Slingers rejoiced; yet did not offer to associate with the
Prince the first day, who took it somewhat unkindly, that they stood upon the
Ceremony of being asked. Therefore he draws them in by his Sister Longueville.
It was no ha^^ piece of business; there being nothing that could fall out more
to the advantage of Beaufort and Corinth, than this breach; who judged that by
joining their Interests with Conde, they could easily heave Mazarine. The
Prince joyfully gave admission to the Heads of the Slingers; promising to do
his stoutest endeavor to return their kindness with advantage. They engage to
one another ^ mutual promises: all which was presently carried to Mazarine by
Chabot, a perpetual Spy of all secrets. This is certain, that Beaufort and
Corinth did upon this account oblige themselves to the Prince, that Mazarine
should be banished, and not abide in his Ministry, though rendered lame and
enfeebled. Condes mind was not so, but he would have the Cardinal broken and
maimed, not taken off, nor banished. Therefore having sounded the intention of
the Slingers, he thought it more advisable to oblige Mazarine to himself than
them. Thus growing more moderate in his passion, and placable, he yielded to be
wrought upon by Mazarine within few days; whose breast then first of all did
entertain a firm and unmovable resolution of throwing Conde into Prison, from
whom there was no better to be expected, than an imperious course of life,
whereby he would hold the prime Minister under his devotion (not as his
Servant, but as a ^^ained Slave) to tug and drudge at his pleasure: which being
highly derogatory to the King and Queen, the Cardinal could not digest. To put
this in execution, secrecy and subtility were needful: principally must Orleans
be made a Party; and the Slingers brought in by any means. But before we relate
the whole train of this action, some particulars remain to be recited. In the
first place Mazarine makes his peace with Conde, descending to the most humble
satisfactions. Pontarche is promised Longueville within two months; for which
Orleans passes his word. Other Concessions too were made, which are not proper
to mention here. Conde puffed up with this prosperous success, judges the same
course is to be taken for the future of extorting, what could be desired from
Mazarine, who must fear, or else would be feared. It is commonly given out by
the Flatterers of Conde, that the Prince had found out the true way of handling
the Cardinal, by dealing roughly with him.

The Duke of Richlieu, the grand Nephew by the Sisters side, of the great
Armand, having failed of the hopes of matching with the Daughter of Chevreuse;
and testified his resentment in a youthful manner, for his being repulsed a^
Madame Longuevilles, she thinking the opportunity was to be embraced of
gratifying her friend, puts him, whilst he was in his discontent, upon
Catharine Poussarte, Vigenoise, the Relict of the Marquess of Pontois Albret,
no surpassing Beauty, yet not unhandsom. Richlieu of a sudden fell so
passionately in love with her, as that immediately he concluded upon Articles
of Marriage. And because this could not be liked at Court, though it were done,
they agree upon a place for consummating the work. None seemed more convenient
then Try, which is a Palace of Longuevilles, fourteen miles out of Town. The
matter is not discovered to the Duke of Longueville, but only to the Prince of
Conde, who accommapanied the Bride and Bridegroom to the place himself in
person, and assisted at the Solemnity; without taking any notice of the
Cardinal, who had designed Richlieu for one of his Nieces: nor of Longueville,
who had reason to think himself injured: but what is most observable, in
contempt of a Custom, which has the nature of a Law, That none of the Nobles
may marry, without first by way of Honor acquainting the King with it. I
waited upon Mazarine, not by order of Conde, but Madame Longueville, to
acquaint him with the whole matter, after it was done. He having set his looks
in a dissembling posture, as his fashion was, made answer; Whether the Contract
were lawfully made or no, that must be decided by the proper Judges; nor was it
for him to interpose in a matter, wherewith he had not been at all made
acquainted. And having designed one of his Nieces for the Duke of Richlieu, out
of a thankful remembrance of his obligations to his Uncle, He said with a
smile, Tha (...) his opinion his Niece was not inferior to Katherine Poussart.
In earnest, I could not discern that he was in passion; such a command he had
of his ^ook and language all his life time. Yet was he inwardly exulcerated in
his spirit, that Conde would ^ever desist his old practices.

Hereupon he not only persists in his design of imprisoning the Prince, but
resolves to hasten it; being plainly satisfied, that he made this but a step ^o
proceed to farther indignities. Longueville re^enting the affront, takes advice
to relinquish all ^nterests with Conde, and resign himself up entirely ^o the
disposal of the Queen and Mazarine. And ^n truth he had need of such Protectors
to recover his liberty: his Wife being grown intolerable, and ^e not able to
bring her under any rule, by reason ^he was abetted by Conde. He humbly begs of
the Queen and Mazarine in my presence, pardon for his part offenses; promising
for the future his du^itiful Allegiance in opposition to all men whatsoever.
The Cardinal gave no credit to Longuevilles professions, and the issue verified
his judgment. for the Mother of Conde, desirous to preserve a right
understanding in her Family, having suspicion of the discontent, so througly
reconciled her Son, and Son in Law together, that Longueville did as faithfully
promise Conde his service, as he had done ^he Queen and Mazarine that day
before. Which being presently revealed to Mazarine by Chabot, did quite take
off his affections from Longueville: and so much the more, because at the same
time he had informed the Abbot of Riviere of his imminent danger. This Mazarine
took very hainously, being resolved to ruin Riviere, that so he might come the
fairer at Conde. Till this time Mazarine had intended to sever Longueville from
sharing in the Imprisonment: but finding him so fickle of his word; after
resolved to involve him in a comm^^ ruin with his Brother in Law. I return to
the Marriage of Richlieu, which Conde, did not promote, but to make it appear
in what high Authority he was, that could advance or depress at pleasure; and
that he might make the Governer of Havre de Grace to be at his devotion.

Corinth, the Head of the Slingers, in nothing sluggish, but always intent upon
every occasion, having got a lucky and fit accident, dexterously cherishes the
matter of new troubles springing forth upon occasion of the Rents yearly
payable to the Creditors of the City, that is, such as let out their moneys in
the Chamber of the City at a certain Interest, and the Principal secured, as
having Part mortgaged for it. The persons interessed complaining of the ill
payment of that Rent, a Committee was chosen of six eminent Citizens, who
should find out Expedients for paying the money. Amongst the rest were the
President Charton, Joli, Bellote, and Couture. Now when those private meetings
looked toward Sedition, the prime President of the Parliament of Paris Mole,
making a fair Harangue to the throng of Creditors,(which walking the streets in
Troops, seemed to menace disturbance to the State) promised, that he would
(...) his utmost endeavor, that they should be fully satisfied by the
Parliament. The Rout giving out threatening terms, nor enduring to wait, and
instigated by those that had more factious spirits, than wisdom, broke out into
ill language; and particularly Couture, who was ordered to be arrested by the
Pursuivants, which attempted in vain to do it. Hereupon arose diverse
murmurings. But nothing seemed a fitter opportunity to the Mutineers for
rising, than if any one of the Bouttefeux were slain, or at least wounded.
Therefore as Joli was riding in his Coach Chartons house, he is shot without
drawing any blood; a Pistol is discharged by a suborned Fellow, who having
pierced the Coach-leather with a harmless Bullet, immediately gallopping away,
vanished out of sight. Joli cries out, not having been much against his will
struck at, but through his own falsehood: That good Patriots were murdered: that
this was the effect of Mole' s menaces. Charton highly resented the attempt, as
making it his own case: though both were secure enough, both from the danger of
expecting or having received any harm. All this was but mummery to make the
City take up Arms. The Heads of the Slingers were, glad, and made their
advantage of Joli's wound, murmuring, that honest men standing up stoutly for
their Countries good, should have such violence offered them. What security was
there in the City? it was no longer Paris, but a Den of Thieves. They consult
who is the fittest person to set the City in an uproar. The most likely man to
do the feat is pitched upon, one Eschalart Laboulaye, a very popular person,
and one that was in great reputation, for having conveyed provisions into the
City, in the time of the Siege. He therefore incites them with language,
gesture, affection to take up Arms; advises to shut up their Shops draw the
Chains cross the Streets, and all other like actions of a Town running
frantic. Whether it were that Boulaye outrun the popular fury; or that the
Citizens were not in that fit troubled with the overflowing of the gall, all
was hushed and quiet. [That beast is not always in the humor; nor can the common
People at every moment fall into its frenzy fits. This Crisis soon passes over,
and it belongs to none but old Crafts-masters in the trade of Rebellion, to
nick those Articles of time.] Yet their stomachs swelled, and one might have
seen flocks of dissatisfied persons at an evening in the Lanes and Streets,
whispering one with another.

Conde, after his reconciliation to Mazarine, so far kept his word to the
Queen, as to exercise declared Hostility both against the Slingers and all
other Mutineers, making it his principal business to cast down whatsoever stood
up in opposition to the Court: yet in such a manner, as that he might seem the
prime Actor, not a Minister to execute what he was ordered. So at once he both
highly distasted the Slingers, and in maintaining the Royal Authority, eclipsed
it.

The Slingers, before they rendered themselves, and interests to Mazarine, for
the pulling down of Conde, strive rather to win the Prince over to their Party,
to make him instrumental for the overthrowing of Mazarine. But the Prince
receiving them coldly, and desiring to be rid of them, as most unwelcome
Guests: then the Slingers, having abandoned all hopes of prevailing upon Conde,
resolve to surrender themselves to Mazarine upon the honourablest terms they
can get. What those were having heard them diversely related, I can therefore
write no certainty. Some say Corinth was promised a Cardinals Cap: Beaufort the
Admiralship after his Fathers death, passing by Mercoeur: and a sum of money to
boot. Every one of the Slingers to be considered in proportion to his being
serviceable. The Duke of Orleans his Daughter to be married to the King, etc.

Whilst this Intrigue is managed with great secrecy, and Conde acts more
fiercely against the heads of the Slingers, there fell out, or was contrived a
new Stratagem, the most proper one as could have been invented to exasperate
the Prince, and incense him against the Slingers: which was the only aim
Mazarine. For whilst the two Factions were implacably divided, without
controversy, his cause prospered. Therefore is oil by a notable device poured
upon the fire already kindled. Conde being in the Louvre, is advised to look to
himself, that there were a knot of men with Arms upon Pontnoeus in the way to
Condes Palais: that he was waited for there with some mischievous intention;
therefore that he should decline that Road; but yet to try the conclusion, that
his Coach might be let go that way. It was done accordingly: Some Rogues
setting him there, assault the Coach; and kill his Lacquay that happened to
ride in it. The Prince that lay behither the Bridge, at a Bathkeepers,
receiving advice of the attempt made upon his Coach, falls, into choler. He
cries out for Justice, and due execution of the neglected Laws. Mole President
of the Parliament, who always took Condes part, stoutly maintains his quarrel.
Orleans that was now dissaffected to Conde, comes yet to the Parliament, and
performs him all exterior offices of a specious kindness. At every turn
importunes the Judges in his favor. The Queen and Mazarine openly detest the
Fact. Some were of the opinion that Mazarine did not work this design; but
Conde himself with intention of overthrowing the Slingers, whom he might this
way most easily ruin. Others repute it to have been a mere accident. Now if
there had been a perfect understanding between all other parties, he might then
indeed most readily have destroyed them that way: yet certain it is, that
Witnesses examined upon Oath, did depose, that they had heard more than once
secret whispers and broken words about the killing of Conde. However the matter
were, Mazarine now sure of the breach made irreparable, thinks of ripening the
design of his Imprisonment. And some little inkling of it was got forth by I
know not what presage, which the Prince looked upon as groundless, who fancied
himself Mazarines great Favorite, especially being put into strong confidences
by Tellier, and sure of Orleans by the means of Riviere, which was now quite
out of favor, and worn about him in the false reputation of being a man of
business. Mazarine disliked the spreading such a suspicion, and for the
removing of it, presses Conde to apprehend Couture, expressing that many
discoveries might be racked out of him, by which the Slingers would be quite
and clean confounded, which was the mark he pretended to aim at. The Prince
thanked him; and undertakes the business of providing Troopers and Dragoons,
because Conture was related to live in a house hard by Port Richlieu: there he
placed a Squadron of Horse, setting a Trap to catch himself.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. Conde, Conti, and Longueville are imprisoned. Thrice they alter
their Prison in thirteen months. What passed in the mean time in Normandy,
Burgundy, and at last Guyenne. What differences? How great contests about
either releasing or detaining the Prisoners. By what Intercessors their release
was procured. What means were used for the banishing Mazarine out of France,
whither be shortly after returned in Triumph.

MAzarine not impolitickly concluding that none is sooner than, than he that
fears nothing, made use of Condes security, the most usual rise of Troubles, as
an opportunity of his Imprisonment. Therefore at first he admits but very few;
afterward more, to whom, he imparts the secret, issues out Orders for the
Execution. Prefixes a time. (This was discovered to the Prince, however
peremptorily he denies it.) But now the Fates prevailed against any Counsels,
and had utterly blinded the eyes of his understanding. For so it falls out,
that when Fortune is minded to pull down any man, it perverts his Counsel, and
which is unhappy, causes whatever befalls him, to appear justly to have come
upon him; so that his misfortune is interpreted his crime. Therefore he says
he cannot believe it, and measures the opinion of his being in favor by the
conscience of his merit. But there was no farther room, after, the first
information slighted, for a second to come. For Mazarine when his design was
now so completely laid; thinking it not convenient longer to defer the
execution, sets all in readiness: at length revealing the whole matter to
Beaufort. He was indeed necessary being in so great authority with the common
People, that if any Tumult should happen to rise on a sudden, he might pacify
it. At first Beaufort stood off, saying; That he desired to preserve the good
opinion he had acquired in the City: this he must lose, if he should cease to
oppose Mazarine; that his interest lay in that opposition; if Beaufort should
turn Mazarinist, he were no longer Beaufort, but a shadow without a substance.
But having weighed, the friendship of Orleans, the Admiralship, and a certain
other thing offered him which he stood in need of; he rendered to prevailing
arguments. Conde having his confidence sufficiently, as he thought, grounded on
the faithfulness of Tellier and Riviere, despising reports, prosecuted his
Charge in Parliament against the Heads of the Slingers, assisted by Orleans.
Never did the Queen, never did Mazarine so highly esteem of his Conduct; never
was he more kindly, never more honorably received. He applauded himself, not
once searching into the Plot, of which no body besides himself ever made any
doubt, seeing his presumption to pass all bounds.

Longueville suspicious, lest Mazarine should harbor some displeasure against
him, visits him, thinking to overreach by his sleights the most discerning
person in the world. Mazarine made show as if he believed all that was said,
appearing not only pacified, but friendly: Spare, says the Cardinal, all this,
and let us see what course is best to be taken, that you may find the Queens
grace. Then he filled with large promises his easy credulity, who always
embraced shadows for substances. At length came the decisive day (it was the
18. of Jan. 1650.) on which I waited after my usual manner, very early on
Mazarine, in the behalf of the three Princes, to desire somewhat of no very
great moment; afterward comes in Conde, who whilst I make my address to the
Cardinal, and dispatch my business, stood whispering somewhat or other
familiarly into Lionnes care; as I was going away, Conde speaks to me to desire
Longueville to come thither, because the apprehending of Conture, being under
deliberation, he might appease the rising, if any should be by means of his
Cousin and friend Corinth.

I went to Chaliot, a little way out of Town [where Longueville lived, to keep
at distance from his Wife.] When I had plainly told him my observation of the
approaching danger; he answered me calmly, That it was possible Prince might be
apprehended; but it was to no purpose to warn him that would not, as well as
his Sister, take (...) advice; as for himself, having but the day before made
his peace with the Cardinal, he feared nothing. We came to Paris, whither he
was bound in all haste, at the request of Beveron, who had desired Longuvilles
intercession to Mazarine for his Son to succeed in the Government of Normandy,
Toward the evening, Conde waits upon the Queen after his usual manner: and
having heard of Riviere, unacquainted with the design, that the Duke of Orelans
would not be there, somewhat startled at it, he soon conceived that the defense
of his cause in the Parliament was deserted. He did advisedly absent himself,
either with intention of composing the storm that was expected, or that he
might not look on the Fact. Conti and Longueville meet in the Council Chamger;
where was present the Chancellor, Servienne, Tellier, and some other honorable
Personages of his Majesty's Privy Council. Mazarine was retired into his
Chamber, having carried off the Abbot Riviere with him. Guitalil, Captain of
his Majesty's Guards, came earnestly into the Council Chamger, and bowing
himself to Condes ear, charges him in the Queens Name to go along with him as
his Prisoner. Cominges does the like to Conti, Cressy to Longueville. Conde at
first seemed to laugh at it. Afterward finding Guit ald to speak in earnest,
he then turned to the persons present, and said, The Queen arrests me by this
Guitald; my dutifulness, my loyalty has (...) deserved this; not to mention,
my services. I have not only hopes, but assurance in her Majesies Justice. I
desire you to bear witness of my moderation. Hereupon he entreats the
Chancellor to go to the Queen in his behalf, and obtain, if it were possible, a
Conference of her for him. He desires Servienne to do the same with Mazari^^ in
his favor. Both of them obey the Prince. The Chancellor returns, having in
vain attempted to speak with her Majesty; Servienne came no more back. Mazarine
being certified by him, that the work was done, declares it to Riviere: who
muttering, as if Orleans would take it ill, was then plainly told, that nothing
was done but by the approbation of Orleans. He went away, much stomaching it;
and when he offered to speak to Orleans after his usual manner, he had a flat
denial: And then was he confidently assured of his being undone. In the mean
time Guitald returns, bringing with him twenty Soldiers, who scouling upon
Conde, looked as though they were prepared for some bold attempt. The Prince
goes along quietly: but Conti could not digest the disgrace, but fretted, and
well-nigh threatened. Conde pacified his Brothers impatience with advice and his
own example. Being carried down the Privy Stairs without any stir, they are put
in a Coach, Conde, Conti, and Longueville; Cominges, the Nephew of Guitald,
never stirring from beside them; a few of the Kings Horse being at first in
company. Miossain waited at the Porti Richlieu with a more numerous Troop. Thus
are they conveyed through by-ways, and in the dead of night to Vincennes,
without any commotion appearing, although the Coach overturned, and threw the
Prisoners to the ground, rather frighted at their dangerous fall, than thinking
to make any escape.

[I am not ignorant, that it will seem like a Fable, that there should have
been so much courage in Mazarine, as that in a City greedy after dissensions,
where the friends of the Princes were so powerful, he should take the boldness,
not only to design, but to put in execution a work so full of nice hazard: and
that he laid all his project with so subtle and shrewd forecast, as that there
was no disturbance in the effect. That so many Dependents of Conde, so many of
Conti, so many of Longueville, should all be wrapped up in such darkness, as to
sleep sluggishly over their miseries, not once daring to stir, after having so
often vapoured of the strength of their Party.] The Slingers run in scattering
Troops about the City, as though they had obtained a great Prize; Beaufort with
the principal. The streets were all over light with Bonfires, in token of the
public Joy: in memory, they would be thought, of the Siege of Paris; whenas
Conde, unaware of the Fates, without any presage of mind, girt in with a
straight Leagure, so friendly, so favoring a City, and wasted the neighbor
Villages, driving all the Pastures, and laying the Country desolate. The Queen
sitting up till late that night, waited for the issue of the Action, and
reckoned upon every movement, as being in a doubtful state betwixt hope and
fear. The same did Orleans. When the work was done, the greatness of its nature
was perceived. At length comes News of their safe arrival at Vincennes, where
being thrust into a Tower, all three Princes in one Chamber, had lain all night
supperless on the floor, unless Rantzow (thrown thither before by Condes means)
forgetting the old grudge, had sent them in some Bottles of Wine, store of
which he never was without; and some Victuals or other. Walls on the left hand
damp, and of a loathsome scent, to make the place of a strength not to be
forced. The Vault is bound with stone Arches, hideous for darkness; the room
nasty and horrible. The Princes lying awake, as is usual in such a case, held
diverse discourses; How Mazarine had put a trick upon their credulity: not only
that the imprisonment was grievous, but the disgrace joined with the restraint;
so many hopes cut short; and the insultation of their Enemies. Here Longueville
put in a true prophecy. The Sling, says he, has thrown as in hither, and the
Sling will fetch us out again. The same night was John Perauld taken, and
shortly after cast into the same Dungeon, suffered for his unspotted
faithfulness, having this accession of glory, that having been a true Servant
of the Royal Family, whose Interest he had always made his own, sharing in
their fortune, he was involved in the same Fate. My self too, I suppose,
escaped because I was beneath their anger, while they were taken up in Actions
of the highest nature. When word was brought to Condes Mother of her Sons
disgrace, she was overwhelmed with such passion of heart, as she almost fell
down dead in the hands of the standers-by. A Lady born of the great
Montmorancy^^ carried about her the haughtiness of their Spirits, and having
been exercised with variety of Fortunes, because she could not have looked for
such a Cross, neither could she stand up under it. After diverse essays to
procure her Childrens liberties, at length broken with affliction, never more
coming to the fight of them, within a few months ended her days with
discontent. The Duchess of Longueville transported more with grief for her
Brothers than her Husband, hearing of the misfortune, fell on the ground, and
did farther with her lamentations defile that night, which had been stained
with so cruel an action. The Mother and Daughter were both persuaded, that
fatal and extreme danger hung over the Prisoners: and that they would not have
presumed to go so far as this, who had not determined to proceed to the
uttermost. The Queen commands Condes Mother to depart the Town: and confines
Madame Longueville to the Palais Royal. The former having obtained leave, shuts
her self up three days in the Carmelites Cloister; from hence she retires to
Chantilly with her Daughter in Law, and Enguien, Condes Son, The latter is
conveyed away by the artifices of the Keeper of the Palais, and with
Rochefoucault her Guide, escapes into Normandy to her Husbands friends to try
their constancy. The Mother had resolved that black night, to go about Paris,
to practice her Sons Partisans, and raise the City: but hearing that all runs
cross; that Corinth and Beaufort went triumphing about the Town; that Bonfires
Were kindled in testimony of the public Joy; she could not hold crying.
Grievously she complained of the Queen: but the Queens heart being inflexible
and obdurate against all prayers, Madam Condes tears were shed in vain. A deep
Lethargy had possessed so many Nobles, that had so often made fair promises to
the Prince. [Never was it evidenced by such clear proofs, how unsafe are all
Court-confidences: while men are in favor, they are highly complemented; if
once fallen under a Cloud, all ties are broken, and they tamely forsaken.]
Bouillon slips away from the present danger, and buries himself in the retreat
of his Territory of Thurenne His Brother Thurenne riding all night through
strange ways, arrives in safety at Stenay: Moussay, and the other Retainers on
the afflicted Family, scatter one one way, and another another: at length
Stenay was the Rendez-vous of all of them, and Sanctuary to others that fell
off from the King. Madame Longuebville tried many means at Rouen, but none
offered her their assistance. The very Beverons that held the City and old
Palace, and were Lieutenants in that Province, banished her that Country, and
oblige her to go for Diep, from whence, how she came forth, I shall afterward
relate.

This was the Posture of the State, upon the imprisoning of the three Princes:
none offering to stir, nor so much as to bemoan. That Conde si often
victorious, that had done so many signal sevices, should be mewed up in a
Dungeon! Who would not admire his Fate, that after so many Triumphs, should
fall into such hands? a Person, then whom few have been more worthy of the
chief Command since Charles the Great, whether you consider his good successes,
or his great courage, or his Spirit equal to any Fortune. The French Nation
would have been judged too powerful, if these great endowments had not their
allay of contrary qualities. He had no violence to revenge wrongs; nor any care
to requite courtesies. None was more obliging in expression, when his need
prompted him: after the danger was over, and his turn served,. all kindnesses
were utterly forgot. The Spirit of Conti was ruled by his Sister Longueville.
The Duke of Longuevilles humor was full of shifts: he would taste superficially
of all things. There could no Party rise, but he would side with them. Scarcely
could he get in, but he would draw his foot back, which would fit a thousand
shoes. He might have sunk several times; but he happened by turnings and
windings, to get off clear. He would renounce his former friendships, and apply
to new ones, so he had any hopes of advantage by them. Would court men in
prosperity, abandon them in distress. Could never deceive any one twice, his
cunning was so palpable. Covetous after gain, to this intent that he might
appear to have been a gainer. He imbased the endowments of his mind with vain
Plots. To be sure he might have kept far enough from the disquiet of a Gaol,
had not he been a Turn-coat, and by being true to neither side, had gone about
to oblige or to delude both.

Yet was not the Age so wholly barren of virtues, as not to produce some
instances in that kind too. Grammont went to the Queen, and not denying his
passion, frankly avowed to her Majesty, that he was afflicted for the
sufferings of Conde: mixing, withal some other expressions, worthy of his
generous boldness: which he afterward advisedly suppressed, because of the Oath
which he had taken to the King. That was to him essential, always to act
gallantly; having a cheerful, yet weighty bravery. Mole also favoring the
Prince, spoke words of like nature.

Cominges that remained at Vincennes, being called home, Bar is set over the
guarding of the Prisoners, who discharged his Office, as imperiously, as
unwarily. To stop the censures of Fame, that were very violent, the Queen sends
a Remonstrance to the Parliament to this effect: that Conde did not demean
himself any longer like a Subject, but a King; that his increasing boldness was
no longer tolerable. Conti grew high upon his Brothers Greatness: there was no
end of Longuevilles Suits, he must have what he asks, and must have it at a day
certain; farther, that no heed was to be given to his word: and that he was
held in prison, left under color of Conde, he should make any Stirs in
Normandy. To this the Parliament agreed. Mazarine brings into sight his Nieces,
that had been locked up in a Nunnery to pacify Conde. The Wife of Bouillon
concealed in an insecure corner, is taken and shut up in the Bastille, having
the liberty of the Garrison; and kept there till the Articles concluded with
her Husband at Bourdeaux. These passages were in the City.

In the Provinces, Mazarine watches strictly: having dispatched Vendosme into
Burgundy; Harcourt into Normandy; Hospital into Champaigne; S. Aiguan to
Bourges, to secure the public Peace. Marsein, General over the French Forces
at Barcellons, being of the Princes Dependants, is taken and carried to
Perpignan: a Person experienced in Martial Affairs, of great reputation, at
first making some offer of resistance, bore his hand to his Hilt, upon
suspicion of some rudeness. Afterward having stilled the disorder of his mind,
he yielded himself with all obedience to Joseph Margarite and John Marcand, to
whom the Kings Orders were sent. All care for the promotion of Riviere is
stopped at Rome. So he missing the hopes of a Hat, goes out of the Town,
increased in wealth, and rich benefices: having been at first in favor with
Orleans, for the pleasantness of his humor; he joins policy with facetiousness;
so steering the mind of his Lord, that he never miscarried through any advice
of his. He never put the Duke upon any difficultties, knowing that he had not
abilities to go through with him. Wise men have admired by what conduct he
could so long dwell in so fickle and changeable a favor. At length the Women's
insinuations against him defeated all his diligence; at last his affection to
Conde overthrew him: if that may be called a ruin, which is a glorious harbor
of rest and honor.

The Queen being certified of Madame Longuevilles intentions (who was resolved
not to stir from Diepe, but there to prepare for a stout defense, having hired
Soldiers to that purpose, with money by all means raised) concludes to go into
Normandy, which lay open for her Entrance, With sufficient Forces to restrain
the attempts of Madame Longueville. The whole Court comes to Rouen through a
Country obnoxious and submissive, dissembling a friendliness, and prone to take
whatsoever side, where security and profit is offered. Every ones interest in
that Quarter is the sad bane of true affection. Amongst so many friends of
Longueville, purchased at so dear a rate, and with such artifice, not one
stirred. The Parliament of Rouen freely renders to his Majesty's pleasure. So
great is the peoples policy, that all rejoiced at the fall of Longueville, who
had never wronged any one. In the mean while his Wife endeavors, not with
female lamentations, but with all her power, by prudence, counsel, and
language, to put Montigny the Governor and the Diepois into a posture of stout
defense. The people refuse; and affrighted by the Kings approach, who was now
drawing nigh in Person, and by the awful Presence of Majesty, conclude upon a
Surrender. Montigny himself talked of nothing but obedience, as he said, due to
the King. Commissioners are sent to treat on the way, and offer their
Allegiance, declaring that they owned no friend, against whom his Majesty's
Trumpets should be blown. Please Belliere is made Governor of Diepe, Montigny,
now laying down his Commission. The Duchess of Longueville thus abandoned,
shifts for her self, and flies, making her escape secretly, riding on a pitiful
Jade through by-ways, without either hope or help. As she rid along by the
Seaside, she lights upon some Vessel accidentally, on which she embarques with
some hazard. Having been likely to be drowned, and hardly saved, at length she
ventures to Sea: and after the being tossed by Fates and Billows, arrives at
Rotterdam in Holland, distressed with the want of all ne^^cearies; at a hard
season of the year, and tempestuous Sea. Her body brought up tenderly, could
hold out all this. From hence dated comes from her a long Epistle to the Queen,
That she was through infinite dangers arrived at Holland, having been obliged
to venture her life on the waves for avoiding the cruelty of Mazarine, who
sought her ruin at Paris, and now newly in Normandy, breathing out the
destruction of the Condes House. She beseeches her Majesty to pity her
condition and sinking Family; that if there be any room for Petition, she would
be entreated to conceive a good opinion of her, and not suffer her self any
longer to be enchanted by the delusions of the Cardinal. In such like terms did
this afflicted Princess, now come to Harbor, disburden her oppressed mind, as
is the custom of grief. But, finding no opportunity of advancing her Cause in
Holland, she pawned her Jewels, and having raised a sum of money, went up the
Maze toward Stenay. Whither when she was come, she advised about making a
League with the Spaniard. Before the King left Normandy, he changed every thing
after his pleasure. The awe of him ranged all under obedience. The Governors of
Castles, that had been Longuevilles Creatures, were turned out. Castles are no
such strong Bars, as the Nobles of France take them to be; They are firm
against a little commotion, but fly asunder at a great Choque. In the Borders
against us are not contemptible; but in the Inland Countries of no use.
Harcourt is made Governor of the whole Province.

Richlieu, presently after the Contract of Marriage, had shrouded himself and
his Lady in the Castle of Havre de Grace, obliging the Garrison to stand by
him. The King summons him to Rouen; and when he sought demurs, Mazarine not
forgeting Armandus his tricks, finds out an Expedient to gratify the Youth;
and advises him to send his Lady that should serve in her Husbands stead. She
comes. The late commenced Marriage is approved: and the Honor of Duchess
conferred on the Bride. The Castle of Havre de Grace is committed to S. Amor,
the Lieutenant of Esguillon, which wisely now as on the like occasions complied
with the times. During this S. Agnan does good service at Bourges. He storms
the Castle, that Palledium of the City, whose strength lay not in the Works,
but venerable Antiquity; and reduces all to the Kings obedience. The like
succeeds in Burgundy, where Vendosme had an easy and prone Expedition. The
Castles and Cities newly at the Princes devotion, readily surrender. [By this
it plainly appeared, that our Noble men take a very ill course, when they are
so importunate to extort places fortified, which have no strength but with his
Majesty's pleasure. This practice so often condemned, is always retained. By
this means their Creatures are preserved from starving; after that by a
miserable servitude, they have purchased themselves such Nests: from whence
they may afterward tyrannize, as far as their power extends, over his
Majesty's Subjects.]

Clermont, about the Borders of Lorraine, which was under the Command of Conde,
is invaded by Seneterre: Danvillers is by a wile wrought over through Becharels
means to render to the Kings Forces. That Garrison too had been brought by
Conde, through his Sicters artifices, to take part with Roehefoucault: Whose
Brother put into that Government, never changing the Garrison, but relying on
Soldiers that he had no proof of, was shamefully deluded. Bouillon, Thurenne,
Rochefoucault, and the rest summoned to the Court, do not come in. And are
thereupon declared guilty of High Treason by the usual way of Process with us.
At the same time Beaufort Corinth, Broussel, Charton and the rest are in
Parliament, acquitted of the charge and suspicion of the Attempt against Conde.

So great was the power of the Slingers, that they brought the Queen to comply
with all their Interests. The very principal of their Designs was, to make
strong applications, that Seguier might be removed, and Chastelneuf, being
weary of his long confinement, might be restored to the keeping of the Great
Seal. He had been Vice Chancellor fifteen years before, afterward for fourteen
years imprisoned at Engoulesmes by Richlien in a disconsolate condition upon
some slight and frivolous pretense.

At the beginning of the Spring, his Majesty attended by his Nobility marches
into Burgundy, where he is received with so great applause, as was never to
this day known in the memory of man. [What else is practiced, especially in
this part of France, but that Princes, and Grandees should rely upon their
Dependencies, and be deserted by them in time of need, as on the contrary for
Princes in their distress to make large promises, and being once enlarged, to
forget nothing sooner, than obligations that have been laid upon them.]

In Burgundy the Parliament, Noblesse, Garrisons lay down the Colors of the
Faction at his Majesty's feet: and rejoicing at the presence of their lawful
Sovereign, come to receive his Orders; forgetting Condes Family, as already
buried. Only Tavan had put into Seurrie with Colline and Sammicault 500 Foot
and 400 Horse, making show of a stout Defense. [ Seurrie is a fortified Town
upon the River Saven on the Border of Franche Comte, now known by the name of
Bellegarde.] The Kings Army, under the Command of Vendosme, comes before it.
All things are prepared for a regular Siege. A Line is drawn, which the King
out of youthful Bravery would view, whilst Mazarine showed it him. The Rebels
are enjoined a Truce of shooting, till his Majesty having surveyed the Works,
was returned again into his Royal Tent. [In the greatest Hostilities this is a
custom with the French, to preserve that Loyalty to their Liege Lord.] As soon
as ever the King was out of Canon shot, the great Guns were let fly, and some
killed by the very side of Mazarine, who continued to give Orders amidst those
dangerous roarings of the Canon. The Commanders in the Garrison are summoned to
a Rendition, and agree to it, unless within a prefixed number of days Relief
should come, which failing, they surrendered the City to the King.

Whilst these businesses were acted in Burgundy, the Mother of Conde posts
into Paris, and there lay incognito in a private house in the Palace-yard: till
unexpectedly failing down at the feet of Orleans with abundance of tears,
implores his mercy for the Prisoners. The like submission she used to Beaufort
and Corinth. Orleans raising her up, and comforting her with good language, as
one that neither granted, nor denied her Suit, requests of her, That she would
moderate her grief, and not prejudice her Sons and her own interest by
unseasonable applications; that the remedy of all was to be expected from time
only. The like did Beaufort and Corinth. Those those that are Curieux in
Court-affairs were from that day forward assured of the future liberty of the
Princes. The Princess Dowager of Conde presents a Petition to the Parliament by
Land Payen, who courageously read it in the House. The substance of it was a
charging Mazarine upon diverse Articles, and striking at the Queen through his
side. She is commanded by Act of Parliament to leave the Town: but petitioning
for the respit of three or two days to put her affairs in order for her last
parting, nay at the last of one, and having obtained that, she goes for Berne:
from whence also being banished by Order from the King, she lodged at the House
of Perault at Angerville, oppressed with melancholy: and at last went to
Chastillon, a Town ennobled by the Seat of Gaspar Colline, and the death of
this Charlotte. For there deceased this most Noble Lady, as well worthy of
having Conde to be her Husband, as Mommorancy for her Father. Henry IV. taken
with her Beauty, had resolved to carry her from her Husband, it is a question,
whether against her consent. Courteous she was, beyond the rule of strict
Matrons. Self-loving, to excess: A fond Mother; but indifferent wife, yet
excellently matched with the Arts of her Husband, and high Spirit of her Son.

The Duchess of Longueville at Stenay entered into League with the Spaniard.
Gabriel of Toledo, in the behalf of Leopold, offered the Lady large conditions,
that is, a weak assistance, pompous indeed for number, but for fighting
inconsiderable. She unacquainted with the danger, did more than once suffer for
flying to the Spanish Craft. Thure^^^^ the undoubted issue of la Tour, would
keep to himself the whole credit of the War. The Duchess of Longueville
endures patiently what she could not tell how to remedy. She did always sustain
the assistance of a manly Charge. This was the substance of the Confederacy,
That they would engage to fight together under the conduct of his Catholic
Majesty, till the conclusion of Peace, and enlargement of the Princes, That the
Cities and Castles taken standing upon the Frontiers, should fall to the
Spaniards; the inland ones to the Confederates; and both one and the other
rendered upon the settlemeut of Peace: That the Spaniard should furnish in 5000
Horse (...) Foot at his own charges, and find their provision also, under a
Spanish Commander, who should yet be subject to Thurenne Captain General of
that whole Army by the King of Spains Commission. That a certain sum of money
be monthly paid Madame Longueville and Thurenne wherewith to defray their
respective Forces and Families. That all the Garrisons upon the Frontiers under
the Command of Conde, be gives up to the Spaniard, till the Peace be
established, and Princes released. The Spaniards most aimed at Bellegarde,
which being now come into the Royalists hands, could not by these Articles fall
under their power. Madam Longueville had stood peremptorily upon reserving
Stenay to her self; nor could she ever yield to come to Brussels, where she
could not have resided without the loss of her liberty.

These things past on the Borders of Champaigne; whilst Bouillon and
Rochefoucault drive on no less designs at Bourdeaux, which was another
Headquarter of the associated Provinces. And as Thurenne influenced the
Counsels of Madam Longueville, so his Brother Bouillon, the chief Confident of
the Princess of Conde, disposed of the Affairs in Guyenne at his pleasure: the
rest were but properties. He having drawn her and her Son Enguien from
Monterotondo, conveyed them through Auvergne (whilst Espernon, and the
Chevalier Valet, in vain opposed their passage) upon the disadvantage of
grounds, either cunningly giving the Go-by, or successfully fighting, till they
came too near Bourdeaux. It was disputed, whether they should be admitted into
the Town: At length remembering Conde, the principal cause of whose Imprisonment
was attributed to his taking the part of Bourdeaux, they open their Heart and
Gates to Enguien and his Mother, letting in none besides their menial Servants.
Within a little while the City was set open, keeping out none, not so much as
the Spaniard, who rejoicing to dress his wounds at the fire kindled in France,
poured in oil, and laid fuel upon the flame.

Mazarine turning his watchful eyes on every side, daily suffered growing
inconveniences at Paris; apprehending more danger to the State from the
Artifices of the Slingers, than from the Confederates, or any foreign force.
The Cardinal, under color of repelling the Spaniard, had conveyed the King to
CompiegNe, with design of rescuing him from the jaws or the Paris Faction,
which was plotting more dangerous mischiefs than the former. Rochefoucault
began first to act in open Hostility. Saumur, where is a Bridge over the Loire
(a pass always regarded at the breaking out of Civil Wars) had been bestowed
upon Cominges, as a reward of his good service in the apprehending of Conde.
Dulmont Governor of the Castle of Sonmur, loath to resign, acquaints
Rochefoucault, that if he would send him in Auxiliary Forces into the Fort, he
would afterward stoutly hold it for Condes Party. Rochefoucault, who was now
preparing for his March into Guyenne, having gathered out of his Lands at
Poictiers and Engoulesme a Band of Gentlemen, under pretense of solemnizing his
Fathers Funerals, marches away speedily for Saumur; but the haste of Dulmont in
resigning up the Castle, prevented all their designs. Rochefoucault failing of
that hope, turned his thoughts to the business of Guyenne, and to Bourdeaux,
designing to gain to himself S. Simon, the Governor of Blaye. Who thinking with
himself, how much he was indebted to the late King; upon which obligations he
had promised an unspotted faithfulness to his Son; and withal how full of
hazard these attempts were, stopped his ears. Rochefoucault joining with
Bouillon, having dexterously enchanted the Spirits of the Bourdelois, enters the
Town, and presently all Visors are cast off, and Enguien is declared Commander
in Chief of all the Forces, and Bouillon with Rochefoucault his Lieutenants.
The Spanish succor is openly implored by certain Commissioners, and the fire
of Civil War raised, only Espernon and the Chevalier Valet being in Arms for
the King. For even la Force with his Children, having long demurred; not upon
the matter, but upon money, at length took to the disaffected Party.

Hitherto have I related what past on the one and the other side after the
imprisoning of the Princes in their favor. Now to return to the Prisoners. The
first eight days past over them, as though they had been buried alive. From
that time, every hour were they informed of all passages; either by a false
Ink, which was rendered legible, by being held to the fire: or by Notes put into
Crown pieces, which were by a rare Art made hollow for that purpose, the metal
being no ways conscious: or by a Priest, who whilst he was saying Mass, instead
of the Liturgy, read them a new Gospel; or whether it were that Bar did
ignorantly deliver the Letters were on the backside, and innocently betray
himself, although he were very vigilant, so as to enquire nicely into all the
circumstances; and free from any corruption, only contenting himself with his
Gaolers Fees. The Cardinal and Slingers fell to be greatly at odds, so as to
betray one another, and treat with the Prisoners, about Marriages, and in a
manner sharing the whole Kingdom.

About this time such a Plot was discovered at Vincennes: the Garrison
consisted of 200 Soldiers, forty of which did with one consent conspire
against Bar. As he was at prayer in the Church, it was resolved to
double-lock the door on the outside, and shut in him, and such part of the
Garrison as is usually assistant with Bar at his devotions^ and then to kill
such as were upon the Guard, (...) stood Sentinel in the Princes Chamber, or
bef^^^ the Chamber door; to set the Prisoners free, a^^ bring them to the
out-wall of the Fort, where p^^ of the Wall should be demolished, and they
received by a strong Party, waiting upon the place (...) convey them away. All
this design was impart^^^ to Condes friends, of whom no small sum of mon^^ was
gotten, as a reward of the Action, but all w^^^ discovered by false Brothers.
The appointed d^^ too was revealed; upon which Beaufort; in the Head of a
strong Party of Horse, hovered about t^^ Country adjacent to Vincennes. Bar
having e^^ ecuted the Conspirators, dismissed the French Garrison, and took in
Switzers of unquestionable faithfulness.

The King was removed to Compiegne, either f^^ avoiding the insolence of the
Slingers, or to be at ^nearer Post for the repressing the insults of the
Spaniard.

Thurenne having received the promised Forces, passing through Heynault, joins
with the Archdul^^ and Fuensaldaigne: and having united the^^ strength and his,
enters France with an hostile Army. After Chastelet, unprovided of meat and
money, was in few days time reduced, he lays Sieg^ to the City Guise. The
Power of Spain has not these late times been more effectually showed, no^^ a
greater train of War: whether you regard the Experience of the Soldiers, or
the Leaders. They fought stoutly on both sides: but Mazarine, who had so
happily settled the State of Normandy, Bur^^^dy, and Champaigne, and had subdued
the stoutest ^osers, could not brook that Guise should be (...) from France,
when the King was so near. therefore laying aside all other business, and
levy^^^ money in every part, even disbursing of his ^^wn private means, he
supported the public Oc^sions, and came into the Kings Camp, that was ^dvanced
as far as Vantacour (which is a Village a ^ile distant from the besieged City)
in company with a gallant appearance of the Noblesse, there he ^as received
with great shouting, and dispersed ^oney to every private Soldier, often
inculcating, that the French glory, and honor of the Kingdom lay (...) ^^ake.
Himself would spy the Enemies quarters, and dispatch Peasants into the place,
to advise the ^^^^^eged that were now reduced to extremity, of ^^ccour ready to
be brought to them. The Enemy had now mastered the Town, pressing hard upon the
Castle, whether Brid had retired with some choice Soldiers, resolved to hold
it out to the last. Mazarines first care was to cut off the Enemy from
provision, which being more than once ready to come in to them he intercepted.
There could no Convoys come but from Cambray, all the ways to which were
blocked up. Plessis Praslin, in the absence of Harcourt commanded in chief:
there were with him besides excellent men, Hocquincourt, Se^erres, Villequier,
Manvissier, Navaille, and several others. So great an Army, already possessed
of the City, was obliged to raise the Siege, and leaving their business undone
to face about toward Cambray. At which news the Slingers were ready to burst
with envy. And the rather, because news begun already to come forth of the
intended Expedition into Guyenne. This thought came in their heads. If after
such successes, Mazarine sh^^^ return too victorious from Bourdeaux, what will
(...) come of us? The Cardinal puffed up with prosperity and keeping in mind
the Slingers boldness, will m^^ it his first business to ruin them; and
perchance b^ himself to release Conde, who exasperated by his sufferings, will
fall fiercely upon the Occasioners (...) them.

Mazarine so highly valued Bourdeaux, tha^ though the Spaniards were encamped
upon the Edge of Picardy; the Slingers enraged, Paris wa^ vering, Orleans, who
had refused the Expediti^^, into Guyenne, dissaffected, and intending to stay
behind in the City, yet he resolved to carry thither the strength of the Army,
with the King, Esper^ receiving advice of the motion of the Court, make
preparation for them: the like does Meilleray, wh^ had crushed or picked up the
unhappy remains o^ Rochefoucault at Poictiers, to join all the Force the^ could
to the King coming in Person against th^^ Rebels. The Chevalier Valet, of a
sudden surpriseth the Isle of S. George, three miles distant from Bourdeaux, in
the middle of the Channel of the Garronne: there was Canoul made Governor, wh^
should interrupt Commerce, and shorten the Provision of Bourdeaux. Many now in
the City mo^^ inclinable to repentance than wantonness, be thought themselves
in how great dangers they we^ involving themselves, without any appearing hop^
of deliverance. Yet the City hurried away with violence, takes up Arms. Raises
a Work about their Gates, which at this time might very well ^ave been spared;
the weak places are fortified. ^t the Works for the most part lie imperfect,
the ^^nish money being largely promised, but supplied ^y drops, or averted to
private men's uses. Bouillon ^^d Rochefoucanlt do no longer hide themselves
^ithin Walls and in Corners, but make trial of ^^eir strength. Three thousand
Foot, and 800 ^^orse sally out of the Town, to seek the Enemy at ^eaulx,
whither Espernon had come to a Rendez^^ with Meilleray and the Chevalier Valet.
There ^y fought; and at length Bouillon and Rochefou^^lt being worsted,
retreated into the Town, out ^f which having recruited, and increased their
Forces with Burgers and Peasants, they sally forth again ^stily, and falling
upon the Royalists, push them ^ver the River Jale; S. Georges Isle is
recovered, ^here unhappy Canoul was taken, to his great mis^ortune; the Forces
of Espernon and Meilleray are ^^^rtered at Grave. The Bourdelois could not have
greater punishment than the destroying their Vineyards, where the whole years
expectation is ^rustrated, by the depriving of the Vintage. [No^hing is more
pleasant than that Quarter: one would call it the Hills of Nisa: to which not
the re^owned places where the Baioe and Cumoe play the wanton, nor where the
Lake Benaco raises her mas^uline waves may compare. From thence come those
cried up Liquors, which think themselves to ^e no whit inferior to the
Falernian Clusters, nor ^he immortal Trebian, if the Planters may be ^udges.
But there is a profit annexed to the deli^acies, which that fortunate Coast
furnishes from the exporting of Wines into the remotest Countries, from which
are collected no small Customs* The Spaniards, who thrive more upon the Fre^^
misfortunes than by their own valor, view^^^ with a joyful eye this posture of
Affairs, send (...) Bourdeaux Joseph Osorio, not so much laden wi^^ money, as
with promises. The sense of the Spa^^ Council was the same, as ever, to
cherish, not que^^ the division; to broil Bourdeaux with a slack fir^ by a
deceitful cure to render the sore of the State i^^^rable. There were not
wanting some Hispa^^^zed Tempers, that persuaded the people they were not to
look for any mercy, and put them forward upon the most desperate courses;
fearing what they had deserved; or recruiting their private indigence upon the
public Calamities, or loving Troubles for Troubles sake, out of the malignancy
of their disposition. It appeared an unseemly thing that a City should be
destroyed, not having sho^^ off the yoke, and still obeying its natural
Sovereign, upon no other occasion, than because it disliked Mazarine and
Espernon to usurp over them: again for Osorio to walk along in it, with Spanish
pride, and in a manner give Laws, where the lawful Prince was hardly obeyed,
seemed intolerable to all.

The purpose of the Faction was politic, to dismiss Osorio with his Vessels,
still trucking underhand, and keeping up a secret Correspondence for the
future. The Spaniard went his way rejoicing that he had kindled such a light
fire; and had sowed that ill seed, which, he thought, would spring up. The
Assembly of the House at Bourdea^^e dispatches Voisin, a Member of theirs, to
the Parliament of Paris, to demand two things, Counsel and ^^^stance: the
former, That they would please to ^^part, and direct them what was to be done
in this ^straight for appeasing his Majesty, and obtaining that Guyenne might
enjoy the benefit of the Pacification at S. Germans; and might not upon the
removing of Excise-men, suffer more intolerable outrages by Offi^ers bearing
another name. [Foule was intimated, who had abused that Country by plundering
Houses, hanging up of Peasants, and such like cruelties, under color of
gathering the Imposts.] That they (...) ingenuously confess, they had granted
the Princess of Co^de, and, the Duke her Son liberty to come into their City:
but what Nation is so barbarous as to ex^^^ out of their Bounds an afflicted
Lady with her young Child, especially the Wife, and Daughter of so great
Princes? And if this be the grievous crime, they confess to have committed it:
and to have sunk under the weight of this one Delinquency. It was long debated
at Paris, whether the Letter should be received, and Voisin have admission. But
was carried for admitting him with the Letter, which yet was to be carried to
the King by the President Ball, and certain Members of the House, chosen
Commissioners, with instructions to petition her Majesty in the Name of the
Parliament to pity poor ruined Bourdeaux, and lay aside all intentions of
pouring out her anger upon them: that she would pardon their ^^ailties; and
vouchsafe forgiveness to her people that had miscarried, rather through
rashness than disloyalty. Orleans made in the Parliament a large and eloquent
Speech, as his manner was, That Espernon was already revoked by his Majesty,
(...) commanded to come and attend at Court: They pardon would be freely
extended, excluding such only ^ had confederated with the Spaniard, and that
(...) things inclined toward a Pacification.

In the mean time preparations are made for the Expedition to Guyenne, which
had been long discoursed of. How eagerly the Slingers endeavored to obstruct
it, may be hence gathered, that every moment they started up new occasions of
disturbance; sometimes pretending, That now the general Peace was to be
concluded, and no longer deferred; Now the Spaniards might be brought to
reasonable terms. Perhaps not hereafter. As though the whole Council of the
King of Spain stood at Mazarin^^ disposal. Anon, That the Princes should be
rem^ved into the Bastille, under the custody of young Broussel: (For he had got
that charge by his Fathers Interest.) Anon, That a Provost des Marchands must
be chosen, such as the Slingers should like, being an Officer of great
concernment to whatsoever party (...) should incline. Now Mazarine granted the
Parisians Monsieur Fevre, a Member or Parliament, being of the Slingers party:
but soon obliged him to himself by his Cajolments. But Beaufort sought
occasions of breaking with Mazarine: for being called Mazarine by the people,
he was much troubed that the common Rout did not follow him as he past along
the streets with their usual acclamations; therefore imperiously demands by
Bellevre the Admiralship, as though his elder Brother Mer^^^^ having espoused
Mazarines Niece, might look higher; but that his Father Vendosme might not be
altogether unregarded, That he should enjoy it for his life, and Beaufort
succeed his Father. Whereupon Mercoeur breaking into passion, threatened his
Brother that he would decide the Quarrel with the Sword. Here the Sling would
not be quiet, but murmured farther: That the Bourdelois should be assisted; it
was intolerable that Mazarine a Stranger, should make so bold with the King, as
in the sultry Dog Days to hurry him through a Province scorched with heat, only
to advance the private Interests of Espernon. That that Journey was undertaken
for no other ends, but that poor Bourdeaux might be sacrificed to the revenge
of its incensed Governor. That the glory of the King was the least aimed at,
but only to consummate the Match between Candale and his Niece, who must have
for her Portion the blood of the Bourdelois. When that work was over, he would
march victoriously through into Provence: would turn out the Count d'Ales, and
take the Government of that into his own hands, as lying next to Italy, Then
having solemnized the Nuptials of Mercoeur with his other Niece, would return
glorious with Triumphs over the French Provinces: then having first trampled
down Orleans and the Sling, would afterward bring Paris under the yoke. As for
the confined Princes, he would either keep them in perpetual imprisonment, or
so enlarge them, as they should be rendered his Bondmen. These and the like
rumors were greedily swallowed, as people are always more ready to give credit
to the worse surmises. Nor did the Commoners prate this in the corners of
streets, but the Principal men argued after this manner. Orleans being easy of
belief, and now incensed against Mazarine contrived what he afterward put in
execution, by the instigation of his Wife chiefly, who rejoiced at the
imprisonment of Conde, upon the single expectation that her Husband should by
that means come to be Principal in the management of the State: which when she
saw proved otherwise, she chose rather to have Conde an Equal, than Mazarine
Superior. Orleans being desired to go Captain General in the Expedition into
Guyenne, not only refused such a Commission, but avowed himself to be of the
opinion against his Majesty's being carried thither. Chasteauneuf wearied with
having lain in a nasty Prison, and restored to the Charge of Keeper of the
Great Sea, seemed to have no other aim, but to shape a safe course, so as to
disoblige, neither party. He persuades Orleans to conceal his mind, and not to
be openly violent; that time produces many things, from thence he should expect
whatever he desired. In the mean while he might do well to wait on the Queen,
who would deny him nothing. Her Majesty adheres to her resolutions, and so the
Journey proceeds. Orleans being left with a full power between the Seyne and
Loire, the Faction much bauling at him, for not having removed the Princes into
the Bastille, which he had often and earnestly pressed. Orleans abides at Paris
chief Governor, assisted by the Counsels of Chasteauneuf and Tellier; and
tellier was the sole Director, who ordered all things in a constant Loyalty,
through his whole life, which singular Policy and Courage, having gotten an
opportunity wherein he made large proof of his abilities, and steered the Ship
of the Commonwealth amidst the raging Billows to safe Harbor.

The Court, without making any stay at Poictiers, of elsewhere, goes directly
for Libourne. Rebellion has this property; if you demur upon it, it increases;
The public safety injoyns a necessity of motion, because nothing is more
ingenious to plot than Treason, and there still starts up some new Inventor of
Stratagems to vouch their designs; the thoughts of the Common People working
without end. The honest Party at Bourdeaux, mixed with the factious, did what
they could to moderate their boldness, and the violent courses of those who
thought it no less dishonor to yield, than to be conquered. D'Ognion keeping
close in his Garrison of Brouage, spoke ambiguously as standing Neuter;
Sansimon at Blay continued loyal, and that was all: Commissioners and Mediators
of Peace went forward and backward, from one to the other side.

All which the mischance of Richo and Canoul broke off. The former was Governor
under the Bourdelois, of the Castle Vaire, lying between the Garonne and
Dordogne, who being obliged by Meilleray to a Surrender, was hanged upon a
Gibbet set up at Libourne for that purpose, though for some hours he had been
held in false hopes of pardon by the Duke of Orleans his Daughter. The rage of
the Common People of Bourdeaux broke out against Canoul. He having been taken
at S. Georges Isle, which he held for the King, was held Prisoner of War at
large, till the Execution of Richo being heard; he to make retaliation, by a
like turn of Fortune, rendered his innocent Neck to the Gallows; whereupon all
fell again into new exasperations on both sides; Meilleray assails S. Georges
Isle, being of great moment, either to the plenty or scarcity of the Towns
provision; Mottadelaise makes a stout Defense. There was the Chevalier Valet
shot, who afterward dyed of his wound at Cadillac. The Bastard of that
Espernon, who first brought the Honor into the Family, and after whose decease
the Fortune of the House, reduced to one Branch, was extinct with it. Falvausse
receives the dead Chevaliers Commission, and the Isle is taken, to the great
prejudice of the besieged City; which being affrighted with so remarkable a
loss, and also with the Kings Arrival at Bourg, entrenched the Suburb
Sansurine, and the Port Dicousse with sudden Works, and set our Vessels upon
the Garonne, which were only Barks. The public Consternation as disguised
under no Mask. Bouillon, Rochefoucault, and the Cabale depending upon them,
plotted how the distressed City might hold on in its Rebellion begun, until by
public or secret Articles, they might fish out somewhat to make for their
private advantages, which was perpetually their end. Therefore did they with
all possible care, and anxious earnestness omit no industry to break through
their ruin: sometimes producing Letters by suborned Courriers, as though they
were come from Madrid or Guipuscoa, which themselves had forged at Bourdeaux
(the affections and countenance of those to whom they showed them, were marked)
another time would delude them with some other specious fraud, giving out false
reports instead of true; as when they sent Potters with a Guard of Horse and
Foot to convoy Chests of Money filled with Patacons. Their Rials d'Or were
plated over with a thin leaf: being within of a base metal, whilst the outside
glistered with gold.

This Pageantry sometimes smilingly flattered the Princess of Conde; anon that
excellent Lady was ashamed of the egregious Imposture. How beneath her Spirit,
was this Fortune! The Pattern of rare Gallantry which she held forth, was
suppressed by the obstinacy of the Faction. Only the two Commanders were comforts
to her disgrace, that is the dignity of the Delinquents. She young Lady was
scarce entered upon the Luster of the Court, when of a sudden she was overthrown
by the great fall of her Husband, from whom she might have presumed to have had
no other but a title to unquestionable happiness. In the mean time her private
Estate looked toward ruin, being shortened in bread, as well as abridged in
other necessary accommodations.

The ^ly Spaniards laughed and made merry at this mischief; and politickly
taking the occasion, recovered all that they had lost in Italy. First d'Ognati,
Viceroy of Naples, reinforced by Caracena from Milan, reduces Piombino and
Partolongone destitute of all relief from France. The Dukes of Italy rejoicing
because those Harbors infamous for the reception of Pirates, did disgrace the
whole Seacoast of Tuscany. It had been as easy to invade all Italy, as to
maintain places that must be provided of Victuals and Ammunition only by Sea.
But this some Sling at Paris was a troublesome business, the source and occasion
of all the disquiet, because in such a shrewd pinch, the Spanish Army under
Leopoldus, had invaded La Cappelle in the Wallon Country; Chastelet afterward
followed the Fortune of Chappelle; Thurenne with Fuens^^dangne Rhetel, and
Chasteau Porcien upon the Aus^^, which were not. indeed fortified Towns, but
that would serve for Winter Quarters, or to encourage the Faction, whose
daringness was daily heightened by the Inroad of Archduke Leopoldus into
Champagne. He had possessed himself of the most rank and fertile soil lying
between Fimes and Soisso^s, having pitched his Leagure and Headquarters at
Bazoches. There is no Country in Nature that is surrounded with a more
healthful Air, that looks down more warm Hills, upon more extended Plains, more
spacious Fields, and more verdant windings of Valleys. The Spaniard held these,
whilst the King was scorched by the soultry heats in the Clime of Guyenne,
amidst vexatious and unhandsom delays. The Peasants in a fright flocked to
Paris to increase the terror. Bouteville advanced farther than any one else.
The Slingers rejoiced, and turned it to their reputation. It was not, said
they, our mind that his Majesty should be hurried away to Guyenne, that so the
Imperial City might be alarmed by the Enemies olours: yet such is the
gentleness of Leopoidus, as to offer Peace. Mazarine had rather hazard all, so
he may but be Instrument^^ to the vengeance of Espernon, and carry on the Match
that is concluded. What honest man can longer endure such doings? A Pamphlet
was published, wherein Thurenne exhorted to Peace, affirming it to be the
Spaniards mind. Leopoldus sent an Envoye to Orleans, and he wrote again to
Leopoldus, that all terms were ready to be agreed upon for a general
Pacification, so that Mazarine were but excluded. What more needs be said?
Avois, after his usual manner, seeking to advance his private Honor, hastened
to Soissons, and there waited for a Spanish Commissioner, who was content to
fail meeting him. In the mean time the Princes were conveyed into the Castle of
Marcousse, without the Seyne and Marne, at the solicitation of Tellier, lest
they might have been set at liberty, either by the Spaniards, or the Power of
the Faction. It was better to have them kept there till the coming of his
Majesty, than that such pledges should be entrusted to present Fortune. Orleans
was the less unwilling to consent to it, because Chasteauneuf was far the most
potent in all that Quarter; so to have them, as it were, committed to his
custody, was to the great content of the Slingers. It seemed a strange matter,
that noon of so great Dependences as the Princes had, opened their mouth. The
Public occurrents which fell out at Bourdeaux, were slack, ambiguous,
checkered between good and bad. The Village Sansurine, after heaps of men slain
on both sides, fell a petty Triumph, into the Royalists hands. Meilleray,
Roquelaur, and Sanmegrin with Palvausse, behaved themselves stoutly, as though
the whole Empire lay at stake. Mazarine was present in person at the Assault;
the Port Dolphin was attaqued, and a Sconce carried on by the Rebels to the
Port Diaux, which the Royalists assailed with ^incredible valor; but was
defended with more incredible stoutness. Here the success of the Si^^ stopped,
and Mazarine despairing of the matte^^ returned to Court, having encouraged
Palvausse (...) complete the work. Meilleray attempted another approach by the
old Walls, which he thought might be easilier carried, and the way there bett^^
to be made.

Mazarine waited in vain, till the affections of men would declare, and he
might the more easily discern some affected to his Majesty; for a^ yet none had
by his dissent given them any advantage; the agreement of both Commanders was
wonderful, wonderful their Courage. The King Soldiers half torn, were wearied
with fighting and working: so that there was a saint image of obedience all the
Army over. The News of the Faction at Paris reaching Mazarines ears, would not
let his Eminence take his rest in quiet; the fa^^ of all Affairs setting it
self to new troubles. N^ body hated him with any moderation: none had any
kindness for him; the Spaniard was at Pa^ Gates; the strength of the Land
impaired, an perhaps relief might come to the Bourdelois by Sea in which case
they would find but few of his Majesty's Ships anchoring in the Road. The
afflicted State of Bourdeaux no less run to ruin, without any assurance of
relief, whatever they gave out (...) the contrary. The Cardinal was firmly
resolved upon Propositions of Agreement, which the Parliament of Bourdeaux
happily seconded. Commissioners were sent not by predisposition, but in a
hea^^^ to commence a Treaty. Seldom does that Proposal want success, to which
both Parties are inclinable The continuance of the quarrel was to the interest
of neither Party. There assisted also Deputies from the Parliament of Paris by
the interposition of Orleans. The matter was soon concluded, lest any thing
might have fallen out to rend open, the Peace, which was now newly upon
closing, upon terms to this substance. That upon the publishing of an Amnesty,
the Acts on both sides be abrogated: That the Princess of Conde may enjoy her
Revenues, and Houses at her pleasure. That Espernon be revoked from Guyenne,
and another Governor substituted in his room. But no mention was made of (...)
nor of Rochefoucault, and that by the express order of Orleans, the dirft of
which was never published. In the mean time, as the Articles were signing,
there came in several to join in the Treaty, in the behalf of the Princess of
Conde, and the Captains, who approved the Acts, but were not asked their
consent.

The Peace being published on August 2. 1650. the Princess, the Duke d'Enguien,
descendant of so many Heroes, who was yet not long out of his In^ancy, Bouillon
and Rochefoucault with a choice Party of the Nobility happily drew out of
Bour^^^ce. The Princess of Conde protested at her departure, that this kind
reception of her at Bourdeaux should never pass away unrequited. The
Commanders, that they should always be bound to ^^deaux for their lives, and
all the comforts that ^en receive by it. And in truth being purged to the King
and whole Country of Guyenne, they left ^o unsavory remembrance of themselves
behind, ^s having been called to take their share of danger, only what was
falsely believed, when they aimed only at their own ends. Thus was Bourdeaux
le^^ a most proper Seat either for War, or flight, which it was not then judged
expedient to ruin, although it might have been utterly ruined.

The Princess of Conde, and her Son the Duke of Enguien, being on the way with
their dependences, on the sudden light either by chance, or with design upon
Meilleray, Out of courtesy he either attended on, or forcibly carried the
afflicted Family into the Court. The matter could not be approved, but after
the doing, because by that means the Spirit of Orleans always subject to
suspicion, received an umbrage, as if without his privity, they were tampering
to relieve the Prisoners: It being a suggestion carrying along with it much
ground of apprehension to him that was always timorous. Rightly did Orleans
conceive that Mazarine could never join with Conde, but to the destruction of
himself and his Confederates; nor was his jealous credulity in that to be
condemned. Besides that his Daughter, who^went thither a Spy, did frequently
inform her Father of what marks of kindness passed toward the Princess of
Conde, and the secret Conferences had with Bouillon and Roches^cault, whereupon
she begun to fall under the Queens displeasure; and a distaste of Mazarine,
afterward falling foul upon both persons. Nor did the Lady in the sequel far
ever the better for it, so indiscreet and impolitick a thing is it at all times
to resist Favorites at Court.

The Princess of Conde being admitted into the King and Queens presence,
without any suspicion of baseness, did by a silent exprobration attest her own
innocence; yet uttered she no word of abject ^iscontent, but in reverent
sadness addressed her ^peech with so much modesty, and appeared so graceful a
Mourner, that all who were present, found themselves transported to sympathize
with ^er afflictions.

No promise was made of his enlargement, which ^he prostrating her self at the
King and Queens ^et, had so earnestly petitioned for; but she had free license
to go and retire whither she pleased. Having therefore suddenly left the Court,
she went through Anjou and Tours to Monte Rotondo, where ^he attended, in an
unblameable course of life, the ^ommands of her Husband when she should be
en^^arged. Bouillon and Rochefoucault, sensible of the high indulgence that had
been showed their Party, dealt in secret with the Cardinal, alleged in their
excuse the being necessitated to take up Arms, and professed that they expected
nothing more than to be secure upon the public Faith. It was observed that
these two Gallants never so espoused the concerns of others, as to renounce all
respect to their own private Interests. Some intimation was made of marrying
Conti with Mazarines Niece, which followed afterward by other contrivances.
This must be acknowledged, that both Dukes did earnestly inculcate into the
Cardinals care, That he could do no action more to his interest or glory, than
to enlarge the confined Princes without the compulsion, without the persuasion,
without the communication of any other. That the Slingers aimed at nothing,
Orleans himself at nothing else, but to get into their power so great
Prisoner:, that by that means they might afterward ruin both the Queen and
Mazarine. At Bourdeaux that now all seemed in peace^ but there would arise more
violently a tough War i^ that Country, more inclinable to raise new
commit^ions, than to maintain their pretensions, and that (...) themselves had
quitted the party, the people of Guyenne would choose them Commanders of the
stoutest of their Countrymen: That not only the Parliament of Bourdeaux, but
that of Paris, and those of the whole Realm, and the Towns of France, with the
weight of all the Empire, were all that way inclining.

All these suggestions sunk deeply into the mind of Mazarine; wherefore he bid
the Dukes be of good courage, and dismissed them with fair words; and when he
either would not, or could not yet expressly promise the enlargement of the
Princes; he intimated by certain hints, that it would shortly be. From that
time both of them, but especially Bouillon come to be a Mazarinist.

Forthwith Arms fell out of the hands of Bourdeaux, were not by any violence
taken from them Through ranks of people, hushed, and dreading for their having
offended, his Majesty enters the City timorous and conscious of its open
Delinquency, with a Guard of 4000 choice men, both for Pomp and Terror.

The Cardinal had Lodgings with his Majesty in the Archbishops Palace, and
never startled at the unusualness of it. The Bourdelois either approved his
valor, or feared his felicity. He judging all hatred dishonorable, which
survives the Act of Hostility, forgave all. The principal Rebels deba^ed about
visiting him, and beat a bargain, and demanded at what composition they might
purchase ^is Visit. Mazarine rejected it, and would not ^ive way to the
unhandsom offer. Thus was an ^ssue put to so great a commotion according to
^aw, but rather rules of Policy. Espernon, the cause ^f the Insurrection, was
excluded, who might by ^is single virtue purchase a Government.

The Life-guards were dismissed, and the King ^^usted himself to the Guard of
his Subjects; which ^onderfully took with their ambitious temper. The Court
parted from thence with a silence most ^ike oblivion, not only having abolished
all ha^red but any mention of reproach with an equal ^^me of Equity and Mercy.

His Majesty staid at Fountainbelleau upon a pru^ent reflection, all being in an
uproar at Paris, his ^uceess at Guyenne, having enraged the Faction. There it
was ordered to remove the Princes from ^he Castle of Marcousse to Havre de
Grace, to attend their liberty in more safety, about which only was ^he
question at that time between Orleans and Ma^arine. Against his will or without
imparting of (...) to him, they could not be removed; therefore ^here must be
singular address used, that Orleans ^ight come to Court, against the endeavor
of the ^ling. Yet he came to perform his duty to the ^ing, but with no other
intention. The Queen ^lone prevailed that he would yield his consent to ^o
desirable a removal. Therefore on November ^5. the year 1650. Conde, Conti, and
Longueville ^ere conveyed the compass of eleven days Journey ^^rough the midst
of Normandy to Havre de Grace, where they were kept in the custody of the same^
Bar; Harcourt secured the Conveyance with 4^^ Horse, and the like number of
Foot, from (...) charge of the Normans that might stir to res^^ them; which in
truth was not to be feared, (...) the Dependents of the Prisoners being
exceeding quiet.

Chevreuse restless after her old way came t^ Fountain Belleau, with an
intention to oblige the Cardinal to her self and Corinth, or to overthrow him
if he refused it. At length the discerning^ Lady not able to endure Mazarines
slowness, be^ her whole endeavor only to win the King to come into Paris, to
whose effectual applications the Queen yielded much against the Cardinals
Judgment, who could not be ruined but at Paris, but would always have triumphed
out of Town, over Orleans and the Faction. When he committed the Princes, when
he released them not voluntarily, but by compulsion, when he trusted Chevrense
i^ returning into the Town, and afterward in departing the Kingdom, and at
last when he procured Corinth the promotion of a Hat; that Judgment of his, so
often steady, was dazzled. All these Particulars, on which he reflected too
late, he is judged to have done in compliance with the Queen, and against his
own sense.

Charlotte Monmorancy, the Mother of Conde, a^ this Juncture of time desceased,
it is uncertain whether of grief, or her natural death. Her Fame wa^ divided
between favor and envy. For some time careful of her conversation, always
curious of he^ Beauty. No habit of patience, although her condition were not
unexercised with frequent calamities. She indulged the vainest Deity more than
any Woman, amidst very few moments of discretion, yet she always bore a
resemblance of wisdom. But I have spoken more elsewhere concerning this
Princess.

Clode Memmius Avozzi dyed much about the same time, scarcely above fifty five
years old, having comprised in that narrow period of time so great a stock of
virtues, as scarce any Gown-man in France. From his first entrance into public
Employment, he directed his chief actions to the obtaining Fame, which by the
rareness of his parts he soon obtained to favor him, and then by an inofensive
tenor of an upright conversation, together with excellent services, he brought
to an high eminency, being renowned for his most celebrated Embassies over
Italy, Germany, and the farthest of the West, the Danes, the Poles, the Goths,
and Vandals, in which at his pleasure, he brought into League those people of
warlike Natures. At last in the Treaties of Munster and Osnabruge, he did such
service for establishing Peace, with his industry, acuteness, and policy, that
he indeed was not in fault but that a glorious conclusion had been made of that
infinite Work; Expecting of the Kings promise the Order of Knighthood, which is
the principal of the Kingdom, he was in the mean while invested in the Charge
of High Treasurer, which in an exemplar Bravery and Gallantry, he voluntarily
laid down with clean hands, invincible by covetousness, and stubbornly upright;
Inquisitive posterity will diligently search of what lineage this lively
Picture of Honor sprang: I say of the Mammian, whic^^^ when one or two golden
branches are plucked of does eternally sprout forth with the same metal being
an ever flourishing stock of virtues, and daily illustrating its ancient and
unquestionable Nobility with the luster of excellent qualities.

Now I come to the foreign Actions, which proceeded to the ruin of France, in
Italy, the Wal^ Country, and especially Catalaunia; for there M^^^ara took from
us Flix (it is upon the River Iber, a Fort of great importance) and Tortugia a
Sea-po^^ Town, Miravet, and Fausset, and other places. He was General of the
Spanish Army, which exceeded not 5000 Horse and Foot: but so weak were the
Forces of France at that time, and so great the scarcity of all things, that
Mercoeur the Viceroy, being reduced to extremities, was forced to go back, and
leave the Government and Charge of the War to Sanmegrin seconded by Balthazar,
as well as he could.

For all these misfortunes were we beholden to the Sling of Paris, which mark
of infamy no tra^^ of time will wear out. In so great a calamity of the State,
our Soldiery over all the Quarter of Catalannia was without heart, without
discipline, and without money. The Garrison-Souldiers after the manner of
France, plundered and laid waste the neighboring Territory, and when they had
pillaged all, would tear from them as it were their very hearts blood. Hereupon
grew despair, which gives courage to the greatest Coward. Joseph Margareta
assisted every where with his counsel and vigilant care; he evaded a thousand
Plots laid for him by the Spaniards. But what could he do in so deplorable and
lost a State? No Countryman of ours paid a more untainted Loyalty to France,
than this Margaret, whom we afterward saw a banished man to draw a foreign
air, and feed on the bread of affliction, bearing an immortal hatred to the
Spaniards, either slighting or despairing of pardon.

In Picardy the Spaniard invaded nothing but weak places, and such as lay naked
to the first comer; for the only reputation of the Marshall d'Estres preserved
Laon and Soissons unattempted by the Enemies strength, Fuensaldaigne stopped a
while at Bryenne, driving the Cattle: for what other action did he perform?

Praslin defended Rheims in Champagne. No damage was done to the neighborhood,
besides the depopulating of houses, excepting the misadventure Hoquincourt
only, a person more suited for beating up others, than guarding his own
Quarters. But those occurrents are more notorious, than to stand in need of my
relation. The report spreading of the prosperous successes in Guy^nne,
Leopoldus with part of the Cavalry, speedily marches back to Brussels, lest he
might be judged to have made a less handsome Retreat just upon the Kings
approach in Person.

In the mean while Joyeux Granpre, Governor of Mozome upon the Masze, between
Stenay and Sedan, with greater courage than judgment embracing Condes party
eagerly, as he does every thing, was deceived in this, that he aided the
Princes cause with his bare person only, Mozome continuing yet at the devotion
of the King, and breaking their word to their Governor. He huffed, and being
heady at action, and sudden consels, nor well digesting the boldness of the
Garrison, strives to avenge it, and incites Fuensaldaigne with Gamarr^ to the
Siege of Mazome: which when it was reduced, nevertheless he could not get the
Government from the cautious Spaniard. Hereupon growing melancholy, and not
duly respected by Conde after his enlargement, recovered his Majesty's favor,
and his Government, Mozome by the mediation of Fabert. Afterward having given
many proofs of his valor, he made it appear what Martial Discipline Grandprey
had in an Engagement in the open field, upon a March, in Sallies, and at all
occasions, as though Fortune had no power to destroy him, he was daring beyond
valor, and successful, as may be instanced in the single fight of Sillery
against the Condeans.

After the carrying of Mozome, Thurenne carried his torn Army into
Winter Quarters, between the Mazze and the Ausne: Fuensaldaigne departs (it had
been more advisable to quarter together) having made no expedition into France,
that might bear weight, or turn the scale of affairs; for what is more pitiful
than with a pompous Preparation, to have triumphed over a few plundered
Peasants, over Chastelet, Rhetel, and Mozome.

How great trembling the Spaniard had caused at their Entrance, so great joy
left they at their Departure: having left Thurenne and Gamarra, who shortly
after paid soundly for their unhapply staying behind. Nor did that vain
Bravado, either enlarge the Princes; or encourage the dissaffected party, or
advantage the Sling, but only served for an empty Scene of Action, with a small
disaster to allay the success in Guyenne.

The Court is come safe to Paris, where all things run toward ruin. Mazarine
finding his return to be destructive, counted it better upon the repulse of
Foreigners, to win what is held by others, than to overcome what is at home.

He arrives at Rheims about the end of November. An 1650. with a great Train for
War: the Army consisted of 12000. choice men; the Captain was Praslin, a person
always stout and loyal (yet I know not whether he ever received rewards
suitable to his actions, farned all abroad.)

The Siege of Rhetel is resolved upon. It is a City upon the Ausne, famous for
variety of Fortune, more than any thing else. It has so often changed one
Master for another, and one Enemy for another, as a Ball banded to and fro.
Happy in the fruitfulness of the soil: There is still the first Camp upon
falling out. The rough flints, with which it is paved, prove it to be naturally
warlike. John Delipont, a Napolitan held the Garrison with 200 Horse, and 1500
Foot, but the French attaquing it, presently pierce the Suburb, and batter the
Walls falling with age And neglect. Three days after Delipont, not able to
sustain so furious an Attaque, signed Articles of Surrender, and marched out
before the day accorded. In so great a fright was he, although there were hope
of Thurennes coming: who having advanced toward his relief, upon hearing the
Surrender at Tugny, retreated. The Cardinal speedily came to Rethel, that he
might in person upon the place encourage and advise them. Praslin was by this
time got up to Thurenne resolved to try it out in a pitched Battle.

Thurenne was vexed to be thus put by his Winter Quarters, and left at
uncertainties whether to betake himself, then what fretted him worse, was the
shameful loss of Rhetel, the work having been carried only by two Regiments;
for the gross of the French Army slighting the Siege, in long and late Marches
hunted out the Enemy.

Praslin is certified by Hoquincourt and Rose the German, that Thurenne was not
gone far, but drew himself up for fight in the next Valley of Bourg, which he
had signified to his Soldiers by a threefold discharge of his Guns. Shortly,
that is, about an hour after, both Armies marched in parallel Lines; each
seeking an advantageous ground. Thurenne waited for the Lorrainers, by whose
coming up, being strengthened, he stood off no longer, but committed the main
trial to the Fortune of a Battle.

The day was the 15. of December, Anno 1650. in cloudy Weather. The Village
next to the Plain where the fight was, is commonly called Somp, one might
better call it a heap of Cottages. Thurennes Cavalry were about 5, his Infantry
about 4000; the Lorrainers were led by Ligneville and Fouge the Savoyard, the
Wallons by San-Maria, the Germans by Lanaw. There were also French Rebels; The
Croats Dragoons led the Forlorn (like the Roman Rorarii) that with their
light-shot begin the Engagement, as the smaller drops are wont to fall before
it rains downright. It the Van were six great Guns placed so, that it may pass
for a fair pitched Battle.

The French Battalia was skilfully drawn up, and was the very flower of the old
Soldiers, among which were most eminent Villequier and Hoquincourt, Navaille,
Manichamp, Pradeau, Inville, and not a few others of long Experience of War;
the whole Body amounted to above 10000; and had their Pieces of Artillery too,
but lighter ones. Praslin appearing in the Head of the right wing, gave out his
Orders. Thurenne, after his usual manner, led his left Wing. The hottest of the
Engagement was upon our right side, where the Son of Praslin, a very hopeful
young Gentleman, was lost. Dur^s and Bouteville with Beauvosse and Montolier,
at the first charge broke through our whole Wing, and came up to the very Train
of Artillery. Manichamp first routed the Lorrainners: Villequier came up also,
and gave a great turn to the wavering and uncertain Victory. Lanaw, who
commanded five German Regiments, being made Prisoner after his Horse was killed
under him, gave terror to his Party; and here the face of the day, which was
before doubtful, began to alter. At the same moment were take Ligneville and
Fouge, which gave the Lorrainers under them occasion to give back. Then the
Victory turned manifestly to the French side. For Thurenne having his Horse
wounded under him, could no longer be present to give quick Orders in the
sudden Emergencies at several parts; nay, he was near the being taken Prisoner,
and so he had been, unless he had been lent a Horse to escape on, and had got
clear by passing for a French man. All on both Wings of Thurenne were either
taken or slain, and only his own Regiment stood it out to the last. There were
taken Prisoner Boutteville, Gamarra, Ligneville, S. Quintine, and Hocourt, and
the Kettle-drums and Colors lost. In the French Army, besides the Son of
Praslin, Alvimar, Corvald, Valey, Brense, and the Brother of Rosa were lost,
and about 500 common Soldiers.

Thurenne retired by Barleduc to Stenay to Madam Longuevilles, who made
acquainted with the loss received, though deserving, yet courageously refused
Leopoldus his offers, that is, a Refuge in Flanders. In the mean time Chasteau
Porcien, Asilie, Quatrechamp, Bouzance, Guncource, Charbon Bea^mont, and the
like Towns beyond the Ausne, possessed by the Spaniards, voluntarily render
themselves to the French. Seneterre makes large Inroads into Lorraine, having
reduced not a few petty Cities and Towns to obedience.

Such was the issue of Rhetel-fight, where the Counsels of the Cardinal, and
the Courage of Pr^slin triumphed, even to envy, which immediately pouring in,
overthrew all Mazarines Proceedings, so Prudence is for the most part wont to
sink under Fortune.

For adorning the Victory, and procuring more Creatures, the Office of
Marshall was made common, and as it were promiscuously dispensed. Villequier,
afterward styled d'Aumont, Hoquincourt, Stneterre, and to gratify Orleans,
Ferte Imbausse, were preferred to that Dignity. Grancey being offended that he
was not taken into the crowd of Mareschals, withdrew to his Government of
Gravelin, giving out high Words, by reason of which afterward at the
interposition of Orleans, he compassed his desire, lest otherwise Gravelin
might have been in some danger, which was the Top and Crown of the Triumphs of
Orleans.

It was grown a fashion to extort all things by threats, nor was there, at that
time, any readier way to Riches and Honors. Not so much the calamity of the
Age, had introduced this and the like ill usages into France, as the unbridled
liberty of the Court, especially taking upon them at that time. Mazarine under
constraint would promise any thing only for that little moment, till he had
redeemed himself out of the pressure of his Exigents, having a tender forhead
to deny any one any thing. And as water on a smooth board or stone easily
follows which way soever the fingers draw it: so did he comply with every
Petition, which were infinite. As often as the French man feels the weight upon
his back sit light, he abuses without measure the gentleness of his Rider,
taking a licentiousness of offending from a presumption of pardon. That airy
people is not to be fixed but by fear: nor was any man in the world more
inwardly acquainted with the temper of his Country than Armand Richlien, who
first rid France with a curbed Bit, and brought in terror.

Mazarine encountered more sad difficulties upon the Victory, than in the
Battle. The Faction at Paris grew more fierce, but it was in secret Juntas.
They blab out nothing any where, or speak without premeditation; every where
was profound silence, or dissembling words more dangerous than silence. They
who were Mazarines greatest back-friends seemed most inclinable to him; would
invite him to the Court, that he might reap the fr^i^ of his Victories, and
that which of all Court-cras^^ gives the most unavoidable blow, the
counterfeiting a friendship more pernicious than any malice, only to gain more
credit to malignant suggestions conveyed amidst specious Applauses; a venom to
be feared, especially from those that our Confidents, and lodge in our very
bosoms.

The discerning Cardinal perceived those Artifices, but either the Queens
indisposition, or the malignancy of his Fate brought him back into the City on
the last December, 1650. where only the List of his Successes was his
overthrow, as theiis at Athens, who were banished by the Ostracisme.

The Parliament which hitherto had kept within bounds; Orleans, who would not
have had Mazarine banished, the Sling, that thought it for their Interests to
have kept him as their stalking Horse, all now, with united Forces attaque him.

Every such general Commotion is always fatal, nor can ever be suppressed or
regulated by any Expedient. The color of their dissaffection was the
enlargement of the Princes, which every Party wishes, but with different
pretenses. Corinth was then the vital Spirit, which the whole Combination drew.
He only strove not that the Princes might be set at liberty, but removed to
Paris, and kept in less close confinement, that afterward when Mazarine, was
expelled, at pleasure, either he might himself release them, or keep them in
closer restraint; that so he might insinuate himself into the Sling, the
Parliament, and at length into Orleans, by the help Madame Chevreuse, by which
means he might be without cotroversie Head of the Party, and then by raising
Troubles, in a short time get a Hat, that so by raising greater Troubles, he
might at last obtain the being Prime Minister. As if France should eternally
need the Scarlet Gown for her Government, which might more decently be sent
home to Rome for the use of the Conclave its proper place.

Orleans requested the Senate, for the most part by Corinth his Deputy, and
ratified what he delivered in his Name, although sometimes they were bold
words, and such as neither agreed with the gravity of the Hearers, nor the
Character of the Speaker. Nay, would exasperate the Assembly against Mazarine,
by whom he related that Parliament Men and good Patriots were called Cromwells
and Fairfaxes, only for not coming up to the Court-sense, in contemplation of
the Public Good; taking thereupon an occasion to impeach and charge the
Cardinal for being, as he said, the Author of all the public Troubles; taking
always the Engagement of the Princes for a Cloak. Such Assemblies were often
forbidden by the Queen; but always retained and more frequented. Orleans in
person, not regarding Wife and Children, nor minding his Dinner, would abide
whole days in the Parliament House, pressling the Banishment of Mazarine, and
the Release of the Princes without end. Nay, kept at distance from the Queen,
which he had not hitherto done, would make more addresses to her, nor could be
prevailed upon by any entreaties, to come to a private Conference with her,
till the Princes were set at liberty, and Mazarine in good earnest expelled out
of the French Dominions. The Parliament by humble Petitions and Advises
inculcated the same into the Queen, but Mole, the Premier President of the
Parliament of Paris, made this grave and eloquent Speech to her Majesty. There
might not be any longer shifts, nor alleging dilatory excuses; the excellent
Prisoners must be released, and could no longer be detained in a dark Dungeon,
without forfeiture of the French Allegiance, whose very appearance now posting
away, was ready to break, forth into open Rebellion, unless the imminent
mischiefs were timely provided against. It was not equitable nor seemly for the
Kings Uncle to give way to a Foreigner. One of them must be gone. Now it were
better for a Stranger, the cause of all the divisions, before any violence be
offered him, to go away without suffering harm, than for the Duke of Orleans to
come no more to Council, and all the State run to confusion.

When this was heard there were no more debates about the Cardinals departure.
The Leading-men of the Royal Party offered their services, as though Mazarine
were to be maintained by force of Arms, and drawing up Soldiers into the City;
but he judged these to be but flashes. Nor will a wise man ever depend upon
such promises in adversity always vanishing into the air.

From Cuboville, which is a Town of Normandy, not far off Havre de Grace, was a
Letter written by the three Princes, and delivered to the Parliament, wherein
the Illustrious Prisoners implored the Laws trampled under feet, and Statutes
unexecuted. Petitions also from the Princess of Conde, and the Daughter of
Longueville were presented to the Parliament, which was then Umpire of the
French differences. The Princes followers took courage from the success, and
held, which is strange, secret Treaties, in a City that keeps no Council, the
substance of which was; That the Princes by all means be released; that a Match
be procured between Enguien the Son of Conde, and Alencon the second Daughter
of Orleans; as also between Conti, and the only Daughter of Madam Chevreuse, a
Hat for Corinth: and what is the principal Article, that Mazarine be
exterminated. All this did Corinth get subscribed by Orleans, without the
knowledge of Beaufort, who would otherwise have let forth all the secret into
Monbazons bosom, which afterward having been searched into by the subtility of
the Cardinal, would utterly have overthrown the Prisoners before their Release,
and themselves while they were entering upon the Intrigue.

All these Transactions were carried every hour to Havre de Grace, and the
answers of the Princes brought back to Paris, as though the Princes were
already at full liberty by correspondence, not allowed, but unrevealed, the
Servants, Doctors, and Keepers of the Princes, being bribed, whilst Bar was
very careful, but altogether ignorant, and making a great stir to no purpose.
Who would not wonder at so great closeness in a babbling Nation: and that which
will make the miracle surpass belief, all to be managed by Women, not only
Procurers of pleasure, but Platonic Lovers, which proved yet most faithful in
this business. A prodigious thing! for what steadiness can be imagined in so
slippery a Sex, amongst so many Burglars of other men's Beds, and complemental
Flatterers, which are the most effectual motives to female minds?

The Queens aim was to delay and spin out the time, till the Kings coming to
Age, at which all proceedings should be either ratified, or disannulled.
Orleans, his Duchess, and elder Daughter, their designs were to enlarge the
Prisoners, for the restraining, not taking off Mazarine: the same was the sense
of the Parliament and Sling. Only Corinth was for ruining utterly Mazarine, and
by acquiring a Hat, to be Lord of all. Chasteaune^f upon every occasion, more
studious to perform his duty, than advance any private Interest of his own, and
whose Prison was more honorable than his Successors Empire, could not digest
the dishonor of her Majesty; therefore having invited all the Princes friends,
he propounded to them equal terms upon which they might be beholden to the King
only for their Liberties, and not the Faction. These were admitted, and very
well accepted of out of fear, lest Orleans having expulsed Mazarine, and entered
upon the Government, by the counsel of Corinth, should not earnestly promote
the enlargement of the Prisoners, counting it perhaps better in what matters he
ought to be prime and alone, not to take on Conde for his Colleague.

But all this was to no purpose, because the Cardinal perhaps by too
precipitate an haste, as some would have it be, prevented all, and went and
released the Princes of himself, as shall be more largely related in the
following Book.

Now nothing did more effectually incite Mazarine to depart than the face of
the City in an Uproar. That Sea of tumultuous people did swell: and in these,
as in past Seditions, such was the power of the Commonalty, as to be of great
weight in every occasion. This therefore must be the endeavor, that it be
never raised since, when it is once raised, it can be ruled by no Reins. But a
Stranger will be inquiring, What is that which in this place is called the
Commonalty, which is called the City? It is that multitude which is seen in
Paris, that the infinite number of houses there can scarce hold. The greatest
part of that throng lives out of their Country; they are Natives of other
Lands. Order all these to be summoned, and ask every one of them, what is his
Country? you will see that they have left their habitations, and are come by
throngs into that City, which denying none, is become the common Country of all
the World, by a certain Plaster well tempered, because in that Town are great
Rewards propounded to Virtues, and greater to Vices.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. After the Release of the Princes, and the Departure of Mazarine,
there followed not blessed Prosperity, as was expected: Nor were the Troubles
of the State composed, but all grew worse. Conde finds fault with the
Management of the State, and removes the Ministers. Extorts the Government of
Guyenne, rejecting his present one of Burgundy: so choosing a fit Scat for his
future Insurrection. He withdraws. The Civil Commotions break out afresh; and a
third Bourdeaux War arises. Hereupon Mazarine is revoked, upon this ground to
succor the King that was again distressed by the Faction. The Cardinal has
Honor procured him by his Enemies, instead of disgrace.

THE Counsels of the honest Party being overborn by violence, Mazarine
preferring what was necessary before that which was plausible, withdrew himself
from the present Juncture of Affairs. It was a great Victory to the Faction,
that they had chased him out of France, as the Person, who by the greatness of
his Genius had hitherto advanced the Royal Interest, and upon whose death or
absence they hoped any thing might be more easily gained from the Queen.
Hereupon throwing off all reverence, men revolted from their Loyalty, not by
degrees, but running headlong; the State turning to all licentiousness, so that
what they thought they might get by force, they cared not to sue for.

On Feb. 6. An. 1651. in a night without Moonshine, the Cardinal, incognito,
disguised in a habit unsuitable to his Eminency, guarded by about 200 Horse,
riding himself a Horseback, retired to S. Germans, Harcourt beating the way,
who was the perpetual Executioner of Court-commands; there he tarried a day.
Diverse advices and reports that came from Paris, he heard and slighted; but
pursues his Journey to Havre de Grace through the midst of Normandy, with a
pompous Train gazed at by all the people, as he passed along. The same command
over his countenance which he had in his Grandeur went along with him at his
departure. Nor it there any more certain Symbol of a brave Spirit than not to
shrink at the charge or encounter of any adverse Fortune.

He took order for dispatching what was to be dispatched, without any
ostentation of business, being of conditions so tempered, between active and
mild, as that none did more affectionately desire a calm, or was more able to
weather out a storm. When the matter required sitting up late, was always
wakeful. But Fortune toward the same subject was in such extremes, that he who
lately thought he wanted Land for Victory, now wants place for Refuge and
Sanctuary. And what may be accounted incredible, amongst so many as he had
obliged, finds the relief but of few. So it is; Wh^nce thinks that any
obligation holds in force to the Afflicted, or retains the memory of past
kindnesses from one, now, in Adversity: or when did Faith not depend upon
Fortune? whoever had reaped any advantage by him, turned the Odium upon the
Giver, and judged it equitable to keep what he had received of Mazarine, but
let Mazarine who had bestowed it, be banished or destroyed.

Nor yet would Paris think it self safe, if the name of the Cardinal in his
greatness did any where continue. All apprehended him, as though he were still
ready to come upon all of them: and that he might be rendered more odious; fear
was counterfeited. Therefore the Parliament made terrible Ordinances to have
him quite exterminated out of the Kingdom; and branded the memory of him, as he
departed by daily impeachments with perpetual marks of Infamy. The
Common People tore him continually with popular Rage. Thus do Quarrels rising
upon partial Factions out-last the fears upon which they are grounded: for now
there were no farther apprehensions of him. The first attempt was; The clapping
a strict Guard upon the King and Queen, under color that they might not by any
slight get out in a secret way to follow after Mazarine. Orleans was now in
the highest power, who could not be prevailed upon by any entreaties of the
Queen Regent to be present at Council, stiffly denying to yield to it, till the
Princes were first enlarged; which for some days he punctually observed;
whether it were Corinth that fortified the resolution of Gaston, in other
occasions sickle, or Gaston himself having so often suffered for his
inconstancy, had now put on a stoutness for a few days. Chevreuse practiced a
thousand devises in favor of the Prisoners, as though in Election to be
thereby Mother in Law, upon the Match of her Daughter, sometimes would woo
Orleans her self, sometimes by Corinth and Chasteauneuf; at other times would
prostrate her self to Mazarine, of whose departure she was the greatest
occasioner, insinuating this to be the most proper lenitive to the Spirit of
Orleans, who always received satisfaction in compliance either to relax or
endear him. Thus was the French Court governed at that time. The Cardinal, more
than any man living, pierced into these and the like Intrigues, and at length
compassed his ends by a profound sounding of such dispositions.

Harcourt came back from S. Germans to Paris, where he had like to have been
crushed by the popular fury, not so much for having served Mazarine with care
and faithfulness, but for having treated with Seamen, a most rude generation
of people, about hiring a Vessel; who divulging the matter, raised no small
Uproar, as though there were a Plot about conveying away the King and Queen;
wherein I Will warrant you the Mariners were much concerned. Mancini, the Nephew
of Mazarine, overtook his Uncle. His Nieces stole away privately, being
committed to the care of Hocquincourt and were brought to Peronne, as though
the ruins of such a House could not lie in one place; but must be scattered
all the World over.

Yet was not the Age so barren of Examples, but that some discovered a stubborn
loyalty kept entire to the King and Queen, for whose cause especially it was,
not Mazarines; out of the motives of particular interest, as the event
testified: but the Queen had made offers by Mazarine to all, even the
seditious, whatever the one and the other did strive to get, whether secretly,
or by Mutinies, if they would but have been quiet. But the French have no
patience to stay for whatever hopes they have upon any grounds conceived,
therefore they soon (...) from straight to indirect ways, then to crooked
courses, and at last fall into precipices.

The Cardinal proceeded on his Norman Journey, not environed with that Train,
nor guarded with such a Troop as he was wont. Yet there attended him
d'Estrades, Please, Belliere, and about twenty other Personages, not of the
lowest rank of the Nobility, with a Squadron of 200 Horse, commanded by
Palvausse. Other Attendants uninvited with design of drawing somewhat from him
at his going off: Some to be Spies over him; few out of respect. All would
repeat the Risques that they run at their coming forth by a Volley of shot out
of the House of the Duchess of Orleans. We were, said they, almost beaten off
from our Horses; and in reproach called Mazarines. Ronserol with a cloth about
his head often in the sight of Mazarine, though he had no wound, yet had that
wound which was not carefully dressed mornings and evenings, out of a vapouring
ostentation. Diverse discourses ^assed to and fro; Some, That the Cardinal was
^ne directly for Havre de Grace, to secure himself with the Princes, and make
Articles to his best advan^^ge; Others, That he might let them out presently,
and immediately return to Paris; Others, That he ^ight indeed release them, but
himself remain in Ha^re de Grace till the storm were over, and men's passi^ns
abated; which was the nearest truth. Every ^ne spoke after their Judgment, and
perhaps not so much after their Judgment, as out of dissimulation. ^y the third
days March the respect to Mazarine ^egan to grow cheap: For the French are of
such Nature, that unless you hold a strict hand over them, they will not long
be at command. The Cardinal, as his present condition required, giving ^ll fair
words, thereupon presently fell into dis^steem. They would press into his
Chamber, not make their entry; crowd to sit down at Table, ^natch, not take
their meat; prate, and talk loud ^t Board, who had been before most submissive
^latterers. The Horsemen played the wanton, and ^ell upon the Flocks and Herds
that came in their way; the Normans impatient of receiving any the ^east
appearance of damage, take up Arms, and come to Mazarine with complaints of
having their Cattle plundered. This was then his special care, who ordered
either the goods that had been taken away to be speedily by Palvausse restored,
or full satisfaction to be made for them; but was slowly obeyed.

Every day came Letters from the Queen, by which he was bidden to be of good
courage, and was under the Kings Hand assured of his return; which Mazarine
never once doubted, such was hi^ confidence in Fate, and security of Fortune,
which as he said, would never have by such steps advance^ him to that height,
to cast him off in the middle (...) his Race, because of innocent contests with
Competitors for his Masters service: and affirmed that he never was a false
Prophet in divining any thing.

In the mean while Orleans contended for the Release of the Princes earnestly,
and in union with the Parliament and Sling-party to obtain that Rochefoucault,
Violet, and Cominges should be dispatched without any delay, with instructions
from the King and Queen, and Letters of Cachet o^ Commission under the Seal for
releasing the Princes which being issued out, then Orleans waited upon the King
and Queen, and Council, and was President; after that by Act of Parliament,
with the consent of the Queen, he had entered a strict Cave^t for the
unrepealable Banishment of irrevocable Mazarine; who having heard of these
Particulars, and judging it convenient to make haste (lest the Commissioners
who were now on the way, should draw to themselves the merit of having set the
Princes free) came early to Havre de Grace on the 13. Feb. 1651. In order to
this, as has been said, Gramont, Lyonne, and in the behalf of Orleans, Go^l^,
had gone before to be Spies over Conde, under pretense of his enlargement. He
was every day certified by a thousand ways and Arts, besides Ciffres, not only
of the state of Affairs, but of the most minute Occurrents. Now Havre de Grace
was no longer a Prison, but an open Fair, so was all kind of Ware bought and
sold, Bar the Keeper of the Castle ^eing neither Fool, nor Knave, but beset
with a ^rain of corrupted Followers. There was no lon^er debate about their
Enlargement, but the obli^ation and reward for their Enlargement what eve^^ one
laid claim to. If one could be supposed to have ^een a Midas, who turned all
that he touched into ^ld, could never have made so much gold as they ^ould be
Suitors for: or if Conde could rain gold, (...) would never be solvent for what
they expected. These were the very words of Mazarine. And in ^uth the Prince
might easily guess, that when he ^as come out of Prison, as shortly he would,
he ^ould then be confined to closer straights through (...) cravingness of his
Party. Chevreuse was the most pressing burden, because of the promise of
^^arriage, that is, the Match of Conti with her ^aughter, of which Conde never
so much as had ^y serious thought. Every one of the Prisoners was to be made
his own ransom. The whole Faction shrouded most different respects under the
^ommon pretense of hatred of Mazarine, whose ^ffection had been always
inclinable to Conde. Some ^ere were whom the Cardinal loved more dearly, one
that he prized more highly. The Prince sing his advantages immoderately,
overthrew his ^wn Interest, and upon that very ground, that he ^ought himself
feared, slighted all offers out of dis^ain, or distrust; an incurable sore, the
cause of his ^any troubles.

Mazarine having disposed his Cavalry into the neighboring Villages, enters
into Havre de Grace with his Retinue of Menial Servants. He goes into the
Castle alone with only Palvausse and my self. The Guns were discharged by Sea
and Land out (...) respect to him as he entered in. Lionne had gone (...) meet
him at three miles distance, without questi^^ to inform him in necessary
points. Bar met hi^ at the City, Gramont at the Castle Gate. Aft^^ Conference
had, the Cardinal in his Boots an^ Cloak is attended into the Princes Chamber.
Wh^^ having courteously and reverently saluted, he delivers Bar the Queens
Letters, the substance of which was; To execute such Orders at the Cardinal
should give for the discharge of the Princes. Then turning toward Conde,
says; The Queen has made ch^^ of me to signify her Majesty's pleasure for
your rele^^ Forget your Imprisonment, and continue to love (...) King and
Queen, and me your Highnesses eternally obliged Servant. Conde replied, That he
thanke^ her Majesty for his Enlargement, and should advan^ the King and
Kingdoms Interests, as he had still (...) but that he was obliged to Mazarine,
and should (...) bear injuries in mind. Conde looking upon the Cardinal, and
the Cardinal upon Conde, could not ch^^ but be occasions of comfort one to the
other. (...) was scarce ten in the forenoon, when they all (...) down to Table.
Mazarine taking a glass of Wine drunk to the happy return of the Princes into
the Court; they again begun a Health to Mazarine* The Meal was short, and a
slender Collation; Mazarine as it were turning them out, lest by the Dessert of
the approaching Commissioners, the obligation of their liberty already
received, should be hindered. Longueville went out first, then Conti an^ both
of them leaped hastily into Gramonts Coa^^ Conde stayed a little while with the
Cardinal in the Prison-Chamber, which from the three Beds might have been
justly called (as the place of Roman Entertainments) a Triclinium or Room of
three Cou^hes. Many words passed on the one side, and the ^ther. The sum of
Mazarines Discourse was this; That Orleans had been the cause of their
Imprisonment, by the procuring of Corinth; for the future he could do no wiser
act, than to render himself up wholly (...) the King and Queen for destroying
the Faction. That whatsoever strength was held by the Dependencies of Mazarine
in France, should be all at the service of Conde, whilst Conde himself were at
the King and Queens devotion. Mercoeur and Espernon he commended in particular
to him; further, if he pleased to communicate with Lyonne about the principal
matters of State, with whom he had left the very secrets of his heart. From
that time Lyonne was in highest Employment, a subject of much industry and
trust, great dispatch, cheerful in look and life, and of a sagacious Spirit.
Him did Mazarine use as a singular Assistant in the managing of his weighty
Affairs. The Cardinal waiting upon the Prince when he was in the Coach, made
him a decent, and almost submissive Reverence. Conde vouchsafing no return, bid
the Coachman drive away. I had the Honor to be assistant at these passages;
and transmit nothing to posterity, but what I both saw and heard.

The Coach full of the Princes, Gramont and Gou^as, went in Triumph through
Havre de Grace amidst the Acclamations of the people, and the roaring of the
Canons. Four leagues off they lodged in the Castle Gromeny. Thither came in as
at a moment appointed, Rochefoucault, Vrillere, and Vi^^ There were embraces
and joys, and liberal drin^^ing at Supper. Lyonne charged with the cares (...)
Mazarine, having over-taken the Princes, and ^ing coldly received, rides post
to give her Maje^ an account of the particular occurrents. The Pr^ces came
apace through Rouen, Maigny, Ponti^m and S. Denis to Paris. The nearer they
drew (...) the City, they were marked to be more disrespe^^full of Mazarine,
and more infense against him, ^ the way they uttered much reflexively, and m^
directly in scorn and derision of him. Nor w^ Harcourt spared, who like Provost
Marshall (as (...) is commonly called) had conveyed the Prince through the
midst of Normandy, not one of Long^^^villes Creatures daring so much as to stir.

At that very time the observing did discern tha^ Conde harbored those
resentments, which could neither comport with the public Peace, nor (...) late
promises. Orleans came to meet him with (...) great Train, and going out of his
Coach hugge^ Conde with straight embraces, and then presently brought him to
the King and Queen to do his duty. The joy of that day, and the concourse of
the City as though the Pillars were restored to the Kingdom* can scarce be
expressed in words, and perchan^ may scarce deserve to be credited. But now the
Soldiery at the very sight of Conde cried for joy leaping to welcome him, and
longing to touch his Hand. We are glad to see your Highness, and recei^^ our
Prince in safety. I triumphed with you in Flanders, with you in Germany, with
you in Spain. Under your Conduct our Troops pranced upon the Ba^^ of the Danow
and of the Rhyne, which your admired Renown passed over. Before the eyes of all
shone forth an assured hope of safety, peace, quiet, prosperity, so that more
could not have been expected, not expectations less answered.

This night they supped at Orleans his House, where slackning the Reins to
liberty, innumerable Cups of Wine were drunk, to the confusion of Mazarine, who
was now locked within the Garrison Havre de Grace. and found neither Bar nor
the Soldiery very ready at his Commands. For Bar depended on Madam Esgioulon,
and she indeed on the King; but was so pinched by Orleans and the Parliament
and the Sling, that she could not any longer safely allow the Entertainment at
Havre de Grace, when the Cardinal was by the public Acts banished out of the
whole Dominion of France, nor might the Governor of any Castle, if he should
^lye to them for Harbor, give him Refuge. It now follows to relate faithfully
and in short, after my custom, what Mazarine, and what his Rivals did, till his
return.

When the Cardinal left Paris, he had scarcely money to bear his charges on the
way, which he had raised every where, by putting into the Lom^ard part of his
Household Stuff; so that it is the ^ess wonder, if having tasted of being in
want, he proved after his return from Banishment somewhat more provident for
the World. Having therefore received some supply of money by faithful
Cour^iers, after a few days spent in Havre de Grace for ^etting his mind and
business in order he departed, and guarded by 100 Horse, went to Dorlans,
whither the Queen had dispatched Beringham with R^vigny to command him in her
Name with all possible speed to quit the Kingdom of France: for all things were
running to ruin. Amidst so many misfortunes, nothing more afflicted him, than
the he should be an occasion of the Queens trouble With some reluctance he
entered upon the Journey but afterward resolutely executing his intention
exceeded in his future courage, the former ca^ ages compared together: so that
he might be judged rather happily to withdraw, than fly out (...) the Kingdom.
He designed for Alsatia, or the Elector of Colognes Country: and taking in his
way Peronne, la Fere, Rhetel lately reduced by his Ar^^ and Barleduke, stayed
at Clermont, where he was honorably entertained by Seneterre, not regarding
the Parliaments Orders. There being certified (...) the favorable affctions of
the Archbishop of Co^logne toward him, he preferred such a Retreat before
Alsatia, and therefore bent his course toward Sedan, where Fabert,
Hoquincourt, Navaille, M^ dejus, and Broglie offer him their service
courageously and faithfully, if he would stay in France, an^ by force of Arms
resist the Faction, nor suffer himself to be born down by the stream of mad
men. (...) supposing (it is questionable, whether not discreetly) that the
present case needed not such Helpers returned them thanks, and promised he
should (...) forget their courteous proffer. There is nothing sweeter in this
world, than the showing kindness i^ adversity. He chose rather to be safely
miserabl^ than to endanger the Kingdom, already afflicted* And because he could
not come at Cologne, but (...) must pass through the Spanish Territory; having
obtained leave of her Catholic Majesty, as was ^greeable to Reason and Honor,
and received Passes from Leopoldus and Fuensaldagne, he goes straight through
Aix la Chappelle, where he light upon Fabio Cighi, the Popes Nuncio, in
Conference with whom the matter of the Peace among other things fell into
Discourse; but their Judgments differed: whereupon afterward grew a disgust
between them upon I know not what Piqne. Don Antonio Pementelli, the Governor
of Newport, was ^ent with a Troop of Croats, to wait upon the Cardinal. All
offers were made by the Spaniards to have shaken his faith, had they not
encountered a man of Constancy. Pementelli too threw in occasional mention about
the Peace, as being by Fate designed an Instrument for so holy a Work; and
perhaps the motion had taken effect, had not Sillery sent from Conde to
Brussels, broken off the beginnings of the Conference newly put upon the Loom.
Hereupon the Spaniards promised themselves mighty advantages from Conde, and
believed France drawing toward its last gasps. Therefore was the Treaty broken
off, lest any umbrage should be given by it to Conde, whom they had fast to
them already, and were resolved to bind in stronger links, that is, to make a
purchase of our losses, as the Castillions are still wont to do, always with
unlucky success.

Mazarine wearied with travel and cares, comes in safety to Brouell, the Palace
of the Elector of Cologne. The Elector, with the Principal of the Clergy, visit
their new Guest, beseeching him to make free use of any part of their Territory
as he pleased. Magnifience and Courtesy are the eternal Badges of the House of
Bavaria. Mazarine has proof of both, with his Family, Kindred, and all the
Planks of his Shipwreck. Equal to that of the Refugies, was the joy of their
Receivers at they coming of such Persons, which increased with the continuance,
when at the saluting of men, almost of the meaner sort, he would add some notes
of familiarity. And as much as the crowd of persons flocking about him would
permit, trusted his person to all of them. Nones Age, nor weakness, nor Sex
stayed any from silling their eyes with gazing on this strange sight. For he
was often at Church in his Cardinals Robe, not laying off the Habit of his
Dignity. The Children would know him, the Youth^ point at him, the Aged admire
him. Sick men too would creep out of their houses to gaze, and leave him but a
narrow path to pass along.

Let us now leave Brouell, which no Posterity w^ think of without kind
reflections, and return (...) Paris; where a long Letter of Mazarine to the
Queen and the Count de Brienne, his Majesty's Secretary, was read over with an
audible voice in the Privy Council: That being overborn by the Con^^racy and
Envy of his Enemies, in as much as his truth and innocence could find no place,
now be was chased away, and in Banishment with his shipwracked Family, he took
the boldness to complain to the most (...) of Queens, that he foresaw no end of
Fortunes outrag^ but had reason to expect every day more cruel usage* For such
Presidents never stay where they begun, b^ though they be let into a narrow
cut, make a wide I^^dation; That he had been striped of all he had by (...)
implacable Rivals, who had the wind now for ^^em: nay, that their spleen was
vented upon his Housold-stuff, and what other Rarities he had ordered to (...)
brought from Rome for the Ornament of Paris. that he had gained nothing by so
great labors for ^he service of many years but a Hat, which he was ^illing and
ready to return them again; seeking no ^ther advantage than a Corner wherein to
hide his ^ sgrace; but that no storm should be so violent as to ^nge his
Loyalty, although he were exposed to never apparent danger. This powerful
Letter brought me to relent; but exasperated more, who took ^ourage from their
numbers. Mazarine is voted a full House; Guilty of high Treason, the Distur^r
of the public Peace, and Enemy of France; for ^ving committed Piracy, turning
from a Minister to Picaroon, and so interrupting the Commerce of fo^reign
Ships; for having conveyed the French Treasure to his own Country of Italy; for
having been always (...) evil Counselor to the Queen, and implanting his ^n
ill Principles of Government into his Majesty's ^ind, masking his vices under
dissimulation. Cer^ainly nothing must be more depraved than his mind, (...) no
higher rewards could be propounded to have ^racted him to virtue; nor if he be
corrupt, is there ^t any Bar to call him to an Account before it. ^ict
Prohibitions are made, that no Frenchman ^ould hold correspondence with him,
imposing a ^ere penalty on all that should presume to trans^ss. Broussel and
Munier were chosen Commissi^^ers to make strict enquiry into Mazarines
Accounts, and return them into the Exchequer; there was this unhappy
aggravation, that Covetousness ministered an occasion to Cruelty. But who would
have thought that the Sacred Acts should mix with the Profane, and Monitories,
as they call them, be published through all Churches, by which was enjoined
under threats of Excommunication, to reveal to the Parliament Commissioners
whatsoever was known to belong to Mazarine. But their great faith, by being in
vain attempted, or his innocence appeared. Bitaut and Pitheus were sent to the
Borders of the Kingdom, to make Inquisition upon all the Roads, as he passed
through, and report what had been done to the comfort of Mazarine, that so his
Abetters convict, might be brought to condign punishment. There was no
Offender discovered, such was either the negligence of the Judges, or the
excellency of those that were suspected. But the chiefest concernment of the
Faction was, that the King and Queen should not escape* The City-gates had been
for that reason delivere^ up to be kept by the City-Guards by the Queen^
consent, before the return of the Princes, and som^time after. Nevertheless
they were struck ever^ hour with new suspicions. The whole Town wa^ alarmed
with uncertain fears, or gave out as if they had been; so that at midnight they
watched ove^ the King and Queen, while they were asleep, at lea^^ came to look
whether they were in the Bed or no Fear was counterfeited to increase the anger
again^ Mazarine. There was no other way for the Confederacy to keep up its
credit; and to comprise a^ in one word, Within the same City, wherein m^
formerly had contended in virtue, there was no (...) emulation of vice; and he
took himself for the ^est Patriot, who was the worst Subject. When ^en have
once wandered out of the right way, they ^^on run into precipices. Therefore it
was now in (...) State mere tossing, and billows; but no steadiness, where the
Anchor of the public sasety plow^^f, and could not fix. Festivals were kept,
but such Festivals as Ambition and Cruelty provided. The ^nalterable sense of
the Faction was to heave the Queen out of the Coach-box, and bring thing to
^^at pass, as that some notable Change might ensue, and they might in troubled
waters fish out somewhat, though it were never so small.

By these and the like practices, Madam Longue^ille, both Bouillons, and all
that retained upon that Party, are indemnified by the Parliament. But in the
principal place, the Princes are declared to have been wrongfully imprisoned.
It is the Prerogative of the Parliament of Paris, to make Nocents innocent, and
again Innocents, nocent, that is, to make and unmake Laws; and in one day
declare the same persons Enemies of the French Court, and admit them to be
Confidents; boystrous Waves, and immediately a Calm. From the beginning of its
being a Nation, these things have been, and will be. The Elements do not
change; and by these Method does our Kingdom stand, and will stand to the
Worlds end; for France is the only State that is ^ever to fall.

In the mean while Mazarine was in ill condition against whose return were
strict Ordinances, to which her Majesty gave her assent; nay, by Act of
Parliament, not only foreign, but home-born Cardinals, and Ecclesiastics in
whatsoever degree dignified, are rendered incapable of being admitted Members
of the Kings Council, according to the custom of the wisest of Statesmen (who
does not understand the Venetians to be meant?) which courageously and
politickly bar such from meddling with their Government. No man can pay a
divided Allegiance to his natural Sovereign, and the Bishop of Rome; for
Cardinals, if the account be rightly cast up, are but Curates in Purple; they
should attend the Consistories, Bishops the Charge of their flock, which cannot
be neglected without hazard of souls, Corinth drew against the Bill, that only
Foreigners should be excluded from the Government, lest his expected Hat, not
being lined with that Ministry, to which he aspired, might be depressed by his
meaner contemplations.

Obusson Archbishop of Yverdon, in behalf of the Clergy, made an eloquent
Oration for the Privileges of the Church; but without success, because it was
evident by whose instinct and impulse he spoke. Yet the Reputation of Obusson
grew by this means higher, and paved him a path to future preferments. The main
scope of his Oration lay in amplifying the obligations that Cardinals had laid
upon France, whose good services were conspicuous all over the World. The
Parliament made answer; They knew all that already; But withal, that the same
Cardinals were insatiable in Ambition and Covetousness This (said they) is
incident to Ecclesiastical Dignities, a slighting of heavenly matters, and an
affectation of domineering on earth, and Eminency over great Princes, and if it
might be Kings; in all which they write after the Copy, and come as near as
they can to the Roman Court, overcoming all in the World in pride. How were it
else posible that a Frame built non such tottering Foundations, by ways
contrary to the Founders Insstitution, could have been raised to that height?
That although it be plain, that it is risen by the Bounty of Princes, yet is
their carriage more evident, that they turn the greatness that they have
received against their very Benefactors, and aim at nothing less by their
Canonists and Emissaries, than the total depression of the Secular Power. That
these Particulars having been sufficiently marked by most able men, can never
be enough inculcated to check their immoderate advance: which if it proceed,
the Authority of Presbyters and Churchmen will become Empress of the World,
and the Secular Power must be its Lacquay, which is scandalous. The Parliament
of Paris can never be commended enough, which always boldly stands up against
Ecclesiastical Encroachments, and restrains the spreading those Phylacteries
too wide. Excepting the Senators of Paris and Venice, all the rest of the World
bows in ignorance to vain Superstition.

Such was the Fate of France at that time, as that men's minds swelled with
discontent, and the whole State was griped with Intestine Seditions. The
Noblesse too had their Cabals and private Meetings, writ Letters into the
Counties, and as it were sounded an Alarm, and set up the Standard to fill up
the measure of the new Faction; That the public Destruction must be prevented;
that France was run to ruin, the Government dissolved; that the States of the
Kingdom must be summoned as the only relief of the utter desolation that was
imependent over the Land. The Queen tolerated these and such like disorders,
doubting more than need was to meddle. Orleans* and Conde allowed and cherished
them; the Parliament condemned them as prejudicial to their Authority. The
Princes could not well digest the hardiness of the Parliament of Paris, who
interposed as Arbitrators of the Kingdom in all State Affairs, under color of
a Supreme Power. Hereat the great Leaders of the House grumbled, and
interpreted it as a diminution of their Privileges.

This Council of the Nobles would not leave meeting, but slighted both Court
and Parliament, and joined with the Clergy. These flatter each the other with
mutual Remonstrances, as if it were both their grand Concerns, that the Kingdom
should not be at all impaired. But the third Estate which is of the-Justicers
and Lawyers drawing against them, nor coming in, the Assembly of the Nobles or
the States General, as they are in our language called, vanished away, after
great Contests having already chosen their place of Assembling at Tours, and in
order to that already provided for abating the price of Corn in that Country.

Madam Longueville had brought along with her from Stenay the Furies of
Revenge, by whole means all the Country that was before her in perfect quiet,
broke out behind her with the Dragons and Hydras of a most cruel War. One of
her first public Actions was the rescinding the Articles of Marriage between
her Brother Conti, and the Daughter of Madam Chevreuse. Madam Chevreuse had
delivered Conde at his return the Paper wherein he had engaged his Promise for
the future Marriage; withal generously professing, that she would not go to
extort such matters. And what, but that which is noble, could be expected from
the Line of Rohan? Enguiens Match too with the Duchess of Alenson, that had
been in like manner interchangeably signed per Verbum de Futuro, as the
Canonists distinguish, that it would come to nothing, Chevreuse did presage,
and commonly give out; nor was the Lady mistaken, as the event proved. That
Madam Longueville should not consent to the promised Alliance, no body wondered,
that knew her disposition, who was only fond over her Brother Conti, whom she
ruled by Rochefoucault. To have a young Lady not unhandsom, born of such a
Mother, and carrying Corinth in her Train, to come into Condes House, seemed a
troublesome piece of Business but for Conde to disoblige Chevreuse, Corinth, and
their Retainers, who had so great an influence upon Orleans, the Parliament,
and the City, did amaze such as were curious in Court-Politicks. What was his
meaning, I know not; this I know, that innumerable mischiefs were occasioned by
it. His Sister after her return, pondering in her mind the promises of Spain,
and wholly set on Revenge and War, cared not what came of it, sshe might but
inflame and exasperate her Brother, and thereby reduce the Queen to fatal
extremities.

The Prince might by Cajoling and Complements have engaged those that were
already inclined to him. But these were not Condes Methods; therefore at the
same time he lost his old Friends. Bouillon, Thurenne, with not a few others,
men sufficiently known, fell from him, and rendered themselves to the King,
being a great Acquist; Fortune indeed showing them the way to prefer an open
cut to solid advantages, before a by-path. The former Set of Dependents going
off from Conde, after the King had culled the better, there remained Marsin,
Boutteville, Colligny, and Tavanne. This whole Carriage was condemned as rash;
but the Prince having already entertained a heart of withdrawing, and having
already trucked with the Spaniard by his Sister, at Paris, by Sillery at
Brussells, and by Croissy at Stenay, he did politickly throw off those, who, he
was assured, would not stick to him.

The Spaniard is now no longer secretly practiced, but openly from Paris to
Brussells, and from Brussells to Paris the Road is beaten with Condes
Courriers, in whose and his Sister Longuevilles house, Gabriel de Toledo and
Castillian Names ring. Never was the King more saucily affronted. At Marle on
the Frontiers of Picardy, was a Rendez-vous about Vervain, where the Forces of
Conde were mustered, and received their Pay, and the Press-men were observed.
They should rather have trained at the Loyre: Thus they would have divided the
Kings Forces, and the Prince would have been^apprehended every where, as ready
to fall in. At Marle the Troops of Conde were handled rudely, which not being
able to stand the Choque of the Royalists were at last routed.

Nothing came more unexpected, nor more to undeceive the Court; which was held
in the dark, than the suing for Guyenne, which Conde did so instantly press, as
that it might be easily understood what was his meaning; yet was it granted
him, and Burgundy to Espernon in a change of pernicious consequence. It seemed
safer to yield to that, than upon denial of the request, that Conde as Governor
should both hold Burgundy under Command, by virtue of his Commission, and also
Guyenne in the affections of that Warlike people, which breathed forth nothing
else but Conde. But at the same time to have a desire that Provence should be
given his Brother Conti, and Auvergne the Duke of Nemours, and to pretend that
both Countries were promised him, as Conde did, was the first overtly
presumptuous Act after his Imprisonment, by which was declared a contempt of
the Government to the undervaluing of the Queen.

Mazarine knew all at Bruell, and every thing at Court depended upon his
directions, where Conde did solicit his Affairs, not his own. Nothing did more
effectually advance his return than such practices; so that if the Prince had
been Mazarines Pensioner, he could not more usefully have promoted his
Interests, who would have given a great bribe to put Conde upon such a Conduct
of Affairs. Therefore the Cardinal advised to yield Conde all his Suits, and so
cut off any occasion of the least distaste. Therefore by his advice were
Seguier and Chavigny too called up to Court, both of them affected to Conde.
The former not patiently bearing the intermission of his Authority, this latter
infinitely earnest after Alterations in the State, a large Crop of which he
procured by his subtle Counsels; a Person brought up within the Tropic of the
Court, could never sit still in private.

At this time the Seals were taken from Chasteauneus, chiefly at the
importunity of Conde, and were given to Mole, Premier President of Parliament,
without advising with Orleans, who upon the instigation of Corinth, with his
Followers Montresor and others, fell into a great passion, most grievously
complaining of the Queens presumption, that she should offer to take so much
upon her. What, said they, will this come too in time? Nay, Corinth went so far
as to advise the breaking open of Moles house, and taking thence of the Seals.

The poor Seals wandered up and down to requite service, either done, or to be
done; and were no longer a Reward of Virtue, but the Wages of Faction. Such sad
times have we beheld. In three so ancient men, was as long-lived, and not
declining ambition! Chasteauneuf thought them his due, as unjustly taken away;
Seguier would hold them as justly given him, Mole would get them as intending
to merit them, such power he had in the Parliament.

While these and the like occurrents past, Longueville and his Wife could not
agree at all, through old and late discontents, the causes of which were so
much the more bitter, as they were public. Conde interposes as Mediator,
either to work reconciliation; or having use of Longueville, to bring him into
these designs. Whatever were the cause, he thought it his Interest to oblige
the Wife, to be obedient to her Husband, which he effected. But among the
Articles of Reconciliation agreed upon, this being a principal one, that the
Highborn Lady must leave the Town, and plant the Seat of her perpetual
Habitation in the midst of Normandy, and never more think of her dear Argos;
she not having the patience to hold to such a strict condition, thrust forward
her Brothers designs, which were not to have been broached till some months
after; that so the Rupture before plotted, coming speedily to appear between
the Court and Conde, she might be delivered from her Noman Retirement, which
was her earnest desire. Chavigny and Rochefoucault were highly concerned for
the Ladys sufferings, and put Conde into vain frights; That there were private
Conferences between Corinth and Lyonne, which could not but be prejudicial to
the Prince; that the Guards were scouting about Condes Palace, as though they
had been upon some design. And the like stories, which are wont to be
aggravated by false glosses. The Spirit of Chavigny, the Bellows of the
Sedition hastened the Riot, not so much to save Conde, or rescue him out of
danger, for none there was; as to carry favor with the Court, raising Troubles
to render himself necessary. Such was the man's sense, always to serve himself
of Conde, and never to be serviceable to Conde, by any means to insinuate
himself into part of the Ministry, and having been laid aside, and after a sort
buried in obscurity, and being out of employment to aspire unto light and
business.

Conde by night withdraws himself with his Brother, Wife, and Sister, and the
Principal of his Followers to his next Country House, two miles out of Town,
called Sanmaure, as though he had escaped a Plot; signifying by Letters to
Orleans* and the Parliament the causes of his withdrawing: The Queen was
troubled at his sudden departure, and affected pretense of danger, but sought
prudently to stop events, and obviate imminent evils. Therefore she dispatches
to the Prince the Mareschal^ Grammont and Villeroy, provocations of his passion
thus she endeavors to quench the first breaking out, thinking it enough for
effecting the cure when she knew where, and from whence came the disease. The
Mareschals return without being allowed so much as Conference, but only in
public.

Conde grows more rough, the more he is feared. He says he can be safe no
where, as long as the Spirit of Mazarine informed the State: that it acted in
Servient, Tellier, and Lyonne; that Bruel was no longer the Seat of Banishment,
but the Sibyls Cave, whither Nations did flock from all parts to consult the
Oracle, in the mean time the Prince advises the Spaniards of his having
already prosperously begun his Enterprise, and practices his Plots without
disguise, images him friends, such as were present by Complements, at which he
was excellent; such as were absent by effectual Letters; Longueville among the
rest, strives by my application to win over, not that he thought his Brother so
considerable, but for Normandies sake, and reputation with the Spaniard, as
though he had been of infinite importance.

He had got Marsin his sworn Creature the Province of Catalaunia. Dognon the
Governor of Brouage he attempted, but the Army had designed the Duke of Nemours
to the Government, if occasion (...). Nemours was sufficient for the charge to
be imposed. Marshall La Motte, offered his service freely to the Prince, not
having ^ased out of his memory his unjust Imprisonment, but without any
propension to Conde, whom he looked upon as one in distress liberal to promise,
but when delivered out of trouble, forgetful. Bouillon was often at ^^^maure,
as inquisitive and spying to find some crevise of making his own advantages.
Not a few others to warm themselves at the light fire, and to engage to Conde
in deceitful Bonds, that so they might afterward make the better bargain when
they come to be sold to the Court. In the mean time money is distributed to
levy Soldiers. Nor did they who received it, make good their promises; but
went home, and vanquished poverty. This the Prince found afterward in Guyenne
too true to his great disadvantage.

I was sent for to Sanmaure, and came to the Prince, but was coldly received,
because I had, without acquainting him, certified the Queen of Longuevilles
Loyalty. Nevertheless I refused not to go speedily for Rouen to Longueville,
the Prince himself so reauesting me, that I might draw over to the Party, if it
were possible, that inconstant and irresolute Creature, and might obtain leave
for his Sister to retire to Bourges into a Covent of Carmelitesses, during the
reign of this malignant Star: but there could be no more thoughts of continuing
the Nor^^^ Recess, now the Scene of Affairs was altered.

Having first leave granted me by the Queen, I ^aited upon Longueville, and
after mutual debates, ^t was resolved to give his Wife a Pass, and allow her a
standing Aunuity: In this her Husband offered himself no violence, being glad
to be rid of her, by which means he should be free in his Government, and
contented with that Monastic Retreat in Bourges, which she afterward changed
for Monterotondo, and at length Bourdeaux, where being in high Authority, she
long ruled all at her beck, never thinking of her Husband. Afterward wearied
with so many troubles, the strength of the party decaying, she applied her self
to her Husband alone, and lived quietly, embracing a course of life which was
honorable, glorious, and exemplar; challenging nothing of her high Blood,
besides sanctity of Conversation, with Reverence for Religion modest in her
Garb, and sparing in her Retinue; and at length acquired such a reputation of
singleness and purity, that a body would question whether it be more powerful,
either to have always lived after the strict rule of Holiness, or to make good
use of the opportunity of repentance, and however put rified the conscience may
have been, to be restored to health. Longueville could not determine what
counsel to take. To follow his Brother-in-Law the Prince through Shelves and
Rocks, amongst which he sfailed, being a great adventure. To desert him he
judged more dangerous, because when Conde was swallowed up, Longueville was
left but for the next morsel.

Returning, I relate to the Queen, that I found the Duke or Longueville
constant in his Allegiance due to the King; But that he could not well digest,
that Conde should be ruined, whose misfortunes were his own; therefore that he
humbly besought her Majesty to moderate with her prudence his attempts, which
might perhaps be rash, but were innocent, and (...) to Cast headlong a valiant
and good-natured (...), and put him upon necessities of irreverence. (...) he
did not take these courses of himself, but there (...) about him ill
Counselors, which ungraciously (...) for foul weather, because it was their
interest (...) maintained by troubles and storms. Therefore (...) she would
proceed gently; for small delays have (...) them great advantages. That the
Princes jea^^^sies might be satisfied without diminution of her Majesty. These
and the like discourses I held, which (...) Queen graciously heard, as one
resolved neither (...) commence nor to fear War. The space for rai^^^ng the
Insurrection had been longer had not Conde engaged himself and his Parole to
the Spani^^ds, and his Sister with Chavigny pushed him on, that of himself as
it were drew back, and appeared ^^willing.

Diverse Conferences passed between Orleans and Conde, in places near the City,
for neither did Conde ^om^ to Paris, nor Orleans to Sanmaure. Orleans did not
dislike Condes stiffness in removing the Creatures of Mazarine, that
Triumvirate I mean, which has been hinted before; but because he saw him
already plunged into a Civil War, for which the soul of Gaston had always an
aversion. Therefore he would qualify him, and beg time of him as a favor.
Conde would allege the imminency of the danger, and that pernicious counsels
against him daily grew more powerful; so that he must provide for his safety,
and not tarry till the wounds lightly cured, might break forth again and
gan^rene, that the Queens displeasure was to be reckoned amongst the incurable
diseases. she is ^ Spaniard, and what is worse a Mazarinist. O^leans, what in
him lay, moderated every thing both before the Queen and in the
Parliament House. The Parliament passed a Vote to throw out Se^^^ent, Tellier,
and Lyonne, and to remove them from meddling with the Affairs of State. The
Quee^ complied with the senses of Orleans and the Parliament, having used
moderation without effect Tellier first laid down his place. God forbid (sai^^
he) that I should prove of a Minister of State a st^^^ of stumbling; if Peace
can be had at this rate, (...) it. I go my ways readily, and with a good wil^^
The same said Servient and Lyonne, who had cou^^ed Condes friendship; and were
not believed to (...) his Enemies. Therefore they depart, each on rendering the
Queen an account of their Counsel what was to be done; when the departure of
the Ministers was heard, Conde returning into the Town and his House, first
went into the Parliament, gave the Members thanks, and offered himself and his
to their service; always charging Mazarine, who was in vain cast out; If he
might lea^4 behind him Spirits worse than himself. The Prince constancy was
approved by the Parliament, yet wa^ he advised to act with more moderation, and
no^ provoke farther the anger of the Court, that was already so very much
incensed against him.

And because he had provided already his whol^ State for his Government of
Guyenne, and solem^ Entry into Bourdeaux, he displayed it in the sam^ order at
Paris before his departure. You might have seen Conde riding along the streets
in a Coac^ ^over glittering with silver, encompassed with ^merous Lacquays that
had left off their mourn^^g, and shined in new Liveries: yet would not (...) at
the King, but waited upon Orleans and the ^^rliament. Hence arose sinister
reflections of the (...)-party; but the admiration of the Common^^ople was fixed
in gazing upon the Troops of his ^^llowers, and the Laces of his Pages. There
fell (...) an accident, but such as might have redounded a great misfortune. As
the Prince was walking ^^tly upon the Queens Course in this Pomp, the ^^ng with
a small Retinue went over the same course to go a swimming. What, said the
Cour^^rs, if the King had bid Conde come to him; and ^^ase he had disputed it,
had commanded him to be ^^^hended. That direful day might have seen ^^e
horrible thing, and the Course have been con^^^as of an unparalleled calamity
by confused ^^^ghter. For all the Environs were crammed (...) Condes Followers
wearing Arms. It is strange ^^ing this whole civil Commotion, that when ^irits
were exlcerated and highly exasperated (...) against the other, there should be
no person put death; Only by words and writings, mining (...) countermining,
without any bloodshed, ex^^pt in the field; yet many would murmr, as if ^^de
did affront the King and Queen. There^^on Orleans, who always had an Antipathy
to ^^lty, being greatly offended, drew the Prince as were against his will into
the Louvre, where find^^g cold entertainment from both their Majesty's,
departed with a firm resolution of coming thi^^ no more again; nor did he till
the Conclusion of Peace a long time after; yet the Prince ha^ taken care that
he might not have any violence offered him in the Kings Palace, which he had so
hemmed in with strong Guards on both sides, that at the appearance of the least
stir, the Louvre must have bin broken open, and a terrible Carnage would have
ensued. Orleans too had showed Conde a Dagger under his Vest, with which he
would sta^^ the first Aggressor. Conde little relied in his thoughts on that
Weapon, but principally on his Soldiers lodged near at hand.

Matters were now at a very bad pass; Conde did more and more engage with the
Spaniard, which was manifest: nor were the Plottings of War any more secret,
although Conti, beside the practice of the House, interrupted Mole as he was
speaking in the Parliament, that all were arming for civil Wa^ as though Conde
had been wronged, who (said his Brother) aimed at nothing but the Peace and
Glory of the Kingdom. It seemed strange for a Youth to utter these words in the
middle of an Assembly of Senators. But this interruption was by the instinct of
others, which Mole, the President of Parliament, did gravely repress with this
admonition, that the Princes of the Blood were in Parliament no more than
Counselors.

The more Conde, his Brother, and their Partisans were angry at it, the more
they seemed to cry guilty to the charge, which had they not taken notice of,
had fallen to the ground. Sad was the reflection and remorse of their galled
mind, either because the greatness of the Design not yet accomplished, was
understood; or because there is implanted in our Natures a detestation of that
which the Laws and ^^atutes do condemn: Guilt had laid waste the conscience a
waked. This they did so much fear, as Report out-stripping their Actions.

The Queen being certified of Condes intention, which daily broke out in some
overt Act, left she might justly be taxed with negligence, boldly summons the
Parliament and Grandees of the Palais, before whom orderly met in a full
Assembly, Orleans and Conti being present ( Conde came not having notice
beforehand) a Memorial is read aloud by Bryenne his Majesty's Secretary, the
substance of which was to this effect. An. 1651. Aug. 17.

That it seemed grievous to her Majesty, after so many Ordinances made against
Cardinal Mazarine, by which he was wholly interdicted all communication with
France, that yet the ill-affected would not be ^^iet, but still sought an
occasion of revolting by pretending Mazarine, against whom she not only
confirmed all the Orders that were already past, but did declare that it was
the Kings Royal pleasure, they should be assured, as she did again firmly and
steadfastly assure them of the perpetual and unrepealable Banishment of
Mazarine: that the very bad Designs of the Prince of Conde could no longer be
concealed, who after so many Favors both formerly and of late conferred upon
him, did openly plot and carry on an Attempt of Rebellion, to the manifest
contempt of the Royal Majesty. It is now the second month that he harbors in
the City, never so much as rising, nor saluting the King but once, and that
slightly; but in the Parliament and all abroad disperses malignant Speeches
^arping at the Government, though well managed, to disaffect the people, and
draw them of from their due Allegiance, that he had fortified his Garrisons,
levied Soldiers in the Countries, all over which, he had drawn such as were
ready to fall off to his own devotion and party; that open Intelligence was
held with the Spaniard at Brussels continually; that he had not procured the
Enemies Garrison to be drawn out of Stenay, which was a condition of his
Enlargement; that Forces united always at Marle, did obey only the Orders of
the Prince, to the prejudice and affront of the Royal Army; that those mho
quitted his Majesty's Colors, came in to Condes, where was plundering instead
of Martial Discipline, and Hostility acted over Champaigne and Picardy, as
though they were the Enemies Country; that all these were insolences, which
her Majesty could not digest without casting away the Helm of the Kingdom,
which would hereafter be reproached on her. Therefore they should freely utter
their Judgments, if they had any kindlings of Duty toward his Majesty; that
she had disburdened her Spirit in these just complaints, the rather because
within twenty days she must give up the Account of her Regency to the King that
would then come to be of Age.

All suppressed their sense of the matters herein mentioned, only Conti answered;
That all these were the Devices of their Enemies, which his Brother would
easily confute.

In the mean time the Differences were fomented as served to men's advantages.
These are raised by Court-Vassals, whose practice it is to praise or di^praise
all things good or bad alike. To whisper in men's ears dissemblingly, and upon
design for their private gains. The naked merit of a painful service carries no
Honor with it, for which this wary and most excellent Prince is bought and
sold.

Servient, Tellier, and Lyonne being chased away, Villeroy and Bryenne answered
the shadow, but not the substance of a Privy Council. Zongo Ondedei, one of
Pizarro, strongly affected to Mazarine, who took the courage to espouse the
Fate of the Banished rather than pursue his own; acted many things stoutly and
gravely, which might justly countervail the cares of a Prime Minister: But
lying under the imputation of being an Alien, could advance no higher,
therefore insinuated his Counsels underhand by other persons. Those openly
designed were Chasteauneuf, Mole, and Vieville. The first as Candidate of the
Supreme Ministry, the second as Keeper of the Seals, Seguier being again put
out of Office, who was bandied like a Ball by this and that hand, and the last
designed for the Treasury commonly called Barboni (because they wore long
Beards and Mustaches turned up with Whiskers) hated of Conde, as shall be
related.

But during this, Mercoeurs business took up the Court and Parliament, who
scarcely with the Queens consent rid post to Cologne, and was married by the
Archbishop, that Elector, to Mancina, Mazarines Niece. Such assurance was there
of Mazarines being in Favor. The Parliament was highly incensed against the
prohibited Marriage, at the special instigation of Conde. All this fell out as
well as he could wish, and from thence was a powerful occasion to hasten his
Enterprise, because Mazarine was charged still to hold his Usurpation. Conde
thought it his Interest to wash off the Aspersions cast upon him, not so much
out of any advantage that he reaped by it, as to depress and baffle the Queen
and his Enemies. Therefore he extorts from Orleans a Testimonial to compurge
him of the Articles charged upon him. It was read in the Parliament; That the
Duke of Orleans does give assurance that the Forces are kept at Marle, not
without his consent, who had sent Valone thither to command Condes and his own
Troops, not Seneterre, who was a Mazarinist; that he as Lieutenant General of
the Kingdom, had power so to do as to Stenay; that Conde had always offered his
service to out the Spaniard from it, either by strength or policy. In a word,
that he had never observed any thing in the Prince but a mind upright, and
affected to the King and Kingdom. To declare him guilty of high Treason for
holding correspondence with the Enemy, was an ill advised act, which he was not
acquainted with but a few hours before.

Such a Remonstrance from Orleans troubled the Queen, who, as she was most
skilful of dissembling, did yet conceal her resentments. Orleans craved pardon
for what he had done, promising this should be the last kindness he would do
Conde. It was promised they would not foment discords.

Although the Parliament and Orleans were inclined to judge Conde innocent; the
Prince would bear down his Enemies; therefore he publishes a Manifesto very
brave indeed. After the Memorial of Orleans, he needed no farther Apology, yet
that he might obviate scattered Rumors, and might stop the mouth of Fame, and
stiffle Discovery, he had these few things to say for himself. That he held
nothing in France, but what was left him by his Father. Stenay and Clermont
were recompenses for the Admiralty of right devolved upon him by the death of
the Duke of Breze Brother-in-Law. After thirteen months Imprisonment, that the
Enlargement might be called by him an Innocent, not a Favor, but Justice. That
he could not be excluded from the Kings Council, whereof his Father had been
appointed the Principal by the Will of the late deceased King. That he had not
fortified his Party with Castles, whereas on the contrary Mazarine had
possessed himself of all the Forts in France by his Confidents. All the Forces
that he kept at Marle, were not so much to be grudged at, whenas France owed to
such Troops as those the greatest part of their Victories, and they were kept a
foot at the appointment of the Duke of Orleans, who was legally invested in the
power of ordering those Affairs. That he had changed Burgundy, where his Estate
was deposited for Guyenne, that by that means the poor Country might be
relieved from the Tyrannical Government of Espernon. That he had with good
reason kept the fortified Towns in Burgundy, as having been purchased by his
Father with the consent and allowance of the King. That nothing was given him
in lieu of them by Guyenne. That Servient, Tellier, and Lyonne representing
Mazarine, were justly removed with the Applause of the Senate: but for his
forbearing to come to the King and his Council, that was commended by all
understanding men, whenas the Queen did avowedly con^ide in his declared
Enemies; that he must beware of their Plots, that he might not fall again into
their Traps, wherein he had been once already caught. By his Intelligence with
the Enemy (with which he was so much reproached) that he pretended nothing else
but the drawing the Spaniards out of Stenay, which had been his earnest desire
from the very moment of his Release. That he referred all the rest to Orleans,
who must either be scorned, or he must be credited. For himself a Prince of the
Blood to be declared guilty of high Treason, at the Queens suggestion, was
intolerable, and he would not put it up. That the Givers of such cruel Counsel
should be searched out, and either prove it by plain evidence, or be punished.
That he submitted himself and all his Estate to the Parliament, and would stand
to their Judgments. Conde to clear himself or the Articles, if any were charged
upon him, and to stay secret obloquy, made his Defense in the Parliament, most
grievously complaining for the robbing of his Honor, earnestly entreating the
Members, that it might be repaired. The wind favors him; therefore the more
confidently he inveighed much against the Counselors, who out of their
implacable malice had devised these cursed ways for widening the public
Breaches, when they ought to be the Peace of the World.

Corinth perceiving himself reflected on, stood up and answered; That he had
done nothing but in contemplation of the Publicly Good, and what became a loyal
Subject that had never broke his word. Conde said, He wondered that any should
be so bold as to contest with him a Prince of the Blood. Corinth replied, That
he well knew what was due to such a Prince, but in that place entire obedience
must be paid the King only; every Subject had his liberty. The Senators
murmured, and foresaw that exasperation might break forth into some dreadful
outrage, whenas the House before the Senators eyes was not surrounded, but
filled with a Guard of Soldiers. The Companies infense against each other with
all sorts of Arms, threatened some strange Act of Barbarity. On the one side the
Condeans, on the other the Corinthians presented their naked Swords, making a
lamentable Spectacle in the Parliament House. In the Guisian times they would
have come to blows. In our Age there are many words, but dry ones, and that
fetch no blood* whether it be that some bloodless Comet have blasted the temper
of men's spirits; or whether every one were afraid, while the matter yet was
doubtful and dangerous.

Mole President of the Parliament admonished; That this was a place of
Authority, not of Wrangling; the riotous multitude on both sides should be
dismissed, and the Senators left liberty of voting. Then turning to Conde; Your
Highness should by your good Example show the way of Reverence and Honor due
to this Assembly. Immediately Conde receiving his admonition, sends out
Rochefoucault to bid his Followers be gone. Corinth himself goes and requests
the same of his. At his return, being caught by Rochefoucault between the door
and the Posts, and there near crushed to pieces, had almost rendered himself a
pleasant spectacle to the cruelty of his curaged Enemies. But that Champlatre
by his entrance released the crowded Prelate. Thereupon rose a more grievous
quarrel between Corinth and Rochefoucault and their Friends. These high
commotions of Spirit were composed without bloodshed. Who would have believed
it in such a boystrous time?

Orleans moderated the swelling animosity; nor did Corinth come any more into
the House; and Conde but with a small Train. Such is the humor of the French,
that every one had rather pull the State down with him, than be broken by his
own particular fall.

Conde the day after going from the Parliament House to his own home, light in
the midst of the street upon a solemn Procession, in the Rear of which, after
the usual fashion came Corinth in his Archbishops Robes. Conde made a halt, and
falling upon his knees, was content to be crossed and blessed by Corinth.

The people that stood about him murmured, being ready at his least intimation
to sacrifice the Archbishop to his Procession. But there past threatening words,
an uncertain murmur, no blow. One would have said it had thundered without rain.

Conde unacquainted with whiffling in the streets, and plotting higher things
in his mind, about this time is cleared in the Parliament from the charge laid
against him, as though it were false, at the motion of the Queen. What so weak
a Subject could at that time supply the defect of Royal Power? What could a
Woman do? She took patiently what was impossible for her to redress.

Some there were that entertained hopeful opinions concerning the quiet to
ensue, now so many obstructions were removed. But Troubles again traversed all
from a new disturbance arising upon occasion of the Barboni. Three Creatures
there were, Chasteauneuf, Mole, Vieville. These Conde cannot abide. The first
an Enemy, as he said, to his Blood, for the very sentence given against (...)
at Thalose. The second as disgusted, because he had preferred the Son of Violet
rather than of Chaplatre. The last Vieville wrought into Ma^^rines favor by
the artifices of the Princess Palatine That these three superannuated Seniors
after the vigor of their Age is extinguished, should by Embers of cunning
Policies be raised again to life, and yet incurably infected with
Court-ambition. Not Confidents, but Vassals of the Cardinal, worse than
Servient, Tellier, and Lyonne. What did more nearly touch the Prince, was the
fall of Maison who by this was removed from the Treasury, from whom Conde had
by the means of Cha^igny procured a great and desperate debt from the Exchequer.

Conde had no juster cause of indignation; nor will any deny that, but he who
is not instructed in the qualities of the new-fashion'd Barbonismo, or Sect of
Whiskers; yet whatever the Prince complained upon that occasion, they who had
good insight in those Intrigues, well uuderstood that he was glad of it, having
thereby a color of withdrawing offered to him, which he greatly longed after,
being already engaged to the Spaniards and so many friends.

But the day of the Kings Majority approached, at which Solemnity Conde did not
intend to assist. Such like Festivals being not unfrequently polluted with some
act of cruelty; yet could he not conveniently be absent. He makes use of my
service to persuade the Queen that it was for the advantag^ of the State, that
he should give Longueville a meeting to treat about some important Affairs.
Longueville declined conference with Conde, lest he should be insensibly drawn
into a dangerous Confederacy* I disposed him to yield his consent to a Treaty*
when I had studiously advised him by Letter, that the Queen enjoined him to do
it. Try a Seat of Longuevilles, a Summer days Journey from the City toward
Normandy, was the place appointed for the Meeting, to different ends. Condes
was, that he might decently withdraw himself from the solemn day, and withal
might win to his design Longueville, who had hitherto by me given him ambiguous
promises: But the others aim was to avert the Prince from his Attempts, and
comply with the Queen, who in truth neither regarded the Conference, nor the
issue of it, using dissimulation, and and unwilling to abet her own being
deceived. Therefore first comes Longueville to Try, and toward the evening
Conde attended but with a few, taking his way through Pontoise; where he
gathered a strong and stout Party, that if any Plot should be laid for him, he
might get clear off. Nor did he guess amiss: For it was scarcely known by
Rumors dispersed, that the Prince passed toward Normandy by Pontoise, but
Madam Esguillione, who was of very great power in Pontoise, offered her
assistance to the Queen for the surprising Conde, which Harcourt also promised
that he would execute. The Queen refused the proffer, either cut off by the
difficulty, and narrowness of time, or because she apprehended worse
consequences.

The King with the Queen came into the Parliament, Sept. 7. 1661. with a solemn
Pomp. Her Majesty having made a short Recital of her Regency, delivers up the
Government to her Son, to whom kneeling down, she offfered to kiss his Hand,
which the King decently refusing, saluted his Mother, giving her thanks for
having sat at the Helm, and safely steered the Vessel of the State through so
many Quicksands and Rocks. The Chancellor Seguier restored to his former
place, said more. But (...) the Premier President, most largely recounted the
dangers escaped, and the hopes of approaching quiet. The Assembly being
dissolved, they returned in the same order to the Louvre, where the Queen
managed all after the same custom and manner as she was wont before, and
therefore this Turn of Government need not distinguish the beginning of a new
Book by its date, whenas there was no Change in the Order of the Supreme
Government. Chasteauneuf is named Prime Minister; M^le Keeper of the Seal,
Vieville High Treasurer. There were the usual Congratulations and Joying of
Friends, as all Novelty is spent in flattery. Thanks were given Seguier, and
promises renewed of bringing him into his former Credit, which he seemed to
take well; for having found all things generally successful, if any adversity
did fall out, his bearing it patiently prepared matter for his praise.

The first Action of the new King was to fall upon Condes Forces at Marle,
Guise, and Vervain a little City between them, as though they were the Enemies.
They were partly routed, and some slain, part under the Command of Tavan
recovered Stenay, the Sanctuary of the Wretches.

Orleans used all possible endeavors to obtain as a favor the benefit of
three days respit, which was denied him. From thence was the rise of the Civil
War, which I shall recount in the following Book more at large.

Condes not being present at the Inauguration of the King, astonished all men.
Conti before the proceeding of the Train, delivered the King a Letter from his
Brother, wherein he excused his Absence, and promised unspotted Allegiance to
his Majesty. The King took it slightingly, and read it not over.

When this was heard at Try, Conde put of a face of grief, to pacify
Longueville, who positively affirmed that the Queen would set all this right in
time; dehorting the Prince by prudent Councils from Civil War. For his Wealths
sake left him by his Father, an Estate deposited in sure Banks, not on a
f^iling bottom, his Charges, his Governments, the long Hands of the King, whose
Age now grew up to Revenge; That civil War is a dreadful Beasts which has
eternally devoured its Followers. That such an Action has this inconveniency
attending it, as to level all that are Accessories in the Guilt. That the very
Perswaders of it will voluntarily return to their Duty, when they are tired out
with their present condition, and detect the fallacy by a treachery throwing
the Odium upon him. That by money received for the use of the Wars, after they
have a very little while abated their domestical necessities, they shall bring
upon themselves beggary afresh. On the Kings side there shines out a fair
expectation of Riches, Charges, Honors; that he might promise, but could not
perform any such thing. Thereupon would follow a languishing contempt in their
Spirits, who seemed now the Incendiaries of the Civil Discords. This and the
like said Longueville, which I the more boldly affirm, because I was only by
and heard it.

Conde having settled his resolutions upon War, ^lights such admonitions,
discovers to his Brother his Designs, Strength, Confederacies already made with
the Spaniard and English; that the Grandees of the Kingdom were inclined to
him; the intended Revolts of Marsin and Dognon; and that Nemours should by
Prerogative of Blood command in chief the Army, if case of his own falling
sick. Set up, ^aith he, thy Standard in the midst of Normandy, among a people
that will flock in out of their very hate of Mazarine, who is greedily expected
by the Queen, and will come to the derision of the Parliament, and trampling
upon their Ordinances. What can you expect, when torn from me, but destruction
and ruin? They fall upon me first, that they might more easily come at you,
whose Government they grudge at, as being near the City, and Mazarine designs
it to himself. Longueville replies, All that he held in Normandy were weak
Castles, neither supplied with Provision, nor Men; that he had no Money, and
his Authority every day abated, wherein the strength of War consisted. Then,
says Conde, Do you forsake and abandon me to Vengeance? I will never do so,
says he; Rather let my whole Estate perish: In all adversities I will bear you
company, and run the hazard with you with all my strength. Hereupon they shook
hands, and engaged their words, mutually: The Prince adds; The Spaniards will
supply money, the English, men. At the English Name, Longueville the Offspring
of John de Dunon, who gloriously chased that odious Nation from the Bounds of
France, started. I had rather at my own charges, says he, raise Soldiers. But
if the weight of the War should be discharged first upon me, I am not half able
to sustain the Royal Choques: Conde answers, I will be with you, and march
speedily in the Head of 2000 choice Horse.

Whether Longueville were inwardly touched, or whether not having the
confidence to deny Conde any thing to his face, he promised all, in my single
presence. The Prince rejoiced that thereby he added authority to the
confederacy, and increased in reputation with the Spaniard and English; but
when he saw all frowning upon him, he prepares to withdraw the safest way he
could possible; after that the Conference at Try was over, he retires to his
House at Chantilly, avoiding to pass by Pontoise, apprehending the being laid
for in his return, not without grounds. I went back for Paris, to give her
Majesty an account of what had past in the Conference, and, to say truth, I
spared Longueville, whose promising Conde assistance, had it been revealed,
would have diverted the first Expedition of the Court upon Normandy, and within
a month have reduced the Governor of that Country to extremities, which would
have been not unwelcome to the Prince. So small a respit had been a vast
benefit to him, that must otherwise be surprised and crushed.

Coming to the Prince at Chantilly, I found him melancholy for want of all
things in the very preparing for his War; no money, no men levied. His Camp and
Quarters uncertain; some hopes indeed from the Spaniard, none from the English;
for Cromwell, a notorious Impostor, would give no Categorical answer. Never was
so great a superstructure of business set upon so weak and tottering
foundations.

As I was discoursing with the Prince in the Wood of Chantilly, comes in a
Courrier from Longueville with Letters, wherein he expressed that he could not
attempt any thing in Normandy, till he had first received the 100000 Crowns
that were due to him from Conde, and his Wives Jewels, by pawning of which he
might raise some sum of money to defray the first Charges of the War. From that
time forward Conde concluded that nothing was to be hoped for from Longueville,
but what should be perpetually ambiguous and insignificant. For neither would
his Wife give her Husband the Jewels which she stood in need of for her own
occasions in this Juncture, nor could the Prince pay the money he was indebted
to him, not having sufficient for himself to serve for his Journey to Guyenne;
yet he promised to do his endeavor, that he might be plentifully supplied from
the Spaniard, which Longueville looked upon as frivolous, and would have
refused, had it been brought, being resolved not to take to the Party, but
temporize, and never join with Conde, till he had the better.

The Prince no longer brooking destructive delays, propounds to the Queen by an
understanding man equal conditions of agreement, to watch his occasion of
getting away securely, whilst the Court was entertained with fair promises.
Therefore as the Queen is scanning of them, he by long marches having past the
Loyre at the Town of Sully, rides for Bourges, accompanied with some Troops of
Horse; that famous City out of the memory of his Fathers quiet retirement,
receives the Prince with all demonstrations of forward service, being ready to
do the same to the King coming speedily after.

Orleans leaving nothing unassayed, sends to Augerville to bring back Conde,
now running headlong with offers of equal conditions in the Queens Name. That
he might continue at liberty in his Government of Guyenne, and his Forces,
which he was so much concerned for, should have Quarters allowed them, and be
secure from all violence and assault: all which Orleans promised he would
warrant. Conde might and ought to have received these terms. For had the
Cardinal returned, he would have yielded the Prince any thing, planted upon so
many supports, besides the favor of the Parliament, which he would have
acquired by this means; but if Mazarine had failed of all hopes of return, he
had obliged to himself all France that drcaded the relapsing into civil
Commotions. But Fortune, the Empress of life, always making sport at mischief,
disappointed the wisest Councils: for the Messenger of Orleans goes not to
Augerville, where Conde then was, in the County of Gains, but to Augerville in
Beaux by a stupid mistake. From whence sprung many calamities. Near the same
time Croissy sent from Orleans, overtakes the Prince at Bourges, and propounds
the conditions already mentioned. Conde answers he cannot yield his agreement
to the offers without advising with his Brother Conti, Sister Longueville,
Nemours, and Rochefoucault, who were hard by at Monte-Rotondo; therefore he
communicates the whole matter with them. Who with one accord dislike all that
Croissy had brought, as being unsound. That Guyenne does already open her arms
to her expected and beloved Prince; the Country is full of Soldiers, every
where listed in his favor. Brouage and Blaye ready to revolt; the Spanish
Forces have already weighed Anchor from the Coast of Guipuscoa. That nothing is
more base than to trust (...) such a Peace. For what can be expected from
Orleans after breach of Articles? Should such a power of Nobility prepared for
War, so many Commanders, so many People in Arms be thus baffled. The Iron must
be struck while it is hot. It has been always prejudicial to defer when
matters are in a readiness. To these and the like was added a great stroke by
the Letters of Chavigny, who exhorted the Prince seriously to War; That
frivolous delays were propounded till his heat should be over, and then the
naked Prince, destitute of his Followers, should be surprised unawares.

Conde having reflected on all particulars, and pondered so many events in his
thought, consented to War, then turning to his Brother, Sister, and those in
Company, with his naked Sword, says; I drew this unwillingly, which will not
easily return into its Scabbard; he shall be the Rebel, he that obliges me to
be his Enemy against my hearts desire. The Quarter of Bourges being insecure,
this was done at Moro^ce. Here did the Heavens first frown upon Conde. Here did
Fortune first change with breach of Faith. Being always distracted with various
perplexities, he could hardly steal from labor and anxiety any repose for his
wearied eyes. He goes directly for Bourdeaux to levy Soldiers, being assured
that the King would press on, and march speedily upon him. Before he went from
Bourges, he pillaged the Banks of the Customers; which was the first Action of
Hostility, a provocation of mischief.

They say that the Prince in his Passage viewed Xantogne. Xantogne is little in
compass, commodious in situation, lying upon the Ocean, cut by the Charenton;
fruitful in Corn, and infinitely abounding in all Commodities. It is beholden
to the richness of its soil, that it has been the Scene of great Actions.
Besides innumerable fights, of which it is fanatically proud, that at Bassay is
famous, wherein Lewis Bourbon the great Grandfather of this Conde, the most
famous Hater of the Mass, and Scourge of Mass-mongers was slain. The Prince had
a great desire to march over the Field of Battle, and the Plain imbrued in the
blood of Condes, which as he rid over, his Sword fell out of his Belt. An
unhappy token in their Judgment, who are taken with idle fancies, not versed in
Action, who do confidently slight all Prognostications, joyful, sad, or
ambiguous, and do not think that the Divine Goodness has such concern for
mankind, as by these means to be willing to discover future contingencies.

The Prince received at Bourdeaux, not as a Governor, but as Sovereign Lord,
and Arbitrary Disposer of them, being deceived with such a flattering serenity,
displaces the Prime President of the Parliament of Guyenne, as not being enough
at his devotion; surveys the Towns and Cities, recruits his Troops, and fixes
all for the future War, which was to be removed indeed according to agreement
into poor Xantogne, lying too near to Bourdeaux.

The King without intermitting any time coming with his Army to Bourges, finds
the forward affections of that ancient City; in favor of which he ordered the
high Citadel (wherein the Duke of Orleans afterward Lewis XII. had been
imprisoned) to be demolished. By that means restoring to his good Subjects
their liberty, having overthrown that shelter of Tyranny.

Madam Conde and Madam Longueville, with their Followers forsake Montrond, an
insecure Harbor, and come trembling to Bourdeaux to the Prince. Palvausse,
with a lingering Siege, takes, or rather obliges to surrender the Castle, having
been some months held out by Persane. For this notable piece of service he
obtained the Dignity of Marshall of France, which was given promiscuously in
times of confusion, and grew cheap.

The Affairs of the Province of Bourges, being duly set in order by
Chasteauneuf, Villeroy, and Bryenne, who managed their business with wonderful
faithfulness and diligence; the whole Court at the beginning of November
comes* to Poictou to press upon Conde, being in Arms, by Harcourt the stout
General of the Royal Army.

Now was all France hotly engaged against it self, either as to Affections or
Arms, with a divided taking of parties. Some looked upon the fire made* Others
run into the flames; But to be sure the Spaniards chiefly rejoiced, shedding
the Poison of Discord, who under the Marquess of Mortara, beleaguered
Barcellona, Don Juan of Austria blocking up the Port with his Fleet.

To such an Attempt did the calamity of France invite them, but especially the
miserable condition of Barcellona, where the raging Pestilence laid low
innumerable heads, and every day Corpse of old and young were carried in throngs
to the grave. But the Revolt of Marsin was more pestilent than the Plague it
self, who governing Catalaunia with the Kings Commission, by a President
unheard of till this Age, having left that renowned Principality at a prey to
the Spaniard, wheeled off to Conde, according to Covenants already accorded.
Hereupon the Spaniards privy to the intended Treachery, raised up their Spirits
so as to think of Barcellona. If there were any oversight committed in the
absence of Mazarine, it was this; the restoring of Mars^^ to the Government of
Catalaunia, engaged to Conde for his Marriage procured with difficulty, being a
strong bond of Confederacy, and that would turn from his trust through an
exulceration of Spirit upon memory of his Imprisonment.

There was nothing that Guyenne did not hope for from a Prince greater than
expectation. He to answer their desires, and his own promises, sends a raw Army
under a more raw Commander Rochefoucault into Xantogne. Siege is laid against
the poor Town Cognac, and of the sudden raised by the coming of Harcourt. The
fault was laid upon Charenton, a steep River that was then pleased to overflow
and pass its Banks, bearing the Bridge away by the flood. Xantogne thus
unluckily entered, refused to be the School of that unhappy War. Rochel it self
heretofore the Sanctuary of Rebellion, breaths Allegiance to the King, and
rescues it self from the service of Dognon, rendering themselves and all theirs
into the hands of Estissac, one who was no Soldier. This is Huguenot-like in
adversary not to prove unfaithful. The like was done at Egerville or S. Angels,
the stout courage of the Lads of which Town was of great moment to the Relief
of Cognac. It is a little City upon the Bouton, a River, or rather obscure
Bourne, not unpleasant, where the Grandfather of this Conde dyed by ill
practices, and his Father Henry was born. There was my Cradle rocked: Here I
first drew the air. This Land, I know not how came first to be touched by me
that am descended of Venetian Ancestors, and those Illustrious ones. If the
Glories of my Country have been omitted by me, perhaps they will be repeated by
Posterity; and S. Angel in Ages to come will rejoice to have had me born and
bred in her.

At Bourges was a whisper of Mazarines return; all along the way of Poicters a
murmuring; at Poiction certain News of it. Nor had the Cardinal any her
Intercessor for his Revocation than Conde and Corinth, while both of them bend
their designs to the contrary.

The Queen openly declares she is resolved to reinstate him, being unjustly
banished, in his former Dignity. It was for the public Good, and must no
longer be delayed. One might see persons nurtured, up in the Court-trade,
Masters at speaking what they meant not, and not speaking what they mean, could
not keep to themselves their inward thoughts, but must over-wisely vent the
Secret: That the Kingdoms ruin is hastened, Condes Forces increased, the
Faction strengthened, and such like politic hints, not according to rules of
Court-subtility, which prying into the future, never discloses its thought,
keeping still close the secret sense of its soul. Bryenne is commanded to write
Letters of Revocation from his Banishment. How uneasy was that to him, who a
few months before, had advised Mazarine with too forward Counsel to return to
Rome, where he might be more useful to promote the Affairs of France in the
Conclave.

The Cardinal intent upon his future Journey, was already got to Bouillon,
debating with many what should be done; but what he would do, with very few, or
alone by himself; there being no better Counsels than such as are unknown.

Hocquincourt, with Grancey and Navailles, were the principal of Mazarines
Counsel, all this way stout in personal valor, perpetual despiser of life.
Fabert subtle in his way, spyed what was likely to be, and watched to make
advantage of what was present. The gross of the Auxiliaries now coming was 6000
men in Arms, of great importance to turn the scale at that time. The Cardinal
dispatches before him some of his Family with Letters to his firm Friends, and
others wavering, nay to his fierce Enemies, making large promises. The
Parliament of Paris is incensed, Orleans frets, the Sling, after their wonted
manner, rage. Mazarine and his Accomplices are defamed all about in Paris. Forces
are hastened to block up the Loyre, and cut off the Pass of the Yone, under
Commanders, either Gown-men, or cowardly; that should so fight as to be beaten.
The Cardinal having overcome the disadvantage of ways, the fierceness of
people, the violence of Rivers, and the scantness of Bridges comes, through
Hostile Armies, safe to Poictou. His March was quiet, as of one hastening to
Peace, such as no Townsman, no Peasant dreaded. Not nice in his Quarters: not
extorting Reverence by Terror, but obliging Love by Courtesy. An humility
respectful to all, for qualifying men's prejudicate hatred. Himself differed
from the rest in nothing but Worth; nor would he allow himself rest, but after
all. Undaunted amidst so many menacing Acts of Parliament, was not slack in
allowing admission to his person; but exposed to meeting and sight. One might
see the people every where crowd in at his open door, and inviting Threshold.
He was secure by the watching of a good Conscience, and defended by naked
Innocence, the safest Guard, and Integrity an impregnable Garrison.

The King and Duke of Anjou came to meet him, and next to the Kings side entered
Mazarine into Poictou, received by the Queen with a true and ornate gravity.
Soon acknowledged to be greater than all, but greater without the diminution of
any.

Servient and Tellier banished by Conde returned, and were admitted to the
Ministry, wherein they had been before. Lyonne in highest credit amongst the
Officers of the Court, that had been in like manner excluded with those two, by
ill practices for some time continued in Banishment unrepealed. After when he
was revoked, the Judgments of the King and Mazarine, nay of the Princes of
Europe, contended about setting a due Estimate upon him. Mole held the Seal
subject to the pleasure of the Court. Vieville with all possible faithfulness
repaired the ruins of the exhausted Treasury. This was the face of the
Ministry.

Chasteauneuf having left the Helm, begged his Quietus est. Having given up an
account of his Ministry, soon after ready to dye. In what Employment he might
have been prime, he could not see a better. Venerable old man! whose stern
comeliness one would not have feared, but reverenced. Whose greatness none
felt, but either to the relief of his losses, or the enlargement of his
Fortunes. Of an unspotted conscience: His obliging carriage deserved to be
loved, perhaps by the gentle Sex, but there were no Tales told thereupon: Nor
yet did his sweet carriage, seasoned with gravity, hide looseness under a severe
brow, or set his House open a Tribunal for the French Eloquence: One would
heartily say, that his modest dwelling was the Seat of all Virtues, and the
Temple of Justice.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. Mazarine meets with Conde in Arms at Anjou and Giems about the
Loyre, at Estampes, and at last under the Walls of the City, where the Concord
of the Kingdom being broke, the Armies of the same Countrymen offered the
French Blood to be shed by Germans, and the unwilling Lorrainer. At length
Conde, inferior to the Power of the Royal Army, draws off into Flanders:
Mazarine counterfeits a Departure into Spain, to divert the blame of the
Troubles upon Conde alone.

WHen Mazarine had re-entred France, success did not fail his most wise
Counsels, although at Poictou the most politic part of the Court did condemn
this Return of the Cardinal. In truth that which we call Wisdom is an ^nsetled
and wavering business, consisting in the Election of Things, which are of a
different Nature: If those be uncertain, so is that, because it is not only
tied to Things, but more to their Circum^tances, as Times, Places, and Men;
therefore is there no certain Rule of that obscure Virtue. Al^ humane Events
are wrapped up in profound darkness; every thing is brave, and politickly done,
i^ it prove successful. A prosperous undertaking is called Virtue; therefore
should we sacrifice to good success; to this Deity did Mazarine owe not only
Altars, but what is more solemn, high Places.

Now what was the state of Affairs before Mazarine, after his Return, went
forth upon any Expedition, I shall discourse in short.

Conde being chased out of Xantogne, found all things go cross in Guyenne,
whilst Harcourt alarmed him at every turn, and the Spaniard fomented the
Division by weak succors, not serving the Faction, but himself; and the
Gascons were weary of the Service; (none do more eagerly raise Uproars, and fly
to their Arms; none are more forward to lay them down, and detest them with the
greatest execrations) such is the humor of the Nation, not to like the same
estate long. In the Province of Bourges, nothing held for Conde, but Montrond
that was beleaguered, and therefore no longer in his Power. Burgundy was so
obedient to Espernon, that it would omit no sort of the meanest submission to
gain the favor of the new Governor, who equalled himself with Conde by false
Predecessors, and such as were fetched I know not whence: The Castle of Dijon^
returning to his Majesty's obedience by Surrender Bellegarde and other
fortified places, waited with fear on the Kings looks. Bouillon and his Brother
Thurenne had how resolvedly forsaken the Party of Conde, and were in a most
strict League with Mazarine; Longueville carried himself so neutral and
indifferent to both Parties, that he did all after his own Interests, and
seemed to watch his advantage, and to shift his Forces, that indeed were but
small, to this side and that side, which way soever was apperance of the
greater power, So that the Policy o the man was commendable, who having weighed
his own and others force, declared himself for neither.

The Prince had an Army entire, consisting of the remainder of the Forces at
Marle, and Auxiliaries from the Spaniards joined together, which the Duke of
Nemours conducted out of Flanders (in all not exceeding 6000 Horse and Foot)
Beaufort by the order of Orleans commanded these Forces in equal power with
Nemours. Discord presently arising between the Commanders, though allied,
interrupted their Authority. And whatever spirit or fierceness that not
inconsiderable party had when they came in, was emasculated by Subtlers and
Strumpets, and other Incentives of Wantonness at Paris. Presently Drapers,
Confectioners, and Millenars poured in upon the Camp imbrued in Luxury. The
nearness of the City invited their stout hearts that could no other ways have
been civilized; their Quarter was upon the Circuit of Briere between Montargis
and Giemie.

Besides this miscellaneous Army of French, Wal^^rs, Alemans, and Lorrainers,
Condes sole hope was in the City, in Orleans, the Parliament, and Slingers who
left nothing unassayed in favor of the Prince, (...) of malice against
Mazarine, who was persecuted with infinite new Ordinances, his Actions
traduced, all his Ecclesiastical Revenues confiscated, his Household stuff
exposed to sale in public by outcry, and Housekeepers ill-handled, his
Library sold by retail, and that famous Collection of Books, the Ornament of
Paris, was cheaply dispersed. But what will not be believed by posterity, the
Cardinals Head had a price set on it; that Head by which France had lately
raised her head above foreign Nations, about which Fortune had been so
compliant, on whose beck Sea and Land, Peace and War had and did depend, and
that too by the Parliament of Paris, the Teacher of Equity and Justice, then
turned Deviser of Injuries, formerly voting Laws, now Scandals. Pope Innocent,
who else might have emptied his heavenly Magazine, and soon disarmed himself,
by shooting Bolts at Rovers, for the avenging Gods quarrel, laughed out of his
Vatican, See, and sacrificed the Dignity of the Purple to his envy against
Mazarine.

Francis Chanvallon Archbishop of Rouen, out-does the Pope in Holiness, whilst
he inveighs against their Ordinances in a famous Harangue amidst a full
Assembly at Tours, with the approbation of the King.

Besides these public oppositions, the Cardinal was frequently shot at by
secret shafts of envy in the very Court, and that by those on whom he had
accumulated favors, and whose desultory affections the darkness of the Times
did disguise. Who by their sly poisons insinuated Rebellion into the unwary,
after the Clouds were blown over turning abject Flatterers. Mazarine plucking
up the power of his soul, acted courageously, and defended the sleep of all
with his vigilance, the repose of all with his labor, the leisure of all with
his activity; in whose breast, though there were a deep wound, yet there
appeared no scar. In the mean while he rendered all obedient with the awe of
him, so that they who had cruelly hated his former condition, made profession
that they would follow this, though with the hazard of their whole Estates. But
we shortly saw Fortune speedily return to repentance through so many prosperous
successes as ensued.

The first debate was, whether it were better with the whole power of the Army
to overwhelm Conde in Guyenne that was already tottering, or directly to march
for Paris, the principal City, and Headquarters, there to win Orleans who was
wavering, and either oblige the Slingers to return to their duty, or ruin
them. This seemed the more advisable, although Harcourt at that time, standing
upon terms, give some trouble, which I shall afterward more dearly
particularize.

The Army of Nemours plundering the Country, put all into a fright, and laid
the Circuit waste from Orleans by Gergovie and Giemie. It is resolved suddenly
to quench that fire which was of it self inconsiderable, but as it ministered
strength to the Faction. On the March, that the County of Anjou should be
cleared by beating up Chabot. The Service is committed to Hoquincourt, who
within very few days forced Anjou and Chabot its Governor to a necessity of
Surrender, notwithstanding Beaufort had been sent in by Orleans to his
assistance, and reduced Ceo and other Towns to extremity. Chabot is of the
highest Nobility in Xantogne, whose Grandfather was Admiral and Governor of
Burgundy, his Father Lord of a great Estate which he had by his Wife, upon
which he lived in the Country, and had no affection to the Attendances on the
Court. This Gentleman of whom we speak was for the gayness of his spirit, and
comeliness of his person, taken into the Graces of Margaret Roban, and married
her by the mediation of Conde the Father, and this present Prince, then Duke
d'Enguie^; therefore Chabot, not forgetful of his obligation, expressed his
thankfulness to the Prince to the utmost of his power.

The Court staid some days at Saumure to advance the Siege of Anjou. Then did
Corinth compass that Hat so often promised, and so often put by, which Pope
Innocent granted not so much for gratifying the King, as eclipsing Mazarine by
setting up an equal to him in Dignity. What matter of division does not this
outlandish Purple set on fire?

De Rhetz (for so must he be called hereafter, no longer Corinth) Illustrious
in Birth and Honorable Descent, active, eloquent, most eminent in favor,
friendships, and vigor of spirit, as though he had been displeased with his
virtues, which did not presently meet with Preferment, by diverse Plots (which
he thought the shorter cut) when a pleasant path did not lie open to the
highest place, chose the more troublesome way; in the most of his Enterprises he
acted with more Wit than Luck, believing nothing so much his own, as what he
held by his friends, who upon all occasions proved false.

The Court removing from Saumure, by Tours, Amboise, Bloise, at length after so
many motions placed its Residence at Geimie.

There is a Bridge over the Loyre, a Post of great importance to either Party.
The King could not attend the Issues of Affairs in a more convenient station.
On the one side hovering over Paris; on the other pressing toward the
Rebel-Forces; to attend whose motion he had set a strong Army under the Conduct
of Thurenne and Hoquincourt. Orleans (who would believe it?) shut her Gates
against the King. That was in favor of Orleans, and especially his Daughter,
who Pucelle-like, having the courage to appear amongst men of Arms, had posted
thither to give Spirit to the common Soldier.

Conde abides in Guyenne without hopes, finding every where a slackness of
obedience, whilst Harc^urt urges his successes, and plys the favor of
Fortune; what marvel, when he was warranted by his Majesty's Authority, which
every thing in France does at length obey. The Spaniard did more and more
slacken the hand of his bounty. The piomises of England by Cromwell proved more
ineffectual, but what was to be hoped for from that Mountebank, and shameful
Monster in Nature? Hereupon the Guyennois fell to distaiste the Prince, whose
continual presence rendered him less reverenced. No longer did his high Renown
of being (...) Warrior dazzle the eyes of the people. No Creature is more
way-ward than a Guascon. None to be handled with greater Art. This Conde never
^ad. That Nation is apt to rise against none sooner than such as it finds to
pretend to a Government over them without bringing them money. Valiant they
are, and to repair the decays of their Fortunes with their blood, wish for War,
but cannot be long held fast, unless they bite somewhat. Conde pondering all
these things in his mind, the discontents between Beaufort and Nemours
increasing, the Army longing after him, Orleans wavering, the addresses of the
Sling, expectation of Paris, although always fickle; but what was principally
considerable, the pressing admonitions of Chavigny, That he would come up
speedily, and nut let slip the fair opportunities that Fortune offered him;
(although hereby Chavigny more aimed at monopolizing the Prince to himself,
than at the promoting of his service.) Such reflections produced in the mind of
Conde a determination to leave Guyenne, and having reached his beloved Forces
to draw up to the Imperial City. Thus hope being raised out of despair, he
hastens to his wishes, and having left behind him the subject of his fears,
neither carrying his Wife, nor only Son into danger, enters upon his Journey
with, but very few, that he had made acquainted with his intention, through
Forests and Deserts, out of the Road, scarce came under any roof, yet more than
once known by his face, though his hand were held before it, and he had used
all means to cut off the marks to pursue and trace him. A Woman in the train of
the sort of those Ladies that are wont to follow the Camp, had almost
occasioned the discovery of the Prince, as he was taking a Bait in a
Country-Village. He escaped away and crossed the Coast, till wearied with
wandering, he came all dusty, spent with travel, and want of sleep, into his
friends Camp, where he was received With sound of Drums and Trumpets. Scarce
was lie dismounted, when being informed by Scouts how the Royal Army was
lodged, he falls in at midnight upon Hoquincourt that ever was secure, beats up
his Quarters and rifles his Wagons and Baggage to great Consternation, little
loss. One might have seen the Court at Giemie melancholy and dejected; words
were given out of trussing up and marching away, that the Bridge should be
broken down after the King had escaped over at Bourges, and the like which fear
prompts upon a misfortune received. The day after, both Armies stood drawn up,
a Matisse parting them from Engagement. The Guns being discharged on both
sides, Condes Party drew off. Thurenne, who always tempered the forwardness of
the Soldier with Authority, Providence, and Valor, acquainted with being in a
prosperous or dubious condition, and thereupon undaunted, carried away the
credit of that day, and confirmed the drooping Army. There appeared his labor
in business, courage in danger, industry in action, quickness in dispatch. It
may not be omitted that the King being but fifteen years old, stole from those
about him, and animated the Army with his Courage and Gesture, which proved
advantageous.

Condes Forces encamped at Estampes, the Prince goes for Paris to fix Orleans;
that was Chavigny's Counsel. With what joy of the Common People, and with what
Congratulations of the Parliament he was received, can scarce be paralleled in
words.

At this time Longueville fearing the continuance of his state, resolves
voluntarily to lay down his Government in Normandy, thinking himself unable to
sustain the storm ready to fall by the approaching Arms of the King who would
be the Conqueror it was manifest, the edge of Conde's authority growing every
where more blunt. In lieu of Normandy, Longueville had given him on the Borders
of Champagne, the Government of Maceria, Olypomont, Chastel-Renant and
Linchamp, but what was the principal Charleville was bought him of the Duke of
Mantua (it is a Sovereign Lordship amongst the Arcuese of pleasant situation
upon the bank of the Maze, looking toward Flanders and Yverdon,) this pleased
Longneville now in his de clining years; That he should exercise Sovereign
Authority, should lead in mirth the days of his Old Age at his own pleasure,
and without molestation compose his last thoughts, nor be troubled with the
Norman humors. The Articles were signed by Mazarine in his Majesty's Name, and
by me in the Dukes at Giemie, which how they came afterward to be invalidated,
I shall speak in the proper place.

At Paris were boystrous Spirits, but that durst venture no farther than words.
It was long debated in Parliament how the money should be raised for a reward to
him that killed Mazarine, and there was none found to undertake the
Assassinate; The Cardinal was not moved with any terror; only he wondered when
the French were, embroyled in Civil War that all-their Allies should continue
firm, and no one start. Orleans Conde and the Parliament still heaved at the
Government. Whom to restrain, nothing seemed more advisable then for the Court
leaving Giemie to settle at St. Germains hard by the City. This was speedily
done. And immediately Commissioners from the Parliament and from the Princes
attend upon the King and tender him all ready duty. Here were appearances of
entire Loyalty which repentance had redressed, and Rebellion disarmed: but with
unanimous Consent they petition, that Mazarine the occasion of all the troubles
might be removed.

The King leaving St. Germains, made some stay at Courbeil, and from thence
goes and falls upon the Princes forces at their Rendezvous at Estampes, They
having Barricado'd up the place, make a stout defense, and elude the assaults
of Thurenne; who upon the approach of the Lorrainer is forced to draw off and
convey the King in safety to Courbeil. If ever the strength of authority seemed
to have lost its edge, it was in truth at Estampes, where the King in Person
having made an offer of entry without success, was more than once in danger by
the discharge of the Guns^ It had been much better not to have put that to the
hazard.

After having quartered at Courbeil and Melun to watch the narrower over Paris,
the Court chose St. Denis. And that there would be put a period to the Civil
War, was not unreasonably believed, the City growing more complyant, although
the Issue proved otherwise. Conde's Army held St. Clous and the neighboring
Country, led by Tavan. The Royal Camp without the Seyne lying opposite, watch
an opportunity of engaging. Therefore they go to lay a Bridge over the River at
Espinay, but are hindered by the Condea^s. Thurenne with Se^neterre his
continual Fellow-Commander begin to make another Bridge not far from Poissy to
divide the Enemy. Conde certified of the approaching assault, draws off his
Forces by night to lodge them more safely at Charenton. A more convenient*
Quarter could not have been chosen, being flanked with the Seyne and Marne, and
having the plain of Brice open to furnish it with Provision.

While the Parisians deny entrance into the City, the Troops destined to the
slaughter round the Walls, which making but slow progress, by reason of the
vast circumference of the wall, Thurenne presses upon them as they are spread
in the Suburb of St. Anthony, and about Piquepousse. Presently the whole Court
flocks thither. The King attended by Mazarine could hardly be restrained from
entering into the Encounter. The end, says he, to the Civil Wars which ye
desired is come. And who could have doubted of it? The City had turned about to
the Court, being weary of longer bearing the insol^ncies of the Germans and
Lorrainers. The Shops of Paris being destitute of that gainful trade which the
King only suplies. The face of the Camps was very different; On the Kings side
was Number, Valor, the Cause, and above all, Majesty present. On the Enemies,
Terror, a faint Obedience between an infence City, and a King eager in the
pursuit of his denied Rights.

In truth Conde early in the morning coming forth of St. Anthony's Gate, and
having strictly viewed how the state of affairs was, and in what a pinch he was
taken; by fortune turning to Beaufort, Nemours, Rochefoucault, and the rest
standing by said, I do not palliate the danger with words. This day we must
perish. Let us therefore Perish not (...), since after despair of Victory, we
are to (...) fighting. I design my self to that Part, whither I shall be called
by danger; whither I will lead, not send.

The Officers agreed, and all being prepared for be extremest hazard, they
fought from five in the morning till five in the evening, with such obstinate
hearts on both sides, that I question whether ever among the French there were
an Example of a more stubborn Conflict. Under the Walls of the City the
Citizens looking on, and waiting for the Issue. The Daughter of Orleans was no
weak stay of the Battle, whilst with a manly forehead she inflames the
Parisians for Conde, whilst she diverts the Common Council of the City from
their promises made to the King, and holds the Gates open for Auxiliaries to go
out to the Prince, or come in again, whilst she discharges the Canon in the
Bastille against the Royalists, in token that the City stood affected to Conde:
lastly whilst she heartens her Father, and carries him along the streets
appearing to all. The Bulwarks in the Suburb were the matter in dispute. Those
were cast up by the Townsmen against the infesting Lorrainers, now are defended
and maintained with such stoutness and exceeding love of praise. There were
slain on both sides men of quality, besides an innumerable quantity of common
Soldiers. One might have seen from Piquepousse to S. Denis dismal slaughters;
Sanmagrine and Mantini the Nephew of Mazarine, on whom the hope of his Uncle
was worthily set, breathing out their last, were carried back to Court
State-sacrifices. Of the Party Nemours and Rochefoucault came back wounded and
half dead. The Port of S. Anthony being clear, Conde with his mangled Retinue
comes into the City, having ventured at that which could not have been effected
but by a most valiant man. Great every where, but greater than the rest where
the danger was great; in this S. Anthonies fight greater than himself. One
could not know whether to admire him more either when he exceeded all measure
in running upon dangers, or when he kept within the bounds of admitting due
praises. Here he rejected Applauses, and would not avow his own labors, bur
infinitely valued other men's, so different was he after Victory, from what he
was in fight.

What was more cruel in the afflicted City, than to see German, Wallon, and
Lorrain Troops march up and down with drawn Swords, as though the King had been
conquered, carrying along with them flocks of Harlots and Scythian Wagons, yet
had that odious crew Billets assigned them in the places adjacent to the Suburb
of S. Germans and the Seyne, designed for the Entertainments of Paris. These
Plantations the barbarous Soldier held after that he had plundered
Villejuvive, Vitry, and other Towns. There were not wanting some Illustrious
Families too, which freely sent in Provisions to them when they swaggered,
thereby to redeem their being pillaged.

But that nothing might be wanting to the highest Frenzy, the Faction appeared
wearing its Colors; then which Faction there, being nothing in Nature more
slight, the vilest of things, Straw, was chosen for a Standard of Sedition.
Yellow straws were plaited into the Nosegays of the gallanter sort. Carts,
Coaches, and Saddle-Horses came not forth without a Lock of straw stuck on
them; nay, the very Mouks had straw on their Cowls. They that were Chaff-less,
or Straw-less were beaten; in an unusual Subject I musr use an unusual Term.
Such a Straw-Triumph was odious to the good, and imported no good Wheat, nor
the Seed-plot of any good fruit. The City breathed after nothing but Loyalty
and due Obedience to his Majesty. Orleans with his Accomplices wavered. The Court
increased by new accessions. The Normans with Longueville detest War. The
Spaniards by Fuensaldagne enter indeed France, with a pompous Camp. The Duke of
Lorraine concludes underhand with Mazarine. In Guyenne Condes Party weakens.
In a word, all things go cross. No hope is left but in the Union of Paris, with
the Parliament, and Princes, which striking terror with its empty sound, may
bring the King to a Treaty of Peace, wished for and pursued with earnest vows
on all hands.

It was July 4. 1652. when there met in the Town Hall the chief men, Hospital
Governor of Paris, and the Provost of the Merchants presiding after the usual
manner. There came in Orleans and Conde, with innumerable Followers at four in
the afternoon. They were received honorably by Hospital, who seeing that
famous Tuft of Straw in Orleans's Hat, could not refrain from saying; Why do
you come into his Majesty's Room, wearing a Badge of Sedition? Orleans without
any resentment answered, All will be well. The Court was scarcely met, when
there comes in a Trumpet from his Majesty with a Letter, wherein he testifies
that it would be pleasing to him, if the Court were adjourned till four days
after.

So small a space could not be denied the King; the Court is dissolved, the
Princes return, whom as Hospital waited on a suborned Rascal offered him a Tuft
of Straw, in scorn, or to watch an opportunity of Sedition, which was wished
for. Hospital suitably to the quality of his place, and after his wonted manner
answers; Sirrah, I have a good mind to ^^ing you out at window, which I should
command to be done, did not the Dignity of this honorable Person (he pointed
at Orleans) bridle my just indignation. The Princes had scarce got into their
Coach, when there fell shot with a Musket, either by chance, or upon design,
some unknown Fellow, mixed with the vulgar Rout, which with Weapons and
menacing words thronged about the Townhouse. Some affirm among those that
abuse their leisure, that it was done with a mischievous intent. Nor are there
none that witness it to have been by the Order of the Princes, that the desired
Union might be either persuaded, or forced. However the truth be, a great
destruction sprung from thence. The crowd of men in Arms lying under the
Windows, cries out; That Mazarines were locked up there, and did hold very bad
Councils; that the destruction by their means hangs over the City. A Citizen
they had already killed. Some great misfortune is to be expected; that Fagots
would be fetched to lay the House flat with avenging flames.

Of a sudden the common Rout fall on fiercely with Rage, Arms, Fire, and Faggot.
The forwardest are slaughtered, others stifled with smoke, the House is
stormed: that seemed the fatal day of Paris. Those that were potent in Faction
strengthend the Confusion. Companies of Soldiers are drawn up to the
City-Walls. The Town-house-wall is boiled with flames, so that the smoke rolls
in a gloomy Cloud; and had the wind then spread the burning, the Greave would
have been involved, being already scorched all over with the dismal fire, which
as the Will of God was, mounted hot aloft, but had its power confined to the
lower Region. It seems after so many hazards of the poor City, this Game had
been left unplaid. They, were not contented to have eat up the Citizens; They
must burn them too. Whilst the Conflagration and Riot lasted, Conde assayed to
in, Orleans held him, fearing lest the Prince might come to any mischance by
the popular Commotion. Orleans his Daughter came in like a stout Virago, when
the Tumult was appeased, and the fire abated, every one went home to his house.
The flame indeed, was quenched, but the memory not buried, which will live for
ever in their minds. And both Princes burnt not the Houses of the City, but his
own hopes. Hospital having escaped the danger in a disguise, left his House and
the City, and retired. Beaufort is made Governor of Paris, and Broussel Provost
of the Merchants against the approbation of the Court; but what should they do?
Prudence lay oppressed, a secret overpowering Providence driving its Wheel over,
and deriding the Politics of France.

Certain discreet Members of the Parliament are dispatched to the King at S.
Denis. The principal Commissioner was Nesmond, who made a grav^ Harangue; the
drift of his Speech was this; That Mazarine might be unrepealably banished;
upon hi^ removal that blessed Peace would dispel the Clouds in the Hemisphere,
of France; that this was the only means for the afflicted State to recover
settlement. The King answered, That the Cardinal should ^e gone, so the Princes
would but lay down their Arms, and immediately dismiss their foreign Soldiers
who were hostile and odious. That the Prince was far otherwise minded, the
event declared.

Whenas Fortune had failed the most wise Councils at the Suburb of S. Anthony,
and nothing was to be expected of the City, in such a tempest^^ls time; the
Kings Army in that Neighborhood being in want of Provisions, the Court it self
straightned, and diseases spreading by reason of the soultry Dog Days, Pontoise
is cholsen for a fit place of Residence. Thither the King on the sudden conveys
himself; (it is but three hours Journey) having left the
Parliament-Commissioners at S. Denis, whom, upon the Post, Orleans, Conde, and
Beaufort conveyed into Paris. But when very many of the poor Parliament Men,
fearing their Estates, having left the City, wandered about unsettled, by the
advice of Fouquet Procureur General, the Members of the scattered Court are
gathered at Pontoise. The late Ordinances disannulled, and, new ones erected.
The shadow and appearance of a Parliament remaining at Paris, frets at this,
and declare Orleans Viceroy, and Conde General: which was not only at Court
disallowed of, but at Toulouse, the Metropolis of Orleans's Government. The
rigid Provenzals, always of a stiff uprightness, know not how to bow but to
that which is equitable. No People is more obstinate in their Loyalty.

The new Viceroy setles him a new Council, the principal Members of which were
Conde, Seguier Chancellor of France, Chavigny, the Dukes Rochefoucault, Rohan,
Brissac, Sully, and others; Beaufort and Nemours contending the one with the
other, preferred a Duel before the Council, in which they decided the Quarrel
at the Port Richlieu. The Bellows was of a Woman's lust. Nemours shot mortally
by his Brother-in-Law Beaufort, fell rather after the Fate of his Family than
his own; a man stout to a degree beyond Valor; of a life suitable to his
death; born to oblige the World.

Nothing was more empty than that shadow of Orleans's Council, which soon
vanished away. Their first business was to raise money upon the City. Condes
Forces were in extreme necessity, who (though they might have been rich with
their pillaging and plunder) yet what they got ill, spent worse. Therefore a
remedy of their want is found out far more destructive than their very want. A
Tax was laid upon every Port Cochere, or great Gate for a Coach to go in at,
at which the City was greatly incensed, resolving to fall foul upon the
Advisers, and throw off the Imposition. The Princes with a great part of their
Parliament foresee the storm hanging over them from the Court and City; which
Conde resolves to leave, thinking seriously about withdrawing himself and his
Forces; when he saw that the King could not be prevailed with to grant the
Suits made in his Name at S. Germans by Rohan and Chavigny in favor of his
Brother Conti, Nemours, Marsin, Violet, and their Followers, who were not a
few, secretly craving.

The Parliament at Pontoise, wholly devoted to Mazarine, advises with an
unbiassed Council; to depart and throw the whole blame upon Conde; that the
Prince would hold on the same course of distractions that he had begun, and
draw the Odium of the Kingdom upon himself; and that at length with their
universal consent, when the Faction was tired out, the Cardinal should return
to his former Luster, sole Manager of the State, with the Applause of France.
At a most solemn Meeting his Majesty is requested by Commissioners from the new
Parliament in a premeditated Oration, that the Cardinal in favor of Peace to
heal the Nation, might depart the Land, and that he would gratify all his good
Subjects in granting this Suit of theirs; Mazarine answers, He was ready to
obey, and would willingly leave the Ministry, if their rage might but cease,
who feed upon the Countries spoils; that he had been Delinquent, neither in
corrupting others, nor being corrupt: had not deviated from the path of Honor
and Conscience in the least; had not poisoned the ears of the best of Kings
against his Subjects; had not brought scadals into the Court, but by a constant
tenor of his own Example insinuated clemency: and that the Government should
be tempered according to the Genius of the Nation; that Terror is the wrong
way of acquiring Reverence among the French, the most firm Dominion over them,
is such as wherein the Subjects find content. They need fear nothing, if they
have union of hearts among themselves; this he would procure them by his
absence, and quench the fire by withdrawing. Lastly it is not reasonable that a
Kingdom, strong in Forces, rich in Commodities, renowned in Glory, should for
his sake perish.

Amidst these storms, the Duke of Bouillon dies at Pontoise, destined to have
been the second Neck to support the Management of the State, having already
agreed to an Affinity with Mazarine. He used all possible means by not bearing,
and by provoking Troubles, to have plunged himself in unrecoverable ruin. Vast
confidence heightened his valor. His Spanish Wife Leonora Berk drew him over to
the Spanish Party. A haughty Dame, the Eri^nys of Sedan, wearing a vain mask of
Devotion, had ruined the Fates of that Illustrous Family, if any mine can befall
the Nephews of Thurenne invested with so great Splendor of their Uncle.

After that Mazarine had earnestly insinuated what he judged beneficial to the
Public, he departed out of the French Territory, and took up his Residence at
Bouillon, in the Forest of Ardenne; having cluded on the way, by the discovery
of a Spaniard, an Ambush laid for him by the Faction, and left behind him
Tomaso Prince of Savoy, to represent the Prime Minister; who was to have for
his Assistants ^^el Servient, Michael Tellier, and Zongo Ondedei, in whom he
reposed most trust. He chose such Persons that might neither bring him into
danger, nor disgrace. It is a principal Point of a great Ministers discretion,
not to assume a help that is unmanageable by being over-powerful.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. France opening its eyes begins to acknowledge its Errors, and
the deceitful Snares of the Princes. The Faction declines. His Majesty returns
to the City. The Parliament recovers its Authority, that of Pontoise being
determined. Orleans withdraws without waiting on the King. The wearied Sedition
has no where to set its foot, being without a Leader. Yet the Tide is still
upon turning, till the Return of Mazarine, wherein every thing is in good
earnest settled.

THE French Necks used to the Harness, cannot long start from their accustomed
and ancient Yoke, therefore what so many calm Advices could not persuade, nor
could menacing terror extort, only Loyalty without any external impulse did
obtain, being knit by repentance much stronger, then if it had been skinned
over by untimely remedies. But what could the Commonalty attempt when the
Princes were away? Even the same, as the Sea, calm of it self, when the Winds
are still. In nothing did the policy of Mazarine appear greater than in the not
aggravating of faults, and not breaking of the Lute-string that jarr'd, but
bringing it by degrees into Tune. Paris by instinct and in a heat calls for its
King. There are meetings of the Citizens in the Louvre to find out means for
suppressing the Faction, nay, they fall upon the marks of it. For those that
wore Straw, were all about the Streets pelted or abused. On the contrary, such
as had returned to their Allegiance stick scrowles of paper in their Hatts, in
token of their Loyalty to the King.

The Court having broke up its unsatisfactory residence at Pontoise, retired to
Compiegne, whether slocked an innumerable concourse of Nobles, Citizens,
Commoners. Peter Seguier the Chancellor secretly slipped out of the City in
disguise. I know not by what ill luck he was President of the Princes Counsel
against his will; yet would have suggested wholesome advice: He was received
graciously by his Majesty at Compiegne, and afterward had the Seals restored,
which none kept with more integrity, used more discreetly, or held a longer
time. An humble address is voted in the Townhouse whereby the King should be
petitioned to return.

The Parliament of Paris although it seemed to slight that vain appearance of
the Court held at Pontoise; yet took it for a diminution; and declined by
having their Authority divided. Now the secret was divulged that the Parliament
is not confined to the walls of Paris only: and that there is no surer Law,
than that the King may do whatsover soever he pleases to do. Therefore is
Justice drawn an Assessor to Majesty, undoubtedly, because whatsoever is
ordered by, the King must be judged legal.

But the very Parliament men were inclinable to the Kings return, and had
already given thanks for the removing Mazarine, who was called the Rock of
Ofence, the Cause, or at least Occasion of the Troubles.

Although Conde strong with the Lorraine and Wittemberg Forces held Thurenne at
Villeneuve of St. George in a manner blocked up, the Kings Army being there
reduced to extremities: yet such is his foresight, that he plainly perceived,
that he could not longer sustain the sway of all France, recoyling to its
obedience, nor be able to stand the assault which such a power menaced. Least
he should be overwhelmed on the sudden with that vast weight, and all way of
escape cut off, he retreats with his men into Flanders by Champaigne: so much
the more willingly because Thurenne had got away in the night, having left
fires burning in his Camp, to conceal his departure. Indeed the Cardinal the
matter of War being gone, Conde could hope for nothing more from the People,
less from the Sling, the head of which, Beaufort, was quite out of credit with
the Faction. Orleans being weary of his Labor and Arms breathed after nothing
else but rest. Upon these effectual arguments, Conde on good grounds withdrew
from imminent dangers, besides that being so linked to the Spaniard in Bonds of
Association, that he could upon no terms stir from his Articles with them.
Another bait there was in the way; the Plate-Fleet that was then expected from
the Mines of Per^^, The Spaniards do with this Lure inveigle such as are ready
to revolt, with a vain show of riches, which has to often deceived, and will
deceive the simple world. If there be cast up the charges, fortune of the Sea,
and the like, a little Gold is purchased at a great deal of Gold.

At this time died Leo Bouthillier Chavigny, in a flourishing age, but not
estate. Having left the Kings high way, he went into a misleading path.
Prosperity he received thankfully, adversity not so patiently. He might have
rested upon internal goods of his Soul, and been prepared against the
accessories of Fortune. A little before his last, he devoted himself openly to
Religion. It is grown a practice of late years among the French, that they who
miscarry in their designs turn Religious. Vetaries they are commonly called for
palliating their ^ices, vicious in sacrificing to God the dreggs of their life.
Thus died Chavigny, mortifying himself not only with Religion but also with a
more strict diet. By the same Arts hastening his death, as Life is wont to be
prolonged. If there be any levity in the spirit, it is puffed up with felicity,
which upon the turn of favor is abyss'd. A fault of the Nation condemned and
still maintained. From such easiness of fortune, what do not we daily suffer,
and that undeservedly.

During these troubles, France loses the Seacoast of Flanders, Gravelin, and
Dunkirk, and other neighboring Towns, which are born away by the same torrent
of Fortune, having been honorably purchased by Blood and Gold.

But Barcellona, the chief Town of Catalaunia, renders it self to Don Juan, so
often happy, and that had done so many high services. In Italy Mantua
staggerred, and having in vain demanded relief for casall, of our King, applied
to the Spaniards. By such dismal overthrows, France might have felt greater
losses, but Beliere being sent thiher, did a little stay the fall of Catalaunia.

Guise a few years before elected Captain of the Common-wealhth of Neples, and
amidst those cruel disorders taken and carried into Spain, is now set at
liberry, and that principally at the mediation of Conde. It was the Castillian
subtilty to return Guise into France, and to gratify Conde in it. That bearing
in memory his Ancestor, he might make new plotts: and raise disturbance. But he
forgetting the favor of his enlargement and his obligation to Conde, diverted
himself on Balls and Tournaments. His attempt of a second progress into Naples,
was a bravado to renew in his light mind, by way of vain derision, those hopes
taken down to the very ground. None in the world ever fained such idle dreams,
that was descended of Ancestors, who aimed at so lofty and so solid matters.
Monce reduced by a lingering siege to an extreme scarcity of all things, is
surrendered to Pauvausse by Person, the relief of it having been in vain
attempted by Briol.

Conde storms Rhetel, Chasteau-Porcin, and St. Menhoud leaving Garrisons for
his future hopes.

The publich Joy, and Festival Acclamations, for the returning of the King into
the City, cannot be enough expressed. Sedition, Faction, like tales told, are
vanished out of the memory. Paris* glittered with the luster of the Court, so
that one might truly say the shaken and starting world was h^ng right upon his
hinges again. Some orders in the Senate were enacted by the Kings command. The
more obstinate Senators chased out of the City; the submissive by disputing
nothing, obtained pardon of all things; an agreement useful to the Subject,
honorable to the King.

Orleans went not to meet the King, when he came in, and therefore tarried not
in the City. Retired to Limour, thence to Blois, to the end of his life, always
discontented. His Duchess a little while after overtook him. Whilst the
affairs of Guyenne incline toward submission to the King, a new faction starts
up at Bourdeaux called the Elmers, (from an Elm-grove, where at a certain hour
of the day, the Factors of sedition held their discourse^ about the government
of the State.) The chief who made up the Junta, were Putean, Gay, Villart,
Dureteste, Blanc, Gourg, Espagnet, Raymond, Mauvoysin, and others. These
deliberate of Peace, of War, of Confederating with the Spaniard, with the
English. Madam Conde, Longueville, and the party thereupon droop, and cannot
come to resolve what to do. Conti already held secret treaty about alliance
with Mazarine. Vandosme and Candale renew at Bourdeaux their former friendships
studiously, and with all manner of civilities.

Harcourt so often daring, grows cold, grudges at the orders of the Court,
which he complained had not considered him. A man that had done great service,
and continued without prospect of reward, in a mean condition and amongst
dangers.

Brissac upon the border of the Rhine, taken from the house of Austria by
Weymar, remained in the French possession, Derlach of Berne being Governor. He
dies, Charlovoy Captain of the eldest company in the Castle surviving, enters
upon the command of the whole Garrison, one of the former dependents upon
Weybrantz, Tilliadet is sent thither by the Court, as the fashion is, to
command in chief. Charlovoy resents this grievously, as though he had been
disregarded, and so orders his matter, that Tilliadet was obliged to go from
thence without any notice taken of the Kings order. What should be done in such
a doubtful point? The Garrison is courted by the Emperor the ancient Lord, by
the Lorrainer, by Conde. The Widow of Weybrantz enraged with a sting of
Ambition, I will add and gain, interposes to reconcile the parties at
difference: She comes to Brissac with an intention by all means of obliging the
Court to her, and destroying Charlovoy. By the ruin of such a person, the vain
woman had presumed upon obtaining no small reward. She puts upon her hook the
bait which she knew he would bite at. A Mistress, is made the decoy: to visit
whom the poor man goes out of the Castle. The Act of Charlovoy was as weak, as
that of Madam Weybrantz was foul. Whilst he trapanned by a woman is conveyed
to Flesburgh: She is shamefully reviled at Brissac and hardly escapes safe to
Basil.

Harcourt was Governor of Flesburgh; a Garrison entirely affected to him.
There Charlovoy being exceeding courteously entertained, becomes obliged to
him, who absent in Guyenne, disgusted with the unfaithfulness of the Court,
designed to get Brissac to himself, and Charlovoy liberty. They enter
covenants. Harcourt withdraws from Guyenne, and is received in Brissac by
Charlovoys means. After diverse terrors, after variety of hopes proposed, at
length he conditions with the King. He comes forth of the Garrison
surreptitiously gotten, is preferred to the Government of Anjou, Dignity of
Constable, and a Church Revenue: Honorable and fair concessions are made to
Charlovoy. Madam Weybrantz hated on both sides, ended her restless days with
the Spleen and Melancholy.

At a solemn Pomp Rhetz went to Compiegne to under thanks for his Hat, but
especially to gain oblivion of past miscarriages, and credit for the time to
come. The Queen appositely answered, What is done is gone; what is future, is
not to be feared. The Prelate might have presaged what was impendent. He never
fearing his Estate, eternally deceived by false friends, through the humors of
the Pulpit, through the Complements of the Court, through the Faction of the
People, whilst he seems to triumph, being in the Louvre arrested by Villequier,
is cast into the Prison at Vincennes. Several Treaties were for the Release of
the Prisoner. At length he was brought to Nants, and made his escape bravely.
He assisted at Rome, not without Reputation, at the Election of Alexander. From
hence returning to France, he voluntarily laid down the Archbishopric of Paris
to gratify the King. He lives quietly, in Splendor suitable to his
disposition; what he is to do at Rome, the sequel of the story will inform.

After Rhetz being in Prison; Conde a Stipendiary in Spain; Orleans at Bloise
either praying in the Church, or hunting in the Woods, there could not choose
but be secure Peace. These three more boldly than the rest made up the Tragedy,
but at the pleasure of four Women; ours stood a long time right. These others
having a womb neither happy to the Kingdom, nor themselves, whilst they measure
their license of sinning by their high qualities, have most dangerously
embroiled all France. Having compassed lesser designs, still aimed at greater,
and always secretly applied by their Confidents to the Cardinal, whom they
detested openly; yet would betray one another. Thus was Mazarine the Arbitrator
not of three, but four wanton Goddesses.

These were the beginnings, these the grounds of the civil War. The manner of
carrying it on was very bad. Civil Arms can neither be raised, nor held by good
practices: and farther the aim of them was unsound: for the Commanders
pretending the Public Good, every one contend to advance his own power. They
fight on both sides for Rule. I take him to be the better Citizen and Man, that
would endure any torment, rather than not only to be a Principal, but an
Accessory to such cruelty. If you are obliged to meddle and take party, look it
be with this condition, that it may appear a Wiseman, as you do against your
choice undertake it at first, and have no will to stand it out to the last. And
always be of this Judgment, They who commit themselves to these Waves, are no
more in their own power, than they who are tossed upon those at Sea. This is
our Determination in a controverted case, wherein I soon understand that I have
not contented such as are hasty to take up Arms.

THE NINTH BOOK OF THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. Mazarine after his Return, pursues nothing so eagerly, designs
nothing so earnestly as the matter of the Peace; bends all his thoughts upon
that. Because the Spaniards had hitherto by a thousand Artifices dallied in it;
he extorts it from them against their wills; which was honorable for the
French, as Conquerors, useful to the Castillians, as conquered. He settles
France, reduces his Enemies to extremities, obliges his Friends, descending
even to Cromwellism, to the terrifying the Haters of Peace, and obliging them
to equal conditions.

DUring the influence of this malignant Planet, destructive Arms had ranged
over France. A common calamity incident to the Minority of Kings; which proving
always tempestuous, foul consequents can neither be prevented nor amended, all
the tackings about of Policy proving ineffectual. Mazarine without any farther
motion, did at that distance with a silent exprobration, lay before their
consciences his innocence, and profound parts. And forced by so many sufferings
a conviction that none was worthy to stand upon that Axle-tree from whence he
could not be pulled down. At length his Enemies either fell in mutual
engagement one against the other, or fi^h as had offended upon presumption of
his clemency, even upon constraint, did voluntarily make their Addresses to
him. And they were most instrumental in his Return, who were supposed to have
compassed the necessity of his Departure. Manifestly, none was expulsed with
greater obloquy, nor received with more joy. Nor was the Cardi^al more glorious
for his Triumphs and Honors, than either for his Banishment, or the cause of
it. When he was coming, Feb. 3. 1653. his Majesty, with Monsieur, and all the
Grandees of the Court went to meet him two miles off the City, through the Port
of S. Denis. What Embraces and Joys there were, that innumerable multitude of
men can witness, whom the greatness of the Sight had invited to gaze on the
Wonder of the World. That he, against whom so many capital Ordinances, so many
Armies levied, the Town so often alarmed, had raged and roared, should make his
Entry into the same City, with the general Applause of it, and have his Return
adorned with unusual Pomp.

The King took him along with him into his Coach, and carried him to the
Louvre. To the end of his life, he with his Nieces, kept in no other House than
the Palace. Which Honor no Favorite ever before was vouchsafed. The News of
his Coming was entertained by public Expressions of Joy in most Houses. The
Windows set with Candles, and Bonfires made, which the Common People would do
without Order, although it be against Law to make such fires, unless by Command
from the King, when public Joy is enjoined upon the having got Victories or
other happy Occasions.

Not long after he is entertained in the Townhouse, by the Magistrate, and
Eschevins, and all the Officers, with so great Magnificence, and such sumptuous
Feasting, that the like was hardly ever seen. He keeping the command of his
Face, but admitting approaches to his Person, and Hand, smiled familiarly upon
every one, and threw money among the Common People.

After a welcoming with such Joy, Mazarine more pleasing for Novelty is
preferred before old Friends, and all bitterness of distasts being forgotten,
is readmitted into his former Charge, and wheels cleverly about from hatred to
favor. When there was any matter of Punishment or Restraint, the King puts
others upon it: whatsoever Rewards or Preferments were to be bestowed, he
reserved that to pass the Cardinal, who being before all things concerned for
the Treasury, vacant by the death of Vieville, put in Abel Servient and Nicolus
Fouquet to be Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury.

Servient, besides the Luster of his Birth and gentile Qualities, had abilities
proportioned to vast business; of an inventive Head; Maintainer of unlimited
Prerogative, able in Tongue and Pen, had pierced into the Intrigues of Courts,
but so scandalously deficient in comprehended the Secret of the Treasury, that
by what employment others grow rich, he run in debt. He died in the Office
honorably, having empaired his estate. Fouquet under a neglected Garb,
shrowding a vast Spirit, not unmindful of his Friends, but of his Enemies, at
Lucullus like charges, mastered Nature, and oblidged a most disadvantagious
Situation, to relent into a delicious Seat; without wrong to any but himself
and the Kings Treasure.

Such a choice of Mazarine to the management of the Treasury, did not escape
censure in a City which spares no body. Then was that famous word of the
Chancellours given abroad. Whatever I shall do, said he, My Election will still
be defective. Some through profuce Riot will lavish out the Royal Wealth.
Others in a penurious way will worse discontent the Kingdom: Neither will duly
hold up their authority, therefore they shall not hold it long; transported
with Luxury, or Pride worse than Luxury: that public money is like Rivers which
run from the Sea and to the Sea, having refreshed Countries and Cities.

His principal care was over Guyenne, which if it were torn from Conde, the
Princes authority would be deminished with the Spaniard, and the reputation of
his power, by which Wars are supported. That charge is committed to Vandism
the Admiral. A Fleet was necessary, principally because of the Spaniards
drawing down and preparing Succors. C^ndale was joined with him for his
Interest in the ^avourers in the house of Espernon; and to retreve their
affections, for he was of a sweet disposition, and had disobliged none. But d'
Strade was Commander in chief, who since the repentance and return of D'ognon
to his allegiance was Governor of Brouage and Rochel. A man experienced in
diversities of Affairs, discreet in ordering Peace or War, who always carried
on the force of Arms with a concurrence of reason, and to whose only care
Guyenne is engaged for her quit. Such character did Mazarine give d'Estrade;
who presently takes in Bourg, chasing out Osorio and the Spanish Garrison.

Bourdeaux was not of one judgment. It made for the Interest of some to have
the war eternal. These bragged of great Assistances from Spain and England. The
more discreet persons detested that and cried out after Peace: a sweet word,
which none but Beasts disesteem. Conti just entering upon Youth, did moderate in
the City torn between two Factions, and in an age that might have pleaded an
excuse from engaging in such Affairs, acted what might have become gray-hairs.
He considers in his mind all events morally possible, and concludes that there
is no means of deliverance but in submission to the King; yet that too must not
be over-hastily sought. That by too forward a suing for pardon, Grace is
forestalled. Marsin, L^net, and afterward Fiesque coming over from Spain,
Officers in Condes Army were the Incendiaries of the war of Guyenne, nor was it
any than^ to them that it had not been perpetuated, havin^ their whole fortunes
laid in the public misery. These too began to perceive that Peace was likely
to ensue, and Conti's inclination toward it. I am fully informed that there
were councels held about surprising him, which being afterward discovered came
to nothing. In the mean while the Royal Army distresses poor Bourdeaux,
Provisions growing scant, the common people murmured against the better sort.
The Etmers let the Hospitals loose in the Town, and cry out against the
slackness of the Spanish supply; the Townsmen put on White and Red Favors, the
colonrs of this and that Party; a White Flag is set upon St. Michaels Steeple,
and the Red one taken down; the first token of their returning to their
Allegiance to the King: And at length that prevailed, people always returning
to their Duty, which strengthens by time the suppresser of Rebellion. The
Friends of Candale, and those that were affected to the Royal Party, went so
often forward and backward, till that a Cessation of Arms was obtained for a
few days. Provision was sent in by the Generals permission, to relieve the poor
Townsmen. This course was discreetly taken in order to Peace, which is
concluded with a perfect Oblivion of the past Rebellion; all honest and wise
men forwarding the work, amongst whom Virlada was most eminent for his Zeal,
Judgment, and Industry.

Between the Cessation of Arms, and conclusion of the Peace, arrives at the
mouth of the Garonne, the Spanish Fleet, under Santacruz their Admiral. It was
studiously endeavored to conceal that Arrival: the Spaniards, who pretend to
carry away the reputations of Policy from the other Europeans, maturely ponder
into what juncture of Affairs they were plunged, between the hopes of Bourdeaux
cut short, their Accomplices vanquished; Bourg lost, and Libourn, and so the
French Forces every where Victorious. What should they do? it was even their
wisest course immediately to go back again; which was accordingly done with
small, but some damage. Vendosme and Candale are not only received in Bourdeaux
with loud acclamations, but such was their confidence in that Warlike People,
that they forbore the having any Guard, and trusted themselves with the Burger
of Bourdeaux, that has no baseness in him. Vandosme could speak well, counsel
wisely, industriously execute, and had a great reach to lay Plots and
Stratagems to circumvent his Enemy.

Conti retires to Cadillac, still casting in his mind the alliance of Mazarine.
The Princess of Conde, with Enguien to Brabant, to her husband. Mechlin was the
Ladies residence. Madam Longueville cloistered her self a long time at Moulines
in a Nunnery, afterward returning to her husband, lived in concord with him,
for virtue and piety exemplary. Marsin, Fiesque, and Lenet returned to the
Spaniards.

The Court of Bourdeaux, which during these troubles sat at Agennois, returns
to the principal City, some few only removed. Perigord and Villeneuve of
Agennois turning from their factiousness, wherein they were the most notorious
in the Country, submit to the King. d' Estrade, vanquished the residue of the
Spaniards, was Governor of Guyenne, and made Mayor of Bourdeaux,

Conde depending upon the rising of the French, which he had hopes would appear
at his coming, and that he might not grow lazy, and loose credit among the
Spaniards, in keeping within leagures, enters Picardy with a numerous Army, and
overr^ns the whole breadth of the Province, as far as Roye and Noyon, having
seized the banks of the Oyse with so great a flourish to raise up the Embers of
the Faction which was now laid unable to rise any more.

Thurenne was ordered with Seneterre thither, having this Instruction to
decline engagement, which Conde did with all his might provoke. ^^intsaldagne
who commanded the Spaniards, did exceedingly avoid it too, lest he might be
taxed to have brought that strong party upon which the preservation of the
Low Countries did depend into evident danger. He had Instructions limited to
certain cautions; to skirt upon France, and carry the Frontiers before him, but
not rush himself far into the Bowels of it: therefore his heat being al^y'd,
and the year grown to the Autumn, least the Army should return to their Winter
quarters without some exploit, Siege is clapped to Rocroy, whose strength lay in
the stout defense of Mountague. In the mean time Thurenne, for diversion of the
Enemy, besieges Mozome, and soon takes it; After that Rocroy was disabled
with loss of men, and had spent their Ammunion, the Spaniards become Ma^^ers of
it, and bestow it upon Conde to pacify his ^nger against Fuensaldagne, which
he had showed with violence during the whole time of the Siege; and that would
have proceeded to worse, had not ^^opaldus come in as a Mediator, with whom
too ^e had a contest who should give out the Word; and to decide the
controversy, they were fain to take a middle way: Such a quarrelsom business
has ill-fortune perpetually been; whilst every one would shift off the blame
of bad successes upon the other.

After the taking of Saint Menhoud, the Court minded nothing but Masks and
Comedies: In the Palace of Louvre the Wedding of Conti was solemnized with the
Countess of Martinezze, the Cardinals Neice. The policy of the Prince is to be
commended, in providing for himself and Conde's Family by such an Alliance. His
Generosity too is commendable in refusing gallantly the goods of his Brother
that were offered him: further, his Fortune was remarkable in having light upon
a Wife worthy to have been Courted, abating the accessions of a splendid
condition for her Beauty and Virtue. She challenged nothing from he^ Uncles
greatness, but the content in it, never caring to be more then private, though
comparable with the highest Ladies. Their Mother too was present Mazarines
Sister, who gave a like proof with he^ Daughter, that Felicity had added
nothing to them but the deporting themselves so in that condition as it gave
testimony to their Humility.

During the public joy, Charles D. of Lorrain (...) made Prisoner at Brussels,
and hurried away into Antwerp Castle, and afterward conveyed by S^^ to Toledo
in Spain, after so many Campania's mad^ in that Nation. He could not hastily
have expected such a turn, whom Fortune had so often d^^ceiv'd. It was given
out that he had clash'd wi^^ Conde, but the soreness of their anger consider'^
does abundantly demonstrate that he had mad^ some secret contract with the
French. Oftentimes had he been forwarn'd of the danger that was ready to fall
upon him, but despised all admonitions; and had a plain dream of it that very
night, which was the last of his liberty in the Low Countries. Predictions are
not to be heeded, but dreams may with moderation, and without Superstition. For
the Spirit being oppressed with cares, oftentimes the apparitions of future
occurrents do pass before our thought in time of sleep, whether excited by the
trouble of our mind, or the presage of our working fancies.

Duke Francis of Lorrain, the Prisoners Brother, is courted by both sides, as
being to succeed in the command over those Lorrain Troops. He judged it more
convenient to join with the Spaniard, and afterward without having performed
any considerable Action, embraced the French Protection, the issue proving
neither successful to himself nor the French.

The year following, after the Inauguration of his Majesty at Rhevins, which is
performed with a Glewy Ointment (the tradition is, that the Viol dropped from
Heaven only for the saving of the Kings of France) Thurenne takes Stenay, a
City upon the Maze held by a Garrison or Conde's; Seneterre forces to a
surrender, but not without expense of blood, Mountmidy in the Dukedom of
Luxemburgh. The Castle strong by natural situation, and fortified by Art, was
so courageously defended, that the Fortune of France had almost been checked at
that place from passing farther. Mountmaudict or Mountdamnable, it was not
unreasonably called by the Ancients, being built upon a Natural Rock. The
Spaniards out of confidence that the Siege would either be long or fruitless,
fall with the gross of their Army upon Arras. Who could believe that the Arms
of his Majesty should be so fortunate, as that upon the arrival of Thurenne,
and the application of our whole strength, with an incredible effusion of
Treasure; the Rendition was extorted with such speed, that the Victorious Army
being possessed of Mont-midy, did also relieve Arras; which Mondejus held
bravely out in extremity of distress. Here was the last attempt of Leopoldus
and Fuensaldagne; the valor of Conde can scarce be reached by the Pen, who
alone bore the French charge, and brought off the trembling Spaniards

It was resolved in the Counsel of Spain, by change of Governors, to relieve
the distressed estate of Flanders. Leopoldus and Fuentsaldagne are revoked, in
whose room, with the Marquess of Caracene, is put in Commission, Don Juan of
Austria, the Kings natural Son, famous for his great successes in restoring the
settlement of Naples, and obliging Barcellona to surrender, in all undertakings
fortunate. He had scarce entered Flanders, when he relieved Valenciennes,
besieged by the French, where he beat up the quarter of Seneterre at midnight,
and made a mighty slaughter then through the Piles of the slain, having taken
the Marshal Prisoner, entered victorious into the desolate City; for the Scheld
lying between Thurenne, could not come in to the assistance of his
Fellow-commander, nor unite the two Camps. The greatest part of the glory of
that service was attributed to the valor of Conde, was also the relief of
Cambray, whose Siege he raised by conveying Successors into the Town, through
the heart of the Enemy, himself leading the party, and facing danger. Cambray
in thankfulness for the action, stamped Medals, with this Inscription, Sacred
to the Virgin, and Conde our Deliverer. But these joyful beginnings of Don
Juans Government, were shortly after sunk into a lamentable issue in the Sands
of Dunkirk; of which in its proper place.

Mazarine always plotting for peace, and being assured that the Spaniards would
never condescend to any terms, till they were cudgelled into it, engaged
Cromwell's affection with that dexterity by Bourdeaux, that he rejected with
scorn the repeated Embassies of the Spaniard, and courted the friendship of the
French, using the negotiation of William Lockhart was to conclude the new
confederacy. This Lokhuart for his piercing parts so acceptable to Mazarine,
that he alone engrossed more of the public business, then all the Ambassadors
else that were then in Paris. He makes new Propositions to the Cardinal, that
the Forces of both Kingdoms might be united against the Spaniard, the common
Enemy. Lionne, which Lomeny Earl of Bryenne, his Majesty's Secretary, Treats
with Lockhart about the new Agreement; the Articles of the Expedition are
interchangably subscribed March 23. 1657. The substance of them was this;
Toward the forceing Peace from the Spaniards that were averse, that the French
and English forces be joined together; that Siege be laid to Gravelyn, Dunkirk,
and Mardike; and if they were taken, Gravelin to be held by the French;
Dunkirk, and Mardike by the English preserving entire the Profession of the
Catholic Religion. This League to endure a full year, in which time no Treaty
of Peace to be made with the Spaniard, but by common consent. But the Summer of
that year proving too short, retarded the Design only Mardike, being then
taken; saving that the Spaniard, alarmed at so strong a Combination, to suspect
their own strength, took special care to secure the places on that Seacoast.

Then dyed Belleure prime President of the Parliament of Paris, of great
Authority in the gowned Assembly, but growing more and more daily out of favor
at Court. He took much upon him, delighted to wear about him a Train and many
Lacquays, kept Horses and Hounds for credit and pleasure, having Furniture
about him exceeding all bounds. His Ancestors Seat that had been defaced with
dust, was gilt over by him: yet these Braveries could not prevent the Owner
from being scorched up with a Fever. Lamogny succeeded him, being in high
reputation for having well discharged the Office of Master of Requests, and for
integrity of conversation. A person to that degree commendable as honesty can
be understood.

Christina Queen of Swethland,, the Issue of the Great Gustavus, having
relinquished her Kingdoms, and confirmed at Rome the knowledge of the Catholic
Religion, whose first foundations she had laid at Inspruck, resolved for the
satisfaction of her curiosity to travel, to survey diverse parts of Europe, to
inform her self of their Customs and Policies. Inveigled with the delights of
France, returned this year pretending to some News she had to communicate, and
as though she were assured of the State of Naples, proposed the hopes of that
Kingdom to the Duke of Anjou. Mazarine entertained her at the Court at
Fountain-belleau, and though he slighted the idle Report, that the Queen had
brought, yet held her in Treaty by Letters and other Applications. In the mean
time casting behind her back the Reverence due to the Royal House, she ordered
one of her Retinue to be pistolled, under pretense of his being a Traitor and
Revealer of his Ladies Secrets, though he in vain pleaded for the protection of
that privileged place. It was debated whether she should be turned forth
without coming into his Majesty's Presence, or whether the Fact should be
questioned. It seemed more advisable to wave the seeking reparations:
Therefore his Majesty visits her without making any mention of the person
slain, and she having tartied a few days, was honorably dismissed, and
returned to Rome.

The year following 1658. in the beginning of the Spring was the League renewed
with the English, Abel Servient Lord Treasurer, and the Count of Bryenne
concluding with Lockhart. The Siege of Dunkird was resolved at Amiens; and for
a blind of it; the King gave abroad that he had taken up an intention to reduce
Hedin. After the death of Bellebran the Governor Riviere and Forgan, who were
Officers is the Garrison, having shaken off the yoke, did alike disown both the
French and Spanish Command. The Court had drawn down thither to repress the
Mutineers, but they being neither deterred with the brightness of Majesty, nor
with a most powerful Army, discharged their Guns, and by all sort of Hostility
filled up the full measure of Rebellion. From thence the King marches straight
for Calais. Whither he was scarcely arrived, but that he is certified of the
investing Dunkirk by Thurenne, accompanied with the English Arms, under the
Conduct of Lockhart, to the admiration of all the Low Countries, that in the
want of Forage, Wood, Turfe, Wheat, their courage did not fail. Herein, as in
other occasions, the Providence of Mazarine was remarkable, who by continual
Convoys by Sea, mastered the barrenness of the Soil, and with industry supplied
the defects of Nature. The King and he visited Mardike to give the nearer
countenance to the Expedition. But it was judged safer, for his Majesty to stay
at Calais, whilst the Event of the Enterprise was yet in doubt, as doubtful it
was. Cromwell sent his Son-in-Law Falconbridge Ambassador Extraordinary to
kiss the Kings Hand at Calais, and acquaint him, That he was grieved, that by
reason of hit age, and the weight of his Affairs, he could not come in person
to wait upon his Majesty, and give himself the satisfaction of seeing him. The
taking of Dunkirk he indeed wished more to advance by it the Kings Glory, than
for any profit or reputation to the English Nation.

Falconbridge is honorably received by the King, and having been presented
sumptuously and magnificently returned home. In the mean time Thurenne
assaulted Dunkirk, the Marquess of Leyds more stoutly defending. The Spanish
Low Countries bent and restrained their whole Power to relieve the distressed
City. Dou Juan d'Austria and Conde drew up not far off, and sent in
Hoquincourt, who as he views the French Camp, was shot through by a common
Soldier; happy in his misfortune, because by looking out his Fate he
anticipated the destruction that was imminent over the Spaniards.

Thurenne, June 14. 1658. about nine in the morning, having left the care of
the Trench to Richlieu, went to seek the approaching Spaniard, and met with
him, which gave the Enemy terror. The Marquess of Crequi commanded the right
wing, and he was matched with Conde, who understood not to be conquered. Chaste
aunaud Mauvissier led the left Squadron, where stood Lockhart with his English.
Scarce was ever a more bloody Fight in so short a time. Whatsoever old
Soldiers were in the Spanish Forces fell before the face of Don Juan, who
being himself obliged to retreat, is reported to have cried out, That he was
conquered by savage Beasts that rushed on furiously without any sense of
danger. Few of the French were lost. Conde having his Horse killed under him,
escaped hardly, mounted on another. His most intimate friends were taken,
Guitault, Mely, Boutteville, Collins, and others. The Baggage and Colors left
upon the place fell to the Victor. Thurennes valor was extolled even by the
Enemy, who in so great a Battle acted more than commanded. And what less could
be expected of such a Captain, to whom no face of War is new and strange, who
has imbibed all Military Discipline, and perfected it by long practice, having
been so often exercised by Fortune, and always outdone others and himself? No
farther hope of Relief being left the besieged, Leyda held out Dunkirk to the
last undaunted; and at last crushed under so many cares and hazardous attempts,
dyed of a shot; fortunate in this, that he did not survive the destruction of
the City, but had its monumental Walls the Witnesses of his Valor. The
besieged City followed his Fate, which surrendered to the French King. He on the
25. of June entered it, thinking himself abundantly satisfied in securing the
old Religion.

Lockhart in the Name of Cromwell engaged by solemn Oath, that the Catholic
Profession should be preserved entire at Dunkirk. The neighboring Cities
Bergen, Dixmuid, and Feurne readily render to the King. Crequi is sent in a
pompous Ambassade to Cromwell with Mazarines Nephew in his Train. This was the
last Blaze of that petty Tyrant who dyed not long after, in his Bed, a rare
instance. The whole World run a madding after the Fanatic, to whose industry
was attributed what should be imputed to the Vicissitude of Times. The dullness
of his stupid Age acquired him Reputation. Such Monsters do arise when
unavoidable Alterations are imminent; which must be without delay taken off, or
the proper time attended: yet for all this passions of cruelty are not to be
provoked, nor men's spirits inflamed to Revenge. They oftentimes fall into no
great inconveniences who take wrongs patiently.

Amidst these prosperous successes, the King falls into a Fever at Calais,
judged mortal. His Mother groaned over the Fate of her Son, France of her King,
Mazarine of his Master. Supplications are made at all Altars, and Prayers for
his Majesty's Recovery publicly enjoined. Mazarine day and night sat by his
Bedside, to make him governable in taking Physic, which he would taste
himself, either to take off the unpleasantness, or make proof of it. The
eleventh day accounted Critical, the King seemed at the point of death; could
scarcely lift up his eyes, that now appeared almost set in his head. The agony
of the disease a little remitting, he came to know them that stood by him; his
Majesty never being totally eclipsed. Oftentimes turning to Mazarine, whom he
(obligingly called by the name of Friend) would ask him, to advise him freely
of the extreme danger of his life, since his Mother out of tenderness of
affection could not. Philip Duke of Anjou, the Kings Brother, to whom upon the
death of Lewis the succession had devolved, demeaned himself modestly. Please
Praslin was his Governor. Although there wanted not among the Courtiers Spirits
desirous after Alteration, that before the setting of the Sun adored the rising
one. The King having Antimony with judgment administered him by Geunault,
recovered, and being conveyed to Paris, paid his Vows in Nostre-dame-Church; a
Heart of massy Gold was hung upon the Wall as an Oblation. Afterward to
confirm his Health, he retired to Fountainbelleau. Mazarine stayed some time
behind to advance the Siege of Graveling. Marshall Ferte carrying on the
Expedition whilst Thurenne gives terror all abroad over Flanders. The taking of
Graveling was the last Monument of the French Glory before the Conclusion of
the Peace.

Ferdinand III. was dead, and before his Father, Ferdinand the King of the
Romans. The Imperial Throne was vacant; for Leopoldus being in his Minority,
was not yet of an Age capable to manage the Empire. Thus was there a wide field
set open for the Ambition of the Princes. This seemed a fit opportunity to rend
the Imperial Dignity from the House of Austria. It is a hard matter to throw
down from its ancient Seat, a reigning Family that is confirmed by the
uninterrupted succession of so many years. Gustavus Adolphus King of Swethland
having a just quarrel against the Austrians, had indeed laid aside all thought
concerning himself, but promised his Service to promote the Interest of others.
There occurred worthy of the Empire in the Bavarian Line Ferdinandus Maria Duke
of Bavaria, if you consider his power; if prudence and maturity of Age, Philip
William Duke of Newburgh. An honorable Embassy is ordered by the French King,
for the performance of which Gramont Marshall of France, and the Marquess
Lyonne are chosen by the King with these Instructions; To go to Frankfurt upon
Meyne (where the Electoral Diet was held) that there they should possess the
Electors minds; should pervent the Spanish designs; should obviate the
applications of Pigneranda, who was manifestly designed a Broker of Voices,
That the Germans should be minded of their ancient liberty, and of choosing an
Emperor not of the House of Austria, upon the remembrance of their arrogant
exercise of their Authority: to steer their motions by the directions of the
Bishop of Mentz. Upon his Advice this Embassy was undertaken.

The Ambassadors perform their parts diligently, ^ating that of Bravery and
Magnificence, wherein they did not so much feed the eyes of the Vulgar, as the
hopes of the Grandees. They decently address to the Elector of Mentz and the
rest. That their Master did not sue for the Empire in his own behalf, but for
some German Prince. That the Electors should assume Spirits worthy of their
Predecessors, and not suffer the Empire gotten by their joint valor to be
longer entailed upon one Family. That there can be no benefit hoped of the
Peace of Munster, as long as the Spaniards are predominant in the Emperors
Council. That the Austrian strength having been impaired by so many overthrows,
so much the more care should they take, lest by their acquiring the Imperial
Name, their power might turn to the prejudice of Germany. Nor are their threats
of holding forth revenge for the repulse, to be considered. The Aids of France
should not be backward to maintain their Liberties. That the French Forces upon
the Borders of Lorraine and Luxemburgh are at the Electors Command. That the
Austrian Soldiers being dispersed into remote places, cannot so easily come
into a Body, and give the Electors Law.

The Bishop of Mentz having praised the Kings intention, professed that he had
the like inclinations, but that it was a matter rather of wishes than hopes;
his Fellow-Electors without end crying up the Austrian Family, abetted with the
Power of so many Kingdoms and neighboring Provinces, being the Bank of the
Catholic Religion against the inundations of the Turk. When the French
Ambassadors hinted the Duke of Newburgh to them, Mentz interrupting, said the
Electors would not do their College that wrong, as to lay aside the Possessor
of so many Kingdoms, and take in a Prince not of their own number: that only
the Duke of Bavari^ among the Electors can be nominated to stand in competition
with Leopaldus, according to their Orders: But that the Duke of Bavaria would
not presume; and therefore that Leopoldus could not be put by, but should be
admitted upon such terms as that the holy Laws of the Empire may not be
infringed, nor the public Peace disturbed: the French answer that Leopoldus
was incapable by their orders, as not being yet full eighteen year old, and as
not being yet chosen King by the Bohemian, by virtue of which Kingdom he was
reckonedan Elector of the Empire.

Gramont with intention to sound the Bavarians mind, waving the title of
Ambassador, went incognite to Muncken, and made a turn through Heydelberg
alleging any slight matter for the occasion of his Journey. In Muncken he
lodged at Curtius his acquaintances house, who had formerly been entertained
with him: He forbore no argument to that principal Confident of the Bavarian;
Curtius answered, that hit Prince was of that tenderness of Conscience, that he
would never attempt any forbidden thing, and sue for the Empire that was not
his due. Curtius added, If you knew by what engagements this house is linked
with that of Austria, you would attribute to singular prudence, what perhaps
you now impute to sloathfulness.

Gramont returns without effecting what he attempted, Adelais the Bavarians
Wife a Savoyard, the Kings Cousin German, in vain impelling the Dukes mind to
the imperial Crown. The Dukes Mother an Austrian, and Curtius by several
obligations tied to the house big with Empires, restrained the Bavarians mind,
who is contented with his own condition, and soars not over-high. So all the
Plots against the Austrians proved ineffectual, and Leopold chosen King of the
Bohemians at Prague, presently rid to Franckfurt with Pi^^^randa the dispenser
of the Treasure: there is no longer debate of rejecting him, but of limiting
him to certain Articles, which having been commonly spread abroad, it is
superfluous to copy out in this place. July 15. 1658. the Election followed the
French Ambassadors departing as is customary, who returned into France without
waiting upon the Emperor Leopoldus.

Upon the decease of John King of Portugal, his Wife by consent of the Cortes
is admitted to the Regency. She thinking the French Aids necessary to support
that State, sends in Embassy into France, Padre Domingo, a Dominican Friar, her
Confessor to sound their minds. This was principal in his instruction amongst
the Articles of making a League, that the Daughter of Portugal might marry with
his most Christian Majesty. Domingo is honorably entertained, but it was
judged proper to send an Ambassador to Lisbon, that so great transactions
might not seem to depend upon the single faith of a Monk. Cominges is chosen
upon diverse accounts qualified for the Treaty. Eminent in birth, industrious,
politic, bearing a faith to the Queen, unshaken even in the most doubtful
times, which are wont to discover false hearts, or to alter unconstant ones.
Such a man did the weight of the affair require. For when as the Queen was
averse to a match with the Portuguese, it was not to be trusted but to a
faithful Person, as was Cominges beyond others. Mazarine designing in his mind
a Peace, inclined to this Embassy of Cominges, not so much seriously to promote
a League with that Nation, as to distract the Spaniards with jealousies in
requital of a repulse received by Lyonne. When Cominges arrives at the Portugal
Border every age, both Sexes entertain him with Applause and Festival
Acclamations, as the Assertor of their public liberty. By the complacence of
his wit he easily insinuated into the Queens favor, forwarding the woman's
Ambition, and prompting to all that which might lead the high-spirited Lady to
Glory, by the obvious example of our Queen, who had chased away the deadly
storms with her sole prudence, and having subdued her Rebels, enjoyed her
Kingdom in peace. Her Majesty of Portugal yielded a willing ear to him
discoursing on a pleasing subject, and answered modestly, nor according to the
pride inherent in that Nation. To follow such an example, was indeed resolved
by her, but to reach it would be difficult, and turning her eyes to both her
Children which stood by her, and never stirred from thence. This, says she, is
the bound of my Labors, and I desire to live so long till I can prefer them.
France will abundantly oblige me, if it look, favorably on them. In modest
terms she intimated the Marriage of her Daughter. The People transported with
greedy hopes, and anticipated joys, snatched up uncertainties of expression for
concessions: in public acclamations congratulating them as Husband and Wife,
by too forward an exultation did provoke Fortune.

The Common People of Lisbonne breathing after only Liberty comes to the
Ambassadors house, which is a strange act. And being troubled at the dubious
proceeding, begs and beseeches him to open the causes of it, crying out against
the corruption of Ministers, and threatening to be avenged of them. Cominges
discreetly minded the people of their duty, composing the waves of Sedition
with a proper Oration: when they enquired more particularly into the secrets of
the Marriage, he fairly dismissed them as being too bold, yet not without a
donative. About this time Cominges frankly spoke his mind to her Majesty of
Portugal, and showed her in what danger she was, her Ministers disagreeing, her
Officers unable to command, her People divided; that it was his Masters mind to
assist the Portuguez in all Conditions, and not to start from the Articles of
the Agreement already begun: but that it were more advisable to finish it
wholly by an Ambassador at Paris. Thus Cominges acquainted with the Treaty of
Pementelli, preserving entire the dignity of an Ambassador, withdrew himself
from the indignation of the Portuguez.

Sovre is sent Ambassador by her Majesty of Portugal, who being come to Paris,
May 1659. complains to Mazarine that he came to know only by the common rumor
of the vulgar, that a Treaty of Peace with the Spaniards was in agitation,
sobbing out instead of words, tears, and broken murmurings after a lamentable
tone. The Cardinal was not behind in acting his part, and staid the Legate with
a cordial of good words, whilst he fixes all necessaries for his Journey to
conclude the Peace with Don Lowis de Haro, of which we will treat at large in
the following Book.

THE TENTH BOOK OF THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. After an infinite succession of Treaties from the meetings at
Cologne and Munster, at length in the Island of Pheasants, at the Pyrenceans;
Peace is concluded. There follows the marriage of the King, and his Majesty's
pompous entry into the City. Conde returns, and is restored to his former
honor. The death of Mazarine glorious in the highest degree. The King assisted
by a famous Ministry of State takes the Reins of Government into his own hands,
which he manages with wonderful happiness, being awful at home, as a Father,
formidable abroad, as a Conqueror.

IN the last part of my work I may take the boldness to use that Preface, which
most have premitted in the beginning of their whole Narrations, that Iam about
to write the most memorable affair that has occurred in this age, which is the
difficult work of concluding the Peace, which notwithstanding the opposite
reasons of Princes, after so many ineffectual attempts, amidst Interests
laboring to the contrary, Mazarine happily transacted.

Here, first of all, it is sufficiently manifest that since the friendship
accorded between Henry and Philip in the agreement made at Vervin, betwixt the
care of determining that War, and commencing a new one, there had fallen out
diverse provocations which might have rescinded the Articles, and by the heats
of both Nations pass on to open blows, the Peace never standing unmoved, but
shaken with lesser contraventions.

After the death of Henry taken off in the very preparations of a new War,
during the unactive times of d' Ancres and Luines, we fell upon Richelieu, who
having happily composed the affairs at home, first introduced among the French,
the exercise of a strict Authority. He was resolved to have War, for so he
might the more securely, at the expense of foreign blood, maintain his
dominion. His Principal aim was to reduce all to the standard of an absolute
Monarchy, to shake off that long continued Yoke, whereby the liberty of the
Crown is circumscribed by Acts of Parliament, and the Peoples good. So to guild
over with policy, practices ungracious to the public, that money for the War
might be raised with the peoples applause, whose eyes the appearances of so
many Triumphs, and the Eminency of his person did dazzle.

Upon pretense of the Archbishop of Triers being ill used by the Austrians
Ri^helieu that was greedy after occasion, thought (...) no longer to delay, but
joining with the Swedish Arms, made War up, on the Spaniard no more by Auxiliar
Forces, but openly, and proclaimed it a Brussels by an Herald, renewing old
Custom.

It is not my business here to recount the Damages received or done, the
Battles and Slaughters wherewith the strong Forces of either Nation did
mutually destroy one another. On the contrary, I think this to be worth my
pains, to turn my self away from the beholding of so many miseries, as our Age
has for so many years beheld, and hasten me to those matters that concern the
Peace.

Pope Vrbane inflamed with a paternal affection, does with the Commonwealth of
Venice, strive to quench this vast Conflagration of Christendom: A meeting is
appointed at Cologne, lying upon the Rhyne, whether at the beginning of the
year 1637. the Commissioners of the Emperor and King of Spain came.

Here begins the Treaty of Peace, which I have reserved entire for this Book,
lest being scattered by pieces through the whole Work, it might check the
Readers Career. The Swedes rejected the K. of Denmark, nominated for a Mediator
of the Peace, as being their old Rival. Therefore the French, as Partisans with
the Swede, were not admitted into the Treaty at Cologne, amidst diverse
preparations eight years past; In the mean time Richelieu dies, into whose
place Julius Cardinal Mazarine being substituted, would have completed the
Work, had not the untimely death of Lewis put a stop to those fair beginnings.

At length when they had got over the difficulties of the Preliminary Articles
(that term was then invented, to denote the first preparatories) because
Cologne disliked the French, and the Interposition of the Cardinals Ginetti,
and Rossetti. Munster, which is a City of Westphalia, is chosen by the consent
of all, as the place of Treaty, being judged convenient, since upon the removal
of the Imperial garrison, it having continued a Free State, could give
suspicion to none. Fabio Chighi a Senese, the Popes Nuncio at Cologne, and
Aloysio Contareni, a Senator of Venice, both of them men of great Experience,
are by general consent admitted Mediators. The Emperors Commissioners were
Lodowick, Count of Nassaw, and Isaac Volmar Doctor of Law. Afterward Count
Transmendorff was super-added, a Person of the most extraordinary Abilities in
Caesar's Commission. Claude memmius Avossie, and Abel Servient appeared in
behalf of the King of France. From the King of Spain Count Linneranda, with
whom was joined Anthony Brown, a Sequanis, who with his two Pages in a slashed
Suit, and with a tattered Coach, was of more importance to the Work, then half
the Meeting besides. For the Swede came brave men, John Lord Oxenstierne, and
John Sauge Osnabrugge was chosen the Seat for the Protestants, that they might
not mingle with the Catholics. From the States of Holland, Pauw of Amsterdam,
and Knute the Zelander were of eminency beyond the other Commissioners of the
Provinces. Longuevil of the Blood Royal, Principal of the Commission, being
added to Avossie and Servient, entering Munster with a train like an Emperor,
made the Assembly and City gaze upon him. Pinneranda a few days after entered
by night, either to conceal his meaner attendance, or that out of a piece of
Spanish State he would be tarried for.

These were the Prime men who graced the Meeting at Munster; the rest were but
as Accessories sent by their respective Sovereigns; whereupon daily there arose
several disputes about Place: The most remarkable was between the Venetians and
the seven Electors; those pleading the prescription of having been so many Ages
Free-States, do scarcely acknowledge God their Sovereign; These indeed, the
Emperors Creators, do presently worship their Creature. The Venetians carried
the precedence, as in the Council of Trent, and every where else. There was a
mighty dispute of admitting a Commissioner from Portugal, which the Spaniards
in vain opposed; the French stoutly maintained him. It is strange in what
credit the French were, by reason of their prosperous successes. In all this
time differences grew high upon specious pretenses, which gave fuel to great
animosities.

Fabio Chigi, one of a mild temper, did diligently remove all such things as he
judged might obstruct or retard the business of Peace; watchful on all
particulars, disgusted by none; with his Humility and gentle Carriage, did
oblige the respects of the Grandees. Contareni a man of able parts, but
passionate, proceeded sometimes with more violence then wariness.

At the beginning of the Conference was a Requiem for the deceased Pope Vrbane;
news being brought of the Election of Innocent, Te Deum was Sung; And when the
Assembly was fully met, the beginning was made at good Prayers, that God would
prosper their pious Endeavors for putting an end to the War, and a solemn
procession performed for blessing the City; so that all things were done which
are reputed effectual for attoning God. Never was it proved by more evident
Demonstration, that God who is the Author of Peace, though called upon after
the due Order, did not preside in that Meeting; for what was there practiced in
it but Juggling and Sophistry? How much money? How much time was idly thrown
away? How many Letters writ in Ciphers? How many Decypher'd? What insisting
upon Punctilioes? So that the Meeting might seem not to have been held about
the Peace of Christendom, but about the Place of Princes: Never did Assembly
more gloriously play the mad Men, nor upon so serious an occasion, were more
egregious Children. All the time of the Assembly, nothing was more absurd, then
the quarrels between Avozzi and Servient, who not remitting their differences
for the Majesty of their Country, nor out of respect to their Character, nor
the good of the Kingdom, through frequent contradictions of the Council, though
well advised, did by their private peevishness destroy whatever Authority they
had; Whereas it becomes all that consult about matters of moment, to be
unprejudiced with any affection, which does ill qualify to all
Administrations. How undecent is it for men joined in the highest Power for the
Public, to be divided in private Animosities?

In the first place, this is to be laid down for a certain truth, that the
Spaniards, while the new King of Portugal claimed his Right; while the Kingdom
of Naples waver'd; while Catalaunia stood out in perfect Rebellion; while their
Treasury was not sufficient to defray the War, and their Affairs in all parts
distressed, did wholly despair of obtaining honorable conditions of Peace,
especially the French, being puffed up with so many Successes; therefore they
thought they must fly to Policies, which is a part of wisdom. Prevailing upon
the opportunities in France, where the minority of Kings is always accompanied
with public calamities; they feed unquiet spirits with hope of Alterations,
which that Nation abundantly produces; but their principal care is to separate
their Confederates and Allies. The Swedes, they attaque by the Emperor, who
makes them large proffers, so they would but quit the French Interest. The
Hollanders, they practice colourably with an offer of undoubted Liberty,
freedom of Navigation, and a quiet possession of all that they had already
acquired. The Swedes held firmly to their Principle, and the Emperors Arts
could make no impression upon a Nation, always stuck to their Honor and Word.
The case of Holland was greatly debated, not only in the Provinces, but in
Holland it self; several Cities stood severally affected, nor within the Cities
were all of one judgment; but every one led by the impulse of his proper
Interest, the most cogent Argument.

The French Commissioners, before they came to Munster, stayed some time at the
Hague, to pry into whatever weak side, or unsound part should appear,
especially the mind of Orange, whose Wife was taxed to be engaged. The Prince
now stricken in years, and broken with Military Labors, having but one Son,
and he not yet complete Man, thought it safe, after so many gallant Services to
sound a Retreat. Most of the more discreet discoursed thus, that the Charge
could no longer be supported; nor could the War be carried on with any fair
hope; nothing came by it but Damages; that there was no necessity of it, and it
might be justly feared, least the Common People should take distaste at their
Governors, and deny the payment of Taxes. Therefore that they should hearken
to a Truce, or rather a Peace; Provided that their Liberty might be not upon
condition, or for a time, but absolutely and for ever preserved entire. Others
on the contrary, that Peace was not desired by the Spaniard, but the having War
at his own, rather then his Confederates most convenient time; or what is worse
then War, the vexing of their State by Divisions, and corrupting them; till the
strength of their old Soldiers be worn off. At length they concluded, that at
least no agreement should be admitted without the privity, and in a sort the
Warranty of the French.

These Discoursces passed at the Hague, and all over the Low Countries, when
the Mediators at Munster, by their Prudential Addresses, sustained hopes of the
Peace; and the Commissioners of the Kings to the frustrating one another, spun
out time in starting new exceptions. All the Assembly no longer able with any
patience to put up such prejudicial delays, resolved by any means to determine
the Treaty. Seeing for so long time nothing was got but words of an ambiguous
importance, and such as every party interpreted at their pleasure, according to
the daily success of Army.

The French in their first Memorial, require before any thing, that the
Archbishop of Tryers, the occasion of the War, be set at Liberty; that all the
Allies be satisfied, and the possession of the conquered places remain. The
Commissioners of the Emperor reply, As to the Tryers, the Emperor is not
^^rse, but he will never digest that his Subjects should be equalled with him.
The Spaniards contended, that all be restored to them as was at Cam^^ay and
Vervin; that the Duke of Braganza be not included in the Agreement, as being a
Rebel and an ^^just Usurper.

In the mean time a War breaking out between the Swede and Dane, not so much
for the customs of the Baltic Sound, as that out of pretense of Hostility the
Dane might be excluded from the whole Treaty. In these matters, eight months
pass away without any result at Munster. The swedish and Danish differences
being composed by Thuillerte the French Ambassador, the Treaty proceeds a
fresh. The Emperor releaseth, and restores Tryers, leaving Flesburgh to be in
the French possession, as it afterward remained.

In the mean time the French seize on the Seacoast of Flanders, and the Town
of Dunkirk; upon which the French greatness began to be suspected by the united
Provinces, and they began seriously to treat about separating from their
Alliance, which Mazarine was aware of; thereupon it was thought fit to dispatch
away Servient to the States staggering.

Avozzi as he passed by, according to his devoutness, had dropped some
intimations of advice at the Hague about tolerating the Catholic Profession.
That they should do this truly for their Kindreds sake, they should do it for
the memory of their Ancestors, not to hate the Religion which they had approved
more cruelly than the Tenants of the Anabaptists that are new and destructive
to Government, who are tolerated among the Hollanders while the Catholics are
excluded. This puzzled them that are for Liberty of Conscience.

Servient was judged more fit for the Embassy, and he discharged it worthily.
At the Hague he made an eloquent Speech, as he had an excellent Understanding
and Utterance. At last, says he, the Arts that your Ancestors feared are broke
out. And have you forgot the Courage of your Fathers, who avoided the Embassies
of Kings for Peace, not as the Councils of Friends, but as the Plots of
Enemies? If there be no deceit in the bottom, why does not Pinneranda deal
above board? That which is honest and fair needs no Arts to disguise it.
Softness in a warlike Nation is overhasty. It is suspicious to have Liberty
offered by a King not conquered, and to have it secured by the Confession of a
Prince disclaimed. Although ye do obtain it by force of Arms, yet the receiving
it of the Spaniard is the first way to slavery. That Philip was never so
self-denying as to throw away his just Government, but does allow the Dutch the
short respit of a temporary Liberty. That Kings gather strength by delay: When
the hatred is worn away, and past injuries forgot that people return to their
Allegiance. In Peace the vices that accompany security are to be feared. When
your Arms are laid down, you shall never be at Peace; you have no ground to
fear the sad misfortunes of being surprised. So many fortified Towns; so many
Men of War; such strength of Horse and Foot trained for the Field. The Ocean
drawn about you, and the Valor of your most excellent General ( he pointed at
Orange there present) will defend you, and what is more, the joint Arms of my
Master, who stands not in such need of you, as to assist those that slight his
Counsel. This Advice comes to you from a Friend, from your first Confederate,
from a provident King, whose only Interest is your safety. I do not engage you
to eternize the War. I cry after Peace, but such a one whose Issue may be
secure by the French Warranty, and that there is need of joining Councils to
that effect.

It is strange with what heats the Proposition was debated in all the States.
Sometimes even Mazarine was not spared, as though he had secret hopes of future
advantages by the miseries of the suited Allies. Some Emissaries came secretly
from Panneranda to the Hague to set out all Secrets, which was not unknown to
Servient. Wherefore, says he, do there come Spies but to search if there be
any evenue open for deceit and money to enter in at?

Servient whether by his Eloquence, or his Reasons obtained this, that neither
Party, without the consent of the other, should capitulate with the Spaniard
the common Enemy. He returned to Munster, after he had brought the Provinces to
be of one mind, which was to his credit. Mazarine always suspected some false
trick from the Hollanders, nor did the issue deceive him; the French grew more
and more hateful, whose Arms prevailed to the destruction of the Spaniards.
Debates hung undetermined at Munster. All things proceeded slowly. Before
former Propositions were dispatched, new Pretensions are set on foot, nor could
difficulties easily be solved: the Commissioners of the lesser Princes
murmured, and did not conceal it, that they would not be the Spectators of that
Comedy, whose whole Scene was laid at Paris and Madrid.

The Spaniards ordered their proceeding so dexterously, that none did otherwise
but impute a Cessation of Hostility to them, and a desire of continuing the War
to us; and as the beginning of the Troubles was charged upon Richlieu, so the
obstruction of Peace was upon Mazarine, who loved to tread safe, and
consequently slow. From the very first he foresaw that Peace could not be had
from the Spaniard, without extorting it by force of Arms, and therefore he must
propagate both intestine and foreign Wars, that so France becoming victorious
in all Parts, might prescribe Laws of Peace.

At Munster after diverse Proposals without any effect, at length this Project
was broached as conclusive, which by the Mediators was offered to our
Commissioners; That the King of Spain in favor to the most desired Peace, does
quit to the King of France the County of Russillon, the perpetual possession of
the conquered Towns in Flanders and Franche Comte, so that Portugal may be left
to the Spanish Vengeance. That the Duke of Lorraine be satisfied, and what
places in the Territories of the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua have been taken by
both Kings, may be respectively restored to their proper Lord. For ^her matters
in Italy he promised to stand to the award of the Pope and Republic of Venice.
The controverted pretensions of the Emperor, and the Dependencies on the
Empire to be reserved to the Agreement of the Meeting at Osnabrug. Thus far
Penr^anda, but with an intention of picking quarrels, and only for a blind to
deliver the Spaniards from the Odium of the War, and to discharge it wholly
upon the French, by that means giving our Allies and Confederates an occasion
to fall off from us. Then there went abroad a Rumor, that the Peace was
concluded, not at Munster only, but in the Neighborhood; and thence into
remote parts. The Mediators come with joy to Longuevilles house. One might have
seen their faces shine with a sudden lightsomness. Chighi in a manner
prostrating himself before Longueville, begs and entreats him, That now matters
were in a posture more promising than could have been hoped for, he would
content himself, and that he with his Fellow-Commissioners would not insist too
strictly upon Niceties; then showing him a Pen, Take that and sign: This Pen
will bring you more Glory than that Sword of your great Grandfather of Downs,
wherewith he chased the English out of France, and freed his Country from
oppression.

Penneranda indeed had in a Vapor offered these specious, but insidious
Proposals. The French answer, that many things which they had already agreed
upon were omitted; as first of Braganza, whether King or Usurper of Portugal,
that all mention should be waved; Lorraine should be restored, but not fully;
he that had so often violated his Covenant, should for a penalty lose some part
of his Dominion, at least the towering Fortifications of Nancey be dismantled,
that so being disabled from twice doing mischief, he might for the future learn
to demean himself with more moderation; that Duarte of Braganza should be
enlarged, which the French maintained, had been already discussed, but
Pe^neranda had omitted and formalized upon, as though they were newly set on
foot. Here the proceeding stopped.

Mazarine having commended the prudence of the Commissioners, exhorted them to
bend their whole cares upon the Swede and Hollander, that it was hot likely
Penneranda would insist so much upon formalities unless he were secure of them.

Whilst these things were under debate the year 1648. passed on, when in the
mouth of September the French Ambassadors declared that they had it in their
last Instructions, that they should no longer dwell upon the matter, unless the
Article about Lorraine proceeded in form, as has been abovementioned. The
Hollanders impatient for Peace, looking upon the French successes with a
jealous eye, and thinking that the present opportunity was to be laid hold upon
without advice of the French, without advice of the Mediators, conclude with
Penneranda; so it was believed.

The French not well digesting that, sent to the Hague to complain of it. So
far was this from obtaining any thing in favor of the French friendship, as
that the Truce was turned into a perpetual Peace, reserving their Commerce and
the continuance of what they were in possession of. Pauw the Commissioner of
Amsterdam, supported the whole weight of the Pacification against the other six
Provinces. ^^ute the Zelander contributed his diligent assistance to that also.

Thus the Hollanders, having for so many years been supported by the French
Forces, Counsels, many joined in a league of Amity with the Spaniards, their
Enemies. So far have we been from suffering any prejudice by it, that it has
rather turned to our great Glory; Allies joined without the Arms of any, the
Spaniards having been brought to terms of Peace; glorious for us without, etc.
Thus the Commissioners having been baffled after so many expedients, in vain
attempted the Assembly, most famous next after that of Trent, for such a resort
of Nations was dissolved without any effect.

At Osnaburgh, almost at the same time, was the Agreement of the German Peace
concluded, without the intervention of the Spaniards. By that Provision the
Swedes honorably endeavoring to gain the French assent to the Capitulations,
the Princes and Free-States of the Empire were principally satisfied in this,
that they might freely serve God according to their Conscience; that is, a
toleration of performing Divine Service after their own way. This so fretted
Chighi the Nuncio, that he tore the Papers about the Peace, and swore he would
hear no farther; the Swedes got the hither Pomerania, with other adjoining
places. The Savarian had his Territory enlarged, by an accession of the Upper
Palatinate. To our share fell Alsatia, with some Dependants, the payment of a
certain sum of Money being assigned in consideration of Damages, to repair the
house of Austria. An equal and fair regard was also had of the Swedes.

At the end of the whole work are to be subjoyned the Articles of Munster,
agreed at Osnabrug, land at length eompleated and concluded in the Isle of
Phesants, at that absolute Peace, which at this day is in full force and power;
and that it might always so continue, I could wish.

Thus shall I not be charged with negligence, if I go off from these matters
which loath me, and would nauseate others; in like manner as the Wars of Pisa
in Guicciardine, that have blemished that Work, otherwise excellent. Diverse
were the Rumors over Europe, of the frustrating their General expectation of
Peace, some casting the blame upon the French, others upon the Spaniard.
Thereupon came out Libels, incentives of Discord; but who were the occasion
that the business of the Peace was not settled at Munster, would require more
volumes then one to relate.

I am assured by the Letters of Longueville to to Mazarine, that the Spaniards
by their backwardness, still aimed at excepting against some particulars, that
so they might the more easily after their concludeing of Peace with the
Hollanders, disappoint the hopes of the French.

And when Mazarine fearing lest the French Ministers being tied up too close to
the Royal Instructions, might not be able to resolve extempore difficulties
that were moved, did by frequent Letters enquire of Longueville, whether any
thing more were to be remitted of the Kings right, that he might have full
Authority to transact, that Longueville answered to it, that the Spaniards were
averse from all accommodation, and only strived to separate from the French
their Allies.

This I can easily prove by the Originals that I have several times read.
Afterward when France was in flames with the Civil War, the King of spain
heartily discovered to an understanding man the Ambassador, of a most powerful
Prince, that Penneranda would be induced by no Instructions to hearken to
Peace, and still found out new pretenses; that he might not be forced to
conclude it, but that the event had proved it to have been wisely done by him,
seeing that within four years the fairest Cities had been re-taken by the
French divisions, which must have been quitted by the Agreement at Munster.

Mazarine, amidst the Civil Dissentions, left no means unassayed to revive the
Treaty of Peace. Contareni at his entreaty attended upon fetching about the
business, and came to the particular of choosing a fit place, fit for the
Meeting upon the Frontiers of France and Flanders. Penneranda slighted all such
motions, being not backward to make his advantages of the disturbances in
France. For, said he, If when the French prospered in the first times of their
Kings Minority, my Master was averse from Peace; wherefore in the height of
their Civil War should he receive dishonorable Conditions.

At length Vautorce is sent to Brussels; Penneranda unbosometh himself to him;
He could never find in his heart to subscribe those celebrated, conditions at
Munster, although he seemed to give his assent to them; they were so
unreasonable, that no true Spaniard, who had any love for his Country, but
would scorn them; And if the sottishness of those that live at this day, had
proceeded so far, as to have accepted that Agreement, there would have risen
out of their Bones, such as should disanul the Munster-League.

The last Essay was by Lyonne, who being at Cambray, used all possible means to
induce Penneranda to a Treaty; but the endeavors or Lyonne proved ineffectual,
Penneranda standing unmovable to the point of reclaiming all that had been
taken from them, who went afterward into Spain, and gave an account of his
Ministry.

Upon the whole matter the Counsel of Spain was divided; Penneranda, whether he
thought so, or to maintain the credit of this performance of that Trust, in the
presence of the King, before that Honorable Board affirms; that Mazarine
neither was willing to have Peace, nor was there reason he should be willing.
Diverse Arguments he brought to confirm his Position. Fuensaldagne, even in his
absence asserted the contrary by Letter, that it was Mazarines interest to have
Peace. Don Lewis de Haro was at uncertainty which to believe; so did the two
opposite Judgments leave the King of Spain dissatisfied.

In the mean time Pope Innocent dies, Cardinal Fabio Chighi, so often mentioned
by us, is elected his Successor; he took the name of Alexander VII. and this
was done not by a nice scanning of Politic Circumstances, but run off in a
heat. At the Consecration of the new Pope, the Christian World rejoiced, for
having such a person given them in these Storms and Troubles; nor was it
without cause, for the high reputation of Chighi was already so far advanced,
that the Votes of the Conclave, indeed, conferred upon him this pitch of
Honor; but the wishes of all men designed it. A rare felicity to possess
dignity by the general Judgment, before one is distinguished by the Mitre; and
to be reputed Bishop, not yet to be. Mazarine believed there was certain
expectation of Peace from him.

Lyonne was present at the declaring Alexander Pope: to whom immediately
minding him of the Peace, the new Pope offered it might be transacted Rome more
conveniently than any where else in the World: he answered, that appreared
improper, both because of the Territories which the Spaniard possesses in
Italy; and also for the Kingdom of Naples confining upon Rome: but that some
place would be found upon the Borders of Genona, whither the Prime Ministers of
both Kings might come with full power of concluding the Peace, so that his
Holiness would be present to mediate in it. All ways having been vainly tried
to bring the matter already begun to an issue. Mazarine resolved to try the
minds of the Spaniards by a new and unheard of method, which now France was in
a most flourishing estate, could not be imputed to Cowardice: the sending of an
Ambassador, I mean, to the Enemies, to invite them not only to honorable, but
also profitable conditions of Peace. Such an occasion offered it self to put in
execution the design which the Cardinal had purposed in his thought.

In the year 1656. Gaspar Boniface passing from the Low Countries into Spain
through France, as he kneeled to kiss the Queens hand before he parted, he
freely declared to her Majesty, how passionately the King of Spain was desirous
of Peace, and did not conceal what serious thoughts he had of concluding it
upon equal conditions, so that some trusty person might be sent to Madrid with
full power.

Mazarine was not long in debate with himself to whose fidelity he should
commit the Trust. For any one, besides Lyonne, to be admitted into a secret of
the highest importance, was thought unsafe. Therefore having occasion to employ
him, he remands him from Rome, a person there, whom there was none fitter.
Lyonne is of an Ancient Family in Dauphinois; by being from his first youth
trained up at Court, an intimate Confident of Mazarines, and employed in diverse
Embassies; he is grown perfect in the Government; of a reserved temper, close
in keeping secrets; commanding respect, rather by sparingness of Language, then
multitudes of Complements. Apt to assume nothing to himself, though by his
happy Successes he have acquired praise and glory. No Soul more abhorring
Covetousness and Cruelty: Being qualified with these endowments, he is employed
in so great a business, not only of running over the first draught of a project
of Peace, remitting the conclusion till another time; but if upon any
reasonable terms the War might be composed, within eight days finally to
determine and to publish the Agreement. No single Person had so honorable a
power granted him, which his Majesty wrote all over with his own hand, and
signed it, his four Secretaries of his Cabinet not being made acquainted. The
words of the Instrument I thought fit to be inserted here, as being the Basis
on which the Peace that was so long in Agitation without effect, is planted.

I give this Lyonne, one of my Privy-Counsellours, power to make, conclude, and
sign Articles of Peace between me, and the Catholic King, my Brother and
Uncle; And by virtue of this Commission, whatsoever things the abovesaid
Lyonne shall grant in my name, I engage, and in the word of a King, promise
that I will allow, ratify, and observe. Dated at Compeigne, Jun. 1. 1656.
Which Instrument, when the King had written in Mazarines Chamber, and signed,
he delivered, it Lyonne, in the presence of a Grandee of Spain, whom he spoke
to in these words of great weight and moment. Certify the King your Master,
that this Lyonne whom you see here, is chosen by me, my Plenipotentiary to
adjust a Peace; and that nothing is more desirable to me, then that it he most
speedily concluded, that I may give proofs of my Respects to the King my Uncle.

The Spaniard shedding plenty of Tears, fell down at his Majesty's feet, and
answered, he would immediately obey the commands of so great a King. Lyonne had
not to seek for some occasion of going abroad to be given out; he entered upon
the journey, guarded by his own worth and the strength of the Kingdom; having
changed his clothes, lest he should be known by his own, going upon a secret
occasion; and was disguised in a Perruque, and the habit of a Merchant. In such
a Garb, incognito, he presented himself on the 20 of June, the day appointed,
at the roots of the Syrenean, in the border of both Kingdoms, every where with
profound silecnce, as is his wont, he acted his part; joining in company with a
Spanish Cavalliero that stayed for him; he came safe to Madrid. None enquired
after the occasion of his coming, nor was his Face so much as looked upon by
any to observe it. Coaches are sent to meet him, and he is conveyed secretly
into the Escurial, where he kept close three months with Don Lewis de Haro, to
whom the King of Spain had given a like Commission. He happily comes to a
determination upon the points in Controversy, and had well-nigh been famed for
the concluding of the Peace, before any one had heard that it was in agitation;
all things were carried with such Prudence and Silence. What were the principal
Articles of the Agreement, I have not thought fit to specify here, intending
to put the entire Treaty at the end of the Work, as has been abovementioned.

Upon Conde's business, the diligence of Lyonne was non-plus'd. The Spaniards
were not content, that so great an Exile should obtain pardon of what was past,
recover his Estate, enjoy that, and the Kings Favor; All which Lyonne
promised; but they further press, that he may be restored to his Governments
and Ancient Charges; as though he had rebelled upon even terms, and insist upon
it so stiffly, that they would prefer eternal War before Peace, so as to suffer
themselves to be removed from that Proposal, because it seems they would have
this Maxim imprinted in the hearts of the French. In whatsoever condition the
State of the Spaniards is, they never come to suffer any prejudice who espouse
their Interest. Lyonne was troubled that this Prize should be torn out of his
hand; not unlike a tender Mother, who seeing her grown Babe killed by mischance
or overlaid, mourns, and cannot be comforted.

A few days before he took his leave of Haro, he urges twenty times that he
would but suffer these three words; Besides his Charges and Governments to be
inserted into the Articles already agreed upon, and immediately there would be
an end of so many miseries, and the Sunshine of Peace would break forth and
shine every where. Haro denies that this can be obtained of his Master, and
after that Lyonne was dismissed, so great Secrets having been a long time
suppressed among us, the Spaniards disguising the truth, gave abroad that
Mazarine, both at Munster and Madrid, always deluded the French Ministers, and
that he reserved himself the glory of the Peace, is not to be questioned. He
who thinks otherwise is ignorant both of Mazarine and the French State, and
through envy suppresseth truth.

The Electors of Mentz and Cologne, having met at Franckfurt to treat about the
Election of the Emperor, took hold upon that occasion, and excited the
Ambassadors of both Kings to revive the Treaty of Peace so far advanced.
Penneranda spum out ten months in expecting his Masters Instructions; this
space being expired, he deluded the endeavors of the Electors by repeating the
Propositions so often rejected, and threatening; If any Ambassadors were sent
from the Electors to his Master, he would do his endeavor to have them turned
out of Madrid with disgrace, and not so much as a Bark be allowed them to lodge
in. That in the first place without any Controversy, what the French held by
Conquest they should restore; they must quit all Lorraine, must abandon
Braganza, must restore Conde to his former Dignities, till he was ascertained
that the French had consented to these Conditions, he would not so must as come
to treat. Whilst Penneranda talks at this rate without end, we are come to the
year 1659. in which at last the Peace was concluded.

About the end of the former year 1658. the King comes through Burgundy, that
was in some disorder to Lions, whither came also Christina the gallant
offspring of Henry IV. Duchess of Savoy, with her Daughter Margaret, who was
given out by report the Person that was to be espoused to the King. Both of
them were entertained so affectionately, and so honorably, as more cannot be
imagined. Hither too hastens at a great rate the Duke of Savoy, a Prince of a
comely Personage, and in the flower of his Youth. Vigorous Nature showed the
Stock from whence he sprung, being so strong, that he presently raised an
admiration in the minds of all that saw him. Now was the King supposed to court
Margaret as his future Wife; when all on the sudden Pememelli rides post from
Spain to Vill^franca in such haste, that he would not so much as to stay for a
Pass. After secret Conferences between Lyonne and Pementelli, Pementelli
introduced to Mazarine, reveals the mind of his Master about the Peace, as
Lyonne had concluded it at Madrid, and that about the Marriage of the Infanta
of Spain with our King, he might decently insinuate the matter, he pretended
that Lyonne had already intimated it to Duke Lewis de Haro, although Lyonne had
occasionally hinted the matter, not by Instruction from the King, but of his
own head.

Mazarine being troubled for the Savoy Lady, who having passed the craggy Alps,
and steep Ways in intolerable Weather would be thought to have been mocked,
resolves to reveal to her the whole Intrigue. The Savoyard ill dissembling his
resentment of the slur put upon his Sister, flung away from Court rather then
departed. The Mother impatient, stung with vexation presently after that her
Son was gone very early in the morning, went and lamented to Mazarine. What
shall I do, deluded Woman? Shall I go and sue after the Matches, which I have
already slighted, having been inveigled with a pretended Marriage? Mazarine
pacifieth her with that smoothness of Language at which he was excellent. That
nothing should proceed but to the Common Good. Matters were at that pass
between the Kings of France and Spain, that upon certain Judgment there was
apparent hope of Peace and Alliance, her Highness was of so noble a Spirit as
to prefer the public before her private advantage. If the Spanish Proposition
took not effect, he would do his endeavor that she should never repent of her
Journey and the trouble that she had undertaken: which he promised to procure
her under the Kings Hand. Christiern, whether she believed what he said, or
thought it to her credit to be deceived, in a desperate case, acquiesced to
Mazarines Answer, and went away with Margaret, embracing instead of a King for
her Husband, his Note. This was the precise sum of the Ticket. In case the
Spanish Match fall off that Margaret the Sister of the Duky of Savoy shall be
the Wife of the King of France Lewis XIV. The King posts away in all haste to
Paris, where Pementelli, keeping close for some time with Lyonne, debated upon
the Articles of the Peace and Marriage. He was frequently with Mazarine in the
nights, to whom, when he would relax nothing in Condes case, Pementelli
accorded; That Conde should be restored only to his Estate, but forfeit his
Governments, and the place of Grand Maistre d'Hostel. Farther, that Mazarine
and Lewis de Haro should meet at the Pyrenaeans, and after that matters being
composed between the Ministers, that the two Kings should have an Enterview to
confirm the Articles, and solemnize the Marriage between the King of France and
Maria Teresa the Infanta of Spain.

Pementelli ordered all this to be carried to Madrid by Courriers, expecting
from his Master the confirmation and ratifying of it, after the usual manner.

Mazarine imparted this Secret to none but Lyonne, which that he might keep
from the eyes of the Common People, he gave out such pretenses for a color,
even to Strangers; That the Journey of Pementelli was merely casual, as he
passed from Piedmont to Flanders: Happening to find the Court at Lions, that he
thought it his Masters Interest, if to prevent the Savoy Match, he did court
the French by the Marriage of the Infanta of Spain with the public Peace. That
such a Match is to this end offered to put the Emperor into a scruple that
wishes for it, and to raise Jealousies in the minds of the Portugueze and
English, without whose knowledge these things were believed to be treated in
France. No Head was more fruitful of such Inventions than Mazarines.

In the month of June, in the peaceful year 1659. Mazarine begun his blessed
Journey with great Pomp, not a few Lords of the Court bearing him company.
Between Blois and Amboise at Ecurie, he luckily meets a Courrier of Pementelli
returning from Madrid. He brought with him a Ratification of the Articles in
the Council of Spain, extorted with difficulty and slowly, because of the
debarring Conde of his Dignities and Governments. Mazarine paused, and had
almost gone back again being advised what Haro had promised Conde. Pementelli
earnestly desired him to hold on his Journey he had begun; that there was no
doubt to be made of the success; Pementelli urged that the more confidently,
because he knew how Fuensaldagne stood inclined, whose sense bore great sway in
the mind of the King of Spain. Though these things were done in secret, yet the
Report spread; That the Peace was stifled. In the mean time we were deluded,
for our two months Cessation of Arms which the Spaniards had obtained under
color of the future Treaty. That they designed nothing by that intermission,
but traps in which Mazarine is caught. These and the like were broached,
especially at Paris. Nothin is so given to talk malignantly as that City, ever
since it was City.

Haro in the mean time arrives at S. Sebastians with a splendid Retinue.
Mazarine, although troubled with the Gour, comes into the Seaport Town (S.
John de Luz they commonly call it) at the day appointed. Haro stayed at
Fuentarabie, having passed a Complement upon Mazarine.

In the midst is situated an Island, receiving its denomination from the Birds
Phesants, environed with the River Bidassoa, lying in common; small in circuit;
narrow as to extent of ground; for the greatness of Transactions the bravest of
Islands. There the French and Spaniards erected for the purpose a Tabernacle
with a double Compartiment, that avoiding differences about Precedence, the two
Ministers might meet, and each keep to their own place.

Aug. 13. 1659. first comes Mazarine into the Island in singular state. A
quarter of an hour after appear the Spaniards; a glittering luster shines on
every side. Mazarine and Haro without any Prerogative of place, on one and the
other side parted by the Board, salute interchangeably, in the Spanish
Language. The strangeness of the sight amazed both Nations. It seemed a matter
incredible, That the two principal Confidents of the greatest Kings who had
lately plotted such cruelties one against another* should embrace each other
unarmed, and instead of military force, and the Stratagems of War, only contend
in Courtesy. Upon Conference had, both reaped great satisfaction in their
virtues, finding the judgment of his Enemy to be true.

Some days passed whilst the Instructions are weighed, the agreements made
partly at Madrid, partly at Paris are recited, more clearly explained, and some
committed to the fire to mend all faults. Hitherto so many Proposals for Peace
ineffectual, while the state of Affairs was unripe. All humane events are
wrapped up in profound darkness, their seeds are hidden. But when the Fates
please, all things contribute, and earnestly concur. Cromwells Death, during
whose life there had been no hope of quiet. No Promise made by the King of
France to the Portuguez, and consequently no Rub from thence. Less from the
Hollanders, who had agreed by themselves. The matter of Lorraine gave no
difficulty. Among the Spaniards the work of Peace that had advanced slowly
hitherto, was furthered by the Queens being brought to Red of an Issue
desirable to sway the Scepter, a young Enfante being born. The Vengeance which
was prepared against the Portugal, and could not be wrecked upon them while the
War continued. The Indisposition of the King of Spain. But what is the chief,
the good understanding that was between Mazarine and Fuensaldagne; they were
the two Poles about which the whole Frame rolled. Only the business of Conde
had like to have broke short the Web that was happily upon the Loom;
Fuensaldagne would have been easily content to abandon the Prince, against whom
he had an Antipathy. Haro bore up on the contrary part, out of tenderness for
the public and his private word. Mazarine openly professes, that he judged it
more advisable to go away, and undo all that had been done, than make a
Concession so dishonorable to the King of France. (That Concession was of
Condes Governments and Charges.) We have already condescended too far for
Peaces sake (said Mazarine) and taxing the unpliable stiffness of the Spanish
Council. I am no Prophet, but either I am greatly mistaken, or I do already
foresee the day when you will neglect what you now so obstinately insist upon.
In the mean time the blood which shall be shed hereafter, will condemn you of
having despised Peace for Condes Interests. This said the Cardinal, and with
that look wherein was discovered a grief for the despair of Peace.

At length Haro seeing the Peace to hang by a thread, and that a slender one,
and that Mazarine was inflexible, said, That his Master would rather bestow
upon Conde somewhat of his own, than contrary to his promise abandon a Prince
that had deserved well. A word dropped from Haro* of giving Conde three Cities.
Mazarine not unwatchful, catched the words as they were falling, which at
length upon more clear explanation spoke out Marienburg, Philipsburg, and
Avennes upon the Borders of the Wallon-Country and Champagne, strong by
situation and Works. And because nothing could be granted Conde by the Spaniard
without the approbation of the King of France, the Forts must have been
designed and agreed upon.

Thus after twelve days spent about Condes business only, Mazarine thus thought
with himself; That the Prince bearing sincere Loyalty and Duty; his Majesty
giving within a years time the Government of Burgundy with the plaee of Grand
Maistre d'Hostel, could not be denied. Therefore it was better to comply with
the Spanish Proposition in this ^articular, so those three fortified Towns
might be ac^uired to France, than to yield his consent that Conde should enjoy
them from the Spanish Bounty.

By the express Instructions of his Master, Haro ^^ferred the Honor and
Reputation of having preserved Conde, before those Cities granted the French in
lieu of the Princes Governments, and the Maistre d'Hostel 's place. Mazarine
received this offer with a sour look, but a joyful heart, taking for clear
gains this acquisition purchased purely by his means, to which he would have to
be thrown in Conflans on the Frontier of Catalaunia, and the re^oring Juliers
to its rightful Prince the Duke of Newburgh; which he obtained.

So soon as ever the hope of an undoubted Pacification appeared certain,
Gramont Marshall of France, is sent Ambassador to Madrid, to desire the
Infanta of Spain, Maria Teresa, according to agreement, for Wife to the French
King. How worthily he performed his Embassy, the published. Narratives do
abundantly inform. Nor is it any wonder, whenas besides his noble Birth, and
Honor acquired in the Field, Gentileness and Bravery are connatural with him.
To avoid the trouble of a long Train, he rid Post, as shortning his tedious
way, and declaring the heat of his youthful Master. Gramont returned sure of
the Match, having been entertained sumptuously, and made very welcome. Between
Mazarine and Haro, whilst the Treaty stuck, there were several times thoughts
of revoking Gramont. Difficult business standing upon a precipice, and at the
point of dashing in pieces, was set right by the prudence of the Ministers, I
will say the indulgence of the Fates. Devotions at the first religiously
performed, never totally miscarry in the end.

The Princes of Europe, or their Ministers flocked thither, as to consult an
Oracle; they admired the Island, that is, a little Spot upon which the whole
Globe hung: You would have taken it for the Anchor of the floating World.

The Duke of Lorraine heretofore detained in confinement at Toledo, is then
enlarged, and without waiting upon that King, goes with all speed to Haro, to
know the terms imposed upon him. When he came to understand the condition of
his Affairs, impatient at such a penalty, he broke out into speeches, which
might have given just occasion to have clapped up again in Prison the Duke, tired
out with miseries. This is not a Peace, says he, but a slavery by consent. The
singular goodness of Haro took compassion of afflicted Lorraine, who leaving
the Castilian Minister at Fuentarabie, fled to the French mercy. Mazarine
receives him honorably, Diverse discourses past to and fro, even about entering
Alliance. Duke Charles seemed to go away less discontented. What was afterward
done, shall be related in the end of the Book.

Charles King of England comes from Flanders; for Cromwell whilst he was alive,
and after his death his Ghost would not let him live at Paris. Haro omitted no
Ceremony, no deference of the humblest submission to him as a Stranger, but
neither granted him Condes Troops, which he desired, upon pretense of the
Portugal War, nor would enter into any other enagagement to act for the
restoring of the King of England. Mazarine would not so much as vouchsafe to
speak with, or see the King for fear of Lockhart, who was a Spy there in
behalf of the Parliament of England. It is a thing which posterity will hardly
believe. Mazarine always hated Cromwell, and the growing Commonwealth, yet so
great an apprehension of that petty Tyrant was imprinted on the Cardinals soul,
that he dreaded the very Ghost of him when he was buried, and whom he had
courted with feigned Honor whilst he was alive, he followed with a false
Veneration after he was dead. So true it is, that some meaner Spirits have a
natural ascendant and predominancy to strike awe into them that are of greater
abilities. The King of England having lost his labor, withdrew himself from
the Affront loaded with Complements from the Spaniard, and Contempt from the
French. Ormond who accompanied the King, hardly getting to speak with Mazarine,
to avoid the giving umbrage, it seems, to Lockhard, hinted many things to win
upon the Cardinal. The assured hopes of the Crown which Charles was near
recovering, the Plots in favor of him; all was safe, only that there needed
some small assistance. Nay, proceeded so far as to sound Mazarines mind with an
Overture of the Royal Alliance. Such is the power of fatal and invincible
necessity, which the Gods themselves cannot surmount. All this was to no
purpose; the Restoration was to be put upon no other account than his personal
Virtues and the providence that attended so great a King, who goes away
offended at the French rigor.

Through so many Compliances of Fortune, the two Ministers Umpires of the
disagreeing World, Arbitrate all things at their pleasure, and dispense the
Fates of Nations depending upon them. Portugal fell under debate when Mazarine
turned to Haro, and said, Look me out to the very remotest Indies any
Sovereign Estate for poor Braganza, that his head used to a Crown may not
again sink into a private Condition.

The Affairs of Italy, Mantua, and Savoy, and other Princes were left to the
decision of the Cardinal and Fuensaldagne.

Pope Alexander only was neither party, nor partaker in the Pacification. The
Princes of the Conclave admired at Rome that Chighi, whom they had chosen
principally upon that account, because having been trained up in the Treating
of Peace, he seemed a fit Peacemaker, should be so scornfully passed by.
Mazarine in his Judgment, after Chighis Judgment, reputed a Fomenter of
Discord, and Hater of Peace, shows, That he both could and would conclude
Peace. Things must be fitly timed. The Secrets of Kingdoms should not be
divulged. It is enough to have one Master in a House. No King must usurp
Authority over Religion, only the Inspection. No Bishop must usurp Authority
over Kings, but paternal Affection.

At twenty four Sessions the Business of the Peace was completed, and at
length on Novem. 7. 1659. The Articles agreed on by the two Ministers, were
signed, which having been published, and the Issue of Affairs abundantly show
what they were.

One might have seen the most straight embraces of both Nations, and tokens of
Dearness, upon account of the old Hatred, after so many Inroads made on both
sides, burning of Towns, so many Prisoners carried away, so many Cities subdued
and demolished, so much bloodshed, no Anger left. In the height of public
Rejoicing, each in their proper Language and Manner expressed their Joy; the
past Battles, they accounted as Fictions. The Cities of France and Spain shined
with Splendor and Beauty: So that they seemed truly Objects of pity, who were
not Subjects of the one Crown, or the other. The two Ministers after mutual
Presents from the one of a rich Suit of Hangings, from the other of a gallant
Set of Horses, depart out of the Island, chosen by the Providence of God, to
clear the Sky, and create a right understanding between Nations divided, and of
an insociable Temper of Spirit.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK Of THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. The Contents of the former Book may be the Summary of this,
which contains nothing but all matter of joy, excepting the Death of Mazarine,
that yet was constant, courageous, and agreeable to his Life.

THE Cardinal at Toulouse rendered the the King and Queen an account of the
Peace concluded, whereat they received much satisfaction. From hence the Court
made a Progress into Provence, till the King of Spain should come with his
Daughter, to compose the disorders at Marseilles, which had broken out about
the Privileges of their Consuls. The King, the better to secure Peace at home,
and Reputation abroad, was necessitated to build a Citadel, having a plausible
occasion to preserve the equal liberties of the Community, and especially to be
a refuge for such as were of approved fidelity. A mighty defense without
distaste or charge, of which Beringham is made Governor, than whom no man in
France had a more formal gravity, having served two Princes with an even tenor
of Prudence.

At Paris, where all things are condemned, the match was not believed, scarcely
the Peace; that there were Castilian deceits in the bottom, and Mazarine
overreached, not so much the Common People in the streets and at clubs, as
many of the Noblemen did whisper.

Conde having survived so many Battles, being certified of the State of
Affairs, after he had courteously saluted his Soldiers, according to their
standing or office, spoke to them much after this sort; It is the seventh year,
Fellow Soldiers, since having been tossed by hard Fates, after the extremest
instances of Barbarous usage, being released out of a dark Dungeon, I left the
Kingdom of my Ancestors, obliged to secure my life by Arms. All the time my
Fates, and the Fortune of my Family, have been put into your hand. Now, neither
to inflame your affections any further to the love of me, nor to excite your
Spirits to give new proofs of your Valor, (for both are abundadtly manifest)
but I come hither to request of you an allay of your Courage, and a moderation
of your kindness toward me; that is, that you would be satisfied with the
quiet that is already gotten mankind. Nor that we should bandy your and other
men's Fortunes restless, between hope and fear; seeing that we can perform no
better service, the Fates of France importing us. The Peace of Nations, and my
own safety is secured, with your safety, and that of Flanders, I do quietly
possess in France, both the Privileges of my house, and the dignities which I
formerly possessed, and the Fortunes left by my Honored Father. In a word, my
estate is in such condition, that I neither need comfort nor revenge. I and
Fortune have tried our strength; we have contended a great while: I will now
show the example of contending no further. Others have been longer engaged in
Civil Wars, none has come off more contentedly. Should I suffer so many brave
Armies, so many Commanders, to be again beaten down, and without cause expose
this Valor of yours to dangers. Let this frame of spirit continue, as though
ye would dye for me, but survive. The more hope you show, if I were willing to
fight, the braver will Peace be. But when I see so many maimed Limbs, so many
Wounds; that is it which afflicts my Heart. Whether will your old years, now
when your blood is exhausted, go for relief? What shall be the settlement for
you, when past service? What Assignments of Land after your fruitless
Compagnes? Since at the present I am dis-abled from requiting you according to
your merits, the one thing which I have; in this juncture of Affairs I leave
you eternal Gratitude, and the example of my Life. Time will be, when perhaps
my house may be able to afford a donative; in the mean time, receive these
small monuments indeed, but such as testify our perpetual love. Thereupon the
remnant of money which he had, was divided among the Soldiers in particular.
After that the Assembly had long murmured in uncertain Senses, Marsin the
Liegois, in behalf of the Troops, without any Rhetorical Artifice,
Souldier-like thus spoke.

Most Invincible Prince, the greatest Commander of the French Nation. Military
Discipline consists more in obeying, then questioning the Orders of our
Officers; we have Arms and Courage, we leave to you Counsel and the conduct of
our Valor. It belongs not to us to enquire into the Causes of Peace, nor to
pry into the Breasts of Kings. Our Truth and Reputation has continued to this
day unstained toward your Highness. We have equally shared the hazards and
uncertainties of War; You always first beat the path of dangers, we following
your Colors, have learned so often from you to dye. The issue of Rebellions
comes upon us, the glory of Battles upon you. Our service, with you, has been
Gentle and Courteous, You have vouchsafed Pardon to our Errors, past by our
slips, and never called our Torments or Disgraces Discipline. Take not care for
our Rewards, or whither we shall go; Fortune will set us in a way. We have a
great monument of glory, that you cannot complain of us. Go your way Saint and
Merciful; Soldier and Invincible; We do Eternally Love and pray for you. The
Immortal Gods grant you this Blessing, that you may never have occasion to
think of us. Thus much said Marsin openly concerning himself, these few words
to him aside, You know at what rate I have purchased you: seek a name for the
Action, advise with the voice of the World; if it be Rebellion, I did it for
your sake.

The Prince, with a pleasing look, gave good attention to all this, and advised
the younger with Authority, the elder with entreaty. The next day, having
called the Nobles of the Low Countries to his House, he declared to them the
Motives of the Peace, and the tetms. Of himself he spoke little and cautiously;
of the Public largely. The Cities earnestly offered him Presents, Praises,
Applause; he refused all, yet permitted thanks to be given him, but
nevertheless did not vain-gloriously provoke Fame, attending rather till the
heat of applauding was over: his departure was graced with much Complement. At
that time he delivered up the Provinces in quiet and safety to Caracene; And
lest his Entry into great Cities should be remarkable for the Pomp and
Multitude of such as came to meet him, both in Flanders, and especially in
France, he avoided them, and the Attendances of his Friends; but went with a
small Retinue, plain in Garb, and courteous in discourse. The Duke of Enguien
never parted from his Fathers Company, needing no stranger to be his Governor.
Through Vervin and Soissons, and then Culmar which is a Town of Brie, famous
for a Seat of his Brother-in-Law Longueville; he came through sharp Frosts and
rugged Ways; there he made some stay to mend his Tackle, and recruit his
Health. None were admitted to see him, but such as were sent for; he had in
company his Wife and Son, with his only Daughter, scarce three years old; a
part only of his Family ragged, nasty, and smelling of Dutchery, Banishment,
and dreadful Wars. It was judged fit for Longueville to go before, to break the
way for his access to the King. The Prince having left his Wife and Enguien
behind, went after, not in a loitering pace, lest he might seem to be timorous,
nor yet hastily; but letting the report of him grow by expectation, he turns
his course to Madam Chastillons, for whom he ever had a kindness when he was
young, being his Kinswoman, and handsome; which gave him a double title of Love;
but that was no hinderance to the minding his business. At length he comes to
Aix, which is the principal Town of Provence; that was agreed upon to be the
place for his waiting upon his Majesty to kiss his Hands. They come in
multitudes to meet him: amongst the rest, his brother Conti, who having left
the Monastery, whither he had put himself, and Married Mazarines Neice, had
left, some good time since, his brothers Army and Party. Conde receives him
affectionately; Mazarine was put into some trouble at the coming of so great a
suppliant, yet attends him with a cheerful countenance, which was not usual
with him. Four miles off they send Coaches, Horses; and a Guard, in show of
Honor. The Prince is received by Mazarine at the Stair-Head; there were
straight Embraces, words heard by none; diverse discourses passed to and fro,
without permitting any to stand by. Longueville and Conti himself, although he
shined with his Brothers image, standing in the crowd among the Servants;
Mazarine went alone into the Presence Chamber, whither within a quarter of an
hours time, Conde being called in, falls down at the Kings feet, but was
presently raised up, as is usual on such an occasion; the first word was most
attentively watched for, but instead of that, was a courteous whispering, that
one would soon have imagined a hearty reconciliation. After this, having
visited the Queen and Anjou, he presented the choice Commanders of his Army
Boutteville and Mersin, and the rest, not concealing the Virtues of each.
Marsin disfigured more then any else with scars received for Conde, no less
confounded with the Kings bounty, as the memory of his own carriage, and the
public hatred; the cause of which was the more grievous, in that it was just;
casting his eyes on the ground, acquitted himself with only looking up to Conde.

In Conde there was no abjectness, no pride, no change of temper in a change of
Condition; his mind had on the sudden wheeled about from Banishment and Guilt,
to Majesty. He admitted all mirth and plenty, applied himself to such as
flocked about him, and expatiated in Flatteries, having a quick Wit in a
graceful return of Complements. Whatsoever he said or did, although without
Art, delighted the ears and eyes of them that were present. Further, that he
might allay the name of Soldier, which sounds harsh amongst the idle
Courtiers; with other virtues, he avowed his resolution of following a quiet
and peaceful life. One might have seen faces shining with a sudden
cheerfulness, the cloud of so many part troubles being in a short time
scattered. So much power had that brightness of blood, that of successes, and
what is above all, nothings being difficult to Conde's Fates. Thus having spent
about eight days, he returns back the same way, hearing as he came along, the
death of the Duke of Orleans, of whom I shall speak afterward. He that in
work, and upon the march lately consorted with the Common-Souldier in Flanders,
reserving entire the Authority of a General; at Paris vies with the most
Courtly Lords in Ceremony and Complements. As men's Affections were forward,
Conde's Wit increased his Reputation, being adequate to any fortune whatsoever;
the gracefulness of his Countenance with a certain Majesty, his prosperity,
men's minds bending toward him; and instead of all his Fortune. To have escaped
so many imminent mischiefs, be restored to his house, advanced in glory. One
might see the Prinees Palace, from early in the morning, till late at night,
swarm with people; Men come out of curiosity, return with content, cannot be
satisfied with gazing; admire the same virtue, which lately they hated; his
youthful affections, and which had been heretofore loose, now ^^rbed with heavy
cares; his conditions altered for the better, and though he were but
middleaged, as to years, yet was he reported to have paralleled the longest
time of life as to Glory.

These things were heard at Court, and believed to be more then in truth they
were; his Popularity was condemned; and it was disliked, that he had received
Bishops with courtesy above the ordinary rate; that he had nailed Mourning to
the top of his Coach for the death of Orleans. It is a Custom which is past
into a Law, that none may assume this to themselves, besides the immediate
issue of Kings. He that had so often nailed Canons, dares not now nail his
Coach. The Prince complains of mischief in the new Court, equally grievous, but
not equally condemned: yet modestly as amongst his Masters, thanked Mazarine
for giving him such advice. For the avoiding these and the like jealousies, he
resolves to leave the City for a time, and retire, into Burgundy.(The
Government of that Province which had been restored him, was the Pretense) nor
to spread his sail any more to prejudicial Fame, but seek a cure of his
Troubles from lying still. He takes along with him young Enguien, already
showed, to the Fates, that he might produce him among the Peoples. It will not
be amiss to observe, that the Lorrainers and Guises paid their respects, to
the Prince by Proxy, lest they should walk lower-most, and on the left hand in
his house. They complained, that he observed this practice which his Father had
neglected and remitted.

The Duke of Orleans, born of Henry the Fourth, and Mary Medices, only Brother
of Lewis XIII. having laid down the Civil Arms, would pass off the discontents
that were risen in his Spirit, for the ill success of his design with retiring
to Blois. No longer did he give himself over to be ruled by any of his
Servants; imparted his cares only to his Wife, Margaret de Lorraine, trusted
her only with his secrets, and the thoughts of his Soul. Turned of the sudden
Antiquary and Herbalist, more exquisite, then comported with the Quality of so
Highborn a Prince: Delighted in Dogs and Hunting, and ranging the Woods, not
for Venison, but to save the Deer. Set all the City of Blo^se into a Religious
Humor, Masses without end; openly professed himself Devout Votary (to use a
new Term upon a new Subject) when as God is to be adored in Spirit only, not
only to be served with that Ostentation. Those that rise to that height, in a
frenzy of Zeal, fearing, not loving, wrong him whom they worship. Religion is
to be used with moderation, as all good things which cease to be such, if that
be wanting. Amongst these and the like courses he fell sick, and having
Antimony unduely administered, within a Week died of a Lethargy. Having been a
hopeful Child, and passed his youth in pleasure, always under the direction of
his Servants, never at his own disposal.

Margaret de Lorraine spends a few days to compose her spirit, being
transported with grief and impatient. Then rides to Paris with her three
Daughters and the Hearse going before. The Corpse of Gaston is deposited at St.
Denis among the Tombs of his Ancestors; with a Private Burial, at small
Charges, the Heralds scarce paid.

The Kings according to Agreement meet; the French stays at St. John de Luz,
the Spaniard with his Daughter at Fuenterabie. Thither is sent Ondedei Bishop
of Friuli to make the Contract by a Proxy, who performed the Ceremony with an
unaffected Gravity. At last broke forth that day which put an end to the War,
and consummate^ the marriage. The Island formerly confident of such high
transactions, how Spectatress, receives the Majesty's and the Nobles of both
Kingdoms. The French King flourishing in years; the Spaniard declined. This
casting a great shadow with his Trunk, that with his Leaves. Maria Teresa
keeping close under her Fathers wing, wishes and fears the issue of what was to
follow.

The two Kings having passed their interchangeable salutes; there was time to
imagine what they Would say. There was for some space such a profound silence
universally. The Old King admires in his Son-in-law, that valor could consist
with so great comeliness. Lewis and Mary dwelt in astonishment upon mutual
contemplation of each other: So, in the whole company, every one admired at
that which surprised the other with mutual admiration. Equal years, and in
differing Faces, the same Majesty. The Gospels were laid, on stands on both
sides with a Crucifix. The Kings kneeling swore upon them, that they would
religiously observe the Articles of the Peace concluded, which were at the same
moment read by the Secretaries, on that side Fonseca Contrera, in Spanish; on
this, in French, by Lewis H. Lomeny Count of Brienne. It was his last public
Act, who resigning the place so unblameably, so worthily held by his Father,
and by his Grandfather before him, sequestered himself to God, giving an eminent
Example in the flower of his youth, and by the Mothers line of the Emperors
Family.

The French King admitted the addresses of the Spaniards, the Spanish, of the
French; neither spoke to them when they came to kiss their hands. Mazarine
presented the French to Philip; Haro the Spaniards to Lewis, only at the name
of Thurenne the Spaniard broke silence. Him (says he) I remember and have
reason to remember. The hour drew on of breaking up the Company, when Philip
framing occasions of delay, at length gave his daughter a parting-kiss, and bid
her his last farewell. The Queen Mother did almost throw her self into her
Brothers Arms, but he out of Spanish gravity would not admit her. This was the
order at the entering into the League of Peace.

Having left the Island, whole memory will be grateful to all posterity, they
were thus parted never more to return to the sight of one another. At S. John
de Luz, next day a solemn Wedding was kept with unusual Splendor; withou any
stay that barren Seacoast and unhospitable Quarters are abandoned. All
greedily long after Paris. It was thought convenient to stay a while at
Fountainbelleau; thereby giving the Parisians respit to provide for the pompous
Solemnity. Mazarine all the Journey long, grown more morose than he used to be,
not cheared with any recreation, not so much as with winning at Play,
discovered to the King several times that his time of dissolution approached.
The King could not forbear weeping. In the mean while the Cardinals
Indisposition delayed the coming to Town; whose Infirmity at length abating,
and all things being prepared, the King with the Queen Consort hastened his
Entry into die City.

The Entry was next to a Triumph. In a Dom^^ set up in the Suburb of S.
Anthony, both their Majesty's were congratulated by the several Orders coming
forth decently marshalled. First came the Ecclesiastics (in point of Honor
they should have came last) carrying Images with them, and antic Gods, of rude
Workmanship. After the Companies of Tradesmen proceeded the Magistrate, then
followed the Parliament in their Robes. Afterward the Chanellour, laid all
over with Gold, the Masters of Requests guarding the Royal Seal, charged upon a
Horse loaded with Trappings. The Soldiers and the Heralds in rich Coats. All
had spotted Plumes in their Hats. The Captains marched in the Head of their
Companies with the Ensigns. All sort of Riches is displayed, and the Ornaments
of the City are fetched to grace the Public Joy. A Coach embellished with all
the Badges of Majesy is brought to the Queen. She is set in it alone. The King
would not go in a Coach; but mounted on a gallant Steed, rid before. The
Princes on Horseback followed immediately after. The joyful City thronging on
both sides, looked earnestly upon the Queen; being aware, that in her Chariot
was the chiefest of all Victories. Joyfulness at the Sight was provoked by
variety of Sounds. In the way all along as they came were Quires of excellent
Musicians resounding cheerful Airs in Consorts of Instrumental and Vocal
Melody. The new-married Pair came amidst this Pomp to the City-Gate. At the
Entrance was set up aloft an Image of Peace, holding forth in its right hand
diverse Verses. They proceeded from the Port through the High-streets of the
City to the Louvre, even ^^red with Joy.

Mazarine having performed this magnificent Solemnity, proposed to ease the
people of Taxes, to succor the Allies, to encourage Navigation for War and
Merchandise, to reform the French Fashions and Laws, to beautify the City with
stately Buildings, and finish the Louvre, the most glorious Monument of this
Age; which being set accidentally on fire, was warning and forerunner of what
what was approaching. He did not continue in the blessed Light of this World,
cruel Fortune disappointing these Intentions. Scarce were six months expired
after the Entry of the King, when taken desperately with all the Symptoms of
extremest pain, he gave presages of his fatal hour. In nothing slack, but in
Cure of his Infirmity. His Liver and Lungs distempered, causing a general
feebleness in all his Limbs, threw back somewhat impenetrable by the learned
Faculty, although, what is strange, the putrefaction scarce amounted to a
Fever. After that it was clearly understood, that there remained no hope in
the Physicians, the more skilful of whom gave their Judgment of his being
dangerously ill, he drew to Vincennes there to dye; as though Fortune would be
less taken notice of in committing the crime without than within the City. The
King commanded he should be left to his rest, and disturbed with no business.
His Virtue stood always unwounded, and never touched. Having his Soul
insensible of any evil, he clearly showed how vile the body is to them that
have great glory in their eye. Having his thoughts taken up about nothing more
than the Glory of the Kingdom (whose rise and growth one may say that he
assisted) he is reported to have suggested many things of the various Schemes
of Policy, to the King who generally sat by his Bedside. A long time they
kept silence with mournful looks, restraining tears before either begun the
bitter discourse. The King most obligingly commending his Merits, deferred to
him the success of his Arms. Our Victories, says he are your Work. You have
sweetened the hazard, you the misfortunes, you the labors of War. You have
preserved my Crown. At length you fall a Sacrifice after so many propitious
successes obtained for me. Whilst I shall use my Estate restored by you, I
shall oftener remember all this has been received from you, than you ever
thought that you gave it. I will enjoy the goods gotten by your Counsel, and
shall understand from the use what you have bestowed upon me. The Nobles
standing round attended, and shrouded most different thoughts under a common
silence, being prepared to sway their affections which way soever the
Discourses of the King and Mazarine should incline them. Mazarine, although he
supposed all this to be true, which had been said, answered as became his
modesty; That all must be put upon Account to the Kings Cause and Felicity:
that himself too had received an inestimable favor to have the Honor to
meddle with his most holy Arms and Counsels. Afterward wisely admonished the
King, That himself would undertake the Government of his State, and not create
a public Jealousy by ill chosen Favorites: That he should have the same
Genius, and the same Divine Assistance of his Counsel to rule, as he had to
obtain his Victories. Many Secrets he farther Instilled into the King, opening
his Majesty's eyes. As they were thus discoursing together, many times he
fainted away. When all hope was quite past, the King departed, lest his voice,
rattling through weakness, might lose its Majesty; his grief turning to
thoughts, what was to come after. Amongst all the tokens of extreme torment,
yet no pains did extort a groan or complaint. The same settled look which he had
when he was well, accompanied him at his departure. Just as if he had been to
prepare for a Journey, folding and laying up his Papers in their order, and
locking up his Desk, he did even temper his discourse with facetiousness. In
this time he signed his Will. As to the main, his mind was unaltered: In
particulars he made some change; leaving the King his Heir, but many Legatees:
Then he adopted Du Port the only Son of Meilleray into the Privileges of his
Blood, recalling an old Custom out of use, to whom he gave his Niece in
Marriage, and conveyed him his Name and Arms, being for his Merits taken into
equal dearness, as if he had been his own Son. He advanced his Nephew Mancini
in Governments, Lordships, and Riches. These were to share equally. Of his
Attendants and Menial Servants none almost was left without a Legacy. Somewhat
too he bequeathed to Learning. He ordered the building a College for the
training up of Youth, of the gained Provinces, and Acquist of Territory, to
have this Motto, A Monument of the Empire enlarged. He earnestly entreated the
King, To confirm and ratify whatsoever he had ordered, being it was his last
Will, he had hopes of help from Equity, and for that Equity, from the King. The
King past his word to him; Ask, says he, what you will from Us, it will be
less than your Merits. He left a plentiful, he might have left an immense
Estate, having command of the Treasury; which is not to be attributed to ill
practices, but his careful Ministry. At this time especially he recommended by
particular Character John Baptista Colbert, in whom as he professed he loved
many qualities, so especially his faithfulness and his industry, and with his
most piercing Judgment, sincerity unknown to the most of men. One whom no body
ever could, and who would deceive no body. Having a vast quantity of Jewels, he
distributed them among several. Conde especially in testimony of injuries
forgotten, he gave a Diamond of no mean price: The King he left eighteen that
were inestimable, styled Mazarines, to propagate his Name and Renown to
posterity: His fair Estate without any alteration of the course descended upon
the designed Heirs. By habitual pains he was so beaten to sufferings, that when
he was ready to dye, he had an appearance of cheerfulness. All the blood in his
Veins being out of temper, and his Lungs obstructed with the very dregs,
stopped his breath. Showing the bare Bones and his Belly swollen with a
Dropsy, he informed how frail a thing that is which is of greatest account in
this World. When his weak body was forced to yield to the power of the disease,
no Physic being available against fatal necessity, when certain signs of death
appeared, the Counsel of Physicians withdrew. For they say it is improper, that
they who ought to be Helpers of life, should be Spectators of death. They could
not at all agree in the Nature of his Disease, about which all the time that
they had him under Cure, they were at sore difference. Some of them concealing
the desperateness of his case out of policy, others out of ignorance. Sometimes
ten, sometimes twelve, at the fewest there were six enough to have killed one
that were in perfect health. Being of a stout and invincible Spirit, he applied
the remnant of life, which he found left him to Meditations of Death: and at
last March 15. which month Diviners had foretold would be fatal to him, he
passed from this mortal life at Vincennes. On the very same day dyed that other
Julius at Rome. Not a few grieved to please the King; the rest transported,
pleased themselves with the liberty of mourning. The King was heartily sorry.
The Court was hung with Mourning, and all that would be in the fashion, went
into Blacks.

Thus deceased the most potent of all Favorites that ever were, in the year of
his Life 59. of his Power 18. In France all that time he reigned in absolute
Authority, Majesty ever saved, turning all things with his Look, the rest being
but a Company of Vassals. He was observant of Religion, as to the external Acts
of Worship: For when he drew nigh to his latter end, after the Christian
fashion, he did solemnly receive the Eucharist to assist him in his Passage,
and with a devout Litany received Extreme Unction. Nay farther requested, that
Masses might be said for him. All was performed in the Temples with
extraordinary diligence; and God exposed upon the Altars. Supplications were
made before all the Saints. Zealous for the Sea of Rome, beyond measure;
whether out of hopes of the triple Crown, to which he was a bold Pretender
after the Conclusion of the Peace; or out of a natural respect, or out of Art:
Whatever it be at his earnest request, the Popes Nuncio blessed him, and pacified
God.

He was one of no ordinary presence: his stature rather of a neat cut than
tall, with a high forehead: one would readily judge him a mild man. His access
at the first gate was guarded by a sullen Porter, but to such as could happily
get clear through the throng, and frowardness of the Sentinel in at the Wicket,
his Reception was courteous. So great a power had he over his Countenance and
Language, that when he would most conceal his Intentions, he seemed most
open-hearted: so artificially couching his words, that a man would easily
imagine, he meant to perform more than he promised. Confident he was of
reconcilement, so as to the admiration of all, he would admit such as were
lately his Enemies, again to be next his person; and inseparable Companions at
his Business and Divertisements, having already pardon for those that
submitted, and no punishment for the stubborn. His natural abilities he
improved by industry, for greater Affairs he would manage himself, sparing of
sleep and ease, but not by Assistants. Being aware of the uses of money, he was
counted thrifty of the Public, covetous of his own. But for Bravery of the
Accommodations and Furniture of his own Dwelling, for multitude of Lacquais and
Pages, above great Princes. No seat of theirs is more magnificent than
Mazarines House; as though he alone should show Strangers the Wealth and Power
of France. Nor was this distastful to the King from whom he redeemed all
suspicion of pride by addrese and submission. He pryed into the Secrets of
Kingdoms and private Persons. I know not whether ever man was more accomplished
to delude the French. He would buoy up hopes with ceremonious Applications, and
would enlarge Nobility with the offer of Titles: carrying himself so fairly,
that every where he might appear freed from the being apprehended to have done
wrong. But so fast in keeping counsel, that he was wholly inaccessible even to
those that were reputed his greatest Confidents. He would never brag any thing
in vanity of words. Toward prosperity and adversity he bore an even face, not
mind. And though great he was accounted whilst he stood; in his fall, and when
he was down, he appeared greater. In truth, by his Courage he deserved that his
Calamity should at last turn to his Glory. Being given to dissimulation, he
yielded an ear to Suspicions and Slanderers. Large in promises, which
oftentimes he did not perform; or if he did make them good, the Courtesy was
long pondered with scruples and delay, and extorted by importunity, so that he
made it unserviceable, consuming the joy with the tediousness of expectation.
Sometimes he rewarded Virtue, but never went forth to meet it. And that upon
acquaintance, with the French Temper, which presently upon receiving one
favor, thinks of a new one. He fell under Infamy, seldom for his own, many
times for others actions. The malignity of Fortune often overcame his Arts, and
in him Fate was too hard for Virtue. In so great a happiness of Nature, there
was an eminent complication of all exquisite qualities, which were consistent
with transcendent Virtues. The Reputation of Clemency he stood upon, even when
severity had been expedient to absolute Government. By Gentleness he arrived to
that Praise, with which many many have grown famous by violent and rigorous
courses. In truth no innocent Ghosts will torture him, no public Evils, nor
domestic can justly be reproached upon him. He deserved well of our Ancestors
and Posterity, having increased the Empire by the accession of Territory, and
not impaired it by any emin^nt loss. It must be marked, that he fell into times
different to Richlieu's. He had most sore Enemies that rivalled a Woman and a
Child. Being haughtily secure through his own Conscience, and the Kings Love,
he stoutly waged, and gloriously finished a War that had been rashly
undertaken. Comparable to any of the Ancients for profoundness of
Understanding, he was buried amidst the Applauses of Victory in his own Triumph.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE History of FRANCE.
The CONTENTS. Provision is made for the exhausted Treasury; the Spaniard lays
an Injunction upon his Ambassadors, not to contend any more with the French
about Precedence. Lorrain Covenants with the King about his Country; Dunkirk is
purchased from the English. The Pope repairs the violation done to the French
Ambassador at Rome. The Emperor requires, and receives aid against the Turks
invading Hungary. The French Trade is spread through the New World.

AFter the Death of Mazarine, the Kings Cabinet Counselors were Michael
Tellier, Hugh Lyonne, both Secretaries of State, and John Baptista Colbert,
Lord Treasurer, men of great Virtue and Fame. There is no more certain evidence
of a great Prince, then to take and employ able men, and of reputation; for all
will presently judge that he is such a one, as those be that are about him.

The Progress into Britanny, that had been long talked of at Court, at lest
about the end of the month of July, Anno 1661. broke out upon the head of
Nicholas Fouquet, who was Arrested, as he returned from the Kings Council. He
was carried into the Castle of Angers; from thence to Vincennes, and at last to
the Bastille. The greatness of the blow seconded the wishes of his Friends,
none offering to interpose between him and that stroke, which was set on by so
Powerful a hand. He was a man of a noble Spirit, but ruined by his good Nature,
and blinded by Prosperity; (if it may be called Prosperity, the disposing of a
vast Treasure) being neither rightly acquainted with his own Station, nor the
falsehood of Flatterers; he fell not out of a greediness of hoarding, but of
scattering Money. Yet none appeared in his defense when he came in trouble, so
widely had he offended, and in such a compass, as if he had made that his only
business. He is not the only person that this Mask has trapanned, the same
Visour has deluded thousands. Where is the man who has escaped out of these
Nets, but has left some feathers upon this Bird-lime; the lust of women too
playing about such streams of Gold. The King passed no fierce, no hasty
sentence, but gave the Prisoner time to give in his own and others
misdemeanors. He erected a Court of honest men, chosen out of every Parliament
of France, lest their power should be corrupted if they had been few: These
were, by Commission, to make inquiry into the Embezelling the Public Money, to
discover by what Caverns, what Gulfs it was wasted: The young King would have
his Chequer improve in height; Restraint was needful, though late; yet there
was no penalty laid upon Fouquet, but that of Banishment. See the storms and
tossings of life, that no Wisdom can ever regulate in the slippery Pinnacle and
Precipice of the Court. It is a hard matter, in any sort of life, so to behave
ones self, as not to trip; and it is a great gift of nature to have common
sense, and not presume too much upon Fortune.

At the close of February [1662] the King was present in Parliament, that the
conditions of Agreement accorded with Charles of Lorrain, might be consirmed by
their Act. The substance of them was to this effect, That Charles Duke of
Lorrain, being without Issue, does voluntarily, without any constraint, make
over to Lewis King of France, all his right in the Dukedoms of Lorrain and
Bar; that the same Charles, during his life, shall command both Countries with
Sovereign Authority; his Subjects continuing free from all new Taxes and
Impositions; that the King have free power, as soon as he pleases to fortify
Marsal, that if the Duke be invaded in Germany, in the Low Countries, in
Franche-Comte, that the King shall come in to his defense; that the Accession
of so great a Territory is compensated by adopting them into the Royal Family.
After the Imperial Progeny of the Bourbons, that the Princes of Lorrain be
advanced into the Privileges of the Blood Royal; Yet that they may not exceed
the number of four, who should be of that Family Authorized to the passing of
Public Acts. That all these, so great Privileges, are granted upon the
condition, that they who pretend to he descended of that Line, all actually
subscribe, the Articles otherwise to be void and of no effect. With such a
Bridle was the notorious Pride of that Audacious House restrained. Diverse
discourses past about a business of that moment; the Public voice disliked it;
the more understanding did not join in it; the Court was divided; those that
were still foremost in compliance, as the custom is, magnify the Kings
Prudence. The more Sour condemn it in dubious words; Seguier performing his
Chancellours part in the Parliament, reported the Kings Act with a proper
Oration; in the Privy Council he discharged his duty, that the Blood Royal
could not be transfused into the veins of Strangers; that it is dangerous to
have them adopted, who had once the boldness to contend for the Kingdom; that
the present Fortune of the King is above all dispute: Emergencies and future
events are above all Royal Power: that the States of the Kingdom would
eternally condemn Covenants that carried a snare in them. When the Succession
of the Kingdom is in question, they would not be velued without their consent;
that such matters do not depend upon a Queens fruitfulness, nor the flourishing
Age of a King; for a numerous Issue Royal has been more then once seen of a
sudden turned into barrenness. That the pretense of the Vendosms, and
Longuevilles, could not be determined, which all the Nobility would favor,
that never would put their Necks under a strangers yoke: that such matters as
these are not approved, till done; yet he could not forbear, but according to
the duty of his Place, he should mention this boldly indeed; but modestly
submitting all to the Kings Judgment. Lyonne replied a word on the place; that,
the King was not much concerned in what should be the contests of Posterity;
that a vast accession was purchased at a Chimera. It were a very high Crime to
question the eternity of the Bourbons. Therefore the matter was resolved upon,
the Kings Authority turning the Scale, though the Vendosms, Longuevilles, and
Courtneys drew against it; yet these forbore to make any present stir, being
certified of Charles 's repentance, and the retirement of his Nephew and
Namesake into Germany. What will be the issue, must be expected from time.

The chief Princes of Europe had sent their Ministers to Charles II. King of
Great Britain, for the establishing his Authority, not yet any long time
re-setled. Whilst Count Brahe sent by the Swede, prepares his Entry into
London, October. 10. Of the preceding year, there arose a contention between
Estrade, the French, and Batteville the Spanish Ambassador, whose Coach should
take place in the proceeding. Batteville hired him some of the baser sort of
people in London; then whom none are more forward to mutiny, that once in his
life he might get his King one petty triumph over the French: Therefore at the
set day the sordid rout vented their Spleen upon the Attendants of Estrade,
having butchered his Coachman and Horses, and some of his Servants; the
Spaniard continued Master of the Field. The King of England turned the blame
upon the Common People, which by reason of his being newly restored, he could
not at the present restrain. The French Kings indignation discharged upon
Batteville only: More noble Anger has not at any time else appeared. In such a
juncture, whatsoever Prudence suggests, an incensed Prince scorns, rushing only
upon reve ge. He banishes from the Veerge of the Court, the Count Fuelsaldagne,
not respecting his Integrty, and that he had been Conductor of the Queen, who
was the pledge of Peace. He also denied Caracene, that was discharged of the
Government of the Low Countries, a passage through France in his return for
Spain. And as though the Kings wrath were not satisfied with all this, the
Archbishop of Yverdon, who was then at Madrid upon the Kings account, is
ordered not only to demand of Philip himself, that Batteville, who had
offended, might be punished according to the hainousnouss of the offense; but
to cut off all contention about Precedence for the future, that the. Spanish
Renunciation of all Priority, might be established by a Public Act. The fierce
Spaniard hardly digests it, and whilst he debates the question, the French
Ambassador keeps at home, laying down his public quality, as though he had
divested himself of all Privilege. But Paternal affection bore sway. Philip
waving the Regal Dignity, puts on the Father, thinking it not unglorious to
give way to him, to whom he had given his Bowels. But lest this Spanish consent
should vanish into Air, it was to be confirmed by a solemn Embassy. The
Marquess Fuentes, chosen for that purpose, comes to Paris with a great Train.
The King, that he might make the Audience more glorious at an act of that high
Nature, would have the Popes Nuncio, the Ambassadors of Venice, Swethland,
Savoy, the United Provinces, and all Foreign Ministers to be present; as also
the Peers of the Realm, the Chancellor and four Secretaries to Register it.
Fuentes having been experienced in State Affairs, and diverse Embassies, was not
surprised at the luster of so great an Assembly. Therefore taking that
concourse, not as a witness of abridging his Honor, but turning it to his
Glory, thus spoke to the King: There being nothing more upon the King my
Masters Heart, then Religiously to observe the Laws of Consanguinity: He has
sent me hither with a charge to confirm them; which at his Personal presence,
he established with his Royal mouth. His Person I sustain this day, not
representing a King, that knows not to yield, but a Father, whose spirit only
nature works to a compliance. He has thought fit voluntarily, to quit to you
those Transitory Honors which he has enjoyed so long; since, shortly, Death
is like to put a period to them. Those Gallantries may become your Age; Such
youthful ambition, an old Man, and your Father-in-law envies not. The London
Outrage has sunk deeper into his, then your Heart; he could not more
effectually redress it, than by punishing the Author. The Revocation of
Batteville, is a public declaration of inflicting punishment on him. But what
could have been added more to this, then to lay strict Injunctions, that his
Ambassadors, for the future, do not contend with yours about Precedence. This
is the occasion of the Embassy, which I the rather perform, because the Peace
lately concluded, is hereby confirmed; May it stand in full force to all
Generations.

The King receiving satisfaction in his due Honor, gave him a nod when he had
concluded his Speech, reserving to himself the whole Spanish State, with their
Homage. He advised the Ambassadors to be mindful of what had past, and report
to their respective Princes what they had seen and heard. At the breaking up of
the Assembly, Lewis appeared more August.

It may be also called a Victory without blood, when the King bought of the
English, Dunkirk for ready Money. What matters it whether so strong, so
considerable Garrisons come by Gold or Steel? and the Nation planted in the
Kingdom of Neptune, be excluded from the Continent?

The same year, 1662. The King, by Proclamation, commanded the Tenets of the
Jansenists, condemned by Innocent X. and Alexander VII. to be abolished. The
New Sect received its denomination from Cornelius Jansen, Bishop of Ypers, who
about the 40 year of this Age, put out a Book abour Grace and Free Will;
wherein he is believed to have fastened to St. Austin a sense contrary to that
Doctors mind. But I confine my self within my own bounds, and do not climb
those heights, lest like an ill Tyler, I should fall from the Housetop, and be
laughed at. In the better part of the World, what broyls has an itch of
Arguing about Religion made? that which does, and has, and will occasion this,
is man's weakness, of which there is no more certain Argument, then to quarrel
about sacred matters. It is a Disease of the Soul to make superfluous questions
about God; but what can we do? Divines had rather dispute their live. It is
commendable to restrain a Gallimawfrey and Hotch-potch of Religions and
Innovatours, because they may put people upon Change. A Prudent King ought with
all his Power to defend the Ancient Worship, nay, rather then know it: he is
justly counted, next under God, by whom his Majesty is vindicated: yet Faith is
to be wrought by Persuasion, not by Command.

No less valiantly did the King avenge the affront offered Crequi his
Ambassador at Rome, then that done D'Estrade at London. Contempt is a
Pestilent thing to Kingdoms, whose Soul is Authority, and an honorable opinion
of their Sovereign. But contempt is a mean and low opinion of the Prince and
his State, imprinted in Subjects and Foreigners, by which the Majesty of the
Throne lies on the ground. For few overrhrows of States have been by malice,
the most by scorn. Lewis the XIV. has vindicated himself from that more then
any of the Ancient, or more modern Kings, who has not spared so much as the
Pope himself.

The Corsi, the Soldiers that are the Popes Guard, upon pretense of some
trivial quarrel with Crequi's Pages, shoot Pistols in at his Windows, set upon
his Wives Coach as she is coming home; and offer all sorts of Insolences,
trampling upon the Holiness of the Embassy. Crequi departed from Rome
unsatisfied; the Corsi triumph. The Ring of France having taken into his power
Avignon, a City of the Popes; threatens to use extremity, and prepares an Army
against Italy: After diverse Treaties, it is concluded at Pisa; That for the
appeasing the Kings Wrath, the Corsi be eternally banished from Rome! A
Pyramide be built for an everlasting monument of the Action; but what is the
principal matter, That a Legate, a Latere be sent to the King too in submissive
terms, to give satisfaction for the hainousness of the Fact; which was decently
performed by the Popes Nephew, Cardinal Chighi.

The State of France being in perfect settlement, the King reverenced at home,
and feared abroad; holds his Eyes steady over all Europe, to bring speedy
relief to that part, which he saw injured and in distress. Behold, of a sudden,
the Tyrant of Asia enters Hungaria. The Emperor Leopoldus implores the French
Succor: It is presently sent under the command of Collins. Again, did the
double-nam'd Ister admire the French Banners; they fight stoutly against the
Turk; and the King lending his strength, and his Fortune, a Peace is concluded,
or a Truce like a Peace. The Victorious Army at their return, showed at Paris
their naked Semitars, taken from the Musulmans.

Merchandise is rendered considerable, stocks of Money being provided for it.
Our power is diffused through the West and Eastern Countries,the Sea being on
all parts free or linked in Commerce. Now as the management of every public
Affair requires some assistant, the direction of this great charge is committed
by the King, to John Baptist Colbert, to those private profit, whatsoever does
not turn to the public, he does not think conducing, a person of a deep reach.
We see Rebellion chained, Luxury subdued, the Robbers of the Public Money
confounded; all men, either inclined by their Wills to do well, or necessitated
by the Laws. For a Prince by his actions, teaches his Subjects to act
righteously; and as he is greatest in Power, so is he yet greater in Example;
and no body complains but of his Greatness, who is the hope and Peace of People.

Here ends the year 1664. and my History, with the new Apparition in the Sky;
they call it a Comet; there is none but desires to know, whether he should
admire, or fear it. Some there are who give out, that it portends some grievous
matter; we are of that temper, that we pass over with neglect, what we see
every day, though worthy of admiration; on the contrary, even the least
matters, if they appear to us unusual, we make a business of gazing upon them.
FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
IN the rendering Histories from one Language by another proper Names of Persons
are not the least obnoxious to suffer, and by consequent leave an obscurity in
the Relation. Particularly the Latin retrenches modern Styles, and moulds the
word after a Propriety much differing from our own; it may therefore contribute
some light to restore the Persons here principally named to their French
Appellation, and add some Account of them, then to subjoyn the more dangerous
Errata.

A Table of the Proper Names.
A.
D'Ales, le Comte d'Ales, Louys de Valois, Governor of Province. page 154.
Alvimar 172. a Maistre de Camp. he was slain in Rhetel-Fight. Anne d'Austriche
the Widow of Lewis the Just, and Sister of Philip IV. King of Spain. 414
d'Ancres, Concini Marquis d'Ancres, 95. the great Favorite to Lewis XIII.
Arcos, Roderick Ponce de Leon, Duc d'Arcos, a Spanish General. 66 Argenson, le
Vayer d'Argenson, Conseiller du Roy. 161 Avaux, Clode de mesme Comte d'Avaux,
his Character, and Death. 231 d'Aumont, Marquis d'Aumont Villequier Anthorine
made Marshall 1651. 238. Duke and Peer of France. 1665.
B.
BAll, the President Ball, and certain Members of the House. page 215 Le
President de Bailleul Nicolas, and Clement le Meusnier or Miller, Estienne
Saintot Conseillers de la Grande Chamber; Jehan Canaye, Jehan le Camus,
Francois Bitault, Charles le Comte de Montoglan, Jacques Maugis, and Pierre
Martineau: These were the Parliament Men of that Commission. Bar, de Bar, put
in the place of Cominges to be Keeper of the Princes. 198 Bassompeirre, Francis
Marshall de Bassompierre imprisoned for words against Richlieu. 8 Beaufort,
Francis de Vendosme Duke of Beaufort the younger Son of Caesar, and Frances de
Lorraine born 1616. lived unmarried, and was slain at Candia. Beauvais,
Augustine Potier the Bishop of Beauvais falls into disgrace. 13 Becharel, de la
Becherelle recovers Damvilliers by Stratagem. 202 Bellebrun, de Bellebrun
Governor of Hesdin. 357 Bellevre President of Belluvre Pompone, Ambassador to
King Charles I. of Great Britain, and to the States of Holland in the
Munster-Treaty, afterward Premier President of the Parliament of Paris, his
Character and Death. 356 Belliere le Marquis du Plessis-Belliere, Jacques de
Rouge Maistre de Camp is made Governor of Diepe. 200 Belnau le Marquis de
Belnau. 54 Bence a German Colonel slain at Rhetel-fight. 238 Beringham, Henry
de Beringhen sent to Mazarine. 258 Bethune, Marguerite de Bethune Daughter to
the Duke of Sully, Wife of Henry de Rohan. 130 Beveron le Marquis de Beuvron de
Harcourt, Longuevilles Deputy Lieutenant in Normandy, and le Marquis d'Eglot
his Son. 191. 196 Bignon, Hierosme Bignon Advocat General. 121 Blammeny, Rene
Potier President de Blammenil. 99 Bouillon, Frederic Maurice de la Tour
d'Auvergne, Duke of Bouillon, Son of Henry de la Tour de Auvergne, Duke of
Bouillon, and Elizabeth of Nassaw, his Wife was Eleonor Febronie of Bergh, 198.
plotting against Richlieu is taken, 5. and loses Sedan which he resigned, 165.
and received in compensation the Dutchies of Albrer and Chasteau-Thierry, with
the Counties of Auvergne and Evreux, resigning up his former Sovereignty over
them, but reserving the Titular dignity; and so upon the delivery of the
Princes, both he and his Brother Thurenne continued firm to the King. Note upon
his life and death, and upon her, their Family of ten Children, an affinity
hinted, perhaps that ten years after consummate between Godfrey Maurice of the
Tower of Auvergne, Sovereign Duke of Bouillon, and Mademoiselle Mane, Anne de
Mancini a Niece of the Cardinals, 323. his Temper. 123, 124. 140. Boulaye le
Marquis de Boulaye, Eschalart Son in Law of de Bouillon, la Mark Colonel
General of the Suisses, and Suitor for that place after his Father was dead
wherein being repulsed by Mazarine, he took distaste, his Wives Ancestors also
were Possessors of Sedan: but Henry de la Tour (the Father of Frederick the
Duke of Bouillon, and Marshal Thurenne) having married the sole Daughter and
Heir of the right Line, though she dyed without Issue, had it confirmed to them
and their Heirs by Patent from Henry 4th. 183 Boutteville, le Comte de
Boutteville Mommorancy, 222, 409. Breze Armand Maille, le Duc de Breze, and de
Fronsac, made Lord Admiral of France, 1642. Governor of Brouage, Rochel, Ree,
and Oleron, the Son of Urban Maille le Marshall de Breze, and Nicola Sister of
Richeliu, the Brother of Claire Clemence, married to Enguien, and afterward
Princess of Conde; the Admirals Death was i646. 70 Urban Maille le Marshall de
Breze, Governor of Anjou, 151, 175. His Death was 1650. Brid Louys de
Brideieu, Governor of Guise. 211 Briol le Comte de Briolle. 338 Brissac le Duc
de Brissac, Louys de Cosse. 321 Broglio, Maistre de Camp and Governor of la
Baissee. 258. Broussel, Pierre de Broussel President to the Parliament. His
Character, 92. his Son Broussel de la Louviere.
C.
CAndale le Duc de Candale, Son to the Duke of Espernon Governor of Toulouse.
p. 169. Canoul le Baron de Canole. 212. Castelnaud-Mauviciere, le Marquis de
Castelnau, Mauviciere Master de Camp. 211, 359. Chabot. Henry Chabot married
Mademoiselle de Rohan, who was sole daughter and Heir of Henry Rohan and
Margaret Bethune, he being the Grandson of the Admiral Chabot, though his
Father lived privately in the Country, obtained this Match by the Prince of
Conde's help; but without the consent of her Mother who was living yet had
parted with her estate to advance her Daughter to some high Match, 130. He was
made Governor of Anjou. 307, 308. Chambaret de Chambaret, the Leader of the
Bourdelois slain. 164 Champalvon Francis de Harlayce de Champvalon, Archbhishop
of Rouen. 306. Charevoy de Charetvoy, Licutenant in Bristc. 330. Charton, Louys
le President Charreton. 99. Chasteaunaeuf, Charles de IN Aubespine, Marquis de
Chasteaunaeuf imprisoned at Engoulesme. 8. 203. His Character and Death. 302.
Madam Chastillan Isabella, Angelica, Boutteville Mommorancy, the Relict of
Louys Gaspar de Dandelot Coligny, Duc de Chastillan. 114 Chastre la Chastre
Comte de Nance, Colonel of the Suisses. 54 Chauvigny Leo Bouthillier Comte de
Chauvigny, the Son of Claude Bouthillier Sur-Intendant of the Finances his
Character, 11. Death 327. both mentioned 30 Madam Chevreuse, Mary Rohanne
Mombazon Duchess of Chevreuse, was first married to Charles Albert Duke of
Luyne, then to Claude de Lorraine de Guise Duke of Chevreuse and Peer of
France; a great Confident of Queen Anns, who had writ certain Letters into
Spain without the Kings knowledge which were intercepted and upon which Madam
Chevreuse fled thither till the Death of Lewis 13. her Stepmother Marie d'
Avougour, Duchess of Montbason, 45, 46. Cinque-Mars, Henry Ruze de Cinq-Mars,
the Marquess of Effiat his Character 4. death. 6 Clanleil le Marquis de Clanleu
Governor of Mardike and Dixmuyd refusing Quarter offered by Captain
Vautorneux, was slain at Charenton. 131. Colbert Jean Baptiste Colbert his
Character. 419 Collins, le Comte de Coligny, Chastillon, Maurice. 45 Le Duc de
Chastillon, Louys Gasper de Coligny D'andelot. 205. he was slain at Charenton,
1649. 131. Conde Henry Bourbon Prince of Conde married to Charlotte Marguerite
de Montmorancy, his Character 16. Death 64. Her Character and Death. 205, 230.
their Issue. 65 Conti Armand de Bourbon Prince of Contij. Corvald the Viscount
of Courval. 238 Couture des Coustures, Burgess of Paris. 182. born 1629. 65.
takes part with the Discontented. 177. he is made Governor of Champaigne, is
arrested with the Princes, 191. mannages the Affairs of Bourdeaux, 348. marries
with the Countess of Martinezze the Cardinals Niece. 352 Cramaillac Adrian de
Mon Luc de Cramail the Earl of Carmain. 8 Crequi Charles Marquis de Crequi, One
of the 4. first Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, D. and Peer of France; was
Ambassador at Rome to Alexder VII. 433 Cressy de Croissy an Officer in the
Guards. 191
D.
D'Ognati, The Comte Dognati, Viceroy of Naples. 221 D'Ognon, Comte du Dougnon,
Louys de Foucault Vice Admiral and Governor of Brouage, when the King comes to
Guyenne, is sick of the Gout, 219, 272, 291. Dulmont. Du Mont Governor of
Saumur. 208 Dunon, John Earl of Dunois, the Bastard of Orleans in the times of
Charles 7. successful in Enterprises upon the English from whom the House of
Longueville receive many Privileges, 292, 381. Duras le Marquis de Duras Son
of le Comte de Duras, 237. made Duke and Peer, 1668.
E.
ELboeuf Charles de Lorrain Duc d' Elboeuf, was Governor of Picard^ (...). had
three Children living by Catharine (...) Natural Daughter of Henry 4. Charles
d^^^rraine Duke d' Elboeuf. Charles de Lorraine Prince d' Harcour. Francis
Maria de Lo^raine Princess de I'Isle bonne, 123 Ernery Michael Partuelli
d'Emery, removed from his beingt Treasurer, 96. restored. 152 Enguien Lewis
Bourbon D. of Enguien his Character, 16, 17, 26, 56, 125, 176. he is the
present Prince of Conde born 1621. and married the Marshall de Brezes
Daughter, in 1641. his Victory at Rocroy, 36. at Thionville* 41. overthrow of
Merck, 51. taking Spira, Mentz, Worms, etc. Ib. Victory at Norlingue, 55. he
agrees to the King and Queens retiring from Paris, 118. comes out a little
after. Ib. Owns the Counsel of the Kings retirement, 120. suspected of
coldness, 128, 129, 144. crosses Mazarine in the match of his Neice, 144, 151.
abets the disorders of Guyenne, 158, 169. practices Candale pretendant to the
other Niece, 175. contends for d' Ales, 175. strikes up a secret match for the
Duke of Richelieu, 179. is imprisoned, 1650. 190. released 1651. 254. withdraws
from the Town, 271. flies to Arms, 296. goes for the Low-Countrie, 326. returns
for France at the General Pacificaion, 1659. 406 Erlac the General Erlac du
Canton of Berne, descended of one of the 4. Noble Families left in that Canton;
dies Governor of Brissac. 330 Esguillon Mary Vignerotte, Duchess of
Esguillon, Daughter of Frances the Sister of Cardinal Richelieu. 288, 257.
Espernon Bernard, le Duc de Espernon of Nogaret, Governor of Guyenne, his
Character, 56. Estampes, Jacques d'Estampes de la Ferte Imbault, 49. made
Marshall d' Estampes, 1651. 238 Estrade, le Comte d' Estrade, 250. his
Character, 347, 348, 350. D'Estres Francois Hannibal le Marshall de Estree the
Eldest now living made 1626. 233
F.
FAber le Ferve Maistre du Camp, Governor of Sedan. 234 Fauge a Savoyard
Colonel of the Lorrainers 236 Fiesque le Comte de Fiesque, of the Noble Family
of the Fiesqui in Genoua. 350 La Force Armand Nompar de Caumont, le Duc de la
Force. p. 209 Foul, Foul Maistre des Requests. 215 Fouquet, Nicolas Fouquet
Procureur General, his Advice, 320. Surintendant of the Finances, 346 his
Character, 347. Fall. 426
G.
GAssion, Joh Gassion, after the Battle of Rocroy, made Marshall de France,
1643. trained up under Gustavus, overthrew Lamboy, took la Baissee, his
Character, 26. Death. 72 Gerve, Francois Potier, Marquis de Gerve, slain at
Lerida. 41 Goulas, the Duke of Orleans 's Secretary. 252 Grammont, le Marshall
de Grammont Anthoine made so 1641. 54, 197, 399. Grancey, le Comte de Grancey,
Jacques de Roussel, made Marshall, 1651. 238 Grandpre, le Comte de Grandpre,
Charles Francois de Joyeuse. 233 Grimaldi, Hierosme Cardinal Grimaldi.
Guenegauld, du Plessis Guenegauld Secretary d' Estate. 132 Guise, Henry Duke of
Guise his Character, 18. Action at Naples, 67. imprisonment 68. enlargement.
338 Guitault, Francois de Comenge de Guitault, a Captain in the Guards arrests
Conde 191, 365. Gaston Jean Baptiste de Comenge his Brother arrests Conti. 191
Guillaume de Pechepeirou de Guitault, a follower of Condes. 359
H.
HArcourt, Henry de Lorraine Comte de Harcour. 18, 126. Hesse the
Landt-Gravinne, Amelia Elizabeth Hannauw, the Relict of William. 53 Hocourt de
Haucour. 238 Hoqulncourt le Marquis d'Hoquincourt, Charles de Munchy, Governor
of Peronne, 147. made Marshall of France, 1651. 238. his Death. 359 Hospital,
le Marshall de l'Hospital, Francois Halier, Governor of Lorraine, afterward
of Champaigne, 198. Lieutenant to Enguien at Rocroy, 38. Governor of Paris.
317
I.
JArcey, le Chevalier de Jarze, a Knight of Maltha. 148 Jerzey, le Marquis de
Jarze. ibid. Inville misnamed in the Paris Edition for de Linville Maistre de
Camp. 237 Joli, Joly Conseiller au Chastelet. 182
L.
LEwis XIV. present King of France, his Birth 1638. Baptism, 12. being King
1643, 14. Tuition, 66. 64. Majority 1651. 289. Coronation, 1654. 353. Marriage
1660. 415. Land Payen, Pierre des Lands Payen Conseiller. 205 Lavieu, de la
Vie. 169 Legue, le Marquis de Legue. 137 Lewis XIII. Son of Henry le Grand, and
Marie de Medicis, his Character and Death. 14 Lionne, Hugh de Lionne, Nephew of
Abel Earl of Servienne employed into Italy, during the time of Richlieu, by
Mazarine, described. 255. 302. 388. Lomeny, Henry Auguste de Lomeny Comte de
Bryenne, married to Louyse de Beon du Mace, described. 414 Longueil, Rene
Longueil le President de Maisons. 114 Longueville, Henry d'Orleans Duke of
Longueville married first to Louise de Bourbon Princess of the Blood, eldest
Daughter of the Duke of Soissons, 1617. after to Anne Mademoiselle de Bourbon,
Sister to the present Prince of Conde, his Character, 17. 197. 123. 177. he
dyed 1663. Lorraine, Charles Duke of Lorraine, 43, 44. 63, 64. imprisoned at
Brussels 352. enlarged 400. Francis his Brother. 353. Luyne, Hostel de Luyne.
The House of le Duc de Luyne, Charles Albert. 104
M.
MAgalot, Magalotti Maistre de Camp, 64 slain in viewing la Motte. Manicamp,
Manicamp de Longueval Maistre de Camp. 237 Mantua, Charles II. Gognaza Due de
Mantoue, and Montis ferrati, married Clara Eugenia Austriaca, Daughter of
Albert Archduke of Inspruck, and the year following the Emperor Ferdinand 3.
married Eleonora Sister of Charles. Marguerite, Dom Joseph Marguerite Marquis
d' Aquilez, a Noble Catalaunian. 72 Mazarine, Julius Cardinal Mazarine, his
Character, 11. Parallel with Richlieu, 31, 32. Wars in Italy, 70. Magnificence
in Library, 76. Stables, Houshould-stuff, 77. Jewels, 78, his Operas, his
distribution of Justice, ibid. Contempt of Money, 79. opposed by the Wits, the
Beauties, 80. the Parliaments, the Princes, 81. the Sling, 97. sues to match
his Nephew Mancini with the only Daughter of the Comte d'Ales, 86. joins with
Conde against the Slingers, 179. with the Slingers, and with Orleans against
Conde, 184. 189. 192. whom with his Brother and Brother-in-law he imprisons,
191. brings out of the Nunnery his Nieces, 198. watches over the Provinces,
ibid. conveys the King to Compiegne, 208. to appear in Person at Guise, 211.
and then with the whole Army to pacify the Commotions at Bourdeaux, 212. which
he with difficulty effects, 225. thence advances to Rhetel, 235. where having
gained the Victory in a pitched Battle, 238. he falls under a general envy,
240. as he goes into Banishment releaseth the Princes, 247. transfers the
occasion of their restraint upon Orleans and the Slingers, 255. by reason of
the Princes turbulency, is revoked, and returns in the Head of 6000 men, 300.
upon the joint Supplication of the Parliament and City of Paris he withdraws
again, 323. Upon the return of the King, and the Heads of the Faction removed,
he is firmly restored 335. setles Guyenne, 347. matches his Niece with the
Prince of Conti, 352. Enters a League with Cromwell, 355. Countenances in
person the taking of Gravelin, 361. bends himself to the Conclusion of Peace,
387. treats with Haro, 306. assists at the Enterview of both Kings, 414. After
the Marriage of his Master and Entry into Paris, his Death. 416. Meilleray, le
Marshall de la Meilleray, Charles de la Port, Governor of Britanny. 70
Melian, Blois Melian Procureur General. 121 Melay, le Comte de Meille. 359
Mercoeur, Louys Gardinal de Vendosme, Duc de Mercoeur, marries Victoire de
Mancini, 1651. 281 Miossan, de Pons de Miossans. Modena, Francois d'Este, le
Due de Modena marries 1648. Victoria Sister to the Duke of Parma, 59 La Mogny,
Chrestien la Mognon Conseiller an Parliament. 356 Mole, Matthieu Mole Premier
President au Parliament de Paris, 105. is made Keeper of the Seal. 289 Mondejus,
le Marquis de Mondejeu de Schulembert, 354.258. made Marshall, 1658. Montigny,
de Montigny, Governor of Diepe. 200 Montague, de Montaigue, Governor of
Rocroy. 351 Montresor, le Comte de Montresor de Bourdeille. 270 Mottadelais, la
Motte de Las. 172 La Motte, Marshall de la Motte Houdancour, was the first
Governor of Catalaunia; where occasions being ill supplied, and thereupon not
succeeding as at his first Exploits, he was after Revocation imprisoned. 71.
123 Moussaye, le Marquis de Moussaye Goion. 54. 196.
N.
NAvaille Philippe de Montault, the Earl of Navaille, Maistre de Camp, made
Duke and Peer of France, 1650. was employed to the Relief of Candy 211 Nemours,
Amedee de Savoy, Duc de Nemours married Isabel de Vendosme, Sister of Beaufort,
was disgusted against the Cardinal for being deuied the Government of Auvergne,
much devoted to the Duchess of Chastillon, his Character, 18. Death in July,
1652. 321 Nesmond, Francois Theodore, the President of Nesmond, Son-in-law to
la Moignon. 320 Noirmont, Louys de la Trimouille Marquess of Noirmonstier.
Noyers, Francois Soublet de Noyers, his Character 10. death 12
O.
O Busson, George d'Aubusson de la Feuillade, Archbishop of Embrun. 264
Ondedei, Zongo the Abbot Ondedei. 281 Orleans Gaston-Jean-Baptiste Duc
d'Orleans, married for his second Wife to Marguerite de Lorraine, his
Character, 16. 48. 159. Death 412, 413. her Character, 43. Mademoiselle the
eldest Daughter of Orleans, 309. 315. by Marie de Bourbon only Daughter of the
Duke of Montpensier.
P.
PAlvauisse, le Marquis de Paluau de Clerambault, made Marshall of France,
1651. 297 Parma, the young Duke Ranuccio, Son of Odoardo Farnese, Duke of Parma
and Piacenza. 58 Perauld, Jehan the President Perault, Condes Sollicitar. 194
Perefix Hardouin de Perefix Abbot of Beaumont, directed the young Kings
Studies, and the Coadjutor being prevailed upon to stand by, was afterward,
made Archbishop of Paris. 66 Persan, le Marquis de Persan de Vaudetar. 128
Plessis Praslin, Caesar de Choiseuil, Comte du Plessis-Praslin, made Marshall
of France. 1645. commended, 172. made Duke and Peer, 1665. Auguste de
Choiseuil, Comte du Plessis-Praslin slain at Rhetel-fight, 237. is Lieutenant
to Prince Thomas. 69 Poussard, Anne Poussard (for so she is called in the
History of de la Barde) was the Daughter of Francis Poussard, Marquis du
Vigean, and Anne Neubourg, was relict of Phoebus d'Albret de Miossan de Pons,
called Madame de Pons, or la Marquese de Miossan de Pons, marries with the
Duke of Richlieu. 179 Pradeau, de Pradelle Maistre de Camp. 237 Princess
Palatine, Anna Gongaza married to Prince Edward. 195
R.
RHetz, Jon-Paul-Francis de Gondy Abbot of Rhetz, has this surname from a fair
Lordship so called, which his Grandfather Albert Gondy had by matching with
Catherine Clermont Tonnerre, the Heiress of it. Coadjutor to the Archbishop of
Paris, his Character, 21. 128. made Archbishop of Corinth, 46. 105. Cardinal of
Rhetz. 308 Richlieu, Armand-Jehan du Plessis Cardinal de Richlieu, his Birth,
and Life, and Death, 9. Parallel with Mazarine. 31, 52 D. of Richlieu, Armand
Vignerot, Marquis de Pont de Curley, Duc de Richlieu, General of the Galleys
and Governor of Havre de Grace, marries with the Marchioness of Miossan de
Pons, 179 is Deputy Lieutenant at the Siege of Dunkirk, 359 Richo misnamed for
Pichon ( as Monsieur de la Barde the Marquess of Marolles) Governor of the
Castle of Vayre. 219 Riviere, Louys Barbier, Abbe de la Riviere, first a
Schoolmaster in Paris, then attending on Habert de Montmor, Bishop of Cahon,
Chaplain to the Duke of Orleans, by his complacent humor insinuated into the
Favor of the Duke. 16 Rochefoucault. The Prince of Marsillac la Rochefoucauld,
called Marsillac, 131. See 117. 123. he was Son of Francis Duke of
Rochefoucauld, and Peer of France, and Governor of Poictou, who dyed 1650.
208. his Brother Le Chevalier de la Rochefoucauld, Knight of Maltha, and set by
him to hold the Town of Damvilliers, 202, 203 Ronserol, de Roncerolles Maistre
de Camp, 250. he was Governor of Seurre-Bellegarde. Roquelaur, le Marquis de
Roquelaur created, 1652. Duke and Peer of France. 223 Rosa, Colonel Rose
Commander of the Germans after various Engagements with the Bavarians,
Lieutenant under du Plessis Praslin in the Rhetel-fight, 1650. is slain. [Note
that Priolo says his Brother, but Marolles that he himself was there slain]
238 Ruvigny, de Ruvigny.
S.
SAintagnian, le Comte de S. Agnan, Governor of Bourges. 202 Saint Amor, one
of the 4. first Gentlemen of the Kings Bedchamber, de Saint Maure, the Deputy
Governor of Havre de Grace, under the Duchess of Esguillon. 202 Sammigrin le
Marquis de Saint Megrin, Jacque Stuard, was killed in the fight at the
Fauxbourg de St. Anthoine. 315 Saint Quintin, the Earl of Quintin, the Son of
de la Moussaye Goion. 238 Saint Simon le Due de Saint Simon, Claude du Plessis
de Rasse, Governor of Blaye. 208 Sammicault de Saint Micau, Governor of
Seurre Bellegarde. Seuboeuf le Marquis de Sauveboeuf. 167 Savoy, Charles
Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Christina the Duchess Dowager Daughter of King Henry
IV. and Sister to our late Queen. 69 Senneterre, le Marquis de la Ferte,
Senneterre Henry made Marshall of France, 1651. 238. taken Prisoner by Don
Juan. 354 Seguier, Peter Seguier made Chancellor. 103, 289, 321. Servienne,
Abel Comte de Servienne, first the Kings Attorney in the Parliament of
Grenoble, then Master of Requests, afterward Secretary of State, and
Commissioner at Munster; whence he goes Ambassador to the Hague; his Speech
378. dies Commissioner of the Treasuty; his Character and death. 346,347.
Sillery le Marquis de Sillery-Bruslard, who married Rochefoucaulds Sister.
Sirot, the Baron of Sirot, 39. he was slain 1652. at Gergol upon the Loyre.
Sully Maximilian Francis Bethune, Duke of Sully. 321
T
TAlon, Omer Talon, Advocat General. 121 Tavan de Saux Comte de Tavan. 313,204.
Tellier, Michael le Tellier, Intendant de Justice, and Finances to the Kings
Army in Italy, there obliged Mazarine, was chosen Secretary of State, 1643. at
the laying down of Noyer; his praise, 218. removed by the P. of Conde, 272,
276. restored. 301. De Thou, Francis Auguste de Thou his Death 6. Extraction. 7
Thuillerie, Gaspar Cognet de la Thuillerie, Ambassador Extraordinary from the
King of France to the King of Swethland, and King of Denmark, to mediate a
Peace, 1644. effects it between Christiern IV. and Queen Christina, 1645. as
also a League of Commerce between the King of Denmark and Lewis the 14th. 377
Henry de la Tour, Viscount of Thurenne, he married the only Daughter of the
Duke de la Force, made Marshall of France, 1643. receives a rebuke at
Mariendale, 52. repaired at the overthrow of Merck, 54, 55. commands the French
Forces in Germany, and takes Triers, 57. At the imprisonment of the Princes
withdraws 140. 196. concludes with the Spaniard, 206. enters France, 210. is
raised from Guise, 211. fights stoutly at Rhetel, 236. returns to the Royal
Service upon the enlargement of the Princes, 268. after the rout of
Hoquincourt, stays the Royal Army, 311. attempts not carries Estampes; has
Senneterre in joint Commission, 313. engages in the Suburb of St. Anthony the
Prince, who hardly maintains his Quarter against great disadvantages, 315.
takes Mozome whilst Conde gets Rocroy, 351. he gets St. Menhould, 352. recovers
Stenay from Conde; whilst Senneterre takes in Montmidy, 353. and relieves
Arras, though Conde fought bravely; but cannot come at the Camp, whilst Don
Juan with Conde raise the Siege of Valenciennes, and take Senneterre Prisoner.
354,355. his Victory at Dunkyrk over Don Juan, 359. his Character, 25, 359.
noted by the King of Spains word. 414 P. Thomas of Savoy Commander of the
French in Italy, 69. left Prime Minister. 323 Tilliadet de Tilladet 330.
Governor of Brissac. Trace Alexander de Prouville de Tracy. 52 Tramble,
Charles de Clerc du Tremblay, Lieutenant of the Bastille. 125
V.
VAlette le Chevalier de la Valette Nogaret, Natural Son of the Duke of
Espernon, 209. slain. 220 Valey, Wall Colonel of an Irish Regiment. 238
Valone, Valon Maistre de Camp, Orleans his Lieutenant. 282 Vatteville, le Baron
de Batteville. 172 Vautorce, Francis Casette de Vautorte of the Kings Counsel.
385 Vendosme, Caesar Duke of Vendosme born 1594. married Frances de Lorraine,
by whom he had the Dukes de Mercoeur and Beaufort and Isabelle that married the
Duke of Nemours. 17 Vieville, Charles Marquis de la Vieuville, made High
Treasurer. 289 Villeroy, Charles de Neuville Marquis de Villeroy 28, made
Marshall de France, 1645. and Governor to the King, 8. years old. 64 Violet,
le President Viole. 109 Vitry, Francis Maria del' Hospital Duke of Vitry. 130.
Son of Nicolas de 1' Hospital Marshall de Vitry: who was imprisoned for having
struck with his Stick, being Governor of the Province Escoubleau de Sourdis
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who was Vice Admiral under Cardinal Richelieu. 8.
Voisin, Voisin Conseille au Parliament de Bourdeaux. 215 Uxelles le Marquis d'
Uxelles Louys du Bled. 129 Urillere, de la Urilliere Phelippeaux, Secretary of
State. 256.
W.
WEybrants, Jehan Bude de Hirel Comte de Guebrian Marshall of France, born a
Gentleman in Bretagne, but younger Brother: married Renee du Bec de Varde. In
the Swedish German War commanded the Auxiliary French Troops his Character and
Death, 42,43. Her death. 331.
The Errata's are some from the Original Edition at Charleville in Latin, as
these Proper Names.
Page 123. Mermont intended Nermont or Noirmont, whereas the Name is de
Noirmonstier, p. 215. Ball for Bailleul, p. 219. Richo for Pichon, p. 237.
Inville for Linville, p. 238; S. Quintin for Quintin, p. 297. Montrond for
Moronce,

Some for want of the Interpreters revise after second thoughts.
Page 7. l. 20. from James, read from his Father James, p. 147. Marshall d'
Hoquineourt, r. Hoquincourt, he was made M. afterward, p. 195. confines Madam
Longueville to the Palais Royal, r. summons M.L. to the Louvre, and 5 lines
after; the artifices of the Keeper of the Palais, r. the artifices of the
Princess Palatine, p. 217. He would march victoriously through into Provence,
r. he would m. v. through Languedoc into Provence.

Others have escaped the Corrector not a few literal, these are the more gross
or importing the sense.
Epist. to the Venetians for spacious, r. specious, p. 3. frighting, r.
slighting, p. 6. disgust, r. disguise, p.10. not agree, r. not long agree, p.
13. haste, r. hope, p. 16. desired that nothing, dele that, p. 27. seal, r.
scale, p. 30. condemn, r. be condemned, p. 67. l. 1. dele raising, p. 68. l.
12. dele parts, p. 69. l. 6. found, r. founded, l. 8. Waters, r. Waves, p. 73.
owning, r. owing, p. 76. deferred, r. deterred, p 80. Scholars in Tongue, r.
the Scholars ill Tongue, p. 90. to sound for, r. to sound forth, p. 94. her, r.
our, p. 95. Milanite, r. Milatene, p. 114. l. 26. avance, r. avarice, l. 31.
Longueville, r. Longueil, p. 145, l. 12. with the confidence, r. with the more
confidence, l. 22. French, r. French safety, p. 152. but the special
meditation, r. by the especial mediation, p. 164, l. 18. rising, r. using, p.
188. than, than, r. caught, than, p. 226. far, r, fare, p, 279. rising, r.
visiting, p. 353. l. 22. Rhevins, r. Rheims, l. 24. saving, r. sacring, p. 355.
Successors, r. succors, p. 359. restrained, r. strained, p. 375. stuck, r.
strict, p. 379. l. 20. suited, r. united, l. 21. ser, r. sent, p. 383. l. 6.
many r. and money, l. 10, 11, 12. Allies joined without the Arms of any, the
Spaniards having been brought to Terms of Peace glorious for us without, etc.
r. the Spaniards having been brought to Terms of Peace glorious for us without
the Arms of any Allies joined. [This Confusion is happened throught mistake of
a reference upon an enterlining] p. 392. Bark, r. Baraque.


