A Protestant Antidote Against POPERY: With A Brief DISCOURSE of the great
Atheisticalness and vain AMORS now in Fashion.

Written in a LETTER to a Young Lady.

By a Person of Honor.

DVBLIN, Printed; And are to be sold by Joseph Wild, Bookseller in
Castle-street. 1673.

MADAM,
I Know the Law of Custom has made it not only an usual favor, but an
expected Duty, to complement at least, if not flatter, such women as men write
to, especially the Great Ladies, who think none write well, that do not praise
them much, and those write best, who extol them most: High praises being like
good Poetry, Music in words, the sound of which may be agreeable, but truly to
deserve them, requires such a Gygantick size of merit, as is very
unproportionable to the slender-wasted Virtues of most Ladies, who are
over-eager to receive praises, and over-careless in meriting any, and the grand
reason is, because they know they usually have them without it, and that custom
must give it, though reason cannot, so obliging is the common courtesy of
England to Ladies, that it allows them to pretend to all praises as their due,
though few deserve any as their right. In a word, our English Ladies must have
their Characters writ, just as the Dutch Madams will have their Pictures drawn,
that is very handsome, though they themselves be never so ugly.

But, Madam, for your part, I know your perfections so abundantly, and my own
heart so truly, as I must beg the Law of Custom pardon here, it being beyond my
power to flatter, or complement, since I can neither overpraise your high
merit, or out-speak the real love, and true esteem, I have both for you and
them, so that knowing all manner of praises to be justly due to your merits, I
find I cannot here make you a present of any, without doing you an injury, by
intituling you to those praises by gift, which all know are your own by right.

For truly, Madam, the whole progress of your Actions have still been so highly
virtuous, and religiously strict, and ever believed, and proclaimed such, that
though your Beauty might make bad men wish you ill, yet your Virtues hinder
the worst from daring to think you so; for if they did, their own hearts must
at the same time condemn their own thoughts, and declare your innocence; like
Pilate, who with the same breath he condemned our Savior, said, He found no
fault in him.

But, Madam, though your virtuous life is so transparently excellent, yet for
all that, you ought to look on your unsoil'd reputation as no small blessing of
preservation in these scandalous times, where so few Handsome Ladies escape
censure, and so many deserve it; for now the extravagancies of Romance-Amours
are not only daily read, but almost hourly practiced; and women act, more than
Romances can write, whilst the sober rules of Virtue, and pious duties of
Religion, are seldom thought on, and most rarely practiced, our Youth being
generally grown, such fond friends of Mr. Hobbs his Books, as they are become
mere strangers to our Savior's Gospel, they living as if they were all bodies,
and had no souls, or had them but to lose, turning Religion into Raillerie, and
Gospet into Romance; for thus in short they mangle Scripture, that part which
is chiefly Historical, that is their mere Gospel-part; and that which is the
Gospel-part, is their mere Historical-part; and because they cannot bring the
Gospel to prove their Atheistical reasons, pretend to prove by reason, that
there is no Gospel; and if some of them now and then look over a Chapter, they
only pass through it, as a Spy does an Enemies Country, with a mischievous
design; and if they can but find in Scripture a seeming contradiction, that
they presently bring on the Stage, as they do Fools in Plays, to raillie with,
and make sport at; so great a Jest our Young Sparks now make of their
salvation, as to be pleased in the mere displeasing God, without considering
it is not only Atheistical madness, but Devilish folly, to make that their
Jest which they may be damned for in Earnest.

Thus our Youth throw away way their souls, and for their time they care not
how they spend it, (always provided it be not religiously) and therefore they
wast it most in the company of vain women, and are so eager and zealous in
their pursuit, and so constant in their service, as if they fancied God was
mistaken, and intended creating man for the woman, rather than the woman for
the man; but though all know God made the woman for the man: Yet what Critic
can tell us whether our new-mode has made the Gallant for the Mistress, or the
Mistress for the Gallant; but of this we are all sure, they are so plentifully
made for one another, that the Eastern Country Laws allow not with more freedom
plurality of Wives, than our new- English Customs admit plurality of
Mistresses; Nay, I may yet venture to say more, That the Liberty of our men
exceeds theirs; for they are permitted no more Wives, than they can well keep,
but ours are allowed as many Mistresses as they can any way get.

For indeed the Names of Tom and Bess are hardly more familiar here, than those
of Gallant and Mistress, and are so far from being esteemed Names of discredit,
that many of our Mode Ladies look on their Gallants as Beauty-marks, rather
than stains of Reputation, and for all they cannot but know, that the infection
of Gallants is as bad an enemy to credit, as the small Pox to Beauty, a common
ruiner of it; And though women's Gallants are in plain English no better than
the public Executioners of their reputations, and indeed no women will allow
them, but such as are willingly condemned to suffer (and women that slight
reputation are seldom fond of Chastity) Yet these abusers of love, and
murderers of fame, by their fair words and base Arts have so insinuated
themselves into their favor, as the women now forsooth, call their Gallants
their Friends, and if common report port may be credited, they are indeed their
bosom-ones; (and such women as value little what others say, seldom care much
what they themselves do) Custom having brought many of our women to that pass,
as they now glory in the number of their Gallants, esteeming them rather so
many Vouchers of their Beauty, than so many robbers of their Honor, the so
usual practice of this scandal, having taken away women's sense, that like
blackness amongst the Aethiopians, its commoness has removed its deformity:
And there is now such a forward Love-spring in the Nurseries of our Young
Ladies, as the very little ones learn to spell Amor with their Fescue, and
will pretend to entertain their Young Gallants, in the dark walks of Love, and
in the Labyrinth of its Intrigues, before they well know what the thing Love
is, or the name of Gallant means, and would have Servants come to them, before
they come to the Teens, (the ripeness of their minds outrunning that of their
bodies) and fancy men so mad as to believe, it is expectation makes a Blessing
dear; but that dull Presbyterian way of Love, is now quite out of Fashion, and
the loves of our Young Gallants are grown as fickle and mere skin deep, as
their Mistresses Fancies and Beauties; and Love-wounds that are but skin deep,
can never hurt the heart; and therefore though every day we hear of Hundreds of
Gallants that are dying for love in their Mistresses company* yet we cannot
read of one these many Ages that dyed for Love in the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, the obliging carriage of the Ladies of the times having made our
Young men so healthfully wise, so forwardly bold, or at least so impatiently
hasty, as they expect now a days to take Young women, as great Armies do weak
Towns, only by Summons, or Assaults, as not esteeming them worthy the time and
trouble of a Love-siege, though their Mistresses were as yielding as Rome it
self, which Writers say, was never besieged without being taken: that is in
short, they hold Handsome women worth enjoying, but not wooing. And that makes
our Young men so eager and inconstant in their Amors, as really it is a very
hard measuring-cast to tell, whether our Young Gallants use now more art, or
speed, in the getting or forgetting of their Mistresses.

But the best of it is, that the inconstancy of both Sexes are now so equally
matched, that I cannot write more of their Gallants inconstancies, than their
Mistresses make good of their own; for they deal with their Gallants, as their
Fashions, that which comes latest is still like'd best, and used most In a
word, the constancy and inconstancy of our Young men and women, are just like
water, and ice, where one still makes the other, and their loves (ice-like)
never last long, and as soon as it is dissolved, turns immediately to the same
it was before, without any alteration or prejudice: Nor can water be more apt
and ready by the coming of Frost to turn to ice, than our Young men and women's
hearts are apt and inclined to return to love, at the approach of fresh-fancied
Beauty. And truly the inconstancy of our Young men cannot be so great, nor
their inclinations so ill, but the tongues of many of our Young women are grown
as bad; for now if a Young maid be but cried up for handsome, and resolves to
continue virtuous, and therefore will not turn vain, and deserve censure, as
much as the rest, they will be sure to speak her as bad as the worst, and if
they cannot with Justice wound her virtue, they will attempt by ill Arts to
murder her reputation, (envy being the parent of wicked invention) it being
now a Mode principle amongst most of our handsome women, that no woman that
enjoyes a large proportion of Beauty, but must as an unavoidable appurtenance,
carry with it a load of scandalous censures (a false Character of some, though
too true a one of most) which occasions their not caring how unjustly they
increase another burden, in hope to lessen their own load, and by
overstretching the miscarriages of others greater than they should be, hope to
shrink theirs less than really they are, vainly fancying that by spattering
with dirt and reproach other women's reputations, were a kind of wiping clean
their own, which suits not at all with the mild and moderate rules of Virtue,
which only allows women to correct each others faults, by their good Examples,
but not to increase them by their bad censures: For, scandalous censures like
Mushroms grow without any root, so tender, and mutable a thing, is a handsome
woman's good Name: there is no taking its true Elevation by any certain outward
Rules and measures, Since it depends more on her Neighbors good or bad report,
than on her own virtuous, or ill actions; and more on what they say, than what
she does; and really such reports are usually so sophisticated with self
concerns, and so strongly biased by aversion or inclination, as you may daily
hear in common Discourse, both men and women turn virtue into vice, and vice
into virtue; and so characterize Good women to be bad, and bad women to be
good, speaking not as women deserve, but as they fancy; and therefore it often
happens, that many women save their reputations even by a speedy losing their
chastity, whilst other women lose their reputation in their very defense of it,
that is in short, more women lose their reputation in admitting to be much
courted (though that be all) than by being in enjoyed, and the reason is plain,
because the courtship is public to all, but the enjoyment is only private to
themselves, and it is more rational Two concerned persons should keep their own
council, than many unconcerned should keep it for them; so that it cannot
necessarily follow, that the reported reputation or disreputation of handsome
women must needs be the true issue of their merits, but often the by-blow of
chance, and therefore common report can be no right rule to measure women's
reputations by, for many reports have much of the Devils nature in them, who is
a liar from the beginning. And indeed if we but truly consider, we shall find
women generally censure one another, not as they are really faulty, but as
they appear, and are esteemed handsome; and therefore ugly women have the
privilege of Popes, who cannot err, but may do what they will, and take what
liberty they please, and handsome women will be as far from censuring their
actions, as young men from praising their persons, so that really in effect, we
find most women's censures are not proportionable to the ill, others act, but
rather suitable to the beauty they possess, which by their leave is a way of
judging, that is both irrational and uncharitable; since I am sure none can
deny, but that there are some unhandsom women, unchaste; and some chaste women
handsome, for virtue and beauty are not so declared enemies, but they
sometimes meet; though I cannot deny, but that virtue which in former Ages was
esteemed one of the greatest adornments of the soul, is now so Eclipsed by the
outward beauty of the body, as virtue and piety the true inward beauty)
cannot shine out: a good soul being nothing now in comparison of a good face,
beauty being now the Great Empress that commands the whole World, and makes
very Kings to un-King themselves and become subjects to her. And yet this so
adored beauty, (which all women are so ambitious of, and all men so court) has
at best no intrinsic value in it, but just like riches, they enjoy most, that
are contented with least; since it is not much, but enough, that is the true
measure of satisfaction. But Madam, it is now more than time to beg your pardon,
for I find I am strayed both beyond the time, and beside the road of my
designed Discourse, which is not to present you a Character, or List of the
fine Ladies, and mode-vices of the times, they will require a much wittier Pen
than I pretend to be Matter of, and a larger Volume than I design to trouble
you with: but this Character which indeed merits volumes of praises, I am sure
I can give you without needing wit, or abusing of time; and if I could here
cast up the sum total of all the vices that your Sex are either guilty of,
or scandalized with, (which I Will assure you are more than a few) their number
might be tedious to read, but need not be disagreeable for you to hear, since
by naming all those faults, they are infected with, I should but tell all those
you are free from.

But, Madam, my design is now to remove my Battery, and change my Scene of
Writing, as you have your place of Living, and to level my Discourse, not at
the vices and pleasures of London, nor the pastimes of the Court, but at your
Country Neighbors; the Woods and Mountains of Macroome, which renders it a
place much fitter to exercise your patience, than satisfy your delight, were
you of the humor of most Ladies; but all know you are not only an Excellent
woman, but an Extraordinary Wife, I mean in Goodness, (for it is rare now to
meet a Wife that is not extraordinary) for you take as much satisfaction in the
cares of well managing and improving your Estate, as most other Ladies delight,
in the lavishing theirs, so that I can truly say, you have not only brought
your Lord a large sum of money for your Portion, but a continued increase of
Rent by your Industry.

And I am sure, Madam, if you were now ask't as the Philosopher was, Where was
his home; you would answer now, as he did then, My home is still where my chief
business is. so that now your chief concerns and Family, (which is still the
good Wives Treasure) being at Macroome, I must conclude your heart is there
also.

A place where in lieu of London, crowds of good Company, and swarms of
divertisements; you must prepare to meet with, and do penance to your self,
among the Flocks of Priests and Friars, against whose Popish insinuations, and
infectious persuasions, I here present you a small, but necessary Collection of
Arguments to carry about you, as a preservative in your own Religion, and an
Antidote against theirs; and though I cannot pretend this pocket Pistol is a
sufficient Battering piece, to beat down their infallible Church, yet I doubt
not but it will at least be a sufficient Lifeguard to defend you and your
Chamber against their assaults.

They are most of them argumentative reasonings I picked out of Mr.
Chilling-worth, as one that reasons best, and satisfies me most, of any I ever
read; and knowing you want a Collection of choice flowers, I heartily wish that
these I have gathered out of his Garden, and here sorted and made up to present
you in a Nosegay, may serve you against the unpleasing savor of Popish
Doctrine, and I wish they may not altogether degenerate from the common nature
of flowers, which the Naturalist tells us, grow larger and better by being
transplanted: so that I hope you will not find them the worse, nor like them
the less, for being transplanted, but receive these Arguments just as you do
your Rents, without caring whether your Tenants have the Money out of their own
bags, or borrow it; so you have it to supply your occasions.

Truly, Madam, I have taken some pains, and spent much time in reading the
Discourses of the Papists against our Religion, and though I have considered
their Arguments without the least Byas, or antedated prejudice; yet I can give
no better a Character of them, than I do of ill Dealers, the more I have to do
with them, the worse I like them: they savor much of self-interest, teaching
Church Government, before Gospel Obedience, witness their holding Marriage a
greater crime in a Priest than Fornication, the one is but forbid by their
Churches Law, which they all know is disputable, the later by the Law of
Christ, which they cannot but know, ought to be past all dispute.

And truly, Madam, if you please to admit your reason to make but a short
progress into the Popish Religion, you shall find much to create your wonder,
but little to satisfy your reason or belief; for the Gospel of Christ; is the
Gospel of Truth, and therefore ought still to be pictured naked as Truth,
without any Art of Roman Dresses, which are only obscure shadings of the true
light of Scripture, by making dark Paraphrases on the plainest Gospel Commands,
which in all reason ought to be plain enough for the meanest capacity; for God
forbid it should be otherwise, for the meanest Christian must be saved or
damned, for keeping or not keeping them; and sure God's Justice will never send
persons to Hell, for not doing what they could not understand was his Will,
they should do; that were such a cruelty, as if a man should torment his
servant for not doing his Errant, when he knew he did not understand his
Message; yet the Papist must not take these plain Gospel Commands as such, but
as they are distilled in the mysterious politic Lymbeck of the Popish
interest: indeed Mystery and Obedience is so interwoven in that Religion, that
Papists must take what their Priest tells them, as men do wives, for better,
for worse, and must marry their Faith to their Churches infallibility, which
allows that only to be Gospel which their Church says shall be, not what the
Apostles write is so; for the Papists must obey the Pope, though no where
commanded in the Gospel; but must not read the Gospel, though they are
commanded there to do it.

Nay, when once the Papist can but touch the small Needle of any ones reason
with the Great Loadstone of the Harmonious Doctrine of a necessary Obedience to
their infallible Church, then they make such follow it, to every point of the
Compass, be it good, bad, or indifferent; and so they sail all their life, in a
Trade-wind of ignorance and superstition, and must belive their Priests words
before their own senses in the plainest objects of them; as in the Miracle of
Transubstantiation, where you must have eyes and see not, hands and feel not,
but must believe in a moment real Bread and Wine to be turned into perfect
Flesh and Blood, though you cannot see the least change whatsoever, yet they
are bound to belive their Priest, before their eyes, smell, or taste, nor dare
their Priest say, that the consecrated Bread (which they esteem the real Body
of Christ) will be less mouldie, or more uncertain of corruption after
Consecration than before; and the jest of it is, that at the same time the
Papists believe that Miracle, they also believe this Scripture, That God will
not suffer his Holy One to see corruption. And though for these and many other
reasons, I cannot believe this Transubstantiation-Miracle, yet I cannot but
admire this Miracle that belongs to Transubstantiation, which is, how the Pope
can bring so many, that have sense and reason, to believe it.

But I shall pass by their adoring this Sacrament, their praying to Saints, and
a multitude of their superstitious observances never used in the primitive
Church; and shall only desire you, Madam, to observe in general, that the
Papists follow the Gospel, just as they read Hebrew, that is backward; for God
plainly commands, that all should search the Scripture. And our Blessed Savior
ordered the Sacrament to be administered in both kinds, 1 Cor. 11. Chap. 28. v.
And St. Paul forbids public prayers in an unknown Language, but that which is
most for Edification, 1 Cor. 14 c. 15, 16. v. But these plain positive commands
do not hinder the Church of Rome from declaring, that unlearned men shall not
read and search the Scriptures; but if we believe St. Paul before the Pope, we
may read in the 17. of the Acts, 11. v. how he commended the Noble Bereans for
searching the Scriputes, and therefore if searching the Scriptures had not been
not only lawful, but a commendable act, certainly St. Paul would never have
commended them for so doing. So that the Popish Clergy forbids the reading the
Scriptures, under a pretense that their Laity might not truly understand them.
Next, the Church of Rome allows only their Clergy (except free Princes, for
they are excepters of persons, though God is not) to receive the Communion but
in one kind, though our Savior commands, that all drink of the Cup; and the
Papists cannot deny, but that the Communion was taken in both kinds in all
Christian Churches for above a Thousand years after Christ.

And Lastly, for the poor vulgar sort, they shall only hear their public
prayers in an unknown Tongue, viz. Latin, which a Tenth part of them do not
understand; and therefore how that can be most for Edification, let the Papists
tell if they can, I am sure we cannot, nor do we believe they can; without the
help of another Transubstantiation-Miracle, and make an unknown Language to
most, to be changed at the same time into a common known Language to all.

And now, Madam, I shall humbly desire you to consider in general, that though
the Papists do out-noise us: (as shallow rivers do still the the deepest) with
the high and mighty Rodomontades of their Churches infallibility; yet such
high Rants, without true proof, are but like School-boyes paper-Kites, which
soar high and lofty, but have nothing else worth taking notice of. They will
have the confidence to tell you, that their Popish Church is the Roman
Catholic, and only true Christian Church in the whole world: But the
Protestants Answer to this their boasting, is, that all the Christian Churches
in the whole world (besides, the Popish Churches) though more in number than
they) declare quite contrary. They will ask you, where your Protestant Church
was before Luther, which was wittily answered by one; (where the Papist Church
never was) in the Bible.

The Papists do divert themselves very much at our stiling our King, Head of
the Church, as we do, for their doing so, for we esteem our King, Head only in
his own Dominions, without the Popes title of infallible; and sure it is more
rational that those of a Kingdom should allow their King to be Head of the
Church in his own Kingdoms, than that a few Cardinals should make the Head of
the Church over all Kingdoms, And for all their Jeasting, I am sure we can show
(in sober earnest) Scripture-presidents for Kings being Heads of Churches in
their own Dominions, which is more than the papists can show for their Pope, or
his Churches infallibility: for sure they cannot object against it as new
Doctrine (though Doctrine that is new is their greatest Trade) that the Kings of
Judah, and the first Christian Emperors were Heads of the Jewish Churches and
in their own Dominions: And Solomon tells us, That a Divine Sentence is in the
lips of the King, and his mouth transgresses not in Judgment (which I am sure
Popes have not, witness Liberius) and Solomon gives the reason, because the
Heart of the King is in the Hand of the Lord. If the Papists will pretend so
much Scripture for their Pope, I shall only answer, It Is more than ever
Protestants read, or the Apostles writ.

The Papists will tell you with a great deal of confidence, that though we say
the Bible is the Religion of Protestants, yet there is no Protestant Religion,
or Church, mentioned in the whole Creed, which are the Articles of the
Christian Faith: and they will tell you, that their Church is the Catholic
Church, and to believe the Catholic Church was an Article of the Christian
Faith from the very infancy of the Church in the beginning of the Apostles
time, Now let the Papists tell us, if they bring this as an Argument against
the Protestant Religion in the Bible, or not; if not, what cause have they to
name it, or what need have we to answer it; but if it be one, we make this
reply, That the Roman Church is no more named in the Apostles Creed, than the
Protestant Church is; f^r the Apostles Creed was made before the Roman Church
was a Church, and this I am sure they cannot deny; so that since the Catholic
Church was then in being, and the Roman Church not in being, it must
necessarily follow, that the Roman Church cannot be the Catholic Church
mentioned in the Apostles Creed, and consequently is not the Mother Church, as
the Papists would have her to be: thus the Papists have so overcharged this
Argument to shoot at us, as it recoils and flies in their own faces.

And of kin to this, is their grand Battering piece of all, which so thunders
in the ears of all Papists, and makes the Popes power so absolute, and the poor
credulous Papist so obedient, and that is the power given by our Savior to St.
Peter, in the 16th of St. Matthew, beginning the 18th verse. Thou art Peter,
and on this Rock I will build my Church, and give thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven; and whomsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven;
and whomsoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven; and these
words the Papists understand literally, that St. Peter's person is the Rock
that Christ builds his Church on, which cannot possibly be, by the verses just
following; for there when our Savior tells his Disciples of his going to
Jerusalem, where he must suffer many things, and be killed, and raised again
the Third day; Peter took him, and began to rebuke him; be it far from thee,
Lord, this shall not be unto thee: But our Savior turned, and said unto Peter,
Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense to me, for thou savourest not
the things that be of God, but those that be of men. By which words it is most
clear and evident, that our Savior did not mean Peter's person could be the
Rock of the Christian Church; for if Peter's person had been that Rock meant,
sure our Savior would never have removed it behind him; and it would be not
only irrational, but impious, to believe that Christ would build his Church on
Satan, for so he calls St. Peter's person; and 'twere as unreasonable to
believe that the Rock of Christ's Church could be an offense to him as St.
Peter's person was, and as improbable again as all this, that Christ's Church,
the Foundation of all Christianity, should savor, not of the things that be of
God, but those that are of men, as Peter's person did.

Therefore if you will but please to read the words of our Savior carefully,
you shall find they are most plain, for verse 13th. When Jesus came into the
Coast of Caesarea, He asked his Disciples, Whom do men say that I am, and they
said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias,
or one of the Prophets, but whom say ye that I am; and Simon Peter answered and
said, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God: And I say also unto thee, that
thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, (not this person) I will build my Church,
that is (upon this Rock of Faith) that I am Christ the Son of the Living God, I
build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Now this
must necessarily relate to his faith, not his person; for the gates of Hell,
that is the power of evil, did prevail against Peter's person, or he had not
denied and forsworn his. Lord and Master again and again; and been afterward
proved blameworthy by St. Paul to his face, and indeed as blameworthy as any
of his Disciples; so that it is most plain, that Christ's words (of making him
the Rock of the Christian Church) related not to his person, but his faith of
Christ's being the Son of the Living God.

And for the other part; whereas the Papists believe a particular favor and
power, given by our Savior to S Peter; of the Keys of Heaven; that was given
as much to the Eleven Disciples, as to him, as you may read in the 18th of St.
Matthew, and in the 20th of St. John's Gospel, and the 23, 24. verses; As my
Father has sent me, even so send I you, and when he had said this, he breathed
on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose soever sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are
retained. So that you see this power is general, to the Disciples, and not in
particular to St. Peter, more than to any of the rest, as the Papists
mis-believe.

The Papists have many such Questions, which I am sure, Madam, you have neither
the patience to read, nor I the time to write, but those that are most material
of them you will find, I have here presented you, truly answered, by pure
Scripture, clear reasons, plain arguments, and all in few words, fit for the
weakest memory, or smallest pocket, to carry about them: for true reason does
not consist in large Volumes, long Gowns, or gray Beards; for many live to One
and Twenty, without attaining to years of discretion; the degrees of Age being
not still the measures of wisdom, for the world will never be without old
Fools, and young Philosophers.

And truly, Madam, for my part, I cannot so much as think of the Papists
Religion without wonder, that so many rational men of them should rather fasten
their faith of salvation on the pretended infallibility of their Church (which
is denied by most Christians) than on the Holy Scriptures, which is granted by
all, to be the Will and Word of God; and the very Foundation of their Churches
Foundation, as containing in it all things necessary to our salvation. And we
Protestants have at least this satisfaction and advantage, that not only the
Papists, but all sorts of Christians that are in the circumference of the whole
world, meet and join with us in this center of Faith, that the Scriptures
contain all things necessary to our salvation; which being a general granted
Truth, I confess, I admire, how any Papist can make the least scruple, which is
the safest Heavenly Guide, the Pope or the Gospel: If there be any rational man
so extravagant as to put them in the same balance, and to commit a rape upon
his reason, I shall only desire him to consider this plain Question; If ^he
were to go a Journey in an unknown way, would he not think it more rational and
safe to follow a certain true Guide, that all the Christians in the world
declare, is certainly able and ready to show him the right way, than to follow
a pretended Guide, which the greatest part of the Christians in the world
assures him will lead him out of it; And this being the real difference between
the Papist and Protestant in Gross, concerning the Heavenly Guide, the Bible,
and the Pope, I think I need now say no more, because so many have already said
so much, and I am sure enough, to satisfy any, except such, who will believe a
crooked Rule is better, to draw a straight line by, than a right one.

And now Madam I shall only beg, so much of your patience as to let me tell
you, that the plot and Heads of this following discourse, I have Extracted out
of the worthy Chilingworth. Before I begin the discourse it self; I know in
writing a play, to have Ranked the plot in the Front of it, and to make the
whole design of the Prologue to be the Key, to uncipher the plot of the play,
(though anciently in use) had been now, not only out of fashion, but beside
reason; For the design of plays, aiming chiefly to please the senses, they
ought to be compounded and mixed with hopes and fears, certainties, and
uncertainties, Expectations, and de^ays of the event of the plot; which being
all so interwoven together, creates the agreeableness of the play; for when
once the whole plot is discovered, the pleasure of the play is ended; like
Hare-Hunting, the sport lies not in presently taking the Hare, but in following
him, in all his Rings and Doubles, and those that love plays, and such
Huntings, resemble jealous men, who eagerly pursue what they apprehend to
overtake, or as old age, which we all pray to attain, but fear to approach.

But now I come to soar my discourse to a much higher pitch, and a more
Elevated Subject, and to treat of the most noble part of man, the Soul, and of
true Religion the only way to Heavenly felicity, for without Holiness, no man
shall see the Lord; We must therefore now Madam, change the Scene of sense for
a spiritual one, and climb where earthly nature, can never follow us, to the
pure and high Region of Heaven, which will inform us that the earlier
discovering our plot of attaining Heaven, will but better the play, and the
more speed, the better success: for the joys of Heaven are everlasting, and
admits of no increase or diminution: not ^ike the divertisements of
Stage Plays, or Hunting, or any earthly delights, which cannot last, but for a
season, and decay in our very enjoying them, and must soon leave us, or we
them; but Heavenly thoughts the more and longer we practice them, the better we
shall like them; Heavenly joys so far exceeding all we can here leave, as they
are all we can ever aspire to have; this we all know, but few of us practice,
and we all love God, but few love to keep his Commandments.

I shall therefore now Madam tell you, as the Prologue to my ensuing discourse,
that the grand Plot, and whole design of it, moves chiefly on these two hinges,
first in confirming you, that the foundation of the Protestant Religion is
built on God's holy Word, the Scriptures; which we Protestants, esteem to be a
perfect Rule of Faith, and guide to our actions, and the true Touchstone to
try all matters by, that relate to the good of our Souls, as certainly
containing in it, all things necessary to our salvation. The second thing I
chiefly design to prove, is, that neither the Pope, or the Popish Church are
infallible; and these two shall make up the principal stories, in the little
Model of this small building. The pretended infallibility of the Church of
Rome, is the grand persuasive Argument, and lure to invite men to it, and the
strongest commanding Garrison in all the Popes power; and all other Arguments,
and Persuasions, are but like the small open Villages about this Garrison,
which must be servants to them, that are masters of it; and if a Papist can be
but once convinced, that neither the Pope, nor the Popish Church are
infallible, they will soon be brought to reason, and our remaining differences,
will not be very considerable: I shall therefore only lightly discourse on
them, and shall no further trouble you Madam, then briefly, to answer them in
my own defense, I meet them, or as they follow me, and shall only do as the
Wolf does when pursued, snap, and bite in his own defense, against all
opposers, without altering his pace, or changing his Road: I shall neither
meddle with the Papists, but as I meet them in the way, or toward making of my
way, to my two designed points, which are (as I said before,) to prove the
Scripture to be a perfect Rule of Faith, and guide to our actions: and to
answer, as I go, the Papists main Arguments and objections against it.

Next, that it is against all Scripture, and reason, that either the Pope, or
the Popish Church should be infallible; which is the main design of this
discourse, and if I can by God's assistance make but the Papists believe
reason, (when against their own Church,) I doubt not but by this little Pigmie
discourse (as very dwarfish as it is,) not only to hinder many tottering
Protestants from turning Papists, but to bring some stubborn Papists to turn
Protestants, or at least not to have such an infallible good opinion of their
Church, and so damnable a bad one of ours.

And now Madam, it is requisite that this my discourse should be ended, as soon
as your Patience; and therefore all that I shall add either to the excusing my
self, or justifying Mr. Chilingworth, is, that thus far of this discourse being
my own writing, I confess, deserves only my Apology, and scarce your perusal;
but the following discourse being extracted out of Mr. Chillingworth, deserves
your reading, but needs not any Apology.

And because I find the word Protestant is so badly, and over-largely
interpreted; I shall first acquaint you, that we are not to understand by the
word Protestant, the Doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Geneva or only the
Articles of the Church of England, but that wherein they all agree with perfect
Harmony; that the Bible is a perfect Rule of our Faith, and guide to our
Actions; and this (after having made the most diligent, and impartial search of
the true way to Eternal happiness.) I fully believe, and that we can never find
any convincing satisfaction, but on this Rock of Gods word, the Bible, which I
conceive to be the only true Religion of Protestants.

If the Pope were indeed (what he unjustly says he is, and the Papists
unreasonably believe him to be,) an infallible guide, then there needed no
Bible, but if the Bible be, then there needs no Pope; for if I were to go a
journey, and had a guide that could not err, what need I be taught the way, and
having such a guide, what need I apply my self to another: So that in a word
let us inform our selves the best we can, and consider as much as we please,
the more consideration we take, the more confirmation we shall find, that there
is no other foundation for a considering Christian to build an assured
dependency on, than the Scriptures, for I am fully assured that God does not;
(and therefore man ought not to) require of any man more than this, to believe
the Scripture to be the word of God, to use our best endeavors to find the
true sense of it, and to live, to our utmost according to it.

This I am sure in reason we ought to believe a wiser choice; Then if I should
guide my self by the Roman Churches authority, and infallibility; when really
they have nothing of certainty, but their uncertainty; witness Pope against
Pope, Councils against Councils, some of their Fathers against others, and
rather then fail some against themselves, new Traditions enrolled, and old ones
Cashiered, in a word one Church against another, and (if that be not enough)
the Church of one age, against the Church of another; Whereas the Scripture
being true and unalterable, and containing all things necessary to our
Salvation; I am secure, that by believing nothing else, I shall believe no
falsehood in matter of Faith, and if I mistake the true sense of Scripture, and
so fall into error; yet I am secured from any dangerous error, because whilst I
am truly endeavoring to find the true ground of Scripture, I cannot but hold
my error without obstinacy, and be ready to forsake it, when a more probable
and true sense shall appear unto me: and then being assured, that all necessary
truths are plainly set down in Scripture; I am certain by believing the
Scripture, to believe all necessary truth, and he that does so, if his life be
answerable to his Faith, how is it possible he should fail of Salvation.

And though the Roman Church pretend to be a perfect guide of Faith, and
teacher of all Divine Truths; yet sure that Title might much better, and more
justly be given to the Scriptures, as their Teacher and Master.

The Roman Church brags how ancient their Church is, but doubtless they cannot
deny, but the Scripture is more ancient, if they will but allow the Mother to
be older than the Child.

The Papists say their Church is a means of keeping Christians at unity, so are
also the Scriptures, to those that believe them in unity of belief, in matters
necessary.

The Papists say their Church is Catholic, cetainly the Scripture is more
Catholic; for all true Christians in the universal world do now, and ever did
believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, so much at least, as to contain
all things necessary to salvation; whereas the Papists say, They only are the
true Church, and all other Christians (though more than they) give them the lie
for saying so.

By following the Scriptures, I follow that whereby the Papists prove their
Churches Infallibility; for were it not for Scripture, what pretense could the
Papists have for it, or what true Notion could they receive of it; so that by
so doing, the Papists must plainly confess, That they themselves are surer of
the Truth of Scripture, than of their Churches Authority; for we must be surer
of the proof, than of the thing proved, or else it is no proof: so that
following Scripture, I follow that which must be true, if the Papists Church be
true; for their Church allows it is truth; whereas if I follow the Roman Church,
I must follow that, which though the Scripture be true, may be false, nay more,
must be false, if the Scripture be true; because the Scripture is against it.
Following the Papists Church, I must be a servant to my Savior, and a subject
to my King, only at the pleasure of the Pope, and renounce my Allegiance, when
the Popes will is to declare him an Heretic; nay, I must believe virtue vice,
and vice virtue, if he pleases; for he both makes and unmakes Scripture as he
thinks convenient; witness the Apocrypha, which has not past for Canonical,
but of late years, in the Papists Church, who interpret Scripture according to
their Doctrine, but will not judge their Doctrine according to Scripture, for
none like to weigh light Money in true scales. In short, the Pope adds, and
lessens, and interprets Divine Laws as he pleases, and they must stand for
Laws, and be obeyed as such; so that in effect he rules his people by his own
Laws, and his own Laws by his own Lawyers, his Clergy, who dare not speak nor
uphold them, other than just such as the Pope would have them; and indeed
Cardinal Richelieu gave the reason why more hold the Pope above the Councils,
than the Councils above the Pope, because the Pope gave Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, but the Councils had none to give: and though the Papists say, his
Holiness cannot err, yet let not the Papists forget what God says in the
Scripture, if (not only the Pope) but if an Angel from Heaven shall preach any
thing against the Gospel of Christ, let him be accursed.

In following the Scripture we have God's express command, and no color of any
prohibition, but to believe; the Popish Church infallible, we have no
Scripture-command at all, much less an express one.

Following the Popish Church, we must believe many things, not only above
reason, but against reason, witness Transubstantiation, whereas following the
Scripture, we shall believe many miseries, but no impossibilities; many things
above our reason, but nothing against it; Nay, we need not believe any thing,
which reason will not convince us we ought to believe; for reason will convince
any sober Christian? that the Scripture is the Word of God, and there is no
reason can be greater than this, that God says it, therefore it must be true.

In a word, we Protestants believe, that all things necessary to our salvation,
are evidently contained in Scripture, and what is not there evidently
contained, cannot be necessary to be believed, and our reason is just and
clear, because nothing can challenge our (...) as to salvation, but what has
descended to us from our Blessed Savior Christ Jesus, by original and
universal Tradition; now nothing but Scripture has thus descended to us,
therefore nothing but Scripture can challenge our Belief.

Now the grand difference between the Papists and us, concerning the Scripture,
is this; We hold the Scripture to be the only perfect Rule whereby to judge of
Controversies. The Papists say, That they acknowledge the Scriptures to be a
perfect Rule, only they deny that it excluded unwritten Tradition, which in
effect is this; they say, It Is as perfect a Rule, as a Writing can be, only
they deny it to be as perfect a Rule as a Writing may be; either they must
revoke their acknowledgment, or retract their contradiction of it, for both
cannot possibly stand together: for if they will but stand to what they have
granted, that Scripture is as perfect a Rule of Faith, as a Writing can be,
they must then grant it so complete, as it needs no addition; and so evident,
that it needs no interpretation, for both these properties are requisite to a
perfect Rule: and that a writing is capable of both these properties, and
perfections, is most plain, for he that denies it, must say that something may
be spoken which cannot be written, for if such a complete evident rule of
Faith, may be delivered by word of mouth, as the Papists pretend may, and is,
and whatsoever is delivered by word of mouth, may also be written; then such a
complete and evident rule of Faith, may also be written, for the Argument is
most plain, whatsoever may be spoken may be written; a perfect rule of Faith
has been spoken, therefore a perfect rule of Faith may be written; If the
Papists cannot see this plain conclusion, they had best desire more light to be
added to the Sun:

The Papist pretend their Church to be, the infallible Teacher of all Divine
Truths, and an infallible interpreter of all obscurities in the Faith, but the
Papists will, I hope, give us leave to admire, how they can pretend to Teach
them in all places, without writing them down, that is certainly, beyond the
reach of their power to do, as well as our belief that it is to be done.

And for the Papists saying there must be a living authority, beside the
Scripture, or else controversies cannot be ended; Protestants answer; necessary
controversies, are and may be decided, and if they be not, it is not the defect
of the rule in Scripture, but the default of men; so that if necessary
controversies be ended, it is no matter if the unnecessary be not; for doubtless
if God had required it, he would also have provided some means to effect it;
but sure it does not stand with any reason it should be the Pope, because he
cannot be a Judge, being a party; indeed in civil controversies, a Judge
without being a party may end them, but in controversies of Religion, a Judge
of necessity must be a concerned party, and I am sure the Pope to us is the
chief, and most concerned party, being really concerned as much as his Popedom
is worth.

Now we Protestants make the Papists this plain answer, that the means of
agreeing differences, must necessarily be, either by the appointment of God, or
men; men sure it cannot be, for then rational wise Protestants, may do, as
well as Papists, for let the Papists show us if they can where God has
appointed that the Pope alone, or any confirmed by the Pope, or that Society of
Christians, which adhere to him, shall be the infallible Judge of
controversies; we desire the Papists, if they can to let us see any of those
assertions, plainly set down in Scripture, as in all reason a thing of this
nature ought to be, or at least delivered with a full consent of Fathers, nay
let them so much as show us where it is in plain terms, taught by any one
Father, in Four hundred years after our blessed Savior Christ; and if the
Papists cannot do this, as we believe they cannot; where I pray is their either
Scripture or Reason, that the Pope or his Councils should obtrude themselves as
Judges over us Protestants.

Next we would desire to know from the Papists, whether they do certainly know
or not, the sense of those Scriptures, by which they are led to the knowledge
of their Church, for if they do not, how come they to know their Church is
infallible; but if they do, then sure they ought to give us leave to have the
same means and ability to know other plain places in Scripture, which they have
to know theirs; for if all Scriptures be obscure, how come they to know the
sense of those places; but if some place of it be plain, why pray may not
Protestants understand them as well as Papists.

The Papists say, That the Scriptures are in themselves true and infallible,
yet without the direction of the Church, we have no certain means to know,
which Translations be faithful and Canonical, or what is the true meaning of
Scriptures; and this is the common Argument and general Relief of all Papists:
To which the Protestants answer, That yet all these things must first be known,
before we can know the directions of their Church to be infallible; for the
Papists cannot pretend any other proof of it, but only some Texts of Canonical
Scripture, truly interpreted; therefore either they must be mistaken in
thinking there is no other means to know these things, but their Churches
infallible direction, or else we must be excluded from all means of knowing her
directions to be infallible; for the proof must be surer than the thing to be
proved, or it is no proof; And upon better consideration, I am confident the
Papists dare not deny, but that it is most certain, Faith has been given by
other means than the Church; for sure they will not say, that Adam received
Faith by the Church, nor Abraham, nor Job, who received Faith by Revelation;
and also the Holy Apostles, who received Faith by the miracles, and preaching
of our Blessed Savior: so that you see, and they cannot deny, but their
general Doctrine is contradictory; and to make it yet plainer, I desire to know
of the Papists, if they should meet with a man, that believed neither
Scripture, Church, nor God, but declares he is both ready, and willing to
believe them all, if the Papist can show him sufficient grounds to build his
Faith upon, will the Papist tell such a man, there are no certain grounds how
he may be converted to their Church; or there are; if the Papists say there are
none, they make Religion an uncertain thing: but if they say there are, then
they must necessarily either argue woman-like, that their Church is infallible,
because it is infallible, or else show there are other certain grounds besides,
saying, the Church is infallible, to prove its infallibility.

The Papists demand of the Protestants, if they believe the Apostles wrote all
the Scriptures, for if they did not, how come we to call and believe them
Apostolical, and not the Writings of those that writ them: To which we answer;
Though all the Scriptures were not written by the Apostles themselves, yet they
were all confirmed by them; and though a Clerk writes a Statute, and the King,
Lords and Commons confirm it in Parliament; I believe they would esteem it very
improper to call it the Statute of such a Clerk, though writ by him, but an Act
of Parliament, because it was confirmed by all their consents, and so becomes
their Act, not the Clerks.

The Papist desires us to tell them in what Language the Scriptures remained
uncorrupted, and we desire them, to satisfy us whether it be necessary to know
it, or not necessary, if it be not, I hope we may do well without it, but if it
be necessary we desire first, that they will please to tell us what became of
their Church for One thousand five hundred years together, all which time they
must confess, they had no certainty of Scripture; till the time that Pope
Clement the Eighth, set forth their approved Edition of the vulgar Translation,
and none sure can have the confidence to deny, but that there was great variety
of Copies current in diverse parts of their Church, and read so, which Copies
might be false in some things, but more than one sort of them could not
possibly be true in all things. And Pope Sixtus Quintus his Bible differed from
Pope Clement his Bible, in a multitude of places, which makes us desire to be
satisfied of the Papists, whether before Pope Sixtus Quintus his time, their
Church had any defined Canon of Scriptures or not, for if they had not, then
it is most evident that their Church was a most excellent keeper of Scripture,
for fifteen hundred years together, that had not all that time defined, what
was Scripture, and what was not, but if the Papist say they had, then we
demand, was that set forth by Pope Sixtus Quintus, or was it set forth by Pope
Clement, or if by a third different from them both, why do they not name him;
if it were that set forth by Pope Sixtus, then it is now condemned by Pope
Clement, if that of Clement, 'twas condemned by that of Sixtus, so that error
must necessarily be betwixt them, let them choose which side they please.

And for the book of Maccabees, I hope they will allow it defined Canonical,
before St. Gregorie's time, though he would not allow it Canonical, but only
for the Edification of the Church.

We further desire to be satisfied of the Papists, if the book of
Ecclesiasticus, and Wisdom, and the Epistle to St. James, were by the holy
Apostles approved Canonical, or not, if they were approved by the Apostles
Canonical, sure the Papists cannot deny, but they had a sufficient definition
and authority, not to question them, and therefore erred in doing so. And if
they were not approved Canonical by the Apostles, with what impudence dare the
Roman Church now approve them as Canonical, and yet pretend that all their
Doctrine is Apostolical, and if they say these books were not questioned, they
should do well to tell which books they mean, which were not always known to
be Canonical, but have afterward been received by the Roman Church to be such,
so that this argument reaches these, as well as these.

And further we are to consider, that there is not the same reasons, for the
Churches absolute infallibility, as for the Apostles, and Scriptures, for if
the Church falls into an error, it may be reformed by comparing it with the
Rules of the Apostles Doctrine in Scripture, but if the Apostles have erred in
delivering the Doctrine of Christianity in Scripture, then the Roman Church
cannot be infallible, for Apostles, Prophets, and Canonical Writers, are the
foundation of the Church, as St. Paul says it is built upon the foundation of
Apostles and Prophets.

And now to conclude this part of my discourse in very few words, let the
Papists answer, if they can but these five words. All Scripture is Divinely
inspired. Let them show us so much for the Roman Church, and show us if they
can, where it is written in Scripture, that all the decrees of the Popish Church
are Divinely inspired, and all our Controversies will be at an end, but I
believe they can ever do that, without another Transubstantiation miracle of
words.

The Papists desire us to show them an exact Catalogue of our fundamentals, to
which we answer. That God may be sufficiently known to one, and not
sufficiently declared to an either, and consequently that may be fundamental,
and necessary to one, which is not to another; which variety of circumstances
tenders it impossible to set down an exact Catalogue of fundamentals, for God
requires more of them to whom he gives more, and less of those to whom he gives
less, more of a Commander of a Kingdom, than a poor simple Turn spit. It Is a
plain revelation of God to us Protestants, that the Sacrament the Eucharist
should be administered in both kinds, 1 Cor. 11 c. 28 v. And that the public
Hymns and Prayers of the Church, should be in such a Language as is most for
Edification, 1 Cor. 14, and 15, 16. yet the Church of Rome, not seeing this, by
reason of the vail, would be very angry, if we told them 'twould prejudice
their supposed infallibility.

We read in St. Matthew, that the Gospel was to be preached to all Nations, and
this was a truth revealed before our Saviors Ascension, yet if the Church had
been asked, before the conversion of Cornelius, they would have certainly told
you, it had not been necessary to teach all Nations; for it is most apparent out
of the 11th of the Acts, they all believed so, until St. Peter was better
informed by a vision from Heaven, and the conversion of Cornelius, and then
they turned quite of a differing belief, and esteemed it necessary to teach all
Nations, and yet were still a Church: The Papists are pleased to say, the
Protestants differ in Fundamentals, which indeed appears to us very irrational;
for if they say, We Protestants differ in Fundamentals, how then can they say,
We are members of the same Church, one with another, more than they are with
ours, or ours with theirs; and why do they object our difference more with one
another, than with themselves; and if we do not differ in Fundamentals, why do
they upbraid us, with Fundamental differences amongst our selves. We believe
the Catholic Church cannot perish, yet we believe she may and did err, as I
proved just before: but thus much we Protestants declare in general, that we
esteem it sufficient for any man's salvation to believe Gods Word, the
Scripture, and that it contains all things necessary to our salvation, and that
we do our utmost endeavors to find, believe, and follow the true sense of it;
and being we are sure, that all that is any way necessary is there, believing
all that is there, we are sure we believe all that is necessary.

And therefore it is but reasonable to say, that any private person, who truly
believes the Scriptures, and heartily endeavors to know the Will of God, and
to do it, is as secure, nay securer from the danger of erring in Fundamentals,
than the Roman Church: for it is impossible any man so qualified, should fall
into an error, that can prove damnable to him; for God requires no more of any
man to his salvation, but only his true and best endeavors to be saved: And
for the Papists Sacrament of Confession, which they hold is so absolute and
necessary, and so much upbraid us for the want of it, we answer, We know no
such absolute necessity of it; but yet we hold, we must not only confess our
sins, but forsake them, or we shall not find mercy: And we Protesants farther
believe, that they that confess their sins, shall find mercy, though they only
confess them to God, and not to man: And more, that they who confess them both
to God and man, and do not in time forsake them, shall not find mercy.

And so for the Papists Sacrament of Repentance for Remission of sins, though
we Protestants know no such; yet we allow, and observe the same Duty, but
public before the Church, which was the constant practice of the primitive
Church; and Rhemanus himself, though so great a Champion for the Papists,
writes, That the confession then used, was before the Church; and that
Auricular confession was not hen in the World.

The Papists will tell you that our Bishops have not the true power of
Ordination, but that has been so clearly answered, and so truly proved at large
by so many already, as I shall not need here so much as to name it: only let
me in a word, remember the Papists, that they cannot well deny, but that the
Donatists themselves whom the Papists esteemed as bad as us, as being
Heretics, and Schismatics; yet St. Austin, and Optatus Bishop of Rome, did
both acknowledge that they had the same Baptism, Creed, and Sacrament, and that
these Donatist, Fathers, though Schismatics, and Heretics, gave true
Ordination, or else some of these were not then esteemed Sacraments; therefore
let them take which they please, there must be error of one side.

The Papists pretend they have an unanswerable objection against Protestants,
which is, That we have discords in matters of Faith, without, any means of
agreement: to which we answer, that the Scripture does not let us want solid
means of agreement in matters necessary to salvation, and for our agreement in
all controversies of Religion, either they must say we have means to agree
about them, or we have not; if they say we have; why did they before deny it,
if they say we have no means, why are they so unjust to find fault with us for
not agreeing; when they themselves, say we have no means to agree.

But for a Plaster to this soar, they are so extraordinary civil, as to tell
us, we may come to their Church: and they agree in matters of faith, but the
plain truth of it is, that they define all matters of faith, to be those
wherein they agree; so that to say the Roman Church does agree in matters of
Faith, is but to say, they agree in those things, they do agree in, and sure
they cannot deny, but we Protestants do the same.

But we must desire the Papists to give us leave to tell them, that they most
grossly mistake, if they say, they agree in matters of Faith, as for proof; some
of them hold it against Faith, to take the Oath of Allegiance, others it is
against Faith to refuse that Oath.

Some hold it of Faith, that the Pope (is head of the Church by Divine Law:
others the contrary, some hold it of Faith that the blessed Virgin was free
from actual sin, others the contrary; some that the Popes power over Princes in
Temporalities is de fide, others the contrary: some that it is universal
Tradition that the Virgin Mary was conceived in actual sin, others the
contrary; And how the Jesuits and Franciscans, and other Orders differ to this
day; I am sure needs no memorandum; and the best Jest of all is, the Papists
have not so much as yet agreed in their very pretended means of agreement, and
yet have the confidence to pretend an Unity more than the Protestants; sor some
of them say, the Pope with a Council may determine all Controversies, others
deny it: Some hold, That a general Council, without a Pope, may do so, others
deny this: Others say, Both in conjunction are infallible Determiners, others
deny this: And some among the Papists hold, The acceptance on of the Decrees
of Councils by the Universal Church, is the only way to decide Controversies,
which others deny by denying their Church to be infallible; and yet every part,
pretends to be part of the Church.

In a word, can the Papists deny, but that there has been Popes, against Popes,
Councils against Councils; Nay, Councils confirmed by Popes, against Popes
confirmed by Councils. And Lastly, The Church of some Ages, against the Church
of other Ages; and since every part of the Body is so out of order, methinks
they should not brag of so perfect a health as they do.

The Papists say (and do but say it) that their Doctrine is held Catholic; and
therefore they esteem it an insolent madness of us Protestants, to dispute
against the practice of the whole Church; First, That their Doctrine is
Catholic, we answer; That the greatest number of Christians in the world deny
it; so that they cannot truly say, we dispute against the practice of the whole
Church; And farther we say, supposing we should in complement to them grant,
that their Church is Catholic and Universal; yet we say, That is no sufficient
proof, it came originally from the Apostles, witness the Doctrine of the
Milenaries, and the necessity of the Eucharist for Infants, which was generally
taught by the Universal Church, and believed as Apostolical Tradition, but yet
contradicted by the Universal Church afterward: This, I am sure, the Papists
dare not deny; so that we unavoidably cast the Papists upon this Rock, that
they must either conclude the Apostles were Fountains of contradictorie
Doctrines; or that the Universal Doctrine of the present Church is no
sufficient proof, that it came originally from the Apostles, because from
Church Universal of one time, and the Church Universal of another time did
differ.

Next for their saying, it is insolent madness to dispute against the practice
of the whole Church, First we are sure, we can bring more Christian witnesses,
that deny they are the whole Church, than they can bring to prove it: but
supposing we were as mad as they say we are, and would have us to be, to
dispute against the whole practice of the Church; yet I hope we may desire to
know of the Papists if they can deny, but that 'twas the practice, of the whole
Church in St. Au'stine's time, and esteemed then an Apostolical Tradition even
by St. Au'stine himself, that the Eucharist should be administered to Infants;
And then let them tell us, Whether it be insolent madness to dispute against
the practice of the whole Church, or is it not; if it be not, why do they
accuse us for it; but if it be insolent madness, how mad and insolent is the
Papist Church, not only to dispute against this practice of the Universal
Church, of administering the Eucharist to Infants, but utterly abolishing the
practice of it.

So that the very worst the Papists can say of us, allowing what they say to be
true, is that we but do, what they themselves own already to have done.

And though the Papists are pleased to say that the Holy Scriptures, and
ancient Fathers, assign separation from the visible Church, as a mark of
Heresy, yet they cannot show one plain Text of Scripture to confirm it.

And for the Papists braging of the Antiquity and universality of their
Churches Doctrine, (though we allow it very ancient, (bating the primative
times) we answer first as to its Antiquity, we desire to see what Antiquity
they can show for their giving the Communion but in one kind, when they know
that the Administering it in both kinds, was the practice of the Church for a
Thousand years after Christ; what Antiquity for the lawfulness and expediency
of the Latin service, for the present use of indulgences; For the Popes power
in Temporalities over Princes; for the Picturing the Trinity; For the
lawfulness of worshipping Pictures and Images; Fox their Beads; For their whole
worship of the blessed Virgin; For their Oblations, in the notion of Sacrifices
to her, and other Saints; For their saying Pater Nosters and Creeds to the
Honor of them, and Ave Mary's to the Virgin Mary; For the infallibility of the
Bishop, or Church of Rome; For their Doctrine of the blessed Virgins immunity
from actual sin; For the necessity of Auricular Confession; For the necessity
of the Priests intention to obtain benefit by any of their Sacraments. And
lastly for their licentious Doctrine in holding, that though a man lives and
dies without the practice of any Christian virtue, and with the Habits of many
damnable sins unmortified; yet if at the last moment of his life, he has any
sorrow for his sins, and join confession to it, he shall certainly be saved;
This is a Doctrine may keep many souls out of Heaven, but I doubt will scarce
carry any one there. So that the Papists Doctrine being ancient, is nothing, as
long as it is evident that they hold many dangerous errors, as for instance, the
Milenaries, and the Communicating Infants was more ancient, than their
Doctrine, and it is plain that antiquity, unless it be absolute and primative,
is not a certain sign of true Doctrine: And the very Apostles themselves,
assure us that in their days, the mystery of Iniquity was working.

The Papists demand how comes it to pass that their Doctrine is so universal,
(forgetting that weeds spread faster than good herbs:) And we ask them how the
errors of the Milenaries, and the Communicating Infants became so universal,
let them tell us this, and we will tell them that, for what is done in some,
may be done in others.

The Papists ask us where our Church was before Luther, and tell us, because
it was no Church before him, therefore it can be no true Church at all. To which
we answer, that this cause is no cause; For though Luther had no being before
Luther, yet none can deny, but that he was, when he was, though he could not be
before he was; So there may be a true Church after Luther, though there was
none for some ages before him: as since Columbus his time there have been
Christians in America, though there were none for many Ages before: for it does
not follow, that nothing but a Church can possibly get a Church, nor that the
present being of a true Church depends necessarily upon the perpetuity of a
Church in all Ages; for though I cannot deny the Churches perpetuity, yet
that is not here necessary to our difference; but that a false Church (by Gods
providence over ruling it) may preserve a means of confuting their own
Heresies, and so reduce men to truth, and raise a true Church, (I mean the
integrity of the word of God with men.) Thus the Jews preserve means to make
men Christians, and Papists preserve means to make men Protestants, and the
Protestants false Church, (as the Romans call it,) preserves men Papists: nor
does it appear that the perpetuity of the Church, is the truth of the Papists
Church, for they speak, as if they were the only Christians in the World
before Luther, when the whole World knows, that this is but talk, and that
there were other Christians besides the Papists that might have perpetuated the
Church, though there had not been then one Papist in being: for sure there was
a Catholic Church before the Roman one. Next the Papist say, to hold that the
visible Church is not perpetual, is a Heresy, so that Luthers Reformation
being but particular, and not universal, nor but of late date, it can have
nothing to do with the visible and perpetual Church; which the Protestants
answer thus: To say the visible Church is not perpetual, is properly a Heresy,
but the Papists cannot deny, but that the Apostles who preached the Gospel in
the beginning, did believe the Church universal, though their preaching at the
beginning was not so: So Luther also might well believe the universal Church,
though his Reformation was but particular, the Church in the Apostles time
being universal de jure of right, but not de facto in fact.

Nor did Luther and his followers (as the Papist are pleased to mis-cal many
Protestants) forsake the whole Church, but the corruptions of it, in renouncing
some of their corrupt practices, and this the Protestants say they did without
Schism, because they had cause to do it, and no man can have cause to be a
Schismatic, because he is only one who leaves the Church without a cause; for
it is not only separation, but a causeless separation from the Church, that is
Schismatical: and I think it will not be amiss, before I go any farther, to
distinguish the difference between Heresy, and Schism. Heresy is anobstinate
defense of any error against any necessary Article of the Christian Faith.
Schism is a causeless separation of one part of the Church from another. Now we
Protestants say still, that we never forsook the whole Church, or the external
Communion of it, but only that part of it which is corrupted, and is to be
feared will still continue so; viz. The Papist Church; and forsook not, but
only reformed an other part, which part they themselves were: and sure the
Papists will not say, the Protestants forsook themselves, nor their own
Communion: and therefore the Papists argument must be a very weak in urging,
that the Protestants joined themselves to no other part of the Church,
therefore they must separate from the whole Church; which the Protestants say
is a false conclusion, in as much as they themselves were part of it, and still
continue so; and therefore the Protestants could no more separate from the
whole, then from themselves.

So that by the Rule of Reason, if Protestants be Schismatics, because they
differ from one part of the visible Church, by the same reason the Protestants
may say that the Roman Church is in a manner made up of Schismatics, for the
Jesuits are Schismatics from the Dominicans, and the Dominicans from the
Jesuits, and the Jesuits from the Canonists: the Fransciscans from the
Dominicans, and the Dominicans from the Fransciscans; for all these (as the
World knows) differ in point of Doctrine, and betwixt them there is an
irreconcilable contradiction; and therefore one part must be in error. And if
the Papists will but stand to justify what they declare as truth, that every
error against a revealed truth is a Heresy, they holding for certain as a
revealed truth, the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, then consequently
the Dominicans that hold and declare it an error in Doctrine, must necessarily
hold a Heresy; Now it may be a fault to be in error, because it many times
proceeds from a fault; but sure Protestants forsaking error, it cannot be a
sin, unless to be in error, be a virtue: so hardly do Papists deal with us
Protestants, as they will either damn us in making us follow their false
opinions, or else brand us as Schismatics for leaving them.

And yet the rational sort of Papists can hardly deny, but the Protestant
Religion must be a safer Religion than theirs, in worshipping Pictures, in
Invocating Saints, and Angels; in denying the Laymen the Communion in both
kinds, as was commanded by our blessed Savior; in celebrating their Church
Service in an unknown Tongue, which was condemned by St. Paul. in adoring the
Sacrament; and in all these a rational Papist cannot deny, but he is on the
more dangerous side, as to the committing of sin, and the Protestant in the
more secure way as to the avoiding it. For in all these things, if Protestants
say true, the Papists do that which is impious; but on the other side, if the
Papists were in the right, yet the Protestants might be secure enough too; for
their fault would be only this, that they should only, not do some things
which the Papists themselves confess is not altogether necessary to be done.

And truly the Protestants are so charitably civil, as only to say of Papists,
as St. Austine did of the Donatists, That Catholics approved the Doctrine of
the Donatists, but abhorred their Heresy of Rebaptization. So Protestants
approve the Fundamental and necessary Truths which the Papists retain, by which
many good souls among them may be saved, but abhor the many superstitions they
use in their Religion. And supposing these errors of the Popish Church were in
themselves not damnable, to them that believe as they profess; yet for us
Protestants to profess what we do not believe, and esteem those as Divine
Truths, which we believe not to be either Divine or true; would be doubtless
damnable as to us: for it is certain, Two men may do the same thing, and it may
be sinful to one, and not to the other: as suppose a married woman gives her
self out to be a widow, and one knowing her Husband to be alive, marries her,
doubtless his enjoyment of her was adulterous; but a second man comes, and
after seeing her pretended Husband buried, marries her, and dies without the
least information, of her First Husbands being then alive, his ignorance sure
protected him from sin, and the second Husbands knowledge of the sin he acted,
condemned him of Adultery; and though his fault might be palliated with some
excuses, yet it can never be defended by any just Apology: And so though we
read in Scripture, that it was St. Paul's Judgment, that meat offered to Idols
might lawfully be eaten; yet he says, it any should eat it with a doubtful
conscience, he should sin, and be condemned for so doing.

And supposing we Protestants ought not to have forsook the Papists Church, for
sin, and errors, if she had not enjoined and imposed them on us; yet since she
does maintain them with such obstinacy, and imposes them with such Tyranny, we
ought certainly to say with St. Peter, and St. John, It Is better to forsake men
than God; and leave the Popish Church communion, rather than commit or profess
known errors as Divine Truths; for as the Prophet Ezekiel tells us, that to
say The Lord has said so, when the Lord has not said so, is a high
presumption, and great sin, be the matter never so small; and therefore when
St. Paul spoke concerning Virgins abstaining from marriage, he said, He had no
commandment of the Lord, but I declare my own judgment of it. Now if St. Paul
had given this as God's command, surely we might have justly contradicted him,
and made a distinction between divine Revelation, and humane Judgment.

So that for a Protestant to abide in the Communion of the Roman Church, is so
far from securing him from error, as that if I, or any Protestant should
continue in it, I am confident I could not be saved by it, and the reason is,
because the Papists will not admit of my communion, without professing the
entire Popish Doctrine to be true; and profess this I cannot, but I must
perpetually exulcerate my conscience: and though the errors of the Roman
Church were not in themselves damnable, yet for me to resist known Truths, and
to continue in the profession of known Errors and Falsehoods, is certainly a
capital sin, and of great affinity with the sin which shall never be forgiven.

In short, if the errors of the Roman Church did not warrant our departure,
yet the tyrannous imposition of them would be our sufficient justification; for
they force us either to forsake the Papists Communion, or profess as Gospel
truths, what our conscience assures us is very little a kin to them: so that
the Protestants were obliged to forsake those errors of the Popish Church, and
not the Church, but the errors, and we Protestants did, and do still continue
members of the Church, having only left what appeared most plain to us, to be
superstitious and impious. And we separate no more from the Popish Church, than
she has separated from the Ancient Church; and indeed; to speak properly, our
difference is more against the Court, than Church of Rome, which has introduced
so many new ceremonies and practices in the Popish Church, as was never heard,
nor practiced in the primitive Times; as for one instance of a Thousand, I
might give you; Their denying the cup to the Laity, which was never practiced
in the Church a Thousand years after our Savior.

But because the Papists brag so much of, and depend so entirely on, the
infallibility of their Church, I shall pass by their Outworks, and search a
little into this their Grand Fort, the infallibility of their Church; for
except they prove that, they prove nothing; but in proving that they prove all;
and if the Papists could satisfy me either by Scripture, or Reason, that their
Church is infallible, I should not only be of their Church to morrow, but
repent I was not sooner; but really by all that I ever heard or read, for their
making it good; I find cause only to admire their confidence, but not at all
to esteem their reasons.

The chief Method they take, and degrees they use, to prove the infallibility
of their Church, are by wholesale these. First, that St. Peter was Head and
chief amongst the Apostles, and that there was given to him and his successors
by our Savior, Universal Authority over his Militant Church; That the Pope or
Bishop of Rome is St. peter's Successor, and has his Authority of Universal
Bishop, and consequently the Roman Church being built upon this Rock, is
infallible, all which I doubt not, but to prove, to be inconsistent with, and
contradictory both to Scripture and Reason.

As to the first point of St. Peter's being Head of the Apostles, which the
Papists all style him, and say he was called from thence Cephas, which is
derived from the Greek* word Head, it is a most gross mistake; for Cephas is a
Syriack word that signifies Stone; but this is only by the by: Now we
Protestants say, though we allow St. Peter might have primacy of Order; yet we
cannot grant he had supremacy of power over the other Apostles; for sure it
cannot stand with the least reason, that St. Peter should have authority over
all the Apostles, and yet never act the least authority ever any one of them.

Nor is it reasonable to believe, that St. Peter having authority over all the
Apostles for about 25 years together, should never show the least power over
any of them all that time, nor so much as receive the least subjection from
them; sure any one must think this as strange, and un reasonable, as if a King
of England for 25 years together should not do one Act of Regality among his
subjects, nor receive any one acknowledgment from them.

Nor sure is it less strange and unreasonable, that the Papists should so many
Ages after, know this so certainly, as they pretend they do, and yet that the
Apostles themselves, after that these words were spoke in their hearing by
virtue whereof St. Peter is pretended to be made their head, should still be so
ignorant of it, as to question our Savior, which of them should be the
greatest, by which sure we may rationally conclude, they did not then know; for
if they did, their question had been needless, and superfluous, in desiring to
be taught, what they already knew.

And what yet appears more strange then all, is that our Savior should not
have helped them out of their error by telling them St. Peter was the man, but
rather confirmed them in the contrary by saying the Kings of the Gentiles
exercise Authority over them, but it should not be so among them.

And again it is as strange and unreasonable, that St. Paul should so far
forget both St. Peter, and himself, as in mentioning so often St. Peter, he
should still do it without ascribing him any title of honor: Nor does it
stand*with reason, that St. Paul speaking of the several degrees of men in the
Church, should omit giving St. Peter the highest, if it had been his due; but
place him in the same rank and Equipage with the rest of the Apostles, for St.
Paul says God has appointed (not first St. Peter then the rest of the
Apostles) but first Apostles, secondly Prophets, now certainly if Apostles were
all first, that is all equal, how could one be in greater power than the other.

But besides all this, though we should grant against all these probabilities,
and many more, that Optatus Bishop of Rome, meant that St. Peter was head of
the Apostles, yet sure the Papists are still very far from proving, the Bishop
of Rome was to be so at all, much less by divine right, successor to St. Peter
in his headship and Authority. For what incongruity is there, if we say, that
Optatus might succeed St. Peter as his heir and successor, in that part of his
Government of that particular Church of Rome; (as sure he did even whilst St.
Peter was living) and yet that neither he, nor any man was to succeed him in
his Apostleship, nor in the Government of the Church universal: as though a
Bishop should leave his Son heir to all he dyed possessed of, I hope you will
not conclude, therefore he must necessarily succeed him in the Bishopric he
dyed seized of. The Apostles were men all called, and divinely inspired by the
Holy Ghost, which was the immediate gift of God, and therefore could not be
left as a Legacy by man; for though it be in any man's power to leave his
Estate, yet it is in no man's power to leave to his Son, his acquired parts at
his death. It Is further worth your observing, and special notice, that St.
Peter himself and the rest of the Apostles, by laying the foundation of the
Church, were to be themselves the foundation of it, and are accordingly so
called in Scripture. And therefore as in a building it is incongruous that
foundations, should succeed foundations, so it may be in the Church, that
Apostles should succeed Apostles, the Church being built upon Apostles and
Prophets.

Nor indeed does the grand argument of the Papists, for their Pope, extend any
further in Reallity then to the particular Sea of Rome; for thus goes their
main argument. St. Peter was first Bishop of Rome, and the Apostles, did not
then attribute to themselves, each one his particular Chair (understand in that
City of Rome, for in other place, others had Chairs besides St. Peter) and
therefore says the Papist, he is a Schismatic who against that one single
Chair erects another: (understand still in the same place) and this is the
ground and the Authority the Papists say, the Pope has to be Successor to St.
Peter, and to exercise Authority over the Universal Church.

But sure the Protestants urge more rationally in arguing thus, That St. Peter
wrote Two Catholic Epistles, in which he mentions his own departure, and
writes to preserve the Christians in the faith: but yet in neither of these Two
Epistles does he commend the Christians to the guidance and authority of his
pretended Successor the Bishop of Rome; which sure if St. Peter had intended,
he would never have forgot to have named it.

And since the Papists so reverence and adore the Popes power, let us
Protestants also admire his way and means of attaining this power; for though
the Papists say, that as soon as he is made Pope, he has his authority
immediately from Christ; yet at the very same time the Papists all know, that
he cannot be made Pope, but by Authority and Election of the Cardinals; so that
I am sure by the very same reason, any man that is chosen a Magistrate in any
Town under the Pope's Territories, may claim his Authority as immediately
received from Christ, as well as the Pope. And further, that the proving his
being made Pope, does not render him infallible, I could give a hundred
instances out of the History of Popes, but that will not suit well with my
designed brevity; but let us ask the Papist, if Liberius Bishop of Rome, after
Two years Banishment, did not by the solicitation of Fortunatianus Bishop of
Acquileia, subscribe to Heresy, and consequently could not be infallible. And
though the Papists rely so much on the Authority of the Fathers, to support and
justify the infallibility of their Church, yet upon true Examination we shall
find, they make no more for their Universal Bishop, than St. Peter's Two
Catholic Epistles do.

And for their arguing out of St. Cyprian's 55 Epistles, that sure makes rather
against, than for them; for there St. Cyprian writes to Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, but writes not so much to him, as of himself, who was Bishop of Carthage;
against whom a Faction of Schismatics had set up another Bishop: Now though
the Papists say reasonably, that it is a mark of the Universal Bishop, that
other Bishops should make their Addresses unto the Bishop of Rome, yet sure
'twere better Reasoning to conclude thus, If the Bishop of Rome had been
acknowledged Universal Bishop, and his Authority and Supremacy had been
believed and owned, sure St. Cyprian had not been satisfied with only barely
writing him his sad story, (for he did no more,) but doubtless would have made
his complaint to him, and desired and expected redress from him, as Universal
Bishop over the whole Catholic Church, but his not doing so, argued he
esteemed him Bishop only of one Church.

And further, St. Cyprian all know, did resolutely oppose a Decree of the Roman
Bishop, and all that adhered to him in that one point of Rebaptizing, which the
Popish Church at that time delivered as a necessary Tradition, and
Excommunicated the Bishop of Cappadocia, Galatia, and all that were against
that Tradition, and would not so much as allow them lodging or entertainment in
Rome.

Now since the Papists affirm, that not to re-baptize those, whom Heretics had
baptized, to be a damnable Heresy. It Is well worth asking the Papist, when
this begun to be so; for if they say, from the beginning it was so, then they
must maintain a contradiction; for then was St. Cyprian a Professor of damnable
Heresy, and yet the Papists esteem him a Saint and Martyr.

And on the other side, if 'twere not so from the beginning, then did the Pope
wrongfully excommunicate those other Churches of Cappadocia and Galatia,
without sufficient ground of Excommunication, and separation, which by their
own Tenants, is schismatical; so let them choose which side they please, the
Pope was in an error.

And though Victor Bishop of Rome obtruded the Roman Tradition touching the
time of Easter, upon the Asian Bishops, under the pain of Excommunication, and
Damnation; yet we read that Irenaeus, and all the other Western Bishops, though
they did agree with the Bishop of Rome in his observation of Easter, yet they
did sharply reprehend his excommunicating the Asian Bishops, for their
disagreeing with him; which most plainly argues, that the Western Bishops
thought that not a sufficient ground of Excommunication, which the Bishop of
Rome did; and therefore it must necessarily follow, they did not esteem the
Roman Bishop infallible, nor the separation from the Church of Rome an Heresy.
And this I am sure is true and undeniable reason.

The Popish Story tells us, That Optatus Bishop of Rome upbraided the Donatists
as Schismatics, because they held no Communion with the Church of Rome, by
adding afterward that they were Schismatics, for they held no Communion with
the seven Churches of Asiae, which occasions this Question of the Papist,
Whether a separation from these seven Apostolic Churches, was a mark of
Heresy, or not; if they say it was not, how comes it that the Pope's Authority
is a stronger Argument for the Popish Church, than the Asian Authority for the
Asian Churches; And if the Papists say, a separation from those seven Asian
Churches was a mark of Heresy, then they must confess their Church was for
many years Heretical as separating many years from the Asian Churches.

And Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus and Metropolitan of Asia despised the Popes
universal Supremacy and Authority, and kept contrary to the Pope Easter Day,
the Fourteenth of March.

And indeed though the Papists do so much quote the authority of the Fathers,
yet I find they as little befriend their Churches infallibility, as the Asian
Bishops themselves have done, for though the Papist say St. Hierome conceived
it necessary to conform in matters of Faith, to the Church of Rome; yet before
the Papist brag of that, let them answer us this, how came it then to pass,
that St. Hierome chose to believe the Epistle to the Hebrews Canonical upon the
authority of the Eastern Church, and to reject it from the Canon of the Roman
Churches Authority. And how comes it also that he dissented from the Roman
Church touching the Canon of the old Testament, let the Papist take heed of
losing their Fort, by endeavoring to maintain their outworks.

And now to conclude this point, and excuse the Papists mistake concerning
their universal Bishop, we read in Scripture of the Prophet Elias, who thought
there was none left beside himself in the whole Kingdom of Israel, who had not
revolted from God; and yet God himself is pleased to assure us he was deceived;
And if a Prophet, and one of the greatest erred in his judgment, touching his
own time and Country, why may not the Papists (subject to the same passions)
err in their opinion, and judgment about the Popes being universal Bishop, when
plain reason tells them, as well as us, that there were other Bishops as much
universal as the. Pope.

I now come to examine this infallible Pope, whether he, cannot make his
infallible I Church more infallible than he has made himself, and free the
Popish Church from error, though he could not the Pope from Heresy.

Now toward the disproving the pretended infallibility of the Roman Church, I
lay this as the foundation of my discourse, that the whole Roman Church can be
no better then a Congregation of men, whereof every particular, not one
excepted, and consequently the generality, is nothing but a collection of men,
and if every one be polluted, (as who dare say he is free from sin) how can the
whole but be defiled with error; as reasonably may a man brag he is in perfect
health and strength, and yet at the same time confess he has not one sound
part about him. And truly it very much creates my wonder, but does not in the
least satisfy my reason, what the Papists can pretend by the infallibility of
their church, for if they will allow their Pope to be no better than St. Peter
was; their Church to be composed of no better men than the Holy Apostles were;
I shall desire no more, and I am sure they can never prove so much, for they
that pretend to it, declare as great an ignorance, as St. Peter did a sin, in
denying his Lord and Master: and there are many other known circumstances,
which made St. Paul prove him blameworthy to his face.

And for the Apostles being in error, we have not only the examples of the
Apostles themselves, who in the time of our Saviors Passion, being
scandalized, lost their faith in him, and I believe the Papists will not say
they could lost their faith in our blessed Savior Christ without error; and
therefore our Savior after his Resurrection upbraided them with their
incredulity, and called Thomas incredulous for denying the Resurrection in the
Twentieth of St. John.

And further it is mod: apparent that the very Apostles themselves, even after
the sending the Holy Ghost, did through inadvertency, or prejudice, continue
sometime in an error, contrary to a revealed truth; And if the Papists will not
own to know this truth, they may be fully satisfied of it in the story of the
Acts of the Apostles, where they may plainly read that notwithstanding our
Saviors express warrant and injunction to the Apostles to go and preach to all
Nations. Yet notwithstanding, till St. Peter was better informed by a vision
from Heaven, and by the conversion of Cornelius, (both St. Peter and the rest
of the Church, held it unlawful for them to go and Preach the Gospel to any but
the Jews. Now since we can prove that St. Peter did err, and that the Church
composed partly of the Holy Apostles, themselves, who were blessed with, and
inspired by the Holy Ghost, could mistake, and that there is no man free from
sin, and yet that the Body of men that make, up the popish Church should be
infallible, is I confess beside my Faith, to believe, or reason to comprehend.

For sure if the Roman Church had been esteemed by the Apostles infallible,
what needed the Apostles any other Creed, than this short Creed, I believe the
Roman Church infallible, and that would have been more effectual to keep the
believers of it, from Heresy, and in the true Faith, then this Apostolical
Creed we now have.

And sure the Papists cannot but believe with us, that those holy men that
wrote the New Testament, were not only good men, but also men that were
desirous to direct us in the plainest and surest way to Heaven. And the Papists
cannot also but believe with us, that they were likewise men very sufficiently
instructed by the Spirit of God, in all the necessary points of the Christian
Faith: Therefore certainly it is most: rational to believe, they could not be
ignorant of this unum necessarium, that all Faith is no Faith, except we
believe the Church of Rome, was designed by God to be the Guide of Faith, as
the Church of Room believes, and would have us believe so too.

We also further believe, and that with great reason too, that the Writers of
the New Testament were wise men, especially being they were assisted by the
Spirit of wisdom; and such that must know, that an uncertain Guide was as bad
as none at all; and yet after all this, is it possible for a Philosophical or
contemplative man; nay, for any man that has reason or common sense, after all
these suppositions, to believe that none among these holy Writers of the New
Testament should remember, (ad rei memoriam,) To set down plainly this most
necessary Doctrine, not so much as once, that we were to believe the Roman
Church infallible.

Again, that none of the Evangelists should so much as once name this Popish
necessary point of Faith, if they had esteemed it necessary for us to believe
it, when St. Paul says, He kept not back any thing that was profitable for us
and sure the Papists cannot deny, but what is necessary to salvation, must be
very profitable: And St; Luke also plainly tells Christians, his intent was to
write all things necessary. And sure it stands also with reason, that when St.
Paul wrote to the Remans, he would have congratulated this their extraordinary
privilege, if he had believed it belonged to them.

And though the Romans bring it as a great Argument for them that St. Paul
tells them, Their Faith is spoken all the world over. Yet pray let them
moderate those thoughts with this consideration, that St. Paul said the very
same thing to the Thessalonians; and let them further consider this, that if
the Roman Faith had been the Rule of Faith for all the world for ever, as the
Papists hold, sure St. Paul would have forborne to put the Romans in fear of an
impossibility (for though raillery is much in Fashion now, sure 'twas not then)
that they also, nay the whole Church of the Gentiles, if they did not lock to
their standing, might fall into infidelity, as the Jews had done, 1 Ephesians. 11.

And methinks it also stands with great reason, that the Apostles writing so
often of Heretics, and Antichrist, should have given the Christian world this
(as Papists pretend) only sure Preservative from them, to be guided by the
infallible Church of Rome, and not to separate from it, upon the pain of
damnation.

Methinks also St. Peter, St. James, and St. Jude, in their Catholic Epistles,
would not have forgot giving Christians this Catholic direction of following
the Roman Church; and St. John in stead of saying, He that believes that Jesus
is the Christ, and born of God, might have said, He that adheres to the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, and lives according to it, is a good Christian;
and by this mark you shall know him. In a word, can there be any thing more
irrational, than to believe, that none of these holy men, who were so desirous
of men's salvation, should so much as once remember to write, that we were to
obey the Roman Church, but leave it to be collected from uncertain principles,
and by more uncertain consequences.

So that upon the whole, I cannot without much wonder, look on the Pope's
confidence, and the Papists credulity, in esteeming the Pope or his Councils to
be an infallible Guide; sure either they never read what they ought to believe,
or else they will not believe what they read, though it be never so known a
Truth, and worthy of belief: for if they did, they could never believe the
infallibility of the Popish Church for indeed if they would read the Popish
story; or, as I may well call it, the Civil Wars of the Popes, you shall find,
as I said before, Pope against Pope, Councils against Councils; some Fathers
against others, nay, some against themselves; new Traditions brought in, and
old ones turned out; one Church against another; nay, the Church of one Age
against the Church of another. In a word, the Papists say, their Church is
infallible, and all other Christians besides themselves, though more in number
than they, absolutely deny it; and yet we must for all that believe the Popish
Church infallible.

And to speak the plain Truth, and in a word to unravel the real cause of the
Grandeur of the Church of Rome, above all other Churches, is only this; Rome
was the Imperial Town of the Empire, and its Greatness was given by men, and
not God; and when afterward Constantinople was the Imperial City, they
Decreed, that the Church of Constantinople should have equal Privileges and
Dignities with that of Rome.

And now to end this Discourse, I desire you will please to consider this
Conclusion, which is, that after all that the Papists have said, be it never so
much and mighty to show the infallibility of their Church, I am verily
persuaded they cannot show more, if so much, out of the Scriptures, for their
Church, as the simallest society of Christians met together in prayer, can for
themselves, that when two or three are met together in my name, I will be
amongst then says the Lord. And now I have just done this small discourse, and
the Sun is just upon finishing this days visit. I can very readily follow that
holy advice of not letting it go down in my anger: (which I thank God I have to
none living) and therefore am in so much Charity with the Papists, as to wish
that neither they, nor Protestants, might wast their precious time in mere
speculative controversies about words: and ceremonies, which of themselves will
never carry us to Heaven; but that we may spend our time like wise Christians
in the ways, and fear of God, which is the only beginning of wisdom; and not
consume it in studying and maintaining of Disputes, and factions, but if we
must still differ, let Protestants, and Papists differ in opinions, but as
Aristotle, and Cicero did, who, though they were of differing Judgments
touching the natures of Souls, yet both of them agreed in the main, that all
men had Souls, and souls of the same nature.

And as Physicians though they dispute whether the Brain or the Heart be the
principle part of man, yet that all men have Brains, and Heart they
sufficiently agree in; So though Protestants esteem one part of the Church
doctrine, and Papists set a higher value on another part, yet the Soul of the
Church may be in both of them, and though the Papists account that a necessary
truth, which the Protestants account neither, necessary, nor perhaps true; yet
in truth, truly necessary they both agree, viz. The Apostles Creed, and that
Faith, Hope, and Charity, are necessary to Salvation; And lastly though Papists
hold, they may be justified by their works, and Protestants hold none can be
justified barely by them, (in regard of the imperfections of their works) yet
on the other side, we so much agree with the Papists, as to esteem none can be
justified without them, for without Repentance, and Charity, none can be good,
they being both like Health to our bodies, the want of which is sufficient to
disturb all other pleasures. Therefore when we read St. Paul's Treatise of
justification by Faith, without the works of the Law. Let us at the same time
read what he writes to the Corinthians concerning the absolute necessity of
that Excellent virtue of Charity, and they will reconcile one another; and I
wish, that we were all so reconciled in the unity of the Spirit, and in the
bond of peace. And that you Madam may be the sooner reconciled to me, for this
tediousness; I shall now make a conclusion, which after such an overgrown
letter, must needs be the best complement that can be made by,

Madam yours etc.
London the 24. of Feb. 1673

