A General Epistle TO FRIENDS Every Where. Written in obedience to the
Requirings of the Spirit of Life from God.
Some of the things spoken to in this Epistle.
GOd's peculiar Love and Favor manifested to the People of God; With a
Salutation to them. The manner of Gods bringing of us out of spiritual Sodom
and Egypt, and his end therein. Something of the old Serpents subtilty and
cunning working; with a way opened for all (how to escape it) that are
convinced of the Truth. Some wholesome Exhortations unto all who are come to the
Way of God, to continue steadfast in it, and to be constant in their Obedience
to Christ Jesus unto the end. With something by way of Advice, to beware of the
Whores Cup, and that ye receive not the Beasts Mark on your Foreheads, or in
your Hands. Also, concerning mighty things done by Faith. A few words
concerning Marriage: And several other things relating to Husbands and Wives,
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants. A friendly Caution to all such who
have transported, or may transport themselves beyond the Seas into foreign
Plantations.
Dear Friends and Brethren;
WHO are the called of God in Christ Jesus, and witness the hope of your
calling out of Darkness into his mavelous Light, and are the Children of the
Light and of the Day, The dear and tender Salutation of my Love, in the Light,
Life and Spirit of God, reaches to you all, with fresh and fervent desires,
that you all may be kept faithful unto him who has called, and also made
choice of you to serve, worship, love and obey him in your generation, that you
may be called the Trees of Righteousness, of the Lords planting, his Seed
taking deep Root in you, you will all bring forth fruit to the honor and glory
of him who has not only planted, but often also watered you with his heavenly
dew and showers of plentiful Rain, which purely and refreshingly has fallen
down upon you, as no People else has witnessed the like in our age or
generation, nor has been known since the Apostles days, glory to the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, he has made many Trees fruitful, that now remain as
lively, fresh and green as ever, although some are not only withered, but dead
twice and plucked up by the Root, that were planted, and have been watered with
us often by our heavenly Father, the Husband man both to us and them, who did
sow the same good Seed in them Grounds that prove evil, as on that which is
good Ground; and that which he plants or sows in any man's heart is good, and
shows man what is purely good, and of God, from that which is contrary, that
all might come to love the good, and hate the evil, as its manifest from God by
his immortal Seed or Word of Life within, and that all might choose the good and
refuse the evil, as either appear, or is represented to any particular; all are
to love the good, and hate the evil; to choose the good, and refuse the evil; to
join to, and be one with the good, but to separate from, reject and deny that
which is evil; and the pure Light of Christ in every Conscience (as all take
heed thereunto, and wait therein) will let them see, and know how to
distinguish betwixt good and evil, under what disguise, fair pretense or
transformation of the Enemy soever it may appear, to blind, beguile or deceive
the simple, either to keep in the evil always from the good, or to lead out and
draw from the good, after tastes of it, into the evil again, to make the latter
end of such worse than their beginning. I say, and testify in the Lord, dear
Friends, as we all keep in, and mind the glorious Light of the Son of God, no
such Darkness will ever again come over any of us, as to call good evil, or
evil good, to put light for darkness, and darkness for light, sweet for bitter,
or bitter for sweet; for that comes of Darkness, from the Prince of Darkness,
and God of this World; even the blindness that some are in who profess the
light, yet put darkness for it, and call good evil, and evil good; and how can
such know the good and acceptable will of God, or good from evil? then they
were not like to choose the good, and refuse the evil: And how were they like to
obey the Light of Christ, or walk in it, that cannot clearly or truly
distinguish betwixt Light and Darkness, Christ or Belial! May not such follow
darkness in stead of light, and Belial instead of Christ? nay, do they not walk
in darkness, not knowing whither they walk, whose Minds thus are blinded by
darkness? And such, to the Children of the Light, and of the Day, may be known
by this Character, that though they profess the Light of Christ, and have been
convinced by it, yet they hate it, and will not bring their deeds to it, to be
proved and tried; this Prover and Tryer that judges and condemns for sin and
evil they cannot abide the coming of, but would have their works and things
tried and proved by the Darkness which they themselves are in. Which, dear
Friends, I tenderly beseech you in the love of God to beware of, and dwell in
the Light of the Son of God forever, mind it, love and believe in it as much as
ever you did since you turned to it, and came to believe in it, then I know you
will be as willing to bring your deeds to it as ever you were, and will be as
ready to embrace and follow the motions of it, as you were at your first
Convincement, or the Candle of the Lord first shined upon your Tabernacles: And
I doubt not but a Remnant are so at this day, although some are already turned
aside from the Light into great Darkness, and lost the sense of Life, having
Death over them, and they feed thereon, being out of the green and fresh
Pastures of Life, where once they fed with us gladly, and accounted them good
and precious, which now seems but to them as the Manna did to the Children of
Israel, when they had eaten thereof and were full, how did many of them forget
the Lord and his works, and murmured against Moses that was faithful in God's
house, and said, Has he brought us hither to destroy us? And they said, Can
God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? which was also a questioning of Gods
Power and Providence; All which were the fruits and evil effects of Unbelief,
and their revolting and acksliding Hearts; and the Lord said, Israel has cast
off the thing that is good; he saw it, was angry and greatly displeased
therewith; and the Lord did forsake them, and cast them off, because they did
forsake him, and cast off the thing that was good, and followed after that
which evil, and often did evil in the sight of the Lord; and many ways God
proved them, and tried them, and did mighty things for them, for his Names
sake, and for Isreal's sake he cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon, and divided
and made a way in the Sea, a good and safe Passage for them in the Journey
which the Lord led them on in; he carried them on Eagles Wings, and rebuked
Kings, and subdued strong Nations before them; but when they rebelled, then he
turned to be their Enemy, and fought against them whom he had often saved, and
had been afflicted with them in their Afflictions.

So, dear Friends, you that are gathered to God by his gathering Arm of Love
and Power, keep with the Lord, and forsake him not whatsoever you may suffer
for his Names sake therein; the Lord will appear to your joy, and will afflict
them that afflict you for your obedience to God, and the keeping your
Consciences pure and good in his sight: Let not a revolting or rebellious Heart
be found in any one of you, such cannot continue or abide with the Lord whose
hearts are evil and rebellious, out of them comes not good things, their
hearts are defiled with evil, filled with it, and bent to do wickedly, and they
cannot cease from sin. And how has the Devil loaded some with Iniquity, that
do yet profess the same Light and Way of God with us? How do they manifestly
appear Children that are corrupters or corrupt Children, endeavoring to
corrupt the Minds of the Professors, and other People, by the seeds of
Corruption which they have sown and printed for them to feed upon; and its the
evil Seeds-man that sows corrupt or evil Seed: What Instruments soever are by
him made use of in that work, mark them, and avoid them as Instruments of
Unrighteousness.

Oh Friends! as you love your eternal Rest and Peace with God, watch against,
and shut out the seed of the Serpent, and his evil Seeds-men that sow it
abroad; by the Light of the Lord which shines in your hearts (and has given
you the knowledge of God) you may discern and see clearly the old Serpent's
cunning in his Agents, what high swelling words soever, in their vain minds
they may come with amongst you, or print for Food to the uncircumcised, and the
unclean. Be ye steadfast, always abounding in the work of the Lord, unto which
you are called of God; be not beguiled any one of you by the Serpent's cunning;
wait low in the pure Simplicity, and that will give knowledge and understanding
of the wiles and cunning working of the creeping Serpent. And now is the seed
of God risen to break the head of the Serpent, and to tread under foot his
power and authority, which he has got in man and women by disobedience, and
their rebellion against God, whereby man in the beginning was subjected to
vanity, and not willing, but by a salfe hope the Devil had begotten in them,
which was the cause of their being beguiled, the begetting of that false hope,
that they should be as Gods, knowing good and evil, and as if they should not
dye, notwitstanding their transgressing the Command of the Lord, which the
Serpent's deceitful and beguiling Doctrine subjected them into the belief of.
Therefore take heed that none of you be beguiled as the Serpent beguiled Eve,
and draw you from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus. It seems the
Believers which the Apostle writ to had a godly simplicity and stedfastness in
the Truth of God, but afterward were in some danger to be drawn from it; but
Eve had not been so beguiled if she had minded to keep Gods command and
counsel, and not hearkened to the Serpent. So hearken not to the doctrine or
voice of the Serpent, which leads from God, into Transgression and to death,
from the Life of God, and to lose the Image of God, which Adam and Eve were
deprived of, though once beautified therewith: And so Gods Image may be lost
now by them that are come into it, and have born it, and the beauty of Holiness
that any one had, may be lost, if there be not a keeping in that Power which
brings into it, and preserves the faithful in it. The heavenly Creator in the
new Creation, creates us in Christ Jesus unto good works, and he restores his
People to God in his Image, which is after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness; so we become holy as the Lord our God is holy, and perfect as our
heavenly Father is Perfect; and so we are a chosen Generation and a royal
Priesthood to God, and are prepared of him to offer an Offering acceptable and
well-pleasing in the sight of God, and come to know how to please God in all
things, and to hearken to his voice, and obey his Voice, that is better than
Sacrifice or the sat of Rams, which some content themselves with, even a bare
Profession of the Truth and Knowledge of, but do not obey it nor walk in it,
but rather cause the way of Truth to be evil spoken of, opening the Mouths of
Adversaries to blaspheme that holy Name by which we were called, and who know
the Truth, but act contrary to the guidance of that Spirit of Truth which led
them into the Truth, and the Way wherein they should go, and so go into the
Apostasy, and to turn back again into Egypt, which all ought to beware of; for
we were not brought out of the Apostasy or delivered out of Egypt either to
look, back or go back again. Did not the Lord by a very mighty hand, and
stretched out Arm bring us out of Egypt spiritually, as really as he did the
Children of Israel out of outward Egypt in the days of old? And how did God
wound and overthrow our Enemies (though strong and potent) not by any might or
power carnal, but by his own holy Spirit and Power, which he made known in our
hearts, and which we received from him? Has not this conquered and overcome
many of your Enemies that oppressed you, which you groaned under, and were
sorrowful because of, till deliverance came? And cannot many of you say, that
the right hand of the Lord has brought mighty things to pass, and that the
right hand of the Lord has done valiantly? And cannot you say, the Lord was on
your side, and now is the same; and that greater is he that is in you than he
that is in the World? Although, dear Friends, you have many Enemies yet to
encounter with, fear not, neither be at all dismayed, only look to the Lord,
and believe in him, and love and trust in him; fear not man, nor put no trust
in Princes, nor in any Arm of flesh; and if the wicked bend their Bow, and
shoot their Arrows at you who are innocent in your Minds, and of a peaceable
Life, matter it not, but look to the Lord, that Innocence and a peaceable Mind
still may be found in you all; leave your cause to the Lord to plead, who in
his own due time will plead your cause, and execute judgment for you; the Lord
can if he please, soon break the Bow of the Wicked, and turn their Arrows
against themselves, and make all their Weapons they form against you,
unprosperous, and cut off their expectation that seek your Ruin and
Destruction: And as Innocence is found in you, and you preserved in a godly and
peaceable life, you will never envy them that oppress you, nor choose any of
their ways, but will mind Gods good old Way, Truth and Life, and will not walk
in the way of the Wicked Ungodly men, nor sit in the seat of the Scornful,
Proud and Arogant, which leads to Death and Destruction; if you see many in
that way, let not that be an occasion for you to stumble at, or to forsake the
way of the Lord, which is narrow, and leads to Life, Peace and Rest that is
Everlasting, wherein you have learned to trust in the Lord, and to stand
resigned up to his will in the most perilous times, when they come; and wherein
you have learned to love the Lord and one another with that love which is shed
abroad from God in your hearts, and is unfeigned, in which dear Friends forever
dwell; and shut out all Deceit, Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, which does render
them black amongst us that have not put away, or are not purged from such
things, and so does Envy, Wrath or Malice wherever it is, which is all for
the fire, and to be purged away, that you may pray in the Spirit of the living
God, by which you were all quickened; quench it not, neither grieve it, nor
rebel against it; for that hinders the heavenly joy and comforts of the Spirit,
when Tribulation arises because of the Word. Let not any of you be found
without true joy and comfort, when you may have need enough of it, and behold
many weeping and wailing for want of it; for certainly it will be woeful and
miserable for that man or woman that is without the comfort and joy of the holy
Spirit, when no comfort and lasting joy will be found in any visible created
thing, which this World can afford; men's hearts already begin to be astonished,
and to fail them for fear, because of the things that are coming to pass; for
not only the Powers of the Earth, but the Powers of the Heavens shall be shaken.

Friends, let not any of you be found an evil or sloathful Servant, that shall
say in his Heart, My Lord delays his coming; and so put his Day afar off, to
let Night again over you; You may remember what Sorrow and Heaviness we endured
when we were Children of the Night, and covered with thick Darkness, and what
Joy came in the Morning of God's glorious Day, as it dawned in our Hearts; did
not many then sing for Joy of Heart, and experimentally could say, The singing
of Birds was come? But the evil and sloathful Servant that says in his Heart,
My Lord delays his coming, cannot sing out of any sense of heavenly Joy in his
Heart, and therefore frets and smites his fellow Servant, and eats and drinks
with the Drunken, such become the Companions of the evil and sloathful Servant,
he delights not to be a Companion to them that fear the Lord, and are diligent
in his Work; nor will not say to the workers of Iniquity, Depart from me, I
will keep the Commandments of my God; but rather joins with the workers of
Iniquity, and is one with them in breaking the Commands of God, and rebelling
against him; and its just with the Lord to suffer Night to come over such
again, that have been called to serve the Lord in his House, but are evil and
sloathful Servants; not good, not diligent, nor watchful, but are found bad,
negligent and unwatchful, and unsensible of God's presence, and the coming of
the Lord, which draws nigh: Oh! keep in the Spirit and Power of the Lord God,
and that will preserve you all fervent in love to him, and one another, and
diligent in the Lord's work whereunto you are all called with a holy calling,
to watch and war against the Devil; and whatsoever is of him, let it have no
place in you, nor let not the Devil ever enter your Hearts any more, and if he
do, not to dwell there, but feel you the Arm and Power of the Lord to cast him
out, and keep him out, that he may never work in you any more, nor have any
Lordship or Rule in you, or over you, then I am sure you will be ready in Heart
and Mind to follow that which is good; and resist the Devil, and all his
badness which is so beloved of the World, and then you will be prepared to
avoid every appearance of Evil, and will give no place to it, but will keep
faithful to God over it, and then you will be made capable in the Spirit of
Love, and a sound Mind, to reprove such as are light, vain, and of a loose
behavior, and shun the Cross of Christ; and not indulge that Nature and Spirit
that keeps some high and unsubjected, and in disobedience to the Lord God; and
for this cause some are weak and sick amongst us, and some fallen asleep; had
they but taken up the daily Cross, and kept therein, there would never have
appeared that Self love, Weakness, Sickness and Sleepiness, that is in some
that are amongst us, that would be accounted wise Virgins, and indeed have come
long enough among us to have been found such at this day, but are not, but are
weak as in the time of their first Convincement, and as if they had not waited
upon the Lord with us; they so faint, and have so little strength to stand in
the day of Trial, or hour of Temptation, that it appears their strength is but
small. I say in the Lord, if they that now faint in the time of Adversity, had
waited upon the Lord in diligence and sincerity of Heart, doubtless they would
have had more strength, and received more Power from God than they enjoy or
feel, and would have grown more in the Grace and Knowledge of God than they
have done, and would not have been so sick at their Stomachs as some are, that
they cannot digest wholesome Food, but slight and dis-esteem it, whereby some
Members suffer; and indeed it hurts the whole Body, when any of the Members
thereof suffer, especially as the Apostle said then, when many were Weak and
Sick amongst them, and some fallen asleep for want of subjecting themselves to
that Spirit and Power, which would give all strength, if they kept in it, and
preserve all in God's saving health, and with a good Stomach to that which is
good, and for Food, if they did wait for it, and keep in the Spirit and Power
of the Lord God, this would rouse up and awaken all careless and sleepy
Virgins, that want Oil in their Vessels and Lamps, who have not their Lamps
trimed, nor are ready when the Bridegroom comes; Beware ye sleepy, foolish
Virgins, lest Midnight Sleep come quite upon you, so that the Cry of the
Bride-groom's coming be before you are prepared for him, or the door of
entrance in with him be shut against you, or you prepared for his
entertainment; the sloathful Servant being apt to delay the doing of his Duty
to the Lord, imagins that the Lord delays his coming, then he does that which
he should not do; and so causes his Lord and Master, that is full of Mercy and
Love, to be angry with him, and reward him according to his Deeds.

Dear Friends, therefore love the Cross of Christ, whereby you will learn to
take up your daily Cross, and follow your Captain Christ Jesus, the Captain of
our Salvation, that endured the Cross, and despised the Shame, and was made
perfect through Suffering; follow him in the Cross, as you desire to have the
Crown; despise the Shame of the Cross, and endure it, and do not shun it, for
you will not be as David, nor witness David's House to be as God's, if you shun
the Cross, nor will you grow stronger and stronger, as you ought, if you are
troubled at the shame of it; you will never deny your selves much for Christ if
you shun the Cross, or be amazed at the daily taking of it up; whilst it is so
with any convinced of God's heavenly Truth, they will not shut out the world's
Spirit, Words nor Actions, but will be lusting after the world's Words, vain
Fashions, Ways, and not come out into a clear separation from them, nor be
capable to bear witness against the World, nor their Words, Ways, vain
Fashions and Actions that are contrary to the Lord, and whereby his holy Spirit
is vexed from day to day, such amongst us that will not cross their own Wills,
and unbridled Tongues, to speak Thou to any single Person, high or low, but
give way to a worldly and fleshly Will, and fleshly Desires, will not be
willing to follow the Lord and his Servants, the Prophets and Apostles in their
true Language, which was used by them that writ and gave forth the Scriptures,
from Genesis to Revelations; and can such be now good? or is their Religion
good? who have been long convinced and come amongst us, that have not a Bridle
for their Tongues, nor do not know the Power of God's Truth, professed by them,
to tame their Tongues; Why are some in this estate, anciently convinced, but
because they would not subject their worldly corrupt Wills to God's holy Power,
which would have made them willing so to do, and would have made them willing
to have left all for Christ, and to have suffered the loss of all things,
though it had been never such a Darling-beloved, for Christ's sake.

So let every one leave and forsake all which the Lord has called you to
forsake, whether it be Father, Mother, Wise, Children, Lands or Livings, and
come to that whereby the laying down of a man's own Life may be made easy,
which a Disciple of Christ ought to do, when called of God thereunto: And as
you all keep in the Cross of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, you will be
preserved in a pure separation from the whole World that lies in Wickedness,
and are Ungodly as the old World was, which God destroyed by Water; and you
will be Preachers of Righteousness (as righteous Noah was) by a righteous Life
and Conversation, which will speak more expressly, and have a louder cry in
their Ears than Noah's building the Ark had, although that had a speaking in
it, if the old World had not been dull of hearing, and closed their Eyes, they
might have heard God's speaking Voice, and have seen his Providence in it to
preserve Noah, and his Righteous Family; though they were but few in number,
God saved them, and preserved them in the Ark, which Noah was a building before
the Flood came and drowned the Ungodly old World; and he will not spare the
Ungodly World now, but till their Sins be full, and they ripe for a Deluge or
Destruction, and then it will come upon them, and overtake them before they are
aware thereof: and now many are uncircumcised in Heart and Ear, and will not be
warned, nor take notice of God's hand that is lifted against them.

Friends, take heed of mixing with the wicked World, now have no fellowship
with them, nor their works of Darkness, for as you are the Children of the
Light, and of the Day, what fellowship can any of you have with Darkness, or
the works of the whole World that lies in Wickedness? or how can you touch
with them in their corrupt Communication, Ways or Worship, or any of their
unclean and polluted things, but rather reprove and rebuke them that are found
therein: And keep true and faithful to the Lord God, who called you out of the
World, and separated you from the Kindreds of the Earth, to stand for God, and
to be living Witnesses against the Devil and all his works; and you are called
of God to stand with the Lamb, and his faithful followers, against the Devil,
never more to join with the Devil, or take part with his profane, ungodly
Followers in their Sins and Trespasses, nor in their Wrongs, Oppression and
Cruelty, nor contribute any strength to them, stand clear, and in a pure and
spiritual separation, from all that which God's holy Spirit and Light condemns
and judges to be evil, and contrary to the Light, Spirit, and Grace of God;
give not way to that, to save the world, or its Favor; temper not with the
Snares nor Baits of this World, but in the hour of Temptation keep low, waiting
upon the Lord God, who knows how to save and deliver you, and mightily to
succor you when you are tried, and to preserve you out of the power of your
old Adversary, or any of his Snares, Baits or Temptations, God has by his
Light let you see what you ought to choose, and what you ought to refuse; choose
the good, cleave to the good, whatever you may go through or suffer for so
doing, choose Lise, that you may live forever; and how sew or many soever your
days may be in this World, refuse the evil, and the ways of Death and
Destruction; whatsoever has not the mark of Truth upon it, as to Way, Worship
or Religion, refuse it, and enter into no Consultation with the Devil, or his
bad sensual Reasoning, which he will fill them with, that desire and consult
ways to conform in this or the other thing relating to Faith, Religion and
Worship, which never was, nor is of the Lord; and when the Wind blows high,
Rain fall, and Sea rage and foam, then especially look carefully and diligently
to your standing, and look to Christ Jesus the everlasting Rock, that is higher
than you, and higher than the Heavens, and who is the author and finisher of
your Faith; all steadfastly look to him, trust in him, fear him, and think upon
his Name, and still remember that the Lord God by a mighty Hand and Arm
stretched forth, brought you out of Egypt spiritually: Do not forget that we
were once Bonds-men in Egypt, nor how the Lord brought us forth, and the
eminent Hand of the Lord that appeared in our deliverance and freedom from
Egypt's hard Task masters; and the Lord did redeem us from the Heathen, and
their Heathenish Words, Fashions, Ways and Worships, never to learn their
Words, Ways, Fashions or Customs any more: And God called us out of Sodom
spiritually, and to leave the filthy Communication and Conversation of the
Sodomites, which we were never to look back upon any more; truly it is very
dangerous being in Sodom and Egypt spiritually, where our Lord was crucified;
who can expect any thing but Ruin and Destruction to be found amongst them that
now declare their Sin as Sodom? Therefore let none of you go into Egypt again
for any help, or think to have relief there, go not down thither, nor look back
toward Sodom, lest you perish, or be found worthy of the Wrath and Displeasure
of Almighty God, by reason of going back into Egypt again, and then any of you
should be found in Sodom or Egypt spiritually; for if there be a desire in any
to go back, and they draw back, God's Soul shall have no pleasure in them; and
God will be displeased with you that lust after Egypt, or the Fleshpots there,
or any thing you were called of God to leave and forsake, when you came out of
Egypt, notwithstanding a Sea of Troubles, and many Hardships may appear, yet
still resolve in the Power of the Lord to go forward, and with heavenly delight
follow the Lord fully; and look still to the Lord, and not at any Hardships or
Difficulties that may appear in your Journey, nor at the length of it neither:
O! let none of you say, that Food which God has given you from Heaven is light
Meat, for that evidently bespeaks murmuring at the Food which God gives,
whereof you have eaten with us; If any shall be filled so with unbelief, to
slight that, and desire Egyptian Fleshpots, and begin to value that again,
which you vomited up as unsavory, and not good Soul's Food, and return to it
again, sad will the latter end of such be, whatever their beginning was: And if
any of you should forsake the Lord, his Fountain of living Waters, and dig to
your selves broken Sisterns that will not hold the living Water, then a
terrible day of Wrath, and the great Displeasure of the Lord will come upon
you, and so you may become Monuments of his Displeasure, which to avoid, wait
upon the Lord low in his fear, when you come into the Assemblies of the
Righteous, and earnestly desire that this Heart of Unbelief, whereby some in
all Ages departed from God, and went backward, and not forward, may not be
found in you, resolving for the future, in the fear, awe and dread of the Lord
God, to cleave to the Lord, and follow the Lord in the doing of that which is
good, and to keep out of Disobedience, Sin and Evil, while you abide in this
world: Come not to the Meetings of the Saints, as if it were a thing
indifferent whether you came or did stay at home, such lukewarm Hearers and
Professors of the Truth amongst us, God will spue out, that are neither cold
nor hot, and yet cold enough toward that which is good, the day is at hand
that will manifest every Birth, every Tree, and every Spirit really as it is,
unto all who witness the ^a^^ measure of the heavenly Birth, or are Trees of
Righteousness, and who are of a right Spirit.

Dear Friends, give not way to that, to please your selves, or to gratify the
Devil, or any corrupt Men or Women in the Spirit of this World, which would
entice you, or draw you thereunto, that you might be ensnared, and then such
will but sport themselves, to see any of you speak, act and walk after the
course of this World, as such as would draw you into evil, do; but be not you
like unto them, nor learn any of their ways, for the ways of evil men lead
from God, and from his pure and precious Life, which he has made manifest, and
brought you into in measure; so be the more circumspect, diligent and watchful;
watch you in all things, that you may please the Lord, and endure Hardship and
Affliction with God's called, chosen and faithful, when we are called
thereunto, that as true and faithful Warriors in the Spirit and Power of God,
we may all be kept together in one Spirit to the end: Oh! be circumspect every
Son and Daughter, Servant and Handmaid, have your Eye in your Head; and if thy
Eye be single, the whole Body will be full of Light, which tends much to the
safety and preservation of the whole Body, and the faithful are the Body of
Christ, and Members one of another, and must needs be sensible of each others
suffering; can one Member suffer, and not the whole Body suffer with it? Dear
Friends, keep to Christ Jesus, who is the Head of his Body, the Church, which
he has purchased with his own Blood; still mind the Head, and hold the Head,
that you all may be kept living Members of his Body, purely knit together, and
firmly united unto him, that you may be complete in him, wanting nothing of
that state which you ought to be in, as to a growing into him who is the
fullness that fills all in all: In your Assemblies diligently wait to feel his
presence more and more, purely to refresh and comfort you, whereby more and
more you will have living experience how good and safe a thing it is for them
that fear the Lord, to meet often together, to wait upon and serve the Lord,
and answer his will and requiring therein, whatsoever men may require contrary
of us herein, we are to obey God rather then man or man's Edicts to the
contrary, whereby many times Storms arise, and the Sea comes to be troubled.
Friends, forget not how the Lord has covered us and sheltred us, when former
Storms and Tempests have been, and the Rain has fallen, yea, when the Enemy
has come as a Flood, and the Floods of the Ungodly broke forth upon us in the
Dragon's rage, to destroy the heavenly Birth, and that which was of God in us;
how the Lord by his mighty Power, which is an unlimitted Power, brought Help
Salvation and great Deliverance, even when all other Helps failed, and stood
afar off: I hope many yet living do remember, with Joy of Heart, how the Lord
caused the Winds and Sea to obey him, and divided the troubled Waters where the
Whore then did sit, and now sits, which was Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and
People, all which the Whore sits upon; for Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and
People, are all like Waters, rouling, tumbling upon Heaps, and are troubled,
there is no settlement upon them, few knowing what they all, nor why they are
tumbled so upon Heaps; but notwithstanding the Saints, who are the Lamb's
followers must pass through these waters, and through the fire also; the Lord
will divide the waters to make way for his Israel in this day; and though Rahab
and the Dragon stand up in the way of Israel, God will cut Rahab, and wound the
great Dragon, and whatsoever would stand up in his way to hinder his Work,
snall be confounded, and fall before him; for strong i^ the Lord that judges
the great Whore, and divides the Waters thereon she sits, and who will give
her Blood to drink, who has long drunk the Blood of the Saints, and still
thirsts after more Blood to drink about Conformity in matters of Religion, and
the worship of God, but the hour of her Judgments is come, her Paint is seen
through, and her golden Cup full of Abomination is clearly discovered, it is in
vain for the Kings of the Earth to think to support or heal her; nay, she is
not willing to be healed, but thinks she has no need of any healing Medicine,
and truly I know none for her (that is to be destroyed, and must certainly be
destroyed) even that false Church, mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots,
which has called her self Christ's Spouse, but has the marks and attire of an
Harlot. My dear Friends, as God has called you out of her, not to partake of
her Sins and Abominations any more, keep out of her, and stand clear of her
Devices and and subtle Strategems she does now, or hereafter may make use of to
draw ye from Christ Jesus, and the Church that is in God, to a House of Wood
and Stone, which they that are in Babylon call a Church, and call to the Sons
and Daughters of Sion to come to their Church, and receive the Sacrament, who
are come to the true Church, which is in the only true God, and are living
Members thereof, united to Christ Jesus our Head and Husband, and we need no
other Head or Husband, nor need not come to any Church, but that which Christ
is the Head and Husband of, from whom we receive of his living Bread, and Wine
of his Kingdom; and his holy things are given to us by the Spirit that comes
from the Father and the Son; and you know Friends, that whereas Christ said, a
little before he went away as (to his appearance in the Flesh) he would send
the Comforter to his Disciples, which was the Spirit of Truth, to lead and
guide them into all Truth, promising them, that the Spirit should take off his,
and show it unto them, which as they then did receive it, we are made now
certain Witnesses of it: So need not go to a House of Wood and Stone, called
Church, and there sit amongst the corrupt, putrified company of diseased
misorable Sinners, that are so much out of Health, that they have no whole part
in them; what comfort can a healed Soul, or a sound mind have in coming or
sitting amongst them? where one may sooner come by an evil Disease, than ever
be soundly cured of any inward Distemper or Sickness; and you partaking of
God's goodness, and his holy things at his Table, and having spiritual
Fellowship and Communion with him, that is abundantly better than all the Bread
and Wine which is outward, and will decay, given by impure Hands to such as
communicate with them (as many times it is administered) without any Commission
from God; and yet that we must by these Churchmen be forced to come amongst
them, and eat and drink unworthily with these unworthy Administrators and
Receivers of that which they call the Sacrament, is certainly both Unchristian
and Unreasonable, and very Unchristian-like, as the Administrators and
Receivers of it, who would now compel us to eat and drink with them, will one
day know to their Woe, if they Repent not in time; and we may justly deny such,
as for their Bellies sake, without any authority from God, presume to take upon
them in a rude unchristian manner, three times (with the same Mouth that they
bless God and curse Men) to admonish us: You that are taught of the Lord, and
have received his Counsel and spiritual Admonition from him, have learned of
him to admonish one another, and know them that watch for the Soul, from them
that watch and lay in wait for their Prey and dishonest Gain, whose God is
their Belly, and who glory in their shame, who hunt you into their Courts to
sleece you, and seed themselves with the Fat, and cloth themselves with the
Wool, which they obtain by making you and yours their Prey, in spoiling of your
Goods. But dear Friends, let none of these things (that are at present, or
things to come) be able to move you from the peaceable Habitation in the Life
and Power of God, to which you are come, and have been kept living Witnesses
of; fear not, neither be at all dismayed; consider whose the Earth is, and who
has Power to give it when and to whom he pleases; for it is not the Devil's,
nor his Servants; Man is but as a Tenant of it at the will of the Lord God, who
has given us that great gift, his Son, shall he not with him freely give us
all things? And be patient and rest quiet and contented, although you should be
fed with the Bread of Affliction, and Water of Affliction for a season; and
that shall not be, unless God see it convenient for us: let this still comfort
you, the beholding of your Teacher near you, that cannot be removed into a
Corner; and feel God's covenant, which is everlasting, that he made with David,
in all things well ordered and sure (said David) although then God made it not
to grow, he had a sure Hope, and doubted not of the growth of it in God's time
and appointed season; And the Vision was for an appointed time, and at the end
it shall speak, the Prophet said; wait for it, it will surely come, and will
not tarry. You tribulated Followers of the Lamb, that are come to stand with
the lamb upon Mount Sion, never regard the high looks nor threats of them of
Babylon, Sodom or Egypt, although they may hate you, and cast you out for his
Name sake, in whom you have believed, God will make them blush for shame for
their high looks, for God will smite them that threaten your Ruin and
Destruction, and their designs God will discover, and confound them, before
they be put in execution as the Wicked desire, whom the Moth shall eat as does
a Canker, and the Wind shall drive them away like Stubble, and the Righteous
shall see it, and rejoice over Babylon, when her Merchants, and them that
traded with her, shall howl and lament, for Widdowhood, Sorrow and Destruction
shall come upon her in one Hour; and it is greatly dangerous to buy any of the
Merchandise of this great Whore and false Church, that would force to their
Church, Religion and Worship, such that believe it, cannot make them better, or
do their Souls any good: What Church but the false, will by Prisons and great
Penalties, endeavor to make them come to their Church, that are not of their
Church, nor Religion, neither do believe that God ever required those Forcers,
to force any into their Church, nor require them, whom the Compellors summons
to come amongst them? These methods will not do to convince Conscientious
Persons of any differing Religion, to come to that House of Wood and Stone.

Now, dear Friends, you may perceive the Beast would have all, small and great
to worship him; how does he seek to compel People to worship him, and receive
his Mark, either on their foreheads or in their hands? and the cry is, Who is
like unto the Beast? and who is able to make war with him? And none will be
able to deny his worship, and refuse his mark, but the faithful tribulated
Saints of the most High, that abide with Michael, our Prince of Peace, who will
stand with and by the Children of his People, the sealed Ones, that have his
mark on their foreheads, and utterly reject the Mark of the Beast, and deny it,
whatsoever they may suffer for so doing. So, beware of the Mark of the Beast,
freely reject and deny the worshipping of the Beast, and the receiving of his
Antichristian Mark; for if any man worship the Beast, or receive his Mark on
their forehads, or in their hands, they shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of
God, and be judged and condemned of him, and the Cup of the Lords Fury shall be
poured forth for them to drink, without any mixture of his mercy or favor.
Therefore, you Children of Light, and of Gods day, who have known that ^ay so
far to dawn in your hearts, as to have a discovery of the Whore, Beast, false
Prophet and false Church, and have warred in the Lambs warfare, (against the
Beast in any measure, and in the Light of the Lamb have seen and denied the
Whore and her golden Cup) still maintain your War in the Lambs Spirit and
Power, against the Beast, and let your hatred be against the Whore and her Cup
as much as ever; for the whore and her cup is no better now than when you first
saw her, and began to hate her, and burn her flesh with fire, and her cup is
the very same now, however she may guild it. I know God has showed, and will
more manifest to you the My stery of the great Whore that sits upon many
Waters, Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, and he is willing to preserve
you, and will keep you from adhering to her, or the beast on which she rides,
and that carries her; if you will hearken still unto the Lord, and obey him, he
will defend you from the cruelty of the great red Dragon, Whore, Beast and
false Prophet, and will take the Beast, and with him the false Prophet, and
give them to the burning slame. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

And remember how freely the Lord has made you to drink of the Waters of Life,
and how that water has been in you as a Well springing up to Life eternal; and
how can any of you that have known the waters of a full Cup, from God given
unto you, (and to your great satisfaction have drunk thereof) return again to
the foul and muddy Waters, that have no clearness nor life in them? Such as
keep in the sense of that Life, and Waters of it, which Christ has given us, I
know will never again meddle with the corrupt foul muddy Waters which the Whore
and false Church gives to her Children; but the Bread and Water of Life, which
you have fed upon, and drunk of at the Table of the Lord, the Children of the
great Whore know not; and therefore their cry has been, Come to the Church,
receive the Sacrament; if you do, you must pay for it, and if you do not, you
must pay the more, and be cited to appear at Courts, which they call Courts
Spiritual; but how carnally they act in keeping of them, and in proceeding
against them that for Conscience sake toward God cannot partake with them, let
all that fear God judge.

Oh! dear Friends, fear not the Wrath of man, though his heart be lifted up
never so much in manifest Oppression, and threaten to act it upon you; but
still know you, and believe, that the remainder of man's wrath, God will
restrain, and disappoint the Wicked; cast not away your Confidence, but wait
patiently upon God, and he will restrain the Wrath of the Wicked Persecutors,
that they will be confounded in their ungodly Proceedings, and not be able to
effect their vile purposes: Depart not from the Faith which God has given you,
the Mystery of which is held in a pure Conscience; stand fast in it, then I
doubt not but such will quit themselves in this day, through the Lords aid and
assistance, from all the Snares that now are, or hereafter may be laid to catch
and hurt the innocent, and betray the simple. So in the peaceable, pure wisdom
and power of the Lord, keep over all the treacherous dealers, who set a trap to
catch men, and who are full of deceit and flattery, and will speak you fair
sometimes, as well as at other times show their Teeth, ready to devour you, or
eat you up; with the wisdom and power of the Lord God, keep out of them and
over them; for their delight is in Mischief, to oppress a man and his house,
but the Lord sees and knows all the intents and purposes of the Wicked, with
all their wicked works, and will reward them accordingly.

Do you see Clouds to appear and arise? remember it is said of Christ, That he
comes with the Clouds; and then should be a time of great Trouble, and how it
should be a day of Darkness, and Clouds, and thick Darkness, and that covers
the Earth, and Nations; for so is the day of the Lord to the Wicked, its a day
of gloominess and darkness, but not light: Now to behold Christ in the Clouds,
how comfortable and glorious is it! but more glorious and comfortable to see
him expelling of them, and causing the shadows of Death and Darkness to vanish
away, which they do, and must do, as the Son, Christ Jesus, the Substance,
comes into Peoples hearts, and is revealed in them. You that witness Christ so
come, see him in the clouds, and how he breaks through the clouds, and drives
all away, that he may cause his day to dawn more in clearness. And Christ said,
Behold, I come as a Thief in the night; blessed is he that watches and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his shame; it is not safe in a
storm for men to be naked, without their garments that should cover them when
distress comes.

And now, a stormy Wind blows, dear Friends, be ye all watchful, and clothed
with the garments of Praise, which God promised to give his People, instead of
the spirit of Heaviness; and it will be a great Woe upon all them that have not
the Spirit of the Lord to c^ver them with in this present Storm, and when
distress of Nations comes, that are not, as good men and women, watching for
the Lords coming, whether at Midnight, Cock-crow, or when ever it be; for the
day and hour knows no man; and Christ said, In an hour when you think not,
the Son of Man comes; therefore how are we all concerned to be always ready,
and prepared for him, to serve, worship and follow him whithersoever he goes?
And Christ said, When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth?
signifying the great loss and want of Faith, that shall be when he comes, and
what shipwreck will be made of Faith; notwithstanding I doubt not but this day
of Trouble will be of great use unto all who are honest in heart, and have
believed with us, and provoke such to examine themselves, whether now they be
in the Faith or not, and truly to search their own hearts, and thoroughly prove
themselves; and so no doubt but all the Sons and Daughters of Sion will come
out of the Furnace more pure than Gold seven times tried in the sire; and truly
a through search, trial and examination will hurt neither the strong in Christ,
nor the weakest of the Flock; it will, doubtless, be of great benefit for all
to examine themselves whether they be in the faith or not; for he that
stands, stands by Faith, and lives by Faith, and pleases God by Faith,
and holds the Mystery of it in a pure Conscience; and works Righteousness
by Faith, and stops the Lions Mouths, and escapes the edge of the Sword by
Faith; and out of weakness are made strong through Faith, and valiant for the
Truth, in warring against all that which works against the Truth, and is for
untruth.

And Friends, to be rich in Faith, such durably are made rich, and such may be
instrumental in the hand of the Lord to make others rich, although they be poor
in this World; for it is the poor of this world (rich in Faith) that are Heirs
of Gods Kingdom.

So, you poor of the Flock, that honor God in your day, be content with such
things as you have; nay, though you should have less, and be made as poor as
any are, do not repine nor murmur in your hearts against God; do not thou say
in thy haste, Why is my Lot and Portion of this World so little, and so hard?
but mind thy being rich in Faith, and still look unto Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of thy Faith, that has made thee rich in Faith, and thou will be as
well contented with such things as thou have, as them who are out of the Faith,
though they be never so much increased with Corn, Wine and Oil, or have this
world's Goods in never such abundance; And if thou be'st poor and needy,
consider the poor, distressed and stripped estate of Gods innocent Servant Job,
and by what he was upheld and kept from sinning against God; let the same Love
to God be in thee, and the same uprightness and patience will preserve thy
goings aright, and keep thee from murmuring when thou want many things that
others enjoy. Thou know that Dives was rich, but Lazarus was poor, and was
desirous of the crumbs that fell from the rich man's Table: Dives had his good
things, but Lazarus his evil things in this world, a Beggar; the Rich man dyed,
and the Beggar also; the Rich man was Wicked, and went into Hell, to be
tormented in that Fire; but Lazarus was received into Abraham's Bosom, and was
blessed and comforted with faithful Abraham, who is called the Father of the
faithful. And you that are poor in this world, consider Christ Jesus, who in
the days of his flesh had not whereon to lay his head, though the Foxes had
holes, and the Birds of the Air their nests; and your heavenly Father knows
what you have need of, and will let you want no manner of thing that he sees
good for you; be content that you are Heirs of Gods Kingdom, and that God has
promised you Treasure in Heaven; keep your Hearts to that, and prise that above
all earthly, cankering, or the rusty Treasure of this world, and it will go
well with you forever and evermore.

The Riches of this World, and all its Honor and Glory, that is uncertain, and
takes to it self Wings and flies away; but we being rich in Faith and in good
Works, that will abide and follow us, when we are gone hence, and shall be no
more seen in this world; but the Riches of this world, and its Delights and
Pleasures will come to an end, and now are flying away from many whose minds
were lifted up, and who were puffed up in their minds with it. And the Apostle
said, Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they be not high-minded,
nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who gave them all things
richly to enjoy. And Job said, Naked came I into this World, and naked shall I
return again; and that the Lord gave, and took away, and could bless the Name
of the Lord: He thus said in his poor stripped and distressed state; and the
Love, Faith and Patience of Job gives true contentedness now, and such as have
it cast their care upon the Lord, and he takes care for them. And Friends, you
that are rich in this World, keep your Minds out of it, or else it will become
a snare to you; and your Table may become a snare, if you keep not low and
sober in the use of these good things that you enjoy in this world; and
although God gives you them for your welfare, yet they may become a trap; and
if when they increase you let your hearts after them, and set your hearts on
them, undoubtedly they will prove so to you, as well as other People. Therefore
keep low, and take heed to your selves, that the Earth get not over you again
to oppress and burden that Seed of God in any of you; for then you will begin
to walk heavily on, and pull back your Shoulder from many good works and
services that you might do for God in your day, and will neglect the doing of
them; and if (when Riches increase) you set your hearts on it, it will steal
away the hearts of such from the Lord, then what avails any thing of a
drawing near to God with the Tongue, or Lips, or any Bodily exercise, that you
may be exercised in; For in this state Pride and vain Glory creeps in, and a
desire after the Glory of the World, and a love to it, and to deck themselves
very unbecoming Truth professed and talked of by them, and to get into the vain
Fashions and Modes of the world; because they have gotten more of it than
others, they may think that they may get into fine Apparel, and needless things
the world uses to wear; and so much of that which is needless and superfluous
is worn by some, especially that are young, that it is a shame their Parents,
that have the government of them, should suffer them in it.

So dear Friends, who are Parents of Children, wait diligently upon the Lord in
his Light, that with his Light you may see betimes into the Natures,
Inclinations and Dispositions of your Children, and have a watchful and good
Eye over them, and their Inclinations; and if you see they are inclinable to
that which is good, cherish that in them, if it be never so little, strengthen
it, that more may arise in them, and they may more come to see and taste with
you how good and gracious the Lord is; and be good Examples to them in words
and actions, that they may hear gracious words from you, and behold your good
Conversation coupled with fear, fear to offend the Lord, and fear to do any
thing against his glorious Truth, and then you will shine as Lights among them
and your whole Families, and amongst all the Children of men: But if you see
your Children incline toward that which is evil, to Pride, vain Fashions of
the World, or that they delight in the company of the Wicked, and in Sports,
and that they evilly spend their time; without delay, check and sharply reprove
them for it, and endeavor as much as in you lies, to stop and restrain them
therefrom; and stubbornness, high-mindedness and all manner of Evil, labor in
the love and wisdom of God to break them from, and keep down in them. If any
say, What can I do? God must do all. I fear some amongst you have omitted your
Duty on your part, to do as Christian Parents, under that pretense of God's
doing all, and therefore do not train up your Children in the way of God, Truth
and Life as you ought to do: But suffer them not to learn the corrupt ways of
evil Men and Women, and to choose their ways; it is true, God works all our
Works in us and for us; but as he works immediately by his Spirit and Power
in our hearts, he also works by Instruments; and you in the wisdom and spirit
of God are, or may become fit Instruments for God to work on your Children and
Families by, and to reclaim your Children and Families from Vice and
Wickedness, which you may see them incline unto; If the believing Husband may
save his Wife, and the believing Wife her Husband, that believes not, then why
may not you, as believing Parents, save your Children, duly watching over them
for good, believing in God for them, and doing your duty to them carefully, and
in God's heavenly wisdom? And why may not you, your Children and Families be
thus sanctified and saved from the Abominations of the times, and the Evil of
the World, while you and they are in it? If wholly you discharge your duty and
trust, as Parents or Masters of Families; and then if your Children or
Servants, notwithstanding remain wicked, you will be clear, and their Blood
will come upon themselves, or at their Doors. I doubt not but there are many
Parents have a Godly care over their Children, and as Masters, and Mistresses
or Dames have a Christian care over their Servants and whole Family, to
instruct them in the way of Righteousness, and that reprove and correct their
Children, and their Servants, when they see them do that which is evil. But
this is written in the love of God, as a caution to and reflection upon all who
are negligent and careless amongst us in this respect, that all may come into a
care of God's glory, and of their Children and Servants, that as much as in you
lies, you endeavor to reclaim, and restrain them from Sin and Evil, and train
them up in that which is good, that you all may be able to give account to God
with Joy, when by him you may be called to an account how you have governed and
ruled your Families, trained up your Children, counseled and advised your
Servants, and what Examples you have been to your Families, whom God gave you
the rule and government of here, a few days in this World. And you believing
Husbands, who have Wives that believe not, love your Wives, and be very careful
how you speak and act toward them, that no blemish may come upon the Truth by
any unadvised words to your Wives, neither any unseemly carriages or behavior,
that if possible, you may gain your Wives, that believe not, to the Lord, and
belief of his precious Truth. And you Wives, that have Husbands that believe
not, speak and do likewise the same to them, that you all may be found Holy and
Unblamable in the day of God, that the unbelieving Wife may be sanctified by
her believing Husband, and the unbelieving Husband by his believing Wife,
loving and cherishing the good in them that believe not, whether Husband or
Wife; but keeping clear of that which is Evil, never join with that which is
Evil, for thereby you will not only hurt and darken your selves, but also harm
your Relations, and strengthen them the more in that which is evil, and
contrary to God, and make your Lives more uncomfortable. And all Husbands and
Wives in general, live in Love, in the love of God, out of a pure Heart loving
and cherishing one another, submitting your Hearts to God and his counsel in
one another, as the Lord by his Spirit may move in any of your Hearts, so to
counsel and advise each other therein, that you may be made to each other meet
helps in the Truth, and helps in him to advance that in your Families, or in
helps in Government in the Church of God. And Children, be subject, and in
obedience to your Parents in the Lord, that you may please the Lord; for the
stubborn and disobedient displease the Lord, and come short of the Blessing of
the Lord, whilst so, I mean his Blessing in heavenly things, and often in this
world and its things, they are not blessed to them, nor do not enjoy them in
the blessing of God: Take heed Children, disobedience to Parents is a great
evil, to disobey them and their Commands, being that which is good; Let none be
high, or set not your selves against such Commands, if you do, God will punish
you for it, and kindle his wrath against you; if your Parents command you to
keep out of evil Company, and out of bad Words and Actions, obey them, or else
it will be ill with you. Parents care being over you for good, will you grieve
them, by rewarding them evil for good, and rebellion toward them, instead of
esteem, honor and duty, which you owe to them, even so much as you can scarce
do it enough? therefore diligently mind your Parents commands in the Truth, to
observe and do them. And all you Servants, that are convinced of and own God's
Truth, let God's fear be before your Eyes, and let his Truth guide and order
you, and keep you, that you may be enabled by the Lord to discharge your duty
in the place of a Servant, every one of you, not as Eye Servants, or sloathful
and careless in your Masters business, knowing you must give an account to God
for any evil in this respect done by you; and you ought to do, in all matters
belonging to your place, as what you did and were concerned in, were your own;
and you ought to perform business in your Masters absence, as if present, and
shun all Cousining and Defrands, and seek your Masters profit, and be obedient
unto them, and subject to them in all their lawful and just Commands, that the
blessing of God, and the good pleasure of your Masters you may obtain; do not
despise or slight the commands of them, because they are Godly, or may bear
more with you, and allow you more just Liberty than the wicked will do, for
that would prove Wickedness in you, and incur their displeasure, which you may
avoid if you be wise; and rightly consider your place and station, and do not
strive unlawfully to get out of it; And take you heed what Words you use, and
what Actions you do amongst your Masters Children; for your evil example,
doubtless, may do much hurt to Children, who many times are more inclinable to
the bad, than that which is good, you being frequent with them, by your bad
Words and Actions, may give great strength unto; encourage no corrupt
Communication, nor provoke them to Laughter, foolish Jesting, nor any unseemly
behavior, to stir up the wrong part, that you and your Masters Children ought
to check and keep down in each other by the Grace of God, which you all being
taught by, will make them good Children, and you good Servants, and then the
blessing of the Lord will rest upon you, whether Servants, or made free, and
whether single, or in a married condition, wherein are the greatest Snares,
Troubles and Encumbrances. And you that are single, be not over hasty to force
your selves from that state, to change your conditions, (I speak this both to
Friends, Children and Servants) wait the Lord's due time, and wait low in his
fear in it, that you may be taught of the Lord, what to do, and not Sin against
God in changing your conditions; and take heed of being unequally yoked, or
marrying with the World, although they may be civilized, and have established
to themselves a Righteousness, which is not the Righteousness of God, which if
you be not aware of, may beguile your Simplicity, and anger the Lord God, and
grieve your Parents that waited for, and expected better things from you; so
your Marriage will not be honorable, nor you and them (you make thus choice
of) be joined together in Marriage by the Lord: Therefore take heed of the
World and the World's Spirit, which leads from God; for that will lead you to
love the world, and to have an Eye out to the Riches of it in your choice, and
the Beauty of their Daughters, that have not believed nor received the Truth:
You Young Men will look out after, and may be you see some elder than you drawn
by the spirit of this world into the same Practices, and you may strengthen
your selves in that, which God never justified you nor them in, but you are
both condemned for, when you come to the witness of God, and hearken to the
witness of God in your own Consciences, that never consents to any unequal
yoking, nor any thing else that is done contrary to God, by any amongst us,
whether they be Young or Old, Rich or Poor, Married or Unmarried, God does not
justify, but he condemns all bad Marriages, and other things, now as much,
nay, more then in the times of Ignorance; although he disallowed them ever
since the beginning of this World, and forewarned the Holy Seed not to mingle
themselves in Marriage with the Heathen, and commanded them to keep themselves
Pure, and to be Holy, with this caution, I the Lord your God am a Holy God; but
they not regarding the command of the Lord, and taking to themselves Wives of
all sorts, thereat God was grieved, And it repented the Lord that he had made
Man, when he saw the provoking of his Sons and Daughters, and he said, I will
cut off Man and Beast from the Earth. So, all you Unmarried, whether Young or
Elder, that are convinced of God's Truth, and come amongst us, look to the Lord
in your proceedings in Marriage, wait low and enquire of the Lord first,
whether it will stand with his honorable Truth, and be an honorable Marriage,
that you have a mind to effect and bring to pass, yea or nay; and if in answer
from God, after patient waiting upon the Lord in it, you find that it will be
to the honor of the Lord, and with the consent of your Parents, go on, and the
Lord will be with you, and will direct, guide and bless you in your
undertaking, which is of very great weight; but if after a deliberate waiting
upon God, you find not the Lord with you in your purpose and design, but that
his Hand is against you and your purpose, then stay and give it up, and be not
discontented, and hastily carry on the matter in your own wills; nor let not
your fond, foolish Affections sway you so, that you may become Captives to
them, or the Will and Lusts of the Flesh; for then God's safe counsel will be
hid from you, and you will run on in your own Wills averse and opposite to the
will of the Lord in that weighty concern, whereby some dishonor the Lord,
defile their Bed, grieve and make sad their Parents, or them concerned, as left
in trust with them, and endanger their own Ruin, both as to Soul and Body. So
dear Friends, whether Young Men or Maidens, or more Aged, that may be concerned
in this weighty matter of Marriage, consider these things, do nothing against
the Truth, but look to the God of Truth, give up your selves to be at the
Lord's dispose and ordering, and he by his heavenly Wisdom will preserve you
out of the Spirit of this world, and out of all the Ways, Works and Snares of
it. And you Parents of Children, give no encouragement or strength to your Sons
or Daughters (that are owned by us, or in the profession of Truth with us) to
Marry with the worlds People Sons or Daughters; keep your selves clear of such
mingling and Marriages, that are out of the Truth, which you cannot, nor your
Children, expect comfort or Gods blessing in; let no Earthly end whatsoever
prevail with any of you, to connive at, or encourage such things in your
Children; for if so, thereby will the worlds Spirit creep into you, as well as
it has done your Children that so proceed, and may darken God's counsel from
both you and your Children, and hinder Gods blessings from your Familes, and
let in the curse amongst you, and bring his displeasure upon you and yours, and
that is a woeful thing. God Almighty lead, direct and guide you all in the
things that concern your everlasting Peace, which you are come to know and
understanding; but the Wicked of the World know them not; and so in the day of
the Lord you will be more inexcusable, (acting against Knowledge) than such
will be that have not known those things: So be ye all diligent and watchful,
that you may be kept out of the World, and the Evil thereof, and keep God's
holy Will and Commands all the days of your abiding in the World. And you
Masters, Mistresses or Dames, behave your selves in the fear, awe and dread of
the Lord in your respective Families toward your Servants, instruct and inform
them, as God your Master in Heaven, by waiting upon him, will give you Wisdom
to do it, which Wisdom will direct you how to speak and act toward them, as
such that know they have a Master in Heaven, even so carry and behave your
selves in your duty and places to your Servants, forbearing threatening in any
words you say to them, that whether your Servants believe, or be such as
believe not, you may by your good Communication and Conversation reach the
good, and answer Gods witness in them, and to put no stumbling blocks in their
way, whereby to cause them to stumble, by hasty, rash, unadvised Words, that
savor not of God, nor comes of him that called you; you being kept in the
fear and dread of your Master in Heaven, will have true and peaceable wisdom
given you, to carry your selves in your Families; so that the Truth will not be
reproached, nor its way spoken evil of justly by your occasion, and that
greatly tends to the honor of the God of Truth, and increase his wisdom and
counsel to order your own Household or Family well, and will bring ablessing
upon them. And I could not be clear in the writing of this Epistle to you, but
to put you in mind of these things that are good to be known and practiced in
every Family, which had I not seen a neglect of in some, there would have been
no need of.

And My dear Friends, that have transported, or may transport your selves or
Families beyond the Seas, out of your Native Country, consider and thoroughly
weigh your aims and ends therein, that they be such as you may expect God's
blessing in, and without seeking great things to your selves, or set your Nests
on high, lest you fail in your expecttation, and bring much Sorrow, Trouble and
Exercise upon your selves and Families; from the richest to the poorest of you,
seek Gods honor, and keep in his Counsel; wait low that you may enjoy Gods
counsel, and stand in it wherever you are; for that is certain and safe, and
will direct you certainly and safely, if you wait to be ordered and guided by
it; and that as you keep in it, will bring a blessing to all the Countries
wherever you may be dispersed, and bless your Undertakings where you Plant
and settle your selves; but whether you who are gone already, or such as intend
to go out of the Land, follow not your own wills, or fond weak affections in
going into foreign Countries, or because this or the other Person goes, and
may have a share in Government there; consider, it is a weighty thing for one
Person to remove out of his Country afar off, and his way clearly he sees not,
perhaps neither; and if so, its not only a weighty, but a dangerous matter to
remove a whole Family for favor and affection; and affection not well governed
may lead a man or woman far into things they have not a right understanding,
nor clear sight in, whereby some miss their way in their undertakings, which
brings trouble, vexation of Mind, and discontents; not that I have any thing
against any Person or Family going to settle themselves or Families, or to
plant in any Country, that go in clearness, as to God, and singly mind his
Honor and Glory more than any thing else besides, that is visible; for I know
the Light of Gods countenance will blessedly shine upon such wherever they
are; and they will not go in their own Wills, nor be swayed by foolish
Affections to run into things, or do things hastily, nor will or run in a heady
mind in their undertakings, but will patiently wait upon the Lord, not only to
know the mind and will of the Lord, but faithfully give up to do it, whether
here in England, or any other Country; and such dare not remove themselves nor
Families, but as they feel the Lord to countenance them in it, or have real and
true freedom in the clear Truth of God, which leads us out of, and carries over
all worldly aims and ends, and seeking, giving or receiving any earthly Honor
which is judged of the Lord God, and gratifieth only that worldly part and
spirit that leads into it. And Friends, all of you, be sure you neither had nor
have in your hearts any secret reserve (to save that which ought to be freely
given up) in your transporting your selves; for wherever that is, it arises
from Unbelief and carnal Reasoning: And if there be any of you that have left
the Land, or shall hereafter leave it, that shall do it to save liberty, estate
or life (which I doubt not but you might have temptations to in your
undertakings) certainly that will not be well; you may be in danger and
jeapordy there, as well as we here: And by any particulars giving way to that
here or there; they will thereby but render themselves less capable to bear or
keep up their Testimony for the Lord as all ought to do. Truly my hearts desire
and Prayer to God for you is, That you may be saved out of the many Snares and
Dangers that may attend you there, as well as we your Friends and Brethren here
left behind you; and that you with us may be kept forever to God, that we all
may answer the Witness of God in all People, Nations, and of what Tongue
soever; and it will be so, we keeping in Gods fear and wisdom, and never
departing from him or his counsel; hereby shall many Nations be converted to
God, from their Idolatrous Ways and Practices. And come out of all whatsoever
is Evil and contrary to the Lord God, and so Friends will you with us, and we
together with you in one Spirit of Love, Life and Power be preserved out of the
many Snares and Temptations to such things as would dishonor God, grieve his
Spirit one in another, or be any occasion of stumbling to them that will watch
strictly over both us and you, that in all things we may so behave our selves,
that the holy Name of the Lord, known and professed by us, may never be
reproached or blasphemed by any of our Adversaries. Walk wisely, and behave
your selves in tenderness and lowliness of mind toward the Indians or others,
whom you may have occasion to deal with, do justly, as you would they should do
unto you; and cease from Anger and Wrath in conversing with them, that you may
answer the just Principle of God in People of all Nations, which you may be
concerned with, that we may hear of your welfare and stedfastness in Christ
Jesus, that the Lord may be with you, and bless your Undertakings, is sincerely
the desire of my Soul. And my dear Friends, in general, that love and fear the
Lord, whatsoever things are good, pure, honest, that are of a good Report, or
which have any virtue in them, think of and heartily put in practice, without
being offended at the least thing or things that really are of God, and which
he appears in, and blesses his People in the Practice of. Oh! be of one accord
and one mind therein; avoid all corrupt Reasoning and needless Questions about
such things, as becomes Saints; and avoid all Evil Speakers, Whisperers,
Back-biters and Tale-bearers, who thereby would cool Brotherly Love, or make
Discord, and divide the Body of Christ Member from Member, to lay waste Gods
Heritage, and trample upon his pleasant portion: In the fear and wisdom of God
keep, that you may be made capable Instruments to stop such evil Instruments,
and whatsoever is ^ad, impure, dishonest, and of a bad Report; And in the Life
of Righteousness, and pure Judgment thereof, stand up for God as faithful
Witnesses, against that which would defile and work Abomination, when and
wherever it would enter to hurt and spoil the Vines; for our Vines have tender
Grapes, and the Lord of the Vineyard looks for Grapes from his Vineyard, but
will be displeased with sower Grapes, whosoever brings them forth: And shut
out all self-Interest, and that which would lead you to respect Persons in
Judgment, that nothing which is Evil may escape Judgment within in the
particular, nor in such amongst us that do profess the Truth of God, whoever
they be, rich or poor; and that the Righteous may be justified in Judgment,
that an equal hand of true Judgment and Justice may still be born, and flow
forth toward all of the Household of Faith, without respect to Persons. God
Almighty be with you all, and keep you in your strong Tower of safety the name
and power of the Lord, now the winds blow hard, and the sea swells; if any of
you go out of the name of the Lord, into which you are gathered, and seek to
save your selves without the Lord and his counsel, you cannot be safe, what
course beside soever you take: Therefore keep with the Lord in his name, light
and life, and he will be with you to save and deliver you out of the hands of
all your Enemies, but do not prescribe the Lord a way, how to work deliverance
or bring salvation, leave that to him that it belongs unto, the time and manner
of his saving, and making bare and stretching forth of his hand; but stand fast
in believing, be still, and know continually, that God is God, and by Faith in
his power you will see such things brought to pass as your Eyes yet never
beheld done by Gods almighty Power. Manifest your selves still peaceable, and
quietly wait upon the Lord, who for the cry of the oppressed will arise, and
his Arm will put on strength; he will help the poor and needy, and will have
mercy upon Zion, and favor his People who eye him, and cost not away their
confidence which you have had in his Power, and Gods everlasting Covenant of
Light, Life and Power feel made with you, even the sure Mercies of David, and
the bright and morning Sear to direct you, and guide you in all your ways, that
none of you may err or go astray any more. And remember Gods Covenant and
Promise, which is sure, that he made with David and his seed, which greatly
comforted David in his afflictions and troubles, that his House was not with
God, as it ought to have been; be thought upon Gods everlasting Covenant, he
regarded that, and believed God would perform it in a time when be made it not
to grow; and God said, As my Covenant is wi^h the day and night, that there
shall be day and night in their proper seasons so is my Covenant with David and
with his seed forever; and David shall not want a man to sit upon his Throne
from henceforth and forever. And the Lord said, If I break my Covenant with the
day and the night, that there shall not be day and night, then will I break my
Covenant with David. But we see God continues his Covenant with the day and
night, in their season, as in his eternal wisdom and counsel be appointed in
the beginning, and set all thing in order which he had made, and the day and
night ever since, according to Gods Covenant has remained, and kept their
order even so God made his Covenant with David and his Seed. Therefore dear
Friends, feel that you are all of the Seed and Offspring of David, the bright
and morning Star, and feel and be sensible of his sure Mercies and Covenant
with you, and extended toward you continually; and having received such
Mercies and precious Promises, faint not, whatever may become of your outward
Man or Estates in this world* freel^ give up all to the Lord, from whom you
have obtained many favors and peculiar deliverances, when you were in great
straits, and have been sorely beset with the Enemy within and without, how did
the Lord then appear to stand by you, and strengthen you, when you had no other
helper, nor looked for Salvation or strength in the day of trouble, from any
other certainly then was Gods time to appear, who then did confound your Foes,
and stop and drive back the Powers of Darkness, that with^^ood the Lords work,
by his Power in you, and which he has also begun in the Nations of the Earth,
which he will carry on and prosper for his Names sake and Covenants sake, which
in all things is well ordered and sure, in which God Almighty keep you and
establish you all for evermore.

Your Friend and Brother who forever desires to be found one with the faithful
in every good word and work JAMES PARK
Alton in Hampshire, ^he latter end of the 11th Mon. 1682.

