PROPOSALS For Settling the East India TRADE.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

PROPOSALS For SETTLING the East India Trade.
THE best Way to carry on that Trade, to the General Advantage of the Nation,
is by an Establishment of a Regulated Company, whereby all the Subjects of
England may have Liberty to concern themselves therein at all times, upon an
equal Foot.

'Twill be a great Encouragement for Adventurers, to make new Discoveries, when
every one may have the Management of his own Affairs, and reap the Benefit of
his own Industy; the Trade will be driven to its utmost Extent, more Ships
employed, His Majesty's Customs advanced, many of the Younger Sons of the
Gentry provided for by beneficial Employments, greater Quantities of the
Commodities of our Native Growth and Manufactures exported by many Buyers,
which will consequently raise their Value here; and there will be larger
Importations from India, consequently lower the Price of these Goods, by the
many Sellers at our Markets, give us great Advantages to surmount our European
Competitors in that Trade, and enable us to supply all these parts of the World
with the Commodities of those Countries much cheaper than they, especially if
the whole Subsidy may be repaid upon all that shall be Shipped off for Parts
beyond the Seas.

And Lastly, By such an Establishment, Three great Evils which have been
practiced by the present Joint Stock, will be effectually remedied, viz.

That of a Monopoly, wherein is but one Buyer and one Seller of all the Goods
Imported and Exported to and from so great a part of the World.

The taking up vast Sums of Money at Interest upon a common Seal, which is a
thing very unequal and hazardous to the Subject, because no particular Men's
Estates are liable for Payment of the same. And,

That pernicious and infamous Trick of Stock-Jobbing, whereby several Families
have been already ruined, and had its Original from this Company.

Now for the Constitution of a Corporation to manage this Trade, and the Powers
requisite for such a Company, we do further most humbly propose,

That a convenient Number of Persons be appointed and chosen annually, to
direct the General Affairs, who may be empowered to raise Money at a certain
Rate per Cent. on all Merchandise, as may be agreed by a general Court of
Adventurers, which shall be the Company's Stock, for maintaining an Ambassador
at the Court of the Great Mogul, Consuls at the principal Ports, making such
Settlements as may upon due Consideration be judged necessary, and for
defraying all other Public Charges.

That every Person at his Admittance into the Company, shall pay for his
Freedom a small Sum for the Uses aforesaid.

That the Adventurers at a General Court may make such Bylaws, for the better
regulating and carrying on the Trade, as shall be approved of by the Lord
Keeper, the Lords Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron for the time being,
to be consistent with the Laws of the Land.

SOME REASONS AND CONSIDERATIONS Why the East India Trade should not be Settled
in a Joint Stock Exclusive.
THough at the first Constitution of a Joint Stock it is made as diffusive by
the Subscriptions of many in small Sums, as the nature of the thing is capable
of, yet by Purchase, or otherwise, it soon comes into few hands, and is
attended with all the Evils that a destructive Monopoly brings with it, without
having the least of those specious and pretended Advantages so much talked of;
and the Assertion, that the Dutch out of choice have settled that Trade in a
Joint Stock, and that the Scotch have so settled it, because it is the most
advantageous, is ill grounded, being done by them for the Reasons following.

The Dutch had the beginnings of their Trade to India in the Minority of their
State, when they strugled with the Mighty Power of Spain, in a long and bloody
War; and the Spaniards and Portugueze (who were then under the same Monarch)
being Masters of the whole Trade of the Indies, the States, to weaken their
Enemies, wisely Encouraged their Merchants to send Ships into those Seas, by
giving them Commissions of War; and they effectually did it, by taking
considerable Booties from them, and by augmenting still their Force, had great
success at Sea, and seized on some of their Fortifications. This brought the
Merchants of their several Towns to join: where, by prosecuting their Trade,
and their Privateering several Years, they became very considerable. Then the
States United them further, that they might yet be more serviceable to annoy
the Enemy, and brought the whole Trade and War into a Joint Stock, and gave it
mighty Privileges; as of paying no Customs In, or Out, etc. which they enjoy
to this day.

This was the Reason so long since that induced the States to this Settlement,
by way of Hostility and depredation; and not that they thought it was best so
to do for the general good of the Trade, or that it could not be as well
managed by a Regulation, if their Circumstances had been otherwise.

The East India Company of Holland being thus Established, as it were by
Conquest, and thereby incumbring themselves with many Fortresses in the
South-Seas, and Ceylon, to maintain to themselves their most advantageous
Spice-Islands (without which the Company must fall) there seems a necessity
upon them to drive that Trade in a Joint Stock; for indeed their Establishment
in India is another Commonwealth, and their Charge to maintain their many
Forts is so extravagant, being forced to send out twelve or fifteen hundred Men
yearly; that though they bring home many very Rich Ships Annually, yet their
Dividends are but small, and those suspected by most, to be rather out of their
Quick Stock, for they owe and continually take up vast Sums of Money at
Interest, at home, as well as in India; wherein our Company has imitated them,
though they had no Spice-Islands, or profitable Colonies to help defray those
Charges, but only a plain Trade, which might as well, nay much better, be
carried on without Forts. And as we cannot in the one, so we humbly conceive
there is no Reason to imitate them in the other; because we have better ways,
even by a Regulation, to outdo them. For, Anno 1653. to 1657. while our Trade
to India lay open to all, the Holland East India Company sunk greatly in their
Stock and Credit: we under-sold them in all those Commodities, and brought home
Spice in spite of th^^, procured at Macossar (a considerable Mart in the
South-Seas, where we once had a Settlement) and elsewhere; which gave them such
apprehensions of losing their Trade, that to prevent it, they employed some
Persons to influence Oliver Cromwell to Establish this present Joynt-Stock,
Anno. 1657. And they gave also Pensions in England, to forward the Design.

And though they so much applaud the Dutch, calling them a Wise People, Masters
of the Mysteries of Trade, etc. they do not tell you that they have not the Act
of Navigation upon them. So that the Condition of the People of England will be
infinitely different from theirs: For if the Holland Company set their Goods
too high, and use the People ill, though they cannot send Ships direct to
India, they can send to England, France, and Spain, or any other Country, to
buy all Goods except Spices. But if our Company be thus Established, the People
of England have no way to help themselves. For the Act of Navigation Prohibits
the Importation of all Goods from any Port or Place, except that of their
Growth, Production, or usual place of their first Shipping. And then, if an Act
passes that none is to Trade to those parts, but by a Joint Stock, then can no
East India Commodities be imported but by them; and then if those Gentlemen
will demand one hundred pounds for what cost them but five pounds, the People
must pay it, or be without; for we can buy none of those goods in Holland, or
any where else, because those two Laws have staked us down, and wholly
subjected us to those Men.

In all other Taxes we have this satisfaction, that we know the most can be
demanded of us; but were this Company settled, we are left to their boundless
will, to order them from time to time as they list.

The Company do indeed pretend that they cannot set their own Rates, and get
what Prizes they please, because their Goods are always exposed to Sale by
public Candle, and put up low, where every Person is admitted to buy, and the
Buyer sets the price. Now that this Salvo is insignificant, is known almost by
every Trader's constant practice; for when a Ship, or any Goods are exposed to
Sale by Candle, the Sellers have always Friends in the place, who bid until it
comes up to the Seller's price. So this Relief by a public Sale will not help;
besides, the Company can import so little, that the Peoples wants of the
Commodities, will force them to give what price they please.

The Scotch chose a Joynt-Stock before a Regulated Company, because they never
yet had any Trade to India, nor have their Merchants wherewithal to manage it,
so must call in the assistance of other Nations, both for Money and Experience,
which, God be thanked, is not our Case, being very well acquainted in those
parts of the World, having a large improved experience in Trade, and Stock
enough to carry it on to its full extent; such a Genius to Traffic and
Navigation, that wherever we have met with Competitors, and not been clogged
with Joint Stocks (whose Mannagers are Chose, not because of their knowledge of
those Trades, or for their Integrity, or any other Endowment, but because they
will promote the particular interest, and observe the directions of some
Towering Men;) we have Out-Traded them all; witness, to Turkey, Spain, Portugal,
etc. And in the West India Trade, which the Dutch manage in a Joint Stock, we
have so much exceeded them, as no History can parallel.

And since the present East India Company do so much value their Forts, we say,
That Fort St. George is Situate where is neither Port nor Harbor, only an
open Road, where no Ships can Ride upon breaking up of the Monsoons with any
tolerable safety. Nor is this Road well Commanded by the Town, or Fort; nor can
any Passengers or Goods be Landed or Shipped off in other than the Country Boats,
which are exposed to great hazard, and can be managed by none but the Natives,
and carry but six or eight Bales at a time; nor have they Water, Fuel, or
Provisions enough within themselves to hold out a ten days Siege, being
supplied with all from the Country.

It is the worst seated for Trade, or to make investment of Goods, of any on
the Coast of Cormandel; and is now much oppressed by a Custom-House the Mogull
has lately set up very near it, which exacts 5 l. per Cent. upon all Goods
going in, and coming out of the place; so we believe the Company had no such
Penniworth of it, when they agreed to allow the former Company six Thousand
Pounds for it.

Bombay, it is true, is more defensible; there is a Port, and it may be relieved
by Sea, yet it is a Place without Commerce, and the safety and convenience of
Ships Harboring there would be more, were it in the Mogull's hands; for he
will not suffer any hostility in his Ports nor Roads, but protects all People
that come thither to Trade, as may be instanced in the Constantinople Merchant,
which was secured at Mechlapatam, an open Road, from five Dutch Men of War,
1665. and in the Success (a private Ship) and the Benjamin, a Company's Ship,
who were secured two years since from five French Men of War in the River of
Suratt. As also two French Ships, who by the last Advices were still riding in
the Bay of Bengal under the Mogul's Protection, notwithstanding the Dutch had
six Men of War to take them, but durst not offer them any violence, although
there are no Forts or Fortifications in any of those places. Besides this place
of Bombay is extremely unhealthful.

But to inform you more truly, we here set down four Paragraphs out of Sir John
Child, the Companies General, and two more of their Councils Letter, Dated June
the 7th, 1689. to the present East India Company, Viz.

We wish this Island may Prosper and Flourish suitable to your Desires, but we
truly think it will never be otherwise than a Charge to you; and if the Mogull
takes the Country round about us, it will be next door to an impossibility to
maintain the Fort against him.

The Shopkeepers at best are but poor needy Fellows, and what they sell is but
just enough to supply their necessities from hand to mouth; however, in
compliance to your Order, shall see and raise a moderate Duty on the Shops, as
may be most for your interest.

We shall be glad to raise your Revenues suitable to your Desires, and wish the
Island was in such a Condition as to be able to bear such a Charge as your
Honors propose; We fear that will never be in our days, and find no reason to
hope that ever it will be.

If ever there be a Dutch War, believe it from us, that at best we shall be but
in a bad Condition in these parts of the World, they being so very numerous:
But for your Island of Bombay, we do verily believe they will never offer to
meddle with it; for we cannot conceive what should induce them to such an
Undertaking.

And we presume to add, nor no body else, except it were to make a Present of
it to the Great Mogull; for the Dutch find Forts chargeable things, where they
support the Trade, and will not be so mad to load themselves with them, where
no Trade is to be expected. For they have not long since abandoned Policat, a
better Fort of their own in the Bay. But should they be so, it is not doubted
the same Fate will attend that, that did Gambo, a Fort of our Royal Affrican
Companies, mounted with 74 pieces of Cannon, which Surrendered to Monsieur de
Genes with three French Friggots, upon his first Summons in July last.

All the good these two main Forts of St. George, and Bombay, have done the
Company, is, they have raised them in Opinion and Greatness of themselves; for
they have, without any regard to the Honor of the Nation (which they only
pretend unto) exposed it the most ever Subjects did; for after their Factors
had ran above Three Hundred Thousand Pounds in Debt at Suratt, their President
made his escape from thence by particular Order of the Company, in these words,
viz. That he should leave them, but leave them as the Israelites did the
Egyptians.

They took, and contrary to the Faith of Nations, plundered those very Ships
they had given their Passes to, and sent home several of the Goods, which they
sold and divided. After they had so taken the Ships, they made a formal
Declaration of War, and proceeded therein, until by woeful experience they
found the inconsistency of War with Trade, and what a Condition they were in;
as does appear by the following Paragraphs of the aforesaid Letter, viz.

We cannot see any hope of Trade, without making Peace with the Mogull; and we
must then pay our old Debts; and after that is done, we shall not be
over-stock'd with Money.

Your Honors may be assured, that the Mogull is a Potent Prince, and he does
not at all value your Trade; his Subjects are not so poor as you are pleased to
think; we heartily wish the Wars with him and his Subjects were at an end.

Your Honors may firmly believe that we are willing enough not to part with
any thing that we have taken, more than what we see of absolute necessity for
your interest.

Your Honors have neither Mergeen nor Chattegann, and we fear will not have so
Honorable a Peace with the Mogull as is expected; but we shall do what we can
toward it, as becomes us.

And accordingly they did, and sent up Mr. George Welden an Englishman, and
Abraham Navarra, a Jew (which latter when they kept their High Court of
Admiralty in India, was styled His Majesty's Attorney General) to the Court of
the Great Mogul to sue for Peace, where, after they had been some time, and
made their way by Presents, they were admitted to the Mogul's Presence, but it
was in the Posture of Malefactors, obtained his Pardon and Allowance of Trade,
in a Phirmaund granted them in the Words following: All the English having made
an humble submissive Petition, That the ill Crimes they have done may be
pardoned; and requested a Noble Phirmaund, to make their being forgiven
manifest; and sent their Vakeels to the Heavenly Palace, the most Illustrious
in the World, to get the Royal Favor; and Ettimand Chawn, the Governor of
Suratt's Petition to the famous Court equal to the Skies, being arrived, That
they would present the Great King with a Fine of 150000 Rupees to his Noble
Treasury resembling the Sun, and would restore the Merchants Goods they took
away to the right Owners of them, and would walk by the ancient Customs of the
Port, and behave themselves for the future no more in such a shameful manner.

Wherefore His Majesty, according to his daily Favor to all the People of the
World, has pardoned their Faults, mercifully forgiven them, and out of his
Princely Compassion agrees, That the Present be put into the Treasury of the
Port, the Merchants Goods be returned, the Town flourish, they follow their
Trade as in former Times; and that Mr. Child, who did the Disgrace, be turned
out and expelled.



Having thus laid before you the Honor this Company has done the Nation, in
prosecuting the East India Trade; and showed how useful their Forts are to
preserve that Trade, especially in time of War with the Dutch; we proceed to
the Privileges which the Company do pretend to have obtained in India with
vast Expense and Charge: And do aver,

I. That they are all owing to the Embassy of King James the First, by Sir
Tho. Row, Anno 1615. of which the Mogul certified the King in these Words, viz.

I have sent forth my Phirmaunds through all my Countries to this effect, That
if any English Ships or Merchants shall arrive in any of my Ports, my People
shall permit and suffer them to do what they please freely in their
Merchandising Cases, aiding and assisting in all occasions of Injuries that
shall be offered them, that the least Cause of Discourtesie be not done unto
them, that they may be as free, or freer, than my own People. II. Those in the
Bay were the Effect of a remarkable Cure one Mr. Bawden, an English Surgeon,
wrought about Forty Years since upon a Person of great Quality, for which he
refused to receive any other Recompense, than a General Grant, That the English
Nation should have a free and unmolested Trade in those Parts; which was given,
and has been continued until this late unaccountable War, but by the Peace
restored in the Words following, in a Phirmaund from the Great Mogul.

Know this, that the good Fortune of the English has directed them the right
way to end their Faults; they are sorry and ashamed for what they have done,
therefore have sent their Vakeels to our Noble Court, with a Petition for a
Gracious Phirmaund, to pardon their Faults, which the King, out of his great
Favor and Mercy, always ready to pardon, does freely forgive them: Therefore
his clear and unspotted Order is such, which you are to observe as you do his
that you pray unto, That so soon as this gracious Phirmaund reaches your Hands
you suffer no body in your Jurisdiction to molest, hurt, or hinder the English
Nation in their Business, but suffer them to carry it on in the same manner as
formerly: This understand and act accordingly. By all which it is most evident,
That the Company have not any Privilege exclusive of the rest of the Nation.

And this further manifestly appears in the two free Trading Ships, the Seymore
and the Henry this last Year; however the said Company did what they could to
oppose them: For the Seymore, in which were Captain Pit and Mr. Katchpole,
arriving in the Bay, were accused as Pirates by the said Company's Factors, and
as such brought before the Government; and his Excellency Sir John Goldsburrow,
the Company's then Commissary General over all India, having heard that the
Henry (another Private Ship, in whom was Mr. White) was gone to Suratt, did
write to the President there, acquainting him, That an English Pirate, one
Captain Pit, was come into the Bay, on pretense of Trade, was seized, and had
upon Examination confessed, that there was another gone for Suratt, viz. Mr.
White, as great a Pirate as himself; requiring the President to acquaint the
Governor therewith, that he might be seized also, to prevent all further
Damage to the Mogul' s Subjects.

All this notwithstanding, and that these People are extremely exasperated
against Pirates, having suffered so much by Piracy, they could not by this
Artifice be drawn from their accustomed Justice: But having entered into the
matter, though the Company's Factors bribed high at Suratt to prevent it, that
they might take it pro Confesso; they, upon the Merit of the Cause, admitted
both these Ships to Trade, and to return to England with the Produce of their
Cargo in the proper Commodities of those Places, which were as good and as
cheap as ever were purchased by the Company; nor did they pay any more Customs,
Duties or Acknowledgments, than the present Company always did, and now do.

And this present Company are so far from having enlarged the Trade to India,
that they had before this late Charter, and Subscriptions thereunto, reduced
their Trade to so low an Ebb, that the Farming it out to Jews, Armenians, and
others, was the chiefest of their Business: For their Drift was not to enrich
the Nation, but themselves: And their present Circumstances are such, that
without an Act of Parliament exclusive to all others (upon which not only they,
but the meanest of Men may raise Money to carry on the Trade) they cannot upon
their own Bottom send out the number of Ships they have declared to dispatch
thither this Year, although above the vast Sums they owe at Interest, they have
advanced 25 per Cent. upon their Stock, in taking 80 l. paid in Guineas at 30
s. per Piece for 100 l. and give Bills under their Common Seal for paying 112
l. at the end of two Years; which is 20 per Cent. per Annum for the Money
received. And to avoid the Law against Extortion, the Condition is, If Twelve
of the Ships named of those they have abroad, and now going out, do miscarry,
then their Bond is void; but if any one of them arrives, it is in full Force
and Virtue.

The Merchants of England are an industrious People, and Lovers of Trade; they
do not upon small, no, not upon great Discouragements give it over, but do
rather endeavor to recompense themselves by the same Voyages: Otherwise, the
Newfoundland, the Malaga, the Virginia, and all the West India Trades, with
many others now closely pursued, had been left off long since. Where there is
any hope of Vending our home-Commodities, they are ready to carry them even to
unknown, and but in part discovered Places, far beyond a joint Stock, who
cannot, being once so constituted (for it would be against their Oaths should
they) prefer the Public Good in Prejudice of their Joint Stock, which such
Companies were never known guilty of, always Exporting and Importing no more of
any Merchandise, than what will yield them their settled Profits; and employing
few others than Men of broken Fortunes, or Youths at very mean Salaries.

Whereas particular Merchants in a Regulated Company (who cannot make
Combinations) will carry out and bring home much greater Quantities of all
Commodities, employ many of the Younger Sons of the Gentry, who may settle
Houses, raise Estates there, without being at the Pleasure of a few Men; add
greatly to our Navigation, Increase the Customs, and will in every Point be of
Infinite Advantage to the Public, as well as themselves, whose Right and
Property it is, that the Commerce and Traffic by Sea be as unlimitted and free
as the Inland Trade.

It is therefore humbly hoped, That a Regulated Company for India will be
erected, whereby the Right of the Subject may be preserved, and the Trade
carried on, to the Interest and Honor of the Nation.

FINIS.

