A PROPOSAL For Remeeding our Excessive LUXURY*
THE promoving of our Trade, and amending of our Coin, will not much increase
our Stocks, until we amend our Manners; For if Luxury bring in more Goods
than by our Native product and industry we export; And consequently if we send
out more Money to Buy, then we bring in of Money for what we Sell, our Money at
long run must fail, and by how much more Money is sent out in Over Balance to
what is brought in; so much sooner shall we be Exhausted, and Trade with those
who take much money from as, and return little money to us, cannot make us
Richer in money: And if the goods Bought by us, he such as are bought with
money, and not obtained by return of our export, and yet are consumed with us;
So as that we do not Improve them in such manner, as either by sending the
Imported Goods out again, to some place which either for their Goods or their
Effects, shall return us profit, then it is plain we become Poorer by Buying or
Importing of such Goods: But if we send out our Money to Buy Superfluities,
that is to say Goods which are of no use, but what is Vain or Luxurious; That
must be of all Trading the most Hurtful to us.

1mo. Therefore in the first and chief place, let Us by a solid well digested
Sumptuary Law, prohibit the Wearing. Eating or Drinking of these Things which
foster Vanity and Luxury, yet so, as a moderate Use may be allowed even above
Necessities and not to fall short of Decency; taking this always along, that we
are a Remote People, few Strangers come among us, and fewer yet of these, are
very considerable in Quality or Knowledge; And amongst our selves, what all
will and use becomes (in that) Decent.

2do. That these things which are used only for Decency may not be imported, if
they can be made at Home.

3tio. That such superfluous things as can be made at Home, and of Homebred
Matterials may be allowed in Use; That so the Vain Rich Person may support the
poor one? For better it is to give Money to a poor one, for any kind of Work on
Native Subject, than to give Money to them for Begging.

4to. That the Export of all Native Goods be encouraged, and all Encouragement
given to Manufacture, even of Superfluous Goods.

5to. All this will be the more effectual, if the Nation come to a constant
Fashion in Clothing, and that one be prescribed with suitable Distinctions.

From these Premises, these Corellaries offer themselves.

1mo. That Trade to every Place in England is of Advantage, London excepted;
And principally, the English Clothes and Stuffs* Stockings, Blankets, and
indeed of all Woollen Work, except Flannen, is to be forbid.

2do. That Trade with France is hurtful, Especially if they allow not our Fish,
Woollen Manufacture, and Coals to be imported to them.

3tio. That Trade with Spain is profitable.

4to. That all Import of all Silk Stuffs be prohibited.

5to. That all Silk Stuffs made in Scotland, be allowed, the like of Labes,
Points, Frienges, Gloves, Shoes, Boots, Sadles, Matts, and all made Work of
Iron or Wood, excepting Anchors, Cannon, Fusies, Chimney-backs, Sawes.

6to. Since it would be of considerable Loss for Persons already pr^vided, to
cast away their old Cloths, and of new to make others; That Tears be allowed
for wearing what is now already mnde; And if needs be, That Inventars be made
thereof, before some inferior Judge in Burgh and Land, since security against
making Cloths of new import, is of grtat importance.

And for the better furnishing our selves with Clothing at home without
Importing Woollen Cloth or Stuffs from Abroad, and for helping us to increase
or Export, thereby to advance our National Stock, and for recovering of the
great loss we have had, by the starving of so many Thousands during the late
Dearth, who died for want of Food, and wanted Food for want of Work, and wanted
Work for want of Wool; By Exportation of Wool these several years contrar to
the Tenor of our good Laws, and the many Proclamations issued out conform
thereto. That a Law may be past, which will effectually set a stop to the
Exportation of Scots Wool and Year^ of all kinds.

And since all the good Laws which have been made, or may be made in the
Regulations for Export or Import for the Nations good are rendered illusorie by
the ^acks-men and Farmers of the Customs; Who for their own profit suffer these
Goods to be Imported, which are forbid to be imported, and do exact less Custom
and Excyse than is imposed by Law on these Species of Goods which are hurtful
to the Nation; And thereby all our good Laws and designs of the Government for
the good of the People are altogether frustrated, our Trade diverted to a wrong
Channel, and the N^tion Depauperat. It is pr^posed for remedy, that a Law be
made, Inhibiting all Farming of Custom and Excyse, for the Future: And that a
moderat inquiry be made into the bygone Transgressions, at least since the
Mo^th of


