THE PROPHECY Of one of His Majesty's Chaplains, Concerning the Plague and
Black-patches: With Mr: Gadburies happy and joyful Predictions, for the
Decrease of the Plague both in City and Suburbs; The Time when; The Manner how;
by God's Permission, and according to Natural Causes; The Effects and Motion of
the Planets, and what every Week may produce for the thrice-happy and welcome
Abatement of this sad and dismal Pestilence; and the City of London to be
wholly acquit thereof about [or before] Christmas.



London, Printed for G. Horton, 1665.

The Prophecy of one of His Majesty's Chaplains, concerning the Plague, and
Black-Patches.
ALthough after several evil Aspects, and Malevolent Conjunctions of the
Planets, after bad Constitutions of the Air, and distemper of the Weather,
after dearth of Corn, and scarcity of Provision, whereby the humors of Men's
Bodies have been corrupted, and several Diseases have sprung up yet no Plague
has followed; and on the contrary, though after the signs of healthy Seasons,
plenty of good and wholesome Diet, yea and after a most cold and dry Winter,
and in a dry and temperate Summer, the Plague has risen up and spread abroad;
yet most commonly there have been some Tokens, Signs, and Forerunners of it,
which have given men an Alarm to prepare for it, expect it, and provide against
it. From whence also is observable the Causes producing it; Such as are the
Position of the Heavens and the Conjunction of Mars and Saturn; as the Learned
Mr Gadbury has most judiciously set forth in those Memorable Predictions
hereunto ^nnexed. But first the Reader may be pleased to observe, the Signs
immanent and approaching of great Mortality; Mr. Kelway in the third Chapter of
his Treatise of the Plague printed at London 1593. has these words:

When we see young Children flock themselves together in Companies, and then
will fain some o^ their Company to be dead amongst them, and so will solemnize
the B(...)rt, this is a token which has been well observed in o^r Ag^ to
fore-shew great Mortality at hand. And it is worthy of serious consideration,
that about 20 years ago, one of the Chaplains of his late Majesty King Charles
the First of ever blessed memory, did preach at Bristol upon this Text out of
Gen 4.15 and the Lord set a mark upon Cain; And in his Sermon did speak much
against black-patches and beauty-spots; and, among other things, said, that
they were Fore runners of other Spots, and Marks of the Plague; and presently,
within a very little while after, the Plague brake out among them, and all
those persons that did wear them, fled the Town. And when St. Andrews Church
yard Wall did break or fall down this last Winter, some there were that did
prognosticate the coming of the Plague, saying, It fell in like manner the last
great Sickness in 1625. but what reason they had to say so, is best known to
themselves.

Yet true it is, that this black and dismal Cloud was foreseen and predicted
by that great Artist in Astrology Mr. John Gadbury, in his Ephemeris for the
present year 1665. in the Month of April, at which time the Sickness first
began to show it self visible; notwithstanding it took its Rise at Christmas,
he himself being visited at that time.

And though the Plague comes unawares, and frizeth upon a man on a sudden,
yet such is the infinite mercy of God, and the providence of Nature, that it
gives always warning enough to any one that will diligently observe it.

The warnings are either a sudden Headache, a Vomiting, or a Faintness, with
a Chillness, or a Looseness. Each of these Symptom she^^th, what part of the
body has been first infected; the Headache s^^nises the Brains; the Vomiting
the Liver; the Faintness the Heart; and the Looseness* the Stomach and the
Gut.

When therefore any one upon a sudden and without evident cause, finds
him^el^ seized with either of these 4 Symptoms, let him fly to Remedies
without the loss of a moment of time: For it is one of the easiest Diseases in
the World to be cured, if it be taken within 4 hours after the first Invasion;
otherways, and for the mo^^ part mortal. Now as soon as one finds himself
stricken with any of the foresaid Symptoms, let him presently repair to a
clean and warm room, and kindle a wood-fire in the Chimny, to consume and
destroy all the infectious vapors that proceed both from the Air, and the
infected party: Let the Patient presently be put into a warm bed, wrapped in a
sheet and blanket; and then sweat him well, by giving the party some
Venice-Treace; and those that have contracted the Plague by a Fright, put a
little Saffron into it. Venice-Treacle being taken in time, is the only
Antidote against all Plagues and Poisons whatsoever.

Vinegar is a most excellent Antidote against the Plague, and to drink 2 or 3
Spoonfu^s in a Morning is very good. Hence it is, that Physicians to suppress
and take away the fiery Venom of Spurge, Laurel, Mezereon, and other Plants,
steep them in Vinegar, and so give them safely to their Patients, whereas
otherwise they would kill and be a worse Remedy than the Disease. And
Dioscorides says that it resists all poisons both hot and cold. And Christoph.
a Vega tells of one that was strangled with a Rope, and did foam about the
Mouth, and yet was recovered by drinking Vinegar.

Coffee is commended against the Contagion; and moderate exercise; be sure to
prevent costiveness, and violent passions: Sleep moderately, and after you are
up uncover your bed, and open the Curtains to air it, and have the bed well
shaken when it is made, for Damps are very dangerous.

To go forth with an empty stomach is unwholsom; bread dipped in Vinegar is very
good; but the best Breakfast against the Contagion is Biscuit and Raisins.

And as the great Causes of this particular Pest were the Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter October. 10. 1663. the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars Nov. 12 1664.
so also are they chief Causes powerfully impelling, that it is to be feared the
Pestilence we now partake of, will not be the one m^ie^y of the Effects thence
to ensue, or thereon depending. ^y this connection of Causes, it is somewhat
apparent that this Pest should have took its beginning at the latter end of
1664. and truly had not the Winter then been so extremely sharp (it having a
Frost of almost ten weeks continuance together) to have kept it back, it had
beyond all question broke forth then. Nay, and break forth it did then too, as
the Learned Artist in Astrology Mr. Gadbury, can experimentally testify,
having been personally visited with it at Christmas that year. And many other
Patients of Mr. Josias Westwood the Surgeon, were then also afflicted with
the same Distemper, and yet obtained cure against it, the Air being then so
friendly to Nature, and an Enemy unto the Pestilence. But now let us consider
its progress and increase, with the causes thereof, and the possibility of its
abatement, with the time when. In this matter I shall consult, but not trouble
you with the Figure of the Suns Ingress into the Equinoctial Sign Aries, for
the year 1665. and thence draw down the several Arguments of increase and
abatement; and because the Pestilence was hardly perceptible until the Month
of June, I will begin there.

This Month, (as if God and Nature had appointed the Sickness to be Ominous in
earnest to these Nations) we may observe two most fatal transits to usher it
in, viz. Mars his then coming to the opposite point of the Ascendant, and the
Sun to the opposite point of Saturn; a beginning of a sickness so mischievous,
that greater can hardly be; God grant the end be not as inauspicious: and
although (I presume it will not be of many Months continuance to this great
City, yet we are not to suppose a Pestilence ended, when it seemingly acquits
one place.

In the month of July it began to increase considerably, especially toward the
latter end thereof: there were then fix oppositions of the Erratick Stars, and
two Eclipses; and to add to these, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, then came to the
Quadrate place of the Sun, and to the opposite point of Saturn by transit; and
the Sun then came to the opposition of Jupiter both by transit and aspect: all
which were very great arguments of its increase.

In the Month of Aug. Saturn comes to the Quadrate place of the sun, and will
be stationary upon it I the Month; the two Eclipses last Month do now begin to
operate, which are testimonies of very great augmentation: howbeit the
fortunate Planet Venus coming to the Sextile of her own place and of the Moms
at the beginning of the Month; and coming to a Trine of the Sun, the latter end
thereof, may so happily contemper the fury of it, that it may not [now]
increase or augment to any exceeding great height.

A ^art of Septem. is like to prove somewhat dangerous because Saturn is in a
manner still stationary, and the Sun and Saturn then come to a Quadrate aspect,
and this in ill points of the Vernal Figure, Mars and Jupiter who is Dominus
Ascendentis) then also come to an opposition, and both in square of Luna's
place; whence it is probable, that in the second and last weeks of this Month,
the Pest may admit of an abatement; but indeed, I much fear about the middle of
the month an increase considerable: nevertheless, I hope, and rationally
believe ( favente Deo) that this Pestilence cannot ascend to any higher degree,
than it may at that time reach unto.

The Month of October seems to promise well, and the Distemper therein cannot
meet with any eminent cause for augmentation: yet I suppose the second and last
week will make some slight Offers at an increase, because then the Sun comes to
the opposite place of the Moon* and Venus has a progressional motion to the
opposition of the Sun, and Quartile of Saturns places.

November and December in this respect (God not frustrating the course of
second Causes, or taking advantage of us for our sins) I question not will
prove very kindly; and the City of London will begin to be in a better heart,
than in many Months before. Howbeit, it cannot ^e supposed that this
Pestilence should in so short a time totally vanish; or that so great a
Sickness should not leave some unkind impressions behind it; but in comparison
of what it has been, I dare assert, that we shall [then] be (in a manner)
wholly acquitted from it, and its violent raging, destructive Qualities and
Company.

La^^ly, London has at present been the Patient, and has felt the force of
the Almighties scourge to purpose; while most other places of England have
escaped the Lash. I wish with all my soul, that London might be the Scapegoat
for them all: but ah, I fear, before the Planet Saturn be gotten quite out of
Capricorn, that those other parts of this Nation will drink deep of the same
Cup. God and Nature punish none by proxy. It will not be this Cities
sufferings, that can excuse other Towns and Cities, from the violent stroke of
so insatiate an Enemy. Thus much for the Predictions of the Learned Gadbury.

And now the great and principal Antidote against the Plague is, hearty
Repententance and fervent Prayer: For Prayer upon Repentance is of all things
most powerful with God. And as Faith is the best Fence against Fear, so is
Patience the best Plaster against S^res: Let the distrust of God's Mercies be
far from you; and arise from Sin willingly: Read in the Bible daily; take up
the Cross of Christ boldly, and stand to it manfully, bearing all Visitations
patiently; pray continually, Rest thankfully, and thou shall live
everlastingly, and come to the Hill of Joy quickly: To which place hasten us
good Lord speedily.

FINIS.

