THE Protestant Admirer OR, AN ANSWER TO THE VINDICATION OF A Popish SUCCESSOR.
SIR,
WHO and what you are, I do not infallibly know, but suppose without wronging
you, I may for want of a name call you Mr. Little Worth; Indeed you entitle
your self true Patriot, but I fear it is of Italy where bloody Rome stands, and
not of England where Loyal London stands. I have read your Paper called Weighty
considerations, which being put into Protestant Scales, It may be truly said,
Thou art weighed in the Balance and art found wanting; and in the reading of
them I am filled with the following admiration.

1. I do admire your confidence in Dedicating such a foolish Paper to the wise
consideration of so great a Prince and Monarch as the King of England is,
together with his Honorable Privy Council, in which you manifest as if you
were already, or else had a mind to be some great Statesman; but this I must
say that all English Protestants have cause to cry out from Such Statesmen
good Lord deliver us. Your Paper does signify as if you did sometimes read the
holy Scriptures, I wish you had well considered the words of the wisest of
Kings; His Neighbor comes and searches him out.

(2) I admire you should present two sheets of paper to his Majesty, and send
them abroad to the World, and say nothing of the Horrid and Damnable Popish
Plot that is now in being, to Murder the King, Subvert the Government, and
destroy the Protestant Religion; are you willing it should be forgot? or would
you have us believe there is no Popish plot in England? What do you think to
shelter your self under the wings of Royal Majesty while you strive to bring in
a future Ruin upon his three Kingdoms? Would God His Majesty may call to mind
what is recorded in holy Writ, for the learning of all great men, how Joab
while he spoke peaceable to Abner smote him under the fifth Rib that he dyed, 2 Samuel 3.27.

(3) I Admire that at such a day as this is, in which the King and Kingdom are
next door to destruction, you should come forth like Goliath of the Philistian
Army (viz.) the Bloody Papists, and strive to put fear and dread in the English
Israel, (viz.) the poor Protestants, what Sir did you think that the Lord of
Hosts would be less mindfu.l of his Israel now, and stir up none to meet you
who appears in worse manner then Goliath did? for he being an enemy to Israel
appeared no other but such an one, but you appear for the Philistians, and yet
seem to be on Isreal's side, and therefore the more dangerous; but behold a poor
Protestant, one of the meanest of all our English Tribes, comes forth in the
Name of Englands God to meet you as poor David did, with sling and stone, even
so I in a plain and mean way of reasoning let fly at you, the Lord of Hosts
direct this to your heart as he did David's stone to the Philistines Head, that
so you may fall, and all the Popish Philistines fly away; I will do what I can
with you, who are as Goliath, and leave the pursuit of the Philistian Army to
the Worthies of our English Israel (viz.) our Protestant Parliament.

(4) I Admire you should talk at so bold a rate of the Laws of the Kingdom, as
if the King with his Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament could not
without breach of Law provide for the future happinss of the Kingdom, by
establishing a Protestant Successor, that so England may not be undone by a
Papist; I pray you Sir take into consideration that weighty Speech lately made
in Parliament, which shows that to talk at such a rate is a transgression to
be punished with praemunire. Surely what that worthy Gentleman said in this
matter was Law or his own Notion, but we have cause to conclude it to be Law
because the House of Commons did not rebuke him for it, and also let the Bill
against the Duke of York pass. However if you think he has offered his own
Notion in stead of Law, I wish with all my heart you may appear in Parliament,
(not as a member, but) as the Advocate of a Popish Successor; and if you suffer
for it, remember it is but what you persuaded all the Protestants in England to
endure under your popish Successor, which will be far short of theirs. And for
as much as you have been so bold in your Paper to affirm you had the best Cause
in the world to manage, respecting faithfulness to God and Loyalty to your
Prince, be not afraid to appear before the Parliament, that by Informing them
you may inform all England, and so prevent that which you account a great sin.

I am not willing to retain any Error in any matter, but I do not see cause to
change my mind from any thing offered in your (called weighty Considerations;
but perceiving you to be a Man of parts (if not abused) and supposing you have
much more to say, I beseech you, for the Successors sake, and the Kingdoms,
Plead this Cause in the High Court of Parliament: If you be a Protestant, it is
better to suffer a Prison or a Fine under a Protestant King and Parliament than
to be Burnt under a Popish Successor; who, it may be, will Favor you for this
Service, though he destroy thousands of others that now Reason against him,
from Love to their Country, and him also in preventing the wronging of his
Conscience to obtain a Crown. And if you are afraid to venture upon this now, I
can hardly believe you will burn and not turn under his Power you so much plead
for. But if you be a Papist, then no wonder you thus cunningly persuade the
poor Protestants to lose their Inheritance and Lives also.

(5.) I Admire you should call a Popish Successor the best of Princes, (Sir,
you smell strong of Rome) God deliver His Majesty from such Flatterers: What,
do you think that the King and Parliament cannot find out a Protestant Prince
to be his Successor? which if they should, I think you would not then own your
Paper, and who so ready as such as you to call him the best of Princes, rather
than be without preferment under him.

(6.) I Admire you should so highly pretend to plead the Kings Power, and at
the same time strive to take it away, by insinuating as if he with his Lords
and Commons could not Establish another Successor, for the future Happiness of
his three Kingdoms; I thought all England had Learned by this time, that the
repealing of bad Laws, and making better, had been in the power of King and
Parliament.

(7.) I Admire you should make mention of Cook upon Littleton, That if the
right Heir of the Crown be Attainted of Treason, yet the Crown shall descend to
him: What, Sir, have you a mind to encourage Treason, because such an one will
be safe in it (if this be true) the Lord of Heaven open the King of Englands
Eyes, that he may see his Danger, and remember that the first Murder that ever
was in the World was by the hands of a Brother, viz. Cain killed Abel; yet I
would fain hope that the Royal Brother of our King has Learned to abhor such
Wickedness, however it is good to consider, what bad Principles, with Worldly
Glory, wicked Counselors and Satan's Temptations (especially if he may be safe
in it) may lead frail Man unto: But let us consider a little further Cook upon
Littleton, and inquire, first, whether these words be Law, or his Notion as a
Lawyer. Secondly, if it should appear they are Law, whether it will agree with
the Wisdom and Safety of any King (whether Protestant or Papist) to let such a
Law be unrepealed, seeing a Successor may be a Traitor, and yet must have the
Crown. Pray, Sir, consider, it is no breach of Law to Repeal a bad Law, and
make a better.

(8.) I Admire among many of your Follies you should call the Parliament
Omnipotent, in a way of Mockery, and apply these words to the Protestants, O
Foolish and Timorous Countrymen, who has bewitched you? Pray, Sir, let me
return them to you, O Foolish and Impudent Countryman, who has bewitched you?
That you should use such words as does proclaim you to be very near of Kin to
one of the Grand Traitors, viz. Mr. Coleman, for these be his words in which he
Mocked the Parliament in his Letter to the French Kings Confessor ( viz.
Omnipotent Parliament.) Sir, how dare you upbraid our Worthy Protestant
Parliament to our English Protestant King, as a Traitor did to the Confessor of
a Popish French King? What, were you brought up in the Traitors School? Truly,
Sir, I do not like your Learning.

(9.) I Admire that you should say, a King of England, though the most Zealous
Papist, cannot Subvert the Government and Protestant Religion as it is
Established; and you Rebuke the Protestants for having so little Faith, as not
to believe this to be true. What, Sir, do you mean to wheedle the Protestants
out of their Reason and Memory of things upon Record? Truly we have been too
much thus abused already, and though our Eyesight has been much dimmed, we
are not yet stark Blind, thanks be to God and the two last Parliaments for some
Eye Salve, whereby we see our present and future Danger; and besides this, we
have heard of a Popish Successor that has Subverted the Government and
Protestant Religion, viz. Queen Mary: pray do not think to Quibble with us, and
say, you mentioned a King that could not do thus, for if a Woman has done such
Mischief, we think a Man may do as much, if not more; and whereas you persuade
the Protestants to Embrace a Popish Successor, because the Popish party did
suffer Queen Elizabeth to come to the Crown. What, Sir, have you forgot, or do
you not believe that Endeavors were used by the Papists to prevent that good
Ladys coming to the Crown, witness her Imprisonment in the Tower, and at
Woodstock, and a Warrant privately Sealed for her Execution without any public
Trial, witness a party of Men with Coats of Mail to Assault her at Woodstock,
but God strangely prevented them: Witness Queen Mary's pretending to be with
Child, when it was not so, thereby striving to bring in a false Heir to the
Crown, and so put by the good Lady Elizabeth. I pray you Read the Chronicles of
England, and Foxes Acts and Monuments. And you are pleased to Reprove the
Protestants for being more mistrustful of Gods providence than the Papists were
at Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, surely you cannot think the Papists
had any great Faith in the flourishing of their Religion under a Protestant
Successor: However we Protestants think it will be Foolishness and Presumption
rather than Faith in God, to expect the Flourishing of the Protestant Religion
under a Popish Successor. Truly we think we have cause to improve the Old
Proverb, The Burnt Child dreads the Fire: And whereas you say, the Successor is
bounded and limited by Laws, and therefore cannot hurt the Protestants. We
think it is not impossible, nor improbable for a Popish Successor to have a
Popish Parliament, or Rule without a Parliament, and then farewell all the
Happiness of Protestants, viz. Estates, Liberties, Religion, and Lives.

(10.) I Admire you should so much plead the breach of Law, in dis-inheriting
an Heir, whereas it is a common thing for the Father to dis-inherit the Son,
and one Brother to dis-inherit another, and not break the Law, but do it by
Law. I suppose if you were possessed of ten thousand pound per an. and should
foresee that your Son or Brother would destroy the Estate, and Ruin the
Family after your Decease, you would not think it an Act of Folly or Dishonesty
to dispose of the Estate for the welfare of your Posterity: And besides this,
we must consider there is a vast difference between being Heir to an Estate of
Houses and Land (which are senseless things) and Heir to the Government over a
people who have Rational Souls (whose Consent is concerned in this Matter) and
who are capable of Rejoicing and praising God in a state of Happiness, or of
groaning and lamenting under a state of Misery. And if it should be the Mercy
of England to be thus provided for by the King, who is the Father of the
Kingdom, and by Parliament, who is the King and Kingdoms great Council, then
the Oath of Allegiance will not be violated, because the people are thereby
bound to him that is Successor according to Law; and such an one cannot be
counted an Usurper, because he does not force himself upon the Kingdom, but is
Established beforehand by King and Parliament. And whereas in the beginning of
your paper you seemed to Glory in the words of Cook upon Littleton, concerning
the Crown descending to the Heir, though Attainted with Treason; yet afterward
when you take notice of Cook upon Littleton in these words (None is Heir before
the Death of his Ancestors but only the Heir Apparent) here you slight and
reproach Cook upon Littleton, saying, by Cooks leave this his Observation is
fallacious and Impertinent. What, Sir, I perceive you cannot believe all that
Cook says to be Law, except it be that the Heir Attainted with Treason must
have the Crown.

(11.) I Admire you should so bitterly Reflect on persons and things in time
past, when as His Majesty has been pleased to Bury them in the Grave of
Oblivion, and has received some persons formerly Offending into favor, and
crowned them with great Dignity, being well satisfied in their Loyalty; and the
very people you Reproach with the Name of Infamy have behaved themselves with
peaceable subjection to Authority, though many times under very hard usage for
Conscience sake. But pray, Sir, where is your Obedience to the Commands of the
King, viz. to lay aside all Names of Infamy and Distinction? And besides this,
you do not spare the Parliament, calling the House of Commons Fiery Zealots,
Turbulent Zealots, and Robbers of those they should Honor and Obey: By this
His Majesty may perceive how you would let fly your Reflections at him also, if
he should not please you. What, Sir, have you a mind to set King and people at
variance, who are now at peace? And do you think to scare His Majesty from
agreeing with his Parliament, in providing for the future welfare of the
Kingdom? in this Matter, I will say to you, as the Angel of God said to Satan,
Zech. 3.2. The Lord Rebuke thee, the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, Rebuke
thee.

(12.) I Admire you should account it such a Wickedness and sin against God to
dis-inherit a Successor, as if the whole Law of God were violated; surely you
have not considered that Scripture, Sin is the Transgression of the Law: Now
God did never make a Law either for his own people Israel, or for the Nations
of the World, that the next of Blood to the Crown must always wear it. Truly,
Sir, I cannot find any such Law of God in our Protestant Bible: And if there is
no such Law that does always command such a Succession, it cannot be a sin
against God sometimes to let such a Succession be laid aside, for it is written
in another place, Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression: And besides
this, we find in the Holy Scriptures, that those who were not next of blood to
the Crown did wear it by Gods Approbation: David succeeded Saul in the
Government, and not any of Readiness Children; Solomon succeeded David, and not
David's Eldest son: and I hope these Successors may be well called the best of
Princes.

But suppose it could be proved that God had Established such a Succession of
Princes in Israel as you plead for, that will not prove that England is bound
to such a Model of Government as Israel had, for the Nations of the World who
were in Being at the same time of the Government of Israel, were not bound to
have such a Government as they had; and if any venture to affirm, they were
bound in this case, then mark what may be concluded from it, viz. That when the
Government of Israel was by Judges, then should the other Nations have changed
their Kings into Judges also. Indeed, Sir, I do think you will not be in have
to charge those Nations with sin, as you do charge your own Nation, though they
did not Conform to Israel's Government. Furthermore, consider by the same
Reason that Israel's Princely Government must be England's Rule, so must the
Priestly Government be a Rule also; and this is a ready way to destroy the
Church of England as it is now Established, for which you will have no thanks
from our Protestant Clergy. Therefore, Sir, for the time to come Learn to be
wiser, than to Charge either King, Parliament, or people with sin against God,
when no Law of God is broken.

SIR,

I Beseech you Consider what a strange work you have undertaken, in persuading
the Protestants to Embrace and accept of a Popish Successor.

(1.) First, In thus doing you put all the Protestants in England to venture
all their Happiness in the hands, and under the power of one that is taught by
the Sea of Rome not to keep Faith with Heretics, and will be required by the
Authority of Rome to make his people Turn or Burn. How then can England, as it
is now a Protestant Kingdom, be safe under such a Prince? Truly, Sir, we
Protestants had rather for the present let you call us O ye of little Faith,
than that you should cry out of us hereafter, O ye of great Folly.

(2.) Secondly, you put the Popish Successor upon wronging of his Conscience to
obtain a Crown; for he must Solemnly swear at his Coronation before God and the
Kingdom, That he will Maintain and Defend the Protestant Religion, and all
other the Rights and Privileges of the People, according to the Laws of the
Kingdom; and we have sufficient cause to believe thus to swear, is contrary to
his principles, and Conscience, and Authority of Rome. And should he be true to
his Oath after taking it, the Authority of the Sea of Rome would soon
Excommunicate him, Depose, and Murder him.

Now therefore that all true Protestants in England may be free from all the
Dangers that attend them in this Case; and that a Popish Successor may be free
from all the Dangers that attend him in this Case: Let all true Protestants cry
to God, that the King and Parliament may agree together to Establish a good
Protestant Successor; And let all the People

Say Amen. Amen.

FINIS.

