THE PROTESTANT ANTIDOTE Or an Answer to a PAMPHLET, Entitled, A seasonable
Address to the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, etc. Touching the present
Election of Sheriffs. In a friendly Epistle to that worshipful Author, from his
humble Servant Phil. Anglus Trueman.
Mounsieur Philo-patris Miso-patriae!
HAving a months mind to give you a Bottle of Wine and wanting directions how
to send to you by the peny-Post, I am forced to give you the Advertisement this
way. The reason why I am so ambitious of your acquaintance is, because I fancy
Thee to be a divelish patey fellow, a person of Intrigue, and Politics; a man
of Brains and Forehead, a deep one I Will warrant thee. Thou say indeed thou
are a Citizen, but never trust me if I can tell how to believe thee; a Citizen?
man! why thou Writest like any Doctor, Mr. Coleman (if he were alive, again)
could not do it more cleverly; did thou never Read his intended Declaration?
There were Sugar plum words in abundance, and very kind expressions for the
Church of England too, and yet you know (better perhaps than I) the design was
to root out, that pestilent Heresy that has so long domineered over the
Northern World. Therefore I am still apt to conceit thee, some Gentleman's
By-blow at least, because thou art so complaisant and so much in the fashion,
for alas! Be-lettering of men is all the mode of late: A Letter to Dr. Titus
Oats, A Letter to the Earl of Shaftsbury, A Letter to the Duke of Monmouth,
and now a Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and
Commoners of London. And all these and an hundred more scandalous Pamphlets,
smell strong of the same Ink, and wherein (if I mistake not) there is not a
little Gall and Roman Vitriol; One may give a shrewd guess at the work by the
Forge from whence it comes: Whoever you are, that are the father of the
Bantling (which it appears you are ashamed at present to own) the late
Intelligencer about Fetter lane is said to be the Man-midwife; -- But to the
matter. --

You say distempers much prevail in our Corporation, and that it is high time to
consider of an expedient to cure them. What these distempers are, or who
occasions them I shall not inquire, but only observe that you seem to have a
strong opinion of your own Quackship, who thus scatter your Bills, and obtrude
your Catholicons, which yet perhaps like the universal Medicines of other
Empericks will prove in the operation worse than the disease it self, As on the
other side you show but little manners and respect to his Lordship and that
honorable body to which you boldly Address, whilst you suggest that they are
either so negligent as never to consider of, or so weak, as not to know how to
apply apt Remedies without your prescriptions and dictates; you advise us well
to beware of the Jesuits delusions, but do you think we never heard a
Pick-pocket cry, stop thief? Though you have dressed your self up like an Angel
of Light in robes of pretended Loyalty, and seeming zeal, for the established
Church, yet your cloven foot, and the mark of the Beast appears now and then,
and all your Art cannot conceal it, as when you cast a squinting Reflection on
the discovery of that damnable Plot, which would utterly have destroyed that
Church, which you pretend to be such a fr^end to: For you say, those very many
testimonies of it are now become highly esteemed through the follies of those
that testified. It Is a strange paradox how follies should create esteem, and we
bless God, that even by that which you call foolishness, it has pleased the
All wise God in a great measure hitherto, to defeat the subtleties of all the
Romish Achitophels, and wonderfully to preserve the Sacred Life of our King and
our Religion and properties from an inundation of superstition and tyranny.

Another place wherein your speech betrays you: Is, when you complain, that I
know not who lately in Authority pursued Popery so hot that the very Effigies
of our Savior must be made fuel, etc. Suppose this true, did not a Father of
the Church as much? Yes verily, Epiphanius in his Epistle to John of Jerusalem,
Epist. 60. assures us, That h^mself meeting with a vail hanging at the door of
a Church died and painted and having as it were the Image of Christ (for the
very effigies that you talk of, pray tell us, who can draw)? He cut it all to
pieces; and was not this as bad as burning a popish vestment, though adorned
with what the cozening supersticious Priest was pleased to call the Effigies of
our Savior? Nor is Eusebius less zealous against any such Trumpery, in his
Epistle to Constantia the Empress, who sending to him for an Image of Christ,
he thus roundly answers her -- What Image do you require? such as may express
the characters of his Divine Nature? surely you are instructed that no man has
thus seen the Son but the father; do you require the Image of that form of a
Servant, which he took? Then you must understand that that was joined to the
Glory of his Godhead, insomuch that his Apostles could not behold the Glory of
his flesh in the Mount, much more glorious, is it now having put off mortality,
who is therefore able with weak and liveless colors, and a shadow, to express
those dazzling beams of so infinite a splendour? Thus you see such Effigies were
contemned by the fanatics (for so you will call them) of the very primitive Ages,
and do you come now as a Church of England -- man to wheedle us with such
exploded Idolatries? No, no, Sir! The Church of England is more pure and
Apostolical.

But what is all this to the pretended subject of your Letter, The Choice of
Sheriffs? Why, only to scatter a little Popery and blacken an active Plot
Prosecutor by the by, against whom have been forged a thousand other lies and
scandals. I confess the depending Election has made much noise, and outcries
have been of tumults, rabble, and faction. But why, or on which side it lies,
seems undetermined. If the right of Choice be in the Common Hall, if they
fairly Elect persous qualified by Law, is it not a symptom of faction or
turbulency for any little unknown pragmatick fellow (as suppose your venerable
self, Sir!) to Censure the body of the City as opposers of the present
Constitution of the Government? If those that stand for the ancient privileges
and customs allowed by Charter and confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, who
proceed regularly, and plead for nothing but known usages and approved methods,
never heretofore contradicted, must be branded with faction, who are the good
subjects, who the peaceable Citizens? Because you cannot have your unlawful
lusts gratified must you presently sound the Trumpet of sedition and cry out,
Why shall we permit our Adversaries thus to Triumph? let us stand up like men
of Courage, etc. Just as if you were going to Boxing? For my part I should
think it rather blame worthy, if any few should obstinately refuse to acquiesse
in the determination of a Major Vote, or should urge unusual unpresidented
proccedings, and little Stratagems and shams, which should seem against common
Right Equity, and reason, but whether any such thing have lately been offered
by those you would be understood to complain of, is left to wiser judgments.

But you seem to object something against the persons of some of the
Candidates; If they are not qualified, let the law reprobate them, but all you
say, is by way of sly Insinuation, had you spoke plainly and proved any such
matter, it had been worth consideration; now it is only Rancour and Libel.

I am not ignorant, it is buzzed abroad, That one of them was nominated of the
Council of state in the late times of confusion, and a list have been very
industriously printed, concerning which having no personal knowledge of the
Gentleman that seems to be aimed at, I cannot give so full an answer as might
otherwise be done. But however there is so little in that objection, that any
man of impartial sense may abundantly be satisfied that it is malicious and
impertinent; for,

1. In the Act of free and general pardon indemnity and oblivion 12. Car. 2.
Ca 11th. It Is enacted for the reasons in the oreamble thereof, viz To the intent
that no crime whatsoever should thereafter rise in judgment, or, be brough: in
Question against any of the Kings subjects (except such crimes and persons as
are therein excepted) to the least endamagement of them* or to the prejudice of
their reputations by any reproach or term et distinction, and to bury all seeds
of future discords in the breast of his Najesty and in the breasts of all his
subjects one toward another etc. That all crimes misdemeanors, etc. be
pardoned, released, Indempnified, discharged and put in utter oblivion. With a
penalty therein upon any office in any law Court, etc. that shall vex, disquiet
or grieve any person, pardoned, and Indempnified by the said Act,

From whence it appears that every person within mentioned (not exempted in the
sad Act) is as capable as any other of his Majesty's Subjcts to have his share
in the Government and several of them have been since honored, dignified and
employed in eminent Affairs of state by his Majesty's special Election and
choice, and consequently.

Quere. Whether the Printer and publisher of that paper called The true list,
etc. And you Mr. Addresser who are harping on the same string be not disturbers
of the public peace, and enemies to the quiet of his Majesty's good subjects?

2. The Printer or publisher of that paper, would persuade the Reader, that all
those persons therein named had taken the Oath therein mentioned, which is most
false and scandalous, for the Lord Fairfax never took that oath nor appeared at
that Council, and General Monk was then in Scotland, and could not appear to be
sworn at that time, likewise Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper,
Alderman Love, Mr. Bethel and others, of whom I challeng that Libeller or you
Mr. Addresser, to prove that any one of them took that Oath, and if any body
shall report such a thing and be not able to prove it, does he not deserve the
name and punishment of a Libeller or Slanderer?

But the willful malice in the publisher of that paper is apparent in that the
very Author from whom he takes that list, viz. The continuation of Bakers
Chronicle, Fol. 678. calls it only the names of the intended Counselors of
State, and ingenuously and truly acknowledges, that even a third part of them
at least refused it, and were therefore not admitted to sit and act. All which
this Libeller conceals purposely to promote a causeless scandal.

3. It Is well known, that Vice Admiral Lawson (if he did take the Oath) appeared
very faithful to the King after his Restoration, and lost his life in his
Majesty's service at sea, and why unless to serve some popish design, amuse
people, and raise feuds and Animosities; should the Author of this paper now
revive this story and so falsely represented, striving to infect the people with
prejudices and slanders against diverse persons of worth and honest reputation?

In which design you Mr. Addresser, are likewise engaged, and tho your words
are smoother than oil, yet the poison of asps seems to be in your heart, but
the world is pretty well aware of your devices, you spit your venom but in vain:
Let us therefore I beseech you, noble Sir, Enjoy that Peace with you seem to
recommend, Alarm not the Government and your Neighbors with needless fears and
false representations of tumults and tll practices and designs where there are
none; Forbear your slanders how many hundred real, sound, strict, and most
obedient Sons of the Church of England have lately been stigmatized with the
title of Fanatics, merely because they stood up for their just, legal, civil
rights and privileges as Citizens and Englishmen. Whereas you say, it is not so
easy to introduce Popery amongst us, as a Commonwealth, I conceive it is both a
false and seditious assertion, but accursed be he and let his memory rot that
designs either of them; and in spite of all your little dividing arts, I do
not doubt but to see his Majesty long to continue great, dear, and glorious in
the hearts of his subjects, the Church of England to be supported with due
Reverence, the Protestant Religion to flourish, prerogative, liberty, and
property to be maintained according to Law, and Popery with all its plots and
Abbetters however maskt or disguised to be (in these nations shortly, and
throughout the world in Gods determined time) utterly confounded. To which he
that does not cordially say Amen let him be Anathema.

POSTSCRIPT.
If the unknown Author of the sheet called the Address etc. shall within few
days (as he promises) prove himself to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor to be
a Citizen and a Protestant I hereby Engage likewise to publish my name and
openly beg his pardon for any thing wherein I may seem (through mistake) to
have misrepresented him, and upon that Issue I leave it.

FINIS

