A WARNING TO LONDON In Particular.

Wherein the WICKEDNESS thereof is Reproved, and the people put in mind of some
of the Sore Distresses and Great Calamities, that GOD already has brought upon
that formerly Flourishing and Happy CITY.

Also the future Distress and Calamities hinted at, which God will bring upon
the Inhabitants thereof, that come not in their Day to cease to do Evil, and by
timely Repentance turn to the Lord, while he calls, and his Spirit yet strives
with them.

Or those Eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them; think ye
that they were Sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?

I tell you, Nay; But except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish,

Luke 13.4, 5. Printed in the Year 1679.

A WARNING TO LONDON In Particular.
O You Inhabitants of LONDON! will you sleep on in the Sleep of Death? Will
nothing truly awaken you to Life and Righteousness? Will not you call to mind
but strive to put far from you the Hand that has often been lifted up and
stretched forth against you in the Fury of the Lord God, against your Pride,
and that stream of Wickedness which has abounded, and come as a Flood in the
midst of you, and your Streets are full of? O! the Vanity and Folly which
people manifest as they walk the Streets! O what Pride and Vain glory,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying and Debauchery in Words and Practices are many of
thy Inhabitants found in! And for the Iniquity of thy Covetousness, Deceiving*
Cheating and Defrauds, that many of you stand guilty of before the Lord, its
all loathed and abhorred of him, who is of purer Eyes than to behold those
things as justifiable in you, or to approve of in any City or Town whatsoever;
but they are all for Condemnation, and Judgment of the Great and Dreadful Day
of God's Vengeance, that is come and coming upon them that are found wicked and
ungodly.

Many of you, both Men and Women, Young and Old, your Lives and Conversations
declare you to be such, whatever your Tongues have said or say to the contrary
against such things in words; God will bring upon you the Fruit of your own
Ways and Works, which has been and is Evil in his sight: Though ye are not
willing to see or acknowledge them, or sensibly have it told you, yet what has
been declared and sounded in your Ears by the Servants of the Lord, from the
Mouth of the Lord, of his Judgments, Calamity and Ruin, that should come upon
you People of LONDON, if you repent not, will more and more surely be
fulfilled, and come upon you all that Repent not in time of your Wicked Works,
Ways and Inventions, wherewith you have greatly provoked the Lord, and brought
sore Distresses, Wasting, Misery and Plagues upon you; and I know, God has
pleaded with you in his Wrath, and will yet more and more punish and afflict
you, because you have not hearkened to the Voice of his good Spirit, which he
has poured forth upon all Flesh, and given to instruct you, which you have
rebelled against* both Professors and Profane, you have vexed his holy Spirit,
and caused God to turn your Enemy, and fight against you, that was your Friend,
and formerly multiplied his Favors and Mercies upon you: how have ye rebelled
against him, and stopped your Ears, and hardened your Hearts, as an Adamant,
against his Counsel, and yet have expected the Lord should hearken to your Cry,
and save you out of your Trouble and Distress; but he will give you up to the
will of them that hate you, and will despightfully use you, if ye Repent not:
So while ye have time own the Day of God's Visitation, that yet he gives you
that quite have not sinned it out; and remember, God has given you a large
time to repent and turn to him in; and although he has called often, and
knocked at the Doors of your Hearts, how have ye refused his Call, and shut the
Doors of your Hearts against him, and would not have Christ Jesus to rule in
your Hearts, whose Right it is, nor would you be subject to his pure and
heavenly Government of his Kingdom, which he does set up, and whereby he rules
in Righteousness in the Hearts of his Chosen People at this day, magnified be
his Name and Kingdom (which stands in Righteousness) forever and evermore;
where you, that are like a Cage of unclean Birds, cannot come, nor enter into
that estate. Therefore in the Name of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, I warn
you all, with all speed to hearken to the Call of the Lord, who desires not
your death, nor your great Cities Destruction (as the Devil and his Agents do)
but the Lord desires that all men may be saved, and therefore gives all men a
Day and Time to Repent and be saved in, through Faith in Christ Jesus, his only
begotten Son, who came to seek and save them that were lost, even the lost
Sheep of the House of Israel, to find them out, and gather them into his own
Fold, to feed them in fresh and green Pastures, where he causes his Beloved to
rest in the times of greatest Storms, Perils and Troubles in this World: Such
are not left Comfortless in their Straits, Distresses or Trials which they may
meet with in the World for their Lord and Master's sake, who has saved them
from their Sins; they feel in them even Christ Jesus, in whom is all the Saints
Hope and Trust, or else we were of all men most Miserable, who have been hated
of all men for the Name of Christ, in which we have believed, know and trust
in: O People, this Name you have talked of and professed, but it you have not
known, nor could ever trust in; you that have not known it, nor have believed
in it, are all Strangers to the great Work of God, and what it is to believe in
his Son, whom he has given and sent in Love to the World, that they might
believe in him* and not perish, but enjoy everlasting Life, rest and Peace in
him, the Savior, Christ Jesus.

And let not the worst of you say, That he would not pity, love nor save you,
or that he can save you if he will, but question whether he did ever intend
Salvation for you: for such dark Scruples and Questionings of the WILL of GOD*
and the END of CHRIST's Coming into the World, greatly harm you all that give
way to them, and either run them into a State high and conceited presuming upon
the Grace and Favor of God to save and justify them, notwithstanding their
Ungodliness; or else, dispairing of any Love of God in Christ Jesus for them,
in order to their Salvation; one sort of whom goes on sinning, without the
least Fear of offending God; the other doubting they were never ordained to
Life, nor to do any thing that will please him: Now in either of these Paths is
great Danger, and both lead to the Chambers of the Imaginary and Death; for
neither is really the Narrow Way, that leads to Life, nor are Paths of pure
Pleasantness and Satisfaction to the Soul; but such as keep People in Darkness,
Error and Unbelief, where they have no true Peace nor Satisfaction, but remain
groaping for the Wall, as if they had no Eyes to see the Light and Salvation of
God with, not finding the Way of it, nor are really willing to abide in the
Paths thereof. Therefore cease from your seeking to find out God or his Way by
your corrupt dark Reasoning, where long some of you have sought him; but what
have ye found to stay your Minds upon, or believe in, that can stay you, or
save you from your Sin? for are ye not still in your sins, and not saved? So
turn to the pure Principle of God, that which never consents to sin in you, but
does check you, as ye come to turn to it, for the least Vain Thought that you
think, or any Idle Word that you speak, or Wicked Action that you do in secret;
this will bring Judgment and Condemnation upon that which is Evil and
Displeasing to God, which any Man thinks, speaks or does.

And your Set Days of Humiliation and Fasting, wherein ye have not been
humbled, nor performed to the Lord an Acceptable Fast; but your Hearts lifted
up within you* and not right before the Lord; but by his Light and holy Spirit
you may see are for Judgment, and the Condemnation of the great Day of God, who
searches the Heart, and knows your Hearts, and all men's wheresoever, and will
shortly call you to give an account, what ye have entertained and lodged there,
which is contrary to his Mind and Will: And its the Lord of Hosts that shows to
you your Vain Thoughts, when you think or lodge them: And its the Lord that
shows you the Danger of Unsavory and Idle words when you speak them: And its
the Lord who by his Light and Spirit of Grace convinces People of their Evil
Actions, whereby they dishonor his Name, and grieve his good Spirit. Therefore
look to Him alone, turn to his Light and Spirit of Grace in your Hearts, and
that will clearly show you your Sins, convince you of them all; and not only
so, but as you believe therein, that will let you see your Way out of all Sin,
and the Evil of the World, which you have been addicted to, whether Drunkenness
Swearing, Lying, Whoredoms, Envy, Pride, Vain Glory, Love of Money, the
Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, Covetousness, Scoffing, Cursed Evil
speaking, or whatsoever: And the Light and Spirit of God, as ye turn to it,
will clearly let you see all this to be the Works of the Devil, and the Fruits
of the Flesh, which you ought not to be found in* nor to suffer the Enemy of
your Souls to work that in you which is so displeasing to God.

So dread and fear him that comes to destroy the Works of the Devil and Flesh
in you, and all people every where, that not only you may escape and deny these
more gross Evils, but also your feigned Humiliations* and Fastings and Prayers,
being out of the Faith of God's Elect, and Strangers to the holy Name of Jesus,
which you talk of, make a profession of, and some of you outwardly bow at the
Name of, whilst you do not know it, nor confide in it; but in the Day of your
Distress, Woe and Misery, that already you have met with, you have leaned to
Man, and put your Confidence in the Arm of Flesh, that cannot deliver you, nor
save you in a Day of Trouble, but will fail you when ye expect most Help from
it; and the Mountains and Hills which you have fled to, at last cease to lock
for Salvation or Preservation therefrom: But learn to know the Lord, and humble
your selves under his mighty Hand, and learn of Christ Jesus, the peaceable
Savior, that brings Peace on Earth, and not Blood sheddings, nor learns men to
handle Cain's Weapons, nor to fight, or to destroy Men's Lives about Faith,
Worship and Fear toward God; for that is all the Work of the Prince of
Darkness, that comes not but to destroy, being altogether contrary to the
Nature of Christ Jesus, as is manifest by his pressing his Children and
Servants, that are at his Obedience, to Envy, Wrath, Bitterness, to the Killing
of any, High or Low, Rich or Poor, which they look upon to be Heretics. And
you whose Faith is dead, cannot believe over the Devil, and his dark Designs;
but are filled with Doubts, Fear of Man and Unbelief, what will become of those
Bodies of yours and your Cities: Whereas if you did know the Lord, and could
trust in him, you would not fear what Man could do, who cannot reach further
then the Body, nor that neither but as the Lord permits him and his Instruments.

I wish, in true Love to you all, that you had been as ready in your Hearts and
Minds to fear and serve the Lord Jesus Christ, as you have been to fear Men,
and serve the Devil, whom ye have been obeying and serving, and serve diverse
Lusts: How have ye delighted in the Pleasures, Honor and Riches of this World,
the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a season, having had little regard to
that Recompense and Reward which is Everlasting, nor the Honor and Riches that
is Durable, prepared for them that love and fear God, and that walk humbly with
God; and not for them whose God is their Belley, who Glory in their Shame, and
mind Earthly Things, who have not the Fear of God before their Eyes, nor know
no Fear toward God, but what is taught by the Precepts of Men, and according
to the Laws of corrupt men, that are out of the Fear and Wisdom of God: such
pretend to fear, serve and worship God, but it is ignorantly; for their Faith
stands in Man, and in Man's Laws, and not in the Power of God, nor the Royal
Law of Love and Life of Christ Jesus, who commands People, Not to fear him that
only can kill the Body, and it not able to reach or kill the Soul; but to fear
him that can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. All are to fear Him, to dread,
serve and reverence Him, that made Heaven and Earth, and has all Power in
Heaven and Earth committed to Him, who has Power to save your Souls, and
preserve your City from all Danger of Wicked Men, that possibly have Evil
Designs against it and your Bodies: But the Creator of all, and who has Power
over all* can stop and put a limit to them; No further shall their Rage and
Wickedness take place against your Bodies or City, than God permits them.

And therefore turn you with all your Hearts speedily to the Lord, and eye Him;
not a Sparrow (much more any of your Bodies) shall fall to the Ground without
his Providence. And when he suffers Evil to come upon a City or Nation, its for
the Wickedness of them that dwell therein.

O that ye would consider and lay to heart these things, whose Day is not over
and gone, with whom God's Spirit yet strives; O! mind it, receive and obey it,
that you may come to know the Guidance and Conduct of it; and you all coming to
walk in it, you will walk safely, and in Humility with God.

O People! Call to mind, seriously consider all the heavy Woes and Judgments
that have come upon the Inhabitants of LONDON, and why the Lord has smitten
you so often; O! hear his Rod, even the Rod of his fierce Wrath, that is
kindled against you, and Revolt not from Him more and more, to the utter
hardening of your Hearts against his Reproof, and Cheeks of his Spirit in your
Consciences, that sometimes in secret you have had, when no Eye saw you; and
how unsensible and hard are many of you grown, since God visited you by his
Judgments, and great Calamities of Plague, Fire and Sword. What! have you quite
forgotten how the Hand of the Lord was stretched forth in so great Indignation
against that City, that he made almost all Faces gather Paleness, and thousands
were startled and amazed at that time? O! have ye forgotten how the Lord
visited your City, and pleaded with you by a sore, grievous, destroying Plague,
wherein so many Thousands perished, and Multitudes for fear of their Lives
fled, as if a Destroying Enemy had pursued them, thinking themselves best and
most happy that could get from the City? And have you forgotten how
(afterward) the Lord suffered your strong City to be laid in Ashes, and Grass
to grow in the Streets, and how many Thousand Families were forced out of their
Habitations to lodge in the Fields, and sore put to it to get convenient
Lodging, or whereon to lay their Heads? Also, you ought to remember, and never
to forget, how your City was distressed and impoverished by the Disappointments
and Losses that you met with in the two Wars, that God suffered to be betwixt
this Nation and the States of Holland; what Pressing! and afterward the
lamentable Cries, Scrikes and Groans of Wounded Men! such as mine Eyes never
desire to see, nor Ears to hear in this City or Nation, nor elsewhere any
more. And truly, whatever ye look for from God, your Sins and Provocations have
not been less since, but rather more against Him that smote you formerly.
Surely it may be said of many of you, That the more God has smitten you, the
more ye have revolted; and the more Forbearance and Tenderness he exercised to
you* the more ye have set your selves in Opposition and Rebellion to slight and
dishonor him, and grieve his good Spirit.

The Lord has been loath to give the People of this City up to utter Darkness
and Destruction (that I am a Witness of) although the Goodness of many that did
taste of the Goodness of God, was but as the early Dew* that soon was gone;
then such turned with the Dog to their own Vomit, and the Sow that was washed
to wallow in the Mire again; and instead of going forward, toward that Mark of
the Price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, which they professed, and
were called to, have sliden back, and gone back again into the gross Darkness
of Egypt, and declaring their Sin as Sodom:

And many of you that are Inhabitants of London, in this Estate and Condition
have professed the Name of the Lord, and named his Name, imagining that you
believed in it, and that you were saved thereby, and that God would save, spare
and deliver you from your Enemies; whereas ye may justly expect the contrary
from God, if ye do not consider your Ways, and Repent of the Evil of your Ways
and Doings, and turn unto God while its called to day.

And you have been more apt to look out at Secondary Causes, than to smite upon
your Thigh, and say, What have we done, as the Cause wherefore God does bring
all this Evil upon this City and Nation, that has come upon us? When have your
Hearts in a Godly Sorrow cried to the Lord, To turn away his Displeasure from
this City and Nation that you have incurred or brought upon your selves by a
Continuance in Sin, and adding Sin to Sin? What else kindles God's Wrath, or
causes his Displeasure to come upon a City or People?

O! have ye not proceeded from Evil to worse, and rushed into Iniquity as the
Horse rushes into the Battle, as if the Lord did not see or take notice of it?
but as he has reproved you for it, and brought his heavy Judgments upon many
because of it, so he will reprove you and judge you more and more, and great
Woes and Judgments God threatens your City with, to bring upon the Inhabitants
of it, if speedily you repent not of your Wickednesses, and turn from them to
Him that smites you. What way, or in what manner the Lord will bring his Woes
and Judgments upon you, I feel not much in me to go about to determine, but
leave it rather to Him, that sees and is privy to all your Sins, whether
secret or open.

O LONDON, LONDON! thou art a city that many Eyes are upon, watching for Evil
to come to thee, (and not for Good.) But Evil shall come upon them that desire
and design thy Ruin and Destruction; Destruction certainly shall come upon
themselves, that are such Watchers for Evil, and Hellish Contrivers, bending
their Tongues to speak it, and their Hearts to put it in Practice; their own
Wickedness shall correct them, and their Hellish Confidence to pursue and bring
about that Evil, which they have hatched (against thy Peaceable Inhabitants*
that desire to live a Peaceable and Godly Life, both in City and Country) shall
all turn at last to their Confusion, utter Ruin, and the Overthrow of their
black Intents and Works of Darkness. But hereby you who Repent not will be left
without Excuse before God, who may suffer many of ye utterly to perish in this
Calamity because of your Wickedness: Such Evil Instruments may be permitted of
the Lord, as a Rod, to smite and be a Scourge to the People of London, and
others in this Land, that are highly guilty of provoking the Lord to Wrath, who
sometime has suffered Evil Men as the Executioners thereof, to execute his
Wrath upon People, that continue in their Wickedness and Rebellion against him.

And you in this City, who are in that unhappy State, not knowing the Lord, who
is Israel's Keeper, to watch over you and your City, your Watchings, Guards and
Double Watchings will be all in vain, and to no purpose to preserve or deliver
your City from that Evil, that assuredly the Lord will bring upon it, if you
Repent not with all your Hearts, and speedily turn unto him. Which that you may
all do, while God gives you a Day, is the fervent Desire of him, that truly
seeks the Peace of the City, and the Good of all men every where, known unto
many by the Name of

JAMES PARK.
Horslydown, the 14th of the 2d Month, 1679.
THE END.

