PROPOSALS For Raising a very Considerable Sum of Money on Ships and other
Vessels, whereby the Sea as well as the Land may be made to Contribute to the
Defense of Both.
I. THAT there be a general Tax laid on all the Ships, Barques, Barges,
Lighters, Boats, Bottoms, or other Vessels, whatsoever, that go upon the Water,
by way of Tunnage, at the rate of twelve pence per Tun to be paid by the Owners
and Proprietors of all such Vessels, that are for the time being within this
Kingdom of England, Dominions of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or
within any of the Ports, Havens, Harbors, Creeks, and Roads belonging to the
same, to be paid within a limited time. And public Gaugers to be appointed at
every Custom-House or Port to Collect it, taking in all the Havens and Creeks
within their respective Districts. II. Secondly, That all Ships and other
Vessels, that are at this time abroad in Voyages, do pay their Tunnage at the
aforesaid rate of twelve pence per Tun on their arrival to their respective
Ports of Discharge in England, and not admitted to be discharged at the
Custom-House till this Duty be paid. III. That after all the aforesaid Ships,
Barques, Barges, Lighters, Boats, and other Vessels have paid this General Tax
of twelve pence per Tu^, all Trading Vessels to pay twelve pence per Tun
Outward, and twelve pence per Tun Inwards, to the Officers appointed to
Collect the same at the ^^^p^ctiv^ Custom-Houses during the Term of three years
from the twenty fifth of December next ensuing. IV. Tha^ ^ll Coast Trading
Vessels, Barges, Lighters, Boats, etc. pay twelve pence per Tun yearly during
the Term aforesaid; besides the general charge of (...) pence per Tun in the
first Article. V. That there (...) General Office kept in the Port of London,
for a Correspondency with all the Out Ports in reference to this Duty, and for
the observance of such Orders, Rules, and Directions as shall in pursuance of
an Act of Parliament be given to this purpose.
The Method for Collecting this Tax, and the proper Officers to be employed:
their Qualifications, and the Provisions to be made for securing the payment of
this Duty according to the just Gauge of every Vessel, and the Penalties of
such as shall make default, with diverse other things relating to this Duty
shall be ready to be presented in due time, when the ma^^^r herein is approved
of.

The Reasons for this Tunnage-Tax (amongst many others) may be these.
I. FIRST, Because it will amount to a very considerable Sum. II. It may be
made a certain Fund for a security to any Bankers that shall advance Money on
the Credit of the Act. III. A great part of the Money will be raised in a very
short time on all the Ships and other Vessels, that for the time being, after
the passing the Act, shall be in the Kingdom. IV. The Method of Collecting it
will be less chargeable than other Public Taxes. V. It Is most reasonable that
the Product of the Profits of the Trade at Sea should bear some part of the
Burden with the Land. VI. It Is a most easy Tax in Comparison of the usual
Land Taxes, for according to the lowest computation there are few Vessels that
with Rigging, Tackle, and all their Furniture, are not worth, to be sold, more
than three pounds per Tun, for which is paid but one Shilling, the sixtieth
part: Whereas the Land Taxes, at three pence per pound per mensem, come to
three Shillings in the pound, which is near a sixth part per annum, whereas the
Tunnage proposed is but the sixtieth part of the Intrinsic value of the Ships
and Vessels hereby charged. VII. A Tenement of thirty pounds per annum pays, at
the rate aforesaid, about five pounds per annum to the Public Tax, and a Ship
of an hundred Tun pays no more. And after the deduction of Laborers and
Servants Wages, and other necessary Charges in manuring the Land Estate of
thirty pounds per annum, and deduction of all the Charges of a Ship of an
hundred Tun for one years Trading, the Product of the clear Profit of this
Ships Trade for one year, is usually at least four times as much as the profit
of this Tenement of thirty pounds per annum, that pays notwithstanding, at the
rate aforesaid, as much as the proposed Tunnage. VIII. It is also to be
considered the Land has on all occasions for some scores of years last past
been burdened with many repeated heavy Taxes, whereas the Merchants and Owners
of Ships, that Trade at Sea, have been wholly exempted.
Objection. If it be Objected that the Merchants pay a Duty for all Goods that
they Export or Import.
Answer I. THERE must be a distinction made between the Profit of the Ship by
way of Freight, and the Product of the Merchants Cargoe, which are different
things. II. Many Owners get great Estates, only by the Freight of their Ships,
that never Trade by way of Merchandise, and they pay no Duty. III. The Merchant
never loses, but often gains, by the Kings Customs; for he advances the price
of the Commodity answerable to the Charge of the Customs, only the Merchant
lays it out, and the Country reimburse them again with Advantage. IV. But when
the Merchant runs his Goods without paying Custom (which is not unusual) in
this Case the Merchants Gains are much the greater by reason of the Customs,
for he sells as if he had paid the Duty, and makes the Country pay accordingly.
V. The Revenue arising by the Customs is applied solely to the Use, Service,
Benefit, and Advantage of those that Trade at Sea. And the Customs by the Act
of Tunnage and Poundage, are given to that very end and purpose, for the
Guarding and Defending of the Seas, and very probably the King adds a great
part of the other Revenue also toward it. So though the Country as abovesaid,
in effect, do repay the Customs, yet the Merchants and Owners have the sole
benefit of it.


And for all these (and other Reasons, too large to enumerate) the Duty of
Custom can be no reason to exempt the Merchants and Owners from the Duty of
Tunnage herein proposed.

If any other Objections should be made, when known, they may receive an
Answer.

If the Proposer receives Encouragement, he intends to offer Proposals for
Advancing the Revenue of their Majesty's Customs at least 40000 l. per annum,
without any Additional Imposition; and which shall be also for the Advantage of
all Merchants that fustly pay their Majesty's Customs.


