A Proposal for a Yearly Increase of Wealth, by Subscriptions to Advance Money
upon Lives: Examined and approved by the City. Which will produce great
Advantage by Survivorship, to such as please to Subscribe for one, or more
Lives of the Ages of any, or of all the Ten Ranks, and for any of the Sums of
Money of each Rank, as hereby is Expressed.
Subscriptions. Number of Persons in each Rank. Sum Total. Interest per Annum.
l. l. l. 5 2000 10000 600 10 1000 10000 600 20 500 10000 600 25 400 10000 600
50 200 10000 600 100 100 10000 600 200 50 10000 600 400 25 10000 600 500 20
10000 600 1000 10 10000 600

EVery Person from the time of Payment of the Money he Subscribes, shall
receive the full Interest thereof at 6 l. per Cent. per Annum; and as any of
those that are in the same Rank dye, his Income increases, the Survivours of
that Rank being to have the whole 600 l. per Annum (which is the Interest of
all the Money Advanced by that Rank they are in) divided among them; and so in
time the Survivours of that Rank, happening to be but three or four, will have
the whole 600 l. per Annum during their Lives among them; and at last, he that
shall continue the longest Liver of the Rank shall have the 600 l. per Annum
wholly to himself so long as he lives.

By this means, he that will make several Subscriptions of the five first, or
smaller Sums, which all amount to but 110 l. and Rank himself accordingly in
each of those Classes (of his Age) which belong to those Sums, has a Prospect
or Possibility to have for his 110 l. five times 600 l. in all 3000 l. per
Annum during his Life, as is Evident by the said Scheme or Table.

If he will make several Subscriptions of all the ten Sums, which amount to
2310 l. he has the like Prospect, or Possibility to have ten times 600. l. in
all, 6000 l. per Annum during his Life; and although in this Case more Money is
advanced; yet there are fewer Competitors in the same Rank for the great Sums,
and so more probability of Surviving.

If the Person Subscribing be at any time, during his Life, minded to transfer,
or sell his Interest, it will every Year sell for more money than it would the
Year before; for the more dye, the greater is the Income to the Survivours. And
as often as any shall desire to exchange a Life, having first made an Agreement
with the Chamberlain of the City for the time being, and the Managers of the
Rank, he may have liberty so to do, the Fine for such Exchange not exceeding
the Income of the year last past, one half to the City, and the other half to
the Subscriber of the Rank.

The Fund for Security of these Payments shall be settled on Trustees to be
nominated by, and chosen out of the Subscribers in each Rank or Class, before
their Payment of any Money.

At Mr. Hill's, Stationer in Exchange-Alley, Cornhill, Subscriptions will be
(...) for this and the City Bank of Credit.


