A General EPISTLE TO FRIENDS EVERY WHERE, Who have Received, Believe and know
the Truth of GOD as it is in JESUS.
Jesus answered, Are there not Twelve Hours in the Day? If a man walk in the
Day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the Light of this World.

But if a man walk in the Night, he stumbleth, etc.

John 11. 9, 10.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
WHo are made partakers with us of Salvation, and Life, and Peace with God
through Jesus Christ, in perilous Times, and have been made willing to take
part with the Saints through believing in him, and have suffered for His Names
sake, and in patience possessed your Souls, as a People filled and furnished
with power from on High to do the will of God, and finish that work he has
given you to do in your day and Generation; my dear love in the heavenly sense
of that Salvation, Life and Peace which we have received from God through
Christ Jesus the Prince of Peace, dearly salutes you all every where, who
patiently have given your backs to the Smiter, and in the will of God have
suffered Joyfully for well-doing, and have not sainted, nor been weary, neither
(...) removed, nor been shaken in mind, when long furrows were plowed upon your
backs, but in Patience and Long-suffering endured and came through great
tribulations for Righteousness sake; the goodness of God in helping, saving and
delivering of us in the time of need, is evermore to be minded, and never to be
forgotten, but greatly prized by us all who have been and are preserved living
Witnesses of the same, to our abundant joy and comfort, when things looked most
black and dismal without. O what Rest, refreshment and consolation have a
Remnant felt and experienced, when others were amazed, tormented and surprised
with sudden fears to behold their expectations frustrated, and their hopes
perish, your hope was in the Lord, and your confidence in him that never fails
them that hope in his mercy, and put their trust in him. And the Lord has kept
you in this Day of Trial and Hour of Temptation, as a quiet Habitation, and as
a Tabernacle that shall not be destroyed, nor one stake thereof removed, for
all the shaking of the Mountains, and the Earth, and Heavens that have been,
and will be more and more, to make way for that which cannot be shaken or
removed, but shall stand for ever; and how does all things work together for
good to them that dwell in the love of God and Christ Jesus; above all, in this
day of shaking of all false Foundations, and all who have built thereupon. How
are the shaken in mind, they have stumbled and fallen, and seem to have none to
help them up, their minds being from the only Helper Christ Jesus, the tried
Stone, Elect and precious, who is laid in Sion for a Foundation on which the
Church of God is built, and which the gates of Hell shall never prevail
against; and this Foundation of God it stands sure; and all who are thereupon
kept and preserved; they are as Mount Sion that cannot be removed, by all the
shakings of the winds that arise; Floods that come, or the Rains that fall,
because they are built upon this Rock Christ Jesus, which is immovable, who
has been and is our Rock and Resuge to this day, Glory to the Lord God for
ever, who has gathered a Remnant to himself out of the World, and the
wickedness of it; and has brought out from the barren Mountains, to the
Mountain of his House, even the Mountain of Holiness, where his hand appears
and is seen to work and bring mighty things to pass for and in the behalf of
his chosen Heritage, whom the Lord greatly delights in, and takes pleasure in
doing good unto. Now this Mountain of the Lord's House shall be established on
the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, how high and
strong soever they may appear; that are as Mountains lifted up or arise against
the Mountain of the Lords House; or is of another nature, and contrary
thereunto, they must all be brought down and laid wast in man and woman before
the Mountain of the Lord can be established in them and exalted above the
Hills, which Christ Jesus said must be laid low before the Lord alone be
exalted. And Daniel saw a little Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands,
that should fill the whole Earth; here was no Crafts-man or cunning Artists
hands at work in cutting out this little Stone, cut out of the Mountain it was
without hands; no wit or power of man could do it, but only through the Wisdom
of God and his invisible power, for with God all things are possible: he can
make a little Stone cut out of the Mountain fill the whole Earth; he can make a
little one become a strong Nation. Now, Dear Friends, feel the Mountain of the
Lord's House established on the the top of that which is of the House of Esau,
which must be as stubble, and feel the House of Saul fallen; and the Tabernacle
of David that was fallen down, raised up in you, and that every breach thereof
may be healed, that the enemy has made at any time to the weakening or the
throwing of it down; and when any falls into sin or commits iniquity that makes
a breach upon the Tabernacle of David, weakens the good in them: so then the
bad House of Saul grows stronger, and wickedness increases in such to a great
height. O how many Mountains and Hills within and without, has the Lord our
God already brought down and laid wast, that he might set his King upon his
Holy Hill of Sion, and declare his decree that shall stand, notwithstanding
what man or men may decree contrary. God will accomplish the thoughts of his
heart, and will bring to pass his Act, his strange Act, what he has promised
and purposes to do in and for his undefiled Remnant: he will effect it; it
shall come to pass; not a Jot or little shall fail till all be fulfilled. So,
dear Friends, feel Christ Jesus, Who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, set
upon his Holy Hill of Sion, who shall Reign for ever and ever, and sit upon the
Throne of Majesty on High; I say, in the Name of the Lord God witness his Reign
and him to sway the Scepter of Righteousness in you, till every thing that is
contrary to him, or that would exalt it self against his Government, be brought
into obedience and subjection thereunto, that nothing may Rule or Reign but his
blessed Life and Power in and over all for evermore; and that he may be
glorified in you all, who is worthy of Glory, Honor, and Dominion, feel and
witness him come with power and great glory, and taking to himself his great
power, whereby you will all know every Valley exalted, and every Mountain and
Hill laid low, that would lift up it self to oppose or hinder the work of the
Lord, or would not the Lord should Reign, and all keep sensible of that day,
wherein the Lord alone shall be exalted, and when all flesh shall tremble
before him, who lays low the loftiness of man. What is any Mountain, or all
Nations before him, when he comes in Triumph, Skipping over the Mountains, and
leaping over the Hills; of opposition within and without, when he makes his
power known; how does he shake the Earth, and cause the keepers of the House to
tremble, and how will he punish that Leviathan, the crooked Serpent, whose way
is in the Sea, that long has deceived the Nations, and caused People to wonder
after the Beast, and to say, Who is like unto the Beast, or, Who can make War
with him; and makes many for an hour to give their power to the Beast that is
to be slain, and with him the false Prophet, and given to the burning Flame in
the day of the Lord, that burns as an Oven; and all that are proud, and all
that do wickedly shall be as stubble; the day comes that shall burn them up,
and neither leave of them Root or Branch. All, Dear Friends, keep in the fear
of the Lord, and think upon his Name; But fear not man whose Breath is in his
Nostrils; neither fear what man can do, Professor or Profane, if they set
themselves in a prejudiced mind and Spirit against you, Speaking all manner of
evil against you for the Name of Christ, which you know and believe in; fear
you not their fears, neither be any of you afraid of their Revilings, Whom the
Moth shall eat like a Canker, and the Wind shall drive away as stubble. How
has the hearts of many failed them for fear? And what great fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites of this Revolting and Backsliding Age, that have not
been able to dwell with devouring Fire, or stand when the Lord appear? Who sits
as a Resiner with Fire to purge away the dross, and take away all the Tin; and
who comes with his Fan in his hand, thoroughly to purge his Flower, and gather
his Wheat into his Garner, where he will keep and preserve it safe, and secure
it from that that would eat it up and destroy it where ever that appears, you
who are of God, if never so little you are the Lords gathered Wheat into his
Garner, and who are not gathered to God, nor born of God, they are the Chaff,
they are the Children of the wicked One, and will do wickedly, being void of a
Divine or heavenly understanding, how wise soever they may be to do evil, and
they are in the sight of the Lord, but a heap of confusion and corruption,
although their Mountain seem to be never so great and high, the Lord can and
will lay it low, and make it a Plain when he pleases, and by what way and
method he pleases* So feel the Mountain of the Lord's House established on the
top of the Mountain, the Mountain of Holiness, and the Holy Hill of Sion; feel
over all unholy Mountains of sin and corruption, and God's Holy Hill over all
the unholy Hills that are got up in the fall. That, dear Friends, you all may
live, move and keep your Habitation in Christ Jesus, that Noble Vine, into
which you were grafted, that never fell but lives and abides for ever, who is
your Rock and Foundation, your Buckler, Shield, and mighty Defense; when the
Winds blow, Rains fall, and the Floods of the Ungodly come forth, as if they
would overflow the Banks; you know who has power over the Winds, the Rain, and
the raging Sea, steadfastly believe in him Christ Jesus, and let your hearts be
fixed, trusting in the Lord's great power, however it be in the World, as to
Troubles, Amazements, and Fears. In Christ Jesus, the Prince of Peace, feel a
constant Peace, that his Peace may remain with you, and he may guide you
continually, and then your Rest also will be glorious in him, and patience will
possess your Souls in the greatest Tribulation that can come; and you will have
Joy and Consolation, when the Faces of many shall gather paleness, and fear and
astonishment shall seize and take hold upon others, because of the fearsul
Judgment that will come upon them, due to them for their wickedness and great
abominations.

My Dear Friends,
THerefore be all diligent to make your Calling and Election so sure and
certain, that you constantly may have the fresh renewings of the Spirit of God,
and that to bear you witness that you are of the few or small number who are
saved, that enter the strait Gate, and walks in the narrow way that leads
unto Life Eternal, which but few find, and such as never yet found it, how
should they walk in it; and you that have found it, keep low walking in it, and
let none of your hearts by any means be lifted up, by any thing you do for the
truth, or with any thing that you enjoy from God, Who is the giver of every
good and perfect Gift, whether Temporal or Spiritual; but still keep your
hearts and minds unto God, and in perfect love unto him above all, in the pure
enjoyment of all the mercies, which you have received from him; let not the
things of this world have place in your hearts again, who have been gathered to
God out of the World; for whosoever let their minds and affections after that
which is earthly, such cannot well affect heavenly things; therefore all have
great need, even as much as ever, to keep your hearts with all diligence, that
the enemy of the Soul and destroyer enter not again, where he once was cast out
by Christ Jesus; O watch and pray that you enter not into temptation, when you
are tempted to evil; in the hour of temptation watch in the word of God's
patience; be sure that you keep that hid in your hearts, and take heed to it,
and you will witness it a Light to your Feet, to lead and keep you all from the
Temptations of Satan to Sin and Evil, which you may expect to meet with now,
although it be a time of ease, as from outward Sufferings, for that may expose you
more to the assaults of Satan inwardly, that now by his Agents he cannot
imprison your Bodies, fine you, nor spoil your Goods, for meeting together to
worship God, he will beset you and assault you now another way, to wit, within,
there to work, if a diligent constant watch be not kept in the fear of the
Lord; such will be in danger to be ensnared: you know many of you that the
enemy has many snares, and when he cannot catch in one he will lay another
more privily to catch the innocent in, to ensnare such as be of an upright
Conversation. Therefore let not any of you, that by the Lord's Holy Spirit and
Power have known your Souls, to be quickened, suffer death to enter or prevail
again, so to cause the second death to have power over you, or to be twice dead
and plucked up by the roots; how can any good Fruit be expected from such
Trees, but an utter withering. But, my dear Friends, in this time of freedom
and outward liberty, feel the just and holy One at liberty, and to have freedom
in all your hearts, that there the just may not suffer by the unjust, for that
vexes and grieveth the Holy Spirit, when any go into that which is evil, and
commit iniquity in the sight of the Lord that quenches the Spirit of God, it is
all out of the Truth and judged by it, and still all is to keep down to that
which judges down the evil in its first motion in the heart or appearance
there; then it will not get place to have dominion; but you will all in the
Name and Power of the Lord have dominion over, and Reign over that which is
evil, which formerly Ruled in your mortal Bodies to the dishonor of God.

And Friends, Let all beware of Covetousness, which is Idolatry. Let not any of
you covet an evil Coveteousness to your House, or to set your Nests on High;
and keep out of all defrauding, cunning over reaching of one another, or any
which you are concerned in Trade, or otherwise with. Oppress not the Poor;
wrong no man, but give unto all that which is their due, without grudging.
Avoid dishonest Gain, or making crasty advantages of any person to make your
Families Great or Rich in the World. Neither let your hearts be lifted up when
you obtain the World in abundance; consider you are but as Stewards of it for a
little time, and must give an Account to the creator of all things how you use
it, or what good or hurt you have done with it, or by it, daily take a view of
the uncertainty of all visible things; and why sometime they are given to the
owners thereof to their hurt; for its not that in themselves they are hurtful,
but because many times they are ill used or abused, but at the best not to be
trusted in: therefore it is better to be Rich in says and rich in good Works,
whilst we abide here in this earthly Tabernacle, for every good Tree brings
forth good Fruit, although the evil Tree bring forth the corrupt evil Fruit,
therefore all that profess Repentance toward God and Faith in Christ Jesus
ought to bring forth good Fruit, even Fruit meet for Repentance, whereby our
heavenly Father may be Glorified, and we may be Recorded in the Book of Life;
as those that are preserved good and faithful Servants to God in our
Generation; that have passed the time of our Sojourning here in the fear of
God, and finished our course with Joy, unto whom an everlasting Crown and
Kingdom is prepared and will be given, to possess and inherit unto all
Eternity. O what will a profession of God and knowledge of his Will avail any
that are not faithful to God in what he has showed them to be his Will: Will
it not tend to their greater Condemnation? Will it not add to their woe and
misery in the day of Judgment, or when Christ shall enter into Judgment with
them, and not only Judge Peoples words and works, but as Paul said, He shall
Judge the secrets of all men's Hearts; He searches the Heart and tries the
Reins. 'Twill be in vain to seek to hide or cover any sin and evil from him
that will search and find out all the hidden works of darkness and dishonesty
which any would hide or cover from the Lord, who sees all, and will assuredly
reward every man according to his works, such as every one sows, such must
they Reap; He that sows to the Flesh, of the Flesh shall Reap corruption, but
he that sows to the Spirit, of the Spirit shall reap Life Everlasting; it is
certainly a fearful and dangerous thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, for disobedience to his Will, and holding the Truth in Unrighteousness;
for to know God, and not to glorify him as God, nor to walk in obedience and
thankfulness to him for his benefits: this displeases the Lord; and indeed
this is the cause why some convinced among us, and know the Truth, become vain
in their Imaginations, whose foolish hearts is darkened, and are not obedient to
what was manifest in them; neither are they Righteous, nor walk as becomes the
precious Truth of God, but through Disobedience and Unrighteousness, dishonor
God and his Truth, which they profess, causing the Holy and Righteous way of
God to be evil spoken of; also causing some to stumble and take offense at the
way of God, by their unfaithfulness and disorderly walking, for whosoever looks
out at them were not like to be drawn nearer to Truth, but rather driven
further from it, by the evil Conversation of them that obey not the Truth, but
do that which is contrary. And dear Friends, you that have Families of Children
or Servants, and are set of God over them, walk wisely toward them,
instructing them to fear the Lord, to hate evil and love that which is good:
Teach your Children and Servants the way of God, wherein you have found peace
and safety, that they may come to enjoy the same, that you and your Families
may serve the Lord, and walk together in his way, in which is no evil, not any
thing that can corrupt any Family, People or Nation. In this way of the Lord
his Blessing is felt and experienced, to the great satisfaction of all the
undefiled in the way: Let not any Corruption or Sin have liberty, and go
unreproved in your Families, by a foolish pity or indulgence toward your
Children, or negligence of them and your Servants Eternal Good and Happiness:
but keep a watchful eye and care over all in vour Families, that none get up
into Pride or run out into Evil and corrupt Words; neither any evil way fashion
or work, which may displease the Lord, wound their own Souls, and be your grief
and sorrow, for it will be so, if any in your Families, especially under a
profession of the Truth, do that which is evil. And you that are Parents, or
Masters of Families, and have not endeavored to restrain them, how will you
then be clear of them if they perish in their Iniquity. Therefore I beseech you
who are Governors of Families, Professing the Truth* fail not to discharge
your duty to all in your Families, unto whom you may be instruments of good; be
of a ready mind to warn and correct them in the love of God, when they speak or
do evil, then there is need for it, whether they will hear or forbear, do what
you can in the Light and Spirit of God to reclaim them from the evil of their
ways and doings, that they together with you may say and do that which is good
and right in the sight of the Lord our God; who knows but as you are found
faithful in this needful work of Teaching your Families the way of the Lord,
but that you may save many Souls from Death in your respective Families. And
thus indeed and in truth you become even Saviors upon Mount Sion, through
Christ Jesus, who was to turn Ungodliness from Jacob, and who saves his People
who look unto him, work together with him, and put their confidence in him, so
we receive power from him to deny our selves, and take up our daily Cross and
follow the Lord fully, in humility and lowliness of mind; and by this power of
the Lord so dwelling in it, all will be enabled to keep in subjection that
which would exalt it self against the appearance of the Lord in you. It will
bring down every high thought and vain imagination; it will make self of no
reputation in every particular: and Friends never had more need to mind the
Light and bring their deeds to it, believe in it, and walk in it than now, when
even Satan transforms himself into the likeness of an Angel of Light and Truth,
and his Ministers also as Ministers of Christ, and as in the Light of the Lamb
Christ Jesus, all keep and abide walking, you will see and be able to put a
difference betwixt the Divine Light and Truth, and the likeness of it,
howsoever transformed by the prince of Darkness; for by the Light of the Lord
you will all see Light to comprehend all the transformations of the Devil and
Satan, in all his appearances; with what fair shows, or under what specious
pretenses soever he may appear unto you or amongst you; the cunning Serpent is
at work with his transformed likenesses of the heavenly things of God: let none
look out at that, nor think any worse of the Light and Truth of God, because
that even Satan transforms himself into the likeness of an Angel of Light; and
his Angels profess Gods precious Truth, and talk of it with enticing words;
that man's wisdom teaches all this. God permits, that they who are approved may
be made manifest, that all Friends may search and try their ways and works,
and be more confirmed upon the tried Stone, elect and precious, which God has
laid in Sion for a Foundation; and another Foundation can no man lay, than that
which is already laid, which not any thing can move or overthrow, but it stands
and remains the same firm Rock of Ages still; upon this dear Friends, do but
keep and abide, and then none of these things, which only is suffered of the
Lord to come to try us, shall be able to move any of us from our stability in
the Truth, Light, Life and Power of the Lord God: The Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against this invincable Rock of Ages Christ Jesus, upon whom the
faithful are built, a Spiritual Household unto God, and are become to him a
chosen Generation and a Royal Priesthood, to offer up to him the Spiritual
Sacrifice of Praise, and of a broken Heart, which is accepted of the Lord: and
surely we who are the Children of God, and his day had never more need to be
continually with God, and see him in the mount than now, when there is so much
declining from God and departure from the Faith: and I believe many of you are
very sensible that the mystery of Iniquity now works, whereby Satan sets
himself and Agents at work, to let and hinder the work of the Lord, and yet
they cry, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy Name, etc. But are workers
of Iniquity, which coming to be seen and discovered by the Light of the Lord,
by that also is condemned; which lets the Saints in Light see over it and the
mischievous intent of such workers where they come, that are workers of
Iniquity, their works manisest what workmen they are; unto whom the Lord will
say, I know you not, depart from me. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses,
so do these resist the Truth (professed by them being men of corrupt minds and
sensual, although they may still return good Words and fair Speeches, and so
deceive the Hearts of the simple, with their seducing Spirit, and sowing
Discord, Division, and corrupt Seed; which I do entreat you all in the love of
God and care for your Souls good to beware of, and not to believe every Spirit,
but try them with the Light and Spirit of God which he has given you, whereby
you may see and discern clearly, betwixt Spirit and Spirit, the true from the
false; and the things of God from those things that are contrary, which he
never wrought nor ever delighted in; all which is to be denied and shut out,
for by the Spirit of the Lord God, none can own or join with that which works
against the truth, scatters from it instead of gathering to it, or that which
under pretense of most Christian, would lay waste the Heritage of God, and set
up fleshly Liberty instead of true Christianity. In the Name of the Lord, and
with his Light and Truth, see and fathom over all that which is not of God,
which shall not stand. And Friends, feel the Ear open that tries words, as the
Pallat tastes Meats, that you all the Spiritual Meat may feed upon, and not
upon that which perishes or dies of it self, but that which endures to
everlasting Life at the Lord's Table; all feed upon and be filled with that,
and a living Hunger will be increased in you all after that which is pure more
and more, to the renouncing of that which is dirty, defiled and impure, under
what pretense or color soever it may appear, or what fine dress or gloss
soever it may be presented to you in, by such as may presume to speak in the
Name of the Lord amongst you, that are not really of us, but are gone out into a
selfseparation from us, and impose their disunion and disorder in the Church of
God, in opposition to that wholesome Union and Order which that Church maintains,
and is in the practice of; which tends to present it to God holy and without
blame before him, without spot or wrinkle, or any thing that defiles, works
abomination, or loves and makes a Lie; all which shall in no wise enter into
the Holy City, which comes down from God out of Heaven, the seducing Spirit is
of the Enemy the Father of Lies, and leads from the Truth into Lies and
Error, falsehood and deceit, and who are led by this Spirit, they forge Lies and
speak Lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared, they grow
selfwill'd, stubborn and hard-hearted, and appear hard through the
deceitfulness of sin that dwells in them; losing the true tenderness and
brokenness of heart, that for a time appeared in some of them, before they let
in this pernicious Spirit, and gave heed to it, that liberty which now they are
in, and wrangle for it, was hateful to some of them, whereby they corrupt one
another; so they raise their mountain, and set their unholy mountain against
and in opposition to the Lord's Holy Mountain, or the Mountain of the Lord's
House, which is to be established a top of the Mountains and exalted above the
Hills, which all Nations shall flow unto, not only a few Nations, but even all
Nations must flow to and come to it; and every Mountain and Hill must be
brought down and laid waste, that rises up in opposition against the Mountain
of the Lord, where in his day the Lord our God makes to his People a Feast of
fat things full of Marrow, and Wine upon the Lees that is well refined; Glory,
Glory to God and the Lamb over all, for ever and ever. None need pine for
Hunger that come to know the House of the Lord and keep at his Table; there is
Bread enough, Spiritual Meat, sufficient to satisfy every hungry Soul, with
the Water of Life, whereof all may drink, so that you need never thirst more.

My dear Friends, who are come hither, abide with the Lord in the Mountain of
his Holiness; keep in his Temple faithfully, serving of God, and as you always
keep there you will know there is no Night it, for the Lamb is the Light
thereof, and his Servants shall serve him and worship him, and cry, Worthy,
worthy, is the Lamb, to receive Glory, Honor and Praise for ever more. But let
none content themselves or rest satisfied in the outward Court, in outward
Shows, in an outward Form of Religion or Godliness, out of the Life and Power
of God: For when the Lord comes to Judgment, his Sentance upon them will be
sharp, who have a name to live but are dead in Trespasses and in Sins. How much
astonished and perplexed will such be when the Lord comes? Who said, Behold I
come quickly to give a reward to every man according to his works. How sad will
it be with all them that have not repented them, of their wicked deeds which
they have done in the Body, but where it lies at their door still; all the
Wickedness which they have committed, which they should in their day given them
by the Lord, have repented of and ceased to do; and what great multitudes of
People evidently appear in that sad estate, which calls for a Lamentation from
the saved of the Lord, who are his chosen Flock and Heritage; and who can
commisserate the People of this Age, that are run into such wicked ungodly
Practices, which undoubtedly will provoke God to Anger, and to execute his
Judgments upon them with great severity if they repent not. But, dear Friends
you who have tasted and seen how good the Lord is, and have of the Water of
Life and the Rock that followed; Israel of old fed thereupon and drank thereof
more abundantly, that you all may be filled with that which is good, and every
Soul delight it self in the fatness of that Meat which is really Spiritual,
whereby all may come to be strong in the Lord, and through him may be made able
to stand in this day as firm, true and unshaken in mind, as ever you or any of
the Saints in any Age did: that you may not be found wanting, or fail in your
testimony for his Name in the least degree; none to be weaker in Faith because
some have fallen, for through unbelief they fell, who are gone from the Truth and
have sold it for that that perishes, and so are broken off from their
Spiritual Society of Friends in it, whatsoever they may in their carnal
Reasoning urge as occasion given to them by any; so all you that are come to
God the Judge of all, to have fellowship with God and Christ Jesus, keep
constant in the near Union and Fellowship of the Spirit of God, where there is
no stumbling, nor falling away from God and his Truth; but by the Light of the
Lord all will see and learn how precious a thing it is for Brethren to dwell
together in the Unity of the Spirit of God and to keep in the Unity of the
Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace. And, dear Friends love one another and all
Men, even your Enemies, that despightfully used you and hated you without
cause; do good to them and pray for them. And Friends, All greatly prize the
great mercy of the Lord God, and his mavelous kindness toward us, who have
been long accounted as Sheep for the Salughter, that he who has the Hearts of
Kings in his hand, should move in the Kings Heart that now is, to consider our
distressed state; and that violence and spoil we were exposed unto, through the
prosecution of the Penal Laws, that now the King has put a stop to, and
granted liberty for all to worship God according as in Conscience they think
they ought, whereby appears a great openness in most places of this Nation, for
People to hear God's precious Truth declared, and a door of hope of the
gathering in of many to the Lord God, of all Nations and People. Truly Friends,
this Liberty and Ease from outward Sufferings, ought to be used in great
Humility and Lowliness of Mind; and none ought to be puffed up with it to abuse
it, or behave themselves any way unworthy of it, least the Lord should be
provoked to deprive us of that Liberty and Peace which we now enjoy, who not
long since were troubled on every side, and met with many Perils, in which the
Lord was with us, and stood by us and strengthened us by his Power; and giving
us true Comfort and Peace in himself: notwithstanding my dear Friends and
Brethren, who have received from God more peculiar Gifts, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, and the perfecting of the
Saints in Light: let the surtherance of the Gospel be every one of your chief
care and industry. Now is an open door, the Harvest truly is great, and
faithful Laborers are but few; Therefore pray ye the Lord God of the Harvest,
to send forth more faithful Laborers into his Harvest, that every one
returning may bring their precious Sheaves with you, and daily Exhort, Reprove,
and Rebuke, with all long Suffering and Patience; and be diligent in feeding
the Flock and Lambs of Christ, over whom the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers: that although many of you be poor in this World, yet you may be rich in
Faith, and rich in the Work of the Gospel, making many Rich with durable
Riches, where you travel or are set for the defense of the Gospel. And consider
and have regard one to another in your several Services for the Lord; keep
singly and alone to God's Divine Gift, that is in you and given you of God; and
go forth in that in your Warfare, against what is contrary to God, none to be
so entangled with the Affairs of this World, as to let or withold you from
following the Lord in his Work and Service; walking uprightly and without blame
in the fear of the Lord God, whose Servants you are, and unto whom we all ought
singly to be given up in pure Obedience: And all Friends every where keep up
your Meetings, in the Name and Power of the Lord, who was, and is, and is to
come, who changes not, as Times and Laws changes. Be diligent in Meeting
together; let none be idle, or come together in a careless indifferent mind,
whether you come or not, for such does not serve the Lord as they ought
faithfully, not are they sensible of the prosperity of his Work in them; and
such grow not in the Truth, Grace, or Knowledge of God; they shine not as Lights
to the World or amongst Men. But blessed and magnified be the Name of the Lord,
that a remnant do walk with God and faithfully do his Will, who have not
defiled their Garments, but have kept them clean; who glorify their Heavenly
Father by bringing forth much Fruit to him; whom the Lord has hid in the
secret of his Pavillion, and he will hide them more and more in his munition'd
Rock, whose Bread is sure, and whose Waters never fails. In the overflowing of
the Cup of Salvation was I constrained at this time to write this Epistle to
you, who are of the Flock of God, who will give you a Kingdom that is far
beyond the Kingdoms of this World; in which all that abide faithful to the end,
shall live and reign with God the Father, and the Lamb Christ Jesus, for ever
and ever; which that you all may be found Heirs thereof and come to inherit it,
is the fervent Desire and Prayer to God, of

your faithful Friend and Brother in the Truth, James Park.
Horsteydown the 24th. of 5th. Month, 1687.
THE END.

