PROPOSALS FOR National Banks; Whereby the Profits on Usury, tho reduced to
Three per Cent. per Annum, will supply his Majesty more plentifully than ever
to carry on the War, exempt the Nation from Land Taxes, great Customs and
Excises, exceedingly promote Trade and Navigation, and give England many other
very large Advantages.

The Second Impression with Corrections and Additions.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by Peter Parker at the Leg and Star
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, and John Waltho at the Cloisters
in the Temple, and John Gouge at the Castle in Westminster Hall, Anno Domini
MDCXCVI.

PROPOSALS FOR National Banks; Whereby the Profits on Usury, though reduced to
Three per Cent. per Annum. will supply his Majesty more plentifully than ever
to carry on the War, exempt the Nation from Land Taxes, great Customs and
Excises, exceedingly promote Trade and Navigation, and give England many other
very large Advantages.
THREE Manuscripts have been lately presented to some Members of the Honorable
House of Commons, which having met with no dislike save of being too prolix,
it is prayed that Objection may atone for the present Brevity; And this being
penned in too much have, it is hoped the honesty of the Design will excuse that
also.

The Subject was of Banks, such as entirely tend to the common good of the King
and the People of England; and which are of a Nature widely different from
those other Banks that aim Chiefly at the further enriching a small number of
sharpwitted Purse-Men, at the cost of the Kingdom, which will be yet more
impoverished by their engrossing the vast profits on the Usury of the Nation
into their own Coffers.

It Is therefore humbly proposed, that one General truly National Bank, be
established in London, whose Governor and Directors to be (from year to year)
nominated by Parliament; And at the same time that Banks be erected in every
Ward therein, and in every other City, and Market Town in England and Wales,
and those to receive Rules from the Head-Bank in London, and thither to return
Accounts every Week, all which are every whit as practicable as the Offices of
the Custom's, Excise, or any other, and may be settled and put into Action
sooner than were, or can be, those Banks now on Foot; because no time need be
spent in taking Subscriptions (Funds enough to the full being already provided)
not other Terms be made for Money brought in, or to put Bills in circulation;
for that the great Conveniences and Ease in Commerce which those will give all
over the Nation, will cause them to run (every where) swift of themselves,
without the charge of one Penny per Cent. to quicken their Rotation. Nor will
other Banks longer give it, than as Sugar-Plums at first to sweeten Men's
Entrance, for 'twill be so far from needful, as that Bank-Bills in Holland are
(at this very Day) in higher esteem than their best Money in Baggs by 4 or 5
per Cent. And in Venice by 20 per Cent. as is remarked by Mr. Blackwel in the
17th. Page of his Book on the subject of new coining our Money; Printed in Anno
1695.

A plain Scheam for the regular and safe Proceedings of which manifold true
National Banks in England without any confusion, and to render false or stolen
Bills useless to Forgers or Robbers is providing to be presented, whenever a
proper season shall admit for its Acceptance.

Moreover (which is worthy to be very seriously observed) these Banks may be
crected without difficulty, by the common agreement of the Inhabitants
themselves in any Cities Towns, Hundreds, Villages, or Neighbourhoods in the
Counties, and by holding Correspondencies with the Goldsmiths or Banks in
London, plentiful Mediums of Trade will (at the same instant) start up like
Blessing unexpected, and render the Commerce of every such place, as brisk and
more secure and easy, than ever it has been, without three Pence in Money
besides for pocket occasions; and the neat Profits of these Banks at but 3 per
Cent. Interest per Annum. will defray a great part, if not the whole, of the
Taxes Excises and other charges of those parts where the same shall be put in
use.

The Advantages of establishing Banks in the Methods here mentioned will be
mighty and numerous, many of which are (perhaps) as yet undiscerned; But it
will be sufficient to name these few following, which seem to be the most
obvious, Viz.

I. These Banks will furnish the King with several Millions of Money, per
Annum. without burthening the People, and will redeem all the Funds that can be
redeemed, and discharge both the Interest and Annuities of those that are not
redeemable, and will satisfy all Bills that shall be drawn by the Treasury, and
return back the Interest again into the Service of the Nation, if these free
natured Banks may but have the first offers of those Bills. II. These will and
all debates about the bad Money, and set the People at ease. III. These will
repair the losses by Guineys, and bring liberal profit to the Nation thereby.
IV. These will advance the Estates of the Orphans. V. These will be safe
Repositories for private men's Cash. VI. These will return the multitudes of
sums great and small, to and from place to place, throughout the Kingdom,
without charges of carriage or dangers of Robbery. VII. These will quickly
call back that great (or rather greatest) part of the Money in the Land, that
is now employed in Usury, and convert it into Trade. VIII. These Banks will
defray (in great part, if not all, or more than all,) the expenses of the War,
and other the Charges of the Kingdom. IX. These will take off the necessity of
great Land Taxes, Customs or Excises, and make all Commodities cheap. X. These
will raise Lands and Houses to more than double the present Values. XI. These
will unite the Interests of the landed and mony'd Gentry, and capacitate the
former, and excite the latter to contribute toward the speedy retrievement of
the East India Trade, and to carry on that, and all other Trades, to so great
degrees, as to render England (by those means and by its happy situation and
excellent harbors) the chief Storehouse and Bank of Europe, or rather, of the
Universe. XII. These will exceedingly augment our Navigation. XIII. These will
give handsome Entertainments of business to many Gentlemen's Sons all over the
Land. XIV. These will employ and cause to be employed all the Poor that are
able for any service, XV. These Banks will procure the best prices for Cloth
and other the Productions and Manufactures, Native and Foreign.
1st. As to the first Advantage, that will accrue, if Regular Methods are
concerted, these Banks will have (in all likelihood) more than a sufficiency of
Money, freely, and speedily brought in, to pay unto His Majesty's use, all the
sums that the Parliament has given, with cash in Specie, to those that shall
desire it; which none will do in great sums, unless it be (through envy) to be
lodged in their Coffers, or else to melt down, or transport 'em, because Bills
even from any Banks are (every day) experienced, to be much more Eligible in
Payments than Gold or Silver in kind; Nay tho it be of the new Coin, yet it is
not so acceptable to the Receivers, as Bank Bills; which Holland with Venice,
and all parts where Banks are, do effectually prove; Much more will these
please in the Country (where are troubles of Carriage, and dangers of Robbers)
as soon as ever these Bills shall there come in use; and it is further believed,
that (in a very short time) these Banks will be able to redeem all the Funds
that can be redeemed, and rescue the Kingdom from payments of all Interest
whatsoever, as will be by and by made more plain.

Which Regular Methods, to stock the Kingdoms true sort of right National Banks
with plenty of Cash in Specie, are humbly proposed to be, as follows. Viz.

1st. That all his Majesty's present Revenues, and Taxes be paid into the
Banks, next adjacent, to the places where the same shall be collected.

2dly. That all the remaining bad Money be brought into the Banks nearest to
the dwellings of the Owners, on, or before certain days (for that purpose) to
be assigned, and Bills issued for the same; and likewise, that the new Coin be
there returned in, ready to be delivered at the call of those it belongs to,
who (in the mean time) having Bank Bills, the Commerce will be plentifully
furnished with a full and sufficient Medium of Trade, and there will be no
occasion at all of the ill Coin's longer currency which would be avoided, least
evil Men convert all they can of that new Money into such (as it is said) is now
and ('it is justly feared) will be buisily prosecuted as long as they have
prospect to utter it.

3dly. If the Guineys are brought into the Banks, on short notice before more
can be imported, and Bills given for the same at 22 s. (which never need go
higher than to prevent their Exportation) and as much more as each Bringer in
shall swear they have (without Fraud Covin or Combination) taken those at to
30.28.26. s. etc. These will store the Banks with Cash so very plentifully, and
suddenly, as to render the said Banks able (besides furnishing His Majesty's
occasions at demand) to lend (immediately) so much Money on Mortgages and
deposited goods, as that the profits at 3 per Cent. per Annum. paid quarterly
for the Bills in Rotation, by the help of that Fund, will (in a short time)
reimburse the losses made good by the Guineys, and become a standing income
thence forward to the Nation; which will be liberally recompensed without
injury to any particular Man, and the greivances of our Industrious, and Honest
Tenants Tradesmen, and all Losers by Guineys be redressed, to the general
Satisfaction and Joy of the People.

4thly. If the Orphans Money be brought into such of these Banks, as the
Trustees shall choose for that purpose, and Interest to be paid for it, or else,
the same to be improved in stocks of Trade, as the Parliament shall direct;
this will advance the Estates of the Orphans, and also augment the Bank's Cash,
and thereby enable them the better to supply His Majesty, and the sooner to
issue the more Bills in Circulations.

5thly. These Banks will be much safer Repositories for private Men's Cash, than
the hands of fickle Goldsmiths or Scriveners in the City, or of hazardous
friends, either in Town or in the Country, if the Kingdom be security for the
Banks, as will be a great deal of reason it should, when all the Interest on
the wheelings of the said Bills, shall be applied to the service thereof, and
then this will be another expedient for largely increasing the Cash in all the
Banks, and enabling them to circulate the bigger multitude of Bills. And here
must be remembered, that if any disasters by Fire or otherways shall happen to
any of the Banks, the same to be made good by all the Banks in the Land; And
likewise wherever any Money may chance to be wanting, that Defect to be
supplied by the next Banks most convenient.

6ly. The great number of Men whose occasions will daily oblige 'em, to return
Money from place to place, will undoubtedly choose to pay their Money into that
Bank next at hand, and take out Bank Bills of Exchange, for the same which they
may carry, or send to those Banks, (howsoever remote,) where their
Correspondent^ inhabit, or themselves or their Agents shall travel, all over
the Realm; rather than to be at the troubles, and expenses of carriage, and to
run the risques of Robbers; whereby much Cash will flow into all the Banks in
the Land, and the convenience of Bills to be had from those Banks where the
same must be paid, will direct the Receivers rather to exchange those for other
Bills, than to desire Cash in Specie, especially in cases of great sums, as is
daily experienced at the Banks in London.

None will imagine, that these six ways in conjunction, can fail to stock the
Banks with a sufficiency of Money, to be constantly lodged in them ready (at
all times) for His Majesty's Services, and to pay off such Bills in Specie, as
shall so be desired; Yet for further security, If, First, the Head-bank in
London, have power to borrow Money upon some Parliamentary Fund, as that of
Salt or any other, to be settled for the more visible security of the Lenders,
to take place one year hence or at other fit time; 'Twill put all beyond
question, which Money will soon be repaid will the Interest, nay and without
ever requiring one Penny from that Fund; Howbeit the same may be provided as a
Reserve, for the more sure satisfaction to the said Lenders; For it cannot well
be doubted, but that less than twelve months experience of the profits of 3 per
Cent. on the Bills, in Rotation from all the Banks in the Kingdom, will remove
all scruples for ever. And in the Second place if Bank-Bills are made current
by Law, but only until the end of the next Sessions of Parliament, all
objections will be answered, and no man prejudiced one Groat.

Yet of these two Collateral Reserves, it is not (at all) probable, there will
be any occasion, tho too much care cannot be taken in a matter so great; for
it is not likely that of the Cash which comes into the Banks, so much as one
Tenth part will be called for out again in specie; as is proved by those Banks
already in use, much less will it be so desired out in kind, where Men dwell at
distances from their Markets and places of Commerce.

Six of the first mentioned Positions, being supposed to be sufficiently
proved, the Seventh is most plain, viz. That if Usury on Mortgages, and
deposited Goods (not meaning on Personal Securities) other than from these
Banks be suppressed, and be there reduced to 3 per Cent. per Annum. the Usurers
will forthwith turn their Money into Trade, or other wholesome uses, and give
Employments to the poor, and so take off a great part of that charge by them;
which Interests are now at 5 or 6 per Cent. and are made up 8 or 10 per Cent.
to the Borrowers, by their long journeys, with the Scriveners Fees, and
Perquisites, whereby many worthy Families have been brought to lack Bread; and
tho the Interest should be less at the Banks in London, yet the tedious journys
thither, and charges there, and in clearing up of Titles far from Home, would
make those at so great distance not much helpful or easy to Gentlemen, or
others afar off, either in England or Wales. But rather the quite contrary in
diverse regards; because the Banks in London will draw up the Money from the
Country, and leave there no Medium for Commerce, and which will tend so very
much to the prejudice of the Nation, as that all the Families therein must (of
necessity) become their Tributaries, even from the Palaces to the Cottages and
Almshouses, not the Sick nor the Impotent, no nor Infants excepted; seeing all
must use Salt and Earthen-Ware, etc. And all this to serve the turn's of a few
avaritious Persons who have already great part of the Cash of the Realm in
their Hands, which together with the vast Profits on their Paper-Money will
enable them to encroach yet further than is proper to be expressed; which huge
and mighty Profits do of right belong to none other than the public, and who
ought not to be thereof deprived by the sinister Contrivances and crafty
Devices of covetous self-seeking Men, and the generality of the Kingdom be
thereby made poor and miserable to Perpetuity.

For the Annuities the perpetual Interests and Charges in Collections are
computed, will (this very year) rise to above a Million of Money, which is one
Tenth part of the Rents, and is at least one half part of the Land Tax, how
much more soever those may augment from Year to Year; All which these Banks (if
now were established) would pay off in one Years time, so far as the Laws will
admit to be discharged, and would (at the same time) disburthen the Nation of
all the Remainder; But if things still go on at the rate that they have done,
Every Day will swell the Kingdoms Debts bigger, and harder to be paid, and the
state of the Nation will grow worse, and worse, and from Year to Year further
off from Prospect of Retrievement, and toward a perpetual Enthralment under
Debt to the Pursemen, Natives, and Foreigners; as have been for abundance of
Years past, and are at this very Day the unfortunate (if not for ever
insuperable) Circumstances of those languishing Kingdoms and Countries of
Spain; whose Shackles of Usury that Immensness of Treasure, tho flowing in
every Year from their Fountains in America, has not been able to get loos; so
unimaginably strong and powerfully guarded are the Fetters of high Usury
wherever those are got fastn'd on the public; Nor is it often that private
Persons once deeply entangled therein, have found any better.

Those Debts of the Spaniards are said were contracted by reason of their
embroilments in Wars, for more than an hundred Years past, and it is not yet
heard of, that any part of that principal is hitherto paid, or that they are
able to pay it, neither is it by the. Creditors desired; because the Usuries
they receive are profits much larger, safer, and easier, than they can make by
any other improvements of their Money; and who being in those times (a great
part) Assens (chiefly Genoueses) are since then become Naturalized Spaniards,
and linked in with the Money-monger Natives, (too many whereof were then
concerned in their Government) and twisted together with them into the managing
Posts of those Realms, so as to sway the Councils of those harassed Kingdoms
and Dominions; to pursue and protect all possible Advantages to their Usury,
whatsoever becomes of their Trade and Navigation, which all know is fled from
them, and their People live idle, poor, and miserable, and are a Prey to every
Assailant, and like to be so as long as their Nation endures; of which abundant
more might be said, but this will suffice, because it is agreed on all hands
that the Sloathfulness, Poverty, and Misery of those so extremely much decayed
Kingdoms of that once most flourishing and powerful Monarch, and Terror to
Christendom, is owing to the vast Sums of Money continually sucked from that
Crown for Usury by their Dons Grandoes etc.. to the so great vexation and
Calamity of that Indigent Common People under intolerable Gabels, ( i. e.
Excises) as produced that tragical and most deplorable History of Naples, under
the Fisherman Thomaso Aniello in Anno 1647. Written by a Gentleman who was an
Eyewitness thereof, and may be a seasonable warning piece, it being not certain
whether the Common People of England would contentedly bear things of this
nature so long.

This Tragical Subject of Spain, brings to mind the Felix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum of Horace, for tho England seem now in the very same Road of
running the like sad and woeful Fate, if the Foresight and Subtilty of our
self-ended Banks shall prevail with any of our Honorable Parliament Members,
who (perhaps fee not the mighty self ends these Gentlemen reach at) to be drawn
into their Societies hoping by the help of them and their Friends to carry on
and uphold their Usury Projects, taking these politic Pursemen of Spain for
their Precedent; yet if also on the contrary part, the great Wisdom of our
King, and of our every way disinterested good Parliament Patriots, Men fearing
God, and hating Covetousness, (such as it is hoped are the most part of that
Honorable House) shall but vouchsafe to establish this communicative sort of
true friendly Banks, these would immediately dissipate all those black Clouds
that at present impend, of our Kingdom's future Calamities by now plunging into
the like Debts as miserable Spain has done; and would be mightily advantageous
to all the Families and People of England; the rich and the Tradesmen would be
eased in their Taxes of all sorts, and having Banks in the next Market Towns
would enjoy the same benefits thereby, as those who dwell in and about L^odon,
and both rich and poor will have all Commodities cheap. Oh! That the different
Natures of these comforting cherishing and so mightily profitable to the
public last mentioned Banks of the one side, and those canker-like coroding
ones (to our Nation) now on Foot of the other hand; were but sedately
considered, and their quite opposite effects but rightly distinguished, all
Arguments would straight be at end, and our Land be delivered from its present
Distresses, and be happy and glorious to the end of the World.

For proof of the Eighth Position, the Interest at 3 per Cent. per Annum
(according to modest Computation) will bring after all charges paid neat into
the Banks upon the huge multitude of Bills that will be always in Rotation upon
Mortgages, deposited Goods, and such substantial personal Securities as the
Banks shall approve (...), much more than six Millions of Money per Annum; but
whatsoever that shall amount to (more or less) the same will defray (in great
part, if not all or more than all) the expense of the Wars, and other the
charges of the Kingdom; yet as to personal Securities, the inferior Banks may
be limited, not to lend above one Thousand Pounds to any one Person, without
the approbation of the Head Bank in London.

For the Ninth Position, when as all, or great part of The Nations Expenses
shall be discharged by the Interest coming into these Banks; Land Taxes,
Customs, and Excises will need to be but very low, if not quite be laid down,
and when Peace shall come, and thereby the Kingdom shall not lack those large
Supplies of Money which the said 3 per Cent. will be found to bring in, that
Interest may then likewise fall so much lower, as to raise no more than the
necessary Charge of the Nation shall require.

For the Tenth. The values of Lands are accounted to rise or fall according to
the rates of Interest, which being now by Law at 6 per Cent. Land commonly goes
at 20 Years purchase, and when Interests shall fall to 3 per Cent. land will by
consequence rise to 40 years purchase; but about Taunton in Somerset shire and
those parts where Registers are kept, Lands are said to go now at 30 Years
purchase; And (when the one half part of the present Interest shall sink) may
possibly rise to 60 Years purchase, which tho is a rate too hgih to be expected
yet when Landed Gentlemen shall have Money at cheap' Interest near Home, to pay
off the Debts of their Ancestors, the portions of younger Brothers and Sisters,
and sometimes their own Debts contracted in younger years; they will need not, nor
will they, part with one foot of their Patrimonies, no not for one Hundred
Years purchase; which are now swallowed up by the Usurers, for oftentimes no
more than16 or 18 Years Value.

In the Eleventh Place, when the Landed Gentry, and others shall have Money at
cheap Interest, near every Man's Home, where Titles are best known, and the
Usurers slothful Trade be out of practice; These various, nay contrary Parties,
will become united to the promoting of the common Good, so as that the first
will be enabled, and (for their profit sake) both will be forward, to assist in
the retrievement of the East India, and the carrying on that, and all other
Trades to much higher degrees than ever; and when small, or no Customs, or
Excises shall be paid, save for such Vessels, or Goods as Reasons of State
shall require, Strangers Ships will be encouraged to make us frequent Visits,
and by such freedom from charges, together with the happiness of our
Situation, and the commodiousness of our Harbors, England will naturally
become the chief Storehouse, and Bank of Europe, or rather of the Universe,
and will be able to make a yet greater Figure in the World beyond present
imagination; hold, and govern the Balance of Christendom more effectually, and
prevent all ambitious Designs of an Universal Monarchy; and then will all
necessaries be cheap to the Gentry, Tradesmen, and poor, so as all the people
of the Land will live much better and easier.

12. As Trade increases so will the Navigation to degrees beyond what can be at
present foreseen, which is so manifestly proved by what goes before, that more
need not be said on this Subject.

13. Whereas at present many Gentlemen's Sons do but help to fill the Tables of
Parents, Elder Brothers and other Relations, and are oftentimes burthensom
Guests, uneasy in themselves, and (tho against their wills) useless to their
Country, and not seldom by their circumstances exposed to desperate Courses;
If these Banks were established gentile Employments might be had, not only at
the said Banks, but in a multitude of profitable Enterprises which their Landed
Friends and others, by Money to be had at low Interest, and at hand would be
enabled, and Monied Men, (for the sake of their own Advantages) would be
induced to help them to good Posts in; And so would the grievous Misfortunes of
many ingenious young Gentlemen be remedied, and their Parents and Country made
happy by them, who now either linger away their Lives, in tedious Misery to
themselves, and charge to their Friends, or (forced on bad Practices) make
igmominious Exits, to the perpetual Reproach of their Families.

14. When the Usurers shall be put upon other Studies, to make profits of their
Money, their Projections will be every where innumerable, and the Artificers,
Laborers, and Poor, must be likewise called in to put all Undertakings in
execution; which together with the Banks, will have occasion for so many of
both Sexes, as that Employments will want them, rather than they will lack
Employments; which now is the sad case of Thousands in Cities and Country, to
the very great charge of all Parishes in the Kingdom, and yet numbers are said
to be starved, besides those that perish by Famine in Prisons: The disabled in
their Hands may go on Errands, the lame in their other Limbs, may turn the
Wheels of the Makers of Ropes, Cordage, Lines, twine Thread, etc. And also of
Throwsters, and so may the younger, that go not to School, etc. So as none
other than the Superannuated, Impotent, and Infants will wane Provision.

For the 15. Advantage, these Banks will procure the best Sales and prices for
Cloth, and for all Productions and Manufactures Native and Foreign, because
they will sell all Goods at best seasons, and with least charge, to the Clothiers
and others, who by depositing Wares in any one Bank, until themselves, or their
Friends can make their best Markets, will have plenty of Money, (for small
Interests) to be paid them near Home, or afar off, where each Tradesman shall
choose to answer his occasions, without being obliged to trifle away their Goods
at low rates to get ready Money, and to carry the same far and nigh, to obtain
things useful for their respective Occupations; as now is the case with most of
the Tradesmen in England, to their extraordinary Charge, Hazard and Detriment.

But if any other selfdesigning Banks (under what Names Titles or disguised
Pretenses soever) shall be tolerated to enjoy to themselves the mighty profit
by Usury on the Nations Money; those will be as prejudicial to the King and the
Kingdom, as if the Goldsmiths and Scriveners still had it, the case being alike
to the Public, whether the same be devoured by the one or the other: Nay the
latter have the best Title to those profits, because it is the livelihood they
are bred up in, which to suffer Bodies Politic to carry away from them whose
Subsistence depends thereon, would seem Oppression; and to permit 'em to
monopolize those to themselves, with exclusion of our Mother the Nation that
supports us, would be very great Unkindness, Undutifulness, and Ingratitude to
her; Nay, why she should contentedly give any others the place, to bereave her
self of these prodigious Profits, which are rightfully her due; whilst she is
in so very great want, and borrows on so very hard Terms of Usury, is
altogether unaccountable to Reason, or Justice to her self.

In fine, if the Parliament doubt of his Majesty's being punctually supplied by
this true sort of National Banks, (alone by themselves) yet if our Rulers shall
but grant their establishment, without lessening at all, or omitting the least
part of the other Supplies already provided, the King by their help, may be the
sooner assisted with Money to be paid in Flanders, or otherwhere as soon, and as
much as his Majesty himself, and the Parliament please, without exporting our
own Cash, at this exream Scarcity. And if these Banks may have leave to pay off
the Kingdoms Debts, as fast as they shall be able, the first years experience
will undoubtedly raise their Reputation by acquitting the King and the Nation
from payments of those high Interests, that grate hard upon and consume very
much of their Treasure, nay even of all Interests whatsoever, for those Funds
that are redeemable; and yet carry on the War with utmost Vigor, tho the
charge should hereafter exceed what the fame has hitherto been; The Sense
whereof, may so much discourage our Foes as to oblige them to submit, and
endeavor to purchase a speedy Peace on such Terms, as our King and his
Friends, shall be pleased to admit them.

The greatness of the Taxes, the difficulties to obtain Money, the dearness of
Commodities, Domestic and Foreign, by reason of high Customs and Excises, lie
hard upon the Nobility, Gentry, and all others, impoverish the Tradesmen,
hinder the Navigation, fill prisons, starve the poor, and fupply Tiburn; All
which Grievances, this most excellent healing true sort of National Banks would
(in one years time) redress to admiration, and put England into a glorious
condition of prosperity for ever.

But shall the landed Gentry, and other true Lovers of their King and Country,
permit the vast profits of the Kingdom, on the Circulations of Paper payments
(which by the way are unjustly ridiculed) to devolve into the Chests of Bodies
Politic, and other Usurers; all those will have great reason to unite together
to strengthen their Party, and the exorbitant profits will invite all Gashiers
Receivers and other Dealers in Money, as also the rich Mony'd Gentlemen, who
may persuade some of the very Members of Parliament themselves to engage in
their Fellowship, and will tempt them to exert their most vigorous Efforts, to
influence all future Parliaments, (tho under specious pretexts) to favor their
interest, how ill soever the same may comport with that of the good People of
England in general, who (if this right honest sort of National Banks be
disliked or delayed) will languish under the Losses of near Six Millions of
Money per Annum, or rather of much more, (as the same is computed to be)
besides infinite other very considerable Disadvantages, than those before
pointed at.

For it is more than probable, that our Neighbor Nations, particularly our
Brothers of Ireland and Scotland, living under the same Constitution of
Government, may see further and deeper into this matter, than we are at present
willing to do; and may take occasion, from this unhappy and willful Blindness
in us, to erect the like Banks in those Kingdoms; Whatsoever other Nations
farther off, and free from our Comptrol (whose Governments will admit) may
likewise do.

By means whereof, we shall sit still, and envy the Benefits accruing to them,
by improving their Trade and Navigation, which they will draw away our people
to help them to carry on the better, and wherein they may, in no long time,
arrive to that height and perfection, as to decay and supplant our whole
Traffic, and eclipse the Reputation we have gained in the World, by the
greatness and extent of our Commerce, to the weakening of our Naval Force, and
endangering our Safety, which so much depends on our Walls of Wood, and the
Superiority of our Shipping, to any other in the World.

As for Ireland it cannot be imagined, that ingenious people will any longer
truckle and groan under the Drudgery they now toil, of 10 per Cent. Interest,
together with the difficulties of procuring Money in that Kingdom, where it is
so very scarce, and hard to be obtained; besides what other Advantages they may
strive to reach at.

And for Scotland, it is not to be expected that they who are (at this very
Conjuncture) so solicitous in attempting a Trade to East India, (never before
by them adventured at) should now neglect the getting before us; if possible,
into methods so certain as these herein set forth, to advance that undertaking,
and which will undoubtedly carry on that and whatsoever reasonable Enterprises,
besides, they shall take further in hand, to the inviting away of our Bulworks
the English Seamen, and likewise multitudes of our Tradesmen, Artificers, and
others, the most ingenious and industrious of our People, with no small
quantities of the Wealth and Treasure of England, by such tempting
Encouragements as their Politics may give, and by the soft, gentle, honest,
and inoffensive way's of Wisdom and Reason, allure our precious Traffic out
of our Hands, which the Sword, and the Blood of England have so long labored
to preserve, against the Nations more Foreign, tearing it from us by force;
whereby England will be impoverished; and we shall be justly upbraided of
Supineness and Stupidity, when it may be too late for us easily, (if ever at
all) to retrieve the unspeakable Loss of our dear Trade, through our obstinate
Blindness and wilful ^^^^ssness, to embrace this opportunity, of which
Providence has vouchsafed, the great kindness to give us the first offer; For
if any Nation or Nations, that are altogether free from our Checks, shall
insist thereupon, whilst we linger, our resolute Deafness, may be for ever
hereafter lamented, more than that of (now) beggarly Portugal, to their
disobliged Countryman Christopher Columbus.

It is said that Scotland has already so far advanced, as to have made (or are
about to make) the Ports of that Kingdom free, which if so, that will menace
the irrepairable Catastrophe of the prudent and sovereign conduct of K. Henry
the VII. who refused the Match of his Daughter with France, and (to use his own
words) did thereby eschew sending London to Paris, but rather married her to
Scotland, that he might bring Edinburgh to London, which wise Fore sight of
that King took effect, in King James the first of England; Now shall we neglect
this Golden Opportunity of these National Banks, and Scotland lay hold on it
before us? They will not (in likelihood) fail to supplant and take from us the
greatest part of our Traffic, and also to become the Storehouse and Bank of
Europe, etc. (which England has now the first Refusal to be, if it pleases)
and will soon thin our Rivers and Harbors of Shipping, and our Streets and
Country of People; (especially of the numerous Tradesmen, and their Families)
and in no long time draw London to Edinburgh, and wherein the Benefits to
Ireland, will oblige the no little Assistance of that Kingdom.

Diverse other cogent and powerful Arguments might be treated of, which have not
met with any material Oppositions, unless Self-Interest is allowed to be such
with its adherent Prejudication, and therefore whatsoever Misfortunes,
Miseries, or Calamities shall befall England, through the want of these glorious
National Banks, it may seem but reasonable to impute the same, and value our
selves owing therefore to the self-seeking Usurers of the Nation, and their
coveteous and overreaching Party, who will thereby demonstrate themselves no
less Enemies to the King and the Kingdom of England, than is the French King;
nay and in some Respects more pernicious.

But on the other Hand, it is yet in our power (tho not like 'twill be so much
longer) to anticipate all others, and to get the start of all the World, and
the Trades-people and Seamen of England, are so notedly known for their
Ingenuity and Industry, and our Kingdom so happily situated, and our Harbors
so many and so very commodious, as that 'twill be in vain, for any People in
the World to aim at the overtaking us in Trade, were we once gotten entered upon
the right best methods thereof, which will leave no place at all for suspecting
the Authors being biased to any sinister Self-Interest, (so much by him
decried) unless the Prospect of his minute Participation in Communi Bono Regni
Angliae be so accounted, whatsoever his Labors, and Costs have been, or shall
be, having been hereto pushed on by the fervent Emotions of an Impulse, purely
to serve his Generation, whose glory thereby is the sole end of his design.

Upon the whole, he hopes that the Title is much more than nakedly proved, if
we hasten to establish these admirable Banks, for that all the profits on
Usury, and the Circulations of Bank-Bills, will be converted entirely to the
service of the King and the Kingdom, and so preserve and restore the (already
too much) impaired Credit of the Nation, which will (inevitably and most
certainly) be more exceedingly shockt, after the 4th. of May, if not seasonably
prevented by Wisdom before hand; And by which means the King will be supplied
more plentifully than ever, for carrying on the War with greatest Vigor, the
Nation exempted from paying so great Land Taxes, if any at all, and in a short
time discharged from great part, if not all, the Customs, and Excises so
burdensome to the People; the Fishery, and diverse laudable Undertakings be
encouraged, and prosecuted to effect; all Persons furnished that shall have
occasions with Money at 3 per Cent. Interest per Annum, near every Man's Home,
and many large Advantages be discovered, other than those spoken of in this
Paper.

FINIS.

