THE PROPHECIES, AND Predictions, FOR London's Deliverance: WITH The
Conjunction, Effects, and Influences of the Superior Planets, the Causes
thereof, and the probability of the happy abatement of the present Dismal
Pestilence, (according to Natural Causes the Time when, and the Weeks and
Months foretold, when the City of London will be freed and acquitted from the
Violent Raging of this Destructive Enemy.

The Appearance of which Great Pest was predicted by the Learned Mr. LILLY. Mr.
BOOKER, Mr. GADBURY, Mr. TRIGGE, AND Mr. ANDREWS.


Printed for Tho. Brooks, and are to be sold near the Royal Exchange.

Prophecies and Predictions.
DEath is not a greater Enemy to Nature, than the Pestilence is a Friend to
Death; and though it be so grievous a Disease, against which there is yet known
no general nor infalible Medicine; yet sometimes, either by the strength of
Nature, or help of Physic, it has been cured. Now to inform you of the Causes
of this particular great Pest we now labor under, they are these. 1. The great
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter October. 10 1663 in the Celestial sign
Sagittary 2. A Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, Nov. 12. 1664 in Sagittary 3. An
opposition of the Sun and Saturn, June 5. 1664. 4. The Apparition of Three
Comets in the latter end of 1664. and beginning of 1665. 5. The Transit of
Saturn through Sagittary, unto his greatest dignities, the^e to continue for
above 5 years together. All which are Causes so powerfully impelling, that it
is to be feared the Pestilence we now partake of, will not be the one m^iety of
the Effects thence to ensue, or thereon depending. By this connection of Causes,
it is somewhat apparent that this Pest should have took its beginning at the
latter end of 1664. and truly had not the Winter then been so extremely sharp
(it having a Frost of almost ten weeks continuance together) to have kept it
back, it had beyond all question broke forth then. Nay, and break forth it did
then too, as the Learned Artist in Astrology Mr. Gadbury, can experimentally
testify, having been personally visited with it at Christmas that year. And
many other Patients of Mr. Josias Westwood the Surgeon, were then also
afflicted with the same Distemper, and yet obtained cure against it, the Air
being then so friendly to Nature, and an Enemy unto the Pestilence. But now let
us consider its progress and increase, with the causes thereof, and the
possibility of its abatement, with the time when. In this matter I shall
cen^ult but not trouble you with the Figure of the Suns Ingress into the
Equinoctial Sign Aries, for the year 1665. and thence draw down the several
Arguments of increase and abatement; and because the Pestilence was hardly
perceptible until the Month of June, I will begin there.

This Month, (as if God and Nature had appointed the Sickness to (...) Ominous
in earnest to these Nations) we may observe two most fatal transits to usher it
in, viz. Mars his then coming to the opposite point of the Ascendant, and the
Sun to the opposite point of Saturn; a beginning of a sickness so mischievous,
that greater can hardly be; God grant the end be not as inauspicious: and
although (I presume it will not be of many Months continuance to this great
City, yet we are not to suppose a Pestilence ended, when it seemingly acquits
one place.

In the month of July it began to increase considerably, especially toward the
latter end thereof: there were then six oppositions of the Erratick Stars, and
two Eclipses; and to add to these, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, then came to the
Quadrate place of the Sun, and to the opposite point of Saturn by transit; and
the Sun then came to the opposition of Jupiter both by transit and aspect: all
which were very great arguments of its increase.

In the Month of Aug. Saturn comes to the Quadrate place of the Sun and will be
stationary upon it all the Month; the two Eclipses last Month do now begin to
operate, which are testimonies of very great augmentation: howbeit the
fortunate Planet Venus coming to the Sextile of her own place and of the Moons,
at the beginning of the Month; and coming to a Trine of the Sun, the latter end
thereof, may so happily contemper the fury of it, that it may not [now]
increase or augment to any exceeding great height.

A part of Septem. is like to prove somewhat dangerous, because Saturn is in a
manner still stationary, and the Sun and Saturn then come to a Quadrate aspect,
and this in ill points of the Vernal Figure, Mars and Jupiter (who is Dominus
Ascendentis) then also come to an opposition, and both in square of Luna's
place; whence it is probable, that in the second and last weeks of this Month,
the Pest may admit of an abatement; but indeed, I much fear about the middle of
the month an increase considerable: nevertheless, I hope, and rationally
believe ( favente Deo) that this Pestilence cannot ascend to any higher degree,
than it may at that time reach unto.

The Month of October seems to promise well, and the Distemper therein cannot
meet with any eminent cause for augmentation: yet I suppose the second and last
week will make some slight Offers at an increase, because then the Sun comes to
the opposite place of the Moon: and Venus has a progressional motion to the
opposition of the Sun, and Quartile of Saturns places.

November and December in this respect (God not frustrating the course of
second Causes, or taking advantage of (...) for our sins) I question not will
prove very kindly; and the City of London will begin to be in a better heart,
than in many Months before. Howbeit, it cannot be supposed that this
Pestilence should in so short a time totally vanish; or that so great a
Sickness should not leave some unkind impressions behind it; but in comparison
of what it has been, I dare assert, that we shall [then] be (in a manner)
wholly acquitted from it, and its violent raging, destructive Qualities and
Company.

La^^ly, London has at present been the Patient, and has felt the force of
the Almighties scourge to purpose; while most other places of England have
escaped the ^ash. I wish with all my soul, that London might be the Scapegoat
for them all: but ah, I fear, before the Planet Saturn be gotten quite out of
Capricorn, that those other parts of this Nation will drink deep of the same
Cup. God and Nature punish none by proxy. It will not be this Cities
suffering^, that can excuse other Towns and Cities, from the violent stroke of
so insatiate an Enemy. Thus much for the Predictions of the Learned Gadbury.

And now a word or two touching the present Pest, whether it be infectious or
catching: If any Diseases be infectious or contagious, to any person or
persons, it is their fear and imagination; and the timidity of their Affections
that occasion it Cast off then the love of the World, let the distrust of God's
mercy be far from you, use the exercise of a holy life, and good conversation;
and because it is God's doing, repine not at his Providence, but use these
supernatural Remedies, it being a most evident Truth, that Faith is the best
Fence against Fear. Patience the best Plaster against Sores; Repentance the
best Restorative; and Prayer the best antidote These are the only Remedies
against Passions, Terrors, Fears, Frights, and Imaginations, which are more
easily discoursed of, than removed. When, nay, and before you are forsaken of
Friends, and hear nothing but Complaints of Neighbors, the crying of Wives and
Children, the mourning of Husbands and Parents, the sorrowing of Kinsfolks and
Allies, the Sickness spreading, the Pestilence raging, and the Plague
increasing from Tens to Hundreds, and from Hundreds to Thousands. But (God not
altering or suspending the power he has given to second Causes) this Pest will
abate about the latter end of September 1665* and then grow less apace. As those
persons which fly from the Plague, are the most subject unto it; so hence it
is, that the Countries round about us, come to be so suddenly seized with this
sickness; the Fears of the Heartless Fugitives, being as so many nimble
Chariots, to convey it unto the places whither they fly or travel. If men be
afraid to trust God, it is no wonder that he refuses to protect them. How many
are there, that by flying from dangers, have fallen into the midst of dangers?
When men plot to save themselves, their contrivances often procure their ruin.
In the year 1348 when that great and terrible Pest happened, many people not only
changed their Habitation, but their Nation also, in hopes to avoid it. But
behold, they that refused to trust God at Land, were overtaken by that his
judgment at Sea, and were forced to make their Graves in the Bellies of Fishes.
But some there are that say, they fly not from God, but from his Plague: Alas,
Gods judgments are never separate from him; the Rod of his Anger is of such a
Longitude, that it can reach us every where. But that the shutting up of people
in a time of Sickness and denying (...) the advantage of the Air, is certainly
a great cause of the increase of the Contagion. For by how much the more Men
are abridged their customary liberty, by so much the more are they subject to
Fear; and the greater their Fear is, the sooner do they meet the Ill they
dread. And we in this age, shut up not only the unclean, but the Sound and
Sick together, (the only way to be rid of all, if ^^e least there be such a
thing as Infection.) For (...) the time of the Levitical Law, men were not to
(...) shut up above 7 days, and then only the unclean person; but if he amended
either before, or at the (...) days end, then was he pronounced clean.

To conclude, This present Plague was foretold by sun^^ learned and famous
Artists; as Mr. Gadbury, in his Ephemeris (...) the present year, 1665. in the
Month April, at which time (...) Sickness first began to show it self visible;
notwithstanding it (...) its Rise at Christmas, he himself, with many others,
being visited that time.

It was also foretold by Mr. Lilly, Mr Booker, Mr. Trigge, and (...) Andrews,
who in the Judicials of the Aestival Figure thereof, (...) these words: And in
regard he (that is, Saturn) is in the (...) House [ viz. the House of Death and
Mortality] he does thereby (...) to prenote a Mortality, which will destroy and
bring many to their (...) And Mr. Trigge had these-prophetical Expressions, in
his Observations upon June, I very much fear a sickly Season in earnest; from
(...) evil God of his mercy protect this great and populous City, for Mars
^^^sesseth Gemini, the Ascendant of London. It is observable, that' (...)
Sickness then began to increase.

And the eminent Mr. Gadbury, from the apparition of those Celestial Moniters
the Comets, further expresses, That he bewaits (...) World by reason of the
many and terrible afflictions they denounce unto (...) And after a
consideration of the natural portents of the effects influences of Comets or
Blazing-Stars, he subjoyns these word^ When we consider these several dreadful
significations, it may put us at our Letany, From War, PLAGUE, and Famine,

Good Lord deliver Us.

