A PROPOSAL OF THE POETS To raise Their MAJESTY'S A Sum of Money.
Humbly recommended to the Consideration of the Honorable House.
AT this critical conjuncture, when every good subject ought to set his Hand to
the Plow, and use his utmost endeavors to support the present Establishment,
we have not been wanting in our respective Stations to show the sincerity of
our Affection to it. As Fighting was never the Talent of our Tribe, we don't
pretend to have obliged the Nation that way; nor dare we own our selves guilty
of much praying, for that too is out of our Sphere; but with what alacrity and
cheerfulness we have drawn our Pens in their Majesty's quarrel, let Paul's
Church Yard and Westminster Hall speak. No sooner is any Victory gained by our
Forces in Elanders, but we take the Hint immediately, and Record it in Meter:
Nay we may without vanity affirm, that could Ryming have done the business, the
English had long ago beat their Drums through Paris, sent the mighty Monarch to
Grass, and reduced the Louvre and Versailles to Ashes. What is a farther
indication of our good will to the Government, we have not only rymed but
prophesied for it, and if in the heat of inspiration we have laid the Scene of
Conquest somewhat too early, and foretold Triumphs that did not happen at the
time appointed, it is an error on the right side, and we hope the Kingdom will
as readily excuse it in us, as they have done some modern Interpreters of the
Revelations, who out of their great zeal to the Protestant Cause Prophesied the
utter downfall of Antichrist would certainly come to pass last-year; though to our
great sorrow we all see that the Man of Sin is still alive and lusty, and in
all probability will not be induced to break up Housekeeping under two or
three year more.

Gentlemen,

You have made us happy under a victorious Prince, whose immortal acquisitions
employ our Muses daily. You have preserved our Religion, and it is certain we
Poets have a regard to that above all things; you have likewise secured us in
our properties, and how deeply that point concerns the Sons of Ryme and Harmony
we need not mention. For this therefore, and several other important
considerations, our Fraternity at the last general meeting, after having
considered of several ways to express their gratitude, did unanimously resolve
to do what none of their Predecessors ever dreamt of, and in case your
illustrious assembly shall think fit to approve of the proposal, offer to raise
his Majesty six hundred thousand pound, and that too out of the Territories of
Poetry. And though as all our ancient Papers inform us, Parnassus is Apollo's
peculiar, and never paid a farthing to any Government before, yet to testify
our Loyalty and Acknowledgement for the mighty things that have been done for
the Nation of late, we shall cheerfully contribute all that in us lies, to the
ease, benefit and advantage of the public.

We need not remind you that Poets in all Ages and Countries of the World have
been the sole dispensers of Fame and Glory. Now this being an Heroic Age,
wherein every person is ambitious of Glory more or less, and yet would rather
purchase it with his Money at home, notwithstanding the present scarcity
thereof, than acquire it by his Merits abroad, we humbly crave leave that under
your authority and protection we may be empowered to Erect a Glory Office in all
the principal Corporations and Towns in the Kingdom.

We have so contrived matters that this Office shall hook in all sorts of
Customers, Lords and Peasants, Court Ladies and Milkmaids, Clergy and Laity, in
short, the whole populace, by what Names or Titles soever dignified and
distinguished.

As there are Masons in the City so dexterous at their Trade, that they can
build a House to last precisely the time you covenant for, nay can so contrive
matters, that the Roof shall tumble the very minute after the Lease is expired:
so in our mystery we have Brethren that can write for a Day, for a Week, for a
Month, for a Year, and so till Doomsday if the Chapman will go up to the price
of it.

In Grub street they seldom write for above a Week. Some of the better sort in
Paul's Church yard and about the ^^mple, with good looking after may last half a
dozen years and upwards. The Wi^s of Covent Garden hold a shorter or longer
space, according as they mix their colors, and some few among them pretend to
confer immortality, and to endure for ever.

Now in proportion to these different Talents of Writing the several prices are
to be regulated. Inferior persons may have their Twelve pennyworth of Glory,
(and under that rate we are agreed to sell none) and because Glory of that
cheap composition cannot be supposed to keep long, we advise them to renew it
twice a year. This branch of the Revenue is to be managed by the good people of
Grubstreet, and the Commodity thus retailed is chiefly calculated for the
Meridian of Dutch Troopers, Prentices, Milk-maids, Porters, Footmen, Farmers
Eldest Sons, and Semstresses.

The middle sort of Glory from half a Crown up to twenty Shillings is to be
distributed by the City Poet for the time being, and his assistants. And this
may indifferently serve Vintners that can palm a new Wine upon the World,
Physicians that have broached a new Religion, poor Townsmens Daughters that
have snapt an University Fortune, Country Attorneys that can set a whole
Corporation together by the Ears, prolifick Divines that to their great renown
have puissantly begotten twenty Children, projectors of Pacing Saddles, and all
such useful inventions to the public, Schoolmasters that have floged their
thousand younger Brothers that have stole great fortunes, puny Tradesmen that
from Pins and Pack-thread have scuffled their way into a Common Council-ship.
And not to mention any more particulars, all people of middle condition who
have done any thing famous and remarkable in their generation.

The highest pitch of Glory, going under the name of Elixir Immortalitatis will
be only sold at Wills Coffee-house in Covent Garden, and will make the
purchasers free of Epistles Dedicatory, Panegyricks, with the great privilege
and emoluments thereunto belonging. The price of it is just twenty Guineas,
(wonderful cheap all things considered) and we doubt not will draw in infinite
numbers to bid for it, such as Favorites and Courtiers, who would rather buy
glory at any rate, than put themselves to the expense of obtaining it by their
own deserts. Penurious Aldermen who having no inclination to purchase
reputation by building of Almshouses, may here get it at a cheaper rate. Lords
Pages that have advanced themselves to a Sea Commission, but have a mortal
aversion to Wooden Legs. The fine dressing talkative Sparks of the Town that
take Garrisons, and model Kingdoms over their Claret. In fine all those persons
who have a passion for Fume and Glory, but cannot be persuaded to sacrifice
their ease, and pleasures, or venture a broken Shin for its sake. The only fear
is, that to save charges some thrifty people will turn Poets in their own
defense; but this inconvenience may easily be obviated by constituting a
Supreme Office here in Town, which shall have full Authority to place and
displace as they shall see fit, and likewise to regulate the numbers of the
City and Country Poets, as they have prudently done the numbers of Chairmen at
Whi^e^hall.

We humbly conceive that the revenue belonging to this Office will in a years
time with prudent management raise if not the whole, yet at least four parts of
the sum proposed. However if it should happen to fall short of what we expect
(for since the Gentry in two Welsh Counties have lately renounced their
Gentility to save twenty shillings a quarter, we may probably imagine that some
persons for all their pretended Courtship of Glory will rather let it alone
than turn purchasers) it cannot fail of being made up by the following
expedients. We therefore desire that an Epithalamium Office may be erected
somewhere near the Commons, were all people that pay Scot and Lot to the Parish
may be obliged to come for their Wedding Ballad, (without which no Parson shall
offer to Marry them under penalty of incuring a Poetical Censure) and that they
shall pay either according to their quality, or the goodness of the verse. In
the second place we propose an Elegy-Office, where not only Epitaphs of all
sorts may be had (without which it shall not be lawful to bury the party
deceased) but also Funeral ditties upon Ladies Lap-dogs, Parrots, Monkeys, Lord
Mayor's and Alderman's Horses defunct: adjoining to which may be a
Nativity-Office, where the Children of all such Parents that are qualified as
above mentioned, may have their Nativities Registered in Ryme, and their
Fortunes told into the bargain, which last favor will save their Friends the
expense of going into Morefield, or to Dr. Saffold's worthy Successor. For be
it known to all the World, the Astrologers interlope upon the Poets, when they
pretend to Prrophecy.

These Offices you may order to continue so long as the War lasts, whereby
their Majesty's shall receive six hundred thousand pound yearly. We need not
say any thing of the Circulation of Wit, the employing of many indigent
persons, and lastly the great encouragement of the Paper Manufacture, all which
will by this means be promoted and advanced. We only presume to lay our
proposal at your Feet, and subscribe our selves Your most obedient Servants the
Poets.

We have ordered the City Poet, who drew up this Proposal, to communicate this
design to our dear Brethren the Poets of Holland, and to the rest of the
Confederates whom it may concern.

London, Printed for the Assigns of Mr. Jordan and Tubman deceased.


