PROPOSALS for PRINTING A Complete HISTORY of ENGLAND: OR, THE Lives of all the
Kings TO His Present MAJESTY.
CONTAINING, A Faithful Relation of all Affairs of State, both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, with Observations, ancient Inscriptions, Coins and Medals, for
Illustration thereof; and the Effiges of the Kings. Collected from the most
Authentic Authors and Original Papers, by several Hands.
IF History be best supplied both with Delight and Instruction, from a Variety
of Occurrences; there are few Nations better able to furnish it than the
Kingdom of England. We have had so many Changes, carried on by such different
Methods, and to so many several Ends, that if they were set in a true Light, we
should have little occasion to look abroad for Examples, almost in any kind.
But the misfortune is, What would be the great Ornament of our History, if once
finished, has been the main Discouragement from attempting it. We have not
wanted Persons of the greatest Abilities, who, out of a Concern for the
Public, have set about it with the utmost Resolution; but have been either
surpised by Death, or diverted by Business, or frighted by the growing
Difficulties from undertaking the whole, and confined themselves to some
particular part. The great Light of our Nation, Mr. CAMDEN, designed it; and
had as much reason to hope for Success as any one: But though he had time enough
before him, and greater Opportunities than the generality of Men are Masters
of, he fairly confesses, That after a little Progress, he found the Task too
weighty, and so set about the History of Queen Elizabeth. That single Reign
cost him sixteen Years Labor, though himself had been an Eyewitness of the
greatest part of it. It Is true, a General History would not require such a
large account of every Reign; But the whole Body of our Old Histerians must be
examined, the Records of the Kingdom consulted, our Constitution thoroughly
understood: And after all, this Mass of Collections is to be digested into a
Method and Style suitable to the Subject. And certainly here is full Employment
for the Age of any one Man, let him begin as early as he pleases and set out
with all the Advantages imaginable. Such is the Wisdom of those Undertakers,
who would persuade the World they are in earnest, when they promise to run
through all the Changes, from the Flood to this very Day, in the Compass of one
poor Year.

But the many Disappointments which have already happened, and the multitude of
Accidents (as, unavoidable Avocations, Sickeness, Death, and too often want of
Resolution, etc.) which may inrerrupt such a great Undertaking, gives us so
little Prospect of hoping for a Complete History by any such way, that it may
be a Piece of good Service to the Public to fix upon another Method.

It Is in general, to supply the Inconveniences which attend one Man's
Undertaking, by uniting the Labors of several; who, 'as they handled some
single part only, had better Opportunities of informing themselves thoroughly,
and less Temptation to run it over superficially. This (though it may come short
of the Perfection might be wished for) is certainly practicable, and seems the
most accurate that can be reasonably expected. Such as it is, we freely submit
it to the Judgment of the Learned, hoping that the Authors which have singly
had so much Esteem, may be at least of equal Value, and be as kindly received,
when drawn into one Body.


