A General Epistle To all FRIENDS Every where, Scattered up and down in the
WORLD, That they all may faithfully keep and walk in the Truth of God, as they
have received it, thereby to eschew Evil, and do Good, in their Day and
Generation.

Written by a Servant of God, and Labourer for the Honor of his Name,
Prosperity of his Truth, and the Churches Peace and Welfare;

JAMES PARK.

Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord
Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working in you,
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
Glory for ever and ever; Amen. Printed, and Sold by T. S. at the
Crooked-Billet, in Holywell-Lane, in Shoreditch, 1691.

A General Epistle to all Friends every where, scattered up and down in the
World, etc.
My Dear Friends and Brethren,
WHom I very dearly love in the Covenant of Light and Eternal Life from God
made manifest, wherein we have Peace with God, and feel the Joy of his
Salvation, which has been all along, and is our Walls and Bullworks of
defense, wherein we know Safety and true Rest and Peace with God through Faith
in Christ Jesus; herein do I dearly Remember and Salute you all, who are the
Sons and Daughters of God, begotten to him by the Word of his Grace and Eternal
Life, which lives and abides for evermore. Oh! keep all within the Walls and
Bullworks of God's Salvation, that will be a sure Defense, and as a munition of
Rocks to you, where your Bread will be sure, and your Waters never fail, but
the Waters of a full Cup of Blessing will be known, and the refreshing Streams
be witnessed to your heavenly Joy, Comfort and Refreshment in the Lord, the
everlasting Fountain, from whom all our Comfort, Joy and Refreshment comes, in
all Storms, Rains, and greatest Raging of the Sea of wicked and ungodly Men,
your everlasting Rock, Refuge, and hiding Place you know, which is most sure
and certain in all the Perils and Dangers that you may meet with in your
sojourning here: flee to your Invincible Rock, Christ Jesus, and you will not
fear the Rage of the Wicked, nor be afraid what man can do unto you, whose
Breath is in his Nostrils; but then you will only dread and fear the eternal
God, and reverence his Name, who keeps the Feet of his Saints, that none of
their Steps may slide, but that all may walk uprightly, without staggering at
the Promises of God, or stumbling at any Stumbling Block appearing in your Way
and Travel, as Pilgrims in this World; then you will not be dismayed, although
the Earth be removed and carried into the midst of the Sea, now when it is a
time of the Lord's shaking the Earth, with the Heavens also, and all Nations,
which are in the Hand of the Lord: and he will shake them, and remove the Earth
out of its place; and all Nations before him, are but as the drop of a Bucket,
and the small Dust of the Balance; he takes the Islands in his Hand as a very
light thing, and does whatever he pleases in Heaven and in Earth, and in all
the Kingdoms of men: and who has a spiritual Eye opened and sees through the
vail of Darkness, may see the Lord wonderfully shaking the old Heaven and the
old Earth, and that the old things shall pass away, and all things become new,
a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: Blessed are you
that know the old Heavens, the old Earth, with all the old things past away,
that are quite from them, and stand clear from the old Heavens and the old
Earth, wherein Unrighteousness is found; for the Lord said, Behold I make all
things new, and rejoice evermore in that which I creat, for I creat Jerusalem a
Rejoicing, and her People a Praise. And this is the New Jerusalem that comes
down from God out of Heaven, as a prepared Bride for her Husband; Mark, as a
Bride prepared for her Husband, who is her Maker, the Holy One of Israel, in
the midst of her who is not an unprepared, but a prepared Bride, for Christ
Jesus her Husband.

And dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, blessed are you who are come to know
the Spirit of God, and a being Married to Christ Jesus, who are come to the
general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, and keep as wise Virgins,
vigilent, sober and watchful, being stored with the heavenly Oil in your
Vessels, with your Lamps always kept burning, being ready, and prepared for the
Lord's appearing in Power and great Glory; and stand upon your Watchtower, to
oppose every appearance of the Enemy, with the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God, very nigh you, with that war against the Enemy, that he may
not enter again into any of your Hearts to work that which is Evil, and destroy
the Good wrought or created in any particular of you, by the Lord God; when the
Enemy comes as a Flood, to tempt, assault, buffet, or winnow you as Wheat, it
is to hurt the tender Vines, that they may not grow nor put forth in freshness
and greenness, according to the good end of the heavenly great Planter: and the
Enemy would destroy the heavenly Babe begotten of God; but you being all armed
with the whole Armor of God, waring with the Enemy, the Enemy will fly from
you, and will not be able to prevail for to enter any of your Hearts again, by
any of his Temptations, Assaults, Buffettings or Winnowing, whereby he comes
seeking whom of us he may devour: And the Children of the wicked One, know not
God, nor that which is begotten or wrought by him, and therefore they set
themselves in great Rage and Fury against the Lord, and that which he works
in his People, who are begotten to him, and purely live to him, God who has
made you Witnesses of a Spiritual Warfare, for God and his Works, and against
the Devil and his Works; and you know the Lord by his Spirit led us on with
heavenly Zeal and Courage, to strike at the Devil and his Works, that are dark
and corruptible, that they might be put of; for the Birth and Fruits that are
of the Flesh, cannot please God; that birth and fruits of the Flesh must be
known to dye and wither; for they that are in that Birth, cannot be subject to
the Righteous Law and Decree of the Lord God. So all must come out of that
Birth which is of the Flesh, and the corrupt Nature that came upon Man by his
fall from God, whereby he became an evil and corrupt Tree, and brought forth
Briars and Thorns, nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, becoming a
degenerate Plant, even a Child of a strange Vine unto the Lord, who did plant
mankind a noble Vine, a holy and right Seed. My dear Friends, feel that right
Seed, that God has sown in all your Hearts, that in and by the same you may
all stand and remain as noble Plants, in the Vineyard of the Lord, that none of
you may be found corrupt Trees that wither, and bring not forth good Fruit, or
as them who are twice dead, and plucked up by the Roots, and as wandering Stars,
who have left their Habitation that once they had in the Truth; although such
may retain the Profession of the Truth, and come amongst us; but Friends, you
having an inward Eye opened by the Spirit of the living God, you will see them,
and beware of them, and avoid their Deceit and Falsehood, in their most
plausable Words and fair Speeches, which may tickle the Ears of such as have
itching Ears, and draw out the Minds of the Simple to their hurt: But all of
you mind the Lord God, and eye him in all his Leadings; and whither so ever the
Lamb goes, follow him faithfully, even through the greatest Hardships,
Difficulties and Tribulation that you may be called to pass through in this
present world, of Calamity and Troubles: Oh! keep going on to Perfection, in
the Path of the Just, and run the Race that God has set before you with
patience, although you meet with many great Troubles and fiery Trials, look not
out, for that is the way that God leads his People into his Kingdom of Love,
Joy, Rest and Peace, which is everlasting; and the great Tribulations which the
Righteous meet with for a season in this world, and are called to pass through,
is but the more to wash them and prepare them for that everlasting Crown and
Kingdom, which the faithful God, in what he has promised to the Flock of
Christ, will certainly give unto them; and whatsoever evil men may do against
the Church of God, in the execution of their Malice, Violence, Spoils or Ruins,
which the Lord has in many Ages suffered to come upon the precious Sons and
Daughters of Sion; yet in all that which such suffered, our heavenly Father
designed nothing toward them but good, and for their profit, to make them more
and more pertakers of his Glory, who in common Calamities and Judgments met
with hard measure and sufferings from wicked men, that did not fear God, but
were bent to work Wickedness, to do it with greediness; such now will the Lord
judge and recompense the Evil of their own Ways and Doings upon their own
Heads; and the divine Vengeance of God did overtake, and will overtake such,
and with all the Wicked and Unrighteous of the Earth, is the Righteous God
pleading, and they shall be broken to pieces by him, even like a Potters
Vessel; for they cannot stand in Judgment, in the great Day of the Lord,
wherein terribly he will shake the Earth, that it may be removed out of its
place in Peoples hearts; also he will shake the Heavens, for that is to be
shaken, that Heaven and Earth may be full of his Glory, and that the Knowledge
of the Lord may cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea, that Knowledge may
be increased.

Now in the woeful Day of Judgment and Calamity from God come and coming upon
the Wicked and Ungodly; it does appear to me, as if some weak and feeble Ones
amongst us, should say, What will become of us? shall me be hid in the Day of
the Lord's Wrath? will the Lord have pity upon, and spare us, when the
overflowing Scourge shall pass through the Land? This I have to say as from God
concerning the Righteous every where; Fear not Man, neither be dismayed at his
Looks, because of God's Judgments being in the Earth, or when Calamity comes;
for although Judgments and outward Calamity may reach all in general, yet will
the Lord remember to spare, keep and support the weak of his Flock, that
continue with him in Tribulations, and follow him fully, he will give them a
Kingdom of Rest, Joy and Peace, which is everlasting, the Light of his
Countenance shall shine upon them; he will give them Beauty for Ashes, and the
heavenly Oil of Joy instead of the Spirit of Heaviness; that is but for a
Night, but Joy comes in the Morning; the Lord will hide, spare and pity you
weak and feeble Ones, in times of Peril, Trouble and greatest Danger; you
abiding faithful unto him, he will not leave you comfortless, but will comfort
you, and will be a Rock and Refuge to you; for you will find a sure place of
Refuge in his holy Name, in which you have believed, and do trust; he will not
forget you, nor forsake you in your greatest straits: be patient in
Tribulation, for Tribulation works Patience, and patience Experience, and
Experience that Hope which makes not ashamed, and that will be as an Anchor to
hold you all unto, and keep you steadfast upon the sure and certain Rock of
Ages, Christ Jesus, even from the least of you to the greatest; and from the
weakest of you to the strongest; and you will mightily be upheld and supported
by him, in all, through all, and over all, that which God may permit wicked
Men, or Devils, to do against you, to trouble, oppress or try you, who being
sound Righteous, you shall have the blessed Reward thereof freely bestowed upon
you in this World, and that which is to come, and it shall go well with you;
however it be as to Troubles, Oppressions or Trials in this world, when God's
Judgments are in the Earth, and the Vials of his Wrath poured forth with fury
upon the Heads of the Wicked and Ungodly, to cut them off; the Lord will have
mercy upon Sion, he will hear the Cry of the Afflicted true Sion, his Bowels of
Compassion will the more appear and be enlarged, to relieve, save, help and
deliver you, and to cause your Enemies to be at Peace with you: God's love and
care in watching over his, and to incamp about them, that is a sure Defense;
and a Buckler and Shield will the Lord ever be to all that fear him, and think
upon his Name, whether weaker or stronger, God who is just and equal in all his
judgments and ways; will not destroy the Righteous with the wicked, from that
great Deluge that came upon the old World, for there great wickedness,
wherewith they then provoaked the Almighty to great Indignation against them;
yet he saved Noah that Preacher of Righteousness and his Family, being
Righteous in an Ark which Noah built, being warned of God to do it long before
it was finished; when the Flood came, in that Ark was he and his Family saved,
and not destroyed with the wicked: and when God overthrew the Cities of Sodom
and Gomorrow by a dreadful violent Fire, the destroying Angel could not proceed
to his work till just Lot was gone out of Sodom; but afterward those Cities
were laid in Ashes. And how did the Lord keep and preserve that fruitful Bow
Joseph, who was hated of his Brethren and sold by them a Slave into Egypt? how
did the Lord help him, stand by him and strengthen him, when they agreed to
cast him into the Pit to destroy him? did not the Lord cause it to work
effectually for his good, who by his wisdom and virtue obtained great favor
and honor with King Pharaoh and his Court, and throughout the Land of Egypt,
where he was a succor and as a savior to his Father Jacob's Family, his
envious Brethren that took Counsel together to destroy him; Joseph did good
unto, and rewarded them good for their envy and cruelty; and the Lord delivered
Jacob out of all his troubles which he had met with in the days of his
Pilgrimage, which were many, very great and grevious, as the Scriptures
declare; and he that helped, saved and delivered the Righteous in all Ages, he
is the same God now, and changes not with the times and seasons that are in
his Hands, but he will work Wonders for the ho^our and exaltation of his Name,
for the Salvation of his chosen Flock, and for the destruction of his Enemies
that will not bow to him, nor his Government in them, nor over them to reign;
and he will certainly bow them and break them in pieces and scatter them in
there evil Imaginations, and will bring to naught all the unrighteous designs
and wicked Conspiracies of all the wicked and unrighteous in the Earth, to
exalt his Name and spread his Truth abundantly.

Dear Friends, a great and terrible day of Gods fierce Wrath from Heaven is
revealed against them that hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, they hold the
bare Profession of it, out of the Life and Power thereof, and something of the
Form, out of the Power, such do dishonor God, and are a Scandal to the Name of
Christ Jesus, and waver from him, and baulk his Testimony, being not faithful
to him, nor true in their Testimony for those things which we have most surely
believed, to be of and from the Lord. Now his Day is come and coming, that will
be upon all found in that state, although they may hold the Profession of the
Truth of God, yet they are out of the Possession, and they are out of the
Kingdom which stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Spirit, and
are led and guided by an unholy Spirit, into disobedience to the Lord, and are
held Captives therein; and such show forth the Rule and Government of the
Prince of the power of the Air, having dominion in and over them: Now the
terrible Day of God's Wrath will fall heavy on them that obey Unrighteousness,
and hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; and when the Righteous shall scarcely be
saved, where shall they appear that hold the Profession of the Truth in
Unrighteousness? will not such be found amongst the Hypocrites and Unbelievers?
and will not there be Lamentation, Weeping, and great Woe? and shall not
Tribulation, Anguish and Wrath come upon every Soul of man that does Evil, of
what Name and Profession soever they have been of in this present world? Now as
Righteousness and true Holiness leads such who are in it, to be faithful in
their Testimony for God; so Unrighteousness does the contrary, even cause many
to how their Knee to Baal in something or other, to worship the Beast, and
receive his Mark in something or other, more or less, which it may be such know
that they ought not to fall under in, or to give way unto; and that will bring
down Judgment and Wrath from God upon all the disobedient, who are not just,
true and faithful in bearing their Testimony against Wars and Fightings with
Carnal Weapons, and against Tithes and Offerings, which God in the Gospel-Day
puts an end unto, and requires not; and that which the Testimony of Truth in
all the Faithful in our Day, has clearly gone forth against from the
beginning; and God apparently has been with his People, and blessed us herein:
How any can slight, go from, or violate that, and directly, or indirectly, join
with them, or give strength to them that falsify their Testimony, making void
as much as in them lies the great and hard Sufferings of many Ancient Friends
formerly, who loved not their Lives to the Death, so that they might fight the
good Fight of Faith, and keep their Testimony firm and constant for God to the
end? And feel the Spirit of Life from God, to enter into you, and possess all
your Hearts, that you may stand upon your Feet, and be armed with the Armor of
Light, and the Shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit, which proceeds out
of the Lamb's Mouth, that faithful Witnesses for him you may stand against all
that which is Evil, and contrary to the Truth and Testimony thereof.

Dear Brethren and Sisters, and all Friends, who are called of God to do
Service in your Men and Women's Meetings, that are of such great tendency for
the Welfare and Peace of the Church of God; be diligent to keep up and preserve
your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, in the pure and peaceable Wisdom of God,
all minding and following those things which are pure, lovely, and of good
Report, which makes for Peace; within your Walls of Salvation and Strength from
God dwell, and stand up for God's Authority, and that all your Men and Women's
Meetings therein may be kept, all being diligent and faithful to God, he will
be your Shield and exceeding great Reward; your Shield to defend you against
all the Opposition you may meet with, and against the Malice and Rage of them
that seek your heart and overthrow. And be wise in Heart in your Words and
Actions, do all that you do to the Glory and Praise of God, in self-denial and
self-abasement, considering that you act for God, and his Eye is over all; You
know that you are not your own, but the Lords, bought with a Price. So all
ought faithfully to serve, glorify and honor him, to the uttermost of the
strength and ability that you have received from God, or may receive in your
Day and Generation: Be careful in the fear of the Lord, and then all things
will be done decently, and in good order in the Church of God; and let nothing
be done in Strife or vain Glory, but do all things in Love, in that dwell
together, and edify one another, doing all things without Partiality, without
Hypocrisy, and without Dissimulation; and keep your Eye single to God, in all
whatever you do in Word or Deed, that all may be done in the peaceable Wisdom
of Truth and Righteousness, keeping an equal hand of Judgment and Justice
without respect to Persons, in all matters and things that may come before you;
for such as respect the Rich Persons case, more then the case of the Poor, may
err in Judgment, and commit Sin, and the just, equal and righteous Law of God
will take hold on such, and judge them, that are found respecting and bearing
with the Cause of the Rich, because Rich, more then the Cause of the Poor of
the Flock of God, because they are poor in this World. Wait for Counsel from
the Lord, to direct you how to give Advice and Direction unto others, that are
but weak in the Faith, and do not so clearly see their way and work; be tender
toward them, and helpful to them in the Lord, and Eyes to them, and Feet to
the Lame that have halted, and help them on by a Hand of Love and true
Tenderness, held forth to them that need it; then will the Lord be with you,
bless your Meetings, beautify and honor them more and more with his holy
comfortable Presence, and give you Dominion and Power over all that which would
hurt and destroy, or make Schisms, rend and divide Member from Member, or the
Body from the Head: The Lord has been with you, and preserved you together of
one Heart, in his business; and when you have been about your own, his Blessing
you have felt; and he will be with you, as ye all stand, fast in the Faith,
doing his Work unto the end.

And all you who are Convinced of God's Truth, but not brought to live and walk
in it, following your own Wills, Spirits, Passions, and vile Affections, not
knowing how to bridle your Tongues, nor to keep out of the Evil Words and Ways
of the Wicked, but are often catched in the Snares of the Wicked, and led
captive by Satan at his Will, tremble before the Lord, fear his holy Name,
whilst God spares you, and suffers you to cumber the Ground; for you
fruitless Trees cumber the Ground, and must be cut down, God will not always
spare, nor bear with you for your abuse of his Patience and Long-suffering; the
Lord will judge you, he will plead with you in his Wrath, who follow your own
Wills, and suffers your own Spirits, Passions and vile Affections to sway,
govern and make you Bondslaves, and to keep you fast Captives to Sin and
Satan, which is great slavery; and so are apt to be drawn into lewd Company,
and to have fellowship with them, who are given up to work Wickedness, and to
hatch Mischief, and put it in practice; Take heed how you go on in the ways of
evil men, take no pleasure in their company; if sometimes thou fall into their
company occasionally or accidentally, without thy seeking or desiring, but with
all and care diligence avoid their company; avoid their evil Words, and avoid
all their ungodly Conversation, and avoid as much as in you lies Taverns and
Alehouses, where so many wrong their own Souls and Bodies also, and impoverish
their Families, and waste the Creatures that in themselves are good, which many
may want greatly; and although it be lawful to go to such public Houses upon
just occasion, or as necessity may require it; yet for any to go for Lust or
Fashion-sake, and to sit long with them, who Injuriously frequent such Houses,
that has been a Snare to many Young Men and Women to their great hurt every
way; and is no good expedient for the Aged, to spend their precious time
unprofitably in Taverns and Alehouses, or any other Houses where you may
receive harm, and bring Reproach upon the Name of the Lord, amongst wicked and
ungodly men and women, who regard not what Wickedness they do act, nor what
Evil they can tempt and draw others into, desiring that you that know the Truth
might become the Companions of Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, and be made
pertakers with them in their ungodly Deeds, whereby such debauch the Minds of
all that will have fellowship with them, and then rejoice in their Iniquity,
and sport themselves, when they have drawn the minds of others out to join with
them in their abominable Practices: Therefore let such as are Convinced of the
Truth, and frequent our Meetings, whom this may concern, leave off such
Company, and put away all your Iniquities that you are guilty of, and amend
your ways and doing, lest the Lord be provoked so to Wrath by you, as suddenly
to cut you off in your Iniquity, and it prove your utter Destruction.

And dear Friends, be mindful of, and patiently wait for your final Change or
the Dissolution of the earthly House of this Tabernacle; and before, give all
diligence to obtain a certain assurance, that you have a House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens. There are but few mind or consider how near
their Change may be, or when the last moment of Time they may have to spend in
this present World shall be, many Wise men and Prophets of God in our day, are
removed and taken away from us, and from the Evil to come, and many other
Ancient Friends that stood firm in their Day, in Testimony to the Lord and his
Truth, who had overcome, and were made as Pillars in his House, are fallen
asleep, and are at Rest from their Labors and Services for the Lord, and Works
of Righteousness which they wrought in their Day; let it be your care to
remember and follow that good Example they gave you, and left to us all, that
we might be one with them, who were faithful Followers of Christ Jesus, and
labored in his universal Spirit, and endured much Hardship and great
Sufferings, but did not stagger nor faint in their minds, being of great
Courage and Heavenly Resolution in God's Work, and prepared for their
Dissolution before it came, and their Work was done which the Lord gave them to
do: O! be of the same Mind and Resignation to serve, please and follow God, and
to finish that Work he has given you to do, before it be said to you, That
time with you in this World shall be no longer.

The Lord is sealing his Servants by his holy Spirit, and has sealed many to
the Day of Redemption, such have the mark of God on their Foreheads, but
cannot touch nor receive the mark of the Beast on their Foreheads or in their
Hands; the destroying Angel must not hurt nor harm such, that are sealed with
the holy Seal of the Spirit of God, which all ought to wait for, after you have
believed, and feel a fervent Zeal for God as much as ever, being always
zealously affected in that which is good, with a circumspect watch against that
which is Evil, and every appearance thereof; and keep harmless and without
fault in the sight of God, then whoever blame you, or speak evil of you falsely,
yet will you be justified by the Lord, and clear when he judges, that judges
Righteously.

And beware of all manner of Deceit, Guile and Hypocrisy, with all
Double-dealing, Dissimulation, Whispering, Tale-bearing, too much practiced
amongst some professing the pure and precious Truth of God (that come amongst
us) and would be owned as of us, and of the pure Religion, but have not a
Bridle for their Tongues, neither take heed to their Sayings or Doings; no^ are
they simplehearted, but subtle, some of them, and wise to do Evil, shuning and
avoiding the Plain Language of Truth, according to the Scripture of Truth,
which is Thee and Thou to a particular Person: But is all stood firmly in the
Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God, then it would not be so with such
amongst us, but they would bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and be kept
both in the Language and Life of the naked Truth, as it is in Jesus; For all
Deceit, Dissimulation, Hypocrisy and Unrighteous Coverings are abhorred of the
Lord; and to be double-tongu'd, double-dealing, are loathsome and abominable to
God, and Good men and women, and as the Scriptures witness. O! let all be
awakened out of Sleep, and know that now the Day of the Lord is at hand! The
Lord is come, who will judge the Secrets of all men's Hearts, as the Apostle
said, According to my Gospel; and bring all hidden things to light, as he
appears, as he arises in Peoples hearts; who will not judge after the sight
of the Eye, or after the hearing of the Ear, or according to appearance; but
with Righteous Judgment will he judge both Poor and Rich, High and Low; he will
be justified when he judges, and clear when he condemns for Sin and Evil: he
will do no unrighteousness in Judgment, nor judge as man judges, with severe
and rash Judgment: He will remember Mercy in the midst of Judgment; although
men are apt to forget it, and not to mix Mercy with their Judgment, but often
show Rigor instead of Mercy, which is not pleasing to the Lord; for he desires
Mercy rather than Sacrifice, and that we hearken to him, that is better than
the Fat of Rams.

And Friends, beware of Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and the love of Money,
which is the Root of all Evil: how many men heap Sorrows upon Sorrows upon
themselves, by their Covetousness, and being overcome with the Cares of this
Life, and seem as drowned in Perdition through the love of Money, the Root of
all Evil? For what Evil may not arise and spring from this evil Root? How many
evil, hurtful and corrupt Branches that now appear, coming from this pernicious
Root in men and women, are daily brought forth to the dishonor of God, and
great Reproach of his Name, by the Christians in Name only, but not in Nature:
and it matters not much what Profession Idolatrous men and women make that
still bring forth evil Branches, and evil Fruit from this evil root.

And beware of Lying, loving or making a Lie, to slander, defame or judge
another man's Servant, who must stand or fall to his own Master; and God is able
to raise them up that fall; and he that stands had as much need as ever to take
heed, lest he fall amongst them that fall into Mischief, and lest he tempt the
Lord, and grieve his holy Spirit, which is the cause of man's Fall and Misery,
and the Spirit's ceasing to strive with them that utterly fall, by which Spirit
of God we are sealed to the Day of Redemption, as we abide and walk therein.

And beware of Unjust and Unrighteous Measures; but keep to the Balance of the
Sanctuary, which will direct us all to give Right Weight and Measure to others,
even such as we desire they should mete to us; for such measure as we mete to
others, may be measured to us again; and it is but just and equal for the equal
just God to suffer it so to be, that men hear, fear and understand the Rod of
Severity that God can make use of, when his Favor and Mercy is kicked at and
rejected, then an Eye for an Eye, and rendering Evil for Evil, and thinking to
overcome the Evil with the Evil, for want of Christian skill to overcome the
Evil with the Good.

And beware of Hatred, Prejudice and Enmity; envy not one another, for because
of that the Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience, although
they may know much in comprehension, or external Notions of the things of God,
in the head or brain, and be swelled and lifted up therewith; for that
Knowledge that is out of the Life and Simplicity of the Gospel, will hurt, and
not heal, or pour Oil into the Wound, to heal the Hurts or Bruises of the
Daughter of God's People; and what Hurt, Envy, Hatred and Prejudice has done
amongst men, is so obvious, that much need not be said to demonstrate it, for
all may see or hear of the Murders and Bloodsheds that are in the World, the
many Combats and Duels amongst Men, and how they kill one another in their
heat of Passion, Malice and Envy; and he that does envy his Brother is a
Murderer in his heart, and has not eternal Life abiding in him: and the
Treachery that is amongst men, their betraying one another to Death, it
oftentimes does arise and come from that bitter Root of Prejudice and Envy,
which is the work of the Devil. But all Friends every where, keep out of those
things that gender to Strife, Contention, or does provoke to Evil, or to any
manner of Sin, but exercise your selves unto Godliness, cease from Anger and
for sake Wrath, fret not your selves in any wise to do Evil; for Evildoers
shall be cut off; follow the things that make for Peace, and you shall enjoy
Rest, Peace and Quiet, and know the perfect love of God, to cast out the fear
of man, or what man can do, when others are full of Fears and Unbelief, because
of evil Tidings, and concerning future things that may come to pass; dwell in
the Love of God and perfect Charity one toward another, and the Lord will be a
Shelter and Hiding Place to you.

And take heed of Whimsies, or Imaginary vain Conceits, and then to think of
your selves above what is mete; but all keep low in your minds, and be little
in your own Eyes; for some being blown up into high Conceits, are hurried into
uncertain Sounds, and flashes of false Joy, which is not the Joy of the Lord,
that is strength to the Righteous, neither does tend to the Good or Edification
of the Church of Christ; howbeit, put on Christian Charity, and bear one with
another, more especially in public Assemblies: We ought to bear with some
Weaknesses, rather then crush or hurt any thing that is good and right; have
Charity toward the Weak, and bear one another Burdens, that Peace, Order and
Unity in the Spirit may be kept in all the Churches of Christ: And as much as
in you lies, live peaceably with all men, and in the Spirit of God pray for all
men, high and low, rich and poor: And obey Magistrates so far as you may with a
safe Conscience, or your Testimony for the Truth will admit, that under them we
may live a sober righteous Life in all Godliness and Honesty, that whereas many
speak against us as Evildoers, they may be ashamed, and acknowledge to your
upright Godly Conversation, coupled with fear, to do an evil thing, to harm or
be injurious to any man.

And beware of Pride and vain Glory, with the vain and the foolish Fashions of
this perishing world, that passes away, keep out of all spiritual Pride, let
it not have place in any of your Hearts, and hide it not from your Eyes, for
God beholds the Proud afar off; and would any of you have God to behold you
afar off; and such as God beholds afar off, are not near him; for who are near
him, he does behold them so, they are precious in his sight, his Eyes are over
them, and he gives them more Grace: but he resists the Proud; a high Mind
goes before a Fall, and Pride before Destruction; and it has brought Woe and
Destruction upon many; and but few humble themselves under the mighty Hand of
God, lowliness of mind, and humility. Therefore all keep in, give not way to
any proud Desires of your Hearts, from whence comes Proud Words, and
inclinations after high Attire, shining and costly Apparel outwardly, affecting
the Antic Fantastical Fashions of the World, which too many professing God's
plain Truth get into, and delight themselves in.

And all you Elder Men and Women, professing the holy pure plain Truth of God,
be good Examples in Plainness, Purity and Holiness, unto the Younger Men, Women
and Children, in your Lives and Conversations wherever you come; wear nothing,
neither speak or do any thing but that which is Grave and Savoury, becoming
Godliness, which may reach to the Good, and that which is of God in all may
own, approve and justify you in; the Younger look at you who are Elder, and
when or wherein any of you take liberty to fashion your selves like unto this
World: How can you expect but that the Younger Men, and Women, and Children,
will in that be apt to follow your Example; and when you speak rude unsavory
Words, may not you be ill Instruments to corrupt the good Manners of the
younger sort of People amongst us? And when you that are Elders, do any thing
against the pure Truth of God, and the Younger behold you, may not that hurt
and defile them? and so you become Ministers of Evil things to the weak and
Young, and grieve the Spirit of God in them, and also in your selves, which
should seal you to the Day of Redemption, and would keep the Crown of Pride
from you all, if you would keep in the Spirit of God, and be led and guided by
it; for that never led, nor will ever lead any to speak, do, or wear any thing
unbecoming the Truth or Godliness. I know that by the Worldly Liberty, which
some Elder men and women among us have taken in Words, Deeds and Habits, out of
the Truth, and condemned by it, they have but weakened themselves, brought a
Vail over the Seed of God in them, and rendered themselves less useful to serve
God and his precious Truth in their Generation; and all evil Words, evil Deeds,
or evil Fashions, spoken, done or followed, are a dis-service to the Truth,
works against it, causes a slight esteem of it, and does tend to hinder the
Prosperity of it. And therefore every one of you professing the Truth, keep out
of that which works against it, and brings dishonor to it; What manner of
Persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, who know the
Truth of God, to keep in his fear at all times, to fear to offend him or grieve
his holy Spirit, in Words or Actions, or by giving any way to Pride or
Highmindedness in any thing what we say or do. And in our Apparel, men and
women especially, the Elder sort, to be plain and modest, and all to behave
themselves in Sobriety and Moderation.

And you Friends, that are Rich, and have plenty of created Comforts in this
World, let not your Table become your Snare, nor that which was given you, for
your Welfare become your Trap, and withold any of you from God, or your Duty,
wherein you ought to be found constant to him; but be wise, and show forth
Christian Moderation in the right use of all Creatures; and keep out of that
Excess which the World, and worldly Professors take liberty in, and sport
themselves in the practice of, in their Eating and Drinking at Marriage Feasts,
and other Feasts: Oh! what ^luttening Rioting and Wantonness are even many
found in! which sorely displeases the Lord, kindles his Wrath, and that which
they have cause to be ashamed of, and such indeed as is a shame to
Christianity, in the Life of it; for that is that which we are to mind, and
keep to the ancient practice and manner of the Primitive Christians, in our
Eating and Drinking, Marriages, Apparelling our selves, that whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, or take in hand, that all may be done to the Praise
and Honor of God, in pure mindedness to give Thanks unto God the Father, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, who dyed for us and all men, and did purchase us with
his own Blood, that we all might know Remission of Sin, and know the Deeds of
the Body mortified, and the Old man with his Deeds, that are corruptible put
off; and to be covered with and adorned with the Heavenly Man, who is from
above, and he, nor the glory of his Kingdom is of this world: O let all come to
bear his Image, be willing to be made by him conformable to him who is from
above, and above all, that your Wills or Affections may not go out after, or be
set upon any thing that is Visible, or Temporal; but with a pure Eye look to
him who is from Everlasting to Everlasting, Invisible and Eternal; let your
Minds and Affections go after him, and be set upon him; and those things which
are Invisible and Eternal, all wait more and more to love and take pleasure in.

And all dear Friends and Brethren every where, having received the Spirit of
God poured forth from him, keep therein, for its good and profitable to be in
the Spirit of God; and that tends to Godliness, which is profitable in all
things, having the promise of this Life, and that which is to come: and Pray
often in the Spirit of God, having a Spiritual Mind and Understanding also:
Pray to God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that you may be kept
steadfast to him, and preserved in Purity to his praise, whilst in this present
World. O! be ye all fervent in Prayer and Supplications to God, that you may
abide faithful to him in your Words and Actions, and that Testimony God has
called you to bear for him and his Truth; be righteous, true and faithful
therein, and grow up as Pillars in his House, and not to defile your Garments
any more with the Polutions of this evil World, but constantly be kept to God
out of Sin and Evil, throughout your Pilgrimage in it: be tender oue toward
another, and pray one for another in the love of God, that you may be kept
always abounding in it; and love and pray for your Enemies, and do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use and persecute you,
considering that the Prayers of the Righteous the Lord does hear, regard and
answer, and their fervent Prayers in the Name of Christ prevails much with God,
and avails much for the good of his Church, and also for the benefit of the
Children of men in general, that have not sinned out their day, nor are finally
given up to utter Ruin and Destruction. And my Friends, in every thing that you
do receive from God, give humble and hearty Thanks to him; and be you always
contented with what you do receive from him, whether it be that which may
appear Evil or Good, Affliction or Prosperity, being Poor or Rich, in every
state be contented, with your lot and portion in this world; and shut out all
murmuring against the Lord, and all evil Thoughts and Grudgings one against
another; be content with such things as you have, considring that we brought
nothing with us into this world, neither must we carry any thing out with us
when we go away out of it; and in it there is no long continuance.

And you that are but weak in the Faith, or have but a little Faith, neither
have so much Wisdom and Knowledge, as may be others have, let not the weakness
of thy Faith, or want of that Wisdom and Knowledge that others may have, at all
discourage thee, or raise any Doubts, Reasonings, or Questionings in thy mind,
that God will not hear or regard thy Prayers, being in the least measure of the
Spirit of God offered to him; for he will both hear and answer thy Prayers that
are in the living Faith, without doubtings and reasoning of the Flesh,
notwithstanding thy weakness or littleness of thy Wisdom and Knowledge; and if
thou know not how to pray, nor what to ask, wait for the Spirit, and to feel
Life thereby to arise and move in thy heart, for that will help thy
Infirmities, with Sighs and Groans that cannot be uttered forth in words,
howbeit he knows the mind of his own holy Spirit; for it moves to Holiness,
to that which is good, but not to that which is evil, in any man or woman; but
to avoid that which is evil in all Thoughts, Words and Actions: our God knows
the mind of his own Spirit, in a holy Desire or pure Meditation, without Words,
as well as with Words spoken forth.

Therefore my dear Friends, let none of you struggle or strive in your own
Wills to use many Words or Repetitions in Prayer to God the Father, but feel
his Spirit to move in all your Hearts; for that will sufficiently help your
Infirmities, and teach you how to make your Requests in Prayer to God, who
knows what you stand in need of.

So dear Friends, I do commit you to God, and his Spirit of Truth in all your
Hearts, that that therein you may all serve, worship, and pray unto him, and
that you may please the Lord in all things, is the fervent breathing Desires of
your Friend and Brother, in a Spiritual Relation in and through God, and Christ
Jesus, the only Savior and Mediator betwixt God and Man, who ever lives,
making Intercession for all the Saints.

J. P.
Hosleydown, the 18th of the 6th Month, 1691.
THE END.

