To the Flock of God every where gathered out of the Worlds Ways, Worships,
and false Separations, into the Way of Truth, Worship of the Spirit, and its
pure guidance, where true Satisfaction and Peace is witnessed, that you all may
keep there; for there is your Rest for ever, and your Safety in time of your
trouble; that none may gad or go astray out of the Way of Truth for the love of
any thing: for such shall meet with Tribulation, Anguish and Wrath from the
Lord God Almighty.
DEar Friends, Who are gathered into the Life of GOD and Seed Immortal, which
was before the seed of the Adulterer and power of Darkness and Death was, and
are planted a Noble Vine, an holy and right Seed, in that grow, spread forth
your Roots and flourish, that you may be fruitful to God; and stand out of the
seed of the Adulterer, and keep over the Serpent's windings, and turnings, and
subtilty; and that Serpent, and them in it, that would draw you forth into the
World, its Inventions, Customs and Traditions, or to an Oneness with them; for
you cannot please nor serve two Masters, you must hate the one and love the
other, and cleave to the one and despise the other: Therefore, Dear Friends
all, keep in the right Seed, Nature and Ground, and grow in that over the World
and perishing things, and you will all be pleasant Plants, and the Issues of
Life and fresh showers of the Love of God you will plentifully feel, and dwell
in the invisible Power of God, out of all visible things, out of the will of
the flesh, or the will of man in the pride of life; for by that, Death comes
over, and Darkness covers, and gets head and mastery, and so comes to rule and
bear sway. O let not your minds go after the World, its fleshpots, or any
thing you have forsaken, and left behind you for Truths sake, never let that
come into your remembrance again so as to lust after it, but press forwards in
following the Lord. O look not back on the fading glory of any visible or
mutable thing, but mind the Lord that brought you out of the house of bondage,
and Aegypts darkness, and has safely led you on all along, and comfortably
watched over you, as a Shepherd over his flock; Dear Friends, walk on in the
sense of the Lord's Power and precious Presence with you in all your
undertakings, that in the living Faith you all may stand fast; and quit your
selves from every thing that would entangle you, or draw you aside again into
the Corruptibles, that so in the Faith all may be given up, and you made truly
willing to suffer the loss of all: Let nothing be kept back or thought too dear
or near to be parted with, that is visible and perishing, whatever it be,
Husband, Wife, Children, Gold, Silver, Lands, or full Trading and Employments,
value them not, nor love them more than the Truth; for if any so do, they will
not be found worthy of the Truth, but the Truth shall be given to them that are
more worthy of it, and whose delight is to serve it and honor it: So whatever
stands in your way, or at any time would hinder you from running the Race that
is set before you; or, whatever besets any of you, or burdens the Just in
you, cast it from you, and lay it aside, and freely part with it; for they are
worthy of the Truth, and knows most how to prize it, that have laid down all
for it; such come to the Everlasting-Inheritance which fades not away; and by
the laying down of their own Life, thereby come to save it. But many come to
lose the Life, because they were never truly willing to lay down, deny, and
forsake that, which in the evil nature and ground they have a life in, and
yield unto that which is evil, and work offense against God, shunning the
Cross of Christ, wherein the Power of God is manifested unto all that obey
him; for the crucifying and slaying of that which is contrary to God, which the
Prince of Darkness works, and would keep all people in, to their loss and
ruin. But, Dear Friends, be willing to lay down all, and part with that life
which any have in any thing that will perish and come to an end, wherein it
works against the Truth, and hinders its growth and prosperity, or the
preservation and perseverance in it. O lay all down at the feet of the Lamb,
who prevails and shall have the Victory, and stand with the pure Lamb against,
and keep over all Deceit and Hypocrisy in them that would pervert the way of
Truth, and draw you aside from your first Love, and stedfastness to God and his
People, into bitterness and unstability of mind and spirit, and would swell you
up in vain conceits, prejudice and evil surmising, and that would labor to
beget any of you into an amity with the Professions of the World, who are out
of the Seed and Life of God, wherein the true Church-Unity stood, and ever
stands over them all who are of the false Church and Mother of Harlots, and
over all their feigned shows and hypocritical pretenses of Love and Amity; that
will speak fair, and make a fair show, but within full of rottenness, death,
darkness, evil thoughts and Murders, which proceed out of their evil hearts,
and they cannot cease from sin, but make a mock at it, and plead for it, that
they might have it for term of life, and cannot be free till they come at the
Grave, as though the Grave would recover them, and free them from their sins;
which is altogether incredible, and but a formed imagined thing: therefore
Friends, keep out of the Worlds spirit, principles, and dark groundless
persuasions; keep clear out of them, and tamper not with their dead principles,
persuasions, vain traditions, carnal ordinances, forms which they have
invented; nor their Worships which profit not, nor make the comers thereunto
perfect; but keep clear out of them all, in That wherein you have acceptance
with God, and his pure Presence apparently has been manifested in, for the
quickening, comforting, and refreshing of you in all your trials and sufferings,
which you have passed through, and been acquainted with, for the trial of your
Faith in this day of Jacobs troubles, wherein the Lord has been sifting the
house of Israel, and is purging away the filth of the daughter of Sion, and
arraying her with the Beautiful Garments and comely Ornaments, wherein she
shines forth in the excellent Glory and Comeliness which the Lord has put upon
her: And this is she that sometimes sat as forsaken, and few minded to seek
after her, but now is become a City sought up, and not forsaken, and is become
the Delight and Ransomed of the Lord, that is returned out of Babylon and Egypt
with Songs of Deliverance. And undoubtedly the Lord will wound and cut off the
stout-hearted for your sakes, and all they that are incensed against you shall
be ashamed, and they that strive with you shall perish; and the Lord will be
with you, and go before you that remain steadfast and constant in the love of
his Truth and People, if you travel on, not turning to the right hand or to the
left, nor gad abroad to change your way: for if any forsake the Lord, who is
the Way, or his Work and Testimony, in meeting together with the Saints and
Servants of God, that feel his presence with them; how should they expect but
the Lord should leave them, and slight them that slight his Work and Testimony,
which so signally he has owned and led us on in? wherein also we have
witnessed an overcoming of Sin and the Devils works, as the Children of the
Lord did in the Generations past; I say, how should such but grow cold, dry and
barren, and lose their savor, and so be good for nothing but to be trodden
under foot of men, who stumble at, and slight, and cause others to stumble at
and slight the manifest Requirings of God, to meet together to speak of the
things of his Kingdom, to wait upon and worship him, as our former manner was?
So, dear Friends, abide in the Seed which keeps true, single, constant and
unmovable, always abounding in the unfeigned Love of God, that his Work may
prosper in you, and you be kept upright to the Lord, rejecting every evil way
and spirit which gathers not into that which is wholesome and sound, which you
have heard from the beginning, and been assured of by manifold Testimonies from
Heaven, which God's Witness in you has answered to, that have believed and
obeyed from your hearts what was delivered unto you, and are preserved in the
same Love, Life and heavenly Unity of the One Spirit, by which all the Plants
of God were quickened, and kept fresh and green through sundry storms and
tempests which they have past through and been exercised in, both inwardly and
outwardly. O dear Friends, shut out the Wicked-One, and lend not an ear to his
Allurements, nor open an eye to look out at the Glory of this World, which in
the Invisible you may see passing away very swiftly: and the Glory of all flesh
God is staining, and through all his Judgments revealed, manifesting the
emptiness and uncertainty of all things under the Sun. So, dear Friends, feel
dominion over all that which is uncertain and fading away, and stand in the
Dread of God over all Changeables, and them that are subject to change their
way, and that run out in high-mindedness, self-seeking, feigned-flatteries with
the tongue, when their hearts are not with you; And be all in Reality what you
profess in words, and let Truth guide you in all things; and beware of
strengthening the Bad in one another: when you at any time see one another, let
your words be few and savoury, seasoned with Salt, that they may administer
Grace to the hearers; and covet the wholsomest words and the best gifts, and
follow the things that make for Peace, as much as in you lies; and provoke one
another to Love and to good works: And if any be a Talker, or a Busie-body, or
a false Accuser, or a Backbiter, or a Slanderer, going about prating of things
they ought not, warn such unruly spirits, and withdraw from them, that they may
be ashamed, that they may be reproved sharply, and exhorted to mind their own
business, still desiring that they might come to the acknowledgment of their
Sins, and to Repentance for them, and forsake them.

So, dear Friends, the God of all Grace establish you, and keep you in that
which works for God, and which is able to present you all spotless and
unblamable in Holiness; for truly God (through his abundant mercy and kindness)
has extended Life to us that were dead, and by his Power has raised the Dead,
and opened the Graves, and you that are now come forth of the graves of sin and
iniquity, that sometime dwelt in the dust, can now sing, being awakened out of
the sleep of Death, wherein the World and all the salse gatherings lie, so
rejoice and triumph over Death, and that which would draw into Death and
Darkness again; and prize the Truth, in which Life and Salvation is found and
witnessed; O turn not from it, for if any one turn from it, condemnation and
misery shall come upon them, which they shall not be able to escape
whithersoever they run, to hide themselves, or to save their lives, they shall
lose them, the Lord will find them out, and will bring torment and distress
upon them, morning by morning they shall have no rest nor peace, all joy shall
be taken from them, when the Faithful come to rejoice and clap their hands for
joy; after the days of their Mourning be over, then shall sorrow and sadness,
mourning and bitter lamentations come upon all that are not faithful to the
Lord in their day. Therefore, dear Friends, you that know the Truth, prize it
more and more, be faithful to its requirings, and value it more than all
visible things; prize nor esteem any thing, though never so delightful or
profitable, as the Truth, and the Truth will free you from all that which would
hurt, and keep you over all to the Glory of God; keep it, and it will be your
life, it will preserve you and be a Sanctuary of safety for you when the
scourge of the Almighty passes through the Land with greater severity to
destroy and cut off its Inhabitants than yet has been known in our generation.
Oh! Blessed are you that have a habitation and dwell in the Truth, the
infallible way to God, you need not look for another; for there is no other
unto God but Christ, whom we have believed in, who is the Way, the Truth and
the Life, in whom I remain, your Brother and Companion in Sufferings, Exercises
and Tribulations for the Gospels sake, which is the Power of God.

Written near Colchester in Essex the 5th of the 8th mon. 1666. JAMES PARK.

Let this be read amongst Friends when you meet together in the Spirit of Love;
and of a Sound Mind, as it is written.


