AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS.
DEar Friends, Brethren and Sisters in the holy Union of Divine Love, who are
called by Grace in Christ Jesus, the Light and Love of God, I your dear Brother
in the same pure Love and Union, being called and chosen of God, to labor in
his Vineyard, do send Greetings of Love unto you, and write these things unto
you by Way of Remembrance, to stir up your pure Minds, that you may be
encouraged to go on, and press toward the Mark for the Price of the high and
precious Calling, whereunto you are called, that none of you may faint in your
Minds, nor sit down by the Way, neither set up a false Rest, but with Courage
and Boldness go on, following the Lamb in the Light which Way soever he goes,
through Sufferings and trials and all Hardships, like good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, be valiant in the spiritual Combat, until all your Enemies be made your
Footstool, that so you may quietly sit down in Peace and Safety under the
Shadow of Christ Jesus, the Light, Life and Power of God, where none can harm
you, nor make you afraid. And dear Hearts, pure and holy is the Lord, who has
called you, and dreadful is his Name, he is Just in all his Ways, and loves
Truth and Righteousness, and nothing can stand before him, but Purity: no
Hypocrisy, nor Deceit, nor any feigned or false thing can stand in his
Presence, nor enter into his Righteous Kingdom, but by the Fire of his fierce
Wrath is to be burnt up and consumed; Truth is his Delight, and Holiness his
dewlling place, without which none can see him, nor approach unto him; all his
Ways are pure and perfect, and nothing can guide in his Way (which is perfect)
but that which is perfect; the Worldly Eye cannot behold, nor Worldly Wisdom
comprehend nor find out the Depths of his divine Mystery; it is seal^d and hid
from all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, who be in the Transgression, Sin and
Disobedience, separated from the pure Love, Life and Presence of the living
God: But Glory and everlasting Praises be given to the most high, he has
discovered and revealed that Light, and Life, and pure Truth, which has been
hid and veiled under the thick Mists and Clouds of Darkness for many Ages, but
now is manifest unto the Children and Servants of God, who fear his Name, and
tremble at his Word, even the same Truth as ever was, which abides and
continues forever, which makes free from Sin, and unites and Joins the Hearts
of all those who faithful in it abide, together in one pure Love and holy Life.
O my dear Friends, prize the Love and Mercies of God, which have been tendered
unto you in the Light, and continue in his Love, and walk worthy of his
Mercies, as lively Patterns and Examples of a Righteous Life, answerable to
your Profession, that you may be a sweet and good Savor to the Lord, both in
them that believe, and in them also that perish, resembling and representing
him who has called and loved you, holding forth unto all the same Patience and
Long Suffering of God, even as the Lord loved you, when you were his Enemies,
and waited in Patience and Long-suffering, to be gracious unto you, and to do
you Good; so do you show Love and Kindness to them that are without, though
they be Enemies to you, and speak Evil of you, and labor to overcome you, and
to draw you back again into the Mire and Pollution of the World; I say unto
you, in Patience wait, and partake not with them in any Evil, but stand
Witnesses for God against the Evil, and be not overcome therewith, but overcome
Evil with Good; and turn not ye to them, but stand steadfast and unmovable in
the Light, and let them return to you: I know, dearly beloved, the Enemy of
your Souls lies in wait to deceive you and ensnare you, and will not cease to
tempt and assault you as long as he has any Interest in you, to draw you back
again into Sin and Evil; for it is his Work to oppose the Work of God, and to
make War with the Lamb and the Saints; he need not make War with the Worldly
Ones who live in Sin, for they are subject to him already, and led Captive by
him at his Will; but his Enmity is against the Lamb and his Followers, who come
to spoil him, and dispossess him, and take the Kingdom from him, and therefore
does he rage, and go about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour;
therefore let none think strange concerning the fiery Trials and many
Tribulations the Followers of the Lamb do pass through; but every one in
particular wait upon God in the Light, which makes manifest the Deceits and
subtle Workings of the Serpent, that in the Light you may behold the subtle
Enemy in his approaching, and in the Power of God resist him, that so a
Separation you may all know in the Root and Ground between the precious and the
vile, wrought in you by the pure Power of the most high God, that you may know
each Workman in their several Workings in the Mystery; for as Godliness is a
Mystery, so likewise Iniquity is a Mystery; and as God is a pure Spirit, and
works in a Mystery in the Light, so the Devil is a dark Spirit, and works in a
Mystery in the Dark; and as God does work Mankind into his Image of
Righteousness, so the Devil he works Mankind who obey him, into his Image of
Unrighteousness; and as these two Workmen, to wit, the Prince of Light and the
Prince of Darkness have no Fellowship nor Agreement, but are contrary one to
the other, even so the Followers and Servants of each of these have no
Agreement, but are opposite and contrary each to other, and hence arises the
War and the Strife between the two Seeds, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed
of the Serpent, and no Man or Woman can serve these two Masters, or be Heirs of
these two Kingdoms, but every one becomes a Servant to him to whom he yields
his Members. Servants to obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto
Life; and so every man and woman is known whose Workmanship they are, by that
Image which appears in them, and so are known by their Works and Fruits; the
Children of God, who are born of the pure Spirit from above, are marked out,
and have their Father's Name written upon them, which is Meekness and Humility,
Patience and Long-Suffering, Gentleness and Peace, Righteousness and true
Holiness, Truth and Love, hereby they are known, even by their Fruits of
Righteousness; so also the Children of the Devil, who are born of the dark
Spirit from below, are marked out, and have their Father's Name written upon
them, which is Envy and Wrath, Coveteousness and Pride, Arrogance,
High-mindedness, Stubbornness and Wilfulness, Lying and Swearing, Scoffing and
Scorning, Jearing, Drunkenness, and such like, and hereby they are known, even
by their Fruits of Wickedness: Therefore my beloved Friends, wait in the Light
of Christ Jesus, and try the inward Motions, what Spirit it is that moves,
whether the pure Spirit that moves in the Light, or the unclean Spirit that
moves in the dark, that so you may know a Separation in the inward Ground,
between the Good and the Evil, that in the Power of the Lord ye may Join to and
obey the Good, and separate from and resist the Evil in the first Rise and
Motion, before it break forth into Action; for before every Action that is done
amongst men, there is first an Inward Motion: So in the Light of Christ try
every Motion, from what Ground it does arise, and dwell in Righteousness and
true Judgment, that Sin may be condemned in the Flesh, and the Enemy resisted
in all his Appearances, both within and without; for this you shall find by
Experience, that when the Enemy cannot overcome you by that Power which he has
within you, but by the Power of God is resisted and overcome, then he will stir
up some of his Instruments without you, in whom he bears Rule, and make them
Instruments to tempt and ensnare you, and to draw you back again into the Sin
and World of Darkness: But all Friends, stand steadfast and unmovable in that
measure of Light and Truth which from God is manifested in you, and that same
Power which gives you Victory over the Evil within, waiting in Patience in it,
will also give you Victory and Dominion over the Evildoers and Sinners without
you, whereby you may be able to say in the Truth, GREATER IS HE THAT IS IN US,
THEN HE THAT IS IN THE WORLD: So the Lord give you Wisdom and true Discerning,
to put a Difference between the Holy and Unholy, and the Almighty Presence and
Power of the highest accompany you and assist you, that you may therein resist
the Evil, and obey the Good; so shall you have Peace in acting and doing the
things that are Righteous and well-pleasing unto God.

Live in LOVE. So with my dear Love unto all the Upright in Heart, I rest your
dear Brother in the Truth, Alexander Parker.
This to be read among Friends in the Truth, as in the Wisdom of God they shall
see it serviceable.



THE END.

