PROPOSALS For the better Management of the Affairs of the POOR.
ALthough many good Laws have formerly been made for Relief and Employment of
the Poor of this Kingdom, and of late several very Honorable Essays by
Proposals for supplying the Defects of such Laws (as those of Sir Josiah Child,
Mr. Firmin and others;) yet we find so little Remedy of the Evils thereby
intended to be prevented, that many Hundreds of Beggars and Necessitous People
go, lie, and are carried about the Streets of this City and Suburbs, forced, as
they say, to prevent their Starving: This being a very great dishonor to the
Christian Profession in General, and our Nation in Particular: Yet a great many
Well-minded People are with Bowels of Compassion forced daily to be Eye
Witnesses of, whose Concern for those Miserable Objects is Augmented, when they
consider the Vast Sums of Money, that, by the Charity of our Predecessors,
Standing Rates, Customary Collections, etc. are appropriated to their Use.

The many Imbezzlements and Misapplications of this Stock being, as we
apprehend, the Principal Cause of all the Miseries these Poor Wretches sustain;
having good reason to believe that the present Incomes to the Use of the Poor
is sufficient for their Maintenance, if under a better Management; especially,
when disburden'd of that great Number of Seamens Wives, Children, and
Relations, whose Necessities for want of their timely pay, though in His
Majesty's Service, forces them to apply themselves for Relief, and necessitates
the Parishes to contribute to their wants to prevent their perishing: For the
prevention of all which Evils for the future, and obtaining the good which will
Naturally follow a better Regulation; These following are humbly offered to
your Serious Considerations.

That for the Future each Seamans Wife, or Person by him Empowered, shall
receive every Third Month to him growing due to be paid at His Majesty's Pay
Office in London.

That all former Incorporated Bodies, entrusted with Power and Management of
the Affairs of the Poor, be dissolv^d.

That all Beggars, on what pretense soever be prohibited.

That all Feasting upon Parish-Stocks be prohibited, and each Man obliged to
bear the Charge of his Office in relation to the Poor, and pay as others.

That the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and all
other Places within the Bills of Mortality be Associated into one Province or
Body.

That there be one Assembly of Men Incorporated with perpetual Succession, by
the Names of Fathers of the Poor; their Number to equalize the Parishes; to be
Chosen once in Three Years at least by the Majority of each Parish, out of the
most Honorable, either of the City or Country, within Ten Miles of the
Community.

That this great Body have power to make such Bylaws, Ordinances and Orders as
they shall think fit, for the good Governing, Employing, and Maintaining the
Poor; and Copies of all such Laws by them made, presented to the Honorable
House of Commons; Each first succeeding Sessions by them to be Confirmed; or as
likewise Annually for ever to deliver a Copy to the said Honorable House of
the Preceding* Years Proceedings.

That the said Corporation shall, and may, without License in Mortmain Purchase
or Receive any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, not exceeding the Yearly Value
of the Gift, Alienation, or Device of any Person or Persons who shall be
enabled to give the same, and any Goods, Chattels, or Sums of Money whatsoever
to the use of the Poor.

That Four in each Parish, out of such as have served all other Parish-Offices,
be Yearly Chosen Overseers of the Poor.

That to Enable the Overseers the better to Discharge their Trust, and undergo
the Trouble, there be added to them a double Number, by the Name of
Supervisors; Two of which to be the Church Wardens for the time being, the
other to be Chosen out of such as have served all Ward and Parish-Offices, or
Men of known Estate and Honesty: The Choice to be by the Majority of
Parishioners paying to the Poor; and for preventing all Mistakes,
Misunderstandings, or Clandestine Impositions in such Choice, the Clark of each
Parish be obliged to make a Public Declaration of Summons to the Parishioners
the Sunday Preceding the Choice; which shall be made the Succeeding Thursday,
by the Majority then appearing.

That the Overseers and Supervisors do meet in the Vestry of the Respective
Parish Churches every Sabbath Day in the Evening, immediately after Service or
Sermon, to hear the Applications, and settle the Affairs of the Poor; but in
case above Five of the Twelve be Absent, all Business to be adjourned until the
Major part shall meet.

That A List be taken of all Gifts and other Incomes to the Use of the Poor; as
likewise of all Pensioners and their Pensions; a Copy of which Yearly to be
affixed in such place of each Church, as the Body of Twelve shall appoint.

That each Overseer with Two Supervisors take their Turns Weekly to visit the
Poor, and take Care of all Accidental, as Foundlings, etc. as likewise of all
such who in that Week shall have applied themselves for Pensions, or other
Assistance; and make the Report thereof to the Body the next Lords Day.

That each Overseer Receive from the Body a List of all Pensioners, and their
Pensions under his Charge for the Succeeding Week.

That all Moneys as they grow due, either by Rents, Rates, Bells, Palls,
Graves, Accidental Gifts, etc. shall be received by the Overseer that Week; he
to be accountable to the Body the next Sabbath Day.

That for each Parish a Chest be made with Three different Locks, the Keys to
be entrusted in the hands of Three of the Eldest of the Body of Twelve; in
which Chest shall be kept in a Book fairly written, the Account of each
Preceding Week signed by all the Members present at the passing thereof; as
likewise all Moneys that shall be in Stock and Writing, as belong to the Parish
in right of the Poor. This Chest not to be opened but in Presence of Two at
least of the Entrusted Members.

That this Body have Power to Demand of any Person or Persons, the Inspections
of all Papers or Writings whatsoever, in order to the Discovery of any
Clandestine Mortgages, Sales, or other Illegal Conveyances or Settlements: As
likewise to Sue for, and prosecute the Rights of each Parish in any Courts of
Law or Equity; Free of any Fees whatsoever, the Prosecution being in Right of
True Paupers.

That for the more Regular Management and Settling the Succession of this
Society Yearly, with the Four Overseers and Two Church-Wandens, Three, of the
Supervisors go off. Their Vacancies to be supplied, as in the Ninth Article,

That for the timely prevention of those Mischiefs which will attend any
Mistakes that this Body may, its possible, commit; they shall be obliged within
Fourteen days after each Quarter-Day, to carry in to the Fathers at such place
as by them shall be appointed, their Originals, Weekly Books; and Yearly
present a Copy of the List, as in the Eleventh Article.

That each Member of either the Great or Lesser Bodies, be obliged to Act in
his Station upon the Penalty of (...) As likewise each Parish to choose their
Member or Representative within the time limited, upon the Penalty of (...)

That in all Future Rates or Assessments to be made for the Poor, every Man
qualified may have his Voice by his Representative; Twelve Men be Yearly Chosen
in the Method, (as in the Ninth Article) and added to the Body of Twelve; which
Twenty Four shall have Power to Complete and Impose all Rates, and all Persons
aggrieved to appeal to the Fathers.

How Honorable will the Memory of that Sessions be, to this and Future Ages,
who are Founders of such, or like Constitutions; when as the Effects of them,
they see such Bodies of Worthy Men discharging their Paternal Duty to Widows,
Orphans, Strangers, and Necessitous People.

Such Regular Buildings in each Quarter of the Society, that one may contain
Six or Seven Hundred People, with such Governors, Matrons and Inferior
Officers, whose Exemplary Lives, in all Modesty and Honesty, may be of great
Service to those Poor, Ruff, and Unpollish'd People.

Those that before were almost Eaten up with Filth and Vermin, Clothed with
Nautious Rags and Dirt; now of Cleanly and Wholesome Countenance, in Modest
Cloth, Tight and Whole in Shoes, Stockings, and Linen.

Those that before did Eat, and were Lodged more like Brutes than Mankind; now
Twice per Day, Sitting, Eating, and Drinking Good and Wholesome Provisions, and
in Order: And that which is most Praiseworthy, Taught sensibly to crave a
Blessing from the Lord upon, and Return Thanks for his Daily Provisions: And
for their Reception at Night, Good and Cleanly Lodgings prepared.

Those that whilst unhiv'd were a Swarm of Droans and Pest to the Society,
become (oh a Miracle) Industrious Bees, each contributing something to the
support of the General; such a Number in the Service of the Kitchen, such in
the Laundrey, such in the Wardrobe, such in the Nursary, such in the Looking
after, and Attending Aged, Bed-Ridden, and Helpless People, such to the School,
such to Instructing those thereunto appointed by the Superiors in the use of
the Hatchel and Wheel. And such as Instructed at Work on the Stocks of ^lax
brought into the House to be Manured by the good House-Wives of the
Neighborhood. Much more of the same Nature might be added, but for brevity
fake omitted.


