PROPOSALS For Printing (by Subscription) an EXPOSITION On the whole Book of
CANTICLES, BY THE Late Reverend and Learned Divine JOHN DAVENPORT of
New England: Recommended by the Persons undernam'd, and a Specimen of the said
Book annexed.
BY what we have read of the Reverend and Learned Mr. Davenport, his Practical
Commentary on the Book of Canticles (having not time to read it through) we see
just cause to Recommend it; for what explains these ordinary [yet sublime]
Metaphors, cannot but be acceptable to the most Spiritual Christians; and this
with the Blessing of God (which we implore} will enlighten their
Understandings, and warm their Affections toward their beloved Jesus.

We easily grant, that you may find in it some Sentiments different from ours;
but we are as willing to hope, that all Serious Christians have (ere this at
least) effectually learnt heartily to agree in the great Truths here explained,
tho they differ in some lesser things; our differences show our imperfect
State; but to improve the Scope of this Treatise, will singularly contribute to
the raising of us up toward that Perfection which is peculiar to the other
World.

In short, the Author was a Master Builder in the Church of Christ, whose Name
is Precious both in Europe and America; and that alone without any
Recommendation, may be sufficient to invite all Serious Christians that have
ever heard of him, to promote this Work: As for those that are Strangers to
him, we heartily recommend it to them, and doubt not but they will find that in
it, which will more than Recompense whatever Encouragement they give it. That
it may be greatly beneficial to the Church of Christ, is the hearty desire of

Your Servants for Christ's sake, S. ANNESLEY, ED. VEAL.



I. That the Book will contain One hundred Sheets, which shall be the same for
Paper and Print with this Specimen. II. The Subscribers to give 7 Shillings for
each Book in Quires, whereof 3 Shillings and 6 Pence to be paid at the time of
Subscription, and 3 Shillings and 6 Pence at the delivery of the Book. III.
Whosoever procures Subscriptions for six Books, shall have a seventh Gratis.
IV. The Subscribers are desired to bring their first Payment for Subscriptions,
with all possible speed, that the Undertaker may be encouraged to go forward
with the Printing of it.
The Undertaker is Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey.


