PROPOSAL FOR The Farming OF LICENSE TO USE No Conscience AT ALL.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXIII.

A PROPOSAL, etc.
SInce this Nation cannot be ignorant that we of the Faithful Honest Party for
many years last past, have wasted our Patrimonies, have sat up whole nights,
and myriads of nights, swearing, and smoking, and drinking, and soaking in
Sack and in Ale, both raw and buttered; all which we did upon design to promote
the Common Good: And since it is apparent, that many of us have no reward for
these most meritorious Services, insomuch that our great spreading Plumes are
shrivelled, and moultered into one single yard of 4 d. Ribbon; that our Pockets
instead of money are fain to hold the dirty scraps of Bread and Cheese; that
our Swords, like the dreadful Weapon of Captain Bessus, are by our Enemies
merely eaten up into knives, that our Clothes in general are so bedanbed with
distillations from the Pint-pot, that they smell more strong then a Brewers
Apron: We out of an Heroic Indignation can no longer patiently endure these
most ungodly persecutions, but humbly implore, that the means hereafter
proposed may be listened and yielded to, that there may be some Alleviation of
our miseries, and that we may once more be restored to our transcendent
Nobilitating Elements of Sack and Ale, whereby our drooping Spirits will be
again set afloat, to the utter confusion of all the Small-Beer Presbytetians,
Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy-men, and Quakers, and of all the
Coffee-drinking-Commonwealths-men, and Harringtonians.

Our Proposal and Petition is, That whereas this Nation through our assiduous
endeavors does now abound with the Honorable Gentle Qualities of drinking,
swearing, whoring, cheating, etc. no person for the future may indulge either
his pleasure or profit, by exercising himself in any of them, unless he has a
special Warrant or License by some eminent Assembly of us met to this purpose,
under the notion and title of Commissioners, etc. Which Commissioners being to
be composed of eight or ten of those Damme-blades, who own the profession of
the Sword, as many Cheats and Broken Gamesters of any common Dicing-Ordinary,
with some of the rank Flesh-flies and Smell-Smocks, and other strong Drunkards
of the Town, shall have power under the Farm-rent of 200000 l. per annum to the
State, to make every man compound according to the rates here under specified,
for his particular liberty to drink, whore, swear, lie and cheat, and act other
the like extravagancies.

That such a number of Commissioners being found out and nominated, may be
authorized to set up one public Office at the -- Tavern in Covent Garden, or
elsewhere, with power to constitute Underofficers, as Registers, Clerk,
Porter, etc. and that the said Commissioners may have a common Seal, known by
the name of The Great Seal of the Commissioners and Farmers of the Liberty of
having no Conscience; engreven either with a Die Slurrant, or a Tongue
Swearant, or a Mouth Spuant, or a Plush-coat Pawnant, it matters not which; and
with this Motto, Lucribonus odor exre Qualiber.

(...) man impose the Rates here under speeified.

Rates to be observed in all Compositions for Liberty of having no Conscience.
per annum. For Liberty to swear in general. 06 00 00 For grand thundering
Oaths in particular. 04 00 00 For small mimical Oaths: as when we swear by our
Honor, or Virginity, or Truth, or Reputation, or Honesty, or Conscience, or
Fatih: or by any such abstracted Notional Fiction, which never was, nor never
will be in esse. 02 00 00 For Cursing in general. 05 00 00 For sine small
ingenious Curses. 01 00 00 For loud Curses. 04 00 00 For Imprecations, as, God
damn my Soul, the Devil suck my Soul through a Tobacco-Pipe, etc. 03 00 00 For
Congratulations when friends meet, and say, God confound your Soul (Dick) for a
Son of a Whore; how do do? When did thou see Mistress Susan at the sign of
the -- 04 00 00 For the privilege of Lying or Romancing. 05 00 00 For being
drunk with Sack. 02 00 00 For being drunk with Ale, (unless with Cock-Ale, or
China-Ale) 09 00 00 For a License to compile and sing gross baudy songs 02 00
00 For lying with common Park whores. 03 00 00 For debauching Citizens Wives,
etc. 06 00 00 For belying honest Women, saying, That such a Lady loves me, and
such a Lady gave me so many pair of Silk Stockine, or such a Ring, or such a
Suit of Laced Linen, or so much money for satisfying her Appetite. 12 00 00
For the privilege of being a rank Cheat in general. 20 00 00 For Dodging at
Cards in particular, as, for Cutting or Shuffling with a broad Card, or a
smooth Card, or a crooked Card. 02 00 00 For a Liberty to play at Cribbidge, or
Putt, and one and thirty with six or seven Cards. 02 00 00 For Slurring, or
Knapping, or striking a Die out of hand. 04 00 00 For Palming and Fingering a
Die. 03 00 00 For holding one or two Dice at the top or a Dice Box, which we
Gamesters call Topping. 04 00 00 For having our consent to use all sorts of
false-Dice, as Quater Deux aces, Cinq tray aces, Size quater Deuxes, Bar size
ases, high Fullams, low Fullams, etc. 05 00 00 For privilege to borrow money
upon Parol: with an honest intention never to pay. 04 00 00 For a Liberty to
baffle a young Coxcomb out of his money, or Watch, or so. 03 00 00 For the
precious faculty of borrowing a Cloak of a Civil Person, under pretense of
rainy Weather, or foul Linen, with a resolution to pawn it at the nex^
Broakers. 02 00 00 For a privilege to break any oath or promise whatsoever,
upon any motive or consideration. 01 00 00 For making it a common practice to
retreat out of Taverns with sword in hand, promising to pay next time. 02 00 00
For common bilking of a bawdy house when money is gone, and no Dinner to be had
any where else. 01 06 03 For making it a practice to kiss women in the street
when a sudden drunken motion pricketh forward. 01 00 00 For having a Liberty to
huff up and down, and, pretend to Land and Estate, talking of Tenants, Rents,
Servants, Horses, Dogs, etc. 05 00 00 For having a liberty to drop shillings in
the street, thereby to draw in silly Prentices and Country Fellows to be
choused of their single money. 01 00 00 For liberty to set up or hold a Leaguer
or society of Band, Whore, and Hector; such as we see represented in the Comedy
called, The Knave in Grain. 10 00 00 Item, For a Liberty to Coin, or take a
Purse, when money is to be gotten no other ways. 20 00 00

That immediately Proclamation may be made, That all Hectors,
Low-Country-Captains, Broken Citizens, Gentlemen of the Highway, Cheats,
Drunkards, Swearers, Cursers, Wenchers, Liars, etc. shall appear before the
said Commissioners at the place appointed as aforesaid, and there compound
according to the precedent rates, for their illegal and unchristian ways of
profit, pleasure, and vain glory.

That as the said Commissioners shall have power to assets the said Rates
(...), and other privileges; so when any of the Brethren are fallen into
adversity, they shall have authority to allow a competent sum to any of them,
for a Radix, or punclum Saliens to their suture Fortunes.

That in some Cases the Commissioners shall have liberty to gratify and reward
the Gallantillo's for any notable Action done, so it come within the limits of
their inspection.

Rewards for brave and Generous Actions.
As where a man drinking the Kings Health, flings his Hat in the fire, though
the Hat be worth but 2 s. 6. d. 02 00 00 Item, Where the Fort being known to be
full of most consuming Wildfire, is yet entered by some Eager-courag'd man. 04
00 00 Item, Where a man in Cupids Battles has lost the use of his Limbs, and
has his Nose Moth-eaten with the L^es Venerea. 06 00 00 Item, Where a Gentleman
kills any Sergeant or Bailiff; (which Generation in all future times shall be
by us accounted as Woolferthod, qui gerunt Capita Lupina.) 10 00 00 Item, Where
a company of Swa-shado's beat the Watch. 15 00 00 Item, Where a man inspired
with Bacchanalian fury breaks the windows of a whole street. 02 00 00 Item, If
he do it with his hands, and his hands are cut with the Glass. 05 00 00

Et ubi cadem est ratio, ibi erit eadem Lex.

That no man be admitted to compound for having no Conscience at abovesaid,
before he has subscribed the solemn Protestation following:

I. A. B. do heresol mnly protest, that I judge my self bound, as I am a
Getleman well descended, not to yield my self a Captive to the Jaws of Poverty,
nor to attend the leisure or delay of any honest employment, but rather to
cheat, rob, or Hectorize, or plough my maintenance out of the lust of any loose
Woman, whether she be Maid, Wife or Widow, of the City or Country. That as I am
a good Orthodox Commonwealths-men. I am obliged to keep up the Honorable
Customs of drinking, savearing and smocking, and to confound all vile
Fanatics with the fierce Gunpowder of swelling Oaths, and with most pregnant
mickle courage drawn from the operation and energy of Sack: And though I do
intend to carry a pretty plausible Gentile Outside, yet my Resolutions art, for
ever to banish the thoughts of Real Honor, or Conscience, or Religion, as mere
fantastical Idea's, and Chimaerical Notions supra nos, and so nihil ad nos.

Also I do believe, that the Constitution of this Honorable Society of
Commissioners, is very agreeable to our present necessities; and that it is
therefore grounded on Reason supr' amount to that of any positive Law, and so
ought inviolably to be observed.

That no person taking this Protestation, and compounding as abovesaid, shall
be questioned for any of the precedent Misdemeanors in any Court Spiritual or
Temporal; but shall be discharged upon proof made of the said Composition,
Ousur Manstrans d' Escript South Seal del dits Commissioners.

That Letters Congratulatory may be sent to the Pope, to certify the actual
approbation of the English for his taking tribute from the Stews; seeing that
upon the same grounds is built the Superstructure of this Honorable Assembly
of Commissioners, etc. with the Revenue and Profits accrewing to the State
thereby.

That no Common Players (truly so called) be obliged or compelled to compound
according to the Rates abovesaid, because they were long ago virtually
incorporated into this Society by the Statute.

That if any man fear to be Robbed, or Cheated, or to have his Wife whor'd,
etc. in case he repair to the said Commissioners, they shall execute the Office
of Mal Cutpurse, and for a small sum of money shall secure him, by good
pledges, from any such loss or damage.

That for the future no person or persons, having compounded as above said,
shall be branded with any names of ignominy or scandal, as heretosore; but that
such as are common Hectors, Cheats, Padders, or Coiners, shall be called,
Ingenious Persons that live by their Wits: and such as are notorious Sots and
Drunkards, shall be uncharacterized to be Good well-meaning honest Fellows: and
such as are grand Horners and Fornicators, shall modestly be termed, Amorous
Persous: and those who are given to lying, shall be called Romancers or
Historians.

That if any man who has compounded as abovesaid, loose 35.6. d. at any Gaming
Ordinary, it shall be lawful for him to look sour, and curse exceedingly, and
swear to the next man he meets, that he has lost 5 l. and to the next man, that
he has lost 10 l. and to the next man, that he his lost 20 l. and so under
pretense of the said fictitious loss, to thrust along with any Company into a
Tavern, and come off Scot-free.

That the Commissioners shall and may appoint several private Committees at
confiding le-houses, etc. to give in intelligence of young Novices and Bubbles,
that have no more wit or brains then to be cheared; what sums of money are
moving upon the Road; what City-Madams there are of easy wanton inclinations;
what Tailors and Tradesmen are gisted with a photophoria, or sulness of Faith;
where is the best Liquor, be it Wine, Ale, Cider, Chocolatta, etc.

That it being the misfortune of many Hectors, Drunkards and Leachers, who
pretend to sufferings for Loyalty, to (...) poor, so that their Coats (whether
Plush or Cloth) their Horses, Watches, Rings, Swords, Boors, with other
Vestments, Appendants, and (...), were (...) to he Mortgaged in Ale houses, in
Taverns, and Brokers Wardrobes; there may be so much money immediately
deposited by the State as will redeem them; to the end that such worthy
Personages may no longer look like the Epitomes of a Sh^p-wrack, or old-hatcht
Hilts, here a spot of Silver; and there a spot of Rust.

That it shall not be lawful for any Doorkeeper at a Playhouse to deny
entrance to such persons as have compounded as above said; in case any one of
the persons swear God Dammee with a clear and audible voice eight times; and
also in case he call the said Doorkeeper Son of a Whore, and kick him one and
twenty times.

That the Commissioners and their Composition-men may have free privilege to
baffle, out-talk, cut-sweat, and outface any of those Maidenly mealmouth'd
people whom they call Fanatics, or any who dares mention the word Conscience,
or pronounce a Text of Scripture in their company: That in case any one persist
in such babble or impertinence, they may lawfully kick or stab him: or upon the
most moderate terms spit or throw a glass of drink in his face; and so with
solemn censure excommunicate him out of the pale of their Society.

That the said Commissioners may he licensed to hold this following Opinion as
probable and Orthodox: Videlicet:

That Satan being nothing else but a certain Accumulation or Primitive stock of
Evil, whatsoever wickedness is perpetrated by Mortals, must necessarily be a
substraction from his Essence; and the more men sin and transgress, the more
they diminish and spend upon his substance; till at length when their
concupisce thial spungy Natures have sucked up all iniquity, it is impossible
there should any Devil be left at all, in regard he will be totally devoured,
swallowed up, and extinguished.

And that upon this sublime consideration, the said Commissioners and their
Proselites may be looked upon as friends to Religion, because they take the
readiest course to vanquish and annihilate her oldest and greatest Antagonist.

That in case all, or the most essential part of these Proposals are not
granted us our credits with Tailors and Taverns will be clearly bankrupt; and
our wants having bereaved us both of our Periwigs and Linen, Nature, Necessity
and Desperation, will oblige us to grow sullen and Religious, and to fall into
some melancholy Sect, like that of the Quakers, wholly opposite to Hectorizing,
and most Antipodian to the Town Gallantry: in which condition, it is very
probable we shall become Factious, and shall study bitter Invectives, and
dangerous Principles against the Government, etc.

That therefore we ought to be considered, and our Proposals yielded to, not
only in regard of services past, but of inconveniences to come. And we further
more promise, That whatsoever we do, within the limits abovesaid, shall all be
unto Loyal ends, as far as the nature of things will permit: so that when we
drink our liquor with a gasto, when we cheat, or coin, or take a Purse; when we
kiss, embrace, hug, and -- to an high ecstasy of pleasure; when we swear like
Gentlemen of Rank, Curse, Damn, Sink, take our Swinges in all manner of Rants,
carnalities and debauches, though we enjoy the sensual earthly part of them,
yet shall we ever dedicate the pure notional abstracted Idea's of them to the
prosperity of that glorious Interest, for which (in the Battles of Cupid and
Bacchus) we have so long contended. And we shall always endeavor to blast the
thin effeminate Souls of the Fanatics with the strong Hantgant of Sack and
Tobacco, which does stream in a powerful mixture and coagulation from between
our jaws. Nor will we be remiss in striving by all means imaginable to explode
the Heretical Opinion in the Politics, called Democracy, as a Device which we
find to be built upon inconsistent contradictory Foundations, viz. Rotation and
the Balance: For upon sensible experience we know, that when Rotation is in the
Head or Brain, there can be no balance in the heels.

Finally, if nothing else will avail, we will combine to spue and piss out the
fires which lies raked up in the mischievous Embers of Civil diffention. Not do
we care though they make a great Hissing when we first go about in, because the
said Embers, being totally extinguished, we do propose to our selves to dance
and tumble, and frolique it in the ashes. Anonimus.

FINIS.

