PROPOSALS humbly offered for Coining New MONEY, disposing of the Old, and
avoiding Clipped Money for the future.
WHEN I consider what base Money goes now throughout this Nation for Current,
how the Mint lies unemploy'd, and how-many counterfeit Coiners are set up, I
cannot but admire that no Expedient is yet found out for redressing this
Grievance; which, the longer it runs, the harder 'twill be to cure, and at
length prove of fatal Consequence. I humbly conceive, there is no way like
setting the Mint on work (to stop this Inundation of Clipping and Coining) by
making of Milled Money; which is hitherto unclipt, and may be accomplished
after this manner, viz.

I. The Fire Office, which I proposed about three years ago, will be a good
Fund to work upon, which I have hereto annexed, adapting it only to Houses, and
will raise above 1700000 l.

II. If an Act was made to prohibit the use of Plate in Public Houses, (which
the generality of them would be glad of) and the Plate they now have, ordered
to the Mint, allowing them 5 s. 6 d. an ounce for it; and a Mulct or Fine set
upon such of them as should presume to use any for the future, would be a means
to furnish the Mint with present Materials to work on.

III. If the Merchant be allowed 5 s. 6 d. an ounce for his Bullion, which is a
greater price than our Goldsmiths at home, or any Nations round about us give
for it, will occasion the bringing most part of it hither, and be another mean
to raise Materials for the Mint.

IV. If the Coin be lowered two Penny-weight in the Crown-Piece, Sterling goes
now at 5 s. 4 d. 1/2 the ounce.
and so proportionable for smaller Moneys, 'twould pay not only for the Bullion
that is brought to be Coined, but the Coinage too; and as Sterling goes now,
the Shilling will be very little more than a Farthing of less worth than it was
before.

V. Our Gold Coins may be likewise dealt with at the same rate; for our Guineas
which were Coined for 20 s. pieces, weigh 5 Penny-weight and 9 Grains; Gold at
4l. the ounce
which, as gold goes now, is worth 18 d. more than 'twas intended for, and may
be lowered at least 9 Grains.

VI. If any Act was made that no Clipped Money should go, after one or two years
time, and all the old Money, as it comes into the Exchequer, sent to the Mint;
(which the first Proposition makes good) the Nation will be sufficiently
stocked with New Money the Clipped Money wear away insensibly and the Brass and
Birmingham Money scattered and sunk by that time, (as Birmingham Groats were of
late) and be no considerable loss to any.

This Method will prevent the melting, hoarding, or Exporting the Coin; because
more cannot be made of it any other ways. 'Twill advance our own Growth and
home Trade and Manufactory, and set our Poor on work; because Merchants then
will set Handycraft-men and others to Work, and barter Goods, instead of Money;
and the Kings Taxes will be better paid; because the keeping our Money at home
will make it circulate more freely.

PROPOSALS humbly offered for Raising a Supply by a General Ensurance for
Losses by FIRE.
THE Fire Office in London, called The Friendly Society, is certainly the best
and most approved Ensurance of that kind that ever was set up; the Members
thereof come into it for a small Sum deposited at their Initiation; and
whenever any Fire happens, are Relieved by the whole Body of the Society,
each Person bearing an equal share toward repairing the Loss.

Every Member of this Society at his entrance into it, deposits in the hands of
the Undertakers, 16 s. for every hundred Pounds worth of Stone or Brick
Buildings, and double that Sum for Timber Buildings, besides 2 s. 6 d. for his
Policy or Instrument of Ensurance, which lasts but for 7 years.

Now if this Ensurance was made perpetual, and extended throughout the Kingdom,
and an Office fixed in every County, for the due management and ordering of it,
and Established by Act of Parliament, it would be for the general Good and
Advantage of the whole Nation; and no Man in reason will grudge to give for
such Ensurance, double or treble the Sum they pay to that Office; because it
will raise the Price of Houses equal almost to Land, prevent the Ruin of many
Families, which we have daily experience of, avoid the Charge and Trouble of
Briefs, which seldom answer their End, and be many other ways advantageous to
the Subject.

This Ensurance may be managed much as the before mentioned Office is, only
with this, or such like difference; That is by voluntary Subscriptions, This by
a Tax or Assessment on the Tenants and Occupants: In that the Estimates were
given in by the Members themselves, in this, if Estimates be short given in,
Assessors to value it: In that all Losses were born by the whole Society; in
this, if the Loss exceed not 20 l. the Parish, Town, or Constablewick where it
happens, to raise the Sum, if above 20 l. and does not exceed 100 l. the whole
Hundred to bear it, yet at the discretion of Commissioners, to be appointed for
that purpose, of the Gentry of every County, to add more Parishes or Hundreds
to it for their Relief; and if the Loss be above 100 l. and do not exceed 1000
l. the whole County to bear it; and if it exceed 1000 l. such, and so many
Counties to be added for their Relief, as the King and Council shall think fit.

If for this Ensurance there be granted to His Majesty 40 s. for every 100 l.
worth of Buildings, whether Brick or Timber; (I mention them indefinitely,
because Buildings in the Country are for the most part Timber, and not of above
half the value of those in this City, and yet the Charge of Building or
Repairing, is as much, or more in the Country, than in the City) it will raise
a Supply of about 1700000 l. as appears by the following Account; and will be
no greater Tax on Buildings than the 4 s. Aid, accounting 10 l. per Annum worth
100 l. which is the the common Estimate of Buildings in London, and is but a
fifth part of one years value. I cannot consceive but all People will pay this
Tax with alacrity and cheerfulness, and thank the King and Parliament for their
Care of them, considering the great Advantage and General Good that comes to
them by this Ensurance.

If none be allowed for their Loss more than the Estimate given in by the
Assessors, it will prevent short Valuations, the Assessors being likewise to
Appraise all Losses, and the Relief or Reparations of such Losses, to be
charged only on Buildings and not on Land.

New Buildings to be Registered in every County, and the Ensurance Money
certified yearly into the Exchequer, and paid to the Sheriff, and charged on
his Account.

If this Tax be a year or two in Raising, and Assessed, Collected and Paid into
the Exchequer by Quarterly Payments, it will come the easier.

The way to know what this Tax may amount to is thus: The City of London, to
the 12 penny Aid, was Assessed 30000 l. the constant standing Stocks being not
Assessed thereto above a tenth pare of what the whole amounts to; that Act
charging only Debts and Cash; which being Deducted, there will remain 27000 l.
Suppose Westminster, and parts adjacent, amount to as much 27000 These added
together make 54000 The whole Nation, considering the many Cities and Towns in
it, cannot be less than 8 times as much as both London and Westminster 8 432000
And 4 times so much 4 Makes 1728000

Objections to these last Proposals, with their Answers.
Object. 1. This Insurance will make such whose Houses are decayed, set them op
fire on purpose that they may be rebuilt, and make them more careless of their
Fires.

Answ. The same Objection may be made to the Friendly Society: yet this
Insurance is not so liable to fraud as that is, because here they are uncertain
what they shall be allowed; and no more is recoverable for their loss, than
what Assessors (who are the most noted Men in their Parish, and know the value
of every House therein, and cannot easily be deceived) give in upon their
Appraisment; and Commissioners, who are the chief of the Gentry in the County,
allow of: whereas in the other, if the Building be never so much decayed, and
chance to be burnt, they recover the full value; besides the Law punishes the
wilful burning of Houses with Death; and negligent keeping of Fire is Finable
the discretion of the Judge as well as the Action they are liable to, for the
damage done to their Neighbors.

Obj. 2. Farm Houses and Houses which stand alone in the Country, and in most
Country Towns (except in Market Towns) Houses have Twitchels between them, and
stand at some distance one from another, therefore not so subject to this
Casualty as those in Cities and Market Towns are, and not so needful to be
insured.

Answ. Although they do not stand so close together, and not so liable to
receive damage from their Neighbors as the other are, yet every individual
House is as much or more subject to this Casualty than the other, because they
have more Servants, and their Buildings are for the most part Thatched, and
Straw scattered about their Yards; and if a Fire happens there, it generally
consumes all, because of the combustible matter that lies about them, and for
want of that help which all Cities and Market Towns are plentifully furnished
with.

Obj. 3. The Proportions for Losses set on Parishes, Hundreds and Counties, are
too great for some and too little for others.

Answ. If the Proportions are too large for any Parish or Hundred, it is left
to the discretion of Commissioners to add more to them; and if Counties are
hard charged, the Parliament may if they please make it less, or leave it to
the Consideration of the King and Council, because there is as much disparity
in Counties as there is in Parishes and Hundreds.

Obj. 4. This Insurance will lay a perpetual Charge on all the Freehold Estates
in England.

Answ. It does not charge Land, only Houses, which are to reap the benefit, and
so no reason but should bear a share in the Charge.

Obj. 5. This Insurance will be a perpetual Charge to the King and the Crown.

Answ. It will be a perpetual Advantage because of new Buildings, but no more
Charge to the King than the first collecting the Tax. The Commissioners and
Assessors have no Allowance in other Taxes, and will require none in this; and
a Penny or such like Sum per Quarter for every 100 l. insured, will be a
sufficient Compensation for the Register or Clerk that manages this Office in
every County, and may be charged on the Houses insured therein.

Obj. 6. There is no Fund for this Insurance.

Answ. An Act of Parliament is a better Security than all the Funds that can be
made.

Obj. 7. Houses, are already charged to the Four Shillings Aid, and this (if
now, whilst that is depending) will be a double Tax on Houses, which ought not
to be.

Answ. Gentlemen's, Yeomens and Farmers Houses in the Country, and Tenants have
paid very little or nothing to all the Taxes hitherto; therefore if this Tax be
charged on Occupants and Tenants, it will be no surcharge on the Four Shillings
Aid; because that is charged on the Landlord: some few indeed who hold and
dwell in their own houses will be double charged, but this Insurance will make
them a sufficieht Recompense, and will be well satisfied with it.

FINIS.

