THE DECLARATION OF THE REASONS and MOTIVES For the PRESENT Appearing in Arms
OF THEIR MAJESTY'S Protestant Subjects In the PROVINCE of MARYLAND.
Licensed, November 28th 1689.

J. F.



ALthough the Nature and State of Affairs relating to the Government of this
Province, is so well and notoriously known to all Persons any way concerned in
the same, as to the People and Inhabitants here, who are more immediately
Interested, as might excuse any Declaration or Apology for this present
inevitable Appearance: Yet forasmuch as (by the Plots, Contrivances,
Insinuations, Remonstrances, and Subscriptions, carried on, suggested,
extorted, and obtained by the Lord Baltemore, his Deputies, Representatives,
and Officers here) the Injustice and Tyranny under which we groan, is
palliated, and most, if not all the Particulars of our Grievances shrouded from
the Eye of Observation, and the Hand of Redress. We thought fit for general
Satisfaction, and particularly to undeceive those that may have a sinister
Account of our Proceedings, to Publish this Declaration, of the Reason and
Motives inducing us thereunto.

His Lordship's Right and Title to the Government, is by Virtue of a Charter to
his Father Cecilius, from King Charles the First, of Blessed Memory. How his
present Lordship has managed the Powers and Authorities given and granted in
the same, We could Mourn and Lament only in silence, would our Duty to God, our
Allegiance to his Vicegerent, and the Care and Welfare of our Selves, and
Posterity, permit us.

In the First Place, In the said Charter, is a Reservation of the Faith and
Allegiance due to the Crown of England (the Province and Inhabitants being
immediately subject thereunto) but how little that is manifested, is too
obvious to all unbiassed Persons that ever had any thing to do here; The very
name and owning of that Sovereign Power is sometimes Crime enough to incur the
Frowns of our Superiors, and to render our Persons obnoxious and suspected to
be Ill Affected to the Government.

The Ill Usage and Affronts to the King's Officers belonging to the Customs
here, were a sufficient Argument of this; We need but instance the Business of
Mr. Badcock and Mr. Rousby, of whom the former was forcibly detained by his
Lordship, from going home to make his just Complaints in England* upon which he
was soon taken Sick, and 'twas more than probably conjectured that the Conceit
of his Confinement was the chief Cause of his Death, which soon after happened.
The other was Barbarously Murdered upon the Execution of his Office, by one
that was an Irish Papist, and our Chief Governor.

Allegiance here, by these Persons under whom We Suffer, is little talked of,
other then what they would have done and sworn to his Lordship, the Lord
Proprietary; for it was very lately owned by the President himself, openly
enough in the Upper House of Assembly, That Fidelity to his Lordship was
Allegiance, and that the denial of the one, was the same thing with refusal or
denial of the other. In that very Oath of Fidelity that was then imposed under
the Penalty and Threats of Banishment, there is not so much as the least word
or intimation of any Duty, Faith, or Allegiance to be reserved to Our Sovereign
Lord the King of England.

How the Jus Regale is improved here, and made the Prerogative of his Lordship,
is too sensibly felt by us all, in that absolute Authority exercised over us,
and by the greatest part of the Inhabitants, in the Seizure of their persons,
Forfeiture and Loss of their Goods, Chattels, Freeholds and Inheritances.

In the next place, Churches and Chapels (which by the said Charter should be
Built and Consecrated, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Kingdom of
England) to our great Regret and Discouragement of our Religion, are erected
and converted to the use of Popish Idolatry and Superstition, Jesuits and
Seminary Priests, are the only Incumbents (for which there is a Supply
provided, by sending our Popish Youth to be Educated at St. Omers) as also the
chief Advisers and Counselors in Affairs of Government, and the Richest and
most Fertile Land set apart for their Use and Maintenance; while other Lands
that are piously intended, and given for the Maintenance of the Protestant
Ministry, become Escheat, and are taken as Forfeit, the Ministers themselves
discouraged, and no care taken for their Subsistence.

The Power to Enact Laws, is another branch of his Lordship's Authority; but
how well that has been Executed and Circumstanced, is too notorious. His
present Lordship upon the Death of his Father, in order thereunto, sent out
Writs for Four (as was ever the usuage) for each County to serve as
Representatives of the People; but when Elected, there were Two only of each
Respective Four, picked out and summoned to that Convention. Whereby many Laws
were made, and the greatest Levy yet known, laid upon the Inhabitants.

The next Session, the House was filled up with the remaining Two that was left
out of the former, in which there were many and the best of our Laws Enacted,
to the great Benefit and Satisfaction of the People. But his Lordship soon
after Dissolved and Declared the best of those Laws, such as he thought fit,
null and void by Proclamation; notwithstanding they were Assented to in his
Lordship's Name by the Governor, in his absence, and he himself sometime
Personally Acted and Governed by the same; so that the Question in our Courts
of Judicature, in any point that relates to many of our Laws, is not so much
the relation it has to the said Laws, but whether the Laws themselves be
agreeable to the Approbation and Pleasure of his Lordship? Whereby our Liberty
and Property is become uncertain, and under the Arbitrary Disposition of the
Judges and Commissioners of our Coures of Justice.

The said Assembly being sometime after Dissolved by Proclamation, another was
Elected and met, consisting only of Two Members for each County, directly
opposite to an Act of Assembly for Four, in which several Laws, with his
Lordship's Personal Assent, were Enacted: Among the which, one for the
Encouragement of Trade, and Erecting of Towns. But the Execution of that Act
was soon after by Proclamation from his Lordship out of England, suspended the
last Year, and all Officers Military and Civil, severely prohibited, executing
or inflicting the Penalties of the same. Notwithstanding which suspension,
being in effect a dissolution and abrogating the whole Act, the Income of Three
Pence to the Government by the said Act, payable for every Hogshead of Tobacco
Exported, is carefully Exacted and Collected.

How Fatal, and of what Pernicious Consequence, that Unlimited and Arbitrary
pretended Authority may be to the Inhabitants, is too apparent, but by
considering, That by the same Reason, all the rest of our Laws, whereby our
Liberry and Property subsists, are subject to the same Arbitrary Disposition,
and if timely Remedy be not had, must stand or fall according to his Lordship's
Good Will and Pleasure.

Nor is this Nullifying and Suspending Power the only Grievance that does
perplex and burden us, in relation to Laws; but these Laws that are of a
certain and unquestioned acceptance, are executed and countenanced, as they
are more or less agreeable to the good liking of our Governors in particular;
One very good Law provides, That Orphan Children should be disposed of to
Persons of the same Religion with that of their deceased Parents. In direct
opposition to which, several Children of Protestants have been committed to the
Tutelage of Papists, and brought up in the Romish Superstition. We could
instance in a Young Woman, that has been lately forced, by Order of Council,
from her Husband, committed to the Custody of a Papist and brought up in his
Religion. It Is endless to enumerate the particulars of this nature, while on
the contrary, those Laws that enhance the Grandeur and Income of his said
Lordship are severely Imposed and Executed; especially one that against all
Sense, Equity, Reason, and Law, Punishes all Speeches, Practices, and Attempts
relating to his Lordship and Government, that shall be thought Mutinous and
Seditious by the Judges of the Provincial Court, with either Whipping,
Branding, Boreing through the Tongue, Fine, Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death;
all, or either of the said Punishments, at the Discretion of the said Judges;
who have given a very recent and remarkable Proof of their Authority in each
particular Punishment aforesaid, upon several of the good People of this
Province, while the rest are in the same danger to have their Words and Actions
liable to the Constructions and Punishment of the said Judges, and their Lives
and Fortunes to the Mercy of their Arbitrary Fancies, Opinions, and Sentences.

To these Grievances are added,

Excessive Officers Fees, and that too under Execution, directly against the
Law made and provided to redress the same; wherein there is no probability of a
Legal Remedy (the Officers themselves that are Parties, and culpable) being
Judges.

The like Excessive Fees imposed upon, and extorted from Masters and Owners of
Vessels, Trading into this Province, without any Law to Justify the same, and
directly against the plain Words of the Charter, that say, there shall be no
Imposition or Assessment, without the Consent of the Freemen in the Assembly:
To the great Obstruction of Trade, and Prejudice of the Inhabitants.

The like excessive Fees Imposed upon, and extorted from the Owners of Vessels
that are Built here, or do really belong to the Innabitants; contrary to an Act
of Assembly, made and provided for the same: Wherein, Moderate and Reasonable
Fees are assertained, for the Promoting and Encouragement of Shipping and
Navigation amongst our selves.

The frequent Pressing of Men, Horses, Boats, Provisions, and other
Necessaries, in time of Peace; and often to gratify private Designs, and
Occasions, to the great Burden and Regret of the Inhabitants, contrary to Law
and several Acts of Assembly in that Case made and provided.

The Seizing and Apprehending of Protestants in their Houses, with Armed Force
consisting of Papists, and that in time of Peace; their hurrying them away to
Prisons without Warrant or Cause of Commitment, there kept and Confined with
Popish Guards, a long time without Trial.

Not only private but public Outrages, and Murders committed and done by
Papists upon Protestants without any Redress, but rather connived at, and
Tolerated by the chief in Authority; and indeed it were in vain to desire or
expect any help or measures from them, being Papists and Guided by the Counsels
and Instigations of the Jesuits, either in these or any other Grievances or
Oppression. And yet these are the Men that are our Chief Judges, at the Common
Law, in Chancery, of the Probat of Wills, and the Affairs of Administration, in
the Upper House of Assembly, and the Chief Military Officers and Commanders of
our Forces; being still the same Individual Persons, in all these particular
Qualifications and Places.

These and many more, even Infinite Pressures and Calamities, we have hitherto,
with Patience lain under and submitted too; hoping that the same Hand of
Providence, that has sustained us under them, would at length in due time
release us; and now at length, For as much as it has pleased Almighty God, by
means of the great Prudence and Conduct of the best of Princes; Our most
gracious King Witham, to put a Check to the great Innundation of Slavery and
Popery, that had like to overwhelm Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects in all
their Territories and Dominions (of which none have suffered more, or are in
greater Danger than our selves) we hope and expected in our particular Stations
and Qualifications; a proportionable Share of so great a Blessing. But to our
great Grief and Consternation, upon the first News of the great Overture and
happy Change in England; we found our selves surrounded with Strong and Violent
Endeavors from our Governors here, being the Lord Baltemore's Deputies and
Representatives, to defeat us of the same.

We still find all the means used by these very Persons and their Agents;
Jesuits, Priests, and lay Papists, that Art or Malice can suggest, to divert
the Obedience and Loyalty of the Inhabitants from Their Most Sacred Majesty's,
to that height of Impudence, that solemn Masses and Prayers are used (as we
have very good Information) in their Chapels and Oratories, for the prosperous
Success of the Popish Forces in Ireland, and the French Designs against
England, whereby they would involve us in the same Crime of Disloyalty with
themselves, and render us Obnoxious to the Insupportable Displeasure of Their
Majesty's.

We every where hear, not only Public Protestation against Their Majesty's
Right and Possession of the Crown of England; but their most Illustrious
Persons villified and aspersed with the worst and most Traitorous Expressions
of Obloquy and Detraction.

We are every day threatened with the Loss of our Lives, Liberties, and Estates,
of which we have great Reason to think our selves in Imminent Danger, by the
Practices and Machinations that are on foot to betray us, to the French,
Northern, and other Indians, of which, some have been dealt withal, and others
Invited to Assist in our Destruction; well remembering the Incursion and Iurode
of the said Northern Indians, in the Year 1681; who were conducted into the
Heart of the Province, by French Jesuits, and lay sore upon us, while the
Representatives of the Country, then in the Assembly, were severely pressed
upon by our Superiors, to yield them an Unlimited and Tiranical Power in the
Affairs of the Militia. As so great a Piece of Villainy cannot be the Result,
but of the worst of Principles; so we should with the greatest Difficulties,
believe it to be true, if Undeniable Evidence and Circumstances did not
convince us.

Together with the Promises, we have; with all due Thinking and Deliberation,
considered the Endeavors that are making to Disunite us among our selves, to
make and Inflame Differences in our Neighbor Colony of Virginia, from whose
Friendship, Vieinity, great Loyalty and Sameness of Religion; we may expect
Assistance in our greatest Necessity.

We have considered, that all the other Branches of Their Majesty's Dominions
in this Part of the World (as well as we could be informed) have done their
Duty in Proclaiming and Asserting their undoubted Right in these, and all other
Their Majesty's Territories and Countries.

But above all, with Due and Mature Deliberation, we have reflected upon that
vast Gratitude and Duty incumbent likewise upon us, To our Sovereign Lord and
Lady, the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesty's, in which, as it would not
be safe for us; so it will not suffer us to be Silent, in so great and General
a Jubilee, withal considering and looking upon our selves, Discharged,
Dissolved, and Free from all manner of Duty, Obligation, or Fidelity, to the
Deputies, Governors, or Chief Magistrates here, as such: They having Departed
from their Allegiance (upon which alone our said Duty and Fidelity to them
depends) and by their Accomplices and Agents aforesaid, endeavored the
Destruction of our Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Properties, all which they
are bound to Protect.

These are the Reasons, Motives and Considerations, which we do Declare, have
induced us to take up Arms, to Preserve, Vindicate, and Assert, the Sovereign
Dominion, and Right, of King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, to this Province: To
Defend the Protestant Religion among us, and to Protect and Shelter the
Inhabitants, from all manner of Violence, Oppression, and Destruction, that is
Plotted and Designed against them; which we do Solemnly Declare and Protest, we
have no Designs or Intentions whatsoever.

For the more Effectuate Accomplishments of which, We will take due Care, that
a Free and full Assembly be Called, and Convened with all Possible Expedition,
by whom we may likewise have our Condition and Circumstances, and our most
Dutiful Addresses represented and tendered to Their Majesty's: From whose
great Wisdom, Justice, and especial Care of the Protestant Religion; We may
Reasonably and Comfortably hope to be Delivered from our present Calamities,
and for the Future be secured under a Just and Legal Administration, from being
evermore subjected to the Yoke of Arbitrary Government, Tyrany and Popery.

In the Conduct of this, We will take Care, and do Promise, That no Person now
in Arms with us, or that shall come to Assist us, shall commit any Outrage, or
do any Violence to any Person whatsoever, that shall be found Peaceable and
Quiet, and not oppose us in our said Just and necessary Designs: And that there
shall be Just and due Satisfaction made for Provision, and other Necessaries
had and Received from the Inhabitants: And the Soldiers, punctually and duly
Paid; in such Ways and Methods as have been formerly accustomed, or by Law
ought to be.

And we do Lastly, Invite and Require all manner of Persons whatsoever;
Residing or Inhabiting in this Province, as they tender their Allegiance, the
Protestant Religion; their Lives, Fortunes and Families, to Aid and Assist us
in this our Undertaking,

Given under our Hands in Mary Land, the 25th. Day of July, in the First Year
of Their Majesty's Reign, Annoque Domini 1689.
God Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
Published by Authority.

MARYLAND, Printed by William Nuthead at the City of St. Mary's. Reprinted in
LONDON, and Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall, 1689.


