Propositions for Gaining and Encouraging Seamen in his MAJESTY'S Service.
I. That an Account of all Shiping in employ be given in by a day set. A
penalty on Commanders employing unregister'd Vessels. The penalties to be
divided between the Informers, and to the use of married Seamen; the recovery
thereof to be provided for by the speediest Methods.

II. That all Seamen between 6 and 60 Years of age offer themselves to be
Registered; yearly, if required by Proclamation. To encourage Registring that
all the Registered be allowed Smart Money and Pensions, though wounded, when
Licensed in Merchants Ships. And this will also cause a good defense of
Merchants Ships.

III. That Bounty Money be given to all that come into his Majesty's Service,
by the times set.

IV. That Licenses be given each Year to as many as can be spared from his
Majesty's Service, which have been longest in it, to go into Merchants Ships.

V. That their Wages be stated and cleared to them when discharged or turned
over to another Ship.

VI. That a Moiety of their Wages be paid to their Wives, or other Assigns,
every six Months, during their foreign Voyages.

VII. That all Vessels sailing with licensed Men and Registered, shall not be
liable to any interuption or stop in their Voyages.

A Penalty on any Master entertaining an unlicensed Seaman; an Officer to go
on Board all Vessels coming in and going out of Port, and examine their
Licenses; the Master refusing it, to be liable to a Penalty: The Master obliged
to have a List of his Ship's Company always fixed up in some public place of
the Vessel.

Ships coming home from foreign Voyages not to be liable to the Penalties, till
20 days after they arrive in the Port they are bound to.

VIII. A Penalty on such as shall Conceal, or knowingly entertain unlicensed
Seamen.

A Reward to be given to such as shall discover an unlicensed Seaman; to be
paid to the discoverer by the Collector of the next Seaport, and sent by the
Officer who Conveys such Seaman, with allowance for his Journey.

IX. That, for Increase of Seamen, Licenses be given to any Land-men to serve
in Merchant's Ships for two Years; who shall afterward be obliged to come into
his Majesty's Service.

Land-men to bring Vouchers for their being such. A Penalty on vouching
falsely; on counterfeiting Licenses, or personating another.

X. Certificates to be given to Masters of all Vessels above 50 Tuns.

XI. Certificates to be given to aged Seamen.

THe ground is a Register with a Dicipline annexed, interwoven with
Encouragements; by which all advantages to be made in the Sea Service, either
in the King's or Merchants Ships, will fall to them who shall be the forwardest
in complying with their Duty.

The Register of Sailers (though all are commanded to it, and will find
themselves obliged by their Interest to come into it) is so far voluntary, that
no Man that stands out will be under the Penalty of one penny, or the least
corporal Punishment, or any new Obligation, but being denied the advantages
proposed to those who shall actually do what he refuses with the Condition of
them.

The Penalties on Masters of Vessels, and some others, though sometimes
necessary, will be liable to no exception, when it shall be considered, that no
one can be here incurred but by obstinacy and willfulness; and that when they
shall be acquainted with the whole Course, the observance will appear so
plainly their advantage, that all temptation to the breach thereof will cease;
for that they will thereby have more Men, at all times, and on much easier
terms then at present they have.

The Officers for this Service need not be formidable as to their number or
charge; one Register and a Clerk will be sufficient in any out-Port to receive
such as offer themselves or Vessels to be Registr'd, and to make their returns
to the head Register in the Port of London; and to give out the Certificates
and Licenses: And the going on Board and examination of Licenses may be
performed by the Custom-house Officers used to such sort of services, with some
small addition for this.

The Registring of all Shiping in employ will be a useful measure whereby to
know whether the Sailers as to their number, have complied in Registring
themselves; and for ascertaining the Masters: A pretense under which it is
judged that three times the real number shelter themselves from the King's
Service.

The Registring or survey of Seamen yearly, will give a certainty of what
number may be depended on for the Service of the following Year for the King,
and what may be Licensed for the Merchants.

The giving Licenses to serve the Merchants, to such as have served the King,
is the greatest Encouragement that can be given to Seamen; it being the
expectation of those extraordinary Gains that makes all the hiding and
sculking; and it is therefore but just that they who have readily complied with
their Duty should have them; and not they, who by their refractories are the
cause of all the difficulties the Service now labors under.

If the Reward to the discoverers of absconding Men be made equal to the Bounty
Money, 'twill soon appear to them more their Interest to take it themselves for
coming into the King's service, then to let another have it for bringing them
in.

The making the Merchants Ships the Nursery of Seamen, as it is the natural
way, and that by which all ours have been bred, so it is still to be pursued:
It Is to be seen how useless raw Men are in the King's Ships: That Men
accustomed to easier living on Shore, cannot bear the hardships of a Seafaring
life, that therefore the giving them so long time in Merchans Ships will harden
them by degrees, and make them serviceable.

The ways in present use for employing Seamen either in the Kings or Merchants
service, appear to be nothing but a confused scramble for Men; as if a thing
taken up on some sudden occasion, when there was not time to use Order, or fall
into Discipline.

It Is the duty of all Sailers to serve the Nation in War; and for their readier
compliance therewith, several advantages have been given them: The trading
Vessels to get Men for their use, outvie the King's advantages by giving
greater Wages: For the gain of these, the Men hide till they think the danger
of a Press over; being then sure of Employment, and double gains for their
whole time: By which means the greater advantages come to them who avoid the
duty.

If it be thought expedient for the King's service to give yet greater
Encouragements, the Merchant is still ready to bid against them: So that the
greater the Advantages are that are given to the deserving on the King's part,
it does but advance them higher to such as reserve themselves for the Merchants.

The husbandry of such conduct to the public, which pays on both sides, I
shall not insist on, but shall farther show, that this will be the consequence:
For though it were urged that it must come to an end, for that such charge could
not be born by some parts of Trade, yet when Trade is reduced to consist in
almost nothing but what is of absolute necessity to us (how far it is come
toward that I do not determine) the price must be paid let it be almost what
it will: This is visible in the Trade to Newcastle, upon which the Wages are
whatever they please to demand: But Penalties would be too great an advance for
them at once to get over, being always liable and made the Interest of the
Officers and others also to look after.

How far such offer of Advantages will prevail may appear by a late Experiment;
when for six weeks together there was offered three Months pay as a Bounty,
(and what Advantages can be given greater then ready Money) yet with such
success to the Fleet now fitting out, as shows how little such ways alone are
to be depended on.

The mischievous Effects of this growing daily more dangerous to the Nation,
several expedients have been offered for redress; in which a Register is laid
down as a foundation by most, though with some difference in the practice of it.

It Is the opinion of some, that a voluntary Register should be established, for
a set number of Men, who, it is expected should enter themselves into it, being
prevailed on by the Advantages and Privileges given thereby; and that all
others be incapable of those Advantages, and left at their liberty to take
their chance, of being pressed; or escaping it, and making their best Market on
the Merchants.

Voluntariness and Liberty indeed sound well, but let it be considered how far
they are so in this Case, and what effect they may probably have toward a
Redress. If these Privileges be things at a distance, as the being excused from
Parish-Dutys of Constable, etc. they usually weigh not much, and are things
such Men think themselves little concerned in; but a true test will be, what
will they be worth in Money? (for all Advantages are are reduceable to Money,
either gained or saved) will that be more then the Bounty-Money late offered?
Why then should it expect a better effect? But, granting that they will come in
upon it; the Traders will have so many the fewer, and they who stand out, the
greater Advantage from them: What hold is there then on these Registr'd Men,
but that they should run into their service? If it be answered, that they are
Listed into the King's service, and shall be accounted Deserters, and liable to
be prosecuted as such; the voluntary Register proves nothing but a new way of
Listing; and those in it under a much severer obligation, than is here offered;
and all the circumstances will appear to be the same as before, that the
greatest Advantages will accrue to them that stand out, and the hardships lie
on those that do their duty.

From the foregoing Considerations, I infer the necessity of a Discipline,
with the Encouragements: By which I understand, a steady course of obliging all
Equally to do their Duty, by giving the Encouragements to those only who
actually do it; and that they may have the first Advantages, who have already
that way deserved them.

I shall now show how that may be done, under the Propositions above inserted.
The first step into the Register intitles them to Pensions, if hurt in the
whole course of their Service: They have Bounty-money when they come into the
King's Ships: They have their Pay when turned over; which is a redress of one
of their greatest Grievances: And having served, such time as their Numbers
found will allow for their being relieved, will have all the Advantage to be
made in Merchants Service; which (though probably the price of Wages per Month
may fall) will be to them greater Earnings than at present; for that they may
with good assurance and security employ their whole time, without the loss of
any by hiding in Times of Press.

The manner and time of relieving, and giving out Licenses, may properly be at
the time the great Ships are laid up; the Register, or Survey, having been
taken the forepart of the Year: The Licenses for the whole following Year, to
be given to a proportion of each Ship's Company; the remainder, some to be kept
for the relief of such as are to be licensed out of the Cruising Frigates, when
they come next into Port, and the rest to be dismissed with Furloes, till their
attendance shall be required the next Spring.

The suffering none but licensed Men for the Merchants, will be no hindrance to
Trade; they can now have no more than the King's Service can spare; and by this
way they will have as many; and having them at all times without interruption
(whereas they now hide, and lie still out of all Service half their time) it
will be equal to double their number; beside the additional Provision of
permitting Land-men for their Service; and being secure from having their Men
taken from them in the middle of a Voyage, or when their Business most wants
them. Nor need the Traders be at a stand one day; for the Men, now protected in
their Service, may be allowed the Licenses till the King's Ships come in, and
then it directs others to be assigned them.

What is offered for the bringing Land-men into the Sea-service, is from this
ground, that a War necessarily puts a great stop on some Handy-craft Trades and
Manufacturers, who can turn themselves to no new thing which will bring them in
better Earnings than the Merchants Service, which is an Employment that has
something in it of Trade also; who, when they shall see that they may have a
certainty of time, will, probably, good numbers of them take to it, who will
not venture in under the apprehension of being pressed the next day.

The want of Seamen will be every day greater, by the course of natural
Mortality, which takes away a constant proportion; by the losses at Sea in
Storms and Hurricanes; by Fights and Imprisonments; by the want of the usual
Supply from Trading Vessels; and by the greatest of all, as to the King's
Service, the improvements made in the Arts of evading the present ways of
bringing them into the Service.

All which enforce the necessity of a speedy and effectual remedy; lest the
Cure come too late; or an imperfect one being offered at, prove the same in
effect as none at all; and give some Men an Apprehension that any future
Attempt will be fruitless and in vain.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for John Whitlock near Stationers' Hall.


