PROPOSALS For PRINTING Athenae Oxonienses, and Fasti Oxonienses. Both Written
by the famous Antiquary, and Historiographer, Anthony a Wood, M. A. Author of
the History, and Antiquities of the University of Oxford.
THE Book Entitled Athenae Oxonienses, will contain an exact History of all
Writers that have been Educated in the University of Oxford in all Professions:
and of all Archbishops, and Bishops, whether of this, or any other Kingdoms,
that have been Members of the said University. The Birth, Fortune, Preferment,
and Death of all those Authors and Prelates, the great, Accidents of their
Lives, and more particularly the fate of their Writings, and the Character of
their Works are here given with great exactness and fidelity. This Work
moreover gives not only an account of the Authors of Oxford; but of such of the
Writers of the other famous University of Cambridge, as were entered at Oxford,
or Studied in it, or Assisted, Opposed, or Answered any Author of that
University. So that either by these means, or by way of digression; it contains
an exact History of Learning, and of the Learned Men in England; and fully
Corrects, Continues, and Supplie^ Leland, Bale, Pits, and Godwin, on that
Subject, and deserves particular encouragement, as being the first Work of this
Nature, that ever was Printed in English.

The Book Entitled the Oxonian Fast^, or Annals, contains an account of all
the Remarkable, and Eminent Persons of Oxford, (i. e.) Chancellors,
Commissioners, Vice Chancellors, and Proctors of the Universities: The names of
all Dignitaries, as Deans, Arch Deacons, Chancellors, Chanters, Heads of
Colleges and Halls; Abbots, Priors, Monks, Friars, and all Doctors, that have
been Incorporated into the University of Oxford: or have Sojourned there.

The whole Work will consist of two Volumes, the first whereof will begin in
the year 1500. and will end in 1640. The other will begin in 1641. and will end
in the latter end of the year 1690.

The Work will be disposed according to order of time, and will be made more
useful by many large and full Alphabetical Indexes at the end of each Volume.

A large Introduction will be prefixed before the First Volume, giving an
account of the History of Learning in England, before the first date of this
Work in 1500.

And an Appendix will be added, containing an exact account of the Births,
Preferments, and Writings, of the most considerable Writers now living in
England.

In the mean time the Undertaker, Thomas Bennet, does here exhibit a Specimen
of the Paper and Print, in the Lives of two Authors, hereafter annexed, and
makes his Proposals as follows,

1. That the Book shall be Printed on the same Paper, and Character with the
Specimen annexed (only some few of a larger Paper for Gentlemen more Curious.)
2. That this Book shall consist of two Volumes in Folio, each above one hundred
Sheets in double Columns; and that every Subscriber for the ordinary Paper
shall pay for both 20 s. in Sheets, i. e. five down in hand at the time of
subscription, ten at the delivery of the first Volume, and 5 s. at the delivery
of the last: and every Subscriber for the large Paper 30 s. at proportionable
payments as before. 3. That the price to any other than a Subscriber shall be
one pound five shillings for the ordinary Paper in Sheets, and forty shillings
for the large; and there are so few Printed that care will be taken none shall
be undersold. 4. That the Book is already in the Press, and the first Volume
shall be delivered at Easter Term next, and the second at Trinity. 5. All
Gentlemen who subscribe will have their Names, Titles, and places of Abode,
Printed in a Sheet annexed to the Book.
The Proposals and Specimens are to be had of the Undertaker Thomas Bennet, at
the Half Moon in S. Paul's Churchyard, and of these Booksellers following, who
also take Subscriptions, give Receipts, and deliver Books according to the
Proposals.

MR. Gilliflower in Westminster. Hall. Mr. Fox in Westminster. Hall. Mr. Patridge at
Charing Cross. Mr. Not in the Pall Mall. Mr. Bentley in Covent Garden. Mr.
Crook without Temple Bar. Mr. Brown without Temple Bar. Mr. Basset in
Fleetstreet. Mr. Wilkinson in Fleetstreet. Mr. Rogers in Fleetstreet. Mr.
Freeman in Fleetstreet. Mr. Wotton in Fleetstreet. Mr. Swalle in S. Paul's
Chur. Yard. Mr. Clavel in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Kettleby in S. Paul's Chur.
Yard. Mr. Watts in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Mortlock in S. Paul's Chur. Yard.
Mr. Smith in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Chiswell in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr.
Adamson in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Knapton in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Anson
in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Bonwick in S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Robinson in
S. Paul's Chur. Yard. Mr. Saunders in the Exchange. Mr. Churchill in Ave-mary
Lane. Mr. Everingham on Ludgatestreet. Mr. Lawrence in the Poultrey. Mr. Aylmer
at Cornhill. Mr. Horn. at Cornhill. Mr. Crowch at Cornhill. Mr. Hindmarsh at
Cornhill. Mr. Richard Parker at Cornhill. Mr. Powel at Lincolns Inn. Mr. Sare
at Grays Inn gate. Mr. Littlebury in Little Britain. Mr. Sawbridg in Little
Britain.
And by these Booksellers in the Country.

Mr. Geo. West in Oxford. Mr. John Crosley in Oxford. Mr. Hen. Clement in
Oxford. Mr. John Howel in Oxford. Mr. Hen. Dickenson in Cambridg. Mr. Will.
Graves in Cambridg. Mr. Rich. Green in Cambridg. Mr. Yeo in Exeter. Mr. May in
Exeter. Mr. Manlin in York. Mr. Shelmerdine in Manchester. Mr. Green in
Lancaster. Mr. Churchill in Dorchester. Mr. Lawson in Lincoln. Mr. Page in
Chester. Mr. Lasley in Hereford. Mr. Robinson in Ludlow. Mr. Gravett in
Bristol. Mr. Wall in Bristol. Mr. Evans in Worcester. Mr. Palmer in Gloucester.
Mr. Rogers in Shrewsbury. Mr. Pickering in Warrington. Mr. Hows in Nottingham.
Mr. Ward in Leicester. Mr. Fowler in Northampton. Mr. Smith in Daventry. Mr.
Powel in Southampton. Mr. Hartford in Portsmouth. Mr. Smith at Stratford upon
Avon. Mr. Giles in Norwich. Mr. Rose in Norwich. Mr. Oliver in Norwich. Mr.
Redmain in Yarmouth. Mr. Randal in Newcastle. Mr. Johnson in Litchfield. Mr.
Hunt in Coventry. Mr. Nisbet in Derby. Mr. Raw in Bath. Mr. Courtney in
Salisbury. Mr. Warden in Durham. Mr. Weeks in Plymouth.
HENRY SAVILE, Second Son of Henry Savile (by Elizabeth, his Wife, Daughter of
Robert Ramsden, Gent.) Second Son of John Savile of New-hall in Yorkshire,
Esquire, was born at Bradley, alias Over-Bradley, near to Halifax in the same
County, on the last day of Nov. 1549. (3. Ed. 6.) He was entered a Student in
this University in the beginning of the year 1561. and in the beginning of Lent
1565. was admitted Bachelor of Arts, and forthwith determined. Not long after
he was elected Probationer-Fellow of Merton College; at a time, when Learning
in that place, as indeed then in the whole University, was at a very low ebb.
In 1570. he proceeded in his Faculty, and Read his Ordinaries on the Almagest
of Ptolemy: So that growing famous for his Learning, especially for the Greek
Tongue, and Mathematics, (in which last he voluntarily read a Lecture for some
time in Oxford;) He was elected Proctor of the University for two years
together, with John Under^ill of New College, afterward Rector of that of
Lincoln, and Bishop of Oxon. And it is to be remarked, that then and long
after, till the beginning of the Caroline Cycla, the Choice of Proctors was
carried on throughout the whole University with so great and so sollicitous a
Canvass that he must be a Man of no ordinary esteem, who at that time could
twice together obtain so honorable an Office. In 1578. he traveled into France
and other Countries, and thereupon improving himself in Learning, Languages,
and the knowledge of the World and Men, became, and was esteemed, a most
accomplished person at his return. About that time he was appointed Tutor to
Queen Elizabeth for the Greek Tongue, who so much approved and favored him,
that he was not only the sooner made Warden of Merton College, (though a noted
person Edmund Bunney was elected with him, and presented to the Archbishop of
Canterbury for Confirmation) but also by her favor was made Provost of Eaton
College in the year 1596. upon the Promotion of Dr. William Day to the Sea of
Winton. While he governed the former College, (which was thirty six years)
Summa curd (as it is Reg. 2. Act. Societ. Coll. Mert. p. 271.
said) and diligentid fere plusquam humand perdius and pern^^, he made it his
chief endeavors (though troubled with the cares that attend Marriage) to
improve it with Riches and Learning. For the effecting of the last, he always
made choice of the best Scholars at the usual Election of Fellows. In the first
that he made after he was Warden, which consisted but of four persons, Henry
Cuffe and Francis Mason were Elected, both noted for their Learning, though the
first was unfortunate. In the last, about three years before his death, which
consisted of six, four of them, (whereof two were Bishops) namely Doctor
Reynolds of Norwich, Doctor Earl of Salisbury, John Doughty, and Alexander
Fisher, were men of an unquestionable Reputation for Learning. Our Author,
Savile, also took as much care as he could to place noted Men at Eaton, among
whom Thomas Allen, John Hales, Thomas Savile, etc. were chosen Fellows, and
also one Jonas Mountague (all of Merton College) who helped him in the Edition
of S. Chrysostom, was appointed Schoolmaster. When King James I. came to the
Crown, he had a great respect for Mr Savile and his Learning, and, as I have
heard from our Ancients, he would willingly have advanced him to a higher
place, either in Church or State, but he refused it, and only accepted of the
honor of Knighthood from him at Windsor, 21. Sept. 1604. Much about which time
Henry his only Son and Heir dying, and no hopes left of propagating his Name,
and of settling a Family, he bestowed much of his Wealth in publishing Books,
and Founding two Lectures in this University, of which I should be now more
particular, if I had not in another place opportunity of treating of them. Many
are the Encomiums given of him by diverse Authors, which, if I should repeat,
may make a Volume. In one Ibid.
place he is styled Musarum Patronus, Mecaenas Literarum, Fortunarumque
Mert^neusium vere pater, etc. In another John Pi^seus in lib. De illustrib.
Angl. Scriptorib. aet. 1^^ nu. 563. p. 471.
he is charactarized by a Zealous Roman Catholic, who very seldom or never
speaks well of a Protestant, to be Vir Graece and Latin perinde doctus,
venerandae Antiquitatis (ut videtur) tam exquisitus indagator, tam ingenuus and
liberalis editor. To pass by the noble and generous Characters given of him by
Isaac In Append. ad Epist. Vide etiam in^^ Epistolas, Ep. 100. Script. ad H^n.
Savile.
Casaubon, John In notis in Homel in Genesis int. Opera S. Chrysostom.
Boysius, Josias In notis ad Corn. Ta^.
Mercerus, Marc. In Praef. ad Gaudentii introduct. harmonic.
Meibomius, Jos. In lib. 3. Epistatarum, Epist, 232. Script. ad Rich.
Thompsonum.
Scaliger, and many others, I shall proceed to make mention of those things
that he has written and published, which are these following.

Learned Notes on, and a Translation into English of Corn. Tacitus his (1.) End
of Nero, etc. beginning of Galba. (2.) Four Books of Histories. (3.) Life of
Agricola. Land. 1581. 98. and Folio.
And this if we consider the difficulty of the Original, and the Age wherein
the Translator lived, is both for the exactness of the Version, and the
chastity of the Language, one of the most accurate and perfect Translations,
that ever were made into English. These Notes on Tacicus were put into Latin by
Isaac Gruter, and Printed at Amsterdam 1649. in Twelves.

A view of certain Military Matters, or Commentaries concerning Roman Warfare.
Land. 1598. etc. Folio. Put into Latin by Marq. Freherus, Printed at Heidelb.
1601. in Octavo, and at Amsterdam by Isaac Gruter, An. 1649. in Twelves.

Fasti Regum and Episcoporum Angliae usque ad Willielmum Seniorem. These Fasti
are at the end of the Writers which Sir Henry Published, Entitled, Rerum
Anglicarum Scriptores post Bedam praecipui, etc. viz. Gul. Malmesburiensis,
Hen. Huntingdon, Rog. Hoveden, etc. Land. 1596. Folio. The best Copies of which
Authors he Collected, Reviewed and Corrected. In his Epistle Dedicatory to
Queen Elizabeth, set before them, speaking of the History of England, he
complains so much, and so justly of the ancient Historians of this Island, and
of the hard fate of her glorious Ancestors, who had no History suitable to the
greatness of their Achievements, that all the Learned Men of that Age did
earnestly, upon these grounds, expect and wish for an History of England from
Sir Henry. And he is said indeed to have attempted somewhat on that Subject;
and in order to it to have made searches in the Records of the Tower. But
whether through impatience, or disencouragement or despair, he desisted from so
tedious, and so difficult a labor, and employed himself wholly

in the Edition of S. Chrysostom in Greek. In order to this he carefully
Collected the best Copies of this Author, from various parts of the World, and
employed Learned Men to Transcribe, and make Annotations on them. Which being
done, he Printed them at his own charge in a most beautiful Edition, bearing
this Title, S. Johannis Chrysostomi opera Graece octo voluminibus, Etonae in
Coll. Regali, 1613. Folio. On several parts of which he put learned Notes,
beside what the profound John Boyse, Andr. Downs, Thomas Allen, etc. had done.
The whole charge of which Edition, and the rewards given to certain Scholars
beyond the Seas, employed for the obtaining of the best exemplars of that
Author amounted to more than 8000 l. But the Copy, as soon as it was finished,
coming into the hands of a learned French Jesuit, Fronto Ducaeus of Bordeaux,
he mostly Translated it thence (from the Greek) into Latin. Which being done,
he Printed it in Greek and Latin, at Paris, in five Volumes, at the charge of
the Bishops and Clergy of France, An. 1621. The sixth Volume was put out by him
in 1624, and the other Volumes (four in number) came out before at different
times at Heidelberg, by other hands, as it seems.

Sir Henry Savile also procured six Manuscript Copies of Bradwardin's Book De
causa Dei. to be Compared and Corrected, to his great charge. Which being done,
he Published a true Copy thereof under this Title, Thomae Bradwardini Archiep.
olim Cantuariensis, De causa Dei, contra Pelagium, and de virtute causarum ad
suos Mertonenses. lib. 3. Land. 1618. Fol. before which Sir Henry put of his
own writing, Vita Thomae Bradwardini Archiep. olim Cantuariensis.

He also wrote and was Author of, Praelectiones tresdecem in principium
Elementorum Euclidis Oxoniae habitae, An. 1620. Oxon. 1621. qu. Some of which
Lectures he Read when he was a junior Master, as I have before told you.

Oration coram Reg. Elizabet. Oxoniae habita, An. 1592. Oxon. 1658. qu.
Published by Mr. (afterward Dr.) Thomas Barlow of Queens Coll. from the
Original in the Bodleian Library, and also by Dr. John Lamphire in the second
Edition of Monarchia Britannica Oxon. 1681. Oct.

Tract of the Original of Monasteries. MSS, in the Bodleian Library. Orations.
MSS, in the Bodleian Library. Tract concerning the union of England and
Scotland, at the command of King James I. MSS, in the Bodleian Library.
Concerning the last, John, Thornborough Bishop of Bristol did write a Book
about the same time, as I shall hereafter tell you. Our Author Savile also did
Publish Nazianzen's Steleteuticks, Xenophon's Institution of Cyrus, etc. and
had many choice Exemplars in his Library, which were by others Published, as
from Bibliotheca Saviliana. He also Translated into Elegant Latin, King James
I. his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance. Which flying in the same dress as
far as Rome, was by the Pope and the Conclave sent to Franc. Suarez at
Salamanca, with a command to answer it. When he had perfected the work, which
he calls, Defensio Fidei Catholicae, etc. cum responsione ad Apologiam pro
juramento fidelitatis, etc. it was transmitted to Rome for a view of the
Inquisitors; who blotted out what they pleased, and added whatsoever might
advance the Pope's Power. Which matter Joh. Salkeld his Assistant when he wrote
at Salamanca, did often profess when he came over to the Church of England, and
lived for some time in the House of Dr. King Bishop of London; that the good
Old Man Suarez (whose Piety and Charity he magnified much) did not only
disavow, but detest it. However Printed it was, (at Colen I think, 1614) but so
soon as any of the Copies came into England, one was burnt in detestation of
the Fact by public command. Sir Hen. Savile made several Manuscript Notes in
many of his Books in his Choice Library; particularly on Eusebius his
Ecclesiastical History, made use of by Hen. Valesius in his Edition of that
History An. 1659. as he will tell you more at large, if you will consult the
Preface to that elaborate Work. He also made several Notes on those Books,
which he gave to the Mathematical Library in the School-Tower, and on others
which I have seen. Diverse of his Tracts of various Subjects in Manuscript, were
greedily obtained after his Death (sometimes while he lived) by industrious and
ingenious Scholars, which do now, or at least did lately go from hand to hand.
At length, after he had lived beyond the Age of Man, and had done many noble
and generous Works for the benefit of Learning, he departed this Mortal Life in
Eaton Coll. near Windsor, on the 19th of Febr. 1621/2. and was Buried in the
Chapel there, near to the Body of his Son Henry, (who died 1604. Aged 8 Years)
leaving behind him one only Daughter named Elizabeth (by his Wife Margaret,
Daughter of George Dacres of Cheshunt in Hertfordshire) who was Married to Sir
Joh. Sedley of Kent Baronet. Soon after the News of his Death being brought to
Oxford, the Vice Chancellor and Doctors ordered a Speech to be publicly
spoken, in Memory of so Worthy a Benefactor and Scholar as Sir Henry had been;
which being accordingly done by Thomas Goffe of Christ Church, the Speech was
shortly after made public, with many Copies of Verses made by the best Poets
of the University, added to it, with this Title Ultima Linea Savilis Oxon.
1622. qu. These things being done, a black Marble Stone was laid over his
Grave, on the South Side of the Communion Table, in the Chapel of Eaton Coll.
and a most Sumptuous Honorary Monument Erected to his Memory, on the South Wall
at the upper end of the Choir of Merton Coll. With this Inscription,

M. S. CI^ DC XXI. Feb. XIX.

In the Provost-ship of Eaton Coll. succeeded Tho. Murr^y a Scot, Tutor and
Secretary to Prince Charles (afterward King Charles I.) and in his Wardenship
of Merton Coll. succeeded Nath. Brent L L. D. afterward a Knight, who minding
Wealth, and the settling of a Family more than generous Actions, that College
did nothing near flourish so well under him, as under the Government of Sir
Henry.

WIlliam Camden, Son of Sampson Camden, a Native of the City of Bichfield,
Citizen and one of the Society of Painter-Stainers of London, by his Wife,
descended See in Camd Britannia in Cumberland, in his discourse of Wirkington.
from the Ancient Family of the Cur^ens of Cumberland, was Born in the Old
Baily, situated partly in the Parish of St. Sepulcher, and partly in that of
St. Martin near Ludgate in the said City, on the second day of May, 5 of King
Edward VI. Dom. 1551. When this most Eminent Person was a Child, he received
the first knowledge of Letters in Christ Church Hospital in London, then newly
Founded for Blew-coated Children, where being fitted for Grammar Learning, he
was sent to the Free School, Founded by Dr. Colet near to St. Paul's Cathedral;
about which time (1563) he being infected with the Plague, was sent to
Islington, where he remained for some time to the great prejudice of his
Learning. In 1566. (8. Elizab.) he was sent to Oxford, and being placed in
Magdalen Coll. in the condition of a Chorister or Servitor, did perfect himself
in Grammar Learning in the Free School adjoining, then lately governed by Dr.
Thom. Cooper, afterward Bishop of Lincoln. But missing (as it is said) a Demies
place of that College, though of great desert, and partly grounded in Logic;
he was removed to the Ancient Hostle called Broadgates, now Pembroke College,
where he continued two Years and an half, under the tuition of a great
encourager of Learning, called Dr. Thomas Thornton Canon of Christ Church, who
finding in our Author, then Young, very great Signs of future Worth, took him
to Christ Church, and gave him entertainment in his Lodgings, so long as he
continued in the University. About that time he being a Candidate for a
Fellowship in All Souls College, lost it for defending the Religion then
Established; as Dr. (afterward Sir) Dan. Donn at that time Fellow, did several
times testify, and would often relate how our said Author Camden was opposed
by the Popish Party of that House. In the Month of June 1570, he supplicated
Regist. Vniver. Oxon. K K. Fol. 95.6.
the venerable Congregation of Regents; that whereas he had spent four Years in
the Study of Logic, he might be admitted Bachelaur of Arts; but what answer
was made thereunto, or whether he was then admitted, it appears not. In 1571,
he left Oxford, to the great reluctance of those who knew the pregnancy of his
Parts; and whether he was afterward favored in his Studies, by Dr. Gabr.
Goodman Dean of Westminster, whom he acknowledges In his Britan. in Middlesex,
in his discourse of Westminster.
to have been his Patron, I cannot positively affirm. In 1573, he returned to
Oxford, and supplicated again in the beginning of March for the said Degree;
which though, as it seems then granted, and as I presume taken, yet he did not
complete it by Determina-in School-street. In 1575, he was made Second Master
of Westminster School, upon the recommendations of Godfrey, Nephew to Gabriel
Goodman before mentioned (which Godfrey put him upon the Study of Antiquities,
and bought and So Godf. Goodman Bishop of Gloc. Son of the said Godfrey in his
Review of the Court of King James by Sr A. W. M^. p. 19.
gave him Books for that purpose. In 1581, he contracted an entire Friendship
with Barnab. Brisson, the Learned Chief Justice of France, called usually Varro
Galliae. While he continued in teaching at Westminster, he was so successful in
that employment, that Dr. King Bishop of London, Neyle Archbishop of York,
Parry Bishop of St. Asaph, etc. (to say nothing of Persons employed in those
times in eminent place abroad, and many of special note at home of all degrees)
did acknowledge themselves to have been his Scholars. He likewise (which is a
Testimony of his sincere love to the Church of England, which some in his time
did doubt) brought there to Church diverse Gentlemen of Ireland, as the Walshes,
Nugents, O Bayleys, etc. and among others Popishly bred, and affected, the
eldest Son of the Archbishop of Cassiles, Peter Lombard a Merchant's Son of
Waterford, a Youth of admirable docility (the same who was afterward Titular
Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of Ireland, Domestic Prelate and Assistant of
the Pope, and Author of a Book Intit. De regno Hiberniae, Sanctorum insula
Commentarius Lov. 1632. Qu.) and others. In 1582, he took a Journey through
Suffolk into Yorkshire, and returned through Lancashire in the Month of Apr.
in order to the completing of his Britannia; which he says, he published the
same Year, having with great industry at leisure hours, and on Festival Days
composed it. In 1588, Jun. 3. he by the Name and Title of William Camden
Bachelor of Arts of Christ Church, supplicated the Venerable Convocation, that
whereas he had spent 16 Years from the time he had took the Degree of
Bachelaur, in the Study of Philosophy and other liberal Arts, he might be
dispensed with for the reading of three Solemn Lectures, and so be admitted to
proceed in that Faculty; which supplication was granted conditionally that he
stand in the Act following; but whether he was admitted or stood, it does not
appear in the Registers. In the same Month and Year, he took a Journey ( Oxford
being in his way) to Ilfarcomb in Devonshire, in order to obtain more knowledge
in the Antiquities of that Country, and elsewhere, for the next Edition of his
Britannia, and on the 6th of Feb. following, he was made Prebendary of
Ilfarcomb in the Church of Salisbury, in the place of one Joh. Hotman; which
Prebendship he kept to the time of his Death, and then Edward Davenant
succeeded him. The charges of the said Journey, and others that he took for
that purpose, were defrayed Ibid.
by the aforesaid Dr. Gab. Goodman. In 1590, he journied into Wales for the
same purpose, in the company of Franc. Godwin of Christ Church, afterward the
Author of the Commentary of the English Bishops; and in March 1592/3, he was
made chief Master of Westminster School. In 96, he took a Journey to Salisbury
and Wells, for the obtaining of more knowledge in Antiquities, and returned
through Oxford, where he visited most, if not all of the Churches and Chapels,
for the copying out of the several Monuments and Arms in them, which were
reduced by him into a Book written with his own hand, by me seen and perused:
In 97, he Published his Greek Grammar. On the 22th of October. the same Year,
(after he had refused a Mastership of the Requests, which was offered to him)
he was Created Herald of Arms called Richmond, because no Person can be King
before he is Herald, and the next day he was Created Clarenceaux King of Arms,
in the place of Rich. Lee, who died on the 23 of September. last past. This was
done by the singular favor of Queen Elizabeth at the incessant supplication of
his Patron Sir Fulk Grevil, afterward Lord Brook; both which had an especial
respect for him and his great Learning, in English and other Antiquities. In
1600, he took a Journey in Summer time to Carlisle, in the company of the
Eminent Antiquary Robert Cotton Esquire (afterward Bt.) for the viewing of some
Northern Antiquities to be put into another Edition of his Britannia, and
returned not till December following. In 1606, he sent his first Letters to
Jac. Aug. Thuanus the most noted Historiographer of France, from which time to
the Death of Thuanus, which was in Apr. 1617, there was a constant commerce of
Letters between them. Our Author Camden styles In Annal. Reg. Jac. 1. M S. sub
an. 16 7.
him Galliae Lumen and Historicorum nostri seculi Princeps, to whom he had
communicated many material matters concerning English Affairs, which were
afterward digested into the several Books of Histories, published by Thuanus.
In 1608, he began to put in order, and digest his Annals of Queen Elizabeth. In
the beginning of the year 1613. at which time he attended the Funeral of Sir
Thomas Bodley at Oxon, he had the Degree of Master of Arts offered to him, but
refused, as it seems, to take it, and soon after was made the first
Historiographer of Chelsey College by the Founder thereof. In 1619. July I. his
name being then spread over the learned World, six Noble Men of Germany gave
him a visit at his House in Westminster, in whose Albums, he, at their desire
wrote his name, and a Latin Sentence as a testimony of his respect to them,
which they took for a very great honor. In 1621. May 5. he, by his Deed then
bearing date, Founded the History Lecture of this University: which Deed being
published in a Convocation of Regents, and Non-Regents, on the 17. of May 1622.
he was in the year following declared a public Benefactor of the University of
Oxon. In 1622. June 7. He fell again into a most dangerous sickness, and on the
16. of August following, while he sat musing in his Chair, his Hands and Feet
suddenly failed him: whereupon falling on the ground, he rose again much
distempered, and was never afterward well till he dyed. He was a very good
natured Man, very Mild and Charitable, and throughout the whole course of his
life a good Christian. He was an exact Critic and Philologist, accurately
skilled in the Greek and Latin Tongues; and above all a most faithful
Historian, and a most learned Antiquary. These accomplishments gained him the
esteem of the chiefest of the Nobility, and most Learned of this Nation; and
also beyond the Seas, particularly of Ortelius, Lipsius, Dousa, Scaliger,
Thuanus, Gruterus, Piereshius, and Isaac Casaubon, The Epistles of all whom,
and of others of less note, I have seen in the Cottonian Library, and find that
he was generally by them reckoned one of the greatest Scholars of his time. At
home, I am sure, he was always much valued; and by his excellent Works, of
which I shall now give a full and exact account, which deserved that
Reputation. His Works were these,

1. Britanniae sive regnorum Angliae, Scotiae, Hiberniae, and insularum
adjacentium descriptio. Land. 1582. 85. 87. in oct. Land. 1590. 94. and 1600.
in quar. Land. 1607.

