A General Epistle TO FRIENDS Who are Convinced of God's Eternal TRUTH, And
have Received the Testimony of it.

That all may be Kept Faithful in their Testimony to the Truth, Life and Power
of God, which is Unchangeable;

And be preserved unto God by his Power (out of and over) all that which is
Changeable, and such a as are subject to Change their Ways.

By James Park.

Printed in the Year 1678.

A General Epistle to Friends, etc.
DEar Friends and Brethren, in the Universal Love of God do I salute you,
and in the fresh Remembrance of the Power of that Life which has no End do I
exhort you all to keep in the unchangeable Life and Power, which was before
Death and Weakness was, which is the same forever, and purely preserves to God
out of Darkness, Weakness, and all that which is Changeable; the minding
whereof brings Darkness over the Understanding, and will weaken your Faith in
the Day of Trial, from whence comes Doubting, Fleshly Reasonings and Unbelief
about God's Requirings, and the Testimony of the Truth; and one says God
requires one thing, another appears in a Contrary Mind, and yet pretends his
freedom in the Truth in that which is inconsistent with the Testimony of Truth,
as generally received and believed by all that keep in the Spirit of it, and
are baptized by one Spirit into one Body: Here is not many Minds, Opinions,
Division, nor none Broken in Judgment in their Testimony, as it is amongst them
all who are out of the Life and Power of God, they are kept in the many Minds,
Opinions, Division, and Broken in Judgment, changing as the Times change, their
Minds, Opinions and Judgments being wrong, corrupted, and being in that that is
changeable, and will have an End, they look for Help from that which is
changeable, and will have an End: But Dear Friends, you that are brought and
redeemed out of that that is changeable, and will have an end, into that which
is unchangeable of God, and is the same forever. O dwell and abide in that
which gathers you into one, and to mind the same things, and to be kept one in
Heart, Soul and Spirit, and spiritual Judgment, against all that which would
divide in God's Israel, against all that which would keep Self alive, and plead
to save Self, when God's Testimony requires Self-denial, and Crossing Self (and
it is faithful following of the Lamb he requires) and He and his faithful
Followers must have the Victory, and not the Dragon, nor his Followers, be they
never so many, and keeps out of the Dragon's nature and power, by which his
Followers Plot and Act Mischief: there is a greater Power in you that are found
faithful Followers of the Lamb, Christ Jesus; O feel him in you the highest and
greatest Power; look steadfastly to him for Help in all your Distresses,
Sufferings, Perils and Dangers, that you may be exposed to, or meet with for
bearing your Testimony for his Name and Honor's sake, who is able and can save
and deliver you out of all your Troubles and Sufferings, after you have
suffered a while, and to make you perfect; more and more to unite and establish
all who have believed in his Grace and Truth, whereby in times past we have
been saved and preserved, when we have been numbered amongst Transgressors, as
killed all the day long, and appointed as Sheep to the Slaughter; was not then
our help of the Lord alone? for from the mountains and hills in vain was and is
help expected: and Woe, yea, great Woe I know will come upon them that go down to
Egypt for help, when troubles, perils, and the most fiery trials come for the
testimony of a good Conscience and the Word of God; such will violate their
Testimony to the Truth, lose their first Love, and be darkened and weakened in
their Faith toward God, and that which concerns his honor and their
everlasting peace, and they will not lean upon the Lord, our rock and holy One
of Israel in the midst of us who abide faithful, and now is witnessed great in
Power, and worthy for evermore to be believed in and obeyed, trusted in, and
followed fully by all that know him.

O dear Friends, feel God's Salvation as Walls and Bulworks round about you, to
preserve you all constant in your Love and Faithfulness unto him and his
Commands or Requirings in your Testimony for God; and let not in the carnal
Reasoner or Consulter, that would lead from the Daily Cross of Christ, and keep
you back from following him whither soever he goes; then there will be a
looking at the things that are seen, which are but temporal; and the minds of
such will be drawn back from those things which are invisible and eternal: and
the Eye of the mind being from the invisible and eternal Power of God, and the
testimony thereof, there will be an Eye toward that which is carnal for help,
succor and deliverance; so carnal and outward Might will be looked to, and the
Spirit and Power of the Lord not dwelt in, whereby God has done much for us,
and will do in us and for us more and more, as we all constantly look to him,
trusting in the Arm of his Power forever, he will not leave us comfortless in
the greatest Trials, Exercises or Troubles, that ever hereafter we may meet
with, whilst we are in this World.

So in the unchangeable Power of God keep your Habitations and dwell for
evermore; and meddle not with them that are in that that is changeable, who are
tossed to and fro with the Winds and Crafts of men that lie in wait to deceive,
and whereby the simple may be beguiled and harmed, that desires to do nothing
against the Truth, but for it. So, dear Friends, be ye always vigilant and
Watchful, that you may see the Enemy, who would break and divide you from your
heavenly and right Judgment, and oneness of Heart and Spirit that God has
given unto many (Glory to the Lord God for evermore) in their noble Testimony
for his Names sake.

O! put you on the whole Armor of God, never to be without the Armor of
Light, nor your Shield of Faith, and take unto you that; when others arm
themselves with Outward Swords and Carnal Weapons, be sure the Weapons you War
with be Spiritual, and Mighty through God to the throwing down of the strong
Holds of the Devil, wherein he keeps many in Disobedience to, and Rebellion
against the Commands of Christ Jesus, who commands us to Love our Enemies, and
to do good to them that hate us, and pray for them that despightefully use and
persecute us; and then will you all come to see and bear witness to the Kingdom
of Christ Jesus, which is not of this World, as he said; and then none will
hate their Enemies, nor do evil to any man, but will learn of Christ Jesus to
love all men, even your Enemies: which mind of Christ Jesus being come unto,
ends all Wars, and causes Fightings with Carnal Weapons to cease, and brings
people to love one another, and out of all the Killing that has been in the
World about Religion; for the mind of Christ Jesus, as people come to have
that, brings Peace on Earth, and not Wars, Blood-sheddings, Hurting the
Creature, that Bloodthursty men delight in, and men in Cain's way plead for,
which comes of the Wicked One, and is all contrary to the Doctrine and Command
of our peaceable Savior Christ Jesus.

So, dear Friends, let the same mind be in you that was in him, and be you
Armed therewith; for in him and by Faith is the Victory obtained over the
Devil, however and wherever he appears or works within or without, it is to
hurt, weaken and destroy the holy Seed or Babe that is of God, which tenders
Gods Honor that the Devil and his Instruments strikes at and wars against.

Therefore all, dear Friends, shut out the Devil and his dark Spirit and Power,
which is in the World, and leads back to the World and Egypt for help; that so
you all may feel the Lord your Helper to deliver in six Troubles, and also in
seven.

And let none be troubled when you hear of Wars, and Rumors of Wars; look not
out thereat, but look to the Lord, and he will save, uphold and preserve you to
the End; which, that all Friends every where may by the Power of the Lord be
kept steadfast and unanimous in, I was moved of the Lord to write this; who
prefers the Welfare of Sion before any thing in this World, and travails for
the Peace of God's People and the Good of all men, and who remains your Friend
and Brother in the unchangeable Life and Power of God, in which is our Safety
and Preservation in the most Perilous Times.

Horse-lie-down the 9th of the 9th Month, 1678. J. Park.

THE END.

