A General Epistle TO ALL THE CALLED AND Chosen of God With all such as make a
Profession of the Blessed Truth as it is in Jesus every where.

Wherein is Comfort to the Feeble-minded, Support to the Weak, and Reproof to
the Unruly and Disorderly WALKERS.

With several wholesome Exhortations and Admonitions, according to the
Conditions, States and Growth of such as profess the Truth of God; for the
rooting out of that which is Bad, and the stirring up of the pure Mind in all,
that God may be glorified over all.

Written in the Movings of the Spirit of Life and Love from God in me, who am
resolved by the Power of his Might, to you that abide faithful, to follow the
Lord fully,

JAMES PARK.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

A GENERAL EPISTLE TO ALL THE Called and Chosen of God.
Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters;
WHO are made Partakers of the Love, Life and Power of God, by turning to and
believing in the Glorious Light of Christ Jesus, the Only Begotten of the
Father, full of Grace and Truth; My Dear and Steadfast Love is to you all: I am
daily more and more effected with the Power of God manifested in you, and the
living Operation of it, as it blessedly appears, to turn every one of you from
the Evil of your Ways, to God, and his Glorious, Living and Standing Way,
which blasts and stains, and yet will more and more blast and stain all other
Ways, and the seeming Glory of them that are dead, and keep people in Death,
and from the Path of Life, which leads to Life, and preserves in the pure Life
of Jesus, the Son of God, and brings out of the Unstableness, Error and Going
Astray, to have the Heart fixed upon the Lord God, and to love and live in the
Immortal Truth of God, which was before Error, Falsehood and Going Astray was.
You that are come to know this blessed Way of Truth, O love it, love it for
evermore; see that you err not by wandering or straying from it, or turning
aside into any By-path, and so lose your first Love, and fall from your first
Stedfastness; for, the Way of Truth is a steadfast standing Way, over all the
false ways, who ever wander or perish from it, it stands and remains the same
forever, and is the Path of the Just, that shines, and shall shine more and
more unto the perfect Day, over all the ways of the Wicked and paths of the
Unjust, and all the envious Persecutors, that tear after their Prey, hurting
and destroying one another in the false unprofitable Ways and barren Mountains,
where long they have wandered from Christ Jesus, the Way, the Truth and the
Life; and so are always kept from God, and the Knowledge of his everlasting
Way. But Glory to God forever. Dear Friends, the Only True God you know, and
Christ Jesus, whom he has sent to lead to himself, and to lead out of the
World, its Ways Fashions, Customs and the Wickedness that the World lies in.
So, look not back again in the least Degree to Egypt's Ways, the vain and
unprofitable Ways, Words, Manners, Fashions, Customs or Traditions of the
Heathen that know not God, but lie in their Wickedness, adding Sin to Sin,
bringing up one Vain Way, Fashion, Custom and Tradition after another, which
pleases and takes up the vain loose Mind, that loves to be at ease in the
Flesh, and lives above the Cross of Christ; such love best the broad way,
wherein, though they have a little Ease for a few days, but if they Repent
not, they will assuredly meet with Death and Destruction everlastingly, as a
Reward due to them for loving and walking in the broad way of Sin, and hating
and despising the Way of Life. Therefore keep out of the World's ways, keep
out of the way of the Ungodly, which leads from keeping in the daily Cross,
into the lusts of the world, fashions of the world, words of the world, the
lusts of the flesh and pride of life; these things you know are not of God, our
Father; but they are of the world, and kept up in the love and by the spirit of
the world, and the world passes away, its spirit is seen by you; as you keep
in the Light of Christ Jesus, you are kept out of the world's spirit, that
lusts to Envy and after evil things: This spirit keeps people walking after
their ungodly Lusts, one lusting after one Evil, and another after another Evil
Thing: And by this spirit how is Sin committed with Greediness, and Men and
Women's Reins let loose to act all manner of Wickedness, and to run into every
Evil they lust after! so that many seem without Bridle to stay them from any
sensual Desire that by the spirit of the world arises in them. Therefore, Dear
Friends, you Children of God and of his Day, be wise and sober, always having
God's Fear before your Eyes; Let none of you in the least adhere to the spirit
of the world, that draws back into the world, and love of the things of the
world again* for such will have an Eye out toward worldly Delights and
Pleasures, and be taken up therewith; then the sweet savoury words are lost,
and so the sense of Life is lost also, the Pleasures that such have had in the
Truth they lose the lively sense of; then is the Enemy let in as a Flood, and
the Spirit of God not felt to lift up a Standard against him; so the Soul's
Enemy prevails greatly against such, to the losing of their first Love and
Stedfastness they had to God, and his Truth and People; and when the first Love
to God is left, there is a Loss of Stedfastness in the Truth of God, and the
Work of the Day not well minded, but the Mind after the World, and the things
thereof, and that besets and clogs, and so lies so heavy upon the Conscience
that it darkens, hardens, and if not laid aside in due time, sears the
Conscience, that has been good and tender. Now, them who are in that State,
can take up that which they once did lay down for Truth's sake, and in
Obedience to its Requirings, building again the things they destroyed, and
matter not whether they keep to the true Language or not, but will speak it to
faithful Friends and not to others, and so use their Liberty (as may be they
call it) as an Occasion to the Flesh, in Corrupt Words and False Language,
contrary to Thee and Thou to a Particular, which was the Language of all the
Holy Men of God mentioned in the Scriptures, and You to more then one, or many;
but some can take up an Ease in speaking You to one, but its fleshly, and not
spiritual, it is of the Earth, and is earthly, and renders them to be at Ease
in Sion: and this is written in the Love of God, That every one professing the
Truth of God, that have used such a Liberty, may deny themselves of it, and
take up a daily Cross to it, that so that Liberty may be seen to be Bondage to
the god and spirit of this world, whereby the Unfaithful to the Truth of God
are veiled, and so keep not clear nor pure their Consciences toward God or
men, as to the Language of Truth, and Faithfulness therein: Certainly God's
holy Spirit is grieved, especially with those who have been long convinced of
the pure Truth of God, and yet give such way to the Enemy's Temptations, as
that thereby they are kept out of the Language of Truth; so not being faithful
in a little, or the lesser things, that God has by his Spirit led his People
into, and blessed them in, how can such expect to be Rulers over much, or see
much of the Glory of God, that he has revealed in these latter days?

And Dear Brethren and Sisters, seeing you are called with a holy Calling unto
Liberty, let none use it as an Occasion to the Flesh; let not the Liberty you
use be fleshly, but spiritual; then none will take liberty in Words or Actions
contrary to the Truth, and the Spirit that led you into it; nor none will be
Heady or High-minded, for that is out of Truth and the Spirit of it, and goes
before a Fall, and they are not near in Relation to God, nor like unto Christ
Jesus, that are High-minded; neither do they feel the Lord to dwell in them and
with them, although they may have Tastes of his Goodness, and be sensible of
his Power at some times. Now, it is the Heady and High-minded that will not
submit to the Spirit's Rule, Order and Government in the Heart, and so would
set up something of Flesh, something of Man, and rob the Spirit and Power of
God of what belongs thereunto, and so all the bad Rule and Disorder in
Government got up, and is kept up in the World; Flesh would rule, and have the
Preeminence inwardly and outwardly; and who are High-minded, they love to have
the Preeminence, they love Lordship and Superiority above their Fellow
Servants, and will smite them that are of lower degree, whom they ought to
cherish and condescend unto: Now says the Apostle, I would have no man to
think of himself otherwise then what is meet, but every one to think lowly of
himself, to abase and humble himself, as did our Lord and Master-Christ Jesus:
A lively Pattern for all to look at, to be so minded, and to follow his Steps,
in his Humiliation, and enduring the Cross patiently, despising all the Shame
and Reproach he met with whilst in a visible Body of Flesh in the world.
Friends, he has left us an Example, that we all might follow his steps, and
mark his steps, that never stepped into any Evil, nor was Guile found in his
Mouth; and there will be no Headiness then, there will be no giving way to the
Lusts of the world, the lusts of the Flesh nor the Pride of Life, but all that
(with the Light and Spirit of Grace) will be seen, and judged to be out of the
Steps of Christ, that we are required to follow; so the things come to be
pursued and followed which make for Peace in the particular and in the general:
so all high Thoughts and Vain Conceits will be judged down, and shut out with
the Power of the Living God; and all Excess and Unnecessary Things, used by any
that profess the Truth, either in Meats Drinks, or Apparel, will be denied and
come out, of; and there will be no fashioning themselves like the World, nor
getting into their Fantastic Garbs, and foolish vain Fashions, as they are
brought in, but all will be kept to modest and plain Attire, such as becomes
the Truth of God, and was in times p^st; for some are greatly to be blamed who
make a Profession of Truth, who let their Eye after every Fashion, almost as
soon as it appears, Women appearing in Attire immodest, and unbecoming the
plain Truth of our God, both in City and Country; and I write this that they
may be ashamed that are guilty in this matter, without any Reflection upon them
that are clear and innocent, as I know a Remnant are both in City and Country,
Glory to the Lord God forever, who has made his Power known, and subjected the
Minds of a Remnant so to it, that their Communication and Conversation is
honest before God, and amongst men, and is as becomes the Gospel, and as those
that follow the Steps of Christ Jesus, who dwell in the Power of God. You are
the Lord's Jewels (my dear Friends and Brethren) O you are the purified! It Is
you that are made Holy Vessels fit for God, and his Heavenly Treasure, and that
retain the Heavenly Treasure in your Earthen Vessels, it is you that come to
walk with God in white; for you are worthy, when some walk after their Ungodly
Lusts, and after the Course of the World, whose God is their Belly, who glory
in their Shame, and mind Earthly Things. Therefore as any Root of Pride, High
mindedness, Self conceits, or Bitterness would spring up in any, let the Ax be
laid to it; or whatever Evil Root thou may find yet standing in thee, or
which would again spring up in thee, dally not with it, give it up to the
Sword, and spare it not, and so seel the Wicked bowed before the Just in thy
own particular; not only the wicked Branches of the evil Tree, but the Root
also, then will thy cumbering Thoughts be gone, then thou will not be overcome
with Surfeiting, Drunkenness or Cares of this World, but wilt be sensible,
aware of the Day of the Lord, and wilt do the Works of the Day and not of the
Night, or Darkness, as the Apostle says, Ye are not in Darkness as others,
that that Day would overtake you at unawares; for you are all the Children of
Light, and of the Day; and how unbecoming is it for such to be overtaken with a
Work of Darkness or to walk in Darkness; for none are overtaken in Works of
Darkness, but by walking in Darkness, and being subject to the dark Power of
the Prince of Darkness, then Pride is not seen to be Pride, but called Decency,
Civility, good Breeding and good Manners; then Passion is not seen to be
Passion, but accounted Fervency of Zeal to God, and Darkness thus covering, and
overpowering the Creature, such can keep evil Company, more then does them
good, yet say, they cannot avoid it, my Business, Affairs and Interest lies in
keeping all Sorts of Company, and if I do not, my Employment and outward
Calling is at Stake. O you that know the Power of the Lord, every where! be
subject to that, let that good Power rule in you, to the over powering and
throwing down the Power of the man of Sin, then by no enticement of any man,
high or low which thou may have Occasion with in Dealing, or otherwise, will thou be drawn into that, that offends God or hurts thy own Soul: Had thou not
better come to hurt or loss in thy Trade, or outward Business, then to come to
hurt or loss, as to thy immortal Soul; the Salvation thereof certainly is our
greatest Interest, and ought to be preferred before, and far beyond all outward
Interests or Advantages in this present World whatsoever: So we all ought to
seek that most, and first, which is of greatest Weight, the setting up and
Establishment of the Kingdom of God. O to know that it is come with Power, and
to be kept in Subjection to the Power of it, that is more then all, Friends,
being in this none is lifted up above his Measure, nor puffed up in high
Conceits of themselves; that they are what in Deed and in Truth they are not;
for as every one knows the Kingom of God come in Power, and the Mind being
purely subjected to the Rule and Government of the Spirit, and Power of God
come and set up within us, so the Loftiness of Man comes to be laid low, and
every high Thought and vain Imagination brought down into Subjection, then not
Flesh, but the Spirit and Power of the living God has the Dominion: Thus when
the other Lords, that formerly had Dominion over us, and that dark Power,
whereby they ruled in us, comes to be subdued, the Lord alone is exalted in
that Day.

O dear Friends! this is an acceptable Day, this is a Day of Salvation and pure
Rejoicing; hereby you know your Marriage-Union with the Lord God, and being
joined to him in a perpetual Covenant, that cannot be broken but stunds sure
and firm in all Points, as you who are saithful do witness it, and it is you
only, that can say experimentally, David wants not a Man to sit upon his
Throne, for your Eyes have seen the King in h^^ Beauty, even the Lord of Hosts,
the Righteous branch, God promised to raise up unto David that should rule and
prosper, and execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth, and the Echo and Cry
of your washed and purified Hearts is Glory, Glory to him which was, is, and is
to come, because he has taken to him his great Power, and reigns in Power,
Glory and Majesty in you, whilst the World and Professors thereof, please
themselves with a Talk of his Coming without them, putting afar off his
Appearance, and Coming in his Kingdom in them; they will not have him to rule
in them, but will suffer the Devil and Sin to rule and reign rather then Christ
Jesus, whose Right it is to rule and reign in every Man and Woman's Heart, and
such are kept afar off from God, and not made nigh unto him and they are far
from the Kingdom of his Dear Son Christ Jesus. But dear Friends who are
begotten to God, and have been kept faithful to the word of God's Power in its
Appearance nigh in your Hearts and Mouths, and have in unfeigned Love, and out
of a pure Heart obeyed and done it, you are made nigh to God through the Death
of his Son Christ Jesus, you have suffered and known a Dying with him, you have
born in your Bodies the Dying of the Lord Jesus, therefore you must reign with
him, and sit upon the Throne of Glory and Majesty on high with him.

O you faithful Followers of the Lamb in the Regeneration, you Conquerers and
Overcomers of the Power of the Devil, and the Sin that did beset you in times
past, you already feel a Reward in your Bosoms, for your resisting of Sin to
the Death of it, and for your resisting of the Devil in the Spirit and Power of
God, so that you have known him put to flight from time to time, when he has
come to tempt you to Sin and Evil; you that have not entered into temptation,
but have kept pure, clean, and undefiled, the Reward you have received already,
and are receiving your hundredfold here in this World, is but little to what
God has in Store for you, and promised to give unto you in the World to come;
you Overcomers and Conquerers through God's Everlasting Power, you shall all
sit with Christ on his Throne of Glory and Majesty on high, as he overcame and
sat down with God the Father on his Throne; here is Preferment and Honor that
comes from above; for you have humbled and abased your selves, and have been
abased by Men, but God will raise you up, and is setting the poor on high. O
what greater Dignity can you have, then come to sit with Christ on his Throne,
when others content themselves with a Talk of Christ, with a formal Profession
of him, without Life and Power, or leaving any thing for Christ; you have seen
it your Duty incumbent upon you to leave and forsake all Sin and Evil for
Christ's Sake, and to dye to your own Wills and Righteousness for Christ's
Sake, that you might be made conformable to him, and be dead and buried in
Baptism with him, and so through the Death of the first Earthly Adam, you have
obtained Life in the second Adam, and so serve, obey and live unto God, by a
daily dying to Sin and its Law, that warred in your Members against the Law of
your Minds, whereby in times past you were led captive, and could not do the
things you would; but now Glory to the Lord God forever, you Conquerers by
Christ Jesus, Victory is given unto you over Sin with its Law, and Death comes
to be swallowed up of Life; so by a faithful Continuance in the Lamb's War
against Sin, the certain Knowledge of a real Victory over Sin, Hell, Death and
the Grave comes to be witnessed: And you are of the Host of Heaven, listed in
the Heavenly Army, under the Banner of Love, and Standard of Righteousness
which is lifted up, to which many yet shall be gathered, and Nations shall
flock unto. So you whose Names are written in Heaven, under the blessed Conduct
of Christ Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation, O follow him fully, follow him
whithersoever he goes; if he cause thee to go through the Vail of Tears, or
Death, pass on thy Journey with him, be not weary of the Journey which the Lord
of Life leads thee in, and he will remove every high Mountain in thy Way that
stands before thee, and make it a plain, and bring thee to the End of thy
Journey, and if thou meet with Frowns, or Hatred from Professors, or profane
men of this World, thy Neighbors, Acquaintance or Kindred in the Flesh; it is
but that which Christ Jesus the Captain of our Salvation met with, when he came
in that Body prepared for him to do the most great and Noblest Act of Love that
could be done to Mankind, in laying down his Life as a Ransom for all: How was
he frowned upon, and hated of the World? And he said, his faithful Followers
should be hated of all Nations for his Name Sake. How was he hated in his
taking Elesh upon him, and in that Appearance by the chief Priests, and zealous
professing Jews, who were zealous for the Law and Letter, so much that they
thought to have Eternal Life in the Scriptures; they instead of owning and
coming to Christ, did more then the profane frown upon him, hate him, and set
themselves against him, and without any Cause refused to come unto him,
despising and rejecting him, of whom they might have had Life and Salvation,
and when thou meets with any Sufferings for the Name and Testimony of Christ
wait low in God's pure Fear, and seriously consider Christ Jesus suffered
inwardly and outwardly for thee; he was a man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Griefs for thee that knew no Sin, that thou might be made the Righteousness
of God in him. Is that known as the good Effect of Christ's Sufferings for
thee, in all thy Hardships, Trials and Sufferings thou meetest with for his
Testimony in this prefant World? that thou art made the Righteousness of God in
Christ Jesus, thou art awakned in his Likeness, now then thou shines forth as a
Son of God, or as a sixed Star in the Firmament of his everlasting Power giving
Light unto others: Has the Awakening Power of God thus awakned thee to
Righteousness, and true Holiness? O then happy art thou! then thou art not like
the men of this World, thou bear not the earthly Image, but art an Heir of
the World to come, and bear the Image of the Heavenly, and have a certain
Evidence of that Birth which is immortal born, and art come to be a man of God,
now thou art made strong through the Power of his Might, and have passed the
Child's State of Weakness and Infirmity, and going on to Perfection, and thou
art come to him, in whom is the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, and art coming
to a complete State a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

here is the Mark, Dear Friends, which God by his Light, at our first
Convincement set before us, to press after and to attain unto, and not to come
short of it, God never set it before any for that End, never to attain to it on
this Side the Grave, as the vain talkers of it do imagine and talk, promising
themselves Peace whilst they see not, nor know not this Mark, for the Prize of
the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, nor how to press toward it, or
through believing to attain unto it; for they are so far from believing
attaining to Perfection, or to a perfect man in Christ Jesus, in whom the
Fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, that you know they long have pleaded for,
and still plead for Sin and Imperfection, and the carrying about of a Body of
Sin with them whilst they live, and that heavy Load and Burden of Sin with its
Body, renders all such unprepared and unfitted to run the Race set before them;
hereupon many settle on their Lees, and are so settled, that they seem
regardless, and ignorant of that which would unsettle them from their Lees of
Iniquity, and shake the Body of Sin they carry about with them, and make them
put it off, and cast it from them, as that which hinders them from coming to
the Truth, to receive it in the Love thereof, and therefore Professors and
profane in many Places seem so much to be given over to strong Delusions to
believe a Lie, and the false Prophets prophecy Lies in the Name of the Lord,
keeping People in Death, and in the Broad Way that leads to Death, and keeps
them in Death from the Life of the Son of God, from the Image of God, and from
a pure and perfect State in Christ Jesus, which God has brought you into, and
made you Partakers of; Glory, Everlasting Glory and Dominion, be given unto him
forever and evermore, who rides on conquering and to conquer. This you Children
of the Day are Witnesses of; this your Eyes have seen. O you have handled the
Word of Life, you have hid it in your Hearts, how sweet has it been to you
since you came to know and obey it? you have valued it as a Pearl of great
Price, you faithful Followers of the Lamb, you have so prized and valued the
Word of God, Christ Jesus, appearing and working in you, that you have been
made willing by his pure Power to sell and part with all for him, and to deny
your selves, and take up and keep in a daily Cross, that you might follow him
whithersoever he goes.

And Dear Friends, who are called of God out of Egypt and Babylon, to follow
the Lord in his Leadings, let nothing hinder your going forward in following
the Lord, let nothing which you may meet with in your Travail in your Heavenly
Journey hinder you, or weary you; let no Perils dismay you, of what kind
soever; neither let any of you saint when Trials, yea great and fiery Trials
happen to you; look not to that which would discomfort you in your Travail,
whatever it be, or from whomsoever it comes, that which would discourage or
discomfort you, look over it all, to the Rock Christ Jesus; look unto him who
saved and delivered you, and was your only Helper in the time of your greatest
Distress and Need; that had Compassion on you, and heard your Cry, when you
cried to him and no Eye pitied you. I beseech you all dear Friends, look unto
him, and see that you look not out, nor go not out from the Way of Truth,
because of any Hardships, Trials or deep Exercile, that you may meet with in
the Way; for then a Vail comes over the pure, and the Face of the Covering
spreads it self over such again, and such suffer Loss in their Conditions,
therefore whatsoever Hordships, Exercise, Trials or Suffering any of you may
meet with in the Way, love and delight in the Way of God, and be not offended
at the Way of Truth, because of the Tribulations that do attend it, and them
that walk in it, to the Kingdom of God, but consider, that through many
Tribulations the Kingdom of God is entered and come into; its not entered by Ease
in the Flesh, and shunning all manner of Fiery Trials and great Tribulations,
as the Careless and Disobedient Children would have it. You have read or heard
of the Patience of Job, in all his Afflictions and Sufferings, how Patience did
possess his Soul, that notwithstanding all the Evil Intreatments of his
Friends, and the many Assaults the Devil made at him, yet Job sinned not, nor
charged God with Folly: My Dear Friends and Brethren, we have need of the same
Patience in our heavenly Journey, where we meet with many Jeopardies and
Perils, and the Devil as ready to assault, tempt and winnow us, as ever he was;
so we have need to keep in the Faith and Patience, and to wait upon the Lord,
that he may strengthen us, that he may help us; for in vain is the Help of Man,
or Arm of Flesh, that will fail all that look at it for Help; but the Lord will
never fail us that eye him, believe and trust in him; he has been and is a
Shield unto us; he has not left us when we have met with Disappointments from
men, and Perils amongst men; but he has stood by us, and strengthened us, that
have been given up to wait upon him, and trusted in his Name, and fled thither,
that has been our Safety in the Time of Trouble, and the greatest Perils we
have had, looking to the Lord God, we have Joy in abundance, and Encouragement
enough to go forwards in the Way of God, to walk without any Wearisomness, and
to run without Fainting in our Minds, or being stopped in our Progress, which
we have made in following the Lord: Now he goes before us, he has led us on by
the Right Hand of his Power, that we might not faint in any Trial or Suffering
inward or outward; and have we not felt the Lord to uphold us, by his free
Spirit? O! have we not felt the Lord at our Right Hand, so that we have not
been moved when sorely beset on every side, and Enemies within and without,
strove against us very much? and cannot you all say, who have been kept
faithful to God, That the Right Hand of the Lord has brought mighty things to
pass; it has turned back the Power of the Oppresser, and broken his heavy Yoke
from off our Necks, and brought you out of Thraldom and Captivity, into the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God? and in this we are to stand fast out of
all Entanglements and Yoaks of Bondage whatsoever, that would any ways
Imbondage the pure Seed or Spirit of God in us, which ought to have its Liberty
in Male and Female, as the Power thereof is felt to stir and work in them that
believe and obey the Truth; it ought to have its Liberty in what Diversities of
Gifts or Operations soever it comes forth, and manifests it self in; it ought
not to be quenched or stopped in any of the Lord's People; so will the Love of
God in and amongst us increase, and the heavenly Rejoicing be witnessed in the
Hearts of the Upright, that truly seek the Advancement of the Gospel, and the
flourishing State of the Church of God.

O Dear Friends, let Brotherly-Love continue, let nothing in that would hinder
your Love, Dearness and Nearness in the Truth, which is so precious and of such
exceeding Concernment to us, that we cannot be well without it, nor safe out of
the Love of God; and we do not manifest our selves to be Disciples of Christ,
but by loving one another, and being tender over one another, Watching over one
another for Good, and the keeping down all that which is contrary, as it
appears and would get up, under any Pretense, to hinder the pure and precious
Unity of the Spirit, which has been and is the Bond of our Peace, as any thing
of that would arise, that would hinder Brotherly-Love, give not way to it, but
by the Power of the Lord God keep it down, as that which is not for the
Welfare of the Body, but brings Suffering upon the Members thereof, and so a
Suffering may happen to the whole Body, if there be a Decay of Love, or want of
Love in some of the Members of the Body, one toward another, Iniquity will be
let it, and from thence comes Whisperings, Back-bitings, Tale-bearings,
Complainings and Murmurings, and Harboring of Evil one against another, which
ought not to be; for these things stir up Strifes and unprofitable Contentions,
whereby the Weak may be hurt, and the Lame turned out of the way rather then
restored, and all are not of a like Strength or Stature: Some are but weak in
the Faith, and very little, whose weak hands had need to be strengthened, and
their feeble Knees consirmed, yet Babes in Christ, and know the Father, and
their Sins forgiven them for his Name's sake; others are come further to the
State of Fathers, not only begotten to God themselves, but Begetters of others
to God also by the same Spirit and Power by which they were begotten, who are
come to know a larger Measure of Faith given to them of God, through which they
are made strong, and able to bear Burdens, and to bear with the Weak; the Weak
must be born with; you that are strong ought to bear with the Weak, and not lay
heavy Burdens upon them, to ease or please your selves; for then you are out of
the tender Care of Fathers, I have always found the Love and Tenderness of a
Father toward me, to work most in me, and reach the Good, and get up the Good
most in me, and draw me nearest the Lord; yet I have sometimes used the Rod,
and come to some with the Rod, as there was need for it, and as God's Wisdom
leads to it, and I found Love was effectual generally in my own Experience of
the Work of God, or as a Workman for him; many have found that to be the
strongest and best Weapon to war with against Sin and Evil, that has wrought
in our Members, and warred against the Law of the Mind, to lead us captive to
that, which was not allowed by us in the Warfare, and a sore War we have had
betwixt Flesh and Spirit, before we knew how to perform, or were skilled in the
performance of that which is good in Words and Actions. There is a Time of
Weakness, Inability and Feebleness, before we are Fathers, or grown to a
Young-man's State in Christ Jesus; there is much to dye unto; there must not
only be a dying to open, profane, gross Evils, those must not only be slain,
but spiritual Wickedness in High Places; the Rulers of Darkness, and every
thing that would exalt it self against the Appearance of God in us, must be
warred and wrestled with, and it must be conquered and slain; then we appear as
strong in the Lord, and know the Wicked One overcome; then the Proud Man dies
to his Pride, the Covetous Man to his Covetousness, the Self-conceited Man dies
to his Vain and Self conceits he has had of himself; then the Strong Man will
not glory in his Strength, nor the Rich Man in his Riches, nor the Wise Man in
his Wisdom. And they that come to the Truth, and grow in it, the Power of Truth
will quench the Fiery Passions of such as are soon Angry.

And Friends, as you grow in the Truth, Weakness, Childishness and Imperfection
you will all come out of, you will all grow out of, and wholely dye unto, and
the Tossings will be over, and the Tempests will cease, and you will all come
to, and be established in that Rest that is glorious, and be kept in perfect
Union with God, and one with another.

And let all Raisers of Evil Reports, and Broachers of them, be found out and
checked, so far as it tends to stir up Strife, and cause Division in the Church;
let such be marked, and avoid them, as not worthy of having Fellowship with,
that they may be ashamed that are found to raise up an Evil Report against any
of God's People, or sowing of Discord amongst Brethren, busying themselves in
hearing Evil and speaking Evil: Do not judge one another upon Reports, before
the Report be fully sought into, and found out to be true; then let Judgment go
forth according to Gospel Order, that Sin may not remain upon thy Brother, nor
thou to put a Stumbling Block in thy Brother's way, to cause him to stumble, by
the reporting that which is false, and judging him thereupon: That Judgment,
passed upon False Reports, will return back upon such as give it. The Judgments
of the Lord are true, and there is no Unrighteousness in them; he judges
nothing but what is for Judgment: and that which is for Judgment ought to be
judged, where ever it appears. I would not have that spared in any particular,
which causes Division in the Church of God; for that weakens themselves, and
hurts others.

Tale-bearers work against the Truth, and may weaken some Members in the
Church; but that Work communicates no Divine Strength to the Body nor any
Member thereof: for my own particular, I never could well digest such, since I
had any Knowledge how to put a Difference betwixt Good and Evil.

Therefore, Dear Friends and Brethren, I exhort you as a Brother in Love, All
to follow the things that make for Peace, follow after Righteousness, and feel
the Righteous Judgments of God to take place upon all that which is contrary to
God in every particular: O live in Love, and be at Peace one with another: Love
thinks no Evil, speaks no Evil, carries no Tales or Evil Reports; it suffers
long, and hops all things, and bears all things, and vaunteth not it self,
nor is easily puffed up. God Almighty keep you all steadfast in the Love of God,
and one another. You know, Love is of God, and that you ought to dwell in it:
O! dwell in Love, then you dwell in God, and cannot hurt one another, nor can
do nothing against the Truth, but for it; then there is not many Masters, nor
striving for Mastery, nor many Minds, but all in the one Mind of the Lord, and
he alone exalted, and of one Heart in the one Spirit, minding the same things,
and cleaving to and following whatsoever things are lovely, honest and of good
report; then thou will be one with the Flock of God, in all these things, that
tend so much to the Honor of God, and keeping all sweet and savoury, and wilt
mind the Footsteps of the Flock of God, and follow the Lord fully.

And Dear Friends every where, Keep up your Meetings in the Name and Power of
the Lord God, who has owned us, and been with us in all our Sufferings for his
Name's sake; let none deny his Name, nor bring a Reproach upon his Name, by any
Unfaithfulness in any part of your Testimony, which you are called to bear for
his Name and Truth: O meet together as your former manner was, although ye
should meet with greater Trials and Sufferings then formerly; look not thereat,
but look at that Arm and Power of God which formerly saved and delivered us,
and is able to save to the uttermost from whatsoever the Devil and all his
Agents can do against us: For, O how has the Arm and Power of the Lord
prevailed against the Power of the Devil, and his working through many of his
Instruments, that have appeared against the Truth of God, and our meeting
together in the Name and Power of the Lord! And how have we witnessed Christ
Jesus in us and amongst us greater then he that is in the World, who as a
strong man armed has wrought in many Professors. Profane and Apostates,
against the glorious Truth of God, and our meeting together in his Name, which
we have owned, believed in, and born witness unto above every Name, and which
we know every Knee must bow unto! Therefore have many been angry with us, and
with great Madness and Enmity have endeavored our Overthrow and Ruin, and to
hinder us from meeting together, as our former manner has been, to wait upon
God, and to serve and worship him in Spirit and Truth, as he requires of us;
for this have many been enraged against us, and set themselves against Christ's
Appearance in us, and our worshipping of him in Spirit and Truth; but many of
their wicked Devices, which they have devised against us, has God confounded
and brought to naught; and this our Eyes have seen brought to pass, to the Woe
and Torment of many of the Adversaries of Truth, and us the People of God, who
meet together in it.

Therefore, Dear Friends, be you all encouraged to meet together in the Fear of
the Lord, sitting down together in the Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus; so as
you have felt, you will more and more feel, his Name as precious Ointment
poured forth; and he will anoint you with fresh Oil, and you will be made
Partakers with him of his Joy and Gladness; and let no Backwardness or
Carelessness, nor a slight Esteem appear in any of you, in meeting together:
For that Spirit that would cool thy Love to, or any ways lessen thy esteem of
the Meetings of the Saints and People of God, where they meet together in his
Name and to do his Will, this spirit is not of God, but it is of this World,
and is for Condemnation, wherever it appears: So be you Steadfast, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, that you may stir up the Gift of God in one
another, and edify one another, and help to build up one another in the most
holy Faith, and so ye will confound the dead Faiths, and be Instruments in the
Hand of the Lord, to make void the Evil glorying of them who are in the dead
and unholy Faichs, that work not by Love, nor do not stand in the Power of God,
but are made up by the wisdom of Man, and stand therein; all such will be
manifest more and more, and their works of Envy and Opposition to be for the
Fire; a Dreadful Consuming Fire is kindled to the utter consuming of the Dead
Unholy Faiths, that men have devised, with the Fruits thereof; and the living
Faith, that was first delivered to the Saints, and the Fruits and Works of
Righteousness, wrought in God, must come over all the Dead Faiths and Works of
Unrighteousness of the Man of Sin, the bad Worker, that works in all the
Children of Disobedience, and the Beast with his many Heads and Horns, and the
False Prophet that stirs up the Beast, with his Horns, to push at the faithful
Followers of the Lamb, must be taken and given to the Burning Flame, and the
Lamb and his true Followers shall have the Victory over the Beast, and over his
Mark; and the Number of his Names; and the Lord, that has begun this great
Work, and carried it on blessedly, and succesfully will complete and finish it,
to his own Glory and Praise, To whom be all Glory, Honor and Praises, for he
is worthy for ever and evermore.

And my dear Brethren and Si the state of Fathers and Mothers in Israel, Keep
up your Men and Women's Meetings, that were set up in the Power and Wisdom of
God, to keep all that profess the Truth of God in the Savoury Life of it, and
in the Order of the Gospel, and stand up for God, and the wholesome Order of the
Gospel against all that that would lay it waste, and let in Unfaithfulness, and
the Worcester.ld's Disorderly Spirit, that you all may be Helpers together in the
Work of the Lord, against that which causes Divisions, or which any ways would
let or hinder the Prosperity of God's blessed Work, which he has begun in this
Glorious Day of his Power, that the Truth may rule and reign in every Heart,
and amongst us, over that which is contrary; so Peace shall be within our
Walls, and the Truth and Power of God will go over all that which opposes, and
exalts it self against the spreading of it.

These things lay as a Necessity upon me to put you in mind of, and to stir up
your pure Minds by way of Remembrance of them, though you know them already,
that you all might be Doers of that which is good, and be justified of the
Lord, when be judges: And I was constrained to be large in this Epistle,
because in the writing of it much of the Love of God I felt, and my Heart much
opened toward the whole Family and Flock of God every where, and for their
Concord, Peace and Prosperity, for which Cause I have traveled, endeavoring
every where, where I have come, to bring all to the Measure of the Stature of
the Fullness of Christ, and to a perfect man in him, in whose precious Love I
remain,

Your Dear Friend and Brother, JAMES PARK.


