A Brief Necessary VINDICATION Of the Old and New SECLUDED MEMBERS, from the
false malicious CALVMNIES; AND Of the Fundamental Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, Government, Interest of the Freemen, Parliaments, People of
England, from the late avowed Subversions

1. Of John Rogers, in his Un-christian Concertation with Mr. Prynne, and
others.

2. Of M: Nedham, in his Interest will not lie.

Wherein the true Good Old Cause is asserted, the false routed; The old
secluded Members cleared from all pretended breach of trust; The old Parliament
proved to be totally dissolved by the Kings death; The sitting Juncto to be no
Parliament and speedily to be dissolved by the Army Officers; The Oaths of
Supremacy, Allegiance, Fealty to the King, his Heirs and Successors, to be
still binding, continuing: The New Commonwealth to be the Jesuits Project; Chapter
Stewart not sworn to Popery, as Nedham slanders him; The restitution of our
Hereditary King and Kingly Government, not an Vtopian Republike, evidenced
beyond contradiction to be Englands true Interest both as Men and Christians;
and the only way to peace, safety, settlement.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne.

The Second Edition.

Jer. 51. 9, 10. We would have healed (ENGLISH) BABYLON, but she would not be
healed; forsake her, and let us go every one to his own Country; for her
judgment reaches unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies: The Lord
has brought forth our righteousness; come and let us declare in Zion, the work
of the Lord our God. Ps. 63. 11. But the mouth of them that speak Lies shall be
stopped. London, Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and
Eve in Little Britain, 1659.

A brief necessary Vindication, of the Old and New secluded Members, etc.
ON the 17. of this instant September, (during my private retirement in the
Country for my health and quiet;) I received 2. Books, fraught with malicious
calumnies, bitter scoffs, insufferable Reproaches, against my Self and other
secluded Members; yea destructive to the very fundamental Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, Government, Interest of the Freemen, Parliaments and Realm of
England, for which we have so many years contested.

The 1. of these thus entitled, A Christian Concertation, with M. Prynne, M.
Baxter, M. Harrington: for the true Cause of the Commonwealth, etc. by J.
Rogers. A most scurrilous (...) fraught with absurd impertinercies, conjuring,
canting, new coined 2 Pet. 2. 18. Jude 16.
swelling words of vanity, odious comparisons, bitter scoffs, raising
Epethites; In his, p. 35. to 41.
loathsome, stinking obscene Queres, defiling the very air; Page 4. 119.
boyish tricks, playing with men's names and reputations, (which he p. 20 21,
22, 24, 98, 57.
severely censures in others, yet is most guilty of himself) displaying him to
be, rather a His own phrases, p. 3, 4.
conjuring Sorcerer, than Gospel-Minister, an Apostate scoffing Lucian, than
sober real Christian, standing much in need of the p. 59, 65, 26.
several Pills he prescribes Mr. Baxster, to purge his filthy stomach, spleen,
brain, heart, pen, from such rotten stinking humors for the future; almost
every page in his book, being either p. 24, 25.
Scandalum Magnum, or Scandalum Magnatum, to use his own expressions against
all dissenting from him; but an p. 10, 17, 18, 19, etc.
egregious flattery of his own faction.

The 2. Interest will not lie: Or, a View of Englands True Interest, by Mar^
Nedham; which had he entitled, Interest will lie: Or, a View of Englands False
Interest, by Mar. -- England; it had been a true Character of it.

The first, most furiously charge me; and my secluded companions in the Van,
the later in the Rear: The one with whole Vollies of fired squibs, more like a
Whiffler, than a M^skateer; shooting nothing but wildfire, and Psalm. 64. 3.
bitter words, without bullets. The other like a Trumpeter, rather than a
Trooper, sounding a fierce charge against us with his Trumpet, without wounding
us with his Lance or Sword, which are very obtuse.

To avoid prolixity, impertinence, and repetitions, I shall reduce all the
material Differences between us into 6. distinct Questions, wherein I shall
refute what they have published, relating to my self, the other secluded
Members, the Rights, Privileges, Interest of our Parliaments and Nation, with
all possible Brevity; omitting their personal scoffs, and scurrilities.

The 1. Question, J. Rogers and Mr. Prynne, (wherein Nedham has no share) is
but this. Whether the Defense, maintenance of the true Protestant Religion; the
Kings royal person, authority, government, posterity, the privileges and rights
of Parliament, consisting of King, Lords and Commons, the Laws, Statutes of the
Land, the Liberty, Property of the Subject, and peace, safety of the Kingdom,
were the only True and Good Old Cause, for which the long Parliament, and their
Armies, first took up Arms in 1642. and continued them till the Treaty with the
King, 1648. as Mr. Prynne asserts and proves (like Rogers, p. 2.
a Lawyer, by punctual Evidences, Witn^sses, Votes, Declarations,
Remonstrances, Ordinances of both Houses; yea of the Army Officers, Generals,
Council, during all the wars) in his Good Old Cause rightly stated; his True
and perfect Narrative; The Re-publicans and others spurious Good Old cause
briefly and truly anatomized; and in his Concordia Discors: Or, whether the
erecting of a New Commonwealth, and Parliament without a King and House of
Lords, and Majority of the Commons House upon the ruins of the late King,
Kingdom, Parliament, since 1648. to 1653. and the reviving of it May 7. 1659.
by some swaying Army Officers, and the far Minor part of the old Commons House
confederating with them, by mere armed power secluding the greatest Number of
the surviving Members, and whole House of Lords; Which J. Rogers endeavors to
prove like a Logician, without any evidence, witness, but his own Ipse
scripsit; though See my Speech, Dec. 4. 1648. p. 79, to 94.
professedly disclamed by both Houses of Parliament, and the Army too, in
sundry printed Declarations, as the highest scandal, never once entering into
their loyal thoughts? When this Logician with all his Sophistry, Anatomy,
Pills, Physic, can make that which was never in being, but since 1648. as we
all know, and himself asserts in his Concertation, p. 7, 9. to be the Good Old
Cause (in being As himself proves Concertation, p. 43, 44.
long before the last Parliament of King Charles) for whose defense they first
took up arms, in 1642. Or, that cause which never once entered into their
thoughts, and was professedly disclamed till 1648. to be the cause they
proclaimed and fought for, from the wars beginning; he must yield up his
Spurious Good Old Cause, as desperate; his scurrillous Goos-quils (to use his
page 1.
own words) dashing the GALL of his ink upon Mr. Prynnes former papers to
little purpose, in this particular; but to blot them a little, not to answer
them a line, nor the Argument of them in the least.

The 2. Question is this, Prynne, with the Majority of the Commons House, and
whole House of Peers, were forcibly secluded the Parliament by the Army, for
any real breach and forfeiture of their trusts, in 1648. or ever legally
impeached, convicted thereof either then, or since, before any lawful
Judicature?

This Rogers briefly and not very positively affirms, p. 7. but Nedham averrs
and makes it his Masterpiece, insisting on it at large from p. 28, to 37.
(wherein his Interest does naught else, But Lie;) as the basis whereon his
pre^eve^ Parliament, and Rep^ blike are bottomed; which fast or stand upon the
truth or falsehood of it: wherein he is so peremptory, as not only to proclaim
us (...) (to the present and succeeding Generations) in the Highest Degree*
without hea^ing or ^^ial, but to pronounce this peremptory Sentence against us;
Page 36, 3^.
That not only by the Law of Necessity ( which they pleaded that acted it but)
(...) by the Recorded in the Statute Books of ^topia or his lying Mercuries,
but no where else.
Law of the Land, they might have been called to account for their lives in a
Capital manner: But were Favorably, as well as Justly dealt with, in being
depri^ed only of their Interest in the House, when as their (...) might have
been required. So this impudent, insolent Headsman, ex Tripode, magisterially
determines.

This Question, so highly concerning us in our present and future reputations;
and the right, Freedom of Parliaments and their Members in all generations, I
shall more largely debate; and for ever acquit my self and fellow-secluded
Members, from this Scandalum Magnum ^t Magnatum, long since In my Epistle
before my speech, Dec. 4. 1648. And Vindication of the secured and secluded
Members.
cleared, refuted by us, yet now revived afresh against us, in the highest
degree. I shall desire the Readers to consider;

1. That those who full accused us breakers of our Parliamentary Trusts reposed
in us, were neither the respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, who elected,
authorized, returned, trusted us for their Knights, Citizens, Burgesses in
Parliament, the only fit accusers and judges of us out of Parliament, who all
absolve and justify us against this Calumny; nor yet our fellow- Members, or
House of Lords, the only meet impeachers, judges of us in Parliament, if
guilty; But merely the General Council of Officers in the Army; who neither
elected nor entrusted us; were but our mercinary, sworn Servants, not our
supreme Judges; yet most notoriously, traitorously, perfidiously violated both
their trusts, faith, duties, by waging war against us, and forcibly seizing,
secluding us, contrary to their Commissions, the Protestation, S^lemn League
and Covenant they had all subscribed. And were these fit persons to accuse us
then or now of breach of trust, who are such Grand Trust-breakers, Traitors
themselves?

2* That this breach of trust, was not so much as objected against us by them,
before, nor at their treasonable sudden secluding and securing us, December. 6.
and 7. 1648. therefore it could not be the true cause of our seclusion, but a
subsequent pretense: For these Officers to mutiny, the common Soldiers against
us, told them; That the Members* they (...) at the House door, were those who
pursed up and kept away their pay from them; and that was the only cause the
common soldiers as^isted them to secure us, else they would not have meddled
with any of us; as they told me and Col: Birch in the (...) Court the day we
were seized. Whereupon I assuring them, it was a gross untruth; for neither of
us then secured, was a Treasurer or Receiver of monyes; they answered, They
were informed the contrar^^^y their Officers, and (...) we were thus abused,
and (...) out of the House upon such a false suggestion.

3. That they never charged us with breaking our trusts, till ^ear a full month
after our seclusion and securing; and that upon this occasion, as Nedham
himself relates, p. 31. Upon the Armies seizing us December. 6. the M^mbers then
sitting in the House, sent out the Sergeant into the Queens Court, where we
were detained, to command our attendance in the House; but the Soldiers
detaining us Prisoners, would not permit us to go to the House: Thereupon he
was sent the second time, with the (...) to fetch us in; but the Officers staid
him at the House door, and would not permit him to pass: which was (...) in the
^ournal Book, as a Contempt. Being startled with this sudden force on the
House, they concluded not to proceed in Business till their Members should be
(...) (Therefore they judged them no breakers, but performers of their trust,
when seized and secluded by the Army;) and in the mean time ordered, that the
General should be sent (...) of the Armies proceedings in seizing the Members*
Upon this, The General Council of Officers not before ^anuary 3. 1648. (when
they had not left 50 Members in it) returned their Answer to them, That they
were (...), (upon mere forged pretenses) and that these Members (...) which
occasioned their to (...) and seize them. A pretty excuse and cloak for see
transcendent a Treason.

4. That in this Answer, they most falsely scandalized, traduced the secluded
and secured Members, as Nedham does in their terms, with some additions of his
own, which I shall briefly refute:

1. He says, that Mr. Prynne and his party heretofore and now secluded, did
seclude and separate themselves from the Public Interest before they were
secluded, p. 28. But wherein he tells us not. And is this either evidence or
conviction to seclude us? Tertull. Apologia pro Christianis.
Quis insons erit si accusasse sufficiat?

2ly. He adds, our seclusion is justifiable by Lex talionis, because We had
some time before secluded the honest party of the House, by encouraging the
Apprentices who came to the House door, draveaway the faithful party (of which
the Members now sitting are principal) that the Speaker and they were forced to
fly out of Town for (...) to the Army, etc. And Mr. Prynne and all his party
approved this Proceeding. Here Interest lies for the whetstone: For 1. Mr.
Prynne sat not at all as a Member in the House, till November: 7. 1648. being
elected but in August before, without his privity, and much against his will:
This tumult was in July, 1647. above a year and quarter before; yet Mr. Prynne
must then assent to it, as a Member, and be guilty of it and all his charges,
p. 30, 31, 32. before he was a Member, and be for ever convicted and silenced
thereby. 2ly. There was never the least color1 of truth or proof, that any of
the secluded Members raised, or encouraged this tumult of the Apprentices. 3ly.
Most of them, to my knowledge, did then both in public and private, declare
their dislike thereof as much as any now sitting. 4ly. These Apprentices
secluded not one Member out of the House, much less secured any, as the Army
did; but only kept most of them in the House, till their petition was answered
by them; upon which they all departed without any future force: After which the
House adjourned from Monday night till Thursday morning, because of the general
Fast the Wednesday following. 3ly. The Members pretended to be forced out of
Town by this tumult, and to fly for protection to the Army, departed not
thence, till some Army Officers solicited them by persuasions and menaces to
repair to the Army and leave the House, against their judgments, as diverse of
them have confessed. Particularly Mr: Lenthall the Speaker being at the Fast in
Margaret^ Church the Wednesday following, discoursing with Sir Ralph Ashton,
Sir Benjamin Rudyer and 4 more Members sitting with him, between the two
Sermons; told them of his own accord That there was a scandalous report raised
in Town, that he meant to leave the House and run away to the Army: but for his
own part, he seriously protested he had not any such thought or intention, but
resolved to continue in Town, and to live and die with the other Members in the
House, if there were cause. On Thursday morning most of the Members appeared at
the House, expecting the Speakers coming till near 11 of the clock, and sent 2
or 3 Messengers for him. At last they were informed, that he was sent for, and
gone that (...) to the Army. Whereupon Sir Ralph Ashton and those who sat with
him at the Fast, related his words in my hearing (being then casually in the
House) to the other Members, and sundry times since to the House and to my
self; Hereupon the Members present were necessitated to choose another Speaker
pro tempore, (as they had often times done in case of sickness or absence, both
before and since) to supply his place, adjourn* and dispatch the business of
the House: So as the Speaker and Members then departing to the Army, without
the Houses leave or privity, voluntarily secluded themselves, and were neither
secluded by the Apprentices, nor their fellow members; who were so far from
secluding, that they sent sundry Messengers to call them to the House, and were
highly discontented at this their causless departure from it. 5ly. These
Apprentices came without any arms at all to the House, only with a Petition
(occasioned by the Army Officers encroachments upon the Cities Militia, and
Privileges,) without any intention to seclude or secure any one Member,
departing from the House that day, and never returning to disturb them after.
But the undutifull Army Officers, who so much declame against this unarmed
force as Treasonable; against both Houses Votes, Orders, Letters to them, not
only brought up the Army to Westminster, placed whole Regiments of them in arms
at their very doors, who secluded the whole House of Peers, and above two parts
of three of the Commons House; giving the Captains of the guards a particular
list whom to secure, whom to seclude, and whom only to admit; but likewise
continued their forcible great armed guards upon the Houses, several weeks, yea
months, and detained me with other Members Prisoners under them two or three
months; and that after this pretended force of the Apprentices, (no ways
parallel to theirs, who were purposely raised to guard us, not seclude us)
which they so much condemned; and the Speaker himself in his printed Letter of
July 29. with the rest upon their return to the House in their Ordinance of
August 20. 1647. so far branded, as to make and declare all proceedings during
their absence void, by reason o^ (...) Therefore what ever other men may do,
Nedham (to use his own words, p. 29.) and his now sitting party, the
Army Officers and all their adherents, must henceforth be silent, and for shame
lay their mouths in the dust for ever, as to this particular. For, if our
falsely pretended encouraging, conniving at this unarmed sudden tumult of the
Apprentices in July, 1647. were a sufficient ground for our seclusion from the
House as infringers of our trusts; then their evident, apparent fore-plotted
encouraging, conniving at and justifying the Armies force upon the House it
self and the XI. Members twice or thrice, Anno 1647. and on the Majority of the
Commons, and whole House of Lords, 1648. and now again on Mr: P: and others of
them May 7. and 9. 1659. must for ever disable and seclude them to sit or act
as Members in the House, by their own Law and Plea.

3ly. All the rest of his Objections, p: 29, 30. (taken out of the Officers
Answer, Jan: 3.) as they concern not Mr: Prynne, being then no Member; so they
were so satisfactorily answered, refelled as most false and scandalous, by the
secured and secluded Members themselves, in their Vindication in answer
thereunto, printed 1649: p. 7, to 22. that impudency it self might blush to
revive them now: to which I referr the Reader for satisfaction. Only whereas
the Officers then, and Nedham now Object, That the Malignant and Neutral party
in the Horse to gain the Major Vote, upon new elections, by indirect means,
brought in a flood of Malignants or Neuters into the House; I shall add to
what the secluded Members then replied unto this forged Aspersion in their
Vindication, p. 7, 8. First, That all the secluded Members came in upon fair
and unquestionable elections, upon the new recruit; but many of those who sat
both before, at, and after our seclusion, upon Col. Rich, his election at
Cyrencester as foul as any.
most foul ones, voted void long before by the Committee of Privileges, as
Humfry Edwards, and Fryes elections were, who yet continued sitting. 2. That
most of these new Members were brought in by the force, power, and menaces of
the Army, and solicitation of their Solicitor General and Chaplain, Hugh
Peter's; who like an Vbiquitary, was present at the elections for most Counties,
Cities and Boroughs throughout England, and well bribed for his pains, to
canvas for voices for the Armies Instruments. 3ly. That 22 of those 42 Members
called in by the Army Officers, May 7. 1659. and And 8 of them, by writs after
the Kings death; as Mr. Cycil. that self-degraded Earl of Salisbury and others.
above half of those who sat with them since, came in upon this new Recruit of
Malignants and Neuters. 4ly. Col. Ireton, Harrison, Skippon, Rich, Ludlow,
Ingoldesby, Mountague, White, Sydenham, Bingham, Jones, yea Fleetwood himself,
the swaying Army-members when we were secluded, and chief Actors in it) came
all in upon these New elections; some of them being prime Authors, Members of
this New Convention invited in Fleetwoods name and Army Officers to sit, and
authors of our new seclusion: Therefore the Armies and Nedhams slander of our
pretended filling the house upon the new recruit with Malignants (as these have
proved to us at least) must recoyl wholly upon themselves, as such, and be a
real ground for their, not our seclusions. Lastly, if our filling the House by
New Elections to get a Major Vote, were a Crime demeriting seclusion from it:
Certainly their emptying the House then and now to get a Major vote by
secluding most of the Members, must be a Crime and practice, demeriting an
expulsion.

5. The Army Officers themselves in their very answer, waved all these
Calumnies, as no ground of our seclusion; declaring to the sitting Members;
That the sole cause of our seclusion, was, The Vote we passed upon the long
nights debate: That the Answers of the King to the Propositions of both Houses,
was a ground for the House to proceed upon for the settlement of the Peace of
the Kingdom: Which Vote being passed See the Epistle and Appendix to my Speech,
1648.
after 3 days and one whole nights solemn debate, without dividing the House,
notwithstanding the Armies march to the very doors. Hereupon the Army Officers
(to wrest both the Regal and Parliamental power, and Kings Revenues into their
own hands, prevent all hopes of future peace, settlement, and involve us in
endless wars, changes, revolutions, as visible sad experience has evidenced
ever since) mutinying the common soldiers against us by misreports, the very
next morning Dec: 6. marching with several Regiments of horse and foot to the
doors of both Houses, ^uarding all accesses to them; where they seized my Self,
with above 40 Members more at the House door going to discharge their trusts,
pulled two Members out of the House it self; secluded and chased away above 200
Members more, besides the Lords whole House. And whether the passing of this
vote alone after 6. years intestine wars, at the earnest desire of our whole 3
Kingdoms, almost ruined by them, according to our judgments, consciences,
Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, Duty, and the trust reposed in us, by our
electors, upon such ample Concessions of Liberty, benefit to the Subjects,
security to Religion, and safety to our 3: Kingdoms, the Army, Parliament, all
adhering to them, as our ancestors, selves never formerly possessed, expected,
desired; and we never since enjoyed, nor can expect under any New Republike, or
Parliamentary Conventicle whatsoever; was a breach of our Parliamentary trusts,
and a closing with the King upon his own terms, and such as within a short time
would (of necessity) have yielded up and betrayed our lives, liberties, and
whole cause contested for into the Kings tyrannical power, as these
Army Officers, and this impudent Mountebank most scandalously affirm, let their
own consciences and our whole 3 Nations judge; the secured and secluded Members
in their Vindication, and I, in My Speech in Parliament, and Epistle before it,
having so largely refuted it, that the Devil himself (the John 8. 44.
Father of lies) would blush to revive such a Lie and Slander as this: And how
destructive it is and has been not only to the privileges and freedom, but
being of Parliaments, for Soldiers and those who are no Members, without
hearing or accusation, to pull the Major part of the Members out of the House,
only for voting according to their consciences, after free and full debates,
against the votes or designs of the lesser, inconsiderabler part confederating
with the Army; let all wise men, and the sad effects thereof ever since,
determine.

6ly. These Army Officers never impeached any of the then secluded Members for
breach of their trusts, to those few sitting Members they left behind of their
own party, by way of Charge or Article, to which they might give a legal
answer, and be brought to a public trial; and when they were pressed to charge
some of them they secured as the greatest Delinquents in this kind, with
particular breaches of their trusts, they answered, They had yet no charge at
all ready against any of them, but hoped to provide one in due time; which they
never did to this day. As for their scandalous Answer, Jan: 3. being no legal
Charge against the Members, but a pitiful false excuse of their own breach of
trust, faith, duty in seizing and secluding them; Mr. Prynne in particular in
his Epistle to his Speech, and the other Members in their Vindication, gave
such a satisfactory Answer to all the Calumnies in it, as they never yet
replied to: And therefore must stand clear from this Scandalum Magnum and
Magnatum in the sight of God and Man.

7ly. Sundry of the Members sitting since our seclusion, and now again, have
confessed to me; that our seclusion was most unjust; and that their forcible
seclusions since, April 20. 1653. and in 1654. was but a just retaliation and
punishment of God upon them, for consenting to our unjust seclusion in December
1648. yea, a means to deprive us from all future hopes of a free Parliament, so
long as we had any standing Army in England. And yet must we be guilty of
breach of trust?

8ly. Major ^acker himself (an Anabaptist) then and now again a Member of the
Army, in the last Convention at Westminster, publicly acknowledged in the
House, in a long Speech, that he and others of the Army who had a hand in
securing and secluding us, were seduced and instigated thereunto by Cromwels
(and Iretons) suggestions; that we were dishonest men, who pursued our own
private interests and the Kings, to the prejudice of the public: But
afterward he clearly discerned, That we were very honest Gentlemen, pursuing
nothing but the public Interest; acting according to our consciences; and that
he had often cried God mercy in private; and did there again and again cry them
mercy in public; and hoped they would all forgive him, for having a hand in
secluding us: which he often repeated. And others have acknowledged, they were
knaved and fooled into this Action, by slanderous Misinformations. Wherefore
malice it self must needs acquit us from this forged Calumny.

9ly. Those principal Officers of the Army, who accused, and secluded us as
Trust-breakers in Dec. 1648. both accused those who sat from 1648. till April
20. 1653. turned them all out of doors, and declared them actually dissolved,
for sundry years, as far greater Infringers of their Parliamentary trusts than
we; stiling them in The Armies Declaration, Apr. 20 1653. August 22. 1653. And
a true state of the Commonwealth of England, p. 8, 10.
two printed Declarations, A Corrupt party, carrying on their own Designs to
perpetuate themselves in the Parliamentary and Supreme Authority; never
answering the ends which God, his People, and the whole Nation expected from
them, etc. Therefore if their single accusation of us alone by way of Answer
(which we refuted in print) disabled us for ever to sit in the House since
1648. and now again since May 7: 1659. by Nedhams and Rogers resolutions and
the Army Officers who secluded us; Then much more this their doubled and
trebled Accusation against all sitting after our seclusion, and now resitting,
by way of Declaration (which they never yet answered) must much more disable
them now to sit and act again as a House, especially without us, as Members of
that Parliament, if continuing still in being.

10ly. The trust reposed in all Members of the Commons House secluded or
unsecluded in the last Parliament of King Charles, is punctually expressed,
comprised in the Writs and Indentures by which they were chosen, returned,
empowred, trusted, to fit and act as Members by the Commonalties who elected
them; and in the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which they all took, and
ought to take, by the Statutes of 5 Eliz. c. 1. and 7 Jac. c. 6. before they
could sit or vote as Members. Now this trust was wholly and solely, to do and
consent to those things which should happen to be ordained by Common Consent of
the King, Lords and Commons, by Common counsel of the Realm, concerning certain
arduous and urgent affairs, touching the Defense, State, Crown of the King and
his Kingdom, and of the Church of England: to bear faith and true Allegiance to
the King, his heirs and successors; and him and them to defend, with all
rights, jurisdictions annexed and belonging to the Imperial Crown of England,
against all attempts and conspiracies whatsoever: As the Writs and Returns
themselves, (yea all See the second Part of my Register, and Calendar of all
Parliamentary Writs.
ancient Writs of this kind, and their returns,) and the express words of
these Oaths resolve; with the Protestation, League, Covenant, and manifold
Declarations, Votes, Remonstrances of both Houses, to which those sitting from
48. to 53. and now met again, gave their full, free consents and subscriptions,
as well as the secluded Members. Let heaven, earth, our whole 3. Kingdoms, and
our Accusers themselves then, now resolve, whether I and my secluded
Companions, who constantly, loyally, strenuously in the forecited vote, and all
other our proceedings, pursued those Trusts, Oaths, Duties, in despite of all
Oppositions; or those unsecluded sitting, re-sitting Members and Army Officers,
who have most apparently, perfidiously violated them in every branch, by and
since our seclusions, to the destruction of our King, Kingdoms, Kingship,
Parliament, Church, all rights and Jurisdictions of the Crown, and subversion
of the Liberty, Property, Privileges of their fellow Members and all other
subjects; be the Greatest Trust-breakers, Traitors; and which of us best
deserve to lose not only our right of sitting any more in the House, but our
very lives, heads, liberties, estates, in point of justice, and conscience.

All that is or can be objected against us, Objection.
with any shadow of reflection, is the Nedham, p. 31.
Vote of January 11. 1648. made upon the Armies Answer touching our securing,
Jan: 3. That the House does approve of the Substance of the (...) of the
General (...) of the Officers of the (...) to the Demands of this House
touching the securing (...) secluding of some Members thereof: And does appoint
a Committee (of 24.) or any 5. of them, to consider what is further to be done
upon the said Answer, and present the same to the House. But does this Vote fix
any breach of trust upon us for which we deserved perpetual seclusion, without
any hearing, impeachment, trial? Surely not in the least degree. For 1. it
approves only the substance of the Armies Answer, which is general and
indefinite: 2ly, It is not touching the securing and secluding of all the
Members then secured, or secluded by the Officers; but only of some of those
Members who were secured, as well as secluded; without naming any one of them
in particular, most of them being released before this vote: Therefore it can
fix no guilt or crime upon any one particular Member of us, unless those some
had been nominated: 3ly, This Vote was past behind our backs, without hearing
any of us before it passed: 4ly, A special Committee was appointed to consider
further of their answer, and report what was further to be done therein; which
they never did: 5ly, This Vote was made above a full Month after our secluding
and securing, when all the Members but 42. were secluded or driven thence; and
the rest sitting under the Force, Guards, of the Army; and so by their own
Votes and Ordinance of August 20. 1647. this Vote, with all their other
proceedings were mere Nullities. 6ly, Ten of those who passed this Vote, were
the very Army Officers who made the Answer, the chief Contrivers, Authors of
our seizing, securing, and chief Accusers; Therefore most unfit to be our
Judges, or pass any Vote against us behind our backs: especially since they
promised to conferr with us at Wa^^ingford House the Evening they seized us;
and yet lodged us all night on the bare boards in Hell. After which they
promised to confer with us the next morning 9. a clock at Whitehall; and there
kept us fasting, waiting in the cold till 7. at night, without once vouchsafing
to see us, sending us away thence through the dirt, guarded on every side like
Rogue^ to the Kings head, and Swan in the Strand; where they promised several
times to conferr with us, but never came to do it. Now, whether there can be
any credit given to their Votes or Answer, who so frequently brake both their
trusts, words, faiths, promises to us and others, before this their Answer, let
the world, and our greatest Enemies determine. Finally, the chief Authors of and
instruments in this our Accusation and seclusion, were the very selfsame
Army Officers and Members who in April 1653, dishoused, As they have done now
again, October. 13. since this was first printed.
dissolved those now sitting, and then accused, branded them twice or thrice in
print, as far greater Infringe^s o^ their trusts than we: as for the House of
Lords, secluded, suppressed by them, See their Declaration etc Votes, M. 17.
for suppressing the Lords House.
there was never the least breach of trust objected against them; Neither had
the Army, See my plea for the Lords.
or smaller Garbled remainder of the Commons house, the least right or
jurisdiction to seclude or eject the Majority of their fellow Members, much
less the whole House of Peers. Upon all which premi^es, I here appeal to all
the Tribunals of Men on Earth, and Gods, Christ's Tribunals in Heaven (before
which I summon all our Old and New Accusers whatsoever) to judge; Whether this
Great Charge of breach of our trusts, ever justly could, or henceforth can be
objected against us civilly or criminally, without the greatest scandal; and
whether this could be a lawful ground for any to justify our first or last
seclusion?

The 3d Question is this; King Charles his Writ, assembled at Westminster, 3.
Nov: 1640. was not totally and finally dissolved by his beheading, January 30.
1648. notwithstanding the statute of 17 Caroli c. 7?

In this my 2. new Antagonists are divided. Rogers, p. 7. conf^sseth it to be
dissolved; and that I have learnedly proved it in my Narrative, p. 24, to 34.
Adding, How Needless that long Discourse is, to prove what we never denied.
But though he, and his we, denied it not; yet those who sat from 1648. till
16^3. by pretext of their first writs, elections, and of this Act, as they then
affirmed in and by their Speeches, Declarations; Mr. Abbot and Purefoye, in
their Prynne against Prynne, (both of them Members, and one of them now
sitting) with their President J. Bradshaw, who condemned the King, and sundry
others denied it; yea most now sitting denied it by words and action; whereupon
I unanswerably refelled them, and satisfied most others by that long Discourse:
Therefore it was not needless, as this Critic rashly censures it.

Nedham, p. 35, 36, 37. though he confesses; That according to Law the
Parliament was d^ssolved by the Kings death; and that whiles the old
Constitution of Parliaments remained without disturbance it is reason this Law
should be retained, for the reasons I have rendered: Yet in this particular
case, by reason of the war between King and Parliament, he will by no means
yield the Parliament to be dissolved by the Kings death, but to remain entirely
in the Members sitting at his death; and that it is now again revived in them,
after above 6. years interruption: to prove which strange Chymara, by stranger
Mediums, he Page 35. to 42.
spends some pages, to convince and satisfy all Contradictors. I shall a
little examine his absurd and most dangerous Principles from whence he draws his
Conclusion. His main Principle to prove it, i^ this.

That the King by his actual war against the Parliament, did thereupon forfeit
his Kingship and Crown, and became a private person and enemy; dissolved the
Constitution both of the Kingdom and Parliament; and not only violated all Law
in the branches, but plucked up she very roof of it, in destroying the
Parliamentary Establishment. as much as in him lay, and thereby introduced
another Law of Arms. From whence he deduceth 3. Conclusions: 1 The Justice of
secluding the Members: 2ly, The Sufficiency of the authority that condemned and
executed the King: 3ly, The Legality of the remaining Members continuing and
sitting as the Parliament, and Supreme Authority of England, which after the
Kings beheading, and other M^mbers and Lords seclusion, descended and was
transmitted to them by the Law of war, for the people. This he determines to be
Law and Reason too, sufficient to convince both, Royal^ists and Presbyterians
of the Lawfulnes of the Power, and present sitting, acting as a Parliament, by
those few Members at Westminster, secluding all the rest.

To which I answer: 1. That if the Kings death by Law, Reason, dissolved the
Parliament in an orderly course, because his writs of summons abated by his
death, and they could not treat with him concerning his and his Kingdoms
affairs, nor he consent to any Bills after his decease: Which he freely grants:
Then by the self-same Reason, Law, his violent death must dissolve this
Parliament, as I have largely proved. 2ly, If the Kings levying war against the
Parliament, did actually dissolve the very Constitution, Law of the Parliament
and Kingdom, and made him no King at all, but ai private person; which he lays
for his foundation; then it must necessarily dissolve the Parliament and
Kingdom too, and make them no Parliament, no Kingdom at all, as well as himself
no King. For how can the Parliament continue, when its very Constitution is
desolved? 3ly, By this Position it inevitably follows, that we had neither
King, Parliament, Kingdom, nor any Laws at all but only of War, from the
beginning of the Wars or first battle at least, between the Kings and
Parliaments forces many years before his death; But this the King, Kingdom,
Parliament, the sitting as well as secluded Members, both Armies, and our whole
3. Kingdoms ever denied in all their Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Declarations,
Remonstrances, Petitions, Treaties, Propositions whatsoever from 1641. till
December 1648. and Nedham himself in his Diurna^is and Mercuries; In all which
the Parliament, both Houses, and Army Officers styled him their KING, and the
King and his party ever styled them the Houses of Parliament. Therefore this
position must be a most Notorious Falthood, wherein Interest does grossly lie.
4ly. Those he styles the honest faithful Members, in their very Votes of Non
addresses (passed by force and fraud) in their Knack for the Kings trial,
Impeachment, Proceedings, Sentence of condemnation against him, after our
seclusion, in their D^claration of 17 Martii 1648. after his death, and sundry
other Papers, ever styled and acknowledged him TO BE KING, and ENGLAND HIS
KINGDOM, notwithstanding the wars between him and the Parliament: Therefore the
very war did not Unking, nor make him a Private person, no^ dissolve the
Constitution of the Kingdom and Pat^ during his life, else there could not be a
war against or between the King or Parliament, if the war it self unkinged him,
unparliamented them, and dissolved all their constitutions. 5ly. No person by
the Deuteronomy. 17. 8 c. 19. 15. John 7. 51. Acts 19. 38. c. 25. 17. Magna Carta, c.
29. and Cook ibidem.
Law of God, Nature, Nations, the Great Charter, Laws, Statutes of England, and
Votes of Parliament, ought actually to forfeit, or to be ipso facto deprived of
his Office, Freebold, Liberties, Estate, Life, without a legal proceeding,
trial, conviction, judgment, attainder: Much less then the King himself, the
Supreme Magistrate, and Governor of the Realm (in whom all have a common
interest) unkinged and made a private person, or public Enemy, and totally
deprived of his Crown and Sovereignty: Therefore his actual levying war against
the Parliament, without, before any legal impeachment, conviction, or sentence
of deposition, could not unking nor make him a private person, as the cases of
Edward the 2. and Richard the 2. and the sea my Plea for the Lords, p 424 to
460.
Parliaments which deprived them of their Kingships after their resignations,
clearly resolved, against this Jesuitical new Doctrine. 6ly. If the King by his
bare levying war against the Parliament, actually lost his Kingship and became
a mere private person before any sentence of deprivation, then by the self-^ame
reason, law, his old and new revived Parliament, by its manifold old and new
breaches of trust is actually dissolved and become no Paul. at all; yea every
Traitor levying war, conspiring against the King, every Murderer, Thief, Felon,
corrupt Judge, Justice, Mayor, Sherif, Inferior Office, by the very committing
of Treason, Murder, Felony, Adultery, Bribery, Injustice, and breach of their
respective trusts, should be actually attainted of those offenses, their Lands,
Offices presently confiscated, without my Indictment, trial, verdict, judgment
against them: yea every act of Adultery by any Husband or Wise should actually
dissolve the bond of marriage for ever, without and before any Sentence of
divorce between them: which In his Bridebush.
Mr. Wheatly publicly recanted as a dangerous error. And how destructive such
new Nedham, Interest Low would prove to all men's lives, liberties, estates, yea
to every man's soul (since every act of sin by like consequence should
actually damn, and make even Saints themselves to (...) totally and finally
from Grace and Gods favor) let all judicious men resolve. 7ly. If this be Law,
then had the King and Parliament upon any Treaty after the wars, accorded; he
ought to have been new proclaimed, installed, crowned King again; and the
Parliament resummoned by new writs. 8ly. He confesses this to be the very
principle of Barclay the He dyed a Jesuit, in the Jesuits College at Rome.
Jesuit, from whom he borrows it, p. 34. Therefore his present Parliament and
Republike built thereon, are purely Jesuitical by his own confession. 9ly. This
Jesuits position is not so bad as his; He speaks not of every Civil war made by
a King upon his Subjects, for which there may be just occasions; but only of a
King warring upon his people of purpose to extirpate and destroy them: which he
says, it seems almost impossible any King should be so mad as ever to attempt.
Which the King in his war against the Parliament, by his victories, proceedings
against the Prisoners, Members, Towns he took during ^he wars, in sparing all
their lives actually, really, and often times verbally and professedly disclamed
in all his Proclamations, Speeches, Remonstrances, Messages to, and Treaties
with the Houses. Therefore his war against them, did neither unking him, nor
make him a private person and public Enemy, by this Jesuits resolution. 10ly.
If the Kings war against the Parliament did really unking him; then certainly
the Generals, ArmyOfficers, and Armies actual levying war upon both Houses of
Parliament, by secluding, securing the Members and King, did really
uncommission and (...) ^my them, and made them no Officers, no Army at all, but
a rebellious rout; and all Members concurring with them therein, no Members, no
Parliament at all. The sequel is infallible. Therefore Nedham must either now
disclaim this desperate Jesuitical position, with all his 3. Treasonable
Conclusions from it; or else henceforth disclame the Army Officers, Army, and
their formerly suppressed, now revived Parliament. 11ly. Admit his Paradox
true, that the King by his war against the Parliament, actually ceased to be a
King, etc. yet his Inference thence, that the Parliament was not dissolved by
his death, but continued after it, is most false; yea the contrary thence
inevitably follows, that it was wholly dissolved long before his death, so soon
as he ceased to be a King and became a private person; and that by the express
resolution of the whole Parliaments of 22 R. 2. and 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 1, 2,
3. in a case most like to ours. See Speed, T^ussel, Holinshed, Walsingham,
Hall, Stow, and others in R. 2. and H. 4. My Plea for the Lords, p. 424* to 456.
Henry Duke of Lancaster, raising a great Army to lay Title to the Crown, King
Richard the 2d. bringing an Army to suppress him; the King finding his forces
over-weak, and the Dukes too potent for him, having seized Bristol, and other
forts; thereupon a Parlee was had between them, and agreed, King Richard should
summon a Parliament at Westminster, wherein he should resign his Crown,
renounce his Kingship, and the Duke to succeed him. Upon this he accordingly
summoned a Parliament, where he formally resigned, renounced his Kingship, and
was actually deposed of it by sentence, and Henry the 4. who claimed the Crown
upon his resignation, declared King. Which done, it was resolved, declared both
by the Parliament, King, Lords, Commons, Judges, that this Parliament was
actually dissolved by King Richards deposing to all intents; and a new
Parliament ordered to be summoned by King Henry in his own name, wherein he was
declared, crowned King, and the resignation, deposing of Richard the 2.
ratified, and recorded. Therefore by the resolution of both these Parliaments,
(by Nedhams own position, if true) the last Parliament of King Charles, was so
far from being continued only by his wars, even after his death, which else
would have dissolved it without dispute, that it actually dissolved it in his
life time, six years before his death, by degrading him from his Kingship, and
making him a private person. And then his Westminster Juncto sitting from 1648.
to 1653. and now again, cannot have the least shadow of right, law, reason, to
fit, act as any part of the Especially the Members sitting by writs issued by
the Keepers of the Liberties of England after the Kings beheading.
last Parliament summoned by the King, neither could the whole Parliamentary
and supreme power descend or be transferred to them alone by any Law or color
of right whatsoever, by the Kings war, death, or our seclusions, as he most
absurdly concludes. 12ly. The sum of all Nedhams discourse to support his
present Parliaments and Republikes right, title, is but this: That in civil
wars and commotions the conquering or prevailing party gains a legal Supreme
Authority and Parliamentary power over over the whole: That the Kings royal
authority devolved by conquest to the Parliament: the whole Parliamentary
Authority to his Juncto by their forcible seclusion of the Majority of the
Commons, and suppression of the House of Lords. And if so, then by the
self-same consequence; the whole Kingly and Parliamental Authority was lawfully
devolved on the Lord Gen: Fairfax and Army Officers when they seized the King,
secluded the Members, suppressed the Lords, and placed Guards on those that sat
in 1648. Or at least to such of the Officers as were then Members of the
Commons House not to the Juncto since or now sitting; That afterward it
descended, devolved to Genesis Cromwell (a principal Member) when he conquered and
turned the Juncto out of doors, Apr. 20, 1653. as he and the Army Officers then
argued; who thereupon (after some Months exercise thereof by making New Laws,
and imposing New Taxes at Whitchall, Of 120, and ^00 thousand pounds a Month,
by a Whitehall Ordinance.
Anno 1653.) afterward transferred it by deed to their Little Conventicle
elected by them in September, part of which resigning back their Supreme power
to Cromwell, he thereupon claimed it as wholly and absolutely vested in
himself, without any limits (as he declared in his printed Speeches 1654. and
1657.) whereupon he retained it under the Title of A ROYAL PROTECTOR, till his
death, then delegating it to his Son Richard, who by this original Title
enjoyed it; till overpowred by his Brother Fleetwood and other Army Officers,
who by this right of the Long Sword alone, unprotectored him, and then called
in the remainder of the Old Juncto to sit and act as a which by the fame Law,
reason, they have since thrust out of doors, and usurped the Supreme
Legislative power to their General Council of Army Officers, and Committee of
Safety, repealing, nulling their Juncto^s, Acts Orders, Proceedings, to all
intents whatsoever, in their Declaration, Oct. 27. 1659.
Parliament under them. So that by Nedhams Doctrine, the Supreme Regal and
Parliamental power is legally residing in those Army Officers who have
conquered all the rest, till some other greater, stronger power shall be able
to conquer them; and his Westminster^ Conventicle is but their Substitute to
act, vote what they shall prescribe. And by the self-same principle, as the
Army Officers by rebelling against and suppressing the Parliament and their
Masters, who raised, waged them for their defense, contrary to all Laws of God,
man, their own Oaths, Commissions, thereby gained a just and legal Title (as
he argues) to the Supreme Regal and Parliamental Authority of the Nation (not
the people in whom they pretended it to be vested) to any Traitor by killing or
dispossessing his lawful Sovereign, any Son by killing or disseising his
Father, any Servant by imprisoning, killing, or tu^ining, keeping his Master
out of doers, every Thief, plunderer in the world, able by force to take away
any persons purse, goods, house, lands, or shall by power make himself a Judge,
Justice, Magistrate, or take away another man's wife, shall have a just and
legal Title against the owners and all others: and Nedhams Parliament and new
Republike can neither condemn nor execute any Thief, Pirate, Murderer,
Plunderer, Adulterer, Ravisher, nor punish any disseiser or wrong-doer
whatsoever that ^^a stronger than the party injured; since they all may
justify their force, actions, to be lawful against the letter of the 6, 7, 8,
9, and 10 Commandments by the self-same Law, Divinity, Saintlike Title of the
longest Sword, the greatest might, and prevailing party. I hope by this time,
he and all others clearly discern the desperate fatal consequences of his
Jesuitical position, and that his Interest will not lie, is but a mere sink of
Lies, and destructive paradoxes.

If all this will not help to prop up the legal Sovereign Authority of his
present Parliament and Republike, he has 3. other Pillars to support them, p.
37. 1. The Law of Necess^^y, a pretty bull, when as the old proverb resolves,
Necessitas non habet legem; I am sure it will now admit of no Law, Justice,
Conscience, Equity. (...). Did not the beheaded King plead this Law for
Ship Money, Excise, and other illegal projects? yet the long See the Acts
Votes, Declarations against them.
Parliament adjudged necessity in these cases, to be no Law, nor Plea at all.
And shall those very Members plead it in their own case now, who then judged it
no Law nor Plea in his? 3ly. This Law was pleaded by Cromwell and the
Army Officers in April 1653. for the dissolution of those now sitting, who
together with N^dham, p. 40. resolve it no Law or Plea at all; and can it be
justly urged now for their restitution? 4ly. It is a pretext for all villainy,
treachery, impiety, violence ever acted in the world, as I have proved in my
Epistle to my Speech, and the secluded (...) in their Vindication, when the
Officers pretended it for our seclusion; and can it then be made the foundation
of Commonwealths and its Junctoes constitution? 5ly. He adds out of Grotius,
l. 2. de Jure Belli, cap. 6. Necessitas summa reduoit res ad merum jus naturae.
If so, and we are now reduced to such a necessity, as he argues: then it
follows, 1. That this extreme necessity which exempts any part of a Kingdom,
Republike, City from the power, jurisdiction of the whole, as Grotius there
resolves, has much more exempted our whole three Kingdoms, the entire Lords
House and Nobility, the Majority of the old Commons House yet surviving, with
all Counties, Cities, Boroughs for which they served; from the power,
jurisdiction of the present usurping Juncto, Army, so that they have no right,
authority, color at all to impose any new Laws, Taxes, Militiaes, Excises on
all or any of them; nor yet to imprison, sequester, punish any of them for
defending themselves by force of arms against their unjust usurpations over
them. 2ly. That they can As the General Council of Officers of the Army, in
their Declaration, Octo. 27. 1659. p. 18, 19. intend to do.
impose no new Government or Republike on all or any of them, without their own
free voluntary elections, consents; because all politic Governments and
Corporations are and ought to be made by voluntary contract and free consent of
all the parts, ac propterea ju^ ejus, in parts ex prim^va voluntate metiendum
est, as Grotius there resolves. 3ly. That all the integral parts of any
politic body, when the first agreement and Government which united them into a
Kingdom or Republike is dissolved (as Nedham asserts our Kingdom and Parliament
are) by the mere right and Law of Nature have as inseparable, inherent a right,
vote to cast themselves into another new form of Government, as any one
prevailing party of that body, being all equally men, Englishmen, freemen by
Nature, and having no superiority over each other. Therefore the Supreme
authority and Parliamentary power in our present condition and extreme
necessity by Grotius his decision is not devolved to the Westminster Juncto, or
Army Officers, as Nedham^ absurdly concludes, against his Oracle Grotius, but
to the generality of the people, as this very Juncto voted Jan: 6. 1648. and
the Army Officers declared, in their Agreement of the people presented to them
November 20. 1648. and Jan. 20. 1649. Therefore by their own Votes,
resolutions, practices, the generality of the people, not the Juncto, are now
the Supreme authority; and those 50 or 60 Members of the old Parliament and
Much less their General Council of the Army Officers, and New Committee of
Safety.
Army, have not the least pretext of Right, Law, Reason, power to domineer over
all the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, Freemen of the Nation, and the secluded
Members, nor totally to seclude them all from their Councils, Company; much
less to secure, disarm, plunder them at their pleasures, to double, treble
their Taxes, to use them not like their fellow freemen, but their Egyptian
bondslaves, as now they do. What such an Extremity, Necessity then may now put
our whole three Nations justly upon by Grotius and Nedhams Law too, let them
wisely and timely consider for their own and the public safety.

His 2. Pillar is this of Grotius, That In a civil war, the written and
established Laws of Nations are of no force; (Indeed we now find it true by
sad experience under our New Legifers and Tax-masters) and then that only is to
be admitted Law, which shall be settled by the prevailing party. How this new
doctrine will suit with all our late Parliamentary Votes, Ordinances,
Declarations, Remonstrances, Protestations, League, Covenant, Soldiers
Commissions, and Army-Remonstrances; or with our Civil war, which was only for
the preservation and defense of our ancient fundamental Laws, Statutes, and
Great Charter of our Liberties, against all arbitrary encroachments,
alterations, violations of them; Or with the Junctoes Declaration, March 17.
1648. for turning our Kingdom into a Free State; wherein they promise over and
over, inviolably to defend and maintain these ancient Laws, The Badges of our
Freedom, and the most excellent of all other Laws in the world, by violation,
alteration, or abrogation whereof greater mischiefs would inevitably befall us,
than ever we suffered under our Kings and Kingly Government: Or how it will
accord with their Proclamation, May 7. 1659. to like purpose; let Nedham, and
that power for which he pleads resolve us: To whose arbitrary wills and tyranny
(if this monstrous paradox be Oracle) he prostrates all our Laws and Liberties;
after full 17 years bloody contests, and most cruel Concertations for their
Defense, against this his position and practice.

His 3. pillar is this, which he applies to the particular case of the secluded
Members, p. 37. Si qui jure suo uti non possunt, ^orum jus acerescit
praesentibus: Grotius l. 2. c. 5. His meaning is, that if any Members of a
Senate, Court or Parliament be absent through sickness, or any other voluntary
or necessary occasions, the rest may sit and act: will it thence follow, as
this Mountebank argues, Ergo, the Minor part of the Commons House (yea less
than 40 of them) may fit and act now and heretofore, not only as a Commons
House, but absolute Parl. because they and the Army forcibly secluded the Major
part, the whole House of Lords, and beheaded King. Such a gross Nonsequitur as
this, is no better justified from Grotius words, than this; The Army may
forcibly seclude all but 5 or 6 of those now sitting, or leave Fleetwood, and
Sir H. Vane alone: Ergo, in such a case the whole right and power of the
Parliament accrues to them alone, and they may sit, vote as a Parliament, and
make what Laws, Acts, and impose what Taxes, Excises they please, as And
Fleetwood, with his New Committee of Safety now.
Cromwell and his Council did at Whitehall upon the self-same ground. Vno
absurdo dato mill sequuntur.

You see now by this time the falsehood, absurdity, and dangerous consequences
of Nedhams Atheistical, Jesuitical Principles, whereon he would bottom the
continuance, revival, justice, legality of his pretended Parliament, and
Republike, laying a ground for, and encouraging all disorders, confusions,
violences, treacheries and villainies whatsoever by the Law of Necessity and the
longest sword: and what a necessary Tool he is for the party, because he can
say or print any thing for them, though never so false, absurd, mischievous,
and yet not be in danger of his head: (they are his own expressions, p. 32.
37.) I shall inform him of some other Principles prescribed to all Saints,
Christians, and Soldiers, by God and Christ himself, which they ought to
follow under pain of damnation. The first is Mat. 7. 12. All things whatsoever
ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them, for this is the
Law and the Prophets. The 2, is Mat. 22. 21. Render therefore to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. The 3. is Luke
3. 14. Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with
your wages. The 4. 1^ Romans 13. 7, 8. Render therefore to all their dues, etc.
Owe nothing to any man, but love one another. The 5. is Prove. 24. 21. My Son,
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with those who are given to
change. The 6. is Ps. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, do. And* if he can found his present or former
Parliament, Republike, or Interest will not lie, and forecited Conclusions on
these Principles, I shall be his Proselyte; till then I cannot, I dare not but
renounce them, as Jesuitical, Atheistical, Diabolical.

I shall not follow him in his Wild-goose chase any further, to prove the old
Parliament undissolved, and now revived: what he writes of Page 40, 41.
Cromwels Parliaments and Conventions, during the preternatural dead Interval
from April 53. to May 59. That they had not the legal force and virtue of
Parliaments: That they were nothing in Law of themselves, being creatures of
another extraction: (though he writ the quite contrary in his lifetime) That
the Members of this revived Parliament ^itting in them, did not own them for
legal Parliaments: That their sitting in them as Parliaments, could not
prejudice nor conclude the Body now sitting, because a body of men in equal
power and right, cannot be concluded by particular acts done by their own
Members without consent of the rest; And that though they did not own those
Parliaments, nor the power that called them, yet their many and great
complaints of their being secluded from them (by force, or new Oaths) as an
infringement of the Peoples right in Parliament, were just, and they might well
complain, because their complaint of violation was grounded only upon the
General Right inherent in the People, will fully manifest the Parliament of
King Charles to be totally dissolved by his death, notwithstanding any private
Members sitting in it afterward, his pretended Parliament of Commonsg then and
now sitting, to be no Parliament at all, nor yet revived in Law or verity; that
yet M. Prynne and other Members, might justly complain of their forcible
seclusion from it, in the peoples general inherent right, as themselves did
when secluded from Cromwels Parliaments, which they held void and null. And
that if it be still in being, and was only suspended by Cromwels 6. years
force, in respect only of the actual exercise of their power, not their
inherent right, which is now revived: All the secluded Members, Lords, and
Charles Stewart too, ought in right and justice to be recalled and remitted to
their rights, from which they were forcibly interrupted, as well as those now
sitting, having no legal power, ground, nor color to seclude them, as I have
already proved.

To cloze up this Question, I shall propose this Dilemma to my dissenting
Opponents. If the old Parliament were totally and finally dissolved by the
Kings death, as Rogers confesses, and Nedham grants in point of Law and
Reason: Then those few Commons sitting after his death, and now again, cannot
possibly be a Parliament, nor Commit of Parliament in any sense. 1. Because
never summoned by any writ to any such Parl. as this. 2. Because never elected;
entrusted by the people, who elected the in the old Parliament, to sit in this,
or any other Parliament, without a King and House of Lords. 3ly. Because not
new elected by their old electors, or any other Counties, Cities, Boroughs
since the Kings death to sit alone, as then or now they do. 4ly. Because
permitted, desired to sit at first only by the Army Officers, their former
mercenary Servants; and now invited to sit again only upon some of their
motions; having no pretense of Law or right to elect or create them a
Parliament, or Representative of the People of England: much less then of
Scotland and Ireland. 5ly. Because they are not the fifth part of a Commons
House for number or quality, by our old Laws, Statutes, or the new Instrument
or Advice, most Counties, Cities, Boroughs of the Nation having not so much as
one Knight, Citizen or Burgess in it to represent them, and Scotland, Ireland
none at all: and so by the Armies own Declaration at St. Albans, their own
Agreement of the People, and own Votes for An Equal Representative, can be no
Parliament at all, but the highest archest Traitors to, usurpers over the whole
Kingdoms Rights and Privileges.

In the Totles Magna Carta, f. 52. Hen. de Knyghton de Event. Angl. l. 3. c.
14. My Plea for the Lords p. 268, 269, 278, 279, 280, 193. Exact Abridgement,
p. 53. 195, 368, 376, to 385.
Parliament of 15 E. 2. in the Act for the Exile of the two Spencers, Cl. 15 E.
3. m. 32. dorso, the Parliaments of 4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 1. 28 E. 3. n. 9, 10.
21 E. 3. rot. Parl. 11. 21. 21 R. 2. rot. Par. n. 15, 16. 22. R. 2. rot. Par.
n. 3. and Plac. Coronae n. 7, to 16. it was' adjuded, resolved, declared by the
King and Parliament, that the accroaching and usurping of REGAL POWER, by the
two Spencers, Roger Mortymer Earl of March, the Duke of Gloucester, Arundel
Archbishop of York, the Earls of Arundel and others; by keeping the Lords,
Great Men and Counsel of the King from his presence, the Parliament and
Council: by placing and displacing public Officers at their pleasures; By
condemning, executing Lords and others of the Kings Subjects without his
privity by might and power both in and out of Parliament: By not permitting the
King to hear the petitions and complaints of his Nobles and People, and to do
them justice against these usurpers oppressions to their own and the Kings
disinheriting: By compelling the King to grant pardons to Rebels and others
who slew his faithful Lords and Subjects: By seizing, disposing of the Kings
Treasure and Revenues at their pleasures; and enforcing the King to grant them
a Commission to manage his Royal affairs, trust and revenues, in restraint and
derogation of his royal power and prerogative: was no less than High Treason
by Law: For some of which encroachments of Regality, some of them were
Banishen, others of them Beheaded and Executed as Traitors, and their Estates
confiscated by Judgments and Acts of Parliament. If then the encroaching and
usurping of REGAL POWER in any of these particulars, be no less than HIGH
TREASON by the resolution of these Parliaments, then questionless the
usurpation, exercise, not only of Regal power in the highest degree, in
calling, creating, dissolving Parliaments, giving the royal assents to Bills,
Pardons, executing Lords, Commons, creating public Officers, making new Seals,
issuing out Writs, Commissions, making War and Peace, coining Money, etc. but
also of Parliamental power too, in making new Laws, Acts, Treasons, repealing,
altering old Laws, and forms of Process, imposing new Taxes, Excises,
Forfeitures, Militiaes, erecting new Courts, Judicatures, neither of all which
the King can do by his regal Power, but in and by the Parliament only, wherein
both the Power of the King in its highest orb, and of all the Lords, Commons
are united, concentred, must needs be the highest Treason that possibly can be
committed, both against the King, Kingdom, Parliament, Lords, Commons, People;
all injured, usurped on, tyrannized over, dishonored, and oppressed thereby in
the highest degree. Which should discourage, deterr the Anti-Parliamentary
Juncto, and all those who have any dread of God, Men, or love to Parliaments,
and their Native Country, from usurping such a power, as well for their own, as
the public weal.

If the long Parliament be still in being and now revived, (as Nedham pleads,
but proves not at all, his own principles evincing the contrary) then all the
Lords and secluded Members ought in right and Justice to be freely admitted to
sit, vote therein, for the premised reasons; else those now sitting and acting
without them, will incurr the guilt of Highest Treason for Usurping both Regal
and Parliamental power, by mere force, without any Act of Parl. which an
express Act of Parliament made by assent of all the 3. Estates cannot transfer
unto them, as the Statute of 1 H. 4. c. 3. and Parliament of 1 H. 4. rot. Parl.
n. 25. expressly resolve, and I have proved in my Narrative, p. 22, 23, 24.
since the Highest regal and Parliamentary trusts for the public good, safety,
reposed in many by the people, cannot be transferred nor delegated unto a few,
nor the Parliament power, trust, assigned over, any more than the Hobards
Reports. p. 155. 183.
Regal.

Having dispatched these grand questions, I shall be briefer in the 4th. being
only this.

Whether the Oaths of Supremacy, King, his Heirs and Successors; were finally
determined by, and expired at his death?

Nedham, p. 41, 42 and Rogers, p. 33. affirm they are; because the old form of
Kingly Government is lawfully (as they say) extinguished, and a new form
introduced, and so the Oath impossible, because the persons and things to whom
they were made are at an end: Which opinion having largely refuted, in my
Concordia Discors, proving those Oaths to be still obligatory and binding, by
unanswerable Scripture-presidents and authorities, to which neither of these
Antagonists re^ply one syllable; I shall briefly reply to what they object. 1.
That the frame of our Kingly Government was not legally dissolved, but
violently and traitorously interrupted only, as he says this Parliament and
Republike were by Cromwels intrusion. 2ly. That by the resolution of our
Statutes, Judges, Laws, which admit no Interregnum, we have still a Kingdom, a
King, an Heir and Successor to the Crown in actual being, (though out of
actual, not legal possession) to whom we may and ought to make good our Oaths.
3ly. That our fellow members and subjects who took these Oaths as well as we,
can neither absolve themselves nor us by their perjury or treachery in
violating them, by their late forcible, illegal proceedings, and new Engagement
against the King, his Heirs and successors. 4ly. That it is both possible,
just, necessary, safe, honorable, Christian, for them and us, and our 3.
Kingdoms, Churches, Religion, to call in the right heir and successor to the
Crown, upon honorable Terms; there being no obstacle to it but only want of
will, or the covetousness, rapine, ambition, guilt or fear of punishment in
some particular persons in present power, against the general desire and
interest of our 3. whole Kingdoms, Nations, endangered, embroyled, oppressed,
and well-nigh totally ruined, exhausted by his long seclusion. 5. That these
Objectors and others slighting, neglecting, violating, absolving themselves and
others from the conscientious obligation, legal performance of these sacred
Oaths, obliging themselves in particular and the whole Kingdom in general, to
the late King his Heirs and Successors in perpetuity, is no argument of their
piety, saintship, religion, fear of God, honesty, truth, justice, but of their
avowed Atheism, Impiety, Injustice, contempt of God, and all his threats,
judgments denounced, inflicted upon Perjured infringers of their Oaths,
Covenants to their King and others. 6ly. That for the violation of these
Oaths, the whole three Kingdoms have deeply mourned, suffered in sundry kinds
ever since 1648. and are now likely to be ruined by Taxes, Contributions,
Oppressions of all sorts, loss of trade, unseasonable weather, diseases
epidemically reigning, and other judgments. 7ly. That Abraham himself the
father of all the faithful; swearing by God, that he would not deal falsely
with Abimelech, nor with his Son, nor with his Sons son, but according to the
kindness he had done to Abraham, Genesis 21. 23, 24, etc. and his care to perform
his Oath; has justified not only the lawfulness of all our Oaths to the King,
his heirs and successors, but confirmed our Obligation to them all, and how
conscientiously we ought to perform them without fraud or falsehood, yea*
disowed all those from being of his faith or spiritual seed, who make little
conscience to perform them. 8ly. That as the Apostle resolves, Gal. 3. 16, 17.
That the Covenant made by God to Abraham and his seed in Christ before, the Law
which was made 430, years after cannot disannull, that it should make the
Promise of no effect: So the New Engagement ^^de, taken after these two Oaths
to our New Governors, and their late Oath so be Constant, as well as True and
Faithful to their new Republike, without King, or Single person, or House of
Lords (obliging those who take it, if binding, not only to sundry Prejuries,
Treasons, but constant perseverance in them without repentance) cannot disannul
these former Oaths to the King, his heirs and successors, and make them of no
effect, as Rogers, and Nedham tell us, which I have elsewhere proved. 9ly. John
Rogers, p. 9. informs us, that Cleomines the Lacedemonian, swear to his friend
Archonides, that he would do all things jointly with him, and Act nothing
without his HEAD were in it. After which watching his time, he cut off his
Companions head; and to keep his Covenant, after he had parboyled it, he kept
it by him, honored and preserved it; and upon every weighty matter or
consultation would set his Scull by him, and tell it what he purposed; saying
that he did not violate his Engagement, or break his Oath in the least, seeing
he did ever take counsel with the head of Archonides, and did nothing without
it. Verily my Antagonists and those Members they plead for, have dealt more
falsely with the late King, Lords, and their fellow Members, than Cleomines with
Archonides; they twice Swore, Protested, Vowed and Covenanted too over and
over, to be true and faithful to the King, and to act all things Jointly with
him, the Lords, and their fellow Commons in Parliament, and transact nothing
without their heads and advice were in it. But though afterward watching their
opportunity, they cut off the Kings head, and some of the Lords, as he did his
Friends; suppressed the whole House of Lords, and secluded most of their fellow
Commoners; yet they do not set either their heads, sculls, or any of their
surviving persons before them in the House when they consult upon every or any
weighty matter, nor tell them what they purpose: And yet they and these their
Advocates tell us and others; They do not violate their Protestations, Vows,
Covenants, nor yet break their Oaths. Whether of them are the greatest
Hypocrites, Impostors, let the world now judge.

The 5. Question between John Rogers* and me alone, is this.

Whether the Jesuits and our foreign Spanish, French and other Common Popish
Adversaries, were the Original Plotters, and Underhand fomentors, of the
change of our ancient Hereditary Kingship and Kingdom into a NEW COMMONWEALTH,
and of the late Exorbitant violent Proceedings against the King, Parliament,
and secluded Members, to accomplish this their design?

Mr. Prynne has abundantly proved the affirmative by punctual Testimonies out
of Parsons, Campanella, Watson, Clerk, Richelieu's Instructions, Conte
Galeazzo, the Lord Digbies and others Letters, Mutatus Polemo, and other
Evidences; by pregnant Reasons and Demonstrations, both a priori et posteriori,
in his Speech, Memento, Epistles to his New Discovery of Free State Tyranny,
Jus Patronatus, Seasonable Vindication; The Republicans Good Old Cause
anatomized, and in his Narrative, p. 18, 19, 20. 40, to 64. 85, to 89. These
Evidences P, 27, to 36.
J. Rogers neither does, nor can deny in any particular; only he contradicts
the Conclusion, as not sufficiently warranted by the premises; when as most
judicious Protestants of all professions and degrees who have seriously perused
them, are abundantly satisfied, and conclude the contrary, to this Johannis ad
oppositum; who bestows whole sheets and vollies of railing Epithites,
Scurrilous scoffs, unchristian P. 34, to 41.
obscene Quaeres and sarcasmes upon me, only upon this account, that I have
translated the Odium and guilt of the contriving, someting the late Gunpowder
Treason which blew up our King, Kingdom Parliament, Lords House, and Kingly
Government, to erect a New Republike, from the Protestants, to the Jesuits and
those of their religion, who plotted the old one, and would have fathered it on
the Puritans, had it taken the like effect as this has done; which I thought
would have deserved thanks, rather than such reproachful usage from such a
Zealot as he pretends to be. But since he will needs appropriate the glory and
honor of this last Powder Plot, (transcending the former) to those worthies
for whom he pleads, and to himself and his disciples, and allow the Jesuits (a
many of whom he confesses are doubtless in England under disguises and
folding-dores, p. 35.) no share at all in its projection, or execution; I shall
no ways envy them this new Garland, wherewith he Crowns their Temples; let
them wear it in triumph to their graves, or Tyburn; I shall not envy them this
new Crown of glory, of which they are so ambitious, that Rogers spends many
leaves, p. 27, to 37. to evade the Authors I quote to prove the Commonwealth a
spurious issue of the Jesuits projection, by his impertinent answers to them.

1. He endeavors to evade my quotations of Parsons and Campanella, the first
projectors of turning our English Kingdom, into an Holland Commonwealth, by the
agency of the Jesuits, confederating with Anabaptists and other Sectariet
agreeing with them in Antimonarchical principles, by the help of a prevalent
seduced party in the Parliament house, when purged, reformed after Parsons new
models; and by raising wars, tumults, in the Realm, and then infusing this
Principle into the Common Soldiers, people and every Precape, or factious
multitude, getting the Title of a Public State, or Helvetian Commonwealth, to
examine their Sovereigns by what Title they hold their Crowns, and to alter,
change the course, inheritance and succession of the Crown and public
Government at their pleasures, and disscise the right heirs general to the
Crown, and put them to their Formedon to recover them. To which he answers, 1.
That these their Politics were calculated to the State of the Nation as it was
in Queen Elizabeth's time when they writ, to divide us with factions, and
divisions at home, stir up the seeds of an inexplicable, irreconcilable war
between England and Scotland, to deprive King James of the Crown of England; to
promote the Spaniards interest, and hinder the English from infesting his
Fleet, and Indies: Ergo the Jesuits were not the original projectors of
turning our Kingdom into a Commonwealth, though he produces none else before
or besides them; nor yet prosecuted this design (so long since laid) afresh (as
I have proved they did) in 1647. and 1648. for the self-same ends, in
substance, by the self-same means and instruments. 2ly. He says, I should
prove that This, this is the same Commonwealth they plotted then in every
circumstance: I prove it produced by the same instruments, means, pattern they
prescribed, and that it pursued the same ends, designs, which is sufficient and
punctua^. The rather, because himself and those he pleads for, are not yet
agreed what form or kind of creature their new Commonwealth shall be; they
being much divided about it, as himself attests: who spends some sheets against
Mr. Harringtons and others Models of it. 3ly. He adds, their design proved
abortive in Qu. Elizebeths reign, and in the powder plot against King James;
What then? Ergo, they pursued it not since, as I prove by late pregnant
Testimonies, and more than probable arguments, is a mere inconsequent. 4ly. He
objects, the Jesuits Commonwealth admits no toleration of Religions; never was
against Kingship and the Office of it, as theirs is, nor has any similitude
with Jesuitism. All false; the Jesuits pleaded always for See their printed
Petitions to that effect to King James. Mr. Edwards Gangraenaes and Treatise
against Toleration.
a free toleration of religion in England, that themselves might be tolerated,
though they deny it elsewhere: they are See my Epistle before my Historical and
Legal Vindica^ion.
professed enemies to the office, as well as persons of all Protestant, yea and
most Popish Kings, and projected to make us a Commonwealth upon this account in
opposition to Kingship: it has similitude with Iesuitism both in its
principles, witness those of Barclay and Mariana, cited by Nedham, whereon he
founds it; and in its practices of murdering Protestant Kings, blowing up
Parliaments, absolving Subjects from their Oath and Allegiance, etc. by which
it was founded, supported, revived. What else he allegeth, is but mere Froth of
his wanton brain, and scurrillous pen, unworthy reply. Only because he calls
upon me for more evidence, if I have it, to prove his Good Old Cause and
Commonwealth a Plot of the Jesuits, I shall gratify him herein. 1. Hugh Peter's
himself, very well acquainted of late years with the Jesuits persons, plots,
principles, practices, in his Letter to a great Army-Officer (quoted by
himself, p. 12.) styles it, A Cheat of the Jesuits put upon the Army; and that
with much regret of heart and spirit. 2ly. A grave Protestant Gentleman of the
Temple last Trinity Term riding up to London, meeting with a Popish Gent. of
his acquaintance on the way, they discoursing of these last Revolutions and
changes of Government, the Protestant told him, that these alterations were but
the Plots and productions of the Jesuits and those of his Religion, who did
but laugh at us in their sleeves, to see what fools they made us. At which the
Papist growing somewhat angry; He desired him to be patient, since they were
ancient friends, and what he spoke was not in jest or scoff, as he took it,
but in sober sadness; desiring him ( having great acquaintance amongst the
Papists) to inquire out the truth of what he spoke, when he came to London,
where most Papists in England were then assembled, for both their
satisfactions, and to give him an account thereof; which he promised to do.
About 5. or 6. days after, this Papist told him. That according to his
request, he had made diligent inquiry of the truth of what he spoke on the way;
and that he found, all or most of the Jesuits were Knaves, they and most of
the Iesuited Papists being against the King, and wholly for a Commonwealth, as
being most advantageous for the King of Spains Interest; using more words to
the same effect. Which the Protestant (being my old familiar acquaintace) about
two days after related to me in Westminster Hall, as a concurrent testimony
with that I had published to this effect in my True and perfect Narrative, and
the Republicans Spurious good old Cause truly Anatomized. 3ly. Lilly (a zealous
Republican) in his Almanac, Anno 1651. prognosticated; That the Stars did then
promise Acts of Grace and Favor to Popish Recusants, who in their Zeal and
Loyalty to the New Republike exceeded most Presbyterians. An argument it was a
creature of the Jesuits and their projection, to procure them more grace and
favor than before, and promote their designs against us. 4ly. Nedham (Rogers
his Consederate and fellow Champion against me) makes use of the Jesuit Barclay
his forecited Iesuitical Principle, as the chief cornerstone of our New
Parliaments and Republikes structure whereon they are both built: And not only
so, but he uses the very Arguments of Campanella, which he prescribed the King
of Spain to suggest to the English Nobility, Protestants and Clergy, to hinder
and keep out King James from the Crown of England upon Queen Elizabeth's death;
to dissuade and draw them all of from King Charles; and oppose his restitution
now. Campanellaes words are these, cap. 25. De Mon. Hispanica, p. 207, 208.
Praeterea suspitionem incutiat amicis Elizabethae, saepius iis inculcando fore
ut Jacobus in amicis Elizabethae caedem maternam vindicaturus sit, etc.
praesertim cum Maria ipsius matter moriens ei Religionem Catholicam, et sue
caedis vindictam serio commendaverit. Exasperandi etiam sunt mimi Episcoporum
and Ministrorum Anglicorum, proponendo illis, Regem Scotiae Calvini^mum
amplexum esse spe et cupiditate Regni, adactumique vi a Baronibus haereticis:
Quod it vero Regnum Angliae etiam obtineat, tum illum cito priorem Religionem
revocaturum esse, quanddquidem non solum Matter defuncta verum etiam ^ex ipse
Galliarum summopere et illam commendarint. Quibus modis fire ut semina belli
inextricabilis inter Angliam and Scotiam ^aciantur, etc. to keep King James
from the Crown. Which Nedham thus imitates and pursues, with a little
variation, in his Interest, Sect. 3. of the Presbyterians, p. 12, 13. The Royal
party will never leave buzzing in C. Stuarts ears to quicken his memory, that
the interest of your party was in its infancy founded upon the ruin of HIS
GRANDMOTHER, continued and improved by the perpetual vexation of his
GRANDFATHER, and at length prosecuted TO THE DECAPITATION OF HIS FATHER. Be
not so weak as to fool your selves that you shall fare better than others. It
is the common sense of the Cavaliers, that you prepared his FATHER for the
block, and are incensed at others because they took from you the honor of the
execution. Dr. Creiton told him, That the Presbyterians pulled his FATHER Down
and held him by the hair, while the Independents cut off his head. And after
him it was more elegantly expressed by Salmatius, Presbyteriani Sacrificium
ligarunt, Independentes jugularunt, etc. And p. 5, 6. The PAPISTS having had so
fair a Creature of the Father, for many reasons they have no cause to fear foul
dealing from the Son. As for HIS RELIGION (if any) it is at best, but a
devotion to Prelacy, which was bequeathed to him by Legacy. All his other
pretenses of Religion in Scotland, he forfeited before ever he left that
Country. What profession he has since owned abroad, has (for reasons of
State) been kept very close, yet not so close but he discovered it. But if this
be not evident, let us have recourse to reason, and then consider, HOW LONG HE
WAS UNDER THE WING OF HIS MOTHERS INSTRUCTIONS IN FRANCE, and what a Nursery
Flanders has been for him since, which IS THE MOST JESUITED PLACE IN THE
WORLD: consider also the urgency of his necessities, disposing him to embrace
any thing, or take any course to get a Crown, being under the same influence of
the wandering Star, called Reason of State, as was his GRANDFATHER H. the 4th
of France, who shifted his Religion to secure a Crown, etc. These put all
together into the balance, are ground enough to believe him sufficiently
affected, if not sworn to Popery. Here we have Nedham plowing with Campanella
his heifer, using his very policy, words, arguments in substance to exasperate
the Presbyterians, Independents, and Protestant party against Charles Stuart,
and keep him from the Crown, as Campanella suggested to the King of Spain, and
the English Protestants and Prelates, to exasperate them against his
Grandfather King James for the self-same end, by traducing both in their
Religion, and meditation of revenge of their respective Mothers and Fathers
decollations.

Here I shall desire the Readers to take special Notice of 4. particulars. 1.
Of Campanellaes, the Jesuits, foreign Popish Princes and their Instruments
Machiavilian practice* secretly, seriously, frequently to suggest to Protestant
Subjects, that their most Orthodox Protestant Kings, and right heirs to the
Crown, are inwardly inclined and well-affected to Popery, that they profess
themselves Protestants, only for politic ends, to gain or retain the Crown;
that when they are settled in their thrones, they will either profess, or
introduce Popery (which would be the Jesuits and Papists greatest advantage who
thus suggest it, if true) purposly to exasperate their Protestan^ Subjects
against, and alienate their affections from them; yea make them the visible
instruments to keep them from their hereditary Crowns, to the scandal,
prejudice of the Protestant Religion, though they be most real, cordial,
constant Professors of it. And whence such scandalous suggestions originally
spring 2ly. Of the inexcusable malice of Nedham, professing himself a
Protestant, not only in imitating this Jesuitical Romish practice against his
own hereditary Protestant Sovereign Chapter Stuart, but transcending it many
degrees; First, by pretermitting his beheaded Fathers long education of him in
the Protestant Religion whiles he lived; and this charge unto him in (...), p.
235. to 251.
Writing a little before his death, viz, Above all, I would have you, as I hope
you are already, well-grounded and settled in your Religion: the best profession
of which I have ever esteemed that of the Church of England, in which you have
been educated: Yet I would have your own Judgment and Reason now seal to that
sacred Bond which education has written, that it may be judiciously your own
Religion, and not other men's Custom or Tradition, which you profess. In this I
charge you to persevere, as coming nearest to Gods word for Doctrine, and to
the Primitive examples for Government, with some little amendment, etc. Your
fixation in matters of Religion will not be more necessary for your Souls, that
your Kingdoms peace, when God shall bring you to them, etc. If you never see my
face again, I do require and entreat you, as your Father and your King, that
you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection
from the Religion established in the Church of England. I tell you, I have
tried it, and after much search and many disputes, have concluded it to be the
best in the world, not only in the community, as Christian, but also in the
special notion, as Reformed, keeping the middle way between the Pomp of
superstitious Tyranny, and the meanness of fantastique Anarchy. The scandal of
the late Troubles, which some may object and urge to you, against the
Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to them and to
your own thoughts Keep you to true principles of Piety, Virtue and Honor, you
shall never want a Kingdom. For those who repent of any defects in their duty
toward me, as I freely forgive them, in the word of a Christian King: so I
believe, you will find them truly zealous to repay with Interest that Loyalty
and Love to you, which was due to me. In sum, What good I intended, do you
perform, when God shall give you power. Next, in urging, how long he was under
the wing of his Mothers instructions in France (but a few Months space at
most) and what a Nursery) Flanders has been for him since, which is the most
Iesuited place in the world; as his principal reason, to persuade both Papists
and Protestants, to believe him sufficiently affected, if not sworn to Popery,
as if he had been there educated by his own voluntary election; and not
necessitated, yea forced thither by the Army Officers, and those in late and
present power (professing themselves the most zealous Protestants, and
eminentest Saints) full sore against his will. The General Council of Army
Officers, in their Remonstrance of Nov. 20. 1648. presented to the Commons
House, as they demanded the King to be brought to speedy Justice; so they
propounded, That the Prince, and Duke of York, his Sons, might be declared
incapable of any trust or government in this Kingdom, or any Dominions
thereunto belonging; and thence to stand Exiled for ever, as Enemies and
Traitors, and to die without mercy, if ever taken or found within the same.
After his Fathers beheading, when he was called in and crowned King by his
Protestant Subjects in Scotland (where he took the Solemn League and Covenant)
according to their Oaths, Covenant, Duty, Laws and principles of the reformed
Religion: our Republican Grandees and their Genesis Cromwell, by a bloody,
unchristian, unbrotherly, invasive war, expelled and kept him out thence, yea
out of England too, and all his other Dominions, by force of arms after the
battle of Worcester, September. 3. 1651. From whence he was forced to fly
disguised, to save his life, into France; where he landed at Newhaven, October.
2. and some weeks after departed into Holland to the Princess of Orange his
Sister (a Protestant) residing with her, and other Protestants there, remote
from the company and seducements of his Mother, and all Jesuits, Papists that
might any ways seduce him in his religion; living wholly upon the charity of
foreign Protestants; his own Protestant Subjects then and since swaying, being
so stupendiously unjust, uncharitable, as not to allow him or his Brothers one
farthing, out of all the Lands and Revenues of his 3. Kingdoms, for their
necessary support in foreign parts, and making it High Treason for any of his
Protestant Subjects to contribute any thing toward their support in this their
distressed condition; so conscientiously did they practice these Gospel
precepes, Mat. 5. 44, 45. c. 22. 21. Romans 12. 13, 19, 20, 21. c. 13. 1, to 12.
c. 15. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 16, 1. Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36, 37. for which they may justly
expect that fatal sentence, v. 40, to 46. Yet not content herewith, to deprive
Him, his Brethren, and followers, both of the relief, company, comfort of all
their Protestant Friends and Allies in the Netherlands, and force them thence
into Popish Quarters, to the hazard of their Souls as well as Lives, exasperate
them all against the protestant Religion, and enforce them (if possible) unto
popery, they engaged themselves and the English Nation not only in a most
unchristian, bloody, costly, destructive war with our ancient Protestant
Brethren of Scotland till they had totally subdued them, but also with our old
Protestant allies of the Netherlands, which war continued from Jan. 1651. till
April 1654* almost to the ruin of both Nations, and then Oliver Cromwell
concluded a Peace with the Dutch on these terms, (sufficiently evidencing the
true ground and end of that bloody war) That Charles Stuart, with his Brothers,
followers, and adherents, should be forthwith banished out of the Low
Countries, and none of them permitted to reside there, or return thither again.
Upon which, by command from the States, these distressed Exiles were forced to
remove into France, much against their wills, having no other place of safety
to retire themselves to: where they enjoyed the company of their Mother, and
relief of their Popish allies; as likewise the comfortable Christian Society,
Charity, assistance of their French Protestant Friends, Churches, Ministers,
Ministry, to confirm, edify them in the Reformed Religion: which Cromwell and
their English inveterate Enemies maligning, endeavored to expel them thence,
and by quarrelling with the French, and ^atring into an intimate League with
Cardinal Ma^arine, (by the agency of Sir Kenelm Digby a Jesuited Papist)
concluded a Peace with France in November. 1655. upon this condition; That Chapter
Stuart, with all his brothers, followers, adherents, should be forthwith
removed out of France, and all the French Kings Dominious, and not permitted to
return or reside therein. Being thus driven out of Holland and France from the
Society of all Protestants, they were necessitated sore against their wills, to
cast themselves upon the protection and charity of the Spaniard, and fly into
Flanders, having no place else to rest their heads, and there to sojourn among
Papists, and Jesuits in great danger, and extreme necessity; where to their
immortal Honor, the Admiration of all true Protestants and Papists too, and
the Envy of their Protestant malicious persecutors who forced them thither,
they constantly adhere to, and publicly profess the Protestant Religion, and
will not be seduced from it to Popery, notwithstanding the manifold affronts,
injuries, provocations, reproaches, persecutions of some of their own
Protestant Subjects; their exile from their Protestant Kingdoms, their
Protestant Friends in France, Holland, their extreme pressing necessities, and
the frequent solicitations, arguments, persuasions, promises, temptations of
Priests, Jesuits, Papists and Popish Princes, See Militiere his victory of
truth, dedicated to him: and Mutatus Polemo, P. 32, 33.
to turn Papists, as the only means to regain their rights, and restore Chapter
Stuart to his Crowns and Kingdoms. Now that this his forced Exile into France
and Flanders by a prevailing party of his own Protestant Subjects, (against all
their Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declarations,
Allegiancos, Duties, our Known Laws, the practice of all the primitive
Christians, and other Protestant Churches, the principle of Christian Religion,
and of our own Protestant Church^, both in our Articles, Homilies, Canons,
Writers, Liturgies,) and his forced sojourning there amongst Jesuits, Papists,
with his grand necessities, of which they have been the only Authors, (to their
own eternal infamy, and intolerable scandal, dishonor, shame, reproach of our
Protestant Kingdoms, Churches, Religion) enforcing him to cry out with holy
King David, (when forced by Saul, and his rebellious Son Absalom out of his
Kingdom from Gods Ordinances, among Pagan Idolaters) Ps. 120. 5. Woe is me that
I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. My soul has long
dwelt with them that hate peace, etc. should be thus objected against him by
this railing Shimel, and the Authors of it, over and over, as a convincing
evidence, that he is sufficiently affected, if not sworn to Popery;
notwithstanding his open constant avowed profession of the Protestant Religion,
to the admiration of the world, the joy of all true Protestants, and Gods great
glory as well as his own; and made now a motive to excite his Protestant
Subjects (in this juncture of time and revolution of affairs) to take up arms
afresh against him, to keep him still in exile amidst Jesuits, Papists, and
hinder his restitution to his hereditary Kingdoms, and the benefit of Gods
Ordinances among his own Protestant Subjects for his and their preservation,
and of the reformed Religion, now much endangered by intestin wars, the
policies of Jesuits, and combination of the Pope, and Popish Princes, to be
totally extirpated throughout the World; is not only a most unparalleld piece
of malice and calumny, but the very quintessence of Jesuitism, and Jesuitical
policy. The rather, because all our Protestant Bishops, Ministers, Martyrs in
Queen Mary's days, when imprisoned by her for their Religion (though restored
to her Crown, against the usurpations of Queen Jane, a Protestant, by their
assistance, and the Rerum Anglicarum, Annals, Land: 1616. p. 3. p. 116. and
Mr. Fox, Vol. 3.
Suffolk Protestants, quorum propter Religioni^ causam propensissimus favor
Janae adsuturum inde sperabatur;) by their joint Letter to all their Protestant
Brethren, (recorded in Acts and Monuments, Vol. 3. p. 101, 102.
Mr. Fox,) not only declared Queen Mary's open obstinate profession of Popery,
to be no just cause in Law or Conscience, to keep her from her hereditary Right
to the Crown; but likewise humbly required, and in the bowels of our Lord Jesus
Christ beseeched all that feared God, to behave themselves as obedient Subjects
to Her Highness, and the Supreme powers ordained under Her; and rather after
their example to give their Heads to the block, than in any wise to rebel
against the Lords Anointed, Queen MARY, in no point consenting to any Rebellion
or Sedition against Her Highness. Much less then ought his slight suggestions
of Chapter Stuarts secret inclination to Popery, against his constant avowed
profession of Protestantism in the very midst of the most Jesuited Papists, to
be any argument at all for his Protestant Subjects not to assist, but to rise
up and rebel against him, to keep him from the Crown. 3ly. The extraordinary
sottishness and infatuation of those Protestants, who will be cheated, seduced
by such Jesuitical suggestions, calumnies, as Nedham and others have published
of him, touching his inclination to Popery, to withdraw their affections,
assistance from him, either to supply his necessities, or restore him, if not
to his hereditary Civil Rights, yet at least to the comfortable fruition of
Gods Ordinances and Christian Society in our Protestant Churches and Kingdom,
for his spiritual Consolation and Salvation. 4ly. The most barbarous infernal
matchless malice of those degenerated Republican and Army-Saints, professing
themselves Stars of the greatest Magnitude in the Protestant Orb, in expelling
their undoubted natural hereditary Protestant King, not only out of all his own
Protestant Realms and Dominions, but likewise out of Holland and France, where
he lived in exile, and had the relief and society of Protestants, into
Flanders, the most Jesuited place in the world (as Nedham prints) where are
none but Papists; enforcing him there to live upon their alms alone, and keep
him there in Exile; on purpose to necessitate him, with his Brothers,
followers, adherents, to renounce the Protestant Religion and party, and become
professed Papists; to destroy, murder his and their souls and bodies at once;
and deprive him of his eternal Crown in heaven, as well as of his temporal
Crowns on earth. Jer. 2. 12.
Be astonished, O heaven, and be ye horribly afraid, at this unpresidented
Tyranny and Treachery; the highest Malignity of Jesuitism, and express revived
Image of the Jesuits design, against his Grandfather King Henry the 4. of
France; who shifting his Religion, by the Jesuits persuasion to secure his
Crown and Life against their malicious designs; was soon after, See the General
History of France. Hospinian, and Ludovicus Lucius, Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. c.
2. Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 75. 80.
by their instigation, deprived of both, if not of his eternal Crown; by a stab
through his heart, by one of their disciples, though he had bequeathed his
heart to them by will, and built them a magnificent College, richly endowed by
him with lands and plate. If then Mat. 7. 16, 20.
the tree (as Christ himself resolves) may be certainly known by its fruits, we
may easily judge, from whence these rotten bitter fruits of Jesuitism
originally sprung, and who were the planters of those trees which bear them.
But if they cannot effect this infernal design to destroy his Soul and body
together; yet they will make use of it to murder his reputation, and render him
a suspected; if not a devoted proselyte to Popery, to debar^ his return to his
Protestant Kingdoms. Jer. 5. 9, 29.
And shall not God visit for these sins? Shall not his Soul be avenged on such
a Nation as this?

I shall add a 4th Evidence, (I only pointed at True and perfect Narrative p.
62.
before) worthy special observation; which will fully answer the late printed
Sheet, entitled, A clear Vindication of Roman Catholics from a foul aspersion
cast on them by Mr. Prynne, and Mr. Baxster; as if they made and headed Sects,
had a powerful influence upon the Army, in relation to their proceedings
against the late King, and Changes, to reduce us under the power of ROME; which
the nameless Author, says, the chiefest of their Clergy and Laity (with whom
he has spoken) protest to be a black Calumny. Mr. P. and Mr. B. do neither of
them charge the Roman Catholics in general, but only the Jesuits, some of
their Priests, Friars, and Jesuitial faction, with these and other like
practices, fully charged and proved against them, in Iesuitarum per Vnitas
Belgii provincias negotiatio, printed 1616. Hospinian, and Ludovicus Lucius,
Historia Jesuitica, Speculum Jesuiticum, and others, as well Papists as
Protestants. For their heading Sects and the late Quakers, I have diverse
instances, besides those published, to evidence it; and for their deportment in
relation to the Kings death, and the change of our Government, this one
instance may satisfy them and others. When the King was executed before
Whitehall, Jan. 30. 1648. Mr. Henry Spottesworth riding casually that way just
as his head was cut off, espied the Queens Confessor there on Horseback in the
habit of a Trooper, drawing forth his sword, and flourishing it over his head
in triumph, (as others there did) at this spectacle. At which being much
amazed, and being familiarly acquainted with the Confessor, he rode up to him,
and said 3. O Father! I little thought to have found you here, or any of your
profession at such a sad spectacle. To which he answered, There were at least
forty or more Priests and Jesuits there present on Horseback besides himself;
which being afterward objected by a Protestant friend of his to a Romish
Priest, he had no excuse to make for it, but this, that one end of his and
their coming thither, was. That if the King had died a Roman Catholic he might
not want a Confessor, had he desired one. This the Gentleman (now dead) and his
Sister (whom the Confessor often solicited to turn Papists) within few days
after, and at other times seriously related to a Bencher of Lincolns Inn his
familiar acquaintance (who often reported it to me and others) using it as one
chief reason, Why thy refused to turn Papists; and because they also found the
Jesuits and Popish Priests both before and after the Kings death, had diverse
meetings about London, to alter the Government, and disinherit the Kings
posterity. Which compared with their releases from Imprisonment, and free
liberty they enjoyed, ever since the Kings death till now under the New
Republike, whiles diverse Protestant Ministers, Gentlemen, Noblemen, and some
Members were under close restraints, With the late proviso in the Proclamation
of July last (occasioned by my Narrative) for Banishing Jesuits, Priests, and
such Cavaliers of the Kings party who had not compounded, (the principal
parties aimed at) by the 1. of August, under pain of High Treason: Provided,
that if any of them, (Jesuits or Popish Priests, 23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2.
1 Jac. c. 4. 3 Jac. c. 5.
Traitors by sundry Laws yet in force, as well as Protestant Cavaliers, made
Traitors only by this New proclamation, equally ranged with Jesuits, Priests,
and only inquired after) should submit themselves to the present Government,
and give security for their obedience and peaceable deportment; that this
proclamation should not extend unto them; but that they might still continue
amongst us. Since which I hear of sundry Protestant Ministers, Gentlemen,
Noblemen, and some secluded Members, secured, imprisoned, prosecuted in most
Counties, which every Diurnal is fraught with, but not with one Jesuit or
Popish Priest yet apprehended, though there be multitudes of them in England.
Which New Evidences, compared with those in my Narrative and other
publications, will I trust fully satisfy all disinteressed persons in this
grand Question, till time shall discover further proofs (as it does each year)
to resolve this controversy, if these be not sufficient. As for I. Rogers and
his Disciples, they deny the Jesuits and Popish party to have any share in our
late Changes, because they would monopolize the honor and reward thereof to
themselves alone: witness this querulous passage to his revived High Court of
Parliament, p. 96. We can tell you, that no men in England did more (if so much
move, run, write, meet, counsel, pray, sit up night and day to effect your
return into the place of Trust where you now are, than those whom you grieve,
^light, frown upon, and do least for, in point of justice, conscience, or
encouragement, This is grievous, and must needs prove dangerous to the whole at
the last. And p. 119. We have suffered Bonds, banishment, plunderings, perils
of life, liberty, estates, 5, of 6. years together, in many prisons one after
another; and yet no reparation, restitution, provision, or encouragement, for
holding ou^ like Fortresses, against so hard a siege. All this for the Cause,
and Commonwealth: worthy of thanks at least, who have been Instruments of your
Restitution: but these are slighted by friends and foes: the Pipers, Dancers,
and Devisers of New Forms to trouble us with: that are rather the Incubus than
Incumbents of a Free State. If this his Complaint be true, it is either a just
punishment of God upon him and them for their Innovations, Prove. 24. 21, 22. or
an Evidence, the Jesuits and Romanists had a greater share and activity in the
Cause, and our Changes, than He and his We, which makes them so much slighted,
and them in greater favor than before.

The last Question, Nedham, obliquely by Rogers, (the substance of both their
Pamphlets) is this, which concerns me as an English Freeman briefly to debate*
that the World may judge, whether I and other secluded Members be so Rogers, p.
6 10, 37, 38. 119. Nedham, p. 32, etc.
Beblam-mad, or such Breakers of our Trusts, and Enemies to the public, as
they scandalously report us.

Whether our (...) hereditary Kingly Government, and restitution thereof to the
Right Heir; or late, yet unformed, revived Commonwealth, and future
establishment thereof, to prevent a Relapse to Kingship and Kingly Government,
be Englands true public Interest, as Men or Christians?

What I formerly alleged in my Speech and Memento 1648. Anatomy and Narrative
1659. in defense of Kings and Kingly Government, and the mischiefs of a
Republike, (to which these Antag^nists have not answered one syllable) is
sufficient to resolve this Question: I shall only add thereto by way of
Supplement,

1. In the affirmative* That the restitution and preservation of our old
hereditary Kingly Government by Common consent (especially upon the substance
of the late Kings large Concessions in the Isle of Wight) is the only true
public Interest of England, both as Men and Christians: As Men,

1. Because it is that form of Government which all our Predecessors in this
Island, whether Bri^ons, Saxens, Danes, Normans, English have constantly
embraced, continued, maintained, (as all our See Gildas, Beda, Aethel^ed,
(...), Mat. Westminster, Geoffry Monmouth, Wigorniensis, Malmsbury, Huntingdon,
Hoveden, Matt. Paris, Walsingham, Simeon D^nelmensis, Brompton, Knyghton,
Holinshed, Grafton, Speed, Fox, Baker, Cambdens Britannia.
Historians assert) from its first plantation by Brute, till 1648. (except
during their sore bondage under the Roman Emperors and their Deputies) in all
public changes, revolutions, as the best, safest, freest, happiest,
universallest, antientest, honourablest, durablest, di^inest, least
inconvenient, least oppressive, and most agreeable to the temper, weflare,
desires, liberties of the people, of all other forms of Government whatsoever.

2. Because all our Great Councils, Parliaments, in all ages (as their
proceedings, Acts, Canons, and Writs of Summons attest) have constantly
maintained, continued, established, defended Kings and Kingly Government, as
their only public Interest, wherein the unity, peace, wealth, welfare, safety,
liberty, property and hereditary succession of all the Subjects and their
posterity in their Lands and Inheritances 25 H. ^. c. 22. 1 Eliz. c. 1, 3, 4. 5
Jac. c. 1, 2. with the Acts in the Narrative, (...)
most principally and specially, above all other worldly things, consist and
rest: whereupon they have most carefully and vigilantly See Rastal Treason,
Crown, Provision, and Praemunire, Rome, Recusants.
provided for the security of the Kings royal person, succession, heirs,
successors, the rights, privileges, jurisdictions, prerogatives, lands,
revenues of the Crown, and Kingly Government, against all Treasons,
conspiracies, insurrections, rebellions, attempts whatsoever to destroy,
disinherit, suppress, alter, subvert, impair them, or any of them, by sundry
successive Acts of Parliament, sacred Solemn Oaths, Obligations, Securities of
all kinds, in all ages, till 1648. and the last Parliament of King Charles
(whereof most now sitting were Members) by more solemn See An Exact Collection,
and Collection Of them, My Speech, Memento, Prynne the Member reconciled to
Prynne the Barrester, The Good Old Cause truly stated.
printed Oaths, Protestations, Vows, National Leagues, Covenants, Petitions,
Votes, Remonstrances, Declarations, Ordinances, than any or all precedent
Parliaments whatsoever, as I have elsewhere proved at large, and the imprisoned
and secluded Members too in their Vindication.

3ly. Because the manifold incessant intestine and foreign Wars, Insurrections,
Tumults, Divisions, Factions, Revolutions, Alterations, Subversions of
Governments, Parliaments, Republikes, Legal Process, proceedings; the
unconstant fluctuating condition of our State and Civil affairs, the
intolerable doubled, trobled, quadrupled Taxes, Excises, Imposts, Militiaes,
and other Exactions (amounting under our former and present Free State to one
entire subsidy every week in the year, when as our former public Taxes under
our Kings, exceeded not usually one subsidy or fifteen in 2. or 3. years space)
the infinite unspeakable Oppressions, Rapines, Plunders, Sequestrations,
Confiscations, Forfeitures of our Offices, Lands, Estates; Imprisonments, close
Imprisonments, Confinements, Banishments, illegal Restraints, executions of our
person^, ransacking of our Houses, Studies, Writings, and other grievances,
outrages, violences we have suffered by Unparliamentary Convinticles, arbitrary
tyrannical Committees, new High Courts of Injustice, Army Officers, Soldiers,
Sequestrators, Excisemen, and other instruments of Oppression; the Sales,
dissipations of all the Crown Lands, Rents, and standing public Revenues of
our 3 kingdoms, which should defray the ordinary expenses of the Government; of
Bishops, Deans, Chapters, and many thousands of Delinquents lands, estates,
woods, timber, without any abatement of public Taxes; the impoverishment,
destruction of most of the ancient Nobility, Gentry, Corporations throughout
our 3. Realms; the infinite decay of all sorts of Trade by Land and Sea, of
public and private justice, truth, honesty, integrity, charity, amity, civil
society, hospitality, neighborhood, friendship; the inundation of all sorts of
vices, treachery, perjury, hypocrisy, cheating, lying, dissimulation,
subornation of perjury, false accusations, forcible ejectments, detainers,
robberies, murders, treasons, destruction of Houses, Timber, Parks, Woods,
Ponds, Forests, with other miseries tending to public desolation, we have
(...), suffered, groaned under, without intermission, or any hopes or
probability of redress; with sundry other encroachments upon the City and
Country in the Freedom of their Elections of Mayo^s, Aldermen, Officers,
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses; and the frequent securing, secluding of
Parliament Members, and forces upon Parliaments themselves to interrupt,
dissolve them ever since the abolishing of our Kings, Kingly Government, the
erection of a pretended Free State, or Commonwealth, and prologues thereunto;
compared with Judges 17. 6, etc. c. 18. 1, etc. c. 21. 25. Ezech. 19. 12, 13,
14. c. 21. 27. c. 29. 14, 15. Hos. 3. 4. c. 10. 3, 7, 15. Are an infallible,
experimental, sensible evidence, and demonstration, that Kings and Kingly
Government are Englands true, only public interest, as Men.

That it is so, as Christians, is apparent:

1. By Gods own promise to his Church and people under the Gospel: Isay 49. 23.
c. 60. 3, 10, 11.
That KINGS shall be their nursing Fathers, and QUEENS their nursing Mothers;
more particularly Ps. 72. 10, 11. Isa. 42. 4, 12. c. 51. 5. c. 60. 3, 9, 10. c.
66. 19.
KINGS OF THE ISLES, (chiefly verified of our Island, as I have evidenced in my
Narrative, p. 84. and Sir Henry Spelman in his Councils, and Epistle to them)
and none other kind of Governors expressed by name, but they, in sacred Writ.

2. By the 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. I exhort therefore, that First of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all men;
for KINGS, and for all in eminent places (under them) that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; for this is good, and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: Compared with Ezra 6. 10. c. 7. 23.
Jer. 9. 7. Which duty of making Supplications, prayers, intercessions for Kings
and Emperors, whether Pagan or Christian, Heterodox or Orthodox, Protectors or
Persecutors, the Churches, Christians and Saints of God in all ages, places,
kingdoms have constantly and conscientiously practiced, as their Interest, and
the principal mean^ prescribed by God himself, for their quiet, peace, good,
welfare, safe^y, prosperity, increase in godliness, honesty, and well-pleasing
unto God their Savior (whose Ps. 63. 3.
loving kindness is better to them than life, and their greatest felicity) as
I intend to evidence in a particular Treatise. Neither has the Church and
people of England been inferior to any others in this duty, as I could
abundantly evidence by ancient Canons, Missals, Processionals, Liturgies, the
Cl. 22 E. 1. dors. 10, 11. Cl. 24 E. 1. d. 8. 10. Cl. 27 E. 1. d. 7. Cl. 32 E.
1. d. 7. 16. Cl. 34 E. 1. d. 9. 16. Cl. 35 E. 1. d. 9. 15, 17.
Clause Rolls in the Tower, and other testimonies, with the prayers used at our
Kings Coronations before the Reformation of Religion, which I preter^it, and
shall give you only a brief touch of their loyalty and practice since we became
Protestants. At the respective Coronations of King Edward the 6. King James,
and King Charles, there were sundry excellent fervent Prayers and supplications
powered out to God with ardent affections on their behalfs: wherein all the
Prelates, Clergy, Nobility, Gentry, people present at this solemnity prayed
frequently for the KINGS long life, health, wealth, bonor, safety, prosperous
reign, victory over all his Enemies, increase of all royal graces, b Liber
Regalis. Ms. The Breef of the Rites and Prayers used at the Kings Coronation Ms.
virtues, for all temporal, spiritual blessings, and eternal glory in heaven,
etc. to be abundantly powered forth upon his own royal person; and likewise for
the increase and succession of his royal posterity in the throne in all ages,
in these ensuing words in 3. several prayers. Establish him in the Throne of
this Realm, Visit him with increase of children, that his children may be Kings
to rule this Kingdom by succession of all Ages. Let the Blessings of him that
appeared in the bush descend upon his head, and the fullness of his blessings
fall upon his children and posterity. Let his horn ^e exalted as the horn of a
Unicorn, by which he may scatter his enemies from the face of the earth. The
Lord which sits in heaven be his Defender for ever and ever, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen. After sundry such prayers and his Coronation, all the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords present kneel down and do their Homage to him in
these words. I become your Man, and shall be faithful and true, and troth bear
unto you our Sovereign Lord, and to your heirs Kings of England, of life and
limb, and of earthly worship, against all men that now live and die. And I
shall do and truly knowledge the service of the Lands which I claim to hold of
you. So God help me. All of them kissing the Kings left cheek.

The Homage being ended, they all touch the Crown with their hands, by way of
Ceremony, as promising to support it with all their power. Which done, they All
holding up their hands together, in token of their Fidelity, with one voice on
their knees say, We offer to sustein and defend you and your Crown with our
Lives, lands and goods against all the world: and with one voice cry, God save
King CHARLES. Which all the people follow with reiterated shouts and
acclamations. After the Coronation of every King, and of our last King Charles,
in all Churches, Chapels, and religious Families throughout his Dominions, and
in both Houses of Parliament every day they sat (as well after as before the
wars) constant public and private prayers, were continually made to like
effect for Him and His royal posterity, as the Liturgy, Collects in the Book of
Common Prayer, the Directory it self, the Practice of Piety, and other
Prayer-books prescribing forms of Prayer for private persons and Families
morning and evening, and every man's experience attest; yea such was our zeal
and devotion in this kind, that most persons concluded all their Graces before
and after meat, with this prayer, or the like in effect, God save his Church,
our King, Prince, the Royal issue and Realms; God send us peace in Christ our
Lord, Amen. As being Englands true Interest both as Men and Christians. How
can, how dare we then unpray, renounce, abjure, engage, subscribe, vote, fight
against all those public, private prayers, Graces we thus constantly,
fervently made to God for sundry years together, and the Oaths, Homage,
Fealty, Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant we successively swore in the
name, presence of Almighty God, with hands and hearts lifted up to him, by
praying, engaging, subscribing, voting, fighting against the Kings right Heir,
Successor, and Royal Issue, and banishing, dishinheriting, renounci^g,
abjuring, secluding them out of all our Churches, Prayers, Realms for ever, to
set up an Vtopian Republike, without Gal. 6. 7.
mocking God himself to his very face, wilfully violating this Evangelical
precept, contradicting the practice of all the Churches, Saints of God in all
ages, places, yea disclaiming Englands public with our own private Interest,
and forfeiting our own eternal Interest in Heaven, as we are Saints and
Christians? I beseech all Christian Englishmen in the name and fear of God,
most seriously to consider and lay it close to their consciences, without
delay; and examine how they can justify, excuse it either to God or Man.

3ly. By the extraordinary inundation, growth, increase of all sorts of
Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Religions, Sects, Atheism, Irreligion,
profaneness, contempt, rejection, denial of Gods word, Sacraments, Ministers,
Ordinances, Prayer, singing of Psalms, Catechizing, repetition of Sermons,
Apostasy, Lukewarmnesse, Hypocrisy, Perjury, Spiritual and outward pride,
effeminacy, luxury, whoredom, incest, hypocrisy, formality, envy, hatred,
malice, backbiting, slandering, sacrilege, libertinism, covetousness,
oppression, cruelty, all sorts of ^ins and wickednesses whatsoever. The strange
decay, decrease of true real Christian zeal, piety, devotion, faith, love,
charity, brotherly kindness, heavenly mindedness, contempt of the world, fear
of Gods threatenings, judgments, and all other Christian graces, virtues:
substractions of Ministers Tithes, Dues, Glebes, Rewards, Pensions, Benefices,
Augmentations; scorned, reviled, railed against, disturbed, persecuted by
Sectaries, Quakers; sequestered, suspended, ejected, silenced by Arbitrary
Committees, as mere Tenants at will of their Ministry and Freeholds, ever since
the abolishing of Kings, their Nursing-Fathers, by those various Step Fathers,
and Plunderers of the Church and Ministers who have hitherto succeeded them,
and given public toleration, protection to all Religions, Sects, Seducers,
almost to the total extirpation of the true Orthodox Reformed Religion
throughout our Dominions.

To this I shall add, that as there neither is nor can be any possible ease,
or cure of dislocated, fractured joints, bones, limbs in the natural body, nor
restitution of health and soundness to it by any unguents, cerots, balms,
bolsters or artifices whatsoever, but only by the timely, speedy restitution of
every bone, joint, member to its proper place, and keeping them therein by
strong astringent medicaments and ligaments: So all our new State-physicians,
Chirurgions, See their Declaration, May 6. 1659.
Politicians, Councils at Westminster, White Hall, or in the Army, with all
their ar^, skill, for near 12. year^ space together, by all their New-projected
models of Republikes, Parliaments, Governments since the abolishing KingS and
Kingship, could not hitherto ease, cure, or restore to health, the inverted,
broken bodies of our Church, State, (which have grown every year more and more
consumptive, convulsive, decrepit, incurable, disquieted, tormented, and lie
now at the very point of death, under all their several applications, as we
feel by sad experience) because they have not endeavored to restore the
fractured, dislocated chief Members, bones, joints there of to their proper
places, but labored all they could to keep and put them further out; When as
there neither is nor can be any probable or possible way of restoring ease,
health, soundness, safety, prosperity to them, but by a speedy restoration of
their lawful hereditary Head, and Noblest Members to their due places, offices
in them. This consideration, not only the secured and secluded Members made the
groundwork of their premised Vote, December. 5. 1648. upon the long Debate; but
likewise both Houses, Kingdoms, and those now sitting together with them, the
basis of their Protestation, League, Covenant, Petitions to, and Treaties with
the late King, and of these two Memorable Protestations, Passages in their
Exact Collection, p. 663, 664, 695, 696, See p. 631, 632 633. 641, to 645, 657,
658.
Declarations of October 22. and November. 2. 1642. worthy consideration. We the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in the presence of
Almighty God, for the satisfaction of our Consciences, and the Discharge of
that great trust which lies upon us, make this Protestation and Declaration to
the Kingdom and Nation, and the whole World; That no private passion or
respect, no evil intention to his Majesty's person, no design to the prejudice
of his Just Honor and Authority, engaged us to raise forces, or take take up
Arms against the Authors of this war, wherewith the Kingdom is now enflamed,
and We have always desired from our hearts and souls, manifested in our
a^tions and proceedings, and in several humble Petitions and Rem^nstrances to
his Majesty, professed our Loyalty and obedience to his Crown, readiness and
resolution to defend his Person and support his Estate with our lives and
fortunes to the uttermost of our power: And by our loyal affections, actions
and advice lay a sure and lasting foundation of the greatness and prosperity of
his Majesty, and his royal posterity in future time. Mark their reason: For
though the happiness of this and all other Kingdoms depends chiefly upon God;
Yet we acknowledge that it does so mainly depend upon His Majesty and the Royal
Branches of that Root, that as we have heretofore, so we shall hereafter esteem
no hazard too great, no reproach too vile, but that we shall willingly go
through the one, and undergo the other, that we and the whole Kingdom may enjoy
that happiness, which we cannot in an ordinary way of providence expect from
any other Fountain or Streams than those from whence ( were the poison of evil
Counsels once removed from about them) we doubt not but we and the whole
Kingdom should be satisfied most abundantly. The Philosopher De Clementia, l.
1. c. 3, 4.
Seneca asserts, That all Nations are most ready not only to guard and defend
their King, though old or decrepit, but to preserve his life with the hazard of
thousands of their own; not out of any baseness or frenzy, but because it is
their own interest and safety. Ille est enim vinculum per quod Respublica
cohaeret; ille spiritus vitalis, quem haec tot millia tra^unt, nihil ipsa per
se futura, nisi onus and praeda, si men's illa imperii subtrabatur.

-- Virgil. Georg. l. 2.
Rege incolumi men's omnibus una;
Amisso rupere fidem:
Hic casus Romanae (I may add Anglicae) paci^ exitium erit, hic tanti fortunam
populi in ruinas aget. Tamdiu ab illo periculo aberit hic populus, quamdiu
sciat far fraenos: quos si aliquando abruperit, vel aliquo casu discussos
reponi sibi passus non erit, haec unitas, et hic maximi Imperii contextus i^
parts multas dissiliet, idemque huic urbi Dominandi finis erit, qui parendi
fuerit (which we have found true by sad experience) Ideo Principes, Regesque
non est mirum amari ultra privatas ^stam necessitudines. Nam si sanis hominibus
publica privatis potiora sunt; sequitur, ut (...) quoque carior sit, in quem se
Respublica convertit. Olim enim ita se induit Reip: Caesar ut diduci alterom
non possit sine utriusque pernicie: nam ut illi viribus opus est, ita et huic
capite. Therefore let Nedham, Rogers, or other Pseudo politicians scrible what
they please, to flatter any prevalent, ambitious, covetous faction or Grandees
whatsoever, yet if all our ancient Parliaments, Lords, Commons, Seneca, our own
experience, God himself, or Solom^n the wisest of men, of Kings, may be
credited ( Prove. 24. 21. c. 28. 2. Eccles 8 2, 3. c. 12, 13. Hos. 10. 3, 7.
Hab. 1. 10, 14, 15. Ezech. 37. 19. to 28. Zach 9. 9. Lam 4. 20) there is no
other probable, safe, speedy way to prevent our ruin, cloze up our breaches,
settle our Church, State upon lasting foundations, and recover their pristine
honor, wealth, peace, unity, prosperity, but by restoring our hereditary King
and Kingship, the real Interest of all England, and of Scotland and Ireland
too, both as Men and Christians: which we ought in prudence, justice,
conscience, duty, piety, loyalty, now zealously, constantly, unanimously to
pursue against all contradictions, oppositions of any private persons, parties
self interests whatsoever: who if they had any true fear of God, any conscience
of their former Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Declarations,
Remonstrances, any Loyalty to their hereditarie King, any bowels of compassion
or cordial affection to their Native Countries peace, safety, ease, settlement,
or zeal to the Reformed Religion, would like that heroic public spirited
Pagan Roman Emperor ^uetonius, Tacitus, Eutropius, plutarch, and Grimston in
his life.
Otho, choose rather to make a voluntary sacrifice of themselves and all their
usurped power (as he did, against all the dissuasions of his Army, Soldiers,
Friends, relinquishing the Empire to Vitellius his competitor) than imbroil the
Empire and Romans any longer in bloody destructive wars, not against Hannibal,
Pyrrhus, or any other common Enemies (...) ^ome, (...) against the Romans
themselves, wherein both the (...) and conquered did but weaken, ruin and
destroy their own Country, Nation by their contests, and make themselves a
derision, prey to their foreign Enemies: as our Grandees do now.

For the Negative; That the late revived yet unformed Commonwealth, and its
future establishment, to prevent a Relapse to Kingly Government, neither is,
nor can be Englands true interest as men or Christian, is evident by the
premises: and these ensuing Reasons.

1. It never was once in imagination or projection of the Parliament or Army,
before the year 1648. but only of the Jesuits, Campanella, and our Spanish,
French, Popish adversaries, purposely to ruin our Protestant Kings, Kingdom,
Religion.

2. It was professedly disclaimed, Exact Collection. p. 657, 658, 695, 696 See
my Speech, p. 80, 81, 101, 102, 103.
voted, declared against, as Treasonable, and destructive to the being of
Parliaments and fundamental Government of the Kingdom ( when objected by the
Kings party, 1642. and propounded to the House by the Levellers and Agitators)
by both Houses of Parliament and the General Council of Officers in the Army:
in June, July, August, November 1647.

3. The Commonwealth contested for as Englands Interest, is as yet but only Ens
in potentia, or mere Chaos, Ovid Metamorph. lib. 1.
rudis indigestaque moles; Genesis 1. 2.
without form and void, and darkness is upon the face of it; the chief
Sticklers for it, being not yet accorded what kind of creature it shall be;
and much divided both in their debates, judgments, affections, opinions
concerning it: Some would have it to be an Rogers Concertation, p. 62, 70, etc.
Aristocraty, others a Democraty, many a Theocraty, some an Oligarchy; Many are
for a Roman, some for an Athenian, others for a Lacedemonian, not a few for a
Venetian, another party for a Helvetian, or Dutch Commonwealth. Some for a
vast body with two heads; others for a head with two bodies; a third sort, for
a body without any head: printing against each others models with much
eagerness. Now that such an Individuum vagum, rude Chaos, and Commonwealth as
this, not yet agreed upon, should be Englands Interest, and THE GOOD OLD CAUSE,
a^ Rogers, Nedham, Harrington, and others would make men believe, is not only a
Fancy, but Frenzy to a^^irm; seeing Englands Interest was ever in being since
it was a Kingdom, and their Vtopian Republike like the Chemists
Philosophers^stone, never yet in esse, but in fieri, or fancy at the most, and
a mere NEW NOTHING, as their Mercuries inform us.

4ly* The late unshaped, revived Commonwealth and pretended Free State, at its
first erection, like a prodigious All devouring, unsatiable Monster, rai^ed our
monthly contributions, from 3^. to one hundred, and sixscore thousand pounds
contribution each month, and since its new revival has raised a whole years
tax upon our exhausted purses in 3. Months space, and then imposed no less
than one hundred thousand pounds each Month, in lieu of the former 35
thousand; besides Excises, Customs, New intolerable Militiaes, amounting to
thrice as much more: Besides it consumed all the Crown Lands, Church Lands, and
public Revenues of our 3. Kingdoms, with thousands of Delinquents estates, all
alienated, dissipated, being more expensive, oppressive, wastefull to our
Nation in ten years space, than all our Kings since the Norman Conquest, or
Saxon line; only to make us greater slaves to our late Mercinary Army,
Servants, and Fellow Subjects, than ever we were to our beheaded King, or any
of his roial predecessors, whose 2 Chronicles. ^0. 10.
loins were nothing so heavy, as their little finger; chastising us with
Scorpions in new arbitrary, tyrannical Committees, High Courts of Justice, and
other exorbitant Judicatures; when as our Kings corrected us but with rods. It
has subverted our Kings, Parliaments, Peers, Laws, Liberties, Properties,
Great Charters, legal Courts, Writs, Seals, Commissions, Judges, Justices,
Sheriffs, Officers, Coyn^, Government, destroyed our public and private
wealth, Trade, Unity, Amity, Peace, Timber, Palaces, Woods, Shipping, and
many thousands of our gallantest Seamen, Land-men, by bloody wars with our
Protestant Brethren, Allies, and brought us to the very brink of ruin in all
our Civil Concernments, as Men. As Christians, by its toleration, fomentation
of Sects, Heresies of all sorts, it has shaken, undermined in a great measure,
the very Deity of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, the
Trinity of Persons and Unity in the Godhead; the Authority, Divinity of the
Scriptures; all the Arti^les of the Creed, the Sacraments, Ministers and
Ministry of the Gospel; the Fabrics of many, the Freeholds of all; the
maintenance of most of our Churches, Ministers, all now mere Tenants at
sufferance, and removable, sequestrable, taxable at our Republican Grandees
pleasures, yea their new Heralds, Baylifs to proclaim in Churches whatever they
prescribe, under pain of ejectment or their heaviest indignation. In brief, the
introduction of our unshaped Republike by Perjurie, Treachery, Violence,
blood, fraud, Injustice, destruction of our Protestant Kings, Lords,
Parliaments, has made many zealous professors of Religion Jesuits in their
policies, principles, practices, Titus 1. 16. 2 (...) 1. 1. Jude 4.
Atheists in their works; Christ himself and the Gospel (as the Atheistical
Pope esteemed them) a mere Fable, in the repute of many, yea the Protestant
Religion, a mere seminary of Treason, Rebellion, Sedition, Hypocrisy, Perjury,
Disloyalty, Villainy, Ataxy, Antimonarchy; and the zealous Professors of it, the
mere firebrands of Rebellion, Sedition, high Treason against their Sovereigns,
in the estimation of Cornelius Cornelii Praefatio in Minores Prophetas.
Militiere his Victory of Truth. See my Narrative, p. 55.
Foreign Jesuits, Papists, and Popish Princes; who endeavor their total
extirpation throughout the world as such. And can it be then Englands true
Interest, as Men or Christians?

5. J. Rogers himself (the Grand Champion for the Good Old Cause and
Commonwealth) in his Concertation, p. 100, 103, 104, 116, 117. informs us; That
Commonwealths are always subject to frequent changes and alterations; every
one more oppressive, tyrannical, cruel, bloody, prejudicial, destructive to the
peoples Liberties, properties, lives, than the other; instancing in the Romans,
and Athenians, which committed the greatest outrages upon the people, being
little better than a daily Massacre of the most eminent Worthies, and Hangmen,
Tormentors of the Commons; Which Vicissitudes, Alterations, proved the
Athenians utter destruction, and may be a fair warning to us; because the
Causes of such mutations, are the most dangerous Commotions, which tend to the
Ruin of All; as he proves but of Aristotle Polit. l. 5. c. 1. for prevention
whereof he prescribi^ 12 Considerations, unable to cure the fluctuatinge
uncertain state and mischief of a Commonwealth; of which we have already had,
and shall suddenly have again sufficient experience. And can a Commonwealth then
be Englands present or future Interest in any sense?

In brief, as it is the beauty, safety, interest of every natural living body,
whether of men, beasts, fowls, fishes, or creeping things to have only one head
to govern, one Soul to animate it by Gods own most divine and wise institution;
a two-headed body being an unnatural useless Monster, and a double-souled
man, creature, unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1. 8. So it is the safety,
beauty, interest, ligament of every Politic body whatsoever. Hence we find
not only in all Monarchies, but in all Republikes themselves, one Master over
every Family, one Mayor over every City, one Rector over every College, School,
Hospital, Fraternity; one Sheriff over every County, one Governor over every
Province, one Rector over every Parish Church and Congregation, as there is but
Ezech. 37. 23. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6.
one King, Lord, Head, Mediator Jesus Christ, over the Catholic Church; one
Pilot over every ship, one Admiral in chief over every Fleet; and in Armies
themselves, one General and Chief Commander over every Army, Brigade, Party;
one Colonel over every Regiment, one Captain over every Company, Troop, one
Governor over every Fort, Garrison both abroad and at home; a Plurality of
Lords, Masters, Generals, Governors, Rectors, etc. being always in all and
every of these not only dangerous, troublesome, inconvenient, chargable, but
distractive and destructive too, as all Ages, Nations have concluded from
reason and experience. Therefore, a Monarchical, hereditarie Kingly Government
(let Rogers, Nedham, and our Innovating frantic Republicans prate what they
will) must be Englands true and only Interest, honor, safety, felicity, both as
Men and Christians, so long as there shall be but Genesis 1. 16. Psalm 136. 8.
one Sun in the heavens to rule the day, and one Moon the night. Monarchy and
One-nesse being the only Ground, ligament of Peace, Unity, Safety both in
Church and State; but Polarchie the cause of ruin, confusion; as God only wise
resolves against all brain sick Novellers, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 6, 1 Cor. 8. 6.
c.. 12. 4, 5, 6, 11, to 31. Pro. 28. 2. Isay 19. 2, 3. c. 9. 19, 20, 21. Ezech.
37. 22, to 28. 1 Kings 14. 30. c. 15. 7. 16.

Let this last Question be now put to all the Freemen of the English Nation
(and of Scotland, Ireland too) whom it all alike concerns, and the In their
Agreement of the people, and Declaration 20. Nov. 1648.
Army with those Jan. 6. 1648.
now sitting, have formerly voted, TO BE THE ONLY SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THE
NATION, and themselves to be but their Servants, not their Sovereigns, and
therefore cannot in reason, justice, conscience deny them, or any of them the
freedom of their voices herein, in the present juncture of our affairs; and
then I dare pawn my reputation, life, against my Antagonists. I shall have
above a thousand voices concurring with me, to one, consenting with them: And
having both Vox Populi, and Vox Dei too, thus suffragating with me, in the
Supreme universal Parliament of all English Freemen without the House, I hope
no private Persons, not commissioned by the peoples free elections, will
presume to contradict or repeal their Major Vote, within the Commons House,
though they have thrice secluded me out of it by armed guards, before any legal
Accusation, trial or conviction whatsoever, from pleading of this their public
cause therein: which I wholly submit to their Universal Censure and Decision,
till we can gain a full and free, much-desired legal Parliament in both houses,
to resolve this doubt, which Gods wonder^working Providence, I trust will ere
long effect, by dashing the Army and their new Juncto sudainly in pieces
against each other, and turning them all out of doors, with greater contempt,
violence, hatred, dissipation than before, April 20. 16^3. (...) being a
principle in Law, Policy, Nature; Eodem modo quo quid constituitur,
dissolvitur, and a just Judgment of God, to cast them out of the House, for
their most treasonable Usurpation of a Regal and Parliamental power over the
whole three Kingdoms, and secluding the majority of their fellow Members
against all Rules of Law, Justice, Conscience, the Rights, Privileges of
Parliament, and their former Protestation, League, Covenant, Remonstrances, by
the self-same Army^Officers, who* secluded them by their confederacy; and now
have called them in again, for the ends recited in my Narrative; Which if they
refuse to prosecute* at the Armies and Sectaries instigation, John Rogers his
scurrilous Passages and Queres, against the old secluded Members, p. 7, 38, 39,
etc. and Ne^hams large Justification of their former seclusion, upon false,
irrational, Jesuitical Principles, will sufficiently animate them to thrust
their Masters out of doors, upon the self-same reasons and false pretenses he
allegeth for that seclusion, with their approbation; yea Rogers his
discontented Passages forecited, ( p. 46, 47.) threaten some sudden approaching
storm and ejection to them which they shall not escape; -- Nec enim Lex justior
ulla
Quam necis artifices ar^i perire sua.


So that all the surviving re-secluded Members, and our oppressed wearied
Nations sha^e ere long once more have cause to say and sing with the Kingly
Prophet, Ps. 9. 15, 16. The Heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made; in
the net which they ^id, is their own foot taken. The Lord is known by the
judgment which be executes, the wicked is snared in the works of his own
hands. Haggaion. S^lah.

(...), Sept. 23. ^6^0.
FINIS.

