THE PROTESTATION Given in by the DISSENTING BRETHREN, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
July 21. 1652. Reviewed and Refuted; Briefly showing the insufficiency of the
reasons thereof; And consequently the justice of the Assemblies sentence
condemning it.

Done by a Member of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

Psalm. 120. v. 7. I am for peace; but when I speak, they are for war.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, 1652.

THE PROTESTATION Reviewed and refuted; Briefly showing the insufficiency of
the reasons thereof; and consequently, the justice of the Assemblies sentence
condemning it.
AMongst the many sad judgments, wherewith the holy blessed GOD is pleased to
exercise th s sinful Land, staining the pr de of all our glory; there is none
more terrible, then that he threatens to remove our Candlestick, take his
Kingdom from us, and set o^t his Vineyard to other Husbandmen. And in this
evil, that which extremely in-bittereth it, is, that in the day of Sions
calamity, as there is none to comfort her, so when she calls for her Lovers,
they deceive her, her very sons stand a-far off from her; and as if that were
not enough, they persecute her whom the Lord has smitten, and talk to the
grief of those whom he has wounded; like Jobs friends, miserable comforters;
in her adversity they gather themselves together, in the place of Cordials,
bringing Corrosives.

I shall be loath to trace that too-too ordinary by-path, of judging any man's
everlasting estate, by his temporal out-breakings, o^ his heart and
intentions, by the outside of his actions; yet (I think) I may safely say,
that that Assembly at S. Andrews and Dundee, although despised of men, was
owned of GOD; and that he guided their Pens, as all along in their Procedure,
so particularly in their Warning and Declaration, and those words thereof, What
ever has been the intention of those who have been isntrumental, in making
this rent from public Counsels and actings, yet the Work it self, and the
spirit that has been stirring in it, has been, and yet is most effectual, for
carrying on of the Design of the Adversaries of our Cause. Which they prove by
seven steps of their progress, whereof that is the last and highest, their
unparalelled practice (except that of the persidious Prelates) of absolutely
declining the Authority of the General Assembly, and Protesting against it as
null; and so at one stroke, throwing down the hedge of Discipline in this Kirk,
and making way for every beast of the Forest to break in, and that upon such
frivolous and false grounds, as makes the authority of all the Assemblies of
this Kirk, since the begun Reformation, to be called into question, upon the
same or the like pretenses. This course, although they labored to justify, by
whatsoever specious pretexts the patrons of a bad cause could canvasse, yet the
unwarrantableness of that way, and the vanity of the grounds thereof, has been
evidently evinced in that modest, solid and judicious Piece, entitled, A
Vindication of the late General Assembly, etc. Which I cannot but recommend to
the serious perusal of all the Members of this Kirk, who desire satisfaction
in the points of the present Differences, or to be armed against the like
Procedures for the future; And that so much the rather, as that ye may see the
same storm again tossing the almost drowned, and not yet recovered Ship of this
Church. Whatsoever men are doing, the Devil is still driving on the design he
has found so advantageous; dividing, that he may conquer, and that he may
divide, cleaving us with a wedge of our own timber, and adding to his violence,
despite; doing it at such a time, in such a place, and such a way; I mean, by
men who were eminent in our Assemblies, in the City of our solemnities, yea in
the face of the General Assembly, and putting it to the Press, even while
they were treating with them for peace, and studying in the bowels of Christian
condescendance, to reclaim them from so divisive and destructive a course.

This way, as it cannot but sadly affect every son of Sion, so has it forced
me, until an abler Pen shall find more leisure, for preventing further
inconvenience, to write these few things following, that the simple may be
undeceived.

And passing for the present, the Representation (as they call it) but indeed
the misrepresentation of our state and differences; a bitter P^ece, filled with
uncharitable asper^ions, mostly repeated again in the Protestation. Waving also
the Propositions offered therewith to the Assembly, and so satisfactorily
answered by it, I shall (Godwilling) grapple with them in their Arsenall of the
Protestation it self, yet shortly glancing only at some principal things.

Where I begin with the Title, A PROTESTATION, which was given in against the
Supreme Representative of this Kirk, although I do not deny, but that General
Assemblies may err, and the godly be so put to it, as to have no remedy left
them in Law, but to protest; yet except the case be clear and sure, this course
is one of the highest contempts of Ecclesiastic authority. The last refuge for
removing of scandals being Mat. 18.17. tell the Church, after which nothing
remains, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be as a heathen or a
publican. I trust, whatsoever glosses others put upon the words, there is no
difference betwixt our Brethren and us, about the exposition of them: And hence
appears the equity of that Act and practice of our Assemblies, inflicting the
highest censures upon such; and reason, since they (in the highest measure)
neglect to hear the Church, neither is there now any ulterior or superior
Judicatory to go to. It is the judgment of all moderat and modest Divines, that
a great deal of reverence is due to the Church, even when she erreth; But what
if she err not? and whether she do or not, wherein have these men shown their
reverence and respect to their Mother? who what in them lies (but blessed be
the Lord it lies not) would discover her nakedness, when others then Brethren
are to behold it. Let them take heed if this be not a main step to Separation,
(which in words they seem to abhor) when as they protest and profess they
will not hear us, so they would cast on us a kind of necessity to hold them as
Heathens and Publicans; But to prevent this, they have found a way of their
own, and (as if they had not been of us) they are gone out from us, and setting
up to do their own business without us, as they seem to intimate in the last
page of their Printed Paper after the Protestation, contrary to the very
fundamentals of the Discipline of our Kirk, which is, and has ever been
professed to be, by Presbyteries, Synods, and National Assemblies, duly
subordinate one to another, all which their course overturneth, while they walk
in another way to make the matters of their Propositions practicable, as they
say.

But besides that, a Protestation is at best (except in the case of pungent
necessity) in its nature odious, it is so much worse in our Kirk, where we are
tied by the strictest Bonds both of the National, and solemn League and
Covenant, against all divisive motions and courses; and I pray, what is this
other then a divisive motion, and that of the deepe^^ dye, for them to separate
themselves, and joining together make a Party, when the Supreme Judicatories of
Kirk and State were going on in their continued Actings, in the day of great
danger and distress? They may be pleased to remember their own Act ngs and
speeches, when God honored them to be sitting in the Supreme Judicatories; How
far short came the intended divisive Supplication in Anno 1648. of this course
they are now on? Nay, the very cross Petition in Anno 1642. both which some of
them (I say some, for most of them are but of yesterday, and had then no place
in our Judicatories) showed to much zeal against.

And thus passing the Title of it, we come to the matter, where following their
footsteps, we begin with the Narrative which they begin, with asserting, that
it is well known to diverse of our number, what peaceable endeavors they have
used without success, in order to the removing of the differences among us. To
which I reply, that even by the permission of their own phrase, most part of
the Assembly might, yea did not know any such thing, but were confidently
persuaded, if any such endeavors were used, the lack of success did and does
lie solely and sadly upon the Protestors themselves. When this was publicly
debated in the Assembly, there was none found that knew ought in that kind,
except that which was done in the latter end of the last year, which let the
world judge, how peaceable an endeavor it was, and whence it came that it
wanted success.

Thus it was: They meeting then in Edinburgh without Order; after a little
pause, did constitute themselves in an Ecclesiastical Judicatory, wherein
Magisterially they defined things so prejudicial to us, as not only perfectly
obstructed all Peace, but also sounded the alarm to a new conflict, by
emitting a Paper, wherein they peremptorily conclude among the chief causes of
Gods cont oversie with the Land, the public Resolutions and preceding Assembly
to have a special place. And having thus fast locked the door of Peace, to
mock the world, if it did naught else; They sent some of their number to St.
Andrew^, to essay if they could draw off three or four there, and others to
Glasgow for the like intent, making account (which some of them spared not to
profess) that if they could get five or six of our most eminent men off, they
cared not for the rest of the Ministry; professing also at that Conference,
and others of them in an open Synod that they would never unite with the most
part of the Ministry of Scotland. And suitable to those ends was their
carriage at St. Andrews, as is clear in the Relation of the Paper thereanent,
which Paper though public enough, we have never yet heard contradicted by any.

As for any other of their endeavors, they are inter occulta de quibus non
judicat Ecclesia: But I shall desire it to be considered on the contrary, how
the preceding Assembly at Dundee appointed, that Synods and Presbyteries should
deal with them, to give them satisfaction ere they proceeded to censure; the
public Commission could do nothing of that kind, being by the troubles of the
time impeded to sit, yet were not such of them as could most conveniently
correspond, altogether defective in th s, though pressed with either part of a
doleful dilemma; for if they should act in the capacity of a Commission, the
Protesters would not have conferred; and out of that capacity, their Acting
(besides, that it could not have been obligatory to others) had been a silent
quiteing, if not a betraying of their Trust; But Providence offered opportunity
thus: In the beginning of this year, some Brethren from several parts of the
Country, being sensible of the then imminent snare and danger, resolved by
common consent to come to Edinburgh about the 12. of February, at which time
they heard there was to be a great meeting of our dissenting Brethren, where
they resolved to deal with them, that there might be a common Warning emitted
by consent of all the Judicatories of the Kirk, concerning things which we
doubted not were agreed to on all hands: accordingly they dealt with such of
them as were in Town, by the mediation of the Minister of Edinburgh, by whom
they sent to them materials of a Declaration, desiring them to change or add
as they should think fit for the purpose, but they refused to join, to the
great grief of those who did mediat, pretending they would first have a
Conference about Difference, which was nothing else, but to disappoint the
matter, the danger being so near, that a Meeting for such a Conference could
not be conveened, and the danger prevented.

This past, the Synods in April being invited by that of Fife; by their
acceptance of their Overture, showed their Affections to such a Peace with
their Brethren, as might not trouble their Peace with God: And for that effect,
did Commissionate some of their Members to come to Edinburgh, to a Meeting in
May last: But that is the next thing they complain and challenge us of. First
for neglecting to give them timeo^s advertisement, when yet the very first
motion of that Meeting in all our Judicatories, was in their presence, who if
they had been of such a peaceable temper as they talk of, would no doubt have
made such an invitation welcome, and embraced the occasion. As for particular
advertisement to them separatly, the Delegats of the Synod of Fife entrusted
therewith, used all possible diligence, a fortnight before that meeting,
dispatching their missives (which for ought that is known) did not miscarry,
yea upon their diligence we found at that Meeting, some from Rosse, and others
from Drumfreise, places of very remote distance, both South and North: And it
is credibly informed, that some of their chief leading men wrote both to
Aberdeen, and Galloway, desiring their Accomplices not to keep that Meeting.
Secondly, they complain, that not so much as some few days of delay could be
obtained by those few of their number which were then present, whereby they
might give advertisement to others. The truth is, in respect of their paucity,
they required at least a fortnights delay (although they had probably a
pre-indicted meeting reasonable frequent, in that same place the very week
following, and others of them were in Town then, did appear to us, and some of
them went out of Town immediately before our Meeting) and so long a time could
not be given, not only because our Brethren having come hastily from their
several dwellings, were not able to attend so long, and once suffered to
scatter could not conveniently be gathered again; but especially because having
offered unto them a free Gen Assembly (the of old acknowledged proper remedy of
all Ecclesiastical d^seases) where many of our selves might again be present,
it was plain that nothing to any good effect could be done till then: And
Providence happily casting that occasion in their hands, that they might
appoint and determ^ne of the place of the ensuing Assembly, they could not
suffer the same to slip, which could not be shunned, for lack of timeous
advertisement to the Presbyteries, if it were not then concluded. And so (which
they perceived those they spoke with directly aimed at) let the Kirk in this
difficult time be shaken loose of her Possession, of that her dear bought
Freedom, which Mr. Welsh, Mr. Forbes, and other precious men, that now rest,
adventured their lives, and suffered banishment to preserve; As was gravely
pressed home by Mr. Blair upon them in the Conference, and to which they could
not, sure they did not, give so much as a seem^ng satisfactory answer. Thirdly,
they say in the Printed Paper; That a Desire of Reconciliation was presented,
but peremptotily, the Electing, and sending Commissioners to keep the day
indicted by the Meeting of Dundee, was concluded. I know no opposition betwixt
those two, as I conceive any good sense in the former, the one being the end,
and the other a mean to it: Besides, I know no desire of Reconciliation
presented to them, except the Paper of the offer of a free Assembly, as the
proper Remedy of our distractions. But in the autograph, it is pretended, not
presented; and so they most uncharitably assert, We pretended a Desire of
Reconciliation, but had concluded another thing: It is so well known in the
Country, whether it be we or they that use to act so; That I shall only need to
speak to the purpose? Our desire of Peace was real, the obstruction of it was
from them, and we had been very foolish, and censurable, if ever the Lord
should bless us with another Assembly, for not walking answerable to our
Trust, in relation to this, if we had not designed the place thereof.

In the next room, They mention their Paper given in with the Propositions
(wherein they say they have the concurrence of the Generality of the Godly of
the Land) and did entreat for a Conference; which was denied; the Commissioners
proceeding to assume the Power, and constitute themselves in a General
Assembly: Lest any should think, that in assuming the Power, and constituting
themselves in a General Assembly, they d^d some new and uncouth thing, as
those who challenge them did the last year, in constituting themselves a
Commission of the Kirk; Be it known to all men, they did no other thing, nor in
no other way then all the Assemblies since the last Reformation have been in
constant practice of: And how necessary it was, in this staggering time, not to
change in the least, will be assented to, by every ingenuous man, nor know I
any reason why they should complain: For those to whom the Paper was given,
were not in a capacity to give an answer, till they were first constitute in an
Assembly (yea none but an Assembly could satisfactorily answer their Demands,
as is evident too, and will be acknowledged by the judicious Reader) Which was
no sooner done, then they went effectually about it; but on the contrary, the
Protesters would not so much as wait till then, but presently gave in their
Protestation. We will not now speak of that other Paper, yet cannot pass that
arrogant Title of the Generality of the Godly, which they assume to themselves,
and their abettors. We will not mention of whom they learned this, and whom in
many other things they too much resemble: But we shall refer the Reader to that
most fa thful and timeous Warning and Declaration of the late Assembly at
Dundee, and the third admonition and charge of the second part thereof.

Where they affirm it their burden, and that they have no delight to be
contesting with any who profess themselves to be maintainers of the Government
of this Church. It is wished their works were consonant to their words, and
made them credible to all on lookers: Certainly, how ever they may please
themselves, this is not the ordinary opinion that most men have of them.

Next, they speak of a party of insufficient, scandalous, and corrupt M^nisters
etc. complying with the times, expressing their disaffection to the Work of
Reformation, as they found opportunity, as in the time of James Graham, and the
unlawful engagement, who got greater advantage by the public Actings for
bringing in of Malignants to places of Trust: And who perceiving they were not
able to endure trial and purging, began the last year to lift up their heads,
and being encouraged by the Acts and Censures of Dundee, have so strengthened
themselves, as to carry on Public Determinations to their own ends, from whom
(say they) what can be expected, but to favor every evil course, to persecute
such as seek the Lord in sincerity, suppress the power of Godliness, and open
the door of the Mnistiery to such as for insufficiency, scandals, or
dis-affection, have been justly deposed, in regard whereof, they think there is
too great cause to make use of the Prophets words, Jer. 23.14, 15. There be
many things here deserve animadversion.

I.
Although we deny not, but that in every Order there may be some out of Order;
as Judas among the Ap^stles, and Saul among the Prophets, yet know we not of
any such party as they speak of, nor did so much as any person of that kind
sooner appear among us, then according to the measure of his offense, he found
the severity of Discipline. It would be seriously considered, whether or not by
this Party, they mean the Body of the Ministry represented at Dundee, whom
thus they would cast an odium upon; but what favor the Party that was truly
such as they describe, found at that venerable Assembly, let their Acts and
Declarations speak; which Declaration of theirs mentions another Party, that
has, (alas) too long lurked among us, and under specious pretexts brought
their design to that pass we now see. These men should (according to the common
rule) first have purged themselves, and taken this beam out of their own eye.

II.
It is true indeed, and I trust, the Kirk of this Nation has no reason to
repent, that she still has some, who (during the prevailing of the Prelates)
were carried down with the Tide of the times, even to give subscriptions
according to the then way of entry, and being weighted therewith, do comfort
themselves with Paul, That God will be merciful to them, in that which they
did ignorantly. But for those horrid Oaths they speak of, nothing is known but
the common subscription: And if ought concern the Kirk to know more, it should
neither have been so long concealed by those who appropriate to themselves the
title of the godly, nor now revealed at such a time, and in such a way. As for
their subscriptions, they were generally known; yet notwithstanding thereof
were the Subscribers even at first invited to the Covenant, and some of them
with the first appeared against the Se^vice-Book, and many of them have not to
this day fallen from their stedfastness; neither were all that have fallen of
that number. But for further and full clearing of this, I offer these things.
1. Some of the prime of their number, are alse, if not more grossly guilty of
the ill, then any of ours. 2. There are of our number ten for one of theirs,
that in that hour and power of darkness, bare the heat and hard of the day. 3.
Scarce twenty of them are yet of six years standing in the Ministry, and but
about five only of them were Ministers, when the National Covenant was
subscribed. 4. And generally all the old Ministers, and those that were
admitted before the Episcopal incroachment, are for the Assembly. 5. Lastly,
would we speak of those that suffered under the Prelates, the Assembly will be
found to have three for it, where one is against it.

III.
As for any who by word or deed at any time appeared against the late
Reformation, they still found so little patrociny from those who are now
Assembly-Men, that I am sure, if we should serve the Protesters w th the like
measure, for transgressions of he like nature, and perhaps greater, they would
cry out, of cruelty and persecution.

IV.
As for the Epithets they give that Party; I confess, ill enough cannot be
done to, let be spoke, of men who are truly such as they describe: But we
desiderate here both charity and prudence, at such a time, and in such a way,
to fling filth upon the faces of their Brethren; and that (for ought yet seen
or known) most unjustly.

V.
That the Public Actings were for bringing in of the Malignant Party, to
places of power and trust, and bearing down such as had been straight in the
Cause, stirring up the Civil Magistrate against them; and subjecting the
liberty of the Word in the mouth of Christ's Ambassadors, for reproof of sin, to
the immediate judicial cognizance, restraint and cen^ure of the Civil
Magistrate, will appear a mass of malicious reproaches, by shortly setting down
the true stories related to: But I must first tell, that the odious term
Malignant, does not appertain to them, who having satisfied for their offenses
of that kind, according to the Order prescribed by these men's own assent and
advice keep themselves free from new out-breakings of that abjured iniquity;
And if we walk not according to this rule, many of them will be forced to hear,
what for the present I purpose not to speak. And n^xt add, that all the bi^ds
of their feather, were not so straight in the Cause, as they would seem to
insinuat here: And on the other part, some whom they term Malignants here, have
given unquestioned evidence of their affection to, and are still suffering for
that Cause.

Now, the stories related to, are these two; The one so well known, that we
need no more but remember how, when, and upon what pinch of necessity, (which
themselves know how it came) the Commission of the K^rk being enquired by the
State, who might be employed for the necessary defense of the Count^ey at such
a time; The Commission of the Kirk gave that Answer, which their duty to GOD,
their Mother Kirk, Native Country, and the Protestant Interest extorted from
them, and which all Nations and Incorporations whatsoever, will, and do allow
and practice in such a case. But, that people may rightly judge of it, for it
is ordinarily misrepresented, we desire them to get, and ponder the
Commissions own Papers.

The other story is shortly (in so far as it is most material) thus; It being
represented by the Committee of Estates, to the Commission of the Kirk, what
hazard the Garrison of Sterline was in by their Ministers there p^eaching and
otherways dealing they withal signified how they behooved to take some course
for securing the same, the Commission desired their Lordships, that they would
not meddle with the matter, til they had first dealt with them, and returned
their report of the Issue, which being assented to, the Commission wrote for
them to St Andrews, where they met with them; and when by conference they would
not receive satisfaction, began to entreat them first to give assurance, that
they would not obstruct the Levies, but this they refused: Thereafter, that
they would be pleased (for Peaces sake) to with draw for a season from
Sterline, and they would provide their Places, but this they also refused,
although Mr. Blair then (apparently adying) did gravely obtest them, both for
the one and the other; which being represented to the Committee of Estates, and
they thereafter informed, how those Ministers continued in their former
practice, they wrote for them once, and again, to come to Perth; But ere they
came, (the most part of the Committee being removed to the North) they who
remained, desired them to stay at Perth or Dundee, till the rest should return;
against which they protested in very h^gh terms, as encroaching upon the
Ministry, etc. By the time the rest returned, the Parliament did sit, who
desired the judgment of the Commission, whether or not the Committee of Estates
had made any encroachment upon the Ministry and Government of this Kirk, by
detaining these Ministers, and give their advice what course the Parliament
should take in relation to them, for securing the Garrison of Sterline; the sum
of the answer thereto was, the Brethren might lawfully protest, that nothing be
done prejudicial to the Liberties of the Kirk; but that they did not see that
the Committee of Estates had encroached thereon, by that which they had done;
and that they could give no advice to their Lordships, the securing of a
Garrison being a thing not competent to them. After which, some of those
Ministers friends entreated some of the Commission, to deal with the
Parliament, to let their Brethren go home, under-taking for them, that they
should not further offend; which the Brehren of the Commission did, engaging
themselves to be answerable for their carriage; whereupon they were presently
dismissed. This being the true story, let any judge of the truth of the former
calumnies.

VI.
As for their purging humor, which time with these sad dispensations might
have purged out of them, but belike it will never leave them; We grant indeed
the Kirk should be careful to purge out the old Leaven. All our question is,
anent the manner how: And I shall desire them in the fear of God, to consider
whether their practice in this has been in every thing squared to the Apostles
Rules, 1 Timothy 5.19. Tit. 3.10. Gal. 6.1. Jud. 22.23. And whether or not they
made it a politic screw, to wind themselves into all places of Power and
Authority, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and a mean of revenge, exercing it
uncharitably and unseasonably.

VII.
As for any power in any to carry public Determinations to any wrong ends, we
can, and do bless God, the contrary is known to be true, and all the
Assemblies Determinations speak the same Language to the whole world; yea, I
hope, to their consciences also, when the heat of their passions is a little
allayed,

VIII.
For the following words, which are of the stamp with the former, I shall only
add 1. What measure every one that comes not up their full length may expect
of them, if their former actings had not sufficiently cleared, their present
expressions put out of all doubt. 2. It is not one of the characteristicall
properties of the Godly, to be so often assuming that Title. 3. Such heinous
accusations must not be taken upon trust, when naught is said to make them
appear. 4. I believe the Assembly knows of none received to the Ministry,
but according to the Public Order; and when ought shall appear to the
contrary, will take such course therewith as in Justice accords.

IX.
For their allusion to the Prophets words, I shall desire them seriously to
read them again, and perpend if in conscience, they be appl cable to the points
of present differences.

Next; they tell us, it shall be their purpose to maintain the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government of this Kirk, and particularly the
National Assemblies, so long as they are preserved from corruption in the
Constitution thereof: But many need better Arguments to perswde them of this,
then their bare Profession, or practice this year and the last; Of which we may
well say, what ever be the purpose of men, it is evidently the aim of the devil
to ruin General Assemblies, and so to raze the walls of our Jerusalem; And
they would do well to consider if, and how far they have been isntrumental to
drive on that design.

But they would make some clearing here, by telling us that All who are
acquainted with the Principles and practices of our worthy Prodecessors, and of
the learned and godly non conformists in England, will easily ^ee how far they
are from their judgments and practices, who follow the ways of separation.
Bel^ke they still dwell beside evil neighbors, but which is worse, they are
hardly believed, when men call to mind, and consider how now of a long time,
still they took the patrociny of all that were suspected to follow those ways.
2. What Progress some of their chief and cried up men have made in those ways.
3 What affection they still carry to them, and how familiarly they converse
with them, even although excommunicate. 4. But especially how unavoidable
separation is upon their grounds: For if it be a matter of Conscience for them
to join with others in Civil Duties, that necessarily belong to the
Incorporation, whereof both are members, sure much more in Ecclesiastic. But a
little time will further clear this.

As for an Argument drawn from the disclaiming corrupt Assemblies at Glasgow,
or the following Assembly at Edinburgh, its affirming those corrupt Assemblies,
were a chief cause of the evils we then groaned under. How weak, I say, such an
argument will be for justifying their present practice; is palpable to any who
will look either to the matter concluded in those corrupt Meetings, or the
manner of their procedure, or the particular reasons whereon they were
condemned, in all which there being nothing alike; I wonder why they are
alleged, except perhaps, they know many of their Proselytes will take upon
trust, whatsoever comes from them, or seems to borrow countenance from
Glasgow.

They say, they have a clear warrant from Scripture, to plead and testify
against corruptions: It is, indeed, but withal they should have better grounds
then any we have yet heard of, or can conceive, before they trouble the Peace
of a Kirk, and so peremptorily conclude, that a corruption, which they cannot
prove one; yea what all, not only Reformed Churches, from the light of
Scripture are persuaded of, but even generally all people from the light of
Nature, and upon the Principles, of self preservation, are convinced is a duty.

We pass for the present, to give any verdict, concerning some bypast Acts of
theirs (which they mention) how good they were, or how true. What is said being
sufficient to clear, that this their Protestation is alse needless (to say no
worse) as the following grounds given for it are frivolous, which themselves
seem in part to assent to, while they say, they do it for all or some of the
reasons following, and so insinuate, that some of them will not hold water,
which (in my humble opinion) they might safely have affirmed of them all.

Their first reason is, that this Meeting has its dependence, power and
authority for its indiction, from that of St. Andrews, and Dundee. Is not that
to beg the question? and besides, has no weight, neither in respect of us who
hold and have determined it a free, lawful General Assembly, as indeed it was,
and does appear from the Vindication thereof, a nervous piece, not yet
answered, nor easily answerable; Nor in respect of themselves, and their
principles, who in their Arguments against that Assembly, do determine, that
Presbyteries may by mutual consent, meet in a free, lawful Genesis Assembly; now
the Commissions directed to this, do presuppose and import the mutual consent
of Presbyteries.

Their second reason is, That it is constitute after the same manner, and (for
the most part) of the same members that the last Assembly was, to wit, of
persons that have carried on a course of defection, and in respect hereof, are
incapable of being Commissioners; which again beggeth the Question, and besides
that, it is answered in the forecited Vindication, includes this falsehood,
that they are (for the most part) the same Members constituent, whereas the
Rolls compared will clear, that not the third man who was present the last
year, are Members of this, neither d^d this Moderator precede in that
challenged Commission of the Kirk, nor was so much as present at it. But
especially this Argument our Remonstrators have borrowed from the Remonstrants
of the Netherlands, their Protestation against the Council of Dort; at which
meeting, it was largely and learnedly refuted, as may be seen in the judgments
of the Orthodox Divines thereupon.

The third reason is, because of the praelimitation of Elections, by the Acts
made at Dundee injoyning Synods and Presbyteries to proceed to censure all who
oppose the Public Resolutions, or should not acquiesce to the Acts made at
Dundee, and so excludes all not involved in the course of defection, from
Elections, in pursuance whereof, there were sundry praelimitations made since,
by several Synods and Presbyteries. For answer, I would enquire, with what
conscience this Argument is proponed by them, who (for ought I know) are clear
against the major, and cannot be ignorant of the vanity or nullity of the
minor. Their major must be no Assembly, that is praelimited, can be free. But
to pass the judicious considerations thereof in the learned Vindication, sure I
am, themselves will never assent to any Assembly in this Kirk, without strange
prae-limitations, yea and prae-conclusions too; as they did signify at the
Meeting and Conference in May last. And for the Minor, there were
prae-limitations here, I pray you what? Such as may nullify an Assembly? No
such thing. Is a future Assembly praelimited, because a prior determined the
qualification of its Members? Was the Parliament 1649. praelimited and unfree,
because the Committee of Estates excluded therefrom, all that sat and voiced
in the former? Or the Assembly of Glasgow, because the Tables appointed and
laid down a way who should be elected thereto, and who not? Or all future
Assemblies, because that of Glasgow excludes from them all that shall not take
the National Covenant? Whither does their passion lead them? To plead the
Episcopal cause? Besides, did not the Letter of the Commission in May last,
require of Presbyteries, to choose faithful and honest men? Which, what ever
some have said, was no sinful praelimitation Add, although the Act of Dundee
require Presbyteries and Synods, to proceed with the Censures of the Church
against them, who after conference opposed the Public Resolutions (not as they
say, with a disjunctive, or who shall not acquiesce to the Acts made) yet has
no Presbytery nor Synod that I know censured any upon that account, or excluded
any from voicing in Elections; but rather all Presbyteries did require them
thereto. Now, if they might elect, they might also by the same reason been
elected; but themselves foreseeing that, in few Presbyteries obtainable;
wherever they were, they refused and dissented, being probably themselves
praelimited by the order and advice of their ringleaders. Lastly, it is at
best needlessly added, that there were several limitations since in several
Synods, I believe there will be nothing else found but the same, viz. the
assertion of the Constitution of the Assembly of Dundee, which we will not
grant, and they cannot prove to be such a prae-limitation, as is destructive of
the freedom of an Assembly.

Their fourth reason is made up of many particulars, which we thus particularly
reply to.

I. There are many Presbyteries who refuse to send Commissioners to this
meeting as an Assembly. But there be many unquestioned Assemblies have bin made
up of fewer Members, as upon the inspection of the Rols will appear. Neither is
a Meeting that has no determinate Quorum, evacuate or made null, because a
Minor part legally warned, cannot, or will not come thereto, as the perpetual
practice of Presbyteries, Synods, former Assemblies and Parliaments shows.
Nor is the number of the Absents here so great; and although it were greater,
it is not their simple absence, but unjust exclusion, that renders the Meeting
obnoxious to exception.

II. They say, there are many Presbyteries that do concur in protesting against
this Assembly, To which I reply, We have heard of dissents, but not of any
Protestation, except this, which they now have given; which if they mean here,
as the Protestation is not Presbyteriall, so the reason will be found to have
no more of reason in it, then if they had argued thus; We find our selves
necessitated to protest against this Ass. because we have protested against it.
Or thus; This our Protestation is just and lawful, because we have protested.

III. Where Presbyteries have sent Commissioners, the Elections are generally
controverted, there being Protestations made, at least dissents entered,
against most of their Elections, upon good grounds. But here (I think) a
special providence has ruled, that there was no Protestation. In most
Presbyteries there were no dissents at all; and all that we heard of, were
simply against the Elections, not against the persons elected, besides that
they were not prosecute, nor brought in to be discussed. And a dissent
infers not by the Act of the Assembly a suspending, let be a repealing of
the Act of the Judicatory; Only it makes the Judges liable to the censure of
their Superiors, for what they have done; which if it be amiss, the dissenter
is not involved in their guilt or censure; but if not, he is censurable
himself. And if it were otherwise, we should absurdly be forced to confess,
that every Member of a Judicatory, has a negative voice, which will open a
door, whereby every faction may elide all General Assemblies for ever.

IV. There be wanting Commissioners from Burghs, in respect of their present
incapacity. We need say no more to this, since themselves answer it, that they
are in an incapacity: and suppose they were not, yet have they not a negative
voice. Besides that, all were not absent.

V. The generality of the godly in the Land go along with us (say they) and
approve our protesting against this meeting. A strange assertion, and of
dangerous consequence. Th^s Protestation was given in at the very beginning of
the As^embly, ere ever it was constitute, and that upon the delay of taking in
their first Paper: and is it probable they could gather all their consents in
so short a time? Or had they them before? But that smells of a prae-medit^te
Faction; Or go their resolutions along with whatsoever these Protesters do? But
that is not suitable to them that are truly godly, to have their faith pinned
to the slieves of any, how high soever they hold their head. Or is it that they
will allow none to be of the number of the godly, who go not along with them in
every thing? This (I suspect) be the marrow of the matter: But who gave them
that power to put out and put in into the Roll of the Godly, whom ^hey please?
And as we doubt of their authority so to do, even so also of their power; can
they reach the heart, or are they quicker sighted then Elias, who saw not one
of the seven thousand God had reserved to himself? Will they condemn all for
ungodly, that are not of their way? How suiteth that with their professions
elsewhere? I am sure we have here reason to dissent and appeal from such an
uncharitable censure of them that have no power, to the righteous Tribunal of
the Lord, to whom we stand. There may be somewhat more yet of dangerous
consequence in it, in that they seem to subject the Public Ministerial
authority to the People, and amongst them, to such only as are visible Saints,
where if there be any mystery, they will do well to unfold it.

And now for the solemn words of the Protestation, the grounds and reasons
thereof being houghed, we need say no more but if those Principles from which
they say they do it, viz. the zeal they owe to the glory of God, etc. were
rightly weighed, they would infer, and have produced the quite contrary
conclusion: Which the Lord out of his tender mercy to this poor bleeding Church
and Country, imprint upon their spirits for Christ's cause. AMEN.

FINIS.

