Mr. Prowde's Confirmation-Sermon, Preached at BRIDGEWATER, July 16. 1693.

IMPRIMATUR.

LAMBETH, Nov. 17. 1693. Ra. Barker.

A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of Bridgewater, July 16. 1693. Before
the Right Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, AT A
CONFIRMATION.

By FRAN. PROUD, M. A. Vicar of Woollavington in Somersetshire.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for W. Rogers, over against S. Dunstan's-Church in
Fleetstreet, 1694.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, RICHARD, LORD BISHOP of Bath and Wells.
May it please your Lordship,
THE ensuing Discourse, being solely the Product of your Lordship's Command,
seems naturally to fly to you for Patronage. I am very sensible it must meet
with a great deal of that Goodness of Soul, and pious Inclination, which
belongs to your Lordship, to render it acceptable: But the Deference I owe your
Injunction, for having it made public, encourages me to hope it may occasion
some good Thoughts and Endeavors in the World: Which that it may, I heartily
beg of God, and humbly subscribe my self,

Your LORDSHIP's, Most Obedient Servant, Fran. Proud.

ACTS VIII. 17. Then Laid they their Hands on them, and they received the Holy
Ghost.


THAT result of the wise Solomon's maturer thoughts, He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, is not more sadly experimented, than while we
contemplate the religious strifes which are so eagerly maintained in the
Christian World. And among all the perplexing Controversies of this unhappy
nature, that about the Doctrine, which this Text of Scripture presents to our
consideration, is not the least. It Is strange, even to prodigy, to consider,
that after the Office of Confirmation is so plainly delivered, and recommended
in the Holy Scriptures; so religiously observed in the best and purest times of
Christianity; so generally owned in the main, as to its nature and obligation,
even by the most considerable Parties now among us, should, after all, seem
neglected and despised. What can be the occasion of this melancholy scene of
things? And whence must the contradiction between the evident grounds of this
belief and practice derive? Indeed, what other reason can be given of it, but
that the truly Primitive Spirit of Piety and Unity, with which the Holy Jesus,
by visiting these lower regions, blessed the world, is, for want of
entertainment here, fled to Heaven. The Great and Incomprehensible God has no
dependence upon us; all his favors are free, and in strictness of sense,
unmerited by us. The methods of our happiness, though they are agreeable to our
natures, and highly worthy our rational choice, yet they are assigned us by
God, and if we will be happy, we must make our selves so, as God has appointed.
If through carelessness, or obstinacy, we take wrong methods; and refuse, or
oppose those which God has ordained, we then grieve and contradict his Holy
Spirit, and unnaturally bring on our present and eternal ruin. Our
compassionate Savior, at his departure hence, promised us the comfortable
assistance of the Holy Ghost, to the end of the World: And how the divine
efflux shall be communicated, he himself, and the Penmen of the New Testament,
both by their precepts and examples have so plainly taught us, that in short,
nothing but our own perverseness can undo us. Particularly, in the words of my
Text, according to the generality of the most learned and happy Interpreters of
Sacred Writ, we have presented to our thoughts, one of the admirable ways, or
means, whereby the divine wisdom has thought fit to convey both the outward, to
wit, the extraordinary, and miraculous; and the inward, to wit, the saving and
lasting gifts of the Holy Spirit. In short, if we consider the Context, it
makes it clear beyond denial, that by Laying on of Hands, joined with Prayer,
and receiving the Holy Ghost, we are to understand the doctrine and effect of
Confirmation. For those Prayers which we read were made by the Apostles, Peter
and John, verse. 15. did so soon attend the Conversion and Baptism of the
Christians at Samaria, that it must signify Confirmation. When the Apostles
which were at Jerusalem (says the Text) heard that Samaria had received the
word of God, and were baptized by Philip, they sent unto them Peter and John,
verse. 14. which exactly agrees with this doctrine and usage; being an act,
which we find Primitively reserved to the Rulers of the Church, and not allowed
to inferior Officers, such as Philip the Deacon mentioned in this Chapter,
Annotations on, Acts 8. verse. 17.
though he was endowed with the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost. According
to this notion Dr. Hammond observes, that Bishops are called (...), Doctors, as
that signifies the farther instructing them to whom the Gospel has been
formerly preached; and as (...) differs from (...), preaching from teaching.
And in Confirmation it certainly was, that in these first times of the Gospel,
both the saving, and miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit used to be conferred.
But besides this, it is farther probable, that the Faith being planted at
Samaria by Philip, and the Apostles coming thither to Confirm, and not staying
there, Acts 8. v. 25. Acts 14. v. 23. Tit. 1. v. 5. Epist. 1. ad Corin.
but returning to Jerusalem, they did, at their being there, ordain Elders, or
Bishops, in their several Cities; as we find Paul and Barnabas did, and as we
read Titus did also in Crete. This, says Clemens Romanus, the Apostles did in
their journeyings, when they went out preaching the Gospel, (...), etc.
Preaching through Regions, and Cities, they constituted their First Fruits,
Bishops and Deacons, of those that should afterward believe. And thus, before
this time, they had constituted James, the Brother of our Lord, Bishop at
Jerusalem, in the first year after Christ's Ascension: From whence it is not
reasonable to believe, that the Apostles, Peter and John, should come down to
Samaria, where the Gospel had been so universally received, and not also ordain
some Governors over them before they returned. In short, therefore, by Laying
on of Hands, joined with Prayer, and receiving the Holy Ghost, mentioned in my
Text, both according to the Context, and general suffrage of Expositors, we are
to understand Confirmation, and Ordination; the Holy Ghost, by the Apostle's
ministry, coming on all the sincere believers, and endowing them with the
internal, saving and lasting gifts of the Holy Spirit, and some of them with
external and miraculous powers. And the Apostles also, by Laying on their Hands
on some signalized persons, Ordained them Bishops, and Deacons, in several
Cities; the Power of doing which belonged only to the Apostles to exercise, and
was not Philip's business, though he had power to preach, and baptize; nay
though himself was endowed with miraculous gifts. Now these things premised, in
accounting for my Text, and in reference to the present occasion, I shall
pursue this following method.

1. I shall endeavor to give a true, and distinct Account, of the Doctrine of
Confirmation, observing whence it derived, how it obtained, and has been
practiced in the Church.

2. I shall briefly observe the qualification of the Person, to whom originally
the Administration of it seems to have been assigned.

3. I shall answer some Objections, which are brought against it. And,

4. and Lastly, by way of Application, I shall propound some Considerations,
evincing the Reasonableness, Divine Excellency, and Necessity of its Practice.

First of these Particulars; to wit, to present a true, and distinct Account of
the Doctrine of Confirmation, observing whence it derived, how it obtained, and
has been practiced in the Church. The learned Grotius tells us, Grot. Annot.
Cap. 6. Paul. ad Hebr. v. 2.
that Imposition of Hands, joined with Prayer, was peculiarly used in the
Primitive Christian Church, in these five following Cases. Baptizatis ad
obtinendam vim confirmantem spiritus sancti; ordinatis ad Presbyterium; post
peccata reconciliatis; Corpore infirmis; imo and novis conjugibus benedictionem
ab Ecclesia postulantibus; i. e. To those who have been baptized, in order to
obtain the confirming Influence of the holy Spirit; in ordination; to the
Penitent; in cases of sickness; and to the newly married: And most of these, if
not all (as he hints) deriving from Hebrew Customs; and to this purpose, we
find it recorded in these following parts of Divine Writ: Genesis 48. Verse. 14,
15, and 16. And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it on Ephraim's
head, who was the younger; and his left hand upon Manasses's head; guiding his
hands wittingly, for Manasses was the first born. And he blessed Joseph, and
said, God before whom my Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, did walk; the God that
fed me all my life long, bless the Lads. Here we find the Laying on of the Hand
joined with Prayer, used to conferr Divine Grace. Thus we likewise find it
practiced, Numb. 6. verse. 27. being an Account of that sacred Form of Blessing,
wherewith, God himself taught Aaron, and his Sons, to bless the Children of
Israel. Our English Translation reads it, They shall put my name upon the
Children of Israel, and I will bless them. Junius and Tremellius paraphrase the
words: Et imponentes manus filiis Israelis, invocabunt nomen meum, and ego
benedicam eis: Putting their Hands on the Children of Israel, they shall pray
to me for them, and I will bless them. And in their Notes on this Text of
Scripture, they add farther, in these words; duobus signis testatum facient
Populo meo gratiam meam, etc. By these two Signs, Calling on my Name, and the
solemn Laying on of their own Hands, they shall assure my People of that Grace,
which I, according to my Promise, will bestow upon them. And this Grace, or the
Effect of this Blessing, as the Learned Dr. Patrick observes, Dr. Pa^^ Aqua
g^^talis.
from some of the Jewish Rabbis, used to be called the Weapons, and Armor of
Israel. To the same purpose, we read Numb. 8. verse. 10, 11, and 14. Thou shall
bring the Levites before the Lord; and the Children of Israel shall put their
hands upon the Levites; and Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord; thus
shall thou separate the Levites, from among the Children of Israel, and the
Levites shall be mine. I shall only add one instance more, Numb. 27. verse. 18.
That when Moses was to leave the World; and his troublesome Charge, the
Israelites, he was ordered by God himself, to constitute Joshua his Successor,
after this Manner: And the Lord (says the Text) said unto Moses, take thee
Joshua, the Son of Nun, a Man in whom is the Spirit, and Lay thine Hand upon
him. I might instance in other Passages to this same purpose; but these are
sufficient to point to us, whence the Sacred usage of Imposition of Hands, in
the Christian Church derived its Original. And to apply this more particularly
to our present Case: The Jews, having circumcised their Children at Eight days
old, so soon as they were capable of instruction, they took the greatest care
of them imaginable; particularly, when their Sons were five Years old, they
instructed them in the Text of the Law; when they were ten Years old, they put
them to the Text of the Talmud, and when they arrived at Thirteen, they were
publicly presented in an holy Assembly; there solemnly to oblige themselves to
be Filii praecepti, subject to the Law; to keep the Pascha, Sabbath, and the
rest of their Ceremonies; Veem's ^^eposit. of ^^e Moral ^^w. Bux^^rf. Syn.
^^daic.
thence forward, they were to answer for their own Sins; and hereupon, Prayer
was made for them, with the Imposition of the High-Priest's hands, in order to
the conferring Divine strength. In short, agreeable to these, and such usages,
during the Patriarchal, and Mosaic Oeconomies, we find it practiced under the
Christian Dispensation. For by Laying on of Hands, as an applicatory Sign,
joined with Prayer, did our Savior, and his immediate Followers, heal
Diseases. Thus our Blessed Lord demeaned himself toward the Children which came
unto him; he put his hands upon them, and blessed them, praising their
inoffensive, and unprejudiced Tempers, as resembling that happy, habit of
Thoughts, which disposes to the Entertainment of his Divine Religion: This
Imposition of Hands, joined with Prayer, we read our Savior's Apostles
evidently practiced. ^^^ts 6. v. 1.
Thus they invested the seven Deacons in their Office; thus Barnabas, and Paul,
at Antioch, were consecrated to that Divine undertaking, which God had assigned
them. Thus Timothy was ordained Bishop; and thus all along, in the Apostles
Times, it was an unquestionable, and allowed way to bless, consecrate, and
conferr Grace, by Prayer, and the Laying on of Hands. And thus particularly, in
reference to Confirmation, these following Texts of Scripture are almost
Universally interpreted, as Precedents for our Instruction. And (not to insist
on my Text, which I have already explained) thus we read, Acts 19. verse. 5, 6.
When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and
when Paul had Laid his Hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they
spoke with Tongues and prophesied. Indeed, we find mentioned here, only the
miraculous Effects of the Holy Ghost, they being absolutely necessary then, and
allowed by the Divine Power, and Wisdom, for the infant State of the Church.
But as the saving Gifts of the Holy Spirit, were promised by our Savior to the
End of the World, and were ever necessary; so it must be allowed, That they
were then conferred, though the External operations, which presently
demonstrated their Collation, perhaps for that Reason only, are
particularized: But farther, the Doctrine of Confirmation is plainly recorded
in Hebrews 6. verse. 2. Therefore (says the Apostle in the First Verse of that
Chapter) leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead Works, and
of faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and Laying on of Hands, and
of Resurrection of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment. Here, we find the
Doctrine of Confirmation placed among the clearest, and most necessary
Christian Truths, such as are Essentials of our Religion, Faith, Repentance,
Baptism, Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment. And it must
necessarily follow from this Text of Scripture, That either the Doctrine of
Confirmation is not here designed by the Apostle, which is contrary to the
general Sense of Expositors: Or else we must infer, That the Apostle ranked
these Christian Doctrines very unagreeably, which is a too strangely severe
Reflection upon the great Apostle: Or else we must conclude, That we are hence
obliged to pay an extraordinary Deference to this Apostolical usage;
considering, and esteeming it, as one of the happy Advances toward Heaven,
which the Divine Wisdom has assigned us. Now according to these, and other
Texts of Scripture in the New Testament, those that were baptized in the
Ancient Christian Church; Adult Persons, soon after Baptism; Children, when
being taught, and capable of understanding the Principles of Christian
Religion, were brought to the Bishop, publicly to acknowledge, and confirm
their baptismal Vow; and by Laying on of the Bishop's Hand, joined with devout
Prayer for them, were blessed by him, in order to their growing in Grace, and
the knowledge of Christ. Epist. 3. ad Jul.
This, in short, is the usage, which Cyprian declares, was continued in the
Church, from the Apostles Time, and Example, who mentioning the Samaritans,
baptized by Philip, and afterward Confirmed by Peter, and John (as we read in
my Text) tells us, that they who in the Church of Christ have received Baptism,
it is still the Custom, that they be offered; And by our Prayers, (says he) and
the Laying on of our Hands, receive the Holy Ghost. Book I. against Marcion.
Contra Lucif.
The flesh (says Tertullian) by Imposition of Hands, is shadowed, that the
Soul, by the Spirit, may be illuminated. St. Jerome having declared, that by the
Imposition of Authorized Hands, and Prayer, the Holy Ghost was still conveyed
to the Baptized, expostulates thus, Do thou ask me where it is written? I
answer, in the Acts of the Holy Apostles. But if there were not so plain
Authority of Scripture for it, the Practice of the whole Christian World in
this particular, might challenge the force of a Command. St. Austin discoursing
on this Subject, expresses himself thus; Rhemist 's Testa. Acts 8.
Is there any Man of so perverse an heart, as to deny those Children on whom we
Impose Hands in Confirmation, to have received the Holy Ghost, because they
speak not with Tongues, as was frequent, and agreeable to the Times when the
Gospel was first planted? To these I might add the Suffrages of many more; but
this Account of the Doctrine of Confirmation from Antiquity, is so apparent,
and has been so often, and so learnedly performed, that I own my self obliged
to Apologize, for pretending to it: I shall therefore only add these two
Remarks.

1. That it is observable, Cornel. Epist. ad Fabium apud Eusebius. Opt. l. 2. cont.
Par.
that the first opposers of this Doctrine, were the Novatians, and the
Donatists.

2. It Is likewise observable, that no one in the Primitive Church, was admitted
to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, without Confirmation. And so great a
Veneration, had the then Christian World for that Sacrament; that there was no
public Assembly for the Worship of God, without a Communion: And as this
particular Christian Zeal, began to decline, Impiety, and Wickedness, gradually
prevailed. But while I insist on this particular, I shall briefly observe, that
this Christian usage, has been recommended to our Practice, by Protestants of
the greatest Character, even among all Parties. Apol. part. 4. de Baptis. puer.
The Waldenses in their Apology to the Marquess of Brandenburgh, 1532. speaking
of Children which have been baptized, thus express themselves. When they are
come to years of understanding, Confess. Waldens. de Confir.
and can give a competent Account of their Faith, and begin truly to love
Christ; we bring them to profess these things, whatever their Parents, or
Godfathers, or the Church, have taught them: that on their own accord, they may
make a free profession of all these things, before the whole Church, to their
own Salvation, in the Celebration of the Office of Imposition of Hands: Which
being performed, they are Confirmed by the Bishop. Confess. Waldens. de Confir.
Chem Ex. Council. Triden. de Confir.
And this they tell us, was observed in the Times of the Apostles: Thus
likewise, Chemnitius, that extraordinary Person, accounts for this Doctrine, as
'twas held by the Protestant Churches in general. Nostri saepe ostenderunt,
etc. Our Divines have often proved, that the Rite of Confirmation, being
separated from Popish Superstitions, might be very happily used, even according
to the Holy Scriptures, that those who have been baptized in their Infancy,
when they come to years of discretion, should be carefully taught the Doctrine
of the Church, in some short, and easy Catechism: and when they are found in
some competent measure to understand it; that then they be brought to the
Bishop, and the Church; and that the Child, who in his Infancy was baptized,
should,

1. In short, be put in mind of his Baptism; what was then bestowed upon him,
and what he likewise then promised to do, that he would renounce the Devil,
profess the Christian Faith, and endeavor after all Holy Obedience.

2. That the Child publicly before the Congregation, own this Faith.

3. That there be added a serious Exhortation out of God's Word, That he will
continue in that Covenant which he made in Baptism, and that Faith, and
Doctrine, which he then professed.

4. That public Prayer be made for those Children; That God would govern,
preserve, and confirm them in that Profession by his Holy Spirit: At which
Prayer, without all Superstition, may be used the Putting on of Hands. Neither
would such a Prayer (says he) be to no purpose; for it is warranted upon the
Consideration of the Gift of perseverance, and the Confirming Grace. Such a
Confirmation (says he) would afford great Advantage, both to the younger Sort,
and the whole Church: And then he goes on to prove how agreeable this would be
to Scripture, proving several particulars out of the Acts of the Apostles,
Chap. 8, 14, 19. and from several Canons, made in several Councils, much to the
same purpose. Melanct. Confess. Ecclesiarum Sax. cap. de Confirm. Hemin.
Syntag. cap. 22. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c 19.
Melancthon declares for this usage, in the Churches of Saxony; and Hemingius
for those of Denmark; thus likewise Mr. Calvin, Hic mos olim fuit, etc. It has
been an Ancient Custom, that Children being instructed in an easy, and short
Catechism, should be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed by him. And in his
Commentary on Hebrews 6. he has these words. Transacta Infantia, etc. Their
Infancy passed over, and being catechized, Children were admitted to the symbol
of Imposition of Hands; Inst. l. 4. c. 19.
and this one place of Scripture (says Mr. Calvin) plainly proves, that this
practice derived from the Apostles: and in another place, he has these words;
Vtinam vero morem hunc, etc. Would to God we might retain this Custom: Of the
same Judgment with these, I find Beza, Piscator, Marloret, and several others.
And here, not to mention the extraordinary Zeal for this Doctrine, declared by
the many great Men of the Church of England, whose Learning and Piety, is
famous throughout the Christian World: I say not to mention these in our own
Cause; I shall only in short, remark two Instances more, Mr. Baxter's Judgment
in this case; and that of the Assembly in their Annotations, Mr. Baxter p. 102.
in his Tract on Confirmation, besides many other to the same End, has these
Words.

1. (Says he) We find in Scripture, a Blessing of Church Members, with Laying
on of Hands. 2. We find in Scripture, that the Holy Ghost, is in a special
manner, promised to believers, over and above that measure of the Spirit, which
caused them to believe. 3. We find, that Prayer, with Laying on of Hands, was
the outward means to be used by Christ's Ministers, for the procuring of this
Blessing. 4. We sind, that this was a fixed Ordinance to the Church, and not a
temporary thing: Thus Mr. Baxter declares his Judgment. The Assembly in their
Annotations express themselves thus: Laying on of Hands, which is usually
called Confirmation, consisted. 1. In examining those who had been baptized,
what progress they had made in the Doctrine of Christianity. 2. In praying for
them, that God would continue them in the Faith; and give them more Grace,
strengthening them by the Holy Ghost.

Now, when the Chief Pastor, or Pastors of the Church, prayed for them, they
Laid their Hands upon them; whence the Apostolical Constitution was called
Laying on of Hands; so they, so St. Augustine, and so most of the Fathers, with
one Consent. Now from all this, I hope I may justly infer, and that even from
the Confession of some of those, who have been unhappily prejudiced against our
Communion, That the design and usage of the Church, in the case of
Confirmation, owes it self to a pious, and judicious Respect; to a truly
Ancient, and Apostolical Institution, practiced, and recommended, in all
succeeding Ages of the Church, as a Means of conferring farther spiritual
strength, and the Advancements of Divine Grace: To impress upon tender, and
capable Thoughts, a signal and lasting Reverence, and Dread of the Divine
Majesty, and an agreeable Care, and Concern for that Holy Religion, which, they
espoused in their Baptism, by the Means of others.

Second particular, briefly to observe the qualification of the Persons, to
whom the administering of Confirmation, seems to have been originally assigned.
And here, it is much more than probable, that according to Apostolical Example,
and all along after the Apostles, till of very late Years; the Office of
Confirmation, was constantly performed by the chief Governors of the Church,
called Bishops. It Is very evident, that our Blessed Lord himself, made an
original distinction among those, whom he constituted, and ordained Officers in
ins Church. He well knew, that an Imparity in Church Officers naturally
promotes peace, would lay a Foundation for that Unity, which he all along so
highly recommends, and which indeed belongs to the. Nature and Design of that
happy Religion which he came to establish and promote in the World. To this
purpose we find the plain Distinction of twelve Apostles, and seventy, or
seventy two Disciples. When one of the select Twelve betrayed his Master,
immediately one of the Seventy was chosen in his place. Now if the Office of
these, and their Power in the Church were the same, why do we meet with this
Distinction between Apostles and Disciples? Some Inequality of Order and Power,
in the then Officers of the Church, we must hence discover; and that likewise
instituted by our Savior himself. This Distinction which is founded even in
the Nature of Things, and is so absolutely necessary in the World, could not be
forgot by our Blessed Lord, who knew all things now agreeably to this Notion;
to go no farther than my Text, and the preceding Verses, we read, that when the
Apostles, to whom the Power of governing the Church then belonged, (being at
Jerusalem) heard that Samaria had received the Word of God; they immediately
sent two of their own Number, to wit, St. Peter, and St. John, to administer
Confirmation. For though we read that the Samaritans were baptized by Philip,
and that his Miraculous Works among them, demonstrated him to be a very
extraordinary Person; yet it is evident, this did not qualify him for
administering Confirmation, that being an Office, which then belonged to the
Apostles, by reason of that Superiority over the then Infant Church, our
Savior had invested them with: And which according to this his first
Institution, was all along afterward continued in a Succession of Bishops.
Blondel and Salmasius themselves, the great and learned Defenders of
Presbytery, own Bishops to have been accounted Superior to Presbyters, even in
the next Age to the Apostles: But this they labor to prove, was an
Incroachment of Episcopacy. But whoever sincerely reads their Writings, and the
Famous Monsieur Daille, on the same Subject, will find such struggles of
Thought, and forcing of Argument; in short, such obstinate Resolves to maintain
a Cause, as instead of disapproving, recommends the Truth they design to
baffle. Particularly, whoever calmly observes Mr. Daille s violent Efforts
against Ignatius's Epistles, which clearly give the Cause for Episcopacy, must
needs own, that he never saw Opinion more strangely prevail against Truth, and
Judgment. For that great Man, observing several of Ignatius his Epistles,
describing the Constitution of the Hierarchy, in his Time, by the several
distinct Orders of Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, is so extremely furious
against them, that rather than drop his own dear Opinion, he offers such
Arguments, as, indeed, reflect upon all Antiquity, even the Sacred Canon of
Scripture it self not excepted. But having briefly hinted thus much, I might
proceed to show, that according to this Superiority of Order, and Office, this
right of governing the Church, which was first lodged in the Apostles of our
Savior, and wherewith the Bishops were after them, de facto, invested: (I say)
according to this Primitive Custom, and Example, was the Administration of
Confirmation, assigned to Episcopacy, in the succeeding Ages of the Church. To
this purpose, Dialog. advers. Lucif.
St. Hierom tells us, That non nisi per manus Episcopi, etc. By the Hands of
the Bishop only, was Confirmation administered. But waving this Sort of Proof;
I shall only add the plain Confessions in this Case, of some Persons, who were
far from being interested in the Episcopal Cause. Hic mos olim fuit, ut
Christianorum liberi, postquam adoleverant, coram Episcopo sisterentur (says
Mr. Calvin;) It was the Ancient Custom, Instit. l. c. (...) 19.
for the Children of Christian Parents, when they were fit for Confirmation, to
be brought before the Bishop: And, They are certainly to be condemned of gross
Partiality, and Incharitableness (say s Mr. Hanmer) who blush not to say, that
the Bishops out of pride, Mr. Hanmer on Confirm. p. 51.
have appropriated to themselves, the Laying on of Hands in Confirmation. And
that Mr. Baxter allows this Rite, to have been all along, generally administered
by Bishops, must needs be evident to any one who reads his Book on
Confirmation; where he labors to prove, that though Bishops did Anciently
officiate in this Case; yet that Presbyters might do it, the Nature of the
Thing, and Necessity requiring. Thus these unhappy Opposers of Episcopacy, have
recorded their Judgments: But after all, such is the Moderation of the purest,
and best constituted Church in the World, I mean the Church of England, in this
Case, that so the Divine End, and Design of Confirmation be accomplished, she
does not censure those Churches, which want Protestant Bishops.

Third particular I propounded; to consider some Objections, which are brought
against this Usage. And,

1. Some will not permit Confirmation to derive from Apostolica) Example; and
though the Primitive Church entertained it as such a Doctrine, yet (say they)
it was theirs, and has been all along since, a gross Mistake. Thus I find Mr.
Cartwright, on the Rhemist's Testament, and some others arguing. Their main
Argument is, That those Texts of Scripture, which are brought for Confirmation,
are all to be interpreted, only of conferring the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Ghost: And that when these Gifts ceased in the Church, Confirmation vainly had
its beginning. To which in short, it may be answered; That it is clear even
beyond denial, that the Laying on of Hands, joined with Prayer, was used in the
conferring Grace, or Divine Blessing, long before the Apostles Times. And
farther, it can never be proved, that only the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, were given by the Apostles, in their Laying on of Hands. But as the
internal, saving Gifts of the Spirit, were more necessary in their own Nature,
and promised by our Savior to the End of the World; so they must be given by
the Apostles; and thence Confirmation obtained in the Christian Church. Lib. 3.
de Baptis. Cap. 16.
It is not now (says St. Austin), as it was, that by the Testimony of temporal,
and sensible Miracles, the Holy Ghost is by the Imposition of Hands, given as
formerly, to recommend and demonstrate the Truth of the then new Christian
Faith, and for the Enlargement of the lately begun Church; for who (as he
expostulates) does now expect, that those upon whom Hands are Imposed, for the
receiving the Holy Ghost, should suddenly begin to speak with Tongues? But
invisibly (says he) is the Love of God inspired into their Hearts. Thus St.
Austin, answers this Objection. But, indeed, it is very plain, that the
Prejudice of Mr. Cartwright, and others, against this Doctrine, derives from
their Abhorrence of Popish Superstition. For,

This is evident from their Writings, and this leads me to a Second Objection
against Confirmation, that it is a Popish usage, and a Compliance with the
Superstition of the Church of Rome; and this though contrary to all reason, has
prejudiced too many against it. Indeed it must be confessed, that the Church of
Rome has made Confirmation a Sacrament; nay, has gone farther, preferred it to
Baptism, made it consist in opere operato, bestowed it on Infants, and clogged
it with several unnecessary Ceremonies. In short, as they have done in other
matters, so they have robbed it of its Apostolical Primitive Design, and
Decency, and exposed it under a false Notion, and in an antic Garb. But if
this may be lawfully argued against Confirmation, when it is rightly used, and
applied; then must we cast off the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
In short, reject Christianity it self, because all, or most of its admirable
Doctrines, have been abused and debauched by the Church of Rome. For whoever
seriously inquires into the nature of it, will certainly find, that the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, as it differences it self from us, is really
made up of nothing but folly, and contradiction to the Divine design of
Christianity. But to return; the Church of England having removed from
Confirmation all popish Superstition, and Pretenses to a Sacrament; and having
ordered a preparatory Catechism for all those to learn, and competently to
understand, who shall be admitted to it. In short, having taken all possible
care to answer the design of its Primitive Institution, to impress upon the
thoughts of youth, a great and lasting Veneration for Religion, obliges them to
consider, and reassume in their own Persons, what their Sureties promised for
them in their Baptism. In short, that they will believe, and behave themselves
as becomes Christians. These things premised, they are by fervent Prayer,
attended with the Apostolical sign of Laying on of Hands, recommended to God,
and the happy Effects of their own pious resolves. Now, if this be a true (though
short) account of the Church of England's design in Confirmation, how
unreasonable is it, for any one to object against it; as Popish and
Superstitious. But I shall conclude this Objection with an agreeable passage I
find in Mr. Baxter's Postscript to his Tract on Confirmation: Some will say
(says he) it is mere Prelacy, or a Prelatical design, and some that it is
Independancy, or an Independent design; and some that it is but Presbyterian
Examination: whereas they might know that it is proper to none of them, which
is common to them all? If it be Prelacy, how comes it to be found with
Independants? If if be Independancy, how comes it to be approved by Prelates,
and Presbyterians? Is it not rather like Christianity it self, and the Truths
and Duties we commonly own; and therefore, not to be appropriated to any. Thus
Mr. Baxter, pressed on with the mighty force of Truth, answers this Objection.
But,

3. The saddest occasion of the most prevailing Objection against this
Primitive usage, is, The evident want of an hearty, and true concern for
Religion for alas, instead of the Primitive Christian Spirit of Piety and
Unity, a careless and profane Temper, or a furious, and irregular Zeal, have
too apparently got the ascendant in our English world. Hence we are too
generally prejudiced against our Happiness, and hence all our great misfortunes
derive: to be really a Christian, is to be in love with all the Divine methods
which lead us to Heaven; to be sincerely devoted to all the genuine Acts of
Piety, Justice and Sobriety, to practice whatever is acceptable to God, lovely
among Men, and agreeable to the rational designs of our Natures. These things
demonstrate us Christians; would make us happy here, and introduce an habit of
thoughts, in some degree resembling the blessed Spirits above; would lay the
Foundation of our present, and eternal Bliss; would oblige us to comply with
all the means of Salvation, which are assigned us by our God. But while we are
not in earnest with God Almighty; nor sincerely resolved in our choice of
Happiness; it is no wonder we neglect, or despise the methods, which should
advance us to Heaven; it is indeed no wonder we loath our Duties here; and undo
our selves for ever. But having briefly reflected on those Objections,

Fourth and Last particular, To propound some Considerations, evincing the
Reasonableness, divine Excellency, and necessity of this usage. And here,

1. Let us look back into the Primitive times of Christianity; and view this
Practice then prevailing, when the true Christian Spirit, and Temper, was warm
and vigorous, when the holy Jesus had newly blessed the world, with his
Presence and his Miracles; when in the Infant state of our Religion, men did
not quarrel with their Duty, but being influenced by heavenly Demonstration,
conversed here as it becomes Christians, and longed to be where their Lord was
gone. Now either we must condemn these happy times; or we must own our selves
obliged to pay an extraordinary deference to this Primitive Doctrine. If this
Consideration don't awaken our thoughts, what can rouse us from our sinful
slumber? It Is undeniable, that these First professors of Christianity, were
really what they pretended, professing a most holy Religion; and living
according to their Profession, contemning this world; and having their thoughts
fired with a Desire, and Expectation of a better Life; so perfectly holy was
their Faith, that it demonstrated it self to come from Heaven; and so agreeable
was their Conversation to their belief, that it proved their Example to be
divine. Should we not therefore be highly concerned to tread in their steps;
and to use the same heavenly methods, which they have used and taught us? if we
don't how can we please our selves in their hopes; and be partakers of their
Happiness? But,

2. We may sadly consider, That our forsaking, or neglecting this holy Usage,
and Doctrine, does not only contradict Antiquity, reflect upon the Apostles,
and the first and best Christians; but lays the Foundation for the Degeneracy
of our Age, and the Ruin of Religion among us; did we only consider the
Doctrine of Confirmation, as recommended by the First, and best Ages of the
Christian Church; this must needs represent it as a Duty not to be neglected by
us; but of such fatal Tendency is the disuse of it, that it demonstrates that
disuse, not only contrary to Apostolical and Primitive example, but a
contradiction lodged in the Nature of things, against the heavenly design of
Christianity. For how evident is it, that while Confirmation is neglected, the
Catechizing of Children is neglected too? When such a solemn and public trial
of Youth, as Confirmation is, seems by disuse to be laid aside, how unconcerned
are Parents apt to be for their Children, and Children for themselves? How
generally is that sacred Vow forgotten, which Sureties made for Children at
their Baptism? and how little impression does the infant Vow make upon the
Child? while this holy Obligation is not solemnly professed, and reassumed at
Confirmation, how apt are we to rank our baptismal Vow among the Dreams of our
Infancy; among the to-be-forgotten things of our unthinking Age? and what must
naturally follow this neglect, but Ignorance Divisions, and profane Atheism?
for while in order to Confirmation, Children are not instructed in the
Principles of Religion; they are exposed to all these dreadful misfortunes:
Either to fall into a sinful Lethargy, for want of divine Instruction; or
instead of a rational substantial Piety, to be hurried away with a religious
Frenzy; or lastly, to lose the Happiness both of this, and a far better world,
by the wild Inconsistencies of Atheism and Profaneness. Thus does the neglect
of Confirmation, and an agreeable preparation for it, evidently occasion,
either a stupid Ignorance, or a misapprehension, or an open affronting of the
great Creator, and Governor of the world: In short, whoever seriously reflects
on these dismal Consequences, and has not lost all concern for Religion, must
needs deeply resent the strange indifferency, which this Apostolical
Institution has met with among us; that it looks very ominous, even like one of
those presages of divine Displeasure, before the Migremus hinc was heard in the
last Temple of the Jews; for indeed according to this melancholy parallel
between the Jews and us, it is Presumption and not Faith, to expect God to be
with us, if we despise or neglect his Ordinances. But,

3. And lastly, We may very pertinently consider, the many and extraordinary
advantages of the genuine use of this Doctrine, which because they have been so
often, and admirably expressed by great Men of our own Communion; I shall
therefore among the rest, choose to represent it you, in the few, though complete
words of the judicious Hooker: By the means of Confirmation (says he) it comes
to pass, that Children in the expectation of it are seasoned with Principles of
true Religion, before evil, and corrupt examples deprave their Minds; a good
Foundation is laid betimes, for direction of the Course of their Lives; the
seed of the Church of God, is preserved sincere and found; the Prelates and
Fathers of God's Family, to whom the care of their Souls belongs, so by Trial,
and Examination of them apart, of their own heavy burden discharged, reap
comfort, by beholding the first beginnings of true Godliness in tender years,
and neglect not so fit an opportunity of giving every one Fatherly
encouragement and exhortation; whereunto Imposition of Hands, and Prayer being
added, our Warrant for the great good effect thereof, is the same which
Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Apostles, Fathers, and Men of God in all ages,
have had for such their Benedictions. Thus Mr. Hooker expresses himself in this
case, and that I may represent it more particularly,

1. By the due use of Confirmation, the diligent Catechizing of Children, would
be happily promoted; than which, nothing would more truly advance the
admirable design of our most holy Religion. For,

2. By this means Parents, and Sureties would be awakned into a sense of their
Duty, even those Parents, and Sureties, whom the Principles of Piety don't
influence, would be obliged into a concern for their Duty, lest their
remissness should prove their shame; lest those Children they were concerned to
have instructed, should by their Ignorance be unfit for Confirmation; and
consequently the imputation of that Ignorance belong to them. Thus would the
sense of present shame awaken those thoughts, which are unconcerned at the
prospect of eternal confusion; for how little soever of this pious Concern, we
meet with in the world, these Obligations and Vows, will be strictly enquired
after at the Day of Judgment; the Parent, and Surety, must give a sad account
of that Child, which by their negligence is eternally ruined; how natural a
Punishment is confusion, and torment of thought, to such a Crime as this? What
can more aggravate the Misery of the damned, than to reflect, they have brought
others into their place of torment? Nay, how peculiarly close must this pain of
thought stick to that Parent, who is forced to animadvert, he has for ever
undone his own Offspring?

3. By the due use of Confirmation, Children themselves would out of a
pleasant, pious Emulation, happily enquire after Divine knowledge, in order to
their being Confirmed, would endeavor to know Christianity betimes. Thus might
those little ambitious thoughts, which generally show themselves in these
tender years, be disposed to a Divine contrivance; even to lay a Foundation for
Virtue, and to frustrate the Tendency of natural Corruption.

4. By this means there would be made deep and listing Impressions, concerning
the Obligations of our most holy Faith. For how can the Solemnity, which
attends Confirmation be easily forgot? Tn the Presence of God, the Bishop, and
a public Assembly, we declare our selves Christians, own our baptismal Vow,
and promise we will ever sincerely endeavor to perform it. Now how can we
choose but remember this, through the whole Course of our Lives? What a mighty
influence must this day always have upon our thoughts? what Encouragements to
Virtue, and what Arguments against Vice, must we hence needs derive? In the
Primitive times of Christianity, the Adult baptized had a white Garment
delivered to them, immediately after Baptism; this Garment they wore for a
week, and then 'twas deposited in the Church? 'Twas to signify the Innocence,
which should belong to a Christian, and to fix that Impression upon their
thoughts. Now the Office of Confirmation must needs answer this excellent
Design, cannot fail of impressing lively and lasting ideas of our Duty, must
necessarily mind us of, and oblige us to, perform it.

5. The Doctrine of Confirmation rightly attended to, would prove an admirable
means, to ease the thoughts of those, who are Sureties for Infants at their
Baptism, and to acquit them from their heavy Charge: For so great is the
Obligation, which such persons take upon themselves, that nothing but a strange
Stupidity, and the Apathy which is owing to an habit of sinning, can render
them insensible; they solemnly in the name of the Child, promise and vow to
God, that they will renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. This, besides
what their own Obligations to Christianity engage them to, they are bound to
perform, and sincerely to endeavor, that the Child be made sensible of this
their Obligation, which till they have performed, and the Child at Confirmation
has released them from their Vows, by taking it upon it self, they stand bound
to God, and upon the failure of their Promise, are continually exposed to the
Divine Displeasure. How happy would it be for the Christian World, were these
things rightly considered? How evidently would Piety prosper among us? and how
apparently would that only true Felicity of mankind, Peace of Conscience, make
Men happy? In short, these our Vows to God are very solemn, and of great
moment; and as Solomon tells us, the infinitely holy God, cannot possibly take
Pleasure in such Fools, who take no care to perform them; so that whoever
neglects this Vow, how insensible soever he may be of his Circumstances, he
cannot enjoy any true quiet, or peace of Conscience.

6. By the right use of Confirmation, the Anabaptists greatest Objection would
be fully and naturally answered; it would silence their great Clamor about
Faith and Repentance: For though the Practice of the Jews, in reference to
Circumcision; and the undeniable Custom of baptizing Infants, even from
ultimate Antiquity, in the Christian Church; and the several plain Declarations
of Scripture in this Case, are sufficient evidence, yet the Doctrine of
Confirmation, duly attended to, may justly put an end to all their Quarrel.
Here the baptized Person, with all the Solemnity imaginable in his own Person,
owns his baptismal Vow, professes himself a Christian, and declares he will
ever by the Grace of God, endeavor to live according to that most holy Faith.
In short, by the Doctrine of Confirmation, this Objection of the Anabaptists
seems to have been anticipated; and perhaps I may add, that the due use of it
in the early Times of Christianity, was the reason we then heard of no such
Party in the World. But When through the Decay of Piety, and the Corruption of
the Church of Rome, Confirmation began to be slighted, and wrong applied; then
did an Opposition to Infant Baptism, perhaps not unreasonably, take its
beginning.

7. By the right use of Confirmation, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, would
be more duly frequented. This great positive Command of the Holy Jesus, which
was designed by him to such admirable Purpose, among his sincere Followers,
would, by the Means of that Preparation of Thought, which Confirmation
requires, and which by that Divine Assignment is communicated, be highly
valued, and piously approached. It would by this Means, in a great Measure gain
its pristine Honor, and Intenseness of Devotion: The want of which among us is
very dismal to consider; and seems sadly to foretell the Ruin of Religion. But,

8. Were the Doctrine of Confirmation duly attendedto, the Unity of the Church
of God would be more happily maintained: Men would blush to leave the Communion
of that Church, upon a slight, or no consideration, which they so solemnly
owned, when they were confirmed. They could not pick Quarrels out of a
Lightness of Temper, a Desire of Novelty: in short, such an Influence must the
Administration of this Office have upon Men's Thoughts, that nothing less than
the being guilty of evident Sin, (which is the only just Cause of Separation)
would divide them from that Communion, which they once with such Solemnity
chose to themselves. Now how happy an Effect would this be? how acceptable to
God? how pleasing among Men? how like even to Heaven? To conclude, Were the
Doctrine of Confirmation duly valued, it would lay the Foundation for such a
sincere Practice of Chiristianity, as would promote both our public, and
private Peace and Happiness; would pat a stop to that malign Influence, which
Impiety, and Profaneness hive upon us: And finally would bless the World, as
the Holy Jesus designed his admirable Religion should do.

All which; God of his Infinite Mercy grant us, for the alone Sake of the same
Meritorious Jesus; to whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons
and One God, be all Honor and Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for
ever Amen.

FINIS.

