A Legal Uindication Of the Liberties of England, AGAINST ILLEGAL TAXES And
pretended Acts of Parliament Lately enforced on the PEOPLE: OR, Reasons
assigned by WILLIAM PRYNNE of Swainswick in the County of Sommerset, Esquire,
why he can neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence submit to the New illegal
Tax or Contribution of Ninety Thousand pounds the MONTH; Lately imposed on the
Kingdom, by a pretended Act of some Commons in (or rather out of) Pa^liament.

ESAIAS 1. 7. He looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression; for Righteousness,
but behold a Cry. PSALM. 12. 5. For the Oppression of the poor, for the Sighing
of the needy; now will I arise (says the Lord) and will set him in safety from
him that would ensnare him. EXODUS 6. 5, 6. I have also heard the groaing of the
children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered
my Covenant. Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I
will bring you out from under the Burdens of the Egyptians; and I will rid you
out of their Bondage: and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with
great Judgments. ECCLES. 4. 1, 2. So I returned and considered all the
Oppressions that are done under the Sun, and beheld the te^rs of such as were
oppressed, and they had no Comforter; and in the hand of their Oppressors there
was power, but they had no Comforter: Wherefore I praised the dead which are
already dead, more then the living which are yet alive. London, Printed for
Robert Hodges, and are to be sold by him. 1649.

REASONS Assigned by WILLIAM PRYNNE, etc.
BEing on the 7th of this instant June 1649 informed by the Assessors of the
Parish of (...), that I was assessed at 2 l. 5 s. for three months
Contribution, by virtue of a (pretended) Act of the Commons (...) in
Parliament, bearing date the seventh of April last, assessing the Kingdom at
ninty thousand pounds monthly, beginning from the 25 of March last, and
continuing for six months next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the Forces
to be continued in England and Ireland, and the paying of such as are thought
fit to be disbanded, that so Free Quarter may be taken off; whereof 3075 l. 17
s. 1 d. ob. is monthly imposed on the County, and 2 l. 5 s. 3 d. on the small
poor Parish where I live; and being since, on the fifteenth of June required to
pay in 2 l. 5 s. for my proportion: I returned the Collector this Answer, That
I could neither in Conscience, Law nor Prudence in the least measure submit to
the voluntary payment of this illegal Tax, and unreasonable Contribution,
(after all my unrepaired losses and sufferings for the public Liberty)
amounting to six times more then SHIP MONEY, (the times considered) or any
other illegal Tax of the late beheaded King, so much declaimed against in our
three last Parliaments, by some of those who imposed this. And that I would
rather submit to the painfullest death and severest punishment the Imposers or
Exactors of it could inflict upon me by their arbitrary power (for legal they
had none) then voluntarily pay, or net oppose it in my place and, calling to
the uttermost, upon the same, if not better reasons, as I oppugned ( See my
humble Rem^st. (...) against Shipmoney.
) Ship Money, Knighthood, and other unlawful Impositions of the late King and
his Council heretofore. And that they and all the world might bear witness, I
did it not from mere obstinacy or sullenness; but out of folid rea^l grounds
of Conscience, Law, Prudence, and public affection to the weal and liberty of
my native Country (now in danger of being enslaved under a new vassallage, more
grievous then the worst it ever yet sustained under the late, or any other of
our worst Kings) I promised to draw up the Reasons of this my ref^sall in
writing, and to publish them, so soon as possible, to the Kingdom for my own
Vindication, and the better information and satisfaction of all such as are any
ways concerned in the imposing, collecting, levying or paying of this strange
kind of Contribution. In pursuance whereof, I immediately penned these ensuing
Reasons; which I humbly submit to the impart^all Censure of all ^nscientious
and judicious Englishmen; desiring either their in^enuous Refutation, if
erroneous; or candid Approbation, if substantial and irrefr^gable, as my
conscience and judgment persuade me they are, and that they will appear so to
all impartial Perusers, after full examination.

First, By the fundamental Laws, and known Statutes of this Realm, No Tax,
Tallage, Aid, Imposition, Contribution, Loan or Assessement whatsoever, may or
ought to be opposed or levied on the free men and people of this Realm of
England, but by the WILL and COMMON ASSENT of the EARLS, BARONS, Knights,
Burgesses, Commons, and WHOLE REALM in a free and full PARLIAMENT, by ACT OF
PARLIAMENT: All Taxes, etc. not so imposed, levied (though for the common
defense and profit of the Realm) being unjust, oppr^ssive, inconsistent with
the Liberty and Property of the Subject, Laws and Statutes of the Realm; as is
undenyably evident by the express Statutes of Magna Charta, cap. 29, 30. 25.
E. 1. c. 5. 6. 34. E. 1. De Tallagio non concedendo, cap. 1. 21. E. 3. Rot.
Parl. n. 16. 25. E. 3. c. 8. 36. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 26. 45. E. 3. Rot. Parl.
n. 42. 11. H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 10. 1. R. 3. c. 2. The Petition of Right, and
Resolutions of both Houses against Loans, 3 Caroli: The Votes and Acts against
Ship Money, Knighthood, Tonnage and Poundage, and the Star Chamber this last
Parliament, 17. and 18. Caroli. And fully argued and demonstrated by Mr.
William Hackwell in his Argument against Impositions; Judge Hutton and Judge
Crook in their Arguments, and Mr. St. John in his Argument and Speech against
Ship money, with other Arguments and Discourses of that subject: Sir Edward
Cook in his 2 Instit. (published by Order of the Commons House) ^ag 59. 60. etc
527, 528, 529, 532, 533 etc. with sundry other R^cords and law books cited by
those great Rab^ies of the Law, and Patriots of the Peoples Liberties. But the
present Tax of Ninety Thousand pounds a Month, now exacted of me, was not thus
imposed. Therefore it ought not to be demanded of, nor levied on me; and I
ought in conscience, law and prud^nce to withstand it as unjust, oppr^ssive,
inconsistent with the Liberty and Property of the Subject, Laws and Statutes of
the Realm.

To make good the Assumption, which is only questionable.

First, This Tax was not imposed in, but out of Parliament, the late Parliament
being actually dissolved above two months before this pretended Act by these
Tax-imposers taking away the King by a violent death, as is expressly resolved
by the Parliament of 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 1. by the Parliament of 14 H. 4. and
1 H. 5. Rot. Parliam. n. 26. Cook 4 Institutes p. 46. and 4. E. 4 44. b. For
the King being both the Head, beginning, end and foundation of the Parliament
(as Modus tenendi Parliamentum: and Sir Edward Cooks 4. Instit. p. 3. resolve)
which wa^ summoned and constituted only by his writ now ( See 1 E. 6. cap. 7.
Cook 7. Report. 30, 31. Dyer 165. 4 Ed 4. 43, 44. 1 E. 5. 1. Brook Commission.
19. 21.
) actually abated by his death: and the Parliament (as it is evident by the
clauses of the several Writs of Summons to ( Cromptens Ju^isdiction of Courts.
fol. 1. Cook 4. Insti^ p. 9. 10.
) the Lords, and for the election of Knights and Burgesses, and levying of
their wages) being only PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRUN, the Kings Parliament that is
dead not his H^irs and Succ^ssors; and the Lords and Commons being all summoned
and authorized by it to come to HIS PARLIAMENT, there to be present, and
confer with HIM (NOBISCUM, not His Heirs and Successors) of the weighty
urgent aff^ires that concerned ( NOS) HIM and HIS KINGDOM of England; and the
K^ights and Burgesses receiving their wages for, Nuper ad NOS ad PARLIAMENTUM
NOSTRUM veniendo, etc. quod sommoneri FECIMUS, ad tracta^dum ibidem super
diversis and arduis Negotiis NOS and Sta^um REGNINOSTRI tangentibus, as the
tenor of the ( 5. Ed. 3. m. 6. part. 2. Dors. Claus. Regist. f. 192. 200.
) Writs for their wages determines. The King being dead, and his Writ and
Authority by which they are summoned, with the ends for which they were called
(to confer with HIM, about HI^, and HIS KINGDOMS affairs, etc. being thereby
absolutely determined, without any hopes of revivall; the Parliament it self
must thereupon absolutely be determined likewise (especially to those who have
dis-inherited HIS HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, and voted down our Monarchy it self)
and these with all other Members of Parliament, cease to be any longer Members
of it, being made such only by the Kings abated Writ; even as all Judges,
Justices of peace, and Sheriffs made only by the Kings Writ or Commission, not
by Letters Patents, cease to be Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs by the Kings
death, for this very reason, because they are constituted Justiciarios and
Vicecomites NOSTROS ad Pacem NOSTRAM, etc. custodiendam; and he being dead, and
his Writs and Commissions expired by his death, they can be his Judges,
Justices, and Sheriffs no longer to preserve HIS Peace, etc. (no more then a
wife can be her deceased Husbands Wife, and bound to his obedience, from which
she was loosed by his death, Romans 7. 2, 3.) And his Heirs and Successors they
cannot be, unless he please to make them so by his new Writs or Commissions,
as all our ( 4 Ed. 4 44. 1 E. 5. 1. Brook Commissions. 19. 21. and Officer, 25.
Dyer. 165. Cook 7. Report. 30, 31. (...) E. 6. c. 7. Daltons Justice of Peace,
c. 3 p 13 Lambert. p. 71
) Law Books and Judges have frequently resolved upon this very reason, which
equally exnends to Members of Parliament, as to Judges, Justices and Sheriffs,
as is agreed in 4 E. 4. 43, 44. and Brook, Office and Officer, 25. Therefore
this Tax being clearly imposed not in, but out of, and after the Parliament
ended by the Kings decapitation, and that by such who were then no lawful
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Members of Parliament, but only private men,
their Parliamentary Authority expiring with the King, it must needs be
illegal, and contrary to all the forecited Statutes; as the Convocations and
Clergies Tax and Benevolence granted after the Parliament dissolved in the year
1640. was resolved to be by both Houses of Parliament, and those adjudged high
Delinquents who had any hand in promoting it.

2. Admit the late Parliament still in being, yet the House of Peers, Earls and
Barons of the Realm were no ways privy nor consenting to this Tax, imposed
without, yea, against their consents in direct afsront of their most ancient
undubitable Parliamentary Right and privileges, (these Tax-masters having
presumed to vote down and null their very House, by their new encroached
transcendent power) as appears by the title and body of this pretended Act,
entitled by them, An Act of THE COMMONS assembled in Parliament: Whereas the
Hou^e of Commons alone, though full and free, have no more lawful Authority to
impose any Tax upon the people, or make any Act of Parliament or binding Law
without the Kings or Lords concurrence, then the man in the Moon, or the
Convocation, Anno 1640. after the Parliament dissolved (as is evident by the
e^press words of the forecited Acts, the Petition of Right it self; (...), for
the Trienniall Parliament; and against the proroguing or di^olving this
Parliament, 17. Caroli: with all our printed Statutes, 14. R. 2. 1. 15. (...).
H 4. n. (...). 13 H. 4. n. (...).
Parliament-Rolls, and 4. H. 7. 18. b. 7. H 7. 27. 16. 11. H 7. 27. For^ c. 18
f. 20. Dyer. 92. Brook Parliament. 76. 197. Cooks 4 Insti^es, p. 25.
Law Books:) they neither having nor challenging the sole Legislative power in
any age; and being not so much as summoned to, nor constituting m^mbers of our
S^e the (...), and my (...) for (...).
ancient Parliaments, (which co^sisted of the King and Spiritual and Temporal
Lords, without any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses, as all our Histories and
Records attest) till 49 H. 3. at soonest; they having not so much as a Speaker
or Commons House, til after the beginning of King Ed. the third's reign, and
seldom or never presuming to make or tender any Bills or Acts to the King or
Lords, but Petitions only for them to redress their grievances and enact new
Laws, til long after Rich. the seconds time, as our Parliament Rols, and the
printed prologues to the Statutes of 1. 4. 5. 9. 10. 20. 23. 36. 37. and 50.
E^. 4. 1 Rich. 2. 1. 2. 4. 5. 7. 9. 11. 13. Hen. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4. 8. 9. He^ 3. 1.
2. 3. 4. 6. 8. 9. 10. 11. 14. 15. 29. 28. 29. 39. Hen. 6. ^. 4. 7. 8. 12. 17.
22 Ed. 4. and 1 Rich. 3. evidence (which run all in this form, At the
Parliament holden, etc. by THE ADVICE and ASSENT OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and
TEMPORAL and at THE SPECIAL INSTANCE and REQUEST OF THE COMMONS OF THE REALM,
(BY THEIR PETITIONS put in the said Parliame^, as some prologues have it.) Our
Lord the King has cau^ed to be ordaine^, or ordained CERTAIN STATUTES, etc.)
where the advising and assenting to Laws is appropriated to the Lords; the
ordaining of them to the King; and nothing but the reque^ting of, and
petitioning for them to the Commons, both from King and Lords, in whom the
Legislative power principally, if not sose^y resided; as is manifest by the
printed Prologue to the Statute of Merton. 20. Hen. 3. The Statute of Mortemain
7 Ed. 1. 31. Ed. 1. De Asportatis Religiosorum, the Statute of Sheriffs, 9. E.
2. and of the Templers, 17 E. 2. to cite no more. Therefore this Tax imposed by
the Commons alone without King or Lords, must needs be void, illegal, and no
ways obligatory to the subjects.

3. Admit the whole House of Commons in a full and free Parliament had power to
impose a Tax, and make an Act of Parliament for levying it without King or
Lords; (which they never did, nor pretended to in any age) yet this Act and Tax
can be no ways obliging, because not made and imposed by a full and free House
of Commons, but by an empty House, packed, swayed, overawed by the chief
Officers of the Army, who have presumed by mere force and armed power, against
law and without president, to seclude the major part of the House (at least 8
parts of 10) who by law and custom are the House it self, from sitting or
Voting with them, contrary to the Freedom and privileges of Parliament;
readmitting none but upon their own terms. An usurpation not to be paraleld in
any age, destructive to the very being of Parliaments; Cooks 4. Institutes p. 1.
Where all Members ex debito Justiciae, should with equal Freedom meet and
speak their minds: injurious to all those Counties, Cities, Boroughs, whose
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses are secluded, and to the whole Kingdom; yea,
contrary to all rules of reason, justice, policy, conscience, and their own,
Agreement of the people, which inhibit the far lesser part of any Council,
Court, or Committee, to oversway, seclude or fore-judg the major number of
their Assessors and fellow members, over whom they can no ways pretend the
least jurisdiction, it being the highway to usher Tyranny and confusion into
all Councels and Realms, to their utter dissolution, since the King alone
without Lords and Commons, or the Lords alone without King or Commons, may by
this new device make themselves an absolute Parliament to impose Taxes and
enact Laws without the Commons, or any other forty or fifty Commoners meeting
together without their companions do the like, as well as this remnant of the
Commons make themselves a complete Parliament without King, Lords, or their
Fellow Members, if they can but now or hereafter raise an Army to back them in
it, as the Army does those now sitting.

4. Suppose this Tax should bind these Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, whose
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses sat and consented to it when imposed, (though
I dare swear imposed against the minds and wills of all or most of those they
represent; (who by the Declarat. Nov. 28 and 30. 1648.
Armies new Doctrine, may justly question and revoke their authority for this
high breach of Trust; the rather, because the Knights and Burgesses assembled
in the first Parliament of 13. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n 8. Did all refuse to grant a
great extraordinary Subsidy then demanded of them (though not comparable to
this) for the necessary defense of the Kingdom against foraign Enemies, till
they had conferred with the Counties and Buroughs for which they served, and
gained their assents:) Yet there is no shadow of Reason, Law or Equity, it
should oblige any of the secluded Members themselves, whereof I am one; or
those Counties, Cities or Buroughs, whose Knights, Citizens and Burgesses have
been secluded or scared thence by the Armies violence, or settling Members
illegal Votes for their seclusion; who absolutely disavow this Tax and Act as
un-parliamentary, illegal, and never assented to by them in the least degree;
since the only 39. Ed. 3. 7. ^. H. 7. 10. Brook Parl. 26. 40. Cook 4. Instit.
p. 1. 25, 26. 1 Jac. cap 1.
reason in Law, or equity, why Taxes or Acts of Parliament oblige any Member,
County, Borough or Subject, is, because they are parties and consenting
thereunto either in proper person; or by their chosen Representatives in
Parliament; it being a received Maxim in all Laws, Quod tangit omnes, ab
omnibus debet approbari. Upon which reason it is judged in our 49. E. 3. 18,
19. 21. H. 7. 4. Brook Customs 6. 32.
Law Books, That Bylaws oblige only those who are parties, and consent unto
them, but not strangers, or such who assented not thereto. And (whiich comes
fully to the present case) in 7. H. 6. 35. 8. H. 6. 34. Brook Ancient Demesne
20. and Parl. 17. 101. It is resolved, That ancient Demesne is a good plea in a
Writ of Waste upon the Statutes of Waste, because those in ancient Demesne were
not parties to the making of them, FOR THAT THEY HAD NO KNIGHTS NOR BURGESSES
IN PARLIAMENT, nor contributed to their expenses. And Judge Brook Parliament
101. has this observable Note, It is most frequently found, that Wales and
County Palatines, WHICH CAME NOT TO THE PARLIAMENT (in former times, which now
they do) SHALL NOT BE BOUND BY THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND: for ancient Demesne
is a good Plea in an action of Waste and yet ancient Demesne is not excepted:
and it is enacted, 2. Ed. 6. cap 28. That Fines and Proclamation shall be in
Chester, for that the former St^tutes did not extend to it: And it is (...),
The a Fine and Proclamation shall be in Lancaster. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 26. And
in a Pro^lamation upon an exigent is given by the Statute in Chester and Wales,
1. E. 6. c. 20. And by anot^er Act to Lancaster, 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 26. And the
Statutes of Justices of Peace extended not to Wales and the County Palatine;
and therefore an Act was made for Wales and Chester, 27. H. 8. c. 5. who had
Knights and Burgesses appointed by that Parliament for that and future
Parliaments by Act of Parliament, 27. Hen. 8. cap. 26. since which they have
continued their wages being to be levied by the Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 11.
Now, if Acts of Parliament bound not Wales and Counties. Palatines, which had
anciently no Knights not Burgesses in Parliament to represent them, because
they neither personally nor representatively were parties and consenters to
them; much less then can or ought this heavy Tax, and illegal Act to bind
those Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, or those Counties, Cities and Buroughs
they represented, who were forcibly secluded, or driven away from the
Parliament by the confederacy, practice, or connivance at least, of those now
sitting, who imposed this Tax, and passed this strange Act; especially, being
for the support and continuance of those Offcers, and that Army who
traitorously seized and secluded them from the House, and yet detain some of
them prisoners, against all Law and Justice. The rather, because they are the
far major part (above six times as many as those that sat and shut them out)
and would no ways have consented to this illegal Tax, or undue manner of
imposing it, without the Lords concurrence, had they been present. And, I my
self, being both an unjustly imprisonsd and secluded Member, and neither of the
Knights of the County of Somerset, where I live, present or consenting to this
Tax or Act, one or both of them being forced thence by the Army, I conceive
neither my self, nor the County where I live, nor the Borough for which I
served, in the least measure bound by this Act or Tax, but clearly exempted
from them, and obliged with all our might and power effectually to oppose them.

If any here object, That by the custom of Parliament forty Object.
Members only are sufficient to make a Commons House of Parliament and there
were at least so many present when this Tax was imposed: Therefore it is valid
and obligatory both to the secluded absent Members and the Kingdom.

I answer, First, That though regularly it be true, that forty Answ.
Members are sufficient to make a Commons House to begin prayers, and
businesses of lesser moment in the beginning of the day, till the other Members
come, and the House be full; yet 40 were never in any Parliament reputed a
compe^ent number to grant Subsidies, pass, or read Bills, or debate or
conclude matters of greatest moment; which by the constant Rules and usage of
Parliament, were never debated, concluded, passed, but in a free and full
House, when all or most of the Members were present, as the Parliament Rolls,
Journals, Modus te^ndi Parliamentum, Sir Edward Cooks 4 Institu^s, p. 1. 2 26.
35. 36. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 1 etc. 39. E. 3. 7. Brook
Parliament. 27. 1. Jac. c. 1. and the many Records I have cited to this purpose
in my Levellers levelled, my Plea for the (...), and Memento, p. 10. abundantly
prove beyond contradiction^; for which cause the Members ought to be fined, and
lose their ^ges, if absent without sp^cial Li^nce, as. Modus t^nexdi
Parliamentum, 5 R. 2. Par. 2. c. 4. 9. H. 8. c. 16. and A Co^ection of all
Orders, etc. of the late Parliament, pa. 294. 357. with their frequent
summoning and fining absent Members, evidence.

Secondly, Though fo^ty Members only may peradventur^ make an House in cas^ of
absolu^e nece^y, when ^he r^st through sickness, and public or private
occasions, are volu^rily or negligently absent; and might freely repair thither
to sit or give their Votes if they pleased: yet forty Members nev^r yet made a
Common^ House by custom of Parliament (^here being never any such case til
now) when the rest (being above ^our hundred) were forcibly secluded, or driven
thence by an army, through the practice or connivance of those forty sitting,
o^ purpose that they should not over nor counte^-vote them; much less an House
to sequester or expel the other Members, or impose any Tax upon them. Till
they show me such a l^w, custom or President of Parliament (not to be found in
any age) all they pretend is nothing to purpo^e, or the present case.

Thirdly, Neither forty Members, nor a whole House of Commons were ever enough
in any age, by the Custom of Parliament or Law of England, or impose a Tax, or
make any Act of Parliament, without the King and Lords, as I have See my Plea
for the Lords, and Levellers levelled.
already proved; much l^sse after they ceased to be Members by the Parliaments
dissolution through the Kings beheading; Neither were they ever invested with
any legal power to seclude or exp^l any of their fellow Members (especially, if
duly elected) for any Vote wherein the Majority of the House concurred with
them, or differing in their consciences and judgments from them; nor for any
other cause, without the Kings and Lords concurrence (in whom the ordinary
judicial power of the Parliament resides) as I have undeniably proved by
presidents and reasons in my Plea for the Lords, p. 47. to 53. and Ardua Regni,
which is further evident by Claus. Dors. 7. R. 2. M. 32. and Mr. Seldens Titles
of Honor, p. 737. Banneret Camoys Case, discharged from being knight of the
Shire by the Kings Writ and judgment alone, without the Commons vote, because a
Peer of the Realm; the practice of s^questring and expelling Commons by their
fellow-Commons only, being a late dangerous, unparliamentary usurpation
(unknown to our Ancestors) destructive to the privileges and freedom of
Parliaments, and injurious to those Counties, Cities, Boroughs, whose Trustees
are secluded; the House of Commons it self being no Court of Justice to give
either an Oath or final Sentence, and having no more Authority to dismember
their Fellow Members, then any Judges Justices of peace, or Committees have to
disjudg, disjustice, or discommittee their fellow. Judges, Justices, or
Committeemen, being all of equal authority, and made Members only by the Kings
Writ and peoples Election, not by the Houses, or other Members Votes; who yet
now presume both to make and unmake, seclude and recall, expel and restore their
fellowMembers at their pleasure, contrary to the practice and resolution of
former ages, to patch up a factious Conventicle, instead of an English
Parliament. Therefore this Objection no waye^ invalids this first Reason; why I
neither can nor dare submit to this illegal Tax in conscience, law, or
prudence, which engage me to oppose it in all these Respects.

If any object, That true it is, the parliament by the common Law and Custom
of the Realm determines by the Kings death; but by the Statute of 17 Caroli,
which enacts, That this present Parliament now assembled shall not be dissolved
unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; continues
this Parliament still in being, notwithstanding the Kings beheading, since no
Act of Parliament is passed for its Dissolution. The only pretext for to
support the continuance of the Parliament since the Kings violent death.

To this I answer, That it is a Maxim in Law, That every Answ.
Statute ought to be expounded according to the intent of those that made it,
and the mischiefs it intended only to prevent, as is resolved in 4. Edw. 4.
12. 12. Edw. 4. 18. 1. H. 7 12 13. Plowd. Com fol. 369. and Cooks 4. Instit. p.
329, 330. Now the intent of the Makers of this Act, and the end of enacting it,
was not to prevent the dissolution of this Parliament by the Kings death (no
ways intimated or insinuated in any clause thereof, being a clear unavoydable
dissolution of it to all intents not provided for by this Law,) but by any Writ
or proclamation of the King, by his Regal power, without consent of both
Houses; which I shall manifest by these ensuing reasons.

First, From the principal occasion of making this Act. The King (as the
COMMONS in their Exact Collect. p. 5. 6.
Rem^nstrance of the state of the Kingdom, 15 December. 1642, complain) had
dissolved all former Parliaments during his Reign without and against both
Houses approbation, to their great discontent and the Kingdoms prejudice, as
his Father King James had dissolved others in his Reign: and during their
continuance adjourned and prorogued them at their pleasure. Now the fear of
preventing of the like dissolution, prorogation, or adjournment of this
Parliament after the Scottish Armies disbanding, before the things mentioned in
the Preamble were effected by the Kings absolute power, was the only ground and
occasion of this Law (not any fear or thoughts of its dissolution by the King
untimely death) then not so much as imagined, being before the Wars or Irish
Rebellion brake forth) the King very healthy, not ancient, and likely then to
survive this Parliament, and many others, in both Houses judgment, as appears
by the Bill for trienniall Parliaments. This undeniable Truth is expressly
declared by the Commons themselves in their foresaid Romonstrance; Exact
Collection p. 5. 6. 14. 17. compared together; where in direct terms they
affirm, The ABBRUPT DISSOLUTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT is prevented by another Bil,
by which it is provided it shall not be dissolved or adjourned without the
consent of both Houses: In the Bill for continuance of this present Parliament,
there seems TO BE SOME RESTRAINT OF THE ROYAL POWER IN D SSOLVING OF
PARLIAMENTS; NOT TO TAKE IT OUT OF THE CROWN, BUT TO SUSPEND THE EXECUTION OF
IT FOR THIS TIME and OCCASION ONLY; which was so necessary for THE KINGS OWN
SECURITY, and the public Peace, that without it we could not have undertaken
any of these great charges, but must have left both the Armies to disorder and
confusion, and the whole Kingdom to blood and rapine.

In which passages we have a clear resolution of the Commons themselves,
immediately after the passing of this Act; that the scope and intention of it
was only to provide against the Kings abrupt dissolution of the Parliament by
the mere royal power in suspending the execution of it for this ti^e and
occasion only; and that for the Kings own security, (not his Heirs and
Successors) as well as his peoples peace and safety. Therefore not against any
dissolutions of it by his natural (much less his violent) death; which can no
ways be interpreted, an Act of his Royal power, which they intended hereby,
not to take out of the Crown, but only to suspend the execution of it for this
time and occasion, and that for his security: but a natural impotency, or
unnatural disloyalty, which not only suspends the execution of the Kings power
for a time, but utterly destroies and takes away him and it without hopes of
revival for ev^r.

Secondly, the very title of this Act ( An Act to prevent Inconveniences which
may happen by the UNTIMELY adjourning, proroguing or DISSOLUTION of this
present Parliament) intimates as much, compared with the body of it, which
provides, as well against the adjourning and proroguing of both or either Houses
without an Actof Parliament, as against the dissolution of the Parliament
without an Act. Now the Parliament cannot possibly be said to be adjourned or
pr^gued in any way or sense, much less untimely, by the Kings death, (which
never adjourned or prorog^d any Parliament,) but only by his Proclamation,
writ, or royal command, to the Houses or their Speaker, executed during his
life; as all our Journals, 6. E. 3. Parl. 2. Rot. Parl 3 6. 5 R. 2. n. 64, 65.
11 R 2. n. 14. 1^. 20. 8 H. 4. n. 2, 7, 27. H. 6. n. 12 28. H. 6. n 8, 9, 11,
29. H. 6. n. 10, 11. 31. H. 6. n. 22. 30, 49.
Parliament Rolls and Cooks 4. Institut p. 25, Dyer. f 203.
Law Books resolve, though it may be dissolved by his death, as well as by his
Proclamation, writ, or royal command. And therefore this title and act coupling
adjourning, proroguing and dissolving this Parliament together without consent
of both Houses, by act of Parliament, intended only a dissolution of this
Parliament by such Prerogative ways and means by which Parliaments had
formerly been untimely adjourned and prorog^ed as well as dissolved by the
Kings mere will without their assents; not of a dissolution of it by the Kings
death which never adjourned nor prorogued any Parliament, nor dissolved any
formerly sitting Parliament in this Kings reign, or his Ancestors since the
deathof King Henry the 4th; the only Parliament we read of dissolved by death
of the King since the conquest; and so a mischief not intended nor remedied by
Act.

Thirdly, The prologue of the act implies as much; Whereas great sums of money
must of necessity be SPEEDILY advanced and procured for the relief of HIS
MAJESTY'S ARMY and PEOPLE (not his Heirs or Successors) in the Northern parts:
etc. And for supply of other HIS MAJESTY'S PRESENT and URGENT OCCASIONS (not
his Heirs or Successors future occasions) which cannot be so timely effected as
is requisite, without credit for raising the said moneys; which credit cannot
be attained, until such obstacles be first removed as are occasioned BY FEAR,
JEALOUSIES and APPREHENSIONS OF DIVERSE OF HIS MAJESTY'S LOYAL SUBJECTS THAT THE
PARLIAMENT MAY BE ADJOURNED, PROROGUED OR DISSOLVED (not by the Kings sudden or
untimely death, of which there was then no fear, Jealousy or apprehension in
any his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, but by his Royal Prerogative and advice of
ill Counselors) before justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents; (then
in being, nor sprung up since) public grievances (then complained of)
r^dressed, a firm peace betwixt the two Nations of England and Scotland
concluded, and before sufficient provisions be made for the repayment of THE
SAID MONEYS (not others since) so to be raised: All which the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled having duly considered, do therefore humbly
beseech your Majesty, ^at it may be declared and enacted, etc. ^ll which
expressions, relate^ only TO HIS late Majesty only, not his Heirs and
Successors; and the principal scope of this (...), to gain present credit to
raise moneys to disband the Scottish and English Armies then lying upon the
Kingdom, being many years since accomplished; yea and justice being since
executed upon Strafford, Canterbury, and other Delinquents then complained of;
the public Grievances then complained of (as Starchamber, High Commission,
Ship Money, Tonnage and poundage, Fines for Knighthood, Bishops votes in
Parliament, with their Courts and Jurisdictions and the like) redressed by acts
soon after passed, and a firm peace between both Nations concluded before the
Wars began; and this preamble's pretentions for this act fully satisfied diverse
years before the King's beheading; it must of necessity be granted, that this
Statute never intended to continue this Parliament on foot after the Kings
decease; especially after the ends for which it was made were accomplished: And
so it must necessarily be dissolved by his Death.

Fourthly, This is most clear by the body of the act it self: And be it
declared and enacted By THE KING OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with the assent of the
LORDS and Commons in this PRESENT PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, and by the authority of
the same, That THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT Now ASSEMBLED, shall not be DISSOLVED,
unless it be by ACT OF PARLIAMENT TO BE PASSED FOR THAT PURPOSE; nor shall any
time or times DURING THE CONTINUANCE THERE OF BE PROROGUED OR ADJOURNED,
unless it be By ACT OF PARLIAMENT to be likewise PASSED FOR THAT PURPOSE. And
that THE HOUSE of PEERS shall not at any time or times DURING THIS PRESENT
PARLIAMENT BE ADJOURNED, unless it be By THEMSELVES; or BY THEIR OWN ORDER.
And in like manner that THE HOUSE OF COMMONS shall not at any time or times
DURING THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT be adjourned unless it be BY THEMSELVES, or BY
THEIR OWN ORDER. Whence it is undeniable, 1. that this act was only for the
prevention of the untimely dissolving, Proroguing and adjourning of that
present Parliame nt then assembled, and no other. 2. That the King himself was
the Principal Member of his Parliament, yea, our Sovereign Lord, and the sole
declarer and enacter of this Law, by the Lords and Commons assent. 3. That
neither this Act for continuing, nor any other for dissolving, adjourning or
proroguing this Parliament could be made without, but only by and with the
Kings Royal assent thereto; which the Lords and Commons assembled in Parl ament
in their Exact Collect p. 69. 70. 736. 709. 722.
Remonstrance of the 26. of May 1642: often in termin^ acknowledge, together with
his Negative voice to bills. 4. That it was neither the Kings intention in
passing this act to shut himself out of Parliament, or create Members of a
Parliament without a King, as he professed in his (...). c. 5. p. 27. Nor the
Lords nor Commons intendment to dismember him from his Parliament, or make
themselves a Parliament without him; as their foresaid Remonstrance testifies,
and the words of the act import: Neither was it the Kings, Lords or Commons
meaning by this act to set up a Parliament only of Commons (much less of a
remnant of a Commons House selected by Colonel Pride, and his Confederates of
the Army to serve their turns, and vote what they prescribed) without either
King or House of Peers, much le^se to give them any super-transcendent
authority to vote down and abolish the King and house of Lords, and make them
no Members of this present or any future Parliaments, without their own order
or a^sent, against which so great usurpation and late dangerous unparliamentary
encroachments this very act expressly provides in this clause, That the House of
Peers (wherein the King sits as Sovereign when he pleases) shall not at any
time or times during this present Parliament be adjourned (much less then
dissolved, excluded, or suspended from sitting or voting, which is the greater,
and that by their inferiors in all kinds, a Fragment of the Commons House,
who can pretend no color of Jurisdiction over them, before whom they always
stood bare-headed, like so many Grand-Jury-men before the Judges, and attended
at their Doors and Bar to know their pleasures:) unless it be by Themselves,
or by their own Order. 5. That neither the King, Lords nor Commons intended to
set up a perpetual Parliament, and intail it upon them, their Heirs and
Successors for ever, by this Act, which would cross and repeal the Act for
(...) Parliame^ts made at the same time, and on the same Book Parliament. 80.
Relation 85. Dyer 85.
day in Law; but to make provision only against the untimely dissolving of
this, till the things mentioned in the Preamble were accomplished and settled;
as the Preamble, and those often repeated words, any time or times during the
continuance of this present Parliament, conclude; and that during His Majesty's
Reign and life, not after his death; as these words coupled with The relief of
his Majesty's Army and People; and for supply of His Maj^sties pre^ent and
urgent occasions in the Preamble manifest. Therefore this Act can no ways
continue it a parliament aster the Kings beheading; much less after the
exclusion both of the King and Lords House out of parliament by those now
si^ting, contrary to the very letter and provision of this Act; by which dev^ce
the King alone, had he conquered and cut off, or secluded by his Forces the
Lords and Commons House from sitting, might with much more color have made
himself an absolute parliament, to impose what Taxes and Laws he pleased,
without Lords or Commons, on the people, by virtue of this Act, then those few
Commons now sitting since his trial and death do. 6. The last clause of this
Act, And that all and every thing or t^ings whatsoever DONE OR TO BE DONE (to
wit, by the King or His Authority) for the adjournment, proroguing or
dissolving of THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT, CONTRARY TO THIS PRESENT ACT, SHALL BE
UTTERLY VOID and of NONE EFFECT: Now death, and a dissolution of this
parliament by the Kings death, cannot (as to the King) be properly s^iled, a
Thing done, or to be done (by Him) for the adjournment, proroguing or
dissolving of this parliament, contrary to this present Act; which cannot make
the Kings death utterly voi^ and of none effect, by restoring him to his life
again. Therefore the dissolution of the parliament by the Kings death, is
clearly out of the words and intentions of this Act, especially so many years
after its Enacting. 7. This present Parliament and every Member thereof, being
specially summoned by the Kings W^it, only to be HIS Parliament and Council,
and to confer with HIM of the great and urgent affairs concerning HIM and
HIS Kingdom; and these Writs and Elections of them, returned unto HIM and HIS
COURT by Indenture, and the persons summoned and chosen by virtue of them
appearing only in HIS Parliament, for no other ends but those expressed in HIS
WRITS; it would be both an absu^dity and absolute impossibility to assert, that
the Houses intended by this Act to continue this Parliament in being after the
Kings beheading or death: unless they that maintain this paradox be able to
inform me and those now sitting, how they can conferr and advise with a dead
King of things concerning Him and His Kingdom; and that even after they have
extirpated Monarchy it self, and made it Treason to assert or revive it; and
how they can continue still HIS Parliament and Council whose head they have
cut off: and that without reviving or raising him from his grave, or enstalling
His right Heir and Successor in His Throne to represent His Person; neither of
which they dare to do, for fear of losing their own Heads and Quarters too,
for beheading him. This Tax therefore being imposed on the Kingdom long after
the Kings beheading, and the Parliaments dissolution by it, must needs be
illegal and merely void in Law to all intents; because not granted nor imposed
in, but out of Parliament; by those who were then no Commons nor Members of a
Parliament, and had no more authority to impose any Tax upon the Kingdom, then
any other forty or fifty Commoners whatsoever out of Parliament, who may usurp
the like authority by this president to Tax the Kingdom or any County what they
please, and then Levy it by an Army or force of Arms, to the peoples infinite,
endless oppression and undoing: This is my first and principal exception
against the Legality of this Tax, which I desire the Imposers and Levyers of it
most seriously to consider; and that upon these important considerations from
their own late Declarations.

First, themselves in their own Declaration of the 9th February, 1648. have
protested to the whole Kingdom: That they a^e fully resolved to maintain; and
shall and will uphold, preserve, and ^ep the fundamental Laws of this Nation,
for, and concerning the PRESERVATION OF THE LIVES, PROPERTIES and LIBERTIES OF
THE PEOPLE, with all things incid^nt thereunto: which how it will stand with
this Tax imposed by them out of Parliament, or their Act concer^ing New
TREASONS; I desire they would satisfy me and the Kingdom, before they levy the
one, or proceed upon the other against any of their follow-Subjects, by mere
arbitrary armed power against Law and Right.

Secondly, themselves in their Declaration, expressing the grounds of their
late proceedings, and settling the present Government in way of a Free State,
dated 17. Martii, 1648. engage themselves: To prooure the well-being of those
whom the^ serve: to renounce oppression, arbitrary power, and all opposition to
the peace and Freedom of the Nation: And to prevent to their power, the
reviving of Tyranny, Injustice, and all former evils (the only end and duty of
all their Labors) to the satisfaction of all concerned in it. 2. They charge
the late King for exceeding all His predecessors in the destruction of those
whom he was bound to preserve; To manifest which they instance in The Loanes,
unlawful Imprisonments, and other Oppressions which produced that excellent
Law of the Petition of Right; which were most of them again acted, presently
after the Law made against them, which was most palpa^ broken by him almost in
every part of it, very soon after His solemn Consent given unto it. Is not this
the Armies and their own late and present practice?
His imprisoning and prosecuting Members of Parliament, for opposing His
unlawful Will: and of diverse Alderman Chambers the eminentest of them, is yet
since this Declaration discharged by you for his loyalty and conscience only.
worthy Merchants for refusing to pay Tonnage and Poundage, because NOT GRANTED
BY PARLIAMENT; yet And is it not so by you now, and transmitted unto the
Exchequer to be levied?
exacted by HIM expressly against Law; and punishment of many And do not you now
the same, yea, some of those very good Patrio^s?
good Patriots, for not submitting to whatsoever ^e pleased to demand, though
NEVER SO MUCH IN BREACH OF THE KNOWN LAW. The multitude of projects and
Monopolies established by Him. His design and charge to bring in Are not the
Generals and Armies Horse and Foot too, kept up and continued among us for that
very purpose, being some of them Germans too?
Germane-Horse, to awe us INTO SLAVERY: and his hopes of completing all by His
grand project of Not one quarter so grievous as the present Tax imposed by you
for the like purpose.
Ship Money, to subject EVERY MAN'S ESTATE TO WHATSOEVER PROPORTION HE PLEASED
TO IMPOSE UPON THEM. But above all the English Army was labored by the King to
be engaged against THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. A thing of that And is it not more
unnatural in those now sitting, to engage the English Army, raised by the
Parliament of England, and covenanting to detend it from violence against the
very Parliament of England and its Members, and that successively twice after
one another, and yet to own and support this Army without righting those
Members?
STRANGE IMPIETY and UNNATURALNESS for the King of England, to sheath their
swords in one another bowels, that nothing can answer it but his own being a
Foraigner: neither could it easily have purchased belief, but by his succ^eding
visible actions in full pursu^ance of the same. As the Kings coming in person to
the Was not Pride's and the Armies coming thither to seize, and actually
seizing above Forty, and secluding above Two hundred Members, with Thousands of
armed Horse and Foot, a thousand times a greater offense, especially after so
many Declarations of the Houses against this of the Kings?
House of Commons to seize the five Members, whether he was followed with Was
not Humphrey Edwards now sitting, an unduly elected Member, one of them thus
armed?
some hundreds of unworthy d^baunched persons, a^med with Swords and Pistols,
and other Arms; and they attending at the Door of the House, ready to (...)
whatsoever their Leader should command them. The oppr^ssions of the
Councell-Table, Star Chamber, High Commission, CourtMartiall, Wardships,
Purveyances, Afforestations, and many others of like nature, (equalled, if not
far exceeded now by sundry Arbitrary Committees and Sub-Committees, to name no
others in all manner of Oppressions and Injustice) concluding thus: Upon all
these and many other unparalleld offenses, upon his breach of Faith, of Oaths
and Protestations; upon the cry of the blood of England and Ireland: upon the
tears of Widows and Orphans, and childless Parents, and millions of persons
undone by him, let all the world of indifferent men judge, whether the
Parliament (you mean your selves only which made this Declaration) had not
sufficient cause to BRING THE KING TO JUSTICE: And much more you if you imitate
or exceed him in all or any of these, even by your own verdit?

3. Themselves charge the King with profuse Donations of salaries and pensions
to such as were found, or might be made fit Instruments and promoters of
Tyranny: which were supplied not by the legal justifiable revenue of the Crown,
but by Projects and illegal ways OF DRAINING THE PEOPLES PURSES; all which
mischief and grievance they say will be prevented in their free State; though
the quite contrary way; as appears by the late large donation of some thousands
to Mr. Henry Martin, Hen. Ma^tin is accomptable to the State for abvoe 3700 l.
which the Committee of accounts in two years time could never bring him to
account for, and yet has 3000 l. voted him lately for moneys pretended to be
disbursed; to whom and for what, quere.
the Lord Lisle, Commissary General Ireton and others of their Members and
Instruments, upon pretense of Arrears, or Service, some of them out of the
moneys now imposed for the releife of Ireland. And must we pay Taxes to be thus
prodigally expended?

Fourthly, They therein promise and engage, That the good old Laws and Customs
of England THE BADGES OF OUR FREEDOM ( the benefit whereof our Ancesters
enjoyed long before the conquest, and spent much of their blood to have
confirmed by the Great Charter of the Liberties) and other excellent Laws which
have continued in all former changes, and being duly executed, are THE MOST
JUST, FREE and equal of any other Laws in the world; shall be duly continued
and maintained by them; the LIBERTY, PROPERTY and PEACE OF THE SUBJECT BEING SO
FULLY PRESERVED BY THEM, and the common interest of those WHOM THEY SERVE. And
if those Laws should be taken away, all Industry must cease; all misery blood
and confusion would follow, and greater Calamities, if possible, then fell upon
us by the late Kings misgovernment, would certainly involve all persons, under
which they must inevitably perish.

5. They therein expressly promise. p. 26. To order the revenue in such a way,
That the public charges may be defrayed; The Soldiers pay justly and duly
settled: That free quarter may Nota.
be wholly taken away and THE PEOPLE BE EASED IN THEIR BURDENS and TAXES: And
is this now all the ease we feel; to have all Burdens and Taxes, thus
augmented; and that against Law by pretended acts made out of Parliament,
against all these good old Laws and Statutes, our Liberties and Properties,
which these new Tax-Masters have so newly and deeply engaged themselves to
maintain and preserve without the least diminution?

Thirdly, Both Houses of Parliament jointly, and the House of Commons severally
in the late Parliament, with the approbation of all and consent of most now
sitting, did in sundry Exact. Collect p. 5. 6. 7. 14. 342. 49^
Remonstrances and Declarations published to the Kingdom, not only Tax the King
and his evil Counselors for imposing illegal Taxes on the Subjects, contrary
to the forecited acts; the maintenance whereof against all future violations
and invasions of the Peoples Liberties and Properties they made one principal
ground of our late bloody expensive wars; but likewise professed; Exact
Collect. p. 28. 29. 214 263. 270. 491 492. 495, 496. 497. 660.
That they were specially chosen and entrusted by the Kingdom in Parliament and
owned it as their duty to hazard their own lives and estates for preservation
of those Laws and liberties, and use their best endeavors that the meanest of
the Commonalty might enjoy them as their birthrights, as well as the greatest
Subject. That EVERY HONEST MAN (especially THOSE WHO HAVE TAKEN THE LATE
PROTESTATION, and Solemn League and Covenant since) IS BOUND TO DEFEND THE LAWS
and LIBERTIES OF THE KINGDOM against WILL and POWER, which imposed WHAT PAYMENTS
THEY THOUGHT FIT TO DRAIN THE SUBJECTS PURSES, and supply THOSE NECESSITIES
(which theiril Counsel had brought upon the King and Kingdom) And that they
would be ready TO LIVE AND DYE with those WORTHY and TRUE-HEARTED PATRIOTS OF
THE GENTRY OF THIS NATION and others, who were ready to lay down their lives
and fortunes for the maintenance of THEIR LAWS and LIBERTIES: with many such
like heroic expressions. Which must needs engage me (a Member of that
Parliament, and Patriot of my Country) with all my strength and power to oppose
this injurious Tax, imposed out of Parliament, though with the hazard of my
life and fortunes; wherein all those late Members who have joined in these
Remonstrances are engaged by them to second me; under pain of being adjudged
unworthy for ever hereafter to sit in any Parliament or to be trusted by their
Counties and those for whom they served. And so much the rather to vindicate
the late Houses honor and reputation from those predictions and printed
aspersions of the beheaded King; Exact Col lect. p. 285. 286. 298. 320. 322.
378. 379. 381. 513. 514. 515. etc. 618. 619. 620 623. 647. etc. 671. 679. etc A
Collect. etc. p. 100. 102. etc. 117.
That the maintenance of the Laws, Liberties, Properties of the People, were
but only gilded dissimulations and specious pretenses to get power into their
own hands, thereby to enable them to destroy and subvert both Laws, Liberties,
and Properties at last. And not any thing like them, to introduce Anarchy,
Democracy, Parity, Tyranny in the Highest degree, and new forms of arbitrary
Government, and leave neither King nor Gentleman: all which the people should
too late discover to their costs and that they had obtained nothing by adhering
to and compliance with them, but to enslave and undo themselves, and to be
last destroyed. Which royal Predictions many complain we find too truly
verified by those who now bear rule, under the Name and visour of the
Parliament of England, since its dissolution by the Kings decapitation, and the
Armies imprisoning and seclusion of the Members who above all others are
obliged to disprove them by their answers as well as declarations to the people,
who regard not words but real performances from these new keepers of their
Liberties; especially in this FIRST YEAR OF ENGLANDS FREEDOM engraven on all
their public Seals, which else will but seal their Selfdamnation and proclaim
them the Archest Impostors under Heaven.

Secondly, should I voluntarily submit to pay this Tax, and that by virtue of
an Act of Parliament made by those now sitting, (some of whose Elections have
been voted void; others of them elected by See Cooks 4 Instit. p. 10.
new illegal Writs under a new kind of Seal, without the Kings Authority,
style, or Seal, and that since the Kings beheading, as the Earl of Pembroke,
and Lord Edward Howard, incapable of being Knights or Burgesses by the Common
Law and custom of Parliament, being Peers of the Realm (if now worthy such a
Title) as was adjudged long since in the Lord Camoyes case, Claus. Dors. 7. R.
2. m. 32. and asserted by Master Seldom in his Titles of Honor, part. 2. c. 5.
p. 737. seconded by Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Institut. p. 1, 4, 5, 46, 47, 49.)
As I should admit these to be lawful Members, and these unlawful void Writs
to be good in Law; so I should thereby tacitly admit, and ex post facto assent
to some particulars against my knowledge, judgment, conscience, Oaths of
Supremacy, Allegiance, Protestation, and solemn League and Covenant, taken in
the presence of God himself, with a sincere he^rt and real intention to
perform the same, and (...) therein all the days of my life, without suffering
my self directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror
to be withdrawn therefrom. As first, That there may be and now is a lawful
Parliament of England actually in being, and legally continuing after the Kings
death, consisting only of a few late Members of the Commons House, without
either King, Lords, or most of their fellow-Commons: which the very Consciences
and judgments of all now sitting, that know anything of Parliaments, and the
whole Kingdom if they durst speak their knowledge, know and believe to be false,
yea against their Oaths and Covenant. Secondly, That this Parliament (so unduly
constituted and packed by power of an Army combining with them) has a just and
lawful Authority to violate the Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and
alter the constitution of our Parliaments themselves; imprison, seclude, expel
most of their fellow members for voting according to their consciences; to
repeal what Votes, Ordinances and Acts of Parliament they please, ere^t new
Arbitrury Courts of war and Justice (...) a^aign, condemn, execute the King
himself, with the Peers and Commons of this Realm by a new kind of Martial law
contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and Law of the Land:
dis-inherit the Kings poste^ty of the crown, extirpat Monarchy, and the whole
house of Peers, change and subvert the ancient Government, Seals, Law^, Writs;
legal proceedings, Courts, and coin of the Kingdom; ^ell and dispose of all the
Lands, Revenues, Jewels, goods of the Crown, with the Lands of Deans and
Chapters, as they think meet; absolve themselves (like so many antichristian
Popes) with all the Subjects of England and Ireland, from all the Oaths and
engagements they have made TO THE KINGS MAJESTY, HIS HEIRS AND SUCCESSORS: yea,
from their very Oath of Allegiance, notwithstanding this express clause in it
(which I desire may be ^riously and conscienciously considered by all who have
sworn it) I do ^eleeve and in Conscien^ am r^olved, that neither the Pope.
NORANY PERSON WHATSOEVER HAS POWER TO ABSOLVE ME OF THIS OATH, OR ANY PART
THEREOF, which I acknowledge by good and ^ull Authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me and DO RENOUNCE ALL PARDONS AND DISPENSATIONS TO THE
CONTRARY: dispense with our Protestations, Solemn League and Covenant, so
lately A collect. etc. page 327, 358, 359, 399, 404, 416, 420, etc. 694, 751,
768, 769 798, 802 806, etc 878, 879, 889.
zealously u^ged and enjoined by both Houses on Members, Officers, Ministers,
and all sorts of People throughout the Realm: dispose of all the Forts, Ships,
Forces, Offices and Places of Honor, Power, Trust or profit within the Kingdom
to whom they please; to displace and remove whom they will from their Offices,
Trusts, Pensions, Callings, at their pleasures without any legal cause or
trial: to make what new Acts, Laws, and reverse what old ones they think
meet, to ensnare, inthral our Consciences, Estates, Liberties, Lives: to create
new monstrous Treasons never heard of in the world before; and declare r^ll
treasons against King, Kingdom, Parliament, to be no tr^asons, and Loyalty,
Allegi^nce, due obedience to our known Laws, and conscientious observing of
our Oaths and Covenant (the breach whereof would render us actual Traitors and
perjurious persons) to be no less then High Treason, for which they may justly
imprison, dismember, disfranchise, displace and fine us at their wills (as they
have done some of late) and confiscate our persons, liv^s to the Gallows, and
our estates to their new Exchequer; (a Tyranny beyond all Tyrannies ever heard
of in our Nation, repealing Magna Charta, c. 29. 5. E. 3. c. 6. 25. Edw. 3.
cap. 4. 28. Ed. 3. c. 3. 37. E. c. 18. 42. E. 3. cap. 3. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. 11.
R. 2. c. 4. 1. H. 4. c. 10. 2. H. 4. Rot. Par. N. 60. 1. E. 6. c. 12. 1 Mar. c.
1. The Petition of Right, 3 Caro^, and laying all our See Cooks 3 Inst. p. 2,
21, 22, 23.
Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives in the very dust after so many bloody and
costly years wars to defend them against the Kings invasions) raise and keep up
what forces they will by Sea and Land, impose what heavy Taxes they please, and
renew, increase, multiply and perpetuate them on us as often and as long as
they please, to support their own encroached, more then Regal, Parliamentall,
Supertranscendent Arbitrary power over us, and all that is ours or the
Kingdoms, at our private and the public charge against our wills, judgments,
consciences, to our absolute enslaving, and our three Kingdom^ r^ine, by
engaging them one against another in new Civil wars, and exposing us for a
prey to our Foreign Enemies. All which, with other particulars, lately acted
and avowed by the Imposers of this Tax, by color of that pretended
Parliamentary Authority by which they have imposed it, I must necessarily
admit, acknowledge to be just and legal by my voluntary payment of it, of
purpose to maintain an Army, to justify and make good all this by the mere
power of the Sword, which they can no waye^ justify and defend by the Laws of
God or the Realm, before any Tribunal of God or Men, when legally arraigned,
as they shall one day be. Neither of which I can or dare acknowledge, without
incurring the guilt of most detestable Perjury, and highest Treason, against
King, Kingdom, Parliament, Laws and Liberties of the people; and therefore
cannot yield to this Assessment.

Thirdly, the principal ends and uses proposed in the pretended Act and
Warrants thereupon for payment of this Tax, are strong obligations to me, in
point of Conscience, Law, Prudence, to withstand it; which I shall particularly
discuss.

The first is, the maintenance and contiuuance of the present Army and Forces
in England under the Lord Fairfax. To which I say, First, as I shall with all
readiness, gratitude and due respect, acknowledge their former Gallantry, good
and faithful Services to the Parliament and Kingdom, whiles they continued
dutiful and constant to their first Engagements, and the ends for which they
were raised by both Houses, as far forth as any man; so in regard of their late
monstrous defections, and dangerous Apostacies from their primitive obedience,
faithfulness, and engagements in disobeying the Commands, and levying open war
against both Houses of Parliament, keeping an horrid force upon them at their
very doors; seizing, imprisoning, secluding, abusing, and forcing away their
Members, printing and publishing many high and treasonable Declarations against
the Institution, Privileges, Members and Proceedings of the late, and Being of
all future Parliaments; imprisoning, abusing, arraigning, condemning and
executing our late King, against the Votes, Faith, and Engagements of both
Houses, and dis-inheriting His posterity, usurping the Regal, Parliamentall,
Magistraticall, and Ecclesiastical power of the Kingdom to their
Generall-Councell of Officers of the Army, as the supreme swaying Authority of
the Kingdom, and a^empting to alter and subvert the ancient Government,
Parliaments, Laws, and Customs of our Realm: And upon serious consideration of
the ordinary, unsufferable Assertions of their Officers and Soldiers uttered
in most places where they Quarter, and to my self in particular, sundry times,
Can or will the King himself say more, or so much as these, if he invade and
conquer us b^ F^r reign forces? And were it not better for us then to submit to
our lawful King, then so many thousand perfidious usurping pretended Conquerors
of us, who of late pretend they were no other but our servants?
That the whole Kingdom, with all our Lands, Houses, Goods, and whatsoever we
have, is theirs, and that by right of Conquest, they having twice conquered the
Kingdom: That we are but their conquered slaves and Vassals, and they the Lords
and Heads of the Kingdom: That our very lives are at their mercy and courtesy.
That when they have got ten all we have from us by Taxes and Free Quarter, and
we have nothing left to pay them, then themselves will sei^e upon our Lands as
their own, and turn us and our Families out of doors: That there is now no Law
in England (nor never was, i^ we believe their lying Oracle Peter's) but the
Sword; with many such like vapouring Speeches and discourses, of which there
are thousands of witnesses: I can neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence
assent unto, much less contribute in the least degree for their present
maintenance, or future continuance, thus to insult, inslave, and tyrannize over
King, Kingdom, Parliament, People at their pleasure, like their conquered
Vassals. And for me in particular to contribute to the maintenance of those,
who against the Law of the Land, the privileges of Parliament, and liberty of
the Subject, pulled me forcibly from the Commons House, and kept me prisoner
about two months space under their Martial, to my great expense and prejudice,
without any particular cause pretended or assigned, only for discharging my
duty to the Kingdom, and those for whom I served in the House, without giving
me the least reparation for this unparalleled injustice, or acknowledging
their offense (and yet detain some of my then Fellow Members under custody by
the mere power of the Sword, without bringing them to Trial) would be, not
only absurd, unreasonable, and a tacit justification of this their horrid
violence, and breach of privilege, but monstrous, unnatural, perfidious,
against my Oath and Covenant.

2. No Tax ought to be imposed on the Kingdom in Parliament it self, but in
case of necessity, for the common good, as is clear by the Stat. of 25 E. 1. c.
6. and Cooks 2 Instit. p. 528. Now it is evident to me, that there is no
necessity of keeping up this Army for the Kingdoms common Good, but rather a
necessity of disbanding it, or the greatest part of it, for these reasons: 1.
Because the Kingdom is generally exhausted with the late 7 years Wars, Plunders
and heavy Taxes; there being more moneys levied on it by both sides, during
these eight last years, then in all the Kings Reigns since the Conquest, as
will appear upon a just computation: all Counties being thereby utterly unable
to pay it. 2. In regard of the great decay of Trade, the extraordinary dearth
of cattle, corn, and provisions of all sorts; the charge of relieving a
multitude of poor people, who starve with famine in many places, the richer
sort eaten out by Taxes and Free Quarter, being utterly unable to relieve them.
To which I might add the multitude of maimed Soldiers, with the widows and
children of those who have lost their lives in the Wars, which is very costly.
3. This heavy Contribution to support the Army, destroies all Trade, by
fore-stalling and engrossing most of the Moneys of the Kingdom, the sinews and
life of Trade; wasting the provisions of the Kingdom, and enhancing their
prices, keeping many thousands of able men and horses idle, only to consume
other laboring men's provisions, estates, and the public Treasure of the
Kingdom, when as their employment in their Trades and callings, might much
advance trading, and enrich the Kingdom. 4. There is now no visible Enemy in
the field or Garrisons, and the sitting Members boast there is no fear from any
abroad, their Navy being so Victorious. And why such a vast Army should be
still continued in the Kingdom to increase its debts and payments, when charged
with so many great Arrears and Debts already, eat up the Country with Taxes and
Free Quarter, only to play, drink, whore, steal, rob, murder, quarrel, fight
with, impeach and shoot one another to death as Traitors, Rebels, and Enemies
to the Kingdom and Peoples Liberties, as now the Levellers and Cromwellists
do, for want of other employments, and this for the public Good, transcends
my understanding. 5. When the King had two great Armies in the Field, and many
Garrisons in the Kingdom, this whole Army by its primitive Establishment,
consisted but of twenty two thousand Horse, Dragoons and Foot, and had an
Establishment only of about Forty five thousand pounds a month for their pay;
which both Houses then thought sufficient, as is evident by their Collect. etc.
page 599. 876.
Ordinances of Febr. 15. 1644. and April 4. 1646. And when the Army was much
increased without their Order, sixty thousand pounds a month was thought
abundantly sufficient by the Officers and Army themselves, to disband and
reduce all super-numeraries, maintain the Established Army and Garrisons, and
ease the Country of all Free Quarter; which Tax has been constantly paid in
all Counties. Why then this Tax to the Army should now be raised above the
first Establishment, when reduced to twenty thousand, whereof sundry Regiments
are designed for Ireland, (for which there is thirty thousand pounds a month
now exacted, besides the sixty for the Army) and this for the common good of
the Realm, is a riddle unto me, or rather, a Mystery of iniquity, for some men's
private lucre, rather then the public weal. 6. The Militia of every ^ounty
(for which there was so great contest in Parliament with the late King) and
those persons of livelihood and estates in every Shire or Corporation who have
been cordial to the Parliament and Kingdom heretofore, put into a posture of
defense under Gentlemen of quality and known integrity, would be a far agreater
Guard to secure the Kingdom against foreign Invasions or domestic
Insurrections, then a mercenary Army of persons and soldiers of no fortunes,
and that with more general content, and the tenth part of that Charge the
Kingdom is now at to maintain this Army, and prevent all danger of the undoing
pest of Free Quarter. Therefore there is no necessity to keep up this Army, or
impose any new Tax for their maintenance, or defraying their pretended Arrears,
which I dare averr, the Free Quarter they have taken in kind, and levied in
money, if brought to a just account, as it ought, will double, if not treble
most of their Arrears, and make them much indebted to the Country. And no
reason they should have full pay and Free Quarter too, and the Country bear the
burden of both, without full allowance of all the Quarters levied or taken on
them against Law, out of their pretended Arrears.

And if any of the sitting Tax-makers here object, That they Object.
dare not trust the Militia of the Cities and Counties of the Realm with their
own or the Kingdoms defense: Therefore there is a necessity for them to keep up
the Army, to prevent all dangers from abroad, and Insurrections at home.

I answer, 1. That upon these pretenses these new Lords may (...)
intail and enforce an Army, and Taxes to support them, on the Kingdom till
Doomsday. 2. If they be real Members who make this Objection, elected by the
Counties, Cities and Boroughs for which they serve, and deriving their
Parliamentall Authority only from the People, ( the only n^w fountain of all
Power and Authority, See their Declaration, 17 March, 1648. page 1. 27.
as themselves now dogmatize) then they are but their Servants and Trustees,
who are to allow them wages, and give them Commission for what they act. And if
they dare not now trust the people, and those persons of quality, fidelity, and
estate, who both elected, entrusted and empowered them, and are the primitive
and supreme Power; it is high time for their Electors and Masters [the People]
to revoke their authority, trusts, and call them to a speedy account for all
their late exorbitant proceedings, and mispence of the Kingdoms Treasure; and
no longer to trust those with their purses liberties, safety, who dare not now
to confide in them, and would rather commit the safeguard of the Kingdom to
mercenary, indigent soldiers, then to those Gentlemen, Freeholders, Citizens,
Burgesses, and persons of Estate who elected them, whose Trustees and
Attourneys only they profess themselves, and who have greatest interest both
in them and the Kingdoms weal, and are those who must pay these Mercenaries, if
continued. 3. The Gentlemen and Freemen of England have very little reason any
longer to trust the Army with the Kingdoms, Parliaments, or their own
Liberties, Laws, and Privileges safeguard, which they have so often invaded;
professing now, that they did not fight to preserve the Kingdom, King,
Parliament, Laws, Liberties and Properties of the Subject; but to conquer and
pull them down, and make us conquered slaves in stead of freemen: averring,
that All is theirs by conquest (which is as much as the King and his Cavaliers,
or any foreign enemy could or durst have affirmed, had they conquered us by
Battle:) And if so, then this Army is not, cannot be upheld and maintained for
the Kingdoms and peoples common good and safety, but their enslaving,
destruction, and the mere support of the usurped power, authority, offices,
wealth and absolute domination only of those who have exalted themselves for
the present, above King, Parliament, Kingdom, Laws, Liberties, and those that
did entrust them, by the help of this trust-breaking Army, who have Ezekiel. 18.
24.
lost and stained all the glory of their former noble Victories and Heroic
Actions, by their late degenerous unworthy practices, and are become a reproach
to the English Nation in all Christian Kingdoms and Churches.

The second end of this heavy Tax, is the support and maintenance of the
Forces in I^land, for which there was only twenty thousand pounds a month
formerly allowed, now mounted unto^ thirty thousand.

To which I answer in the first place, That it is apparent by the printed
Statutes of 25. E. 1. c. 6. 1 E. 3 c. 5. 7. 18. Ed. 3. c. 7. 25. Ed. 3. c. 8. 4
H. 4. c. 13. C^oks 2 Institutes^ p. 528. and the Protestation of all the
Commons of England in the Parliaments of 1 Hen. 5. number. 17. and 7. H. 5. number.
9. That no Freeman of England ought to be compelled to go in person^ ^r to
find Soldiers, Arms, Conduct mone^, Wages, or pay any Tax for or toward the
maintenance of a^y foreign War in Ireland, or any other parts beyond the Sea,
without their free consents in full Parliament. And therefore this Tax to
maintain Soldiers and the War in I^eland (neither imposed in Parliament, much
less in a full and free one, as I have proved) must needs be illegal, and no
ways obligatory to me, or any other. 2. Most of the ancient Forces in Irel nd
(as the British Army, Scots and Inchiqueen's, toward whose support the twenty
thousand pounds a month was designed) have been long since declared Rebels,
T^aytors, Revolters, and are not to share in this Contribution: and those now
pretending for Ireland, being Members of the present Army, and to be paid out
of that Establishment, there is no ground at all to augment, but to decrease
this former monthly Tax for Ireland, over what it was before. 3. Many of those
now pretending for Ireland, have been the greatest obstructers of its relief
heretofore: and many of those designed for this Service by lot, have in words,
writing and print protested they never intend to go thither, and dissuade
others from going, yet take Free Quarter on the Country and pay too under that
pretext. And to force the Country to pay Contribution and give Free quarter to
such Cheaters and Impostors, who never intend this Service, is both unjust and
dishonorable. 4. If the Relief of Ireland be now really intended, it is not
upon the first, just and pious grounds, to preserve the Protestant party there
from the forces of the bloody, Popish, Irish Rebels, with whom (if report be
true) these sitting Anti-Monarchists seek and hold correspondence, and are now
actually accorded with Owen Roe-Oneal, and his pary of bloudiest Papists; but
to oppose the Kings interest and Title to that Kingdom ( See Seldens Titles of
Honor. p. 42.
settled on HIM, HIS HEIRS and SUCCESSORS FOR EVER by an express act of
Parliament made in Ireland, 33. H. 8. c. 1. and by the Stat. of 1 Jac. c. 1.
made in England, yet unrepealed,) and the Protestant remaining party there,
adhering to, and proclaiming, acknowledging him for their Sovereign; lest his
gaining of Ir^land should prove fatal to their usurped Sovereignty in England,
or conduce to his enthroning here: And by what Authority these now sitting can
impose, or with what conscience any loyal Subject who has tagen the Oaths of
Supremacy, Allegiance, and Cov^nt, can voluntarily pay any Contribution to
deprive the King of his hereditary right, and undoubted title to the Kingdoms
and Crowns of England and Ireland, and alter the frame of the ancient
Government and Parliaments of our Kingdoms, See A Col^ lect. p 94. 95. 99. 698
700. 877. 878.
Remo^strated so often against by both Houses, and adjudged High Treason in
Canterburies and Straffords cases, for which they were beheaded; and by
themselves in the Kings own case, whom they decolled likewise (without
incurring the guilt of perjury and danger of high Treason, to the loss of his
life and estate, by the very laws and Statutes yet in force transcends my
understanding to conceive: Wherefore I neither can, nor dare, in conscience, law
or prudence, submit to this contribution.

Fourrhly, The coercive power, and manner of levying this contribution,
expressed in the Act, is against the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the
Subject, which is threefold.

First, Distress and sale of the goods of those who refuse to pay it; with
power to break open their Houses (which are their Castles) doors, chests, etc.
to distrain; which is against Magna Charta c. 29. The Petition of Right; The
Votes of both Houses in the case of Shipmony, 1 R. 2. c. 3. and the resolution
of our Judges and Law Books. 13. Ed. 4. 9. 20. E. 4. 6. Cook 5 Report, f. 91,
92. Semains case, and 4. Inst. p. 176. 177.

Secondly, Imprisonment of the body of the party till he pay the Contribution,
being contrary to Magna Charta, The Petition of Right, The resolution of both
Houses in the Parliament of 3 Caroli, in the case of Loans; and 17 Caroli, in
the case of Ship-mony, the judgment of our Judges and Law Books, collected by
Sir Edward Cook. in his 2 Inst. p. 46. etc. and the Statute of 2. H. 4. Rot.
Parl. n. 6. unprinted, but most express in point.

Thirdly, Levying of the contribution by soldiers and force of arms, in case
of resistance, and imprisoning the person by like force: adjudged High Treason
in the case of the Earl of Strafford, and a levying of war within the Statute
of 25. Ed. 3. by the late Parliament, for which he lost his head: and so proved
to be at large by Master St. John in his Argument at Law at the passing the
Bill for his attainder, Printed by Order of the Commons House.

Fourthly, (Which heightens the illegality of these illegal means of levying
it) if any person whose goods are destrained, or person imprisoned for this
illegal tax, shall bring his Action at Law, or an Habeas corpus for his
relief, the Committee of Indemnity will stay his legal proceedings, award
costs against him, and commit him anew till he pay them, and release his suits
at Law, and upon an Habeas corpus, their own Sworn Judges (created by them,
without any Oath to do equal Justice, etc. to all: but only to be true and
faithful to their new-erected State:) dare not bayl but remaund him against
Law; An oppression and Tyranny, far exceeding the worst of the Beheaded Kings;
under whom the Subjects had Free-Liberty to sue and proceed at Law both in the
cases of Loanes, Shipmony and Knighthood, without any Council (...), Committee
of Indemnity to stop their suits, or enforce them to release them; and
therefore in all these respects (so repugnant to the Laws and Liberty of the
Subject) I cannot submit to this illegal Tax, but oppugn it to the utetrmost,
as the most invasive on Laws and Liberties, that ever was.

Fifthly, The time of imposing this illegal Tax, with these unlawful ways of
levying it, is very considerable and sticks much with me; it is (as the
Imposers of it declare and publish in many of their new kind of Acts and
devices) in the first year of Englands Liberty, and redemption from thraldom.
And if this unsupportable Tax, thus illegally to be levied, be the first fruits
of our first years Freedom, and redemption from thraldom, as they style it; how
great may we expect our next years thraldom will be, when this little finger
of theirs is heavier by far then the Kings whole loins, whom they beheaded for
Tyranny and Oppression?

Sixthly, The Order of this Tax (if I may so term a disorder) or rather
newness of it, engages me, and all lovers of their Countries Liberty,
unanimously to withstand the same. It is the first, I find, that was ever
imposed by any who had been Members of the Commons House after a Parliament
dissolved; the Lords House Voted down, and most of their fellow. Commoners
secured or secluded by their con^ivance or confederacy with an undutifull Army.
Which if submitted to, and not opposed as illegal, not only the King or Lords
alone without the Commons, bu^ any forty or fifty Commoners, who have been
Members of a Parliament, gaining Forces to assist and countenance them, may out
of Parliament now, or any time hereafter, do the like, and impose what Taxes
and Laws they please upon the Kingdom, and the secluded Lords and Com^ons that
once sat with them, being encouraged thereto by such an unopposed precedent.
Which being of so dangerous consequence and eximple to the constitution and
privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the People, we ought all to
endeavor the crushing of this new Cockatrice in the shell, lest it grow to a
Fiery Serpent, to consume and sting us to death, and induce the Imposers of it,
to lade us with new and heavier Taxes of this kind, when this expires (which
we must expect, when all the Kings, B shops, Deans and Chapters Lands are
shared amongst them, sold and spent) as they will quickly be if we patiently
submit to this leading Decoy; since Matt. Paris, 517.
Bonus Actus inducit consuetudinem, as our Ancestors resolved, Anno 1240. in
case of an unusual Tax demanded by the Pope; whereupon they all unanimously
opposed it at first;

Ovid de Remed. Amoris.
Opprime dum nova sunt subiti mala semina morbi:
Principiis obsta; sero medecina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras,
Being the safestrule of State-physick we can follow in such new desperate
diseases, which endanger the whole Body-Politick. Upon which grounds the most
conscientious Gentlemen and best Patriots of their Country opposed Loans,
Ship Money, Tonnage, Poundage, Knighthood, and the late illegal Impositions of
the King and his Council in the very beginnings of them, and thought
themselves bound in Conscience, Law, Prudence so to do, though there were some
colorable reasons and precedents of former times pretended to countenance
them. And if these Worthies conceived themselves thus obliged to oppose those
illegal Impositions of the King and his Council, though countenanced by some
Judges opinions as legal, to their immortal honor, and high esteem both in
Country and Parliament, who applauded them as the Exact Collection p. 5 6. And
their own Declarations 17. Mar. 1648. P. 7. etc.
principal maintainers of their Countries Liberties; then much more ought I,
and all other tenderers of their own and Countries Freedom, to oppose this
illegal dangerous Contribution imposed on us by a few fellowSubjects only,
without yea against all Law or President to countenance it, being of greater
consequence, and worser example to the Kingdom, then all or any of the Kings
illegal projects or Taxes.

Seventhly, the excessivenesse of this Tax, much raised and increased, when we
are so exhausted, and were promised and expected ease from Taxes, both by the
Army in their Remonstrance, November 20. 1648. and by the In their Declarations
March. 27. 1648. p. 26.
Imposers of it^ amounting to a sixth part, if not a moiety of most men's
estates, is a deep Engagement for me to oppose it; since Taxes, as well as Mag.
Chart. c. 14. E. 3. c. 6. Cook. 2. Instit. p. 26. 27. 169. 170.
Fines and Amerciaments ought to be reasonable; so as men may support
themselves and their Families, and not be undone, as many will be by this, if
forced to pay it by Distress or Imprisonment. Upon this ground, in the
Parliament Records, of 1 and 4 Ed. the Third, we find diverse freed from payment
of Tenths, and other Taxes lawfully imposed by Parliament, because the People
were impoverished and undone by the Wars, who ought to pay them. And in the
printed. Statutes of 31 Henr. 6. c. 8. 1 Mariae c. 17. to omit others, we find
Subsid^es mitigated and released by subsequent Acts of Parliament, though
granted by precedent, by reason of the peoples poverty any inability to pay
them. Yea sometimes we read of something granted them by the King, by way of aid
to help pay their Subsidies, as in 25. Edward 3. Rastal, Tax. 9. and 36. Ed. 3.
c. 14. And for a direct president in point: When Matt. Paris, p. 516.
Peter Rubie the Pope's Legate in the year 1240. exacted an excessive unusual
Tax from the English Clergy; the whole Clergy of Berk-sbire (and others) did
all and every of them unanimously withstand it, tendering him diverse Reasons in
writing of their refusal, pertinent to our time and present Tax; whereof this
was one, That the Revenues of their Churches searce sufficed to find them daily
food, both in regard of their smalness, and of the present dearth of Corns; and
because there were such multitudes of poor people to relieve, some of which
dyed of Famine, so as they had not enough to suffice themselves and the poor.
Whereupon THEY OUGHT NOT TO BE COM^ELLED TO ANY SUCH CONTRIBUTION: which many
of our Clergy may now likewise plead most truly, whose Livings are small, and
their Tithes detained; and diverse people of all ranks and callings, who must
sell their stocks, beds, and all their household stuff, or rot in prison, if
forced to pay it.

Eighthly, the principal inducement to bring on the payment of this Tax, is a
promise of taking off the all-devouring and undoing Grievance of Free Quarter:
which has ruined many Countries and Families, and yet they must pay this heavy
Tax to be eased of it for the future, instead of being paid and allowed for
what is already past, according to A Collection, etc. page 771.
former engagements. Against which I have these just exceptions.

1. That the taking of Free Quarter by Soldiers in men's Houses, is a grievance
against the very Common Law it self, which defines every man's House to be his
Castle and Sanctuary, into which none ought sorcibly to enter against his will;
and which with his goods therein he may lawfully See Cook, 5. Report. f. 91,
92. Semans Case, 7 Rep. Sendels case. Lambert f. 179. Daltons Justice of Peace,
224. 24 H. 8. c. 5.
fortify and defend against all intruders whatsoever, and kill them without
any danger of Law: Against all the Statutes concerning See Rastal Title
Parveyers.
Purveyers, which prohibit the taking of any men's goods or provisions against
their wills, or payment for them under pain of Felony, though by Commission
under the great Seal of England. Against the express Letter and Provision of
the Petition of RIGHT, 3. Caroli. Condemned by the Commons House in their An
exact Collect. p 7.
Declaration of the State of the Kingdom of the 15. December, 1641. and charged
as an Article against King Richard the second when deposed, in the Parliament
of 1 H. 4. nu. 22. Yea, it is such a Grievance, as exposes the houses, goods,
provisions, moneys, servants, children, wives, lives, and all other earthly
comforts we enjoy, to the lusts and pleasure of every domineering Officer, and
unruly common Soldier. Therefore absolutely to be abolished without any
compensation: And to impose an unjust, heavy Tax, and induce people to pay it
upon hopes of freeing them from Free Quarter, 16 but to impose one grievance
upon pretext to remove another.

2. There have been many promises, Declarations and Orders of both Houses and
the General, for taking off Free quarter heretofore, upon the peoples paying
in their Contributions before land, now; and then none should Free quarter on
them, under pain of death: Yet no sooner have they paid in their Contribution,
but they have been freequartered on as much or more then formerly: the
Soldiers, when we tell them of any Orders against Freequarter, slighting them
as so many wast papers, and carrying themselves more unruly: And when complaint
thereof has been made to the Officers, Members, or the Committee for the Army,
or in the House; answer has still been made, That as long as there is an Army
on foot, there will be freequarter taken, and there can be no prevention of it,
there being a nec^y of it: and when any have craved allowance of it, they have
^ound so many put-offs and delays, and such difficulties in obtaining it, that
their expenses have equalled their allowance; and after allowances made, the
moneys allowed have been called for again. So as few have had any allowance for
quarters, and most have given over suing for them, being put to play an
after-game to sue for them after all their contributions first paid, and not
permitted to deduct them out of their Contributions, as in Justice and reason
they ought, which they are still enforced to pay without deduction. This
pretext therefore of taking a way Free Quarter, is but a shoo-horn to draw on
the payment of this Tax, and a fair pretext to delude the People, as they find
by sad experience everywhere, and in the County and Hundred where I reside.
For, not to look back to the last years free quarter taken on us (though we
duly paid our Contributions,) In April and May last past, since this very Tax
imposed for taking away Free Quarter, Colonel Harrisons Troopers under the
command of Captain Spencer, (who quartered six days together in a place, and
exacted and received most of them 3 s. others 3 s. 6 d. and the least 2 s. 6 d.
a day for their Quarters, telling their Landlords, that their Lands, and the
whole Kingdom was theirs) have put Bathwick, Bathford, Claverton, Comb,
Hampton, Soustock, Walcot and Widcombe, small parishes in our Hundred and
Liberty, as they will prove upon Oath, and given it me under their hands, to 94
li. 4 s. 3 d. charge; beside their quarters in other parishes of the Hundred,
Sir Hardresse Wallers Soldiers upon pretext of collecting arrears of
Contribution not due from the hundred, put it to at least 30 l. charge more for
free quarter, they being very rude and disorderly; and no sooner were we quit
of them, but on the 22 and 23 of May last, Col. Hunks his Foot under the
conduct of Captain Flower and Captain Eliot pretending for Ireland, but
pro^essing they never intended to go thither, marching from Minehead and
Dunster (the next Western Ports to I^eland further from it to oppress the
Country, put Bathwich, L^idge, Wolly, B^theastan, Katherin and Ford to 28 l. 7
s. and S^swick (where I live) to about 20 l. expenses for two days
Free Quarter (by color of the Generals Order dated the first of May^ being the
rudest and deboistest in all kinds, that ever quartered since the Wars, and
far worse then the worst of Goring's men, whereof some of them were the dreggs,
and their Captain Flower, a Cavalier heretofore in arms (as is reported)
against the Parliament. Their carriage in all places was very rude, to extort
money from the people, drawing out their swords, ransacking their houses,
beating and threatening to kill them, if they would not give them two shillings
six pence, three shillings, three shillings six pence, or at least two
shillings a day for their quarters, which when extorted from some, they took
Free Quarter upon others, taking two, three, and some four quarters a man: At
my house they were most exorbitant, having (as their Quartermaster told me,
who affirmed to me they had twice conquered the Kingdom, and all was theirs)
directions from some great ones above, from some others in the Country
(intimating some of the Committee,) and their own Officers (who absented
themselves purposely, that the Soldiers might have none to control them) to
abuse m^. In pursuance whereof, some thirty of them coming to my house,
shouting and hollowing in a rude manner on May 22, when their Billet was but
for twenty, not showing any authority, but only a Ticket, [Mr. Prynne -- 20]
climbed over my Walls, forced my doors, beat my servants and workmen without
any provocation, drew their swords upon me, (who demanded whose Soldiers they
were, by what authority they demanded Free Quarter, my house being neither
Inn, nor Alehouse; and Free Quarter against Law and Orders of Parliament, and
the Generals) using many high provoking Speeches, brake some of my windows,
forced my strong-beer cellar-door, and took the key from my servant, ransacked
some of my chambers under pretext to search for Arm^, taking away my servants
clothes, shirts, stockings, bands, cu^s, handkerchiefs, and picking the money
out of one of their pockets; hallowed, roared, stamped, beat the Tables with
their Swords and Muskets like so many Bedlams, swearing, cursing, and
blaspheming at every word; brake the Tankards, Bottles, Cups, Dishes wherein
they fetched strongb^er, against the ground, abused my maid servants, throwing
bee^ and other good provisions at their heads, and casting it to the dogs, as
no fit meat for Soldiers, and the Heads and Conquerors of the Kingdom, as they
called themselves; searched the outhouses for Turkies, which they took for
their eggs and young ones, V^al and Mutton being not good enough for them: They
continued drinking and roaring before, at and after Supper, till most of them
were mad, drunk, and some of them dead drunk under the Table. Then they must
have 14 Beds provided for them (for they would lie but two in a Bed) and all
their linen washed: My Sister answering them, that there were not so many beds
in the house, and that they must be content as other Soldiers had been, with
such beds as could be spared; they thereupon threatened to force open her Camber
door, and to pull her and her children out of their beds, unless she would
give them three shillings a piece for their beds, and next days quarters; and
at last forced her for fear of their violence (being all drunk) to give them
eighteen pence a piece, as soon as they were forth of doors, and six pence a
piece the next day, if they marched not; whereupon they promised to trouble the
House no more. Upon this agreement all but eight (who were gone to bed)
departed that night, and the rest the next morning. But I going to the Lecture
at the Bath, some thirty of them in my absence came about ten of the clock,
notwithstanding the moneys received of my Sister for their Quarters, re-entred
the house, and would have Quarters again, unless she would give them three
shillings a piece; which she refusing, they thereupon abused and beat the
servants and workmen, forced them to drink with them all that day and night,
swearing, cursing, roaring like so many Furies and Devils, brake open my
Parlour, Milk-house, and Garden-doors, abused my Pictures and brake an hole in
one of them; and hacked my Tableboards with their Swords from one end to the
other, threw the chairs, stools, meat, drink about the house; assaulted my
Sister, and her little children, and Maidservants with their naked swords,
threatening to kill them, and kick them to gelly, shot at them with their
Muskets, forced them out of the house to save their lives: which I hearing of,
repaired to my house, and finding them all so Bedlam mad, and that they would
not hearken to any reason, nor be quieted, I thereupon rode to seek their
Captain and Officers at Bath, who purposely absented themselves: and not
finding them till the next morning, I acquainted the Captain then (as I had
done the first night by Letter) with all these unsufferable outrages of the
Soldiers (contrary to the Generals Order to carry themselves civilly in their
Quarters, and abuse none in word or deed) which would render him and them
odious, not only to the Country and Kingdom, but all Officers and Soldiers
who had any civility in them, and be a disparagement to the General, by whose
Proclamation he ought to be present with his Company, to keep them in good
order, under pain of cashiering: And therefore I expected and required Justice
and Reparations at his hands; the rather, because I was informed by some of his
own Soldiers and others, that they had not been so barbarously rude, but by
his encouragement: which if he refused, I should complain of him to his
Superiors, and right my self the best way I might. After some expostulations,
he promised to make them examples, and cashier them, and remove them forthwith
from my house: But the only right I had, was, that more of his Company
repaired thither, making all the spoil they could, and taking away some brass
and Pewter, continuing there till near four of the clock; and then marched away
only out of fear I would raise the Country upon them; many of whom proffered me
their assistance: but I desired them to forbear till I saw what their Officers
would do; who in stead of punishing any of them, permitted them to play the
like Rex almost in other places where they quartered since, marching but three
or four miles a day, and extorting what money they could from the Country by
their violence and disorders. Now, for me, or any other to give moneys to
maintain such deboist Bedlams and Beasts as these ( who boasted of their
villainies, and that they had done me at least twenty pounds spoil in Beer and
Provisions, drinking out five barrels of good strong Beer, and wasting as much
meat as would have served an hundred civil persons) to be Masters of our
Houses, Goods, Servants, Lives, and all we have, to ride over our heads like
our Lords and Conquer^urs, and take Free Quarter on us, amounting to at least a
full years contribution, without any allowance for it, and that since the last
Orders against Free Quarter, and Warrants for paying in this Tax to prevent it
for the future, issued; is so far against my Reason, Judgment and Conscience,
that I would rather give all away to suppress discard them, or cast it into
the fire, then maintain such graceless wretches with it to dishonor God,
enslave, consume, ruin the Country and Kingdom; who every where complain of
the like insolences; and of taking Freequarter since the ninth of June, as
above two hundred of Colonel Cox his men did in Bath the last Lords day; who
drew up in a Body about the Majors house, and threatened to seize and carry him
away prisoner for denying to give them Free Quarter, contrary to the New Act
for abolishing it. Lastly, This pretended Act implies, that those who refuse to
pay this contribution without distress or imprisonment shall be still
oppressed with Free Quarter: And what an height of oppression and injustice
this will prove, not only to distrain and imprison those who cannot in
conscience, Law or prudence submit to this illegal Tax, but likewise to undo
them, by exposing them to Free Quarter, which themselves condemn as the highest
pest and oppression, let all sober men men consider: and what reason I and
others have to oppose such a dangerous, destructive president in its first
appearing to the world. In few words; As long as we keep an Army on foot, we
must never expect to be exempted from Free Quarter or Wars, or to enjoy any
peace or setlement: and as long as we will submit to pay contributions to
support an Army, we shall be certain our new Lords and Governors will continue
an Army to over-aw and enslave us to their wills. Therefore the only way to
avoid free quarter, and the cost and trouble of an Army, and settle peace, is
to deny all future contributions.

Ninthly, The principal end of imposing this Tax to maintain the Army and
Forces now raised, is not the defense and safety of our ancient and first
Christian Kingdom of England, its Parliaments, Laws, Liberties and Religion, as
at first; but to disinherit the King of the Crown of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, (to which he has an undoubted right by common and Statute Law; as the
Parliament of 1 Jacobi chapter 1. resolves) and to levy War against him, to
deprive him of it: To subvert the ancient Monarchical Government of this Realm,
under which our Ancesters have always lived and flourished, to set up a
New-Republick, the oppressions and grievances whereof we have already felt (by
increasing our Taxes, setting up arbitrary Courts and Proceedings to the taking
away the lives of the late King, Peers, and other Subjects, against the
fundamental Laws of the Land, creating new monstrous Treasons never heard of in
the world before, and the like;) but cannot yet enjoy or discern the least ease
or advantage by it: To overthrow the ancient constitution of the Parliament of
England, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, and the Rights and Privileges
thereof: To alter the fundamental Laws, Seals, Courts of Justice of the Realm,
and introduce an arbitrary government at least, if not Tyrannical, contrary to
our Laws, Oaths, Covenant, Protestation, See An Exact collection: and a
collection of public Orders, etc. p. 99. 698. 700. 877. 878.
public Remonstrances and Engagements to the Kingdom and foreign States, not
to change the Government, or attempt any of the Premises. All which being no
less then High Treason by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm (as Sir Edward
Cook in his 4. Institutes chapter 1. and Mr. St John in his Argument at Law, upon
passing the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford (both printed by the
Commons special Order) have proved at large by many Precedents, Reasons,
Records; and so adjudged by the last Parliament in the cases of Strafford and
Canterbury, who were condemned and executed as Traitors by Judgment of
Parliament, and some of these now sitting, but for some of those Treasons upon
obscurer Evidences of guilt, then are now visible in other: I cannot submit
thereto, without incurring the Crime and Guilt of thief several High Tre^sons,
and the eternal, if not temporal punishments incident thereunto, if I should
volutarily contribute so much as one penny or farthing toward such Treasonable
and disloyal ends as these, against my Conscience, Law, Loyalty and Duty, and
all my Oaths and Obligations to the contrary.

Tenthly, The payment of this Tax for the premised purposes, will (in my poor
judgment and conscience) be offensive to God and all good men, scandalous to
the Protestant Religion, dishonorable to our English Nation, and
difadvantagious and destructive to our whole Kingdom, hindering the speedy
settlement of our Peace, the re-establishment of our Laws and Government,
abolishing of our Taxes, disbanding of our Forces, revivall of our decayed
Trade, by the renewing and perpetuating our bloody uncivil Wars; engaging
Scotland, Ireland, and all foreign Princes and Kingdoms in a just War against
us, to avenge the death of our late beheaded King the dis-inherit^ng of his
posterity, and restore his lawful Heirs and Successors to their just,
undoubted Rights, from which they are now forcibly secluded; who will
undoubtedly molest us with continual Wars (whatever some may fondly conceit
to the contrary) till they be settled in the Throne in peace upon just and
honorable terms, and invested in their just possessions. Which were far more
safe, honorable, just, prudent, and Christian for our whole Kingdom voluntarily
and speedily to do themselves, then to be forced to it at last by any foreign
Forces; the sad consequences whereof we may easily conj^cture, and have cause
enough to fear, if we now delay it, or still contribute to maintain Armies to
oppose their Titles, and protect the Invaders of them from public Justice. And
therefore I can neither in conscience, piety nor prudence, ensnare my self in
the guilt of all these dangerous consequences, by any submission to this
illegal Tax.

Upon all these weighty Reasons, and serious grounds of Conscience, Law,
Prudence, (which I humbly submit to the Consciences and Judgments of all
conscientious and Judicious persons, whom they do or shall concern) I am
resolved by the assistance and strength of that Omnipotent God (who has
miraculously supported me under, and carried me through all my former
sufferings for the Peoples public Liberties with exceeding joy, comfort, and
the ruin of my greatest enemies and Opposers) to oppugn this unlawful
Contrbution, and the payment of it to the uttermost, in all just and lawful
ways, I may; And if any will forcibly levy it by distress or otherwise,
without Law or Right (as Thieves and Robbers take men's goods and Purses) let
them do it at their own utmost peril. I trust God and men will in due season
do me justice upon them, and award me recompense for all their injuries in this
kind, or any sufferings for my Countries Liberties. How ever, fall back, fall
edge, I would ten thousand times rather love life, and all I have, to keep a
good conscience, and preserve my native Liberty, then part with one farthing,
or gain the whole world with the loss of either of them; and rather die a
Martyr for our Ancient Kingdom, then live a Slave under any new Republic, or
remnant o^ a broken, dismembered, strange Parliament of Commons, without King,
Lords, or the major part of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Realm,
in being subject to their illegal Taxes, and what they call Acts of Parliament,
which in reality are no Acts at all to bind me, or any other subject, to
obedience, or just punishment for Non obedience thereunto, or Nonconformity to
what they style the present Government of the Armies modeling, and I fear, the
Jesuits suggesting, to effect our Kingdoms and Religions ruin.

WILLIAM PRYNNE.
SWAINSWICK, June 16, 1649.
PSALM. 26. 4, 5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
Dissemblers: I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit
with the wicked. FINIS.
A POSTCSRIPT.
SInce the drawing up of the precedent Reasons, I have met with a printed
Pamphlet, entitled, An Epistle written the 8 th day of June, by Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn, to Master William Lenthal Speaker to the remainder of
those few Knights, Citizens and Burg^es that Col. Thomas Pride at his late
purge thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster, (as most fit for his
and his Masters designs, to serve their ambitious and tyrannical ends, to
destroy the good old Laws, Liberties and Customs of England, the badges of our
Freedom, as the Declaration against the King, of the 7 th of March, 1648. p.
23. calls them) and by force of Arms to rob the people of their lives, estates
and properties; and subject them to perfect vassallage and slavery, etc. who
(and in truth no otherwise) pretendedly style themselves, The Conservators of
the Peace of England, or the Parliament of England, entrusted and authorized by
the consent of all the people thereof, whose Representatives by Election (in
their Declaration last mentioned, p. 27. they say) they are; although they are
never able to produce one bit of Law, or any piece of a Commission to prove,
that all the people of England, or one quarter, tenth, hundred or thousand part
of them authorized Thomas Pride, with his Regiment of Soldiers, to choose them
a Parliament, as indeed it has de facto done by this PRETENDED
MOCK-PARLIAMENT: And therefore it cannot properly be called the Nations or
Peoples Parliament: but Col. Prides and his Associates, whose really it is:
who, although they have beheaded the King for a Tyrant, yet walk in his
oppressingest steps, if not worse and higher.

In this Epistle, this late great champi^n of the House of Commons, and fitting
^cto's Supremacy, both before and since the Kings beheading, who with his
Brother His Petition and Appeal, and his Arrow of Defiance. See Mr. Edwards
Ga^grena, 3 pa. page 154. f. 204.
Overton and their Confederates, first cried them up as, and gave them the
Title of The Supreme Authority of the Nation: The only Supreme Judicatory of
the Land: The only formal and legal Supreme power of the Parliament of
England, in whom alone the power of binding the whole Nation by making,
altering, or abrogating Laws, without either King or Lords, resides, etc. and
first engaged them by their Pamphlets and Petitions, against the King, Lords,
and Personal Treaty, (as he and they print and boast in Page 11, 29.
this Epistle, and other late Papers) does in his own and his Parties behalf
(who of late so much adored them, as the only earthly Deities and Saviors of
the Nation) now positively assert and prove

First, That Page 34, 35.
Commissary General Ireton, Colonel Harrison, with other Members of the House,
and the General Council of Officers of the Army, did in several Meetings and
Debates at Windsor, immediately before their late march to London to purge the
House, and after at White Hall, commonly style themselves the pretended
Parliament (even before the Kings beheading) a MOCK PARLIAMENT, a MOCK POWER, a
PRETENDED PARLIAMENT; and NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL: And that they were absolutely
resolved and determined TO PULL UP THIS THEIR OWN PARLIAMENT BY THE ROOTS, and
not so much as to leave a shadow of it; yea, and had done it, if we (say they)
and some of our then FRIENDS in the House, had not been the Principal
Instruments to hinder them: We judging it then of two evils the least, to choose
rather to be governed by THE SHADOW OF a PARLIAMENT, till we could get a real
and a true one (which with the greatest protestations in the world they then
promised and engaged with all their might speedily to effect) then simply,
solely and only by the will of Swordmen, whom we had already found to be men
of no very tender consciences.

If then these leading, swaying members of the new pretended purged Commons
Parliament and Army, deemed the Parliament even before the Kings beheading, a
Mock-parliament, a mockpower, a pretended Parliament, yea, no parliament at
all; and absolutely resolved to pull it up by the roots as such, then it
necessarily follows, First, That they are much more so after the Kings death,
and their suppression of the Lords House, and purging of the Commons House to
the very dregs, in the opinions and consciences of those now sitting, and all
other rational men. And no ways enabled by Law to impose this or any other
new Tax or Act upon the Kingdom, creating new Treasons and^ Penalties.
Secondly, that these grand saints of the Army and Stearsmen of the Pretended
Parliament knowingly sit, vote and act there against their own judgments and
consciences, for their own private, pernicious ends. Thirdly, that it is a
baseness, cowardice, and degeneracy beyond all expression, for any of their
fellowmembers now acting, to suffer these Grandees in their Assembly and Army,
to sit or vote together with them, or to enjoy any Office or command in the
Army, or to impose any tax upon the People to maintain such Officers, Members,
Soldiers, who have thus villified, affronted their pretended Parliamentary
Authority, and thereby induced others to contemn and question it: and as great
a baseness in others for to pay it upon any terms.

Secondly he there affirms that Page 26, 27
Oliver Crumwel by the help of the Army at their first Rebellion against the
Parliament, was no sooner up, but like a perfidious, base, unworthy man, etc.
the House of Peers were his only white boys, and who but Oliver (who before to
me had called them in effect both Tyrants and Usurpers) became their Proctor,
where ever he came; yea and set his son Ireton at work for them also; insomuch
that at some meetings, with some of my friends at the Lord Wh^rtons lodgings,
he clapped his hand upon his breast, and to this purpose, professed in the sight
of God upon his conscience, THAT THE LORDS HAD AS TRUE A RIGHT TO THEIR
LEGISLATIVE and JURISDICTIVE POWER OVER THE COMMONS AS HE HAD TO THE COAT UPON
HIS BACK, and he would procure a friend, viz. Master Nathaniel Fiennes, should
argue and plead their just right with any friend I had in England. And not only
so, but did he not get the General and Council of War at Winsor (about the time
that the Votes of no more addresses were to pass) to make a Declaration to the
whole world, declaring, THE LEGAL RIGHT OF THE LORDS HOUSE, and THEIR FIXED
RESOLUTION TO MAINTAIN and UPHOLD IT? which was sent by the General to the
Lords by Sir, Hardresse Waller: and to inde^r himself the more unto the Lords
in whose house without all doubt he intended to have sat himself, he requited
me evil for good; and became my enemy to keep me in Prison, out of which I must
not stir, unless I would stoop and acknowledge the Lords jurisdiction over
Commoners; and for that end he sets his agents and instruments at work to get
me to do^ it: yet now they have suppressed them.

Whence it is most apparent, 1. That the General, Lieutenant General Cromwell,
Ireton, Harrison, and other Officers of the Army now sitting as Members, and
overruling all the rest, have wittingly acted against their own knowledges,
Declarations, Judgments, Consciences in suppressing the Lords Hou^e; and
depriving them of there Legislative and Jurisdictive Right and power, by
presuming to make Acts, pass sentences, and impose Taxes without them, or
their assents in Parliament. 2. That this Tax enforced upon the Commons and
Kingdom, for their own particular advantage, pay and enrichment, is in their
own judgment and conscience, both unjust and directly contrary to the Laws of
the Realm, being not assented to by the Lords: and therefore to be unanimously
and strenuously opposed by all who love their own or Countries Liberties, or
have any Nobility, or Generosity in them.

Thirdly, he Page 34. 39, 40. 56, 47.
there asserts in positive terms in his own behalf, and his confederates; That
the purged Parliament now sitting, is but a pretended Parliament, a
mock-Parliament; yea, and in plain English, NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL, but the
shadow of a Parliament. That those Company of men at Westminster, that gave
Commission to the High Court of Justice to try and behead the King, etc. were
no more a Parliament by Law or Representatives of the People, by the rules of
Justice and Reason, then such a company of men are a Parliament or
Representative of the People, that a company of armed Thieves choose and set
apart to try, judge, condemn, hang or behead any man that they please, or can
prevail over by the power of their Swords, to bring before them by force of
arms, to have their lives taken away by pretense of JUSTICE, grounded upon
rules merely flowing from their Wills and Swords. That no Law in England
authoriseth a company of servants to punish and correct their Masters, or to
give a Law unto them, or to throw them at their pleasure out of their power,
and set themselves down in it; which is the Armies case with the Parliament,
especially at Thomas Pride's late purge, which was an absolute dissolution of
the very Essence and being of the House of Commons: to set up indeed a
MOCK-POWER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT; by purging out all those, that they were any
way jealous of, would not Vote as they would have them; and suffering and
permitting none to sit but (for the Major part of them) a company of absolute
Schoolboys, that will, like good Boys, say their Lessons after them their
Lords and Masters, and vote what they would have them: and so be a skreen
betwixt them and the people, with the name of Parliament, and the shadow and
imperfect image of Legal and Just Authority to pick their pockets for them by
Assessments and Taxations; and by their arbitrary and tyrannical Courts and
Committees (the best of which is now become a perfect S: ar-chamber,
High Commission, and Councel-board) make them their perfect slaves and vassals.
With much more to this purpose.

If then their Principal admirers, who confederated with the Army, and those
now sitting, in all their late proceedings; and cried them up most of any, as
the Parliament and supreme Authority of England before, at, and since the late
force upon the House, and its violent purgation, do thus in print professedly
disclaim them, for being any real Parliament or House of Commons, to make Acts
or impose Taxes upon the people; the secluded Members, Presbyterians,
Royallists, and all others, have much more cause and ground to disavow and
oppose their usurped Parliamentary authority and illegal Taxes, Acts, as not
made by any true English Parliament, but a Mock-Parliament only.

Fourthly, He therein futher avers: Page 52. 53. 56. 57. 58. 59.
That the death of the King, in Law indisputably dissolves this Parliament,
ipso facto, though it had been all the time before never so entire and
unquestionable to that very hour. That no Necessity can be pretended for the
continuance of it; the rather, because the men that would have it continue so
long as they please, are those who have created these necessities on purpose,
that by the color thereof they may make themselves great and potent. That the
main end wherefore the Members of the Commons house were chosen and sent
thither, was, To treat and conferr with King Charles and the House of Peers,
about the great affairs of the Nation, etc. And therefore are but a third part,
or third estate of that Parliament, to which they were to come and ^yn with,
and who were legally to make permanent and binding Laws for the people of the
Nation. And therefore having taken away two of the three Estates that they were
chosen on purpose to join with to make laws, the end both in reason and law of
the peoples trust is ceased: for a Minor joined with a Major for one and the
same end, cannot play Lord paramount over the Major, and then do what it
please; no more can the Minor of a Major; viz. one Estate of three, legally or
justly destroy two of three, without their own assent, etc. That the House of
Commons sitting freely within it is limited time, in all its splendour of glory,
without the awe of armed m^n, neither in Law, nor in the intention of their
Choosers were a Parliament; and therefore of themselves alone have no pretense
in Law to alter the constitution of Parliaments, etc. concluding thus: For
shame let no man be so audaciously or sottishly void of reason, as to call Tho.
Prides pitiful Junto A PARLIAMENT, especially those that call^, avowed,
protested and declared again and again those TO BE NONE that sat at
Westminster, the 26, 27- etc. of July 1647. when a few of their Members were
scared away to the Army, by a few hours t^mult of a company of a few disorderly
Apprentices. And being no representative of the People, much less A
PARLIAMENT, what pretense of Law, Reason, Justice or Nature can there be for
you to alter the constitution of Parliaments, and force upon the people the
show of their own wills, lusts and pleasures for Laws and Rules of Government,
made by a PRETENDED EVERLASTING, NULLED PARLIAMENT, a Council of State, or
Star Chamber and a Council of War, or rather by Fairfax, Cromwell and Ireton.

Now if their own late confederates and creatures argue thus ^n print against
their continuing a Parliament, Jurisdiction, Proceedings, Taxes, and arbitrary
pleasures, should not all others much more do it, and oppose them to the
utmost upon the (...)-same ends?

Fifthly, He there likewise affirms, page 53, 54. 59. 41.
that those now fitting at Westminster have perverted the ends of their trusts
then ^ver Strafford did: 1. In not easing the people of, (bu^encreasing) their
greivances. 2, In exhausting their Estates to maintain and promote pernicious
Designs to the peoples destruction. The King did it by a little Ship-mony and
Monopolies; but since they began, they have raised and exto^ted more money from
the People and Nation then half the Kings since the Conquest ever did; as
particularly: 1. By Excise, 2 Contributions. 3 Sequestrations of lands to an
infinite value. 4. Fifth part. 5 Twentyeth parts. 6 Meal-mony. 7 Sale of
plundered goods. 8 Loanes. 9 Benevolencies. 10. Collections upon their fast
days. 11 New impositions or customs upon Merchandise, 12 Guards maintained upon
the charge of private men. 13 Fi^ty Subsidies at one time. 14 Compositions with
Delinquents to an infinite value. 15 Sale of Bishops lands. 16 Sale of Dean and
Chapters lands: and now after the wars are done. 17 Sale of King, Queen,
Prince, Duke and the rest of the Childrens revenues. 18 Sale of their rich
goods which cost an infinite sum. 19 to conclude all, a Taxation of ninety
thousand pounds a month: and when they have gathered it pretendingly for the
Commonwealths use, divide it by thousands and tenn thousands a piece amongst
themselves, and wipe their mouths after it, like the impudent Harlot, as
though they had done no evil; and then purchase with it public Lands at small
or trivial values: O brave Trustees! that have protested before God and the
world, again and again in the day of their straits they would never seek
themselves, and yet besides all this divide all the choicest and profitabl^st
Places of the Kingdom among themselves. Therefore when I seriously consider,
how many men in Parliament and elsewhere of their Associates (that judge
themselves the only Saints and Godly men upon the earth) that have
considerable (and some of them vast) estates of their own inheritance, and yet
take five hundred, one, two, three, four^ five thousand pounds per annum
Salaries, and other comings in by their places, and that out of the too much
exhausted Treasury of the Nation, when thousands not only of the people of the
world, as they call them, but also of the precious redeemed lambs of Christ,
are ready to starve for want of bread. I cannot but wonder with my self,
whether they have any conscience at all within them or no; and what they think
of that saying of the spirit of God, That whosoever has this worlds goods, and
sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from
(...) ( which he absolutely does that any way takes a little of his little from
him) how dwells the love of God in him) 1 John 3. 17. These actions and
practices are so far from being like the true and real children of the most
High, that they are the highest oppression, theft and murder in the wo^ld, to
rob the poor in the day of their great distress by Excise, Taxations, etc. to
maintain their pomp, superfluities and deb^ry, when many of those from whom
they take it, do perish and starve with want and hunger in the mean time, and
be deaf and Adamant-hearted to all their TEARS, CRIES, LAMENTATIONS, MOURNFUL
HOWLINGS, GROANS. Without all doubt, these pretended, Godly Religious men,
have got a degree beyond those Atheists o^ Fools, that say in their hearts,
there is no God. Psalm. 14. 1. and 53. 1. 3. In quite destroying the peoples
essential Liberties Laws and Freedoms, and in leaving them no Law at all (as
M. Peter's their grand Teacher aver^ed lately to my face we had none) but their
mere will and pleasures; saving Fellons Laws, or Martial Law, where new
Butchers are both Informers. Parties, jury men and judges, who have had their
hands imbrewed in blood for above seven these years together, having served an
apprentiship to killing of men for nothing but money, and so are more bloo^
then Butchers that kill sheep and calves for their own livelihood; who yet by
the Law of England, are not permitted to be of any jury for life and death:
because they are conversant in sheddidg of blood of beasts, and thereby through
a habit of it may not be so tender of the blood of men, as the Law of England,
Reason and justice would have them to be. Yea, do not these men by their
swords, being but servants, give what Laws they please to their Masters the
pretended Lawmakers of your House, now constituted by as good and legal a
power as he that robs and kills a man upon the highway.

And if this be the verdict of their own Accomplices and Partiza^s concerning
them and their proceedings, especially touching their exhausting our Estates by
Taxes, and sharing them among themselves in the time of famine and penury (is
the great Officers of the Army and Treasurers who are Members now do, who both
impose what Taxes they please, and dispose of them to themselves and their
creatures as they please, contrary to the practice of all former ages, and the
rules of reason and justice too) are not all others bound by all bonds of
conscience, Law, Prudence to withstand their impositions and Edicts unto death,
rather then yield the least submission to them?

Sixthly, He there avers, proves and offers legally to make good, before any
indifferent Tribunal, that the Page 2. 15. 27. 29. 33. 34. 35 41. 53. 57, 58,
59, 64. 65. 75.
Grandees and overruling Members of the House and Army are not only, a pack of
dissembling, Juggling Knaves and Machevillians, amongst whom in consultation
hereafter he would ever scorn to come, for that there was neither faith, truth
nor common honesty amongst them: but likewise Murderers; who had shed men's
blood against Law, as well as the King, whom they beheaded; and therefore by
the same Texts and arguments they used against the King, their blood ought to
be shed by man, and they to be surely put to death without any satisfaction
taken for their lives, as Traitors, Enemies, Rebels to, and See Page 91. 32.
conspirators against the late King (whom they absolutely resolved to destroy
though they did it by Martial Law) Parliament, Kingdom and the peoples Majesty
and Soveraignity; That the pretended House and Army are guilty of all the late
crimes in kind, though under a new Name and notion, of which they charge the
King in their Declaration of the 17. of March 1648. that some of them more
legally deserve death, then ever the King did: and considering their many
Oaths, Covenants, Promises, Declarations, and Remonstrances to the contrary
(with the highest promises and pretenses of good for the people and their
declared Liberties that ever were made by men) the most perjured, pernicious,
false, faith and Trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the world: and
ought by all rational and honest men to be the most detested and abhorred of
all men that ever breathed, by how much more under the pretense of friendship
and brotherly kindness they have done all the mischief they have done in
destroying our Laws and liberties; there being no Treason like Judas his
Treason, who betrayed his Lord and Master with a kiss, etc. And shall we then
submit to their Taxes and new Acts, or trust them with our estates, lives,
liberties, and the supreme power, if such now in their own late adorers eyes?

Seventhly, He there asserts, P. 57. 34.
That whosoever st^ps to their new change of Government and Tyranny, and
supports it, is as absolute a Traitor both by Law and Reason, as ever was in
the world; If not against the King, PRINCE CHARLES, (heir apparent to his
Fathers^ Cro^n and Throne) yet against the peoples Majesty and Sover^. And if
this be true, as it is, That this purged Parliament IS NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL;
then there is neither legal Judges nor Justices of Peace in England. And if so;
then all those that are executed at Tiburn etc. by their sentence of
condemnation are merely murdered, and the Judges and Justices that condemned
them are liaeble in time to be hanged^ (and that justly) therefore for acting
without a just and legal Commission: either from TRUE REGAL OR TRUE
PARLIAMENTARY POWER: (except in corporations only where they proceed by ancient
Charters in the Ancient Legal form).

And if this be Law and Luke 19. 14. 27. c. 12. 13. 14
Gospel (as no doubt it is) then by the same reason, not only all legal
proceedings, Indictments, Judgments, Verdicts, Writs, Trials, Fines,
Recoveries, Recognisances, and the like before any of our new created Judges
and Justices since the Kings beheading in any Courts at Westminster, or in
their Circuits, Assisses, or quarter Sessions, held by new Commissions, with
all Commissions and Proceedings of Sheriffs, are not only merely void, illegal,
and coram non judice to all intents, with all Bills, Decrees, and Proceedings
in Chancery, or the Rolls; and all Judges, Justices Sheriffs, now acting, and
Lawyers practicing before them in apparent danger of HighTreason both against
King, Kingdom, they neither taking the Oaths of Judges, Supremacy or
Allegiance as they ought by Law; but only to be true and faithful to the new
Erected State; but likewise all votes and proceedings before the pretended
House or any of their Committees, or Sub-Committees in the Country, with all
their Grants and Offi^es, Moneys^ Salaries, Sequestrations, Sales of Lands or
goods, Compositions etc. mere Nullities and illegal acts, and the proceedings
of all active Commissioners, Assessors, Coll^ctors, Treasurers, etc. and all
other Officers employed to levy and to collect this illegal tax to support that
usurped Parliamentary Authority, and Army, which have beheaded the late King,
dis-inherited his undoubted^ H^, levied war against and dissolved the late
Houses of Parliament, subverted the ancient Government of this Realm, the
constitution and Liberties of our Parliaments, the Laws of the Kingdom, with
the Liberty and property of the people of England, no less then High Treason in
all these respects, as is fully proved by Sir Edward Cook in his 3. Institutes,
chapter 1. 2. and by Mr. St. John in his Argument at Law at the attainder of the
Earl of Strafford, both published by the late Commons House Order; which I
desire all who are thus employed, to consider; especially such Commissioners
who take upon them to administer a new unlawful Ex-Officio Oath to any to
survey their Neighbors and their own estates in every parish, and return the
true values thereof to them upon the new proved rate for the 3 last months
contribution, and to fine those who refuse to do it (a mere diabolical
invention to multiply perjuries to damn men's souls, invented by Cardinal
Woolsy, much enveighed against by Father Latimer in his Sermons, condemned by
the express words of the Petition of Right providing against such Oaths; and
a s^are to enthrall the wealchier sort of people by discovering their estates,
to subject them to what future Taxes they think fit) when as the whole House of
Commons in no age had any power to administer an Oath in any case whatsoever,
much l^sse then to confer any authority on others to give such illegal
Oaths, and fine those who refuse them, the highest kind of Arbitrary Tyranny
both over men's Consciences, Properties, Liberties; to which those who
voluntarily submit deserve not only the name of Traitors to their Country, but
to be Exodus 21. 5. 6.
boared through the ear, and they and their posterities to be made Slaves for
ever to these new Tax-masters and their Successors; and those who are any ways
active in imposing or administering such Oaths, and levying illegal Taxes by
distress or otherwise, may and will undoubtedly smart for it at last; not only
by Actions of Trespass, false Imprisonment, Account, etc. brought against them
at the Common Law, when there will be no Committee of Indemnity to protect
them from such suits, but likewise by inditements of High Treason, to the
deserved loss of their Estates, Lives, and ruin of their families when there
will be no Parliament of purged Commoners, nor Army to secure, nor lega^ plea to
acquit them from the guilt and punishment of Traitors both to their King and
Country; pretended present sordid fear of loss of Liberty, Estate, or the like,
being no See 1. H. 4. Rot. Par. n 97.
excuse in such a case and time as this, but an higher aggravation of their
crime: the Rev. 21. 8.
FEARFUL being the first in that dismal list of Malefactors, who shall have
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstome, which is the second
death; even by Christ's own sentence.

JOHN 18. 34. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world,
that I should bear witness unto the truth. FINIS.

