The Protestants Triumph: OR, A particular Description and Prospect of
LONDONDERRY, In its Situation, Building, Fortification, and the Defense it
has made against the French and Irish Papists: With the manner of the Sieges,
Sallies, Encounters, Success and Victories of the Protestants: and what ever
else is Remarkable in that Loyal and Faithful Town.
Together with an Old Irish Prophecy, that relates to the Subduing that Nation.
Licensed according to Order.

view of Londonderry (Derry) A Description of the Portraiture, for the better
Satisfaction of the Peruser.
(A) Ferry-Key-Gate. (B) Ship-Key-Gate. (C) Market-House. (D) The Church. (E)
Bishop-Gate. (F) Butchers-Gate. (G) The Ferry. (H) Boggs. (I) The going to the
Harbor-Mouth, or Green Castle. (K) The Bishops House. (L) The River, or Lough.




THE Kingdom of Ireland was Subdued by the English in the Reign of King Henry
the II. and although since that time sundry Insurrections and Rebellions have
been raised to wrest it from us, yet this Crown has held it out with so hard a
hand, that the Attempts have been successless, and many times fatal to the
Natives. Dublin is indeed accounted the chief City of this Kingdom, because
frequently the Residence of the Deputies and Lord Lieutenants, and the Prime
Seat of Justice; yet for Loyalty at all times to the English since the building
thereof, Londonderry has claimed the Primacy. And having made this Description
in General, we come now to particulars of more moment,

The Town of Londonderry, built by the Companies of London for the securing
their interests interests in that Kingdom, when trade increased, and such as
would purchase were alloted considerable quantities of Land, in the Province of
Vlster, is Situate very advantageously about three miles from the Sea,
encompassed on three sides by a Lough or River, of considerable depth and
breadth, emptying it self into the Ocean, and is Navigable for Ships of
Burden, as far as the Town, and for Boats of Burden and other Vessels, in all
parts; there being a Ferry and diverse Boats plying on it, for the
Transportation of Passengers. The Town is Situate in the County of
Londonderry, in the Province of Vlster, encompassed with a strong Wall and
Flankers, on and in which, are placed advantageously to annoy the approach of
the Enemy, sundry pieces of Cannon: It lies up a little rising Hill from the
Land, and has a Bogg on one part to debar the approach of Assailants: and at
Killmore, about three miles from it, is a Block-House or Castle, to hinder any
approach or surprise: The Hills rise pleasantly at some distance, and the
Valleys and Plains between make it a delightful place: It is Governed by a
Mayor and Alderman, as Towns Incorporated in England; and the Judges Itenerent
for the province, fit there upon Life and Death and Nisi-prius. The Fishing
trade and many other profits, belong to the Companys of London; and there is a
Custom-House and Factory store kept upon the Key

The Gates of Londonderry are four, viz. Ferry-Gate, Ship-Key-Gate,
Bishops-Gate, and Butchers-Gate. In the middle of the Town stands the
Market-House, where the Markets are usually kept, and there are four pieces of
Cannon, with the Arms and Names (...) four Companys of London on them, two of
which appertain to the Felt-makers and Cloathiers; and these Guns are bent on
the four Gates, there being a prospect of the four principal Streets when you
stand by the Market-House, they answering the Name of the Gate: The
Market-House is a very Famous Building, and in it the Magistrates Consult their
weighty Affairs, though of late it is fallen somewhat to decay. At the West End
of the Town, a little on this side Bishops-Gate, stands the Church, very
pleasantly amongst a Grove of Trees, and by it the Bishops palace; there is
yet remaining the ruins of another Church, which time or accident has rendered
useless: The Building is according to the old English fashion, partly Loam or
paper Buildings, and partly Brick; the Inhabitants are generally very Sagacious
in their way of Trade or Business. The place lies over against the Coast of
Scotland, and has for its Accommodation, a fair Haven at a little distance; and
although it is not accounted above a Mile in Circumference; yet for Courage of
its Inhabitants, in withstanding the whole power of the French and Irish
Papists in that Kingdom this present Year 1689. it is the more Remarkable.
Wherefore having described the place answerable to the portaiture, we now
proceed to give an Account of the Noble and Valiant Resistance Londonderry has
made inorder to the securing the English Interest in that kingdom

The Earl of Tyrconnel upon King James's leaving England, as Deputy of Ireland,
raised all the Popish Forces that lay in his power, disarmed such Protestants
as conveniently he could, seizing likewise their Horses, and plundering and
burning many of their Houses, which obliged such as could get together to stand
to their Arms, in expectation of Assistance from England, and in many
Encounters they worsted the Papists, giving them some considerable overthrows,
but the French King sending supplies of Officers, Soldiers, and Ammunition,
and the arrival of the late King James, they found themselves unable to keep
the Field, an therefore thought it expedient to fortify themselves in Towns,
and accordingly in Colerain they made a vigorous resistance, killing a
considerable number of the Enemy, but not being timely succored they were
obliged, after all that could be expected from true Valor and Conduct, to
surrender upon such terms as the could get: And now Londonderry being the only
place of note that held out for the Protestants, the popish Army sent all their
Forces to oblige its surrender; and though it is shrewdly suspected they
corrupted some of the chief Commanders, who suffered Colonel Shelton to swim
the River with his Horse interupted, and march within Musket Shot of the Gates,
and afterward diserted the Town, and notwithstanding the disappointment of
Colonel Richards and Colonel Coningham's Regiments, sent by the King of
England to the Relief of this place, Mr. Walker Minister of the Town took upon
him the Command, and by his courage and example, put new Life and Vigor into
the Citizens and Soldiers, so that the Irish Army, after serveral of their
parties had been beaten off, coming before the place, on the 19th. of April,
possessed themselves of the Castle of Kulmore on the 25th, in which there were
three pieces of Cannon, the Garrison not being longer able to maintain it for
want of Water, however they capitulated to march out with their Swords, but
they were notwithstanding plundered by the Irish Soldiers, whereupon they
advance^ nearer the Town and raised some Batteries; but notwithstanding the
Protestants, there being between 8 and 9000 in Garrison fired very briskly upon
them, using their utmost endeavor to hinder their approaches: And although the
enemy planted some Mortars, and cast Bombs into the Town, yet through the
caution and wariness of the Besieged they did little or no Execution; yet upon
a Council, unanimously resolves that it was convenient to make vigorous Sally,
and taking the opportunity when the Enemy appeared most Supine, they Sallyed
with a strong party, surprising and cutting off a great number of the Irish and
French, putting them in all places to the Rout, pursuing them, and taking much
Spoil, especially in Cattle, which caused a great consternation amongst the
enemy, and puts which caused a great consternation amongst the enemy, and puts
me in mind of an old Irish prophecy, which says, That pennybourn-Mill shall be
watered with the blood of the Natives, when there shall be a certain Man living
that has two Heels on one Foot, and after that the Irish Nation shall be no
more. This Mill is about a Mile from Derry, and it is said there is such a sort
of Man now living in the same. And in the Action the French Lieutenant General
Maman, Major Taff, Captain Fitzgerald, Captain Bourk, and several other
Officers were killed, with a great number of common Soldiers; and the besieged
encouraged by this success made a generous Resolution amongst themselves to
hold out to the last extremity, especially upon notice that the Besiegers
wanted Ammunition, and that a great number of their Horses dye for want of
Forage: And Mr. Walker desisted not from confirming them by walking the
rounds, firing the Cannon with his own hand, and animating those that any ways
fainted with expectation of speedy succor from England, telling them they
could expect nothing but Misery and Slavery under the oppression of a French
power: So that though the Town of Londonderry, the only Refuge of the
Protestants in Ireland, is not large, nor extraordinary strenghthened by Art,
it has hitherto foiled and baffled the popish Army and compelled them to taste
of protestant valor: The Cannon continuing to play furiously, and all
endeavors used to weary out the enemy, or raise the Seige.

FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball in Pye-Corner. 1689.


