TRUTH UNVAILD BY Scripture Light. In Three Parts. Written for the sake of
those that desire to behold it in its native Beauty. To which is added, An
APPENDIX, which the Author desires to leave as a Legacy to his Children.

By a despised Follower of the blessed Jesus, ROBERT PRVDOM.

And that from a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

2 Timothy 3.15. LONDON; Printed and sold by John Marshal at the Bible in
Grace Church Street. 1699.

In Commendation OF THE Ensuing Treatise.
THE worthy Author of the ensuing Treatise I bless God that ever I became
acquainted with, being fully satisfied of the inward Uprightness and Sincerity
of his Soul: besides, his undaunted Resolution and Courage, according to his
Light, in following the Lord Jesus in his despised way, and cleaving to his
Truth and People, who are exposed to the Scorn and Reproach of the World, and
to many Professors also, add to his high Commendation. Moreover, all that shall
vouchsafe to read this Treatise, shall find that the blessed God has
graciously bestowed no small Light, Gifts and Knowledge upon him in the great
Fundamentals of true Christianity; the Lord certainly has raised him up to
defend his Truth and Interest in those Northern Parts of this Kingdom where he
dwells, in a more clear Light than many have attained: Besides, he is not only
furnished with Knowledge, but with a suitable Zeal, he being willing to work and
labor in Christ's Vineyard. The Subject he has wrote upon is such, as calls
(it is true) for the Pen of the most discerning Eye: many have wrote upon the
two Covenants, but how cloudily and darkly is palpable to many; tho others have
most excellently opened them, amongst which the Reverend Mr. Nehemiah Cox in my
Judgment has exceeded; yet his Style seems a little too high for ordinary
Capacities. Our pious Friend, tho very concise, yet is very clear. As far as I
can discern, it is evident that God made a twofold Covenant with Abraham, and
set him up as a twofold Covenant-Head.

First, The one with his natural Seed as such, in which Covenant he promised to
be his God, and the God of all his natural Offspring that sprang from Isaac,
upon the Condition of their answering the Terms thereof; which shows it was a
mere Legal Covenant (or of the same nature with the Sinai Covenant:) and in
this Covenant he separated all his fleshly Seed from all other People in the
World to be his People, and visible Church under that Dispensation, which
consisted partly of the true spiritual Seed or Believers, and partly of
Unbelievers: and in this Covenant he promised them the Land of Canaan; and as a
Sign or Token of all those Legal Covenant-Blessings, he gave them the Rite of
Circumcision. Now this Church State was figurative or typical, and the Precepts
and Ordinances were therefore typical, and so continued till Christ came, and
the Gospel Church (the Antitype of it) was established. Many not seeing this,
run into a great Error, thinking the Covenant made with Abraham was but one
entire Covenant, i. e. the Covenant of Grace; whereas nothing is more clear
than that Circumcision belonged to all the Male Children that sprang from Isaac
(tho their Parents were ungodly, or Unbelievers) as well as the Male Children
of Believers that were of the same Seed. Besides, if all the Children of
Abraham according to the Flesh were in the Covenant of Grace, then one of these
two things would follow, that they must all be saved, or else the Covenant of
Grace is not a sure, an everlasting, or an unchangeable Covenant, nor of mere
Grace, but a conditional Covenant, and so Men may fall from Grace, and perish
eternally. Therefore in the

Second place, The Covenant of Grace which was made with Abraham, it is evident
was a distinct Covenant from the Covenant made with his fleshly Seed as such,
and consisted only in an absolute Promise of God's free Grace through Christ,
which took in none but God's elect ones, and extended not only to the Elect
amongst Abraham's Seed, but those of the Gentiles also: see Romans 9.4, 5, 6.
Gal. 3.16, 29. Moreover, it may seem strange that some Pedo-baptists should
affirm, that every believing Parent is a like common Covenant-Head to all their
Seed as Abraham was: for that was a Prerogative and Privilege only given to
him; and if it is as they dream, then every believing Parent is the Father of
all Nations, or of all Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, for so was Abraham
made by the holy God. See my late Replies to Mr. Burket Rector at Mildon; and
to Mr. James Owen. I shall add no more, only let you know our Author seems
directly to agree with us herein.

As to our Author's Appendix, in which you have an account of his Experiences,
and most pious Counsels to his Children, I am greatly affected therewith: the
good Lord help not only his, but all the Children of Godly Persons (to whose
hands it shall come) to lay those things to Heart. I wish from my Soul, that
every Godly Family throughout this Nation had one of these Books: and that a
Blessing may attend it, shall be the Prayer of him who is yet by Grace
preserved through many Trials to serve the Lord Jesus in his Generation,
according to his small Ability,

Benjamin Keach.
Horsly-down this 5th of the 4th Month called June, 1699.
The EPISTLE to the Christian READER.
REader, in the perusing of the Truths contained in this Book, I desire thou
may, with the noble Bereans, have recourse to the holy Scriptures, which
contain in them the Path that the Flock have walked in, who are gone before to
the Mansions of eternal Rest. The things laid down call for a more clear
Discovery by some of God's Children, who are better fitted for so great a Work;
and I do hope this may be as a Provocation to one of greater Ability to
undertake it: All that I can say for my self is, that what I have done was from
an inward Constraint of Soul; through Grace I have been conscious to my self of
my personal Weakness, and therefore I have endeavored to have my Heart laid at
the Feet of the blessed ascended Jesus, to whom I have devoted Soul and Body,
and all that is dear unto me. My Soul has endeavored to keep sight of my Lord
by Faith held before me in the Gospel-Glass, and to follow that borrowed Light
which shines in the Saints from Christ the Son of Righteousness. Having in my
youthful Years drunk in the Principles of Free Will, General Redemption, and
falling away from Grace, which do fall in naturally with the Judgment of Man
while he stands under the first Covenant; I was so settled in those Opinions,
that nothing less than an Almighty Power was able to draw my Mind to call the
truth of them into question. I was at times checked by those absolute Promises
laid down in the holy Scripture, which seemed to secure to the Saints the
certainty of persevering and of enjoying Heaven at last; but was not able to
reconcile them with other Scriptures, where Promises and Threatenings were
annexed together, and seemed to stand upon terms with the Creature. But he who
has been pleased to reveal his Son in me, having brought me to see that the
Children of Adam are distinguished as standing under the two Covenants of Works
and Grace; and standing in this different state, the Scriptures speak a
Language which meets the Experience of each of them. I then with great pleasure
beheld the Harmony that was in the holy Scriptures; and having for many Years
been trained in the School of the Covenant of Works, I have taken it in my way
to clear it before I entered upon that well-ordered Covenant, by which all that
are once entered into it are secured. I wish thou may not be offended at the
plainness of the Style in which the Truths contained in this Book are laid
down, and so I rest a Lover of thy Soul,

Robert Prudom.

Truth Unvailed BY Scripture Light, etc.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the first Adam, the Excellency of the State and Condition in which
he was created.
AFter God had made the World, and all sorts of living Creatures in it, he
proceeds to make Man as the Perfection of this lower Region; consisting of two
Parts, a comely Body, more beautiful than the rest of the Creatures, not
attended with the least Infirmity, and a rational Soul, fitted to hold
Communion with God, and to bear Rule over the rest of the Creatures. From a
sight of the Creation, and of Man as the Lord of it, while he stood in his
Obedience to his Creator, the Psalmist David breaks forth into a holy
Wonderment, Psalm. 8.3, 4, 5, 6. When I consider the Heavens, the Work of thy
Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; What is Man, that
thou art mindful of him? and the Son of Man, that thou visitest him? Thou have
made him a little lower than the Angels, thou have crowned him with Glory and
Honor: Thou made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands; thou have
put all things under his feet. A curious Canopy over his Head, and a furnished
World for him to walk in, all Creatures giving a willing Subjection to him. And
the great Creator, that he might show unto Man the Authority that he had
invested him withal, brings every Beast of the Field, and every Fowl of the Air
unto Adam to receive its Name; and whatsoever Adam called every living
Creature, that was the Name thereof. How great was the Happiness of Adam while
he stood in that state in which he was created? He knew no wants in his Body,
he had always a furnished Table before him, the Earth affording him all the
Varieties that Nature brings forth, and that without any Toil or Labor; he had
a Garden, and that of God's planting, to walk in, and furnished with Trees
bearing Fruit of every kind. What Gardener so skilful as the great Creator? and
what Fruit so pleasant as that which is of his own making? He not only planted
the Trees, but causes them by his own Power to bring forth, and ripens them to
the height of Perfection: there were all sorts of Fruits that were pleasant to
the sight, and good for Food; a pleasant River goes forth from this Garden to
water it: And to add to Adam's Happiness, he is blessed with the happy company of
his Creator. Stop a little, my Soul, and take a view of Adam before Sin
entered, and the Offspring of the second Adam when wholly delivered from Sin,
and clothed upon with their glorified Bodies. This beautiful Eden, or Earthly
Paradise, is but a Type of the Heavenly Paradise; into this Paradise did the
Tempter enter, into the Heavenly Paradise he cannot come; this Happiness was
but short, but that which is to come is eternal: In this God was enjoyed as
Creator, in the other God will be enjoyed as a Father, the Son as a Husband to
us: Thy Maker will be thy Husband; the holy Spirit for ever tabernacling in
thee, the holy Angels and glorified Saints thy Companions. O my Soul, is this
the happy Country that thy Lord has provided for thee? and have thou indeed
the clear Evidences of an Interest in it? then surely thou will be pressing
toward it, and learn to live more and more above the things of this World.

CHAP. II. Of the Image of God in which Adam was created, and the nature of
that first Covenant-Light while in the state of Innocence.
THE Apostle John in the first Chapter of his Gospel, and the 2d, 3d, and 4th
Verses, speaking of the second Person in the Godhead, the eternal Word, says,
The same was in the beginning with God: All things were made by him; and
without him was nothing made that was made. In him was Life, and that Life was
the Light of Men: that is, That Divine Life which was in the eternal Word,
Creator, did give forth the Beams of its Life and Light in making of the Soul
of Man. Not that the Soul of Man did thereby become any part of the Godhead; to
think this is no less than Blasphemy, but an Image of God; Gen 1.26, 27. And
God said, Let us make Man in our own Image, after our Likeness: and let him
have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over
the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the Earth. So God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of God
created he them. This Image of God did not consist in the curious shape of his
Body, although the Beauty of it did far exceed the rest of the Creatures; for this
were to make God to consist of Bodily Parts, and so confinable to one place,
for a Body cannot be in two places as once; but this glorious Image consisted
in the Faculties of the Soul, and the Impressions of the Law upon it. The
Faculties of the Soul consisted of a spiritual Substance, which God breathed
into that frame of the Body to give it Life; it was not made of any earthly
Matter, as was the Body, but of a spiritual nature like unto its Creator; for
although it had not its being from Eternity, yet it was to continue to Eternity,
and from the time of its Creation was never to come under a Dissolution; it was
not made like the Soul or Life of Beasts, of the same Matter whereof the Body
was made, and therefore dies with them, but was created by God immediately out
of nothing; in which respect God is said to be the Father of our Spirits, Heb.
12.9. Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and
live? As it had Life in it self when it was joined to the Body, so it retains
Life when it is separated from the Body, and lives for ever. It consists of
these five Faculties; 1. The Understanding, wherein consisted true Wisdom and
heavenly Knowledge. 2. The Memory, a holy remembrance of such things as we
ought. 3. The Will, a liberty of choosing or refusing. 4. The Affections,
wherein lay the strength of the desire after God. 5. The Conscience, wherein
lay Man's Integrity or Uprightness in walking with God. And that the Soul might
not be any ways deficient, the Impress of the Law of the Creator was engraven
upon it, which consisted in our Duty to God, and to one another. Adam wanted
not Light to see the Excellency of the state wherein he was created, which
Light, if followed, would lead him to the Creator, as the Spring from whence
this his immortal Soul did come. He was under the greatest Obligations that
were possible of loving his Creator, with all his Heart, with all his Mind, and
with all his Strength, and his Neighbor as himself; both which parts of the
Law he broke in going from his Duty to his Creator, and by offering Violence to
all his Offspring, which were then in his Loins, he being made their
Representative, and the Root from whence they were all to proceeed; which I
shall treat of more at large in the next Chapter, and return now to speak of
the Excellency of the Soul, and of its immortal Nature; (1.) From the
Scripture; (2.) From Experience in our viewing of dying Persons. And, (3.) From
the Sayings of many Gentiles.

First, From the Scripture: Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the Dust return to the
Earth; and the Spirit return to God who gave it. As it received Life from God
without the Body, so being separated from the Body it cease not to be, but
goes unto God its Creator, to be disposed of by him; see Phil. 1.21. I might
also mention the Promise of Christ to the penitent Thief on the Cross; I say to
thee, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; and that of the Parable of
the rich Man and Lazarus: See also 2 Cor. 5.1.

Secondly. In our viewing of dying Persons: How great Testimony have we of the
Excellency of the Soul in its being immortal, in that when the Body is
languishing, and under its last minutes, drawing to a Dissolution, the Soul is
more active and quick than ever, striving as it were to be gone from it? Again,
the Excellency of the Soul in the Immortality of it, does appear in the dying
Hopes of the Saints, and the dying Fears and Terrors of the Wicked: I my self
have seen some who in their dying hours have carried the greatest Evidences of
their Souls being immortal, and that they were going to the eternal Enjoyment
of God that was possible to be given; enough to satisfy the most daring
Atheist; even a meeting of Death with the greatest sweetness and composedness
of Spirit: Give my Love, says one to me, to such and such Friends, and tell
them by such a time my Soul will be in eternal Rest. Their Souls have given
forth the greatest Unconcernedness that was possible to part with those things
that had been most delightful unto them, by being brought to see into the
Emptiness of all these inferior things, having received a view of the full
Enjoyment of God to be had, and that their Souls when separated from the Body,
were capable of such an enjoying of him. Not many Months since I my self went
to visit a dying Friend, who at that time seemed to me to be further from her
Dissolution than she really was; she seemed to be exceeding cheerful: I said to
her, I hope you may recover, you are better than you have been: she answered, I
hope I shall not; to which I replied, Why do you hope so? She answered, My
Evidences are clear for Heaven, and I long to have the Enjoyment of it.

Again: What an Evidence does the dying Fears of unconverted Sinners carry with
it of the Excellency of the Soul, and of the Immortality of it? for although that
part of the Image of God in their Souls, which contained their Duty to God, and
to one another, be defaced, and the Faculties of the Soul have lost that
Rectitude and Order in which they were created; yet the Evidences of the
Excellency of it, in being immortal and capable of an eternal Enjoyment of God,
have remained. What Concernedness has filled the Souls of dying unconverted
Sinners about their eternal loss of God? and how have they been seized with the
sad apprehensions of an eternal exclusion from him? See Mr. Wadsworth on the
Soul's Immortality, and Dr. More.

Thirdly. A third Evidence of the Immortality of the Soul, and of the
Excellency of it, does appear from the words of many famous Gentiles, as quoted
by William Penn in his Christian Quaker, Chapter the 14th of Gentile Divinity
of the Immortality of the Soul: To which might be added the Sayings of diverse
Heathen Writers.

1st, Pythagoras. The Soul is incorruptible, it never dies; for when it goes
out of the Body, it goes into the other World; the pure to God, the impure
bound by Furies in indissolvable Chains.

2dly, Heraclitus. If my Body be overpress'd, it may descend to the destinate
place; nevertheless my Soul shall not descend, but, being a thing immortal,
shall fly up on high to Heaven.

3dly, Socrates. The Body being compounded, it dissolved by Death; the Soul
being simple, passes into another Life incapable of Corruption: The Souls of
the good after Death are in a happy state united to God in a blessed
inaccessible place, the bad in convenient places, suffering condign Punishment.
The same Socrates being condemned to die by Poison, Crito, one of his
Followers, asked him, How will thou be buried? As you think good (says he) if
you can catch me, and if I give you not the slip. Then with a smile, applying
himself to those that stood by him, I cannot persuade Crito, says he, that I
am any more than the Carcass you will anon behold, and therefore he takes care
for my Interment. It seems that what I even now told him, that as soon as I
have taken the Poison I shall go to the Joys of the Blessed, has been to
little, purpose.

From what has been said, it does appear that the Soul of Man is of an
excellent frame or make. How happy was the first Adam while in the state of
Innocence, when every Faculty of the Soul stood in that Rectitude and Order
wherein it was placed by the wise Creator, and the Impressions of what was
required of him engraven upon his Heart? For if that Law which is called the
Law of Nature, carry such Beauty in it now, what Beauty had it in it before it
was defaced by Sin? Adam while in the state of Innocence had no Corruption in
him for to fasten the Temptation upon, his Will was free and at liberty to join
with or refuse the Temptation when presented to him; and to encourage him in
his Obedience, he had the continuance in this his happy state promised to him:
for as the threatening if he disobeyed God carried Death with it, so it must be
implied that his Obedience should continue Life to him. But stop, my Soul, and
take a view of what thou have been treating in this Chapter: Was Adam so happy
in having his Soul created in the Image of God? Did his Understanding consist
in true Wisdom? Was his Memory sanctified with the remembering or meditating
upon divine things? Was the Will at liberty of choosing or refusing? Were the
Affections taken up with the desire of enjoying Communion with the Creator? Was
the Conscience upright in walking with God? Consider, my Soul, that the
Children of the second Adam, who are gotten to the Souls of just Men made
perfect in Glory, have this Image fully restored to them again; and in many
respects are in a better condition than the first Adam enjoyed in Innocence;
for his State was brought to the trial, whether he could be able to stand
before a Temptation or not; their Condition is eternally fixed, and never more
subject to trial by any Temptation. O my Soul, art thou interested by Faith in
this second Adam? Do thou witness a recovery of the same Excellency of the
Image of God upon thee in a good measure, which the first Adam enjoyed in his
Innocence by the powerful workings of the Spirit of God upon thee? Then will thou behold more and more of the Beauty of it; the more thou experiencest of
the recovery of this holy Image in thee, the stronger will be thy Cries after a
full recovery of it: the more thou see of inward Corruption, by which this
blessed Image is defaced, the stronger will be thy Cries unto God against this
Corruption, and that thou may be brought to that blessed place where the
Souls of the Children of the second Adam are made perfect.

CHAP. III. Of the Fall of Adam: The miserable change of his Condition by the
Fall; and how all his Offspring were included in it.
THE great and glorious Creator, that he might show forth his Sovereignty over
that curious Creature Man, whom he had created in his own Image, and that he
might show unto Man, that he did require a perfect Obedience from him was
pleased to try his Obedience by prohibiting of him to eat of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil; -- for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die. This Tree was to be as a warning to them of their Mutability; for
although the state wherein they were created was a most glorious state,
nevertheless it was such a state as was liable to be lost; the Creature
enjoying of it upon the terms of a perfect Obedience; not that the Tree could
give Knowledge, but by tasting of if, the terms upon which Adam and Eve stood in
the favor of God, were broken on Man's part, and so they came to have the
experimental knowledge of Evil in themselves, which before they had of Good
only. But although God had no hand at all in Satan's Temptation, or in Adam and
Eve's Sin, yet we may safely own God to be concerned in the Fall of Adam and
Eve to far as to give them up into the hands of the Tempter, and giving the
Tempter power over them, to try them whether they would willingly go from their
Obedience to God or no; he having before by his eternal Decree determined to
magnify his Power, Justice and Mercy: For being able to bring Good out Evil, as
Light out of Darkness, he orders in his Wisdom the Fall of Man, to the
setting out of the Glory of his Mercy in those that shall be saved in Christ,
and of his Justice on those that shall perish for their Sins out of Christ.
Satan being fallen from a glorious Angel through his Pride into the depths of
Ruin, was filled with Melice against God, and with Envy at the happy state of
Adam and Eve, and endeavors to bring them into the like Misery with himself;
and so is rightly called a Murderer from the beginning: Joh. 8.44. He was a
Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because there is no
Truth in him: When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a Liar,
and the Father of it. He gains upon Eve, by first questioning her concerning
what God had commanded, Genesis 3.1. Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of Every
Tree of the Garden? And finding by her Answer that he gained upon her, she not
answering to his Question, as God had spoken, that surely they should die, but
by a term of doubting, lest ye die; he proceeds in his Temptation to a flat
denial of the truth of the Threatening, Genesis 3.4, 5. And the Serpent said unto
the Woman, Ye shall not surely die: For God does know that in the day ye eat
thereof, your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and
evil. Hereby endeavoring to beget in Eve's Mind hard thoughts of God; as if
his prohibiting them to eat of that Tree, was to keep a future good from them;
and begetting Pride in her Mind, in not being satisfied with that happy state
and condition that she was then in.

Thus through Unbelief in God, and Pride to be like unto God, did Sin enter
into Eve; and through Eve's Prevalency with her Husband, Sin entered into him.
Thus we may see the nature of Sinners is to draw others to the same
Condemnation they are in, as Satan Eve, and Eve her Husband, even those who are
nearest them, whose good they should procure.

Having cleared up how Adam and Eve were brought into their fallen State, I
proceed to show the miserable state that they were fallen into, and how their
Offspring were included in it, and I shall treat of it under these three Heads:
I shall, first, show the miserable change that was brought upon their Souls.
Secondly, The miserable change that was brought upon their Bodies. And,
Thirdly, The miserable state they brought upon all their Posterity.

The Sentence threatened against Adam and Eve for their Disobedience in eating
the forbidden Fruit, did not reach to a Dissolution of the Soul as to its
being; for the Soul remains immortal after Sin entered as it was before; but
the Sentence reached to a Dissolution of that Union that was betwixt the great
Creator and the Soul: the Soul by Sin being changed from that happy state in
which it was created, into a state of Misery, the Faculties of the Soul being
put out of that Rectitude and Order in which at first they were placed.

The Understanding, wherein consisted true Wisdom, and the knowledge of heavenly
things, is now become blind and dark, ignorant of God, and of his Will; 1 Cor.
2.14. But the natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: compared with Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19. This I say therefore,
and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in
the vanity of their Minds; having the Understanding darkened, being alienated
from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their Hearts: who being past feeling, have given themselves over
unto Lasciviousness, to work all Uncleanness with greediness.

The Understanding is so far from being taken up with the Knowledge of God, his
Mind and Will, that it labors more and more after the knowledge of the ways of
Sin, and so becomes more and more estranged from God; wise to do evil, but to
do good without Understanding.

The Memory, wherein lay a holy remembrance of heavenly things, is now become
dull and forgetful, and easily lets go those things which we are in the
chiefest place concerned to remember: we can remember readily the things which
concern this Life; the Vanities and Follies of the ways of Sin. What deep
Impression do these things make upon the Memory of poor Creatures? But things
which lead to the enjoyment of God, and the everlasting Welfare of the immortal
Soul, how slippery and weak is the Memory become to retain these?

The Will, wherein lay the liberty of choosing or refusing, and before Sin
entered, willed always that which was good, is now become impotent and weak in
its joining with Good; how is it inslaved by Sin, and in the Chains of Satan?
Romans 6.20. For when you were the Servants of Sin, ye were free from
Righteousness. Holiness, without which God cannot be enjoyed, the poor
unconverted Sinner has no Will in him to lay hold of; but on the contrary,
lusts after that which is evil. Genesis 6.6. And God saw that the Wickedness of
Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination of his Heart was evil
continually: compared with Job 15.16. How much more abominable is Man, who
drinks Iniquity like Water? Yea, what an Enmity is seated in the Will of
unconverted Sinners against the ways of Holiness? How do their very Hearts rise
against it? Romans 8.7. Because the carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

The Affections of the Soul, wherein lay the strength of the desire after God,
are subjected to Sin. How are they set upon unmeet Objects? inclined to things
they should not be, and not to those they should? Thus we naturally hate good,
and love evil. 1 Kings 22.8. And the King of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat,
There is yet one Man (Micaiah the Son of Imlah) by whom we may inquire of the
Lord: but I hate him, for he does not prophesy good concerning me, but evil.
Our Affections are naturally raised to meet Sin, and the Temptations that lead
into it; and do even embrace the Temptation; but are not stirred up to that
which is Good, unless it be to eschew and shun it: Besides, when the Affections
do move, how disorderly is their Motion? when merry, too merry; when sad, too
sad.

The Conscience, wherein lay Man's Integrity, or walking with God, and wherein
were the Impressions of the Divine Law, which contained in it our Duty to God,
and to one another, how is it disordered by Sin? the Acts of Sin taking away
the inward sense and feeling of the evil of it. And with what weakness does
that first Covenant-Light, which leads the Soul to seek after God as Creator,
move in the Soul? How are its Reproofs hardly taken notice of by most Persons,
and that, by reason of that great Darkness that is fallen upon the Soul of Man?

Thus we may see that Sin, as a Leprosy, has overrun all the Faculties, and
is become as a Body in the Soul, consisting of many Members, Romans 7.23, 24. But
I see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and
bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. O
wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this Death? Tho
all Sin does not appear alike in all, some by Nature are more mild and
courteous than others; the reason of which difference is not, that there are
not the same seeds of Corruption in all, but that the Lord keeps down those
Sins in some, which he suffers to rise up in others.

The Children of God, that are by the Inlightnings of the holy Spirit come to
see into the Corruptions of their Hearts, how do they see the seeds of Sin
lying in their Souls, even of such Sins which they thought had not been in
them? The Heart or Soul does then appear to be desperately wicked: who but God
himself can have the full knowledge of it? For the Children of God in their
searches after Heart-corruptions, cannot come to find the bottom of them: so
far is the Soul of Man fallen from God by Sin, that it is afraid to come nigh
unto God; it flies farther and farther from God, until it gets into the Pit of
eternal Misery. How dark was Adam become by Sin, as to think the Trees of the
Garden could hide him from the Eye of the great Creator? And that God might
aggravate and heighten his Sin, he speaks ironically, by way of taunt, The Man
is become like one of us: He is come to know Evil by woeful experience, he is
filled with inward Horror, and with outward Shame.

Secondly, I shall show the miserable state that Adam was brought into by the
Fall as to his Body; for no sooner was he fallen, but the Sentence was
inflicted on him, That in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die:
Although the Sentence was not so far put in execution against him, as to separate
the Soul from the Body, yet his bodily state was so far changed, as to bring it
under those Evils that lead to a Dissolution. He was driven out of that
pleasant Garden of Delight in which God at first placed him, into the Earth, to
get his Living in it amongst the Beasts of the field: and whereas in his
innocent state he had a furnished Table provided without labor or toil, God
himself having by his own Power provided things necessary for his bodily
Subsistence; now he must till the Earth with labor and toil, which was put
under the Curse of Barrenness for Man's sake, until the poor Body wearied out,
returns to the Earth, by a painful Death, from whence it was taken; Dust thou
art, and to Dust thou shall return. The Beasts of the Field who gave a willing
Subjection to him as their Sovereign, were now so far estranged from him, as to
rebel against him, and ready to put in execution the Sentence of a bodily
Death: the Air in which he breathed, was changed for his sake, and infected the
poor Body with many sorts of Distempers, Sores, Sicknesses and Diseases of all
sorts; Sin being the cause of all this Misery. Mat. 9.2. And behold, they
brought to him a Man sick of the Palsy, lying on a Bed: and Jesus seeing their
Faith, said unto the sick of the Palsy; Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins be
forgiven thee. Thus by taking away the Sin, he takes away that which was
inflicted upon the poor Body for it: Besides all this Misery that is inflicted
upon the poor Body in this Life, if it be not brought within the compass of a
share in the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ, at the morning of the
Resurrection it must be reunited to the Soul, and sentenced to share with the
Soul in eternal Misery, having been a sharer with it in a course of Sin in this
Life.

Thirdly, I shall show the Misery that Adam brought upon all his Offspring by
the Fall. Adam stood not before God as a single Person, but as one that had all
his Offspring in him. They being all in him, and to proceed from him by
Generation, became sharers with him in that state which he fell into; Genesis 5.3.
And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a Son in his own
Likeness, after his Image, and called his Name Seth; born to the same Misery
that his Father Adam was in, and a sharer with him in it. Adam received Light
from the eternal Creator, and a holy rectitude of Soul; and was under no
necessity of giving way to a Temptation, there being nothing in him, while in
his state of Innocence, to fasten a Temptation upon; so that his Fall was a
voluntary going off from God. He receiving those excellent Endowments of Soul
and Body as a public Person, by his Transgression Judgment came upon all Men
to Condemnation; Romans 5.14. Nevertheless Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even
over them who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam 's Transgression. For
from Adam to Moses, we do not read that after the Fall God ever treated with
Adam, or with his Offspring, by an outward trial upon the terms of Do and live.
Besides, Death then reigned, and does still reign over little Children, whose
Infant-state makes them incapable of being put to the trial of their Obedience.
How does daily Experience show us that poor Infants are many times arrested, as
soon as gotten into the World, by grievous Distempers, as the Convulsions, and
such like, which keep them in grievous Misery for several days together before
the Soul be separated from the Body? which is a sufficient Testimony that they
have another's Sin imputed to them, by which their very Nature is defiled; upon
which defiled Nature Death feeds, until it has brought it to Dissolution as to
their Bodies; but their Souls I desire to leave to that rich and free Grace
which flows to Sinners through a second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
Spirit's applying of it to them without any outward means.

Having gone through this third Chapter, which contains the misery of the first
Adam and his Offspring, before thou leavest it, make some Application of it to
thy own Soul. Look back, my Soul, and see what thou wast in an unconverted
state; thou spentst twelve Years in gross darkness, without the least knowledge
of that God from whence thou receivedst thy being: thou wast wholly given up to
the ways of Sin, without the least consideration what bitter Fruit it did
produce; that the way of it led to the Chambers of Death, and the Pit of
eternal Misery. How many times wast thou, while in this state, nigh the
Dissolution of thy Body; the Grave, both to thy self and others, seeming to
open its Mouth to receive thee? What could have been thy state in eternity, if
thou had been then removed? Dos not the holy Scripture fully declare that
those who spend their days in Sin, and in Satan's slavery, shall he eternally
miserable with him? O my Soul, tho thou could not pity thy self, because of
that gross darkness that was upon thee; yet that God that gave thee thy being
pitied thee, and extended sparing Mercy to thee.

It is he that has delivered thy Soul from Death, thine Eyes from Tears, and
thy Feet from falling. Thou now groanest in an unredeemed Body; but thou viewst
by Faith a redeemed one. Does the Creation groan by reason of that weight of
Sin that is upon it? Thy Lord Jesus's Return draws very nigh; his Coming will
bring with it a removal of the Curse; and times of Refreshing shall come with
him; he will renew the Earth, and in it shall dwell nothing but Righteousness.

CHAP. IV. Of the Image of God that was upon the Heart of the first Adam; how
it discovers it self in the Hearts (or Souls) of his fallen Children. The
nature of the leadings of that first Covenant-light; and the Condition of those
that stand under the highest Attainment of it.
THat Adam was a public Person, and that the great Creator entered into
Covenant with him upon the terms of Obey and live, has been proved in the
foregoing Chapter, and shall by the help of the Spirit of God be more fully
demonstrated in this. That all his Offspring, as descending from him by
Generation, are under the same Covenant, have some remaining Impressions of the
same Law upon their Souls, and Light from the Creator answering the terms of
that first Covenant, I shall First clear up from Scripture; Secondly, from the
Sayings of many famous Gentiles; Thirdly, from common Experience of all Persons
that do take notice of the dealings of God with their Souls.

And, First, to prove it from Scripture; Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. For this
Commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee neither
is it far off: it is not in Heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for
us to Heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? Neither is
it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us,
and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? But the Word is very nigh
unto thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou may do it. I have set
before thee this day Life and Good, and Death and Evil. Compared with Romans
2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things
contained in the Law; these having not the Law (that is, in the outward letter)
are a Law unto themselves; Which show the work of the Law written in their
Hearts, their Conscience also bearing witness, and their Thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another. From which Scriptures it is
evident, that the Law delivered at Sinai, and written in Tables of Stone, was
but a Copy of this inward Law which was engraven in the Soul of Adam, and on
the Souls of all his Offspring.

It does further appear, that Adam's Offspring as they descend from him, are
under the same Covenant with himself, from their dealing with God, and his with
them, according to the terms of that first Covenant. Genesis 4.5, 6, 7. But unto
Cain and his Offering he had not respect; and Cain was very wroth, and his
Countenance fell: and the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is
thy Conntenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if
thou do not well, Sin lies at the door. Cain presented his Offering, as a
fruit of his Obedience, to his Creator, and expected acceptance upon the
account of his Obedience; which proving otherwise than he hoped, he was wroth,
and his Countenance fell: the Lord gives him the reason why his Offering was
not accepted, because it was imperfect; the worthiness of his Brother Abel's
Offering lying in an act of Faith put forth in a Redeemer to come, upon whose
worthiness he grounded the acceptance of it, and not upon the terms of the
first Covenant; Heb. 11.4. compared with chap. 12.2. Another Scripture which I
shall mention is, Joh. 6.28. Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we
might work the works of God? From whence it is clear, that notwithstanding the
outward means they enjoyed, which were to lead them as Sinners to a Redeemer,
they still remain under the first Covenant.

The next thing is, to show that the Offspring of the first Adam have the same
inward Light which leads to the Creator, that Adam enjoyed. Prove. 20.27. The
Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the
Belly. Compared with Romans 1.18, 19, 20. For the Wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth
in Unrighteousness: Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse. By
the Spirit of Man he intends the Soul of Man, that is endued with such
excellent Qualities, which, if improved to their right end, do lead the
Creature into the Duties required in the first Covenant; and by viewing the
Works of Creation, to that eternal Power and Godhead, by which all things were
created: the not improving of which Light leaves them without excuse before
God, as they stand under the first Covenant. These Gentiles, of which the
Apostle is treating, did darken that Light which led them to view the Godhead
in the works of Creation, by their Unrighteousness, that is, Impiety,
Profaneness, and Superstition that they run into; so that God gave them up to
strong Delusions.

Secondly; I shall prove that all the Offspring descending from the first Adam
are under the same Covenant with him, have some remaining Impressions of the
same Law upon their Souls, and Light from the Creator leading to answer the
terms of the first Covenant, from the Sayings of many famous Gentiles.

Timeus, one of Pythagoras's Scholars, says, That the most excellent thing the
Soul is awakened to, is her Guide, or good Genius; but if she be rebellious to
it, it will prove her Demon or Tormentor: but having overcome these things,
thou shall know the Cohabitation or dwelling together of the immortal God, and
mortal Men.

Sophocles: God grant, says he, that I may always be so happy as to observe
that venerable Sanctity in my Words and Deeds which is commanded by these noble
Laws (speaking of the Laws written in Men's Consciences) which were made in
Heaven. God is their Father, not mortal Nature; neither shall they ever be
abrogated or forgotten.

It is frequently said of Socrates (says Plutarch) that he had the Guide of
his Life within him; which it was told his Father Sophroniscus should be of
more worth to him than five hundred Matters; he called it his good Angel or
Spirit, who suggested to his Mind what was good, and virtuously inclined and
disposed him to a strict and pious Life.

Cleanthes the Stoic allows not Mankind to be governed of right by the
Dictates of their own Nature, which barely render them Men, but by that Divine,
Infinite, and Eternal Nature, which is God, diffused or sown through the whole
race of Men, as the most sure infallible Guide and Rule. To live (says he)
according to this Knowledge and Direction, is truly to live according to Virtue,
not doing any thing that is forbidden: The Virtue and Happiness of a Man
depends upon a close Correspondence of his Mind with the Divine Will of him who
governs the Universe. Again, says the same Cleanthes, the Knowledge of God is
imprinted upon the Minds of Men.

Plutarch, speaking of the Principle of God in the Conscience, says, It is a
Law not written in Tables or Books, but dwelling in the Mind always, as a
living Rule, which never permits the Soul to be destitute of an inward Guide.
Again, says Plutarch to debase this ancient Faith of Mankind and natural
Belief, which is planted in all reasonable Souls, is to overthrow the strong
and everlasting Foundation of Virtue.

I shall conclude these Sayings of the Gentiles with Antistheties; William
Penn's Gentile Divinity, Christian Quaker, page 72. He was Institutor of the
Cynicks, as they were called, and Scholar to Socrates; he taught that Virtue
was the truest Nobility, that Piety was alone needful to a lasting Happiness;
that true Virtue stood not in saying, but doing that which was good; not in
much Learning, or many words, but upright Actions. In short, that the Principle
of Virtue is sufficient to what Wisdom is needful, and that all other things
ought to have reference thereto; that Piety is the best Armor, and virtuous
Persons are always Friends; that Virtue is an Armor none can either pierce or
take from good Men. He prefers a just Man before his Neighbor; and good Women's
Souls have the same Privilege to Virtue with Men's. He accounted Pleasure one of
the greatest Mischiefs in the World: and being asked what Learning was best? he
answers, that which unlearns Men Evil; for those who would live for ever, must
have a care that their Lives be holy and just in this World.

Thirdly; I shall prove that all the Offspring of the first Adam descending
from him, are under the same Covenant with him, have some remaining Impressions
of the same Law upon their Souls; and Light from the Creator, leading to answer
the terms of the first Covenant, from the common Experience of all Persons that
take notice of the dealings of God with their Souls. We must distinguish
betwixt a sinful Peace gained by Persons in a zealous performance of an outward
Worship, handed down unto them by their Ancestors, and that Peace which Persons
gain by the Conduct of that Light which leads to God upon the terms of the
first Covenant. That the first moving or stirring of the Soul is by this first
Covenant-light does appear, in that the Work upon the Heart does usually begin
with a discovery of some Sin or Sins committed against one of the two Tables of
the Law; either that which contains our Duty to God, or to our Neighbor: which
inward discovery of Sin has attending of it Guilt and Fear of either some
temporal or eternal Punishment; for the escaping of which Punishment, the Soul
does betake it self to a close adherence to this inward Light; and by following
of it, and giving attendance to it, the Impressions of the Law, which contains
our Duty to God, and to our Neighbor (which is engraven upon the Souls of all
Adam's Offspring) comes to be discovered to us, and we are led to follow the
Rule of this inward Law. And by giving Obedience to it Peace is gained, and by
keeping in our Obedience Peace is continued; the Light giving the Soul no
further disturbance, than as it becomes guilty of the breach of this inward
Law: which the Gentiles on the other side, and every moral Person with them
coming to witness, makes them press after it more and more, by which they come
to shine forth before Men by a sober Conversation. That this Light is a
distinct thing from the Work of the Holy Ghost upon the Souls of the Saints is
evident, because all its dealings with God are as Creator, and upon the first
Covenant terms, that is, obey and live. In its Obedience lies its Hope, upon
its Obedience is its enjoyment of God here bottomed, and the eternal enjoyment
of God in Glory; to these the Reward is not of Grace, but of Debt, Romans 4.4. By
Reward is meant eternal Life; they are not brought to see the Imperfectness of
their Works, that so as Sinners they may come to Christ, and through him to
God, to receive a Pardon upon Grace's account, from a sensibility of Soul that
they have a real need of it. They never were yet brought out of the first
Covenant, but only stand as Witnesses of it, and for God in it under high
Seize. Their everlasting State we are to leave to him who is appointed to
be the Judge of all Men: only before I leave them, or end this Chapter, I shall
show by the holy Scriptures how their State differs from the State of Children.
The Light by which these Persons are led, is by Will. Penn called the Light of
Christ; and that it is sufficient, if followed, to lead to eternal Salvation.
And indeed if his Christ which he describes unto us were the true Christ, then
the Gentiles on the other side, and every moral Person were brought to the
enjoyment of him; but his words being brought to the Rule of the holy
Scriptures, and tried by the Experiences of Saints, he is found to be a poor
deceived Person.

William Penn's Christian Quaker, p. 96, 97. And this is unquestionably
confirmed unto us by that known and very weighty Expression of the Apostle Paul
to the Romans, chap. 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the
Flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. Since here both
Christ is distinguished from the Body he took and made one with that God, who
is over all, blessed for ever. Amen. As much as to say, of whose Flesh Christ
took; therefore Christ was before he took it, or his taking it did not
constitute him Christ.

In Answer to William Penn: If the Manhood united to the eternal Word, Creator,
did not go to constitute him Christ, then these Gentiles of which he treats
were Christians, for they were all led to the acknowledgment of God as Creator.
But herein he abuses the Apostles words, and contradicts the Faith of
Christians in all Ages: the Apostle is showing us, that he who was held forth
in the Promises to be the Lord's Christ, was to take his Flesh or Manhood of
the Fathers; that is, according to the Promises, he was to be of Abraham's
Seed, and David's Son; and yet as to his Divine Nature, was from everlasting
God blessed for ever: The Apostle is distinguishing his two Natures in this
Scripture, William Penn is endeavoring to throw away his Manhood. Besides, by
the same way of arguing, may his Godhead be removed from constituting him
Christ; Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that
God has made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. The
holy Scripture is sometimes giving the name Christ to him as he was God; in
other places it gives the name Christ to him as Man, that so we might have his
two Natures distinguished to us, not that thereby they might be separated. And
mark it, Christian Reader, that although the Lord Jesus Christ stood in the Decree
of God, as Godman in one Person, to appear in the fullness of time, and was so
held forth in the Promises to the Fathers in the Old Testament; yet those
Promises were subservient to his Appearance in the state of his Humiliation in
the Land of Judea, and pointed at it; and so were the Fathers by the Light of
Holy Ghost enabled to behold him, and lay hold of him as their Savior, Hebrews
the 11th Chapter, and 12th, ver. 1, 2. Christianity in the Power of it is a
relinquishing the first Covenant-Principles of Light in the Creator, and do and
live, as the Condition of eternal Life, for the Light of Faith in the eternal
Word made Flesh (or joined to Man's Nature) John 1.12. But as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe
on his Name. The Childrens admittance into the Presence of God is upon the
account of a Redeemer, upon the account of a Mediator held forth outwardly in
the Scriptures, apprehended inwardly by Faith through the help of the holy
Spirit: the Children go without Works when they go to Christ, and through him
to the Father. They then leave their Works behind them; before Men they take
the Law with them, and walk by it as a Rule of Life. But seeing I shall have
occasion to speak more of this in the second Part, I shall here shut up this
Chapter, and the first Part, which was to show the nature of the Covenant of
Works.

PART II. Clearing up, that the Covenant of Grace and Redemption is but one and
the same Covenant.
CHAP. I. Of Election bottomed upon the Sovereignty of God. How the Eternal
Word united to Man's Nature is chosen by electing Love as the head of the
Elect, and made the way through which electing Love does pass to every elect
Person.
IN clearing up the weighty Truths contained in this Chapter, I shall treat of
it under these three Heads: First, Set forth the Sovereignty of God. Secondly,
Show that Election proceeds from him as an Act of Grace and Goodness; the
advancing of his own Glory being that which is carried on in the Decree of
Election. Thirdly, I shall show how the Lord Jesus Christ is the Head of the
Elect, and made the way through which electing Love does pass to every elect
Person.

First, I shall set forth the Sovereignty of God from the holy Scriptures; Isa
40.12, 13, 14, 15. Who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand? and
meted out Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance? Who
has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his Counselor has taught him?
With whom took he Counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the Path
of Judgment, and taught him Knowledge, and showed him the way of Understanding?
Behold, the Nations are as a drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small
Dust of the Balance: Behold, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. The
Majesty and the infinite Power that is in God, when some glimmering of it is
beheld by the Soul, how does it lay it in the Dust before him, and make it
willing to be resigned up unto him, to be disposed of by him. For as his own
Pleasure and his own Glory was the moving Cause why he created Angels and Men;
so in disposing of them according to his own good Pleasure, who shall say to
the most High, Why do thou thus? God will be honored by all his Creatures in
a way of Mercy, or in a way of Justice. That he secured part of the Angels in
the state wherein he created them, is infinite Grace to them; that he gave up
others that fell from him to follow the Counsel of their own Wills, and to
persist in a course of Rebellion against him, that so they might glorify the
Attribute of his Justice, is no Injustice in him; the Evil which they brought
upon themselves being a voluntary Act of their own. That part of the Offspring
of Adam are rescued out of their fallen state by rich and free Grace, whilst
the rest are left to the Light or Law of the first Covenant, under which the
great Creator has placed them, determining to proceed toward them according
to the Tenor of that Covenant which they stand under before him, is his own
good pleasure.

In clearing up the Sovereignty of God I shall proceed a little further, and
before I leave it open two or three Scriptures in Job, Chap. 2.3. And the Lord
said unto Satan, Have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like
him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright Man, one that fears God, and
escheweth Evil? and still he holds fast his Integrity, although thou movedst me
against him, to destroy him (that is, in his outward Estate) without cause.
From hence I observe, that Sin was not the moving cause why that great outward
Calamity fell upon Job, but an Act of God's Sovereignty over his Creature,
intending to bring Glory to himself out of the Misery of his Servant, of whom
he might dispose as he pleased without the least Injustice. And Job beholding
God dealing with him in a way of Sovereignty, his Soul was kept in a right
frame before him; ver. 9, 10. Then said his Wife unto him, Do thou still
retain thy Integrity? Curse God, and die. But he said unto her, Thou speak
as one of the foolish Women: Shall we receive Good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive Evil? The best Support for God's Children when under
Affliction, is to look at the Sovereignty of God, that so they may be kept from
murmuring against him. When we look up unto God, as no ways bound to us, but as
he is pleased himself, it makes us stoop before him; and when the Soul goes
from its Duty here, it goes from that which should support it in Peace and
Quietness. An Example we have in Job, when he begun to stand upon terms with
God, how was his Spirit unsettled? as Chap. 31. from ver. 1 to the 35th, and
then he breaks forth, O that one would hear me! Behold, my desire is, that the
Almighty would answer me. And in ver. 37. I would declare unto him the number
of my steps, as a Prince would I go near unto him. Look forward into Job 40.
from ver. 1 to 15. and we find that God does come forth to answer Job; but how
does he answer him? Does he give Job an account why he brought such Calamity
upon him? No, he stands upon his Sovereignty, ver. 2. Shall he that contendeth
with the Almighty, instruct him? He that reproves God, let him answer it. Does
Job now make good what he said, that he would declare unto him the number of
his steps? as a Prince does he go nigh unto him? No, he falls under him, ver.
3, 4. Then Job answered the Lord, and said, Behold I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Here is the end of the Creatures
standing upon terms with God, and here is the safety of God's Children to
endeavor to witness a humble submissive frame of Spirit to him.

I have treated hitherto of the Sovereignty of God: I come now under the second
Head, to show, that Election proceeds from God as an Act of Grace and Goodness;
the advancing of his own Glory being that which is carried on in the Decree of
Election; Romans 9.23. And that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on
the Vessels of Mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory. For although God was
infinitely happy in himself, yet so great is his condescending Grace to those
whom he does by his eternal Decree choose to be Vessels of Mercy, that he is
pleased to manifest of his Goodness to them, and to take them into a state of
eternal Glory with himself; nothing foreseen at all in them being the moving
Cause of God's choosing of them; the only Cause being the good Pleasure of his
Will: 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not
according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace which is
given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. Chap. 2.19. Nevertheless, the
Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that
are his. This Doctrine administreth great Comfort to the Saints, who feel the
Work of Election upon their Hearts, that their Salvation stands by God's
eternal Decree that cannot be changed, and not in themselves that daily might
lose it. How does this make the Saints love God to the uttermost, who has
manifested so great Love to them? How does this serve to humble them, that they
had nothing of themselves for their Salvation, but it freely came from God?

Thirdly; I shall proceed to show how the Lord Jesus Christ is made the Head of
the Elect, and the way through which electing Love does pass to every elect
Person.

I shall prove it by these following Reasons.

1st. Because that our Nature in him was fitted as a Tabernacle for the
receiving of the eternal Word, the second Person in the Godhead; the Holy Ghost
by his incomprehensible Power working his Conception supernaturally, purifying
that Matter of which his Human Nature was taken in the Womb of the Virgin, so
that his Nature had not the least Defilement in it. The Divine Nature and the
Human Nature became united in him; to him run all the Promises, and to all the
Elect as they are united in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. For all the Promises of God in
him are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us, that through him
come to partake of them: the Promises run to him, and fix in him as in an
immovable Rock that can never, be shaken.

2dly. He is the Head of the Elect, and the way through which electing Love
does pass to every elect Person, because they are given to him as a Seed: Psalm.
89.27, 28, 29. Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the Kings of the
Earth. My Mercy will I keep for him for evermore, my Covenant shall stand fast
with him. His Seed will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the days
of Heaven. Compared with Heb. 2.13. And again, I will put my Trust in him: And
again, I, and the Children which God has given me.

As the first Adam conveys natural Defilement to all his Seed, and that which
causes the loss of Communion with God; so the Lord Jesus Christ that conveys
to all the elect Seed, which removes that which hinders Communion, and restores
Communion to them: John 6.57. As the living Father sent me, and I live by the
Father; so, he that eats me, even he shall live by me. Here is three Livers;
here is, 1. The Life of the Godhead. 2. Here is the Man Christ living upon the
Godhead. 3. Here is the Believer living upon the Lord Jesus Christ as Godman in
one Person; the Divine Nature putting Life into the Manhood, and conveying of
that Life to the Elect. Gal 3.16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises
made: He says not, To Seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy Seed, which
is Christ. Is Christ mystical here meant, says Leigh, then the Elect are
comprehended in him: To Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; to Abraham
in Christ, and not to Christ in Abraham, says Kendal against John Goodwin.

3dly. It does appear that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Head of the Elect, and
the way through which electing Love does pass to every elect Person, from the
Experience of the Saints from Abel to this very day. The Elect that were in the
World before his appearance in the state of his Humiliation, did all by Faith
look at him, and through him were brought to the enjoyment of God; and upon him
lay their hope of persevering with God: Heb. 12.1, 2. Wherefore, seeing we are
compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every
weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience
the Race that is set before us; looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of
our Faith. This Cloud of Witnesses that looked unto Jesus, were the Saints from
Abel's time, in the 11th Chapter. The Saints that have been and are in the
World in the times of the New Testament, through Jesus do go to God, through
Jesus do enjoy Communion with God; 2 Cor. 4.6. For God who commanded Light to
shine out of Darkness, has shined into our Hearts, to give the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

To sum up this Chapter; Was the Lord Jesus Christ comprehended in the Womb of
the Decree of Election? Was the Union of the two Natures in the Person of the
Lord Jesus Christ comprehended in the Decree as the Head of the Elect, and by
the Decree appointed to be the Conveyer of Grace to every elect Person? Then
whatever was acted and done by him was subservient to the Decree; and proves
the Covenant of Grace and Redemption to be but one Covenant, Joh. 4.34. Jesus
says unto them, My Meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish
his work.

CHAP. II. Of the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ, in two parts; First,
Perfect Obedience to the Law. Secondly, Satisfaction to the Penalty of it for
the Elect, subservient to the Decree of Election, and leading to answer the
great Designs of it.
THE great God, that he might make good that threatening against Satan, That the
Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head, does by the incomprehensible
Power of the Holy Ghost, first, sanctify that Matter of which the Body of the
Lord Jesus Christ was made, and then without the help of Man's Seed, did create
or form it into the shape of Man, to which a living Soul was given, that so he
might appear to be like his Brethren, the Elect. To this second Man so
wonderfully made, was the eternal Word, the second Person in the Godhead,
united in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, and brought forth into the World, our
Emanuel, the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the wonderful Counselor, the
Prince of Peace: His Divine Nature being the express Image of his Father's
Substance, and in respect of it, it was no Robbery in him to be the Father's
equal, and one with the Father. That he might be one with the Elect, he is
wonderfully united to their Nature in the Womb of the Virgin; and that he might
figure out the Misery that all the Elect were in by Generation, he is born in a
Stable, and laid in a Manger; typifying out, that by reason of their natural
Pollution they were like their first Father Adam, who was driven from the
Presence of God amongst the Beasts. He is put under the first Covenant, that he
might fulfill the Righteousness of it, Gal. 4.4, 5. -- Made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons.

And he is not only put under the first Covenant to give it a perfect
Obedience, that in that Obedience of his the Elect might appear before God; but
he is likewise put under the first Covenant to give Satisfaction to the Wrong
done to it by the Elect, as they successively come into the World. Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us;
as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree: Compared with
Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he
(the eternal Word) also himself likewise took part of the same; that through
Death he might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil.
Those that stood in the Decree of Election as Children, coming into the World
in such a way by Generation, as brought them under the defilements of Sin, and
so under the Penalty of the first Covenant, the eternal Word takes hold of
their Nature, and by sanctifying of it in Death, perfuming the Sacrifice by his
Divine Nature, the Penalty of the first Covenant is removed, and a Pardon laid
in for the Children as they shall successively come into the World, and have it
applied to their Souls by the Spirit. They being interested in this
Satisfaction, the Penalties of the first Covenant are removed, and the
executive Power of it taken out of the hands of Satan.

Having now by way of Introduction, opened the door into the Work of Redemption
wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ, I come, in the next place, to consider this
Soul-amazing Work under these three Heads; First, In his perfect Righteousness,
by which he answered the Requirings of the first Covenant. Secondly, In his
giving up himself voluntarily to Death to answer the Justice of God for the
Elect. Thirdly, How it was subservient to the Decree of Election, and answers
the Design of it.

And, first, I shall consider this perfect Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ: and that I may the more clearly behold it, I shall consider him with
the Apostle, as a second Adam; and as a second Adam brought to the trial of his
Obedience, given up into the hands of Satan, to be sifted and tried whether he
would yield to the Tempter or no: Mat. 4. from ver. 1 to 11. From v. 1 to 3. we
have the preparatory Work that went before the Temptation. And here we may view
the great difference that is betwixt the Persons of the two Adams, the first
Adam assisted with all the outward Advantages that were possible to be afforded
him, that he might withstand the Temptation; the other put under all the
outward Disadvantages that might tend to make him yield to it. Then was Jesus
led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil: And when
he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered. The
first Adam was under no necessity of feeling that grievous Misery that Hunger
brings upon Nature, having always a furnished Table before him; the Temptation
was in a place where there was no moving Cause to draw the Creature from his
Obedience to God, but his Disobedience was a voluntary Act. But the second Adam
in his Human Nature, to prepare for the Temptation, was brought to feel the
bitter Pain of Hunger, Nature having wanted Supplies of Food for forty days and
forty nights together; and besides, the Temptation is brought in a place, even
in a Wilderness, destitute of all outward Support.

The next step is to consider the Progress of the Temptation it self in its
three several Assaults: First, From ver. 3 to v. 5. Secondly, From ver. 5 to v.
8. Thirdly, From ver. 8 to v. 12.

And, first; As to the first Assault, from ver. 3 to v. 5. And when the Tempter
came unto him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these Stones be
made Bread. But he answered, and said, Man shall not live by Bread alone, but
by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. Let us compare this
Temptation with the Temptation brought against the first Adam, and consider the
difference that is betwixt the Matter contained in the Temptations.

In the Temptation that was brought against Eve, and handed by her to her
Husband, there is a Discontentedness with the Bounty already bestowed, and a
seeking by indirect means to attain to a greater pitch of Glory wrapped up in the
Temptation; Ye shall be as Gods knowing Good and Evil. In the Temptation
brought against the second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, the Matter contained in
the Temptation is more closely laid together; here is the supply of Nature's
Necessities presented, and here is the working of a Miracle propounded to
supply the craving Necessities of his Human Nature; If thou consent, Nature
will be supplied, and the Power of thy Divinity will be manifested. The first
Adam looks not at what should be the issue of going out of God's way to attain
that which the Temptation presented to him, and so is taken in the Snare: The
Lord Jesus looks to the Event, as appears in his Answer to the Devil, Man shall
not live by Bread alone. It Is the Blessing of God upon the Bread that makes it
tend to the satisfying of Nature, and not Bread alone without his Blessing that
can do it; and so he overcomes the Tempter.

The Devil being overcome in this first Assault, he prepares for the second,
ver. 5, 6. And the Devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a
Pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy
self down; for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee,
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a Stone. Ver. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. Not that another Scripture opposes the true
meaning of that Scripture cited by the Devil, but his addition to it, Cast thy
self down; for he is said to tempt God, who presumptuously, without necessity,
seeks an Experiment of the Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Truth of God.

The Devil being overcome in this second Temptation, prepares for the third;
ver. 8. Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and
shows him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them. Ver. 9. And
says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: Here he appears as a Liar, in saying that the Kingdoms of the
World* and the Glory of it were at his disposal; and he manifests his Pride in
requiring the Son of God to fall down and worship him: which is implied in our
Savior's Answer, ver. 10. Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

It appears from what has been here laid down, that the Lord Jesus Christ
being required, as the Head of the Elect, to give a perfect Obedience to the
Law, or the first Covenant, did, notwithstanding the assaults of Satan,
persevere in his Obedience: which Obedience of his is in Scripture called God's
Righteousness, because of the Union of the two Natures in his Person; and
because it was by the Power of his Divine Nature that his Human Nature was
supported and enabled to withstand the Temptations. But seeing I shall have
occasion to speak further of this Righteousness when I come to show how the
Holy Ghost does apply it to the Souls of poor, weary, heavy-laden Sinners, who
fly out of self-dependance unto him as to a Sanctuary, I shall proceed to the
second part of the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ, which consisted in his
free and voluntary giving up of himself to answer the Justice of God for the
Elect.

And, first, I shall take notice of the Sufferings of his Soul: Isa. 53.10. Yet
it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to Grief; when thou shall
make his Soul an Offering for Sin. He never had committed Violence, neither was
Guile found in his Mouth; but having undertaken to make Satisfaction to the
Justice of God for the Elect, and to undergo the Penalty of the first Covenant,
how did he feel the weight of Divine Wrath upon his Soul, as that bitter fruit
which does attend Sin? Mat. 26.37, 38. And he took with him Peter, and the two
Sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful, and very heavy. Then says he unto
them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death; tarry ye here and watch
with me. Mark 14.35. And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and
prayed, that if it were possible the hour might pass from him: Compared with
Luke 22.42, 43, 44. Father, if thou be willing, remove this Cup from me:
nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done. And there appeared an Angel unto
him from Heaven, strengthening him: And being in an Agony, he prayed more
earnestly; and his Sweat was as it were drops of Blood falling down to the
ground. He prays for freedom from that Cup and Hour, that is, from the
grievous Torments that were upon his Soul: yea, so great was the Sorrow
wherewith his Soul was ready to be overwhelmed, that he seeks for help by the
Prayers of his poor drousy sleeping Disciples. There is an Astonishment or an
Amazement which falls upon the Soul two ways, that is, an Astonishment of
Admiration, and an Astonishment of Fear; the latter is here meant. He saw
himself fallen on a sudden into such Distress, as he knew he could not be
delivered from it: and being in an Agony he wrestles with Grief and Fear which
pressed his precious Soul; yea, he struggles and wrestles with it, that he
might not be so far overcome by it, as to bewray any kind of Impatience: he
vents his Grief and Sorrow in these words, Not my Will, but thine be done. The
first Adam had a Garden of Pleasure to walk in, the second Adam has a Garden
of Sorrow to weep and mourn in. The Garden in which Adam and Eve was placed had
a pleasant River running through it to water it; this Garden is watered with
the Blood of the second Adam, that is forced through his Veins by inward Grief
and excessive Sorrow: he not only is said to have sweat drops of Blood, but as
it were to have bedewed the place. Says Jansen upon the words; If we behold
him upon the Cross, he there complains of the withdrawings of the Divine Nature
from him in these words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

I come, secondly, to speak of the Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ in his
Body; he experienced the fulfilling of the words of the Prophet, Isa. 50.6. I
gave my Back to the smiters, and my Cheeks to them that plucked off the Hair: I
hid not my face from shame and spitting. Pilate, who was his Judge, pronounces
him innocent, and as an outward sign of his Innocence, washes his hands when
he pronounces Sentence against him, to clear himself of his Blood; yet
scourges him, and delivered him to be crucified: Mat. 27.27, 28. Then the
Soldiers of the Governor took Jesus into the common Hall, and gathered unto
him the whole band of Soldiers: And they stripped him, and put on him a
scarlet Robe. The putting on the Scarlet Robe was for two Reasons, the first,
that the pain of his scourging might be increased upon him; the second reason,
to show their Contempt of his Kingly Power. Ver. 29, 30. And when they had
platted a Crown of Thorns, they put it upon his Head, and a Reed in his
right hand; and they bowed the Knee before him, saying, Hail King of the Jews.
And they spit upon him, and took the Reed, and smote him on the Head. They
would not only mock him with the putting of such a Crown on him, but by the
same also show their Cruelty to him by fastening the Thorns into his Head. Ver.
32. And as they came out, they found a Man of Cyrene, Simon by name; him they
compelled to bear his Cross. It was a Custom among the Romans, that those
Malefactors that were to be crucified did bear their own Cross; but such had
been already the grievous Sufferings of this innocent Lamb, that his Body was
wearied, and made unable to undergo it; so a Stranger is laid hold of to carry
it for him to the place of Execution. Ver. 38. Then were two Thieves crucified
with him; one on the right hand, and the other on the left. This Death of the
Cross was a very painful and shameful Death; the weight of the Body being born
up by Nails struck through the Hands and Feet, until they died by a languishing
Death. He was numbered with the Transgressors, having a Thief on each hand,
that we might be reckoned amongst the Sons of God. His Arms were stretched open
to show his willingness to receive poor returning Sinners; with one Arm
inviting the Jews, with the other the Gentiles, to flee from Wrath to come, by
taking Sanctuary in him. O my Soul, do thou desire to behold the abominable
nature of Sin? Do thou desire to know how hateful it is in God's sight? Then
take a view of thy suffering Lord. How was his precious Soul filled with
Anguish! How was his precious Body (which was formd by the incomprehensible
Power of the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary) wearied out by a
painful Death? Behold this Man of Sorrow, that is acquainted with Grief! The
Vail of the Temple is rent at his Death, to show that he was plucking away that
Vail that interposed betwixt God and poor Sinners. The Sun was darkened, being
ashamed to behold the Rage of the wicked against him: the Earth, who had long
groaned under the Curse for Sin, trembles to behold what the Son of God indures
to remove the Curse.

Thirdly, I proceed to show, that the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ was
subservient to the Decree of Election, and answers the Designs of it. And I
shall clear it up from these following Scriptures, Acts 2.22, 23. Ye Men of
Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth a Man approved of God among you, by
Miracles and Wonders and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye
your selves also know: Him, being delivered by the determinate Counsel and
foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. I shall pass by the Wickedness of these malicious Jews, and only take
notice of what is contained in this 23d. Verse, concerning the Decree of God,
his determinate Counsel and Fore-knowledg, having determined it to be so; that
is, that his Son should thus suffer (which did not in the least lesson their
Sin.) The reasons of our Lord's Death in reference to the answering of the
Decree, we have in John 17.19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that
they also might be sanctified through the Truth: Compared with Heb. 2.11. For
both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one; for
which cause he if not ashamed to call them Brethren. By sanctified and
sanctifies in these two Scriptures is not meant the sanctifying Work of the
holy Spirit, but his being set apart to the Work of Redemption performed by the
Lord Jesus Christ, being the Head of the Elect; for their sakes he willingly
submits to those Conditions his Father required, to clear them from the
Penalty of the first Covenant.

That the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ is subservient to the Decree of
Election, and answers the Designs of it, does further appear from Rev. 13.8.
And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, whose Names are not
written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World.
Here are some by eternal Decree secured from falling into Idolatrous Worship;
here is the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ taken in by the Decree, as the means
appointed by the Decree to secure them from falling. To sum up this Chapter; If
the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ be comprehended in the Decree of
Election, as the means appointed to answer that part of the design of the
Decree, which was the satisfying the Conditions of the Covenant of Works, that
so the Elect might be delivered from the Penalty of it, it will appear to any
unprejudiced Christian, that the Covenant of Grace and Redemption are but one
Covenant.

CHAP. III. Of the Mediatorship of the Lord Jesus Christ, in two parts; First,
In procuring and sending of the Spirit to fit for the publishing of the way of
Salvation. Secondly, For the Spirits accompanying the outward Declaration by
opening the Heart, and so leading into the way; and keeping the Saints in it,
subservient to the Decree of Election, and answering the Designs of it.
IF we consider the state of the Elect as they come into the World, which, by
reason of the natural Pollution that does attend them, does make them wholly
unfit for Communion with God, it is necessary that they should have one to be
their Head, who does partake both of the Nature of God, and of the Nature of
Man, as the Person that was to stand betwixt them and God: He must be Man, of
kin to the Nature offending, that he might satisfy the Justice of God; for the
Righteousness of God did require that the same Nature which had committed Sin,
should undergo the Penalty due to Sin. And he must be God, that so his Justice,
Goodness and Righteousness being every way infinite and eternal, might make the
Sufferings of that Nature to which it was united, of no less force than eternal
Torment in others, to the satisfying of Justice for whom he suffered.

And although the eternal Word did not actually take our Nature on him, that he
might discharge the Elect from the Penalty of the first Covenant, until his
appearance in the state of his Humiliation; yet he stood as the Head of the
Covenant, and through his Undertaking Mercies were conveyed to the Elect, and
Judgments prevented from falling upon them. We have several Instances in the
Old Testament (upon special occasions) of his appearing in Man's Nature, and
that as Mediator upon the account of the Elect: Genesis 18.1, 2, 3. And the Lord
appeared unto him in the Plain of Mamre: and he sat in the tent-door in the
heat of the day. And he lift up his Eyes and looked, and lo, three Men stood by
him; and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent-door, and bowed
himself toward the ground; and said, My Lord, if now I have found favor in thy
sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy Servant. That one of these three
was the eternal Word in Man's Nature, appears, ver. 20, 21. And the Lord said,
Because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great; and because their Sin is very
grievous, I will go down now, and see, whether they have done altogether
according to the Cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
That his Eye was upon the Elect in Sodom does appear, ver. 32. And he (that is,
Abraham) said, O let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once:
Peradventure ten shall be found there (that are righteous.) And he said, I will
not destroy it for tens sake. Compared with Chap. 19. and the former part of
the 22d Verse, Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou
be come thither.

The Son of God, who is the Head of the Elect, has searched after the number
of the Righteous in this place, and has found them in it who belong unto him;
they must be removed, before the wicked can be destroyed.

A second Scripture for the confirming of what I am treating of, is Genesis 32.24.
And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a Man with him until the breaking
of the day. That this Man is the eternal Word in Man's Nature will appear, ver.
28. And he said, Thy Name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a
Prince have thou Power with God and with Men, and have prevailed. The Son of
God sympathizes with his poor afrighted Member, who was in danger to be
destroyed by his cruel Brother Esau. Hosea 12.4. Yea, he (Jacob) had power over
the Angel (of the Covenant) and prevailed: he wept, and made Supplication.

Having opened the way into this Chapter by the foregoing Introduction, I come
now to clear up the Matter containd in it; and I shall confine my self to the
times of the New Testament, which affords us the greatest Light in these
Truths. And, first, I shall show that the sending of the Spirit to fit for the
publishing of the way of Salvation depends on his Intercession, as Mediator
betwixt the Father and the Elect; and that the Spirit's accompanying the
outward Declaration, and opening the Heart to receive the Truths held forth in
the Gospel Declaration, depends likewise, upon him. Secondly, That the
keeping of the Saints in a way of Salvation depends likewise upon him. And
under this Head I shall endeavor to show the nature of that Work which the
holy Spirit carries on in the Hearts of the Saints. Thirdly, and lastly, I
shall show how it is all subservient to the Decree of Election, and answers the
Designs of it.

And, first, I shall show that the sending of the Spirit for the publishing of
the way of Salvation depends upon the Intercession of the Lord Jesus. I shall
divide this Head into two parts, and first treat of the extraordinary
Qualification wherewith the first Publishers of the Gospel were endued:
Secondly, the ordinary Qualification, without which a Person can have no real
Satisfaction to his own Soul, that he is called of God to that great Work and
Service.

And, first; I shall treat of that extraordinary Qualification wherewith the
first Publishers of the Gospel were endued. The Lord Jesus Christ after he was
risen from the dead, bids his Disciples stay for the Qualification wherewith
they should be fitted for the dispensing of the Gospel, in these words, Luke
24.49. And behold, I send the Promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in
the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power from on high: Compared
with Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they
(that is, the Disciples) were all with one accord in one place: And suddenly
there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled all
the House where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven Tongues,
as of Fire, and it sat upon each of them: And they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance. As their Commission was to preach the Gospel to all Nations, so the
Qualification for the Work was agreeable to the Commission. Where Persons do
pretend to the same Commission with the Apostles, and that they have as large
an extent of Power and Jurisdiction as they had, and want the Qualification
wherewith they were endued, they carry, says the learned Dr. Owen, the mark of
Antichrist in their Foreheads. That this Qualification for the first publishing
of the Gospel did proceed from the Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ as
Mediator, for the gathering of the Elect out of the World, will appear, if we
compare these two following Scriptures one with another, Acts 2.32, 33. This
Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all are Witnesses: Therefore being by the
right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the
Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. Compared with
Acts 10.34, 35, 36, 43, 44. Then Peter opened his Mouth, and said, Of a truth I
perceive that God is no respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he that
fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. The Word which God
sent unto the Children of Israel, preaching Peace, by Jesus Christ (he is Lord
of all) To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of Sins. While Peter spoke these
words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word. In Acts 2.32, 33.
the Qualification is laid down, without which Peter had been unable to preach
the Gospel to those of Cesarea; here is the Holy Ghost, as a fruit of the Lord
Jesus's Intercession, attending the outward preaching of the Gospel, and
setting it home upon the Heart with Power; the outward preaching of the Gospel
being the instrumental means appointed to gather the Elect out of the World
unto God. Romans 10.17. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God. By the Word of God here is meant the Declaration of the Gospel: The
outward Declaration of the Gospel does contain in it these Truths appointed by
God for the Salvation of the Elect; the Holy Ghost removes the Vail of Darkness
from the Heart, subjects the Heart unto the Truth, and inclines the Heart to
join with it.

I come, in the second place, to treat of the ordinary Qualification to preach
the Gospel, without which a Person can have no real Satisfaction to his own
Soul that he is called of God to that great Work and Service. The extraordinary
Qualisication and the ordinary Qualification do not differ in a different
Declaration of Truths delivered, but in a different work of the Spirit upon the
Heart in discovering one and the same Truth; the one having it by the immediate
impulse of the Spirit of God overpowering all the Faculties of the Soul, and
making it stoop to the leadings of the Spirit; in the other the holy Spirit
works not so powerfully, but by giving in of Light to behold the Truth already
delivered in the Word (and sealed by Miracle) gives a Gift of utterance to
declare it unto others.

For the clearing up this Qualification, I shall compare two Scriptures, Ephesians.
4.7, 8. But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the
Gift of Christ. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led
Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto Men. Which Gifts to Men he tells us in
ver. 12. are for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ; the Body of Christ taking in the Saints
until Christ's second appearance. The Gifts here intended must be meant the
ordinary Qualifications of the Spirit for the work of the Ministry, as the
means appointed by God to gather the Saints into one Body, and to edify them
when they are gathered in, until they be brought safe to the Mansions of Glory,
because the extraordinary Qualification did cease in a little time. To clear up
this a little further, lock into 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every Man has received
the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the
manifold Grace of God. If any Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God;
if any Man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives: that God
in all things may be glorified through Jesut Christ; to whom be Praise and
Dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Here is contained in these words the Gift
given from God the Father; here is the Lord Jesus Christ, through whose
Intercession this Gift is given; here is the nature of the Gift, which is the
Spirit's inlightnings into the Oracles (or holy Scriptures;) here is the
twofold end, God's Glory, and the Saints Edification. Where this Qualification
is wanting, the Soul can have no real Satisfaction that it is called of God to
that Work and Service: which I shall make appear by these following Rensons.

First, Although Learning be very serviceable in order to have recourse to the
Original Text, for the understanding the Letter of the Scripture in the
Original, for to stop the mouth of Gainsayers; yet the Darkness which is upon
the Soul by Nature is not thereby removed. Neither can Learning of it self
comprehend that inward Life and Virtue which breaths in the holy Scriptures.
The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.

Secondly, Without this ordinary Qualification, of which I have been speaking,
the Soul can have no real Satisfaction that it is called of God to the work of
the Ministry of the Gospel; because that although by Learning, many weighty Truths
may be collected from the Writings of experienced Christians, who have lived in
the Power of Christianity, yet the inward work of the Spirit being wanting in
him that delivers them to others, they give an uncertain sound; there being a
want of an inward sense of these Truths upon the Heart, and often a great deal
of Man's Corruptions mixed with them, which they receive from the Vessel through
which they pass.

Thirdly, Without this ordinary Qualification, of which I have been speaking,
the Soul can have no real Satisfaction that it is called of God to the work of
the Ministry of the Gospel, because without it the Heart is not engaged in the
Work that such Persons take upon them; neither are their Aims and Ends right in
their entering upon this great Work, nor in the carrying of it on; the getting
an outward Support in the World for themselves being the thing they are most
concerned for.

Fourthly, Without this ordinary Qualification, of which I have been speaking,
the Soul can have no real Satisfaction that it is called of God to the work of
the Ministry of the Gospel; because there wants a Union by Faith with the Lord
Jesus Christ, from whence fresh Supplies should be drawn for the discharging of
that great Work: besides, there wants the knowledge of the worth of poor Souls,
accompanied with yerning of the Bowels after their eternal good.

But Learning being put under the Qualification of which I have been speaking,
and brought to be a Servant to it, is to be prised as a very choice Jewel. Yet
so greatly are Christians degenerated from the Power of Christianity, that
Learning is made the main thing in this day; and their Hearts are taken up more
with the curiousness of the Style of the Minister, than with a serious search
about the matter delivered; and so their Faith stands in the Wisdom of Man, and
not in the Power of God.

Having showed that the extraordinary and the ordinary Qualification to
dispense the Gospel, with the holy Spirit's accompanying of it as the
instrumental means, to gather the Elect out of the World unto God, do depend
upon the Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, as being their Head and
Mediator; I proceed, in the second place, to show, that the keeping of them in
the way of Salvation until they be brought to the Manisions of eternal Rest, is
committed to him, and depends on him. And under this Head I shall endeavor
to show the nature of that Work which the holy Spirit carries on in the Hearts
of the Saints.

In showing, that the keeping the Saints in the way of Salvation until they be
brought to the Mansions of eternal Rest, does depend upon the Lord Jesus
Christ, I shall consider the Power with which he is invested as the Church's
Head, his Prevalency with his Father for them, and his unlimited Power over all
the Church's Enemies, for the Church's good.

Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God has
made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. The Father
has given him to the Elect, to be unto them Christ a Savior, that by feeding
upon his Person by Faith, they should find that comprehended in him which
should be sufficient to keep them for ever in the Love and Favor of God: and a
Lord to them, as having an unlimited Power vested in him. Mat. 28.18. And Jesus
came, and spoke unto them, saying, All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in
Earth: Compared with Ephesians. 1.22, 23. And has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be the Head, over all things to the Church, which is his Body,
(by Church here is meant the whole Body of the Elect.) For the good of these he
is set over the holy Angels, that they might be employed by him for their good;
Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them
who shall be Heirs of Salvation? And gave him to be Head over all things to the
Church, not Head unto all things. Neither Satan nor his Instruments have any
benefit by this unlimited Power that the Father has invested him withal, but
the Elect only; yet his Power is of so large extent, as to overturn all the
Plots and Designs of Satan, so as to make the issue of them end in the Church's
good, and his own Glory: he countermines them, and either takes out their
Powder by which they designed to blow up the Church; or in the springing of it
makes the Ruin fall upon themselves. In clearing up a little further this
Soul-refreshing Truth, I shall open the words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11.3.
But I would have you know, that the Head of every Man is Christ; and the Head
of the Woman, is the Man; and the Head of Christ is God.

In opening the words of the Apostle, we are to understand the Head of the
Woman is the Man, where the Woman is joined in Marriage-Union to the Man; and
by the Head of every Man is Christ, must be meant every elect Person, who comes
to witness a Union with him; and by the Head of Christ is God, we must
understand him as having his Human Nature joined to the second Person in the
Godhead, and so brought into a nigh relation with the Father. Now that I
may-come to some discovery of this glorious Mystery, I shall consider the
Relation which the Woman has to her Husband by this Marriage-Union, and the
Privileges that she is invested with by this Relation. That her Relation is
very great does appear, in that of two Persons they are so far made one, that
ever after this Knot of Marriage is tied, he looks upon her as a part of
himfelf; she loses her own Name, and takes the Name of her Husband, thereby
showing that she is become a part of him: and so great is her Privilege by this
Union, that how mean soever her Extraction has been before Marriage, it is
from that time forward forgotten, and she is made a sharer with her Husband in
whatsoever Honor he is invested; and whatever is conferred upon him, she
becomes a sharer with him in it. This, says the Apostle, it a great Mystery,
but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. That is, he was for typifying out
the Relation that was betwixt Christ and the Church by it.

And this leads me to the second thing in the Apostle's words, viz. to show how
every elect Person does become one with the Lord Jesus Christ, and a sharer
with him in the Honor the Father has invested him withal. Every elect Person
does become one with the Lord Jesus by the free tendering of himself to them,
this must be to bring about the Marriage. And O what Condescension is here in
this excellent Person, that he should stoop so low, to take such unworthy
Creatures into so nigh a relation with himself! Persons that before they become
related to the Lord Jesus Christ, are under the Penalty of the first Covenant;
that is, are under the Sentence of the Law, whose Threatenings are no less than
eternal Misery: an eternal Exclusion of Soul and Body from the Presence of God,
being that which is comprehended in the Sentence. That this should be the state
that the Elect are in before the offers of these Tenders, and that Ambassadors
should be employed to make Tenders outwardly, and the holy Spirit sent from the
Bridegroom to draw the Hearts of the Elect to condescend to this
Marriage-Union; O wonderful amazing Work, if we consider the different state
that these two Parties are in before Marriage! The Hearts of the Elect being
drawn to accept him upon the terms he is offered; with what Cheerfulness is the
Heart given up to him to be one with him? and how do they look upon themselves
ever after this Union to be concerned in his Interest as it is in the World?
Does it call for a daily bearing the Cross? With what willingness of Heart do
they come to it, take it up? They look upon their Lord to be at present absent
from them, and therefore they are greatly concerned for his Truths white he is
absent from the World; they are willing to sacrifice their Interests in the
World to the Interest of Christianity. That Person has great cause to question
his Interest in Christ, whose Will is not so far brought over to the Lord Jesus
Christ, as to become a Martyr for him upon the account of his Truths. The Power
to enable to go through so great a Work must come from God when called to it;
but they do not find a drawing back of the Will from it, if he shall see it
good to call them to it. Being united to him, what Privileges have they in
present Possession? and what Privileges have they in Reversion? At present they
are brought into the state of Children: John 1.12. But as many at received him,
to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on
his Name. Through him they witness what it is to have recourse to God as a
Father, and to be owned by him as his Children. In Reversion they behold by
Faith an eternal Inheritance, and a redeemed Body. 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are
we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know,
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.
Compared with Romans 8.16, 17. The Spirit it self hears witness with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God. And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of
God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may
be also glorified together.

The third thing is, to show how the Lord Christ is brought into Relation with
God the Father, and what those Privileges are that he enjoys by virtue of this
Relation. If I should speak of the Relation of the eternal Word with the Father
which was from everlasting, it cannot be declared by the Creature; therefore to
meddle with this were high Presumption: I shall only speak of his Relation with
the Father, as the second Person in the Godhead joined to our Nature; and as so
united, he is styled in Scripture the only begotten Son of God; the Relation of
his Divine Nature with the Father, being not thereby dissolved, but remaining
firm; and his human Nature taken in to share with the Divine Nature in this
Relation.

And as so related he enjoys very great Privileges from the Father; As, first,
To share with him in Divine Honor, Joh. 5.22, 23. For the Father judges no
Man; but has committed all Judgment unto the Son: That all Men should honor
the Son, even as they honor the Father. As we honor the Father as the giver
of every good thing to us, we honor the Son as the way through which it is
given; ver. 27. And has given him authority to execute Judgment, because he is
the Son of Man. That is, he shall externally sit on the Tribunal or
Judgment Seat at the last day, and shall sentence all Persons to their eternal
state.

I come now to treat of that Work which the holy Spirit carries on in the Souls
of the Saints. The Children of God being brought by the Light of the first
Covenant to see themselves under the Penalty of the Law, do come to witness by
inward Experience the truth of the Apostle's words, Romans 7.10. And the
Commandment which was ordained to Life, (to the first Adam while in Innocence)
is to them the Messenger of Death. Actual Sins which they have committed
against God, with the Penalty annexed to them, are in the Glass of the Law
presented before them; they are so far delivered from the Rock of Presumption,
that they are in danger of splitting upon the Rock of Desperation, but that an
everlasting Arm is put under to support them. To these heavy-laden Sinners are
the Tenders of Grace through a dear Redeemer presented outwardly, and these
does the Spirit draw inwardly: The Sins that they have committed outwardly, and
the Corruptions that they groan under inwardly, are brought with them to the
Lord Jesus Christ; they have nothing to recommend themselves by to the
Redeemer, but an inward fight and feeling of the Misery that they groan under;
they see a real need of a Savior: and to these, when laid hold of by Faith, he
is precious. The Evidence of a real Closure with the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
acceptance of pardoning Grace through him, does manifest it self in a
differrent manner. All the Children of God have not alike Evidence of a
Closure; some come only to witness a Faith of dependence on him, and upon Grace
through him, while others are taken into his Arms, and embraced by him, and
drink deep of the Enjoyment of God through him. To each of these Conditions, as
having received through rich Grace some inward Experience of them upon my own
Soul, I shall treat: And, first, Of the Faith of dependence, which does
discover it self to the Souls of God's Children in this manner. The Soul has
strongly born in by the holy Spirit some such absolute Promise as this, John
6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out. They have the Evidences of the Father's giving
them to him, and of his driving them out of self-dependance to this Savior;
they have the assurance in the Promise of his acceptance in these words [him
that cometh] extended to every comer; and they have the certainty of their
Salvation, that he will in no wise cast them out. This, or such like absolute
Promises being not only born in, but engraven upon the Heart by the holy
Spirit, the Soul is enabled by Faith to feed upon, and to rest upon for
Comfort, being thoroughly persuaded of the faithfulness of the Promiser, and of
his Ability to perform what he has promised: and from this does the Soul draw
inward Peace, going a begging through the World for a more full discovery of
their Souls Beloved to them, and of the Fathers Love through him, but are
denied; and many times do breath out their Souls unto God in words not much
unlike their Lord's, My God, my God, Why do thou for sake me? A Faith of
dependence which knits the Soul to him is present, but the Evidence of God's
Presence with them is wanting.

It is upon an absolute Promise that I desire to close with Christ, says Mr.
Cotton; for if the Promise upon which thou closest be conditional, there being
a Failure, through Frailty, of the Condition, the Comforts flowing from the
Promise, will thereby cease: therefore, says he, it is upon an absolute
Promise that I desire to trust for Salvation.

2ly. I come in the next place to treat of that more full and clear Discovery
of a closure with the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Father's Acceptance through
him, which the Holy Spirit does bring some of the Children of God to
experience; and that is by leading a poor sensible Sinner to the Declaration of
the Sufferings of the Blessed Jesus, and conveying the Declaration into the
Soul, and with it giving the Soul an inward Glance of the Person of the Lord
Jesus Christ, from whom the Soul, by the help of the Spirit, does draw such
Virtue as causes an immediate removal of inward Guilt which the Soul has
contracted by Sin; and under much Brokenness the Soul is brought to close with
him. Where this Closure is witnessed, there does an Intercourse with the Father
attend it: The Name of the Blessed Jesus is with this Closure engraven so on
the Heart? that the Enjoyment of him becomes exceeding pleasant and comfortable.

3ly. I shall proceed to show how the Holy Spirit does break down Corruption in
the Soul, and carries on the Work of Sanctification.

1. By discovering unto the Soul the polluting Nature of Sin; that unless the
Soul be preserved from it, Communion with a holy God cannot be enjoyed. It
leads the Soul to watch against Temptations that draw into Sin; and it leads
the Soul through Christ to the Father, for power to be kept from it. The Lord
Jesus Christ as Mediator is the Person, upon the account of whose Worthiness
the Soul craves help from God: No sooner is the Soul come before God to seek
him in its private Addresses, but if Christ be enjoyed by Faith, the Outgoings
of the Heart are to him, and through him to the Father. The Soul claims a Right
of Relation, or Kindred with him, and so uses Plainness of Speech with him
about its State and Condition: and by beholding that its own nature in the
Person of the Lord Jesus Christ stands nighly related to the Father, it puts
him upon taking its Condition, and the managing of it, into his own hands, as
being able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him; seeing he ever
lives to make Intercession for them.

2. The Spirit of God does put the Soul upon seeking unto God for more light,
that so those Seeds of Sin that lie undiscovered in the Soul, may not only be
brought to light, but likewise be rooted out, as says the Psalmit, Search me,
O God, and know my Heart; try me, and know my Thoughts, and see if there be any
wicked way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting. Such is the nature of
Holiness in the Souls of the Saints, that it would have the very Seeds of
Corruption removed: and as the Spirit of God does put the Soul upon the using
that means which God has appointed for the subduing of Sin and Corruption; so
it likewise does not only beget a Principle of Grace in the Soul, by the Soul's
Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, but by its inward Supplies it puts fresh
Vigor and Life into it, by which the Heart comes more and more to be led forth
unto God to seek after him, and engaged more closely to follow him.

3. The H. Spirit does encourage the Soul to persevere in the* Way that leads
to Communion with God, by letting the Soul feel the peaceable Fruit that it
does bear in it in this Life, and likewise that eternal Happiness that it fits
the Soul for in glory. The Saints sow in Tears here, but they shall reap in
Joy: they go on their way weeping, bearing precious Seed; but at the Morning of
the Resurrection, then they shall appear bearing their Sheaves with them.

I come now in the third place to prove how all this is subservient to the
Decree of Election, and answers the designs of it; Ephesians the first Chapter,
ver. 3, 4, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly places in Christ: According
as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the World, that we should
be holy, and without blame before him in love: Having predestined us unto the
Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his Will; to the praise of the glory of his Grace, wherein he has made us
accepted in the beloved. Compared with the first Epistle of Peter, the first
Chapter, 2, 3, 4, and 5th Verses, Elect according to the Fore-knowledg of God
the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling
of the Blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and Peace be multiplied. Blessed
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
Mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead; to an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you; Who are kept by the power of God
through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time.

These Scriptures do fully prove the Truths of which I have been treating, the
Oneness of the Covenant of Grace and Redemption: for, here the Decree as it
proceeds from God is eternal; and passes through Time into Eternity, to the
effecting or perfecting what was designed by it. Can any Person separate the
means comprehended in the Womb of the Decree to attain the End, and not do
manifest Wrong to the Decree it self? Let the serious Reader judge. Here is the
Lord Jesus Christ, the second Person in the Godhead, set up by the Decree as
the Head of the Elect; all the Elect comprehended in him. He appears in a State
of Humiliation for the Elect; they have the Offers of Grace by him, and are
brought to give Obedience to the Offers; have his Blood applied to their Souls
for their Justification, and through him have the Spirit sanctifying them, and
by his mighty Power, bringing them to the Glory which the Decree has designed
for them. All these outward Acts which were transacted in time, were but the
gradual fulfilling of what was comprehended in the Decree which in it self was
eternal; which I hope does prove that which was designed by the second Part of
this Book, that is, that the Covenant of Grace and Redemption is but one
Covenant.

For a Conclusion; This Doctrine administers a great deal of Comfort to those
that have the Marks of Election already wrought in their Souls, to see their
Salvation sixth upon such a sure Foundation; and the Accomplishment in such a
way as brings the greatest Motives with it to Humility and Thankfulness, of
engaging the Heart unto God.

And for those that are under the means which lead to attain the End, it is not
discouraging Doctrine to them; because who are comprehended in the Decree, is a
Secret wholly reserved to God alone; and we no otherwise know that our selves
or others are in it, but as we come under effectual Calling, which is that
which opens the Door into it: Therefore it is in vain for the Creature to think
to know what God at present conceals from him, any other way but that which is
of his own appointing. Secret things belong to the Lord, revealed things to us
and our Children.

PART III. Setting forth the Publication of Gospel Grace, from the Fall to
Abraham; the State of the Church until that time; the Covenant made with him;
the Nature of the Old Testament Church State, and the New Testament
Church State.
CHAP. I. Of the Publication of Gospel Grace from the Fall to Abraham; the
Church State during that Dispensation.
OUR first Parents Adam and Eve having by Disobedience brought themselves, and
all their Offspring being included in them, under the Penalty of the first
Covenant; the great God, whose Mercy, Grace, and Goodness is over all his
Works, does in his threatening against Satan, publish the glad Tidings of the
Gospel, and does hold forth a Redeemer to come of the Seed of the Woman; Genesis
3.15. And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed
and her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. In
which Threatening we may observe, that in the Word It and His the Person of the
Redeemer was held forth unto our first Parents; and upon the performance of
this Threatening against Satan, which did carry Gospel Grace in it, did the
Children of God that lived in the World before Abraham rely: They by Faith
beheld him that was to come; and through that Grace which was granted to poor
Sinners in him, they were brought to walk with God, and to enjoy him.

In the prosecuting of the third Part of this Book, I shall by the Assistance
of the Spirit of God make it appear, That the Gospel as to the Matter of it, is
one and the same with what is contained in this Threatening against Satan; and
that what renewals of Grace God has in a Covenant-way bestowed upon any of his
Children, as upon Abraham and David, they were but as so many Confirmations of
the Certainty of a Redeemer to come, and tended to streng-then this first
Threatening, and to confirm the Faith of the Fathers in the certain Performance
of it. That the Publication of Gospel Grace did not br with God that were under
the found of it, is very clear: It is not the bare Performance of those Duties
required by the Gospel, that does evidence Persons being in Covenant with God,
but the Principle by which they are enabled to perform them. An Instance of
which we have in the two Brothers, Cain and Abel, Genesis 4.3, 4, 5. And in
process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the Fruit of the ground,
an Offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also brought of the Firstlings of his
Flock, and of the Fat thereof; and the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his
Offering: And unto Cain and his Offering he had not respect; and Cain was very
wroth, and his Countenance fell. We cannot think that these two Brothers, as
they were the Children of Adam and Eve, could be ignorant of the Threatening
against Satan, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head: But
one of them offered a more excellent Sacrifice than the other, by Faith having
a view of this blessed Redeemer; upon the account of whose Worthiness, and in
whose Name, he offered up his Offering unto God. Abel's Soul being led by Faith
to the Redeemer, and through him unto God, meets with the acceptance of his
Person, and of his Offering: Cain, who wants Faith, has both his Person and
his Offering rejected. How small was the number of the Spiritual Seed? yea,
into what a small compass was the outward face of the Church brought when God
brought the Flood upon the old World? the outward face of the Church confined
to Noah's Family; Genesis 6.11, 12, 13. And the Earth was corrupt before God, and
the Earth was filled with Violence. And God looked upon the Earth, and behold,
it was corrupt; for all Flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth. And God
said unto Noah, The end of all Flesh is come before me; for the Earth is filled
with Violence through them: and behold, I will destroy them with the Earth.
Although wicked Ham lived in this religious Family, whose Father has this
Character given him by God himself, Genesis 7.1. And the Lord said unto Noah, Come
thou and all thy House into the Ark, for thee have I seen righteous before me
in this Generation. And although he was preserved with his Father from the
Deluge, his Heart is not the least touched with it, but he seems rather hardened
in his Wickedness, as appears by that brutish Act of his to his Father, when he
lay uncovered in the Tent. Although Christ had a Church in the World from Adam
until Abraham's time; and as far as Light can be afforded from the holy
Scriptures, the Church did remain privately in Families; yet that all those
that were in the Family were Members of the Church, much less brought into the
Covenant of Grace, the Scripture gives us no ground to believe.

I cannot but a little wonder to behold the Confidence of some Men who do
assert, That there was no Covenant of Grace before Abraham; and in public, in
my hearing have affirmed, that to make the Threatening against Satan the
Covenant of Grace, is to make God covenant with the Devil. And again; That when
God ever took any Person into Covenant with him, he also took all the
Offspring, or all his Seed, into Covenant with him. To question the Reality of
such Assertions, is to bring one under the Reproach of being Deniers of the
Covenant of Grace; as if they had a mind to inhance a kind of Infallibility to
themselves, by making Persons believe things from their pare Assertions.

CHAP II. Of the Covenant made with Abraham, and of the Old Testament
Church State: what was required to be a Member of it.
THAT the Covenant made with Abraham had something in it peculiar to him as a
Believer, for the strengthening of his Faith, and likewise relating to a
numerous Offspring which were to proceed from his Loins, is that which I hope
to clear up in the following Discourse.

And, first, relating to him as a Believer for the strengthening of his Faith in
the blessed Redeemer, who then was to come: He has this exceeding great Favor
bestowed upon him, to have the Promise of the Redeemer's coming renewed unto
him; and that by a new Promise, with this additional Favor annexed to it, that
the Redeemer according to the Flesh should be of his Seed; which must certainly
bring a great deal of comfort with it to believing Abraham, Genesis 12.3. And I
will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curses thee; and in thee
shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed: compared with Genesis 22.18. And
in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. The Apostle Paul
recites the very Words of the Promise, and calls it a preaching the Gospel
before unto Abraham, Gal. 3.8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham,
saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed; Compared with ver. 16. Now to
Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made. He says not, To Seeds, as of
many; but as of one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ. From which Words I do
observe this Truth, That the Covenant entered into by God with Abraham, was but
a renewing of the same Promise of a Messiah to come, which the Threatening in
the 3d Chapter of Genesis and the 15th Verse contained in it, granted unto him
for the strengthening of his Faith in the Messiah; whose Day of appearance he
beheld by Faith, and rejoiced to see it, and so was justified before God by
that which Faith beheld in these new Covenant Promises. Romans 4.21, 22, 23, 24.
And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised he was, able also to
perform: And therefore it was imputed to him for Righteousness. Now it was not
written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also, to
whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead.

As Abraham by Faith was led to believe this Promise which related to the
Coming of the Messiah, and thereby was privileged in a large share of the
Mercies which accompany the Messiah; so all true Believers that can lay claim
to the same Faith with blessed Abraham, are reckoned his Spiritual Seed, and
become Sharers with him in the same Mercies. Gal. 3.28, 29. There is neither
Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham 's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. As faithful Abraham was
made Partaker of such precious Promises by Christ, to whom all New Covenant
Promises do first run; so every Believer coming to share in the same Faith with
Abraham, lays claim to the Promises with him, and becomes a Sharer in them.
Abraham in respect of the Greatness of his Faith above others, stands as a
glorious Pattern before them; where we may behold him led forth to God by Acts
of Obedience in a wonderful, manner, not staggering how God would accomplish
his Promises, but minding his Obedience: So that he that had received the
Promises, (in Isaac) offers up this his only Son, accounting that God was able
to raise him from the dead, from whence he received him in a Figure. We may by
looking at what passed betwixt God and Abraham, as in a Glass, behold his
sincere Obedience to God, and God's Faithfulness to him in performing to a
tittle what he had promised to his Servant: which may be matter of
Encouragement to us humbly to rely upon our Heavenly Father.

Having treated of God's renewing the Promise to Abraham of the Coming of the
Messiah of his Seed; I come in the next place to treat of that numerous
Offspring which were to proceed from him, and the Privileges of which his
natural Seed as such, were made Partakers. In the 15th of Genesis, ver. 4, 5.
God promises him a numerous Offspring, And behold, the Word of the Lord came
unto him, faying, This shall not be thine Heir; (speaking of Eliezer of
Damascus) but he that shall come forth out of thine own Bowels shall be thine
Heir. And he brought him forth abroad; and said, Look now toward Heaven, and
tell the Stars, if thou be able to number them; and he said unto him, So shall
thy Seed be. As God did perform his Promise to his Servant Abraham, in bringing
forth such Multitudes of People from him as the Promise treats of; so he is
pleased to afford them Privileges above the rest of the World for many
Generations together, which are held forth in the 17th Chapter of Genesis:
Where God is pleased to grant unto the Seed of Abraham, the Promise of the Land
of Canaan for a Possession, and a Church State set up amongst them, wherein his
Worship should be carried on in such a way as was of his own appointing until
the Coming of the Messiah: Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall
the gathering of the People be. That God's End in affording this People his
Worship, before the rest of the World, was thereby to gather the Elect that
were amongst them into the Covenant of Grace, is clear from a multitude of
Scriptures; but that their Admittance to be Members of this Old Testament
Church, which was a Privilege that they enjoyed by Birthright, did of it self
bring them into the Covenant of Grace, is against both Scripture and
Experience. The Apostle in Romans 9.4, 5. does reckon up the many Privileges that
they enjoyed. In the 6th Verse he breaks forth, Not that the Word of God has
taken none effect; (yea it had answered the end for which it was appointed, the
Elect were gathered in by it) But all are not Israel that are of Israel. Ver.
7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in
Isaac shall thy Seed be called. That is, they which are the Children of the
Flesh, these are not the Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are
counted for the Seed. These Scriptures, if compared with Genesis 17. do let us
clearly see what that Covenant was, even a Church State, unto which the
Children of the Flesh had admittance to be Members by virtue of their
Birthright, and that by the very appointment of God. This Covenant having
answered the end for which it was appointed, is ended; and a better state, in
respect to the Church, does succeed it, which I hope to clear up when I come to
treat of the Church of Christ now in the times of the New Testament.

CHAP. III. Of the Ordinances of the Old Testament Church; what they did point
at to the Seed of Abraham, as descending from him by Generation; and what they
pointed at to his spiritual Seed.
IN the last Chapter I showed the nature of that Covenant made with Abraham,
and his Offspring, as they proceeded from him by Generation, that it contained
in it the Promise of an Earthly Canaan, or Earthly Inheritance, to all his
Seed; God intending to show forth some particular marks of his Bounty to them,
as they were the Offspring of this holy Man. To which Covenant or Promise
Circumcision was added as a Seal, even in the time of the Infancy of that Old
Testament Church; and the Paschal Lamb afterward added, when they were brought
out of Egypt, as a Confirmation of the fulfilling of the Covenant made with
their Father Abraham: of which Covenant the Apostle speaks in Heb. 8.7, 8, 9.
For if that first Covenant had been fauliless, then should no place have been
sought for the second. For finding fault with them, he says, Behold, the days
come (says the Lord) when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel,
and with the House of Judah: Not according to the Covenant which I made with
their Fathers, when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the Land of
Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant; and I regarded them not,
says the Lord.

The Apostle in these words does refer us to the bringing the Children of
Israel out of Egypt, the imbodying of that People into a Nation, and God's
setting up his Worship amongst them, which the 17th Chapter of Genesis, and the
Covenant there mentioned, carried in the Womb of it; the Insufficiency of which
Covenant lay not only in the unvailed Administration of Gospel Grace, which was
darkly typified forth in the times of the Old Testament, but chiefly in the
want of internal Grace: from having a share of which Grace the greatest part of
the Seed of Abraham were excluded; not the Elect who were of his Offspring, but
those which were put off with Earthly Enjoyments, which they by their
Rebellions in process of time forfeited, the Forbearance and Patience of God
being wearied out.

Having, by way of Introduction, opened the way to that which I intend to treat
of in the following Discourse, I shall lay down these three Heads to enlarge
on. First, That the Seed of Abraham were (in Gen 17.) taken into Covenant with
God; unto which Covenant temporal Mercies were annexed, and Circumcision given
as a Seal of the performance of it on God's part. Secondly, That as the
Covenant mentioned Genesis 17. carried in the Womb of it the imbodying of the Seed
of Abraham into a separate Nation, in order to have that Old Testament
Church State set up amongst them; so their Deliverance out of Egypt, and the
appointing the Paschal Lamb, was to show them that God was actually on the
accomplishing what was contained it the Covenant. Thirdly, Where internal Grace
did accompany these Ordinances, and other parts of that Old Testament Worship,
the Elect Seed were brought to have spiritual Mercies conveyed to their Souls
through it.

First; That the Seed of Abraham were (in Genesis 17.) taken into Covenant with
God, unto which Covenant Temporal Mercies were annexed, and Circumcision given
as a Seal of the performance of it on God's part, does appear as it is laid
down from ver. 4 to v. 15. extending it self not only to all his Seed that
should descend from him by Generation, but likewise to those that were born in
his House, or bought with his Money. And the uncircumcised Manchild, whose Flesh
of his foreskin is not circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his
People; he has broken my Covenant. That all the Persons that were brought into
this Covenant had inward Mercies conveyed to their Souls, crosses the words of
Abraham, ver. 18. And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before
thee! If he had understood that this Covenant into which Ishmael was going to
be taken by the initiating Ordinance of Circumcision, had been the Covenant of
Grace, he needed not have doubted of that, there being a sincere performance of
what was required of Abraham's part on the behalf of Ishmael. But we find by
God's Answer, that there was not that intended by that Covenant for him; but as
the Covenant promised an Earthly Canaan, so Ishmael, tho he had not that Land,
yet he should have other Earthly Greatness which should carry with it the
performance of what was held forth by the Covenant unto the natural Seed of
Abraham, ver. 20. And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold I have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly: twelve
Princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great Nation. This is that which
the Covenant intended for him, and doubtless Abraham did so look upon it, or
otherwise he would have interceded farther for Ishmael. Evident it is that
Ishmael was taken into this Covenant contained in Genesis 17. for Abraham did
circumcise him as the Covenant required, yet we find the Apostle Paul making
Agar and Ishmael to represent the Covenant of Works, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24. For it
is written, that Abraham had two Sons; the one by a bond-maid, the other by a
freewoman. But he that was of the bondwoman, was born after the Flesh; but he
of the freewoman was by Promise. Which things are an Allegory; for these are
the two Covenants, the one from the Mount Sinai, which gendereth to Bondage,
which is Agar. Mr. Edward Leigh in his Annotations upon the New Testament does
speak so fully to the Truth, that I shall insert his words at large. Ver. 23.
Born after the Flesh.] That is, by a bare natural Power of Generation. By
Promise.] That is, not so much by the natural strength of Parents, as by virtue
of God's Promise, which bound his Truth to set his Omnipotency at work above
Nature. Ver. 24. Which things are an Allegory.] That is, being the things that
they were, signify the things that they were not; a Figure of some other thing
mystically signified by them; that is, they represent or signify the two
Covenants. For these are the two Covenants.] That is, distinct Covenants, of
Works and Grace, first and second Covenant; not the Covenant of Grace
differently administered in the Old and New Testament. Ishmael was not under the
Covenant of Grace in any sense; Isaac and Ishmael represented all Men
regenerate and unregenerate, all which are under the Covenant of Works and
Grace. Mount Sinai.] Which came thence, being there published and promulgated;
the Law and Covenant of Works. To Bondage.] That is, begets not Children of a
free and ingenuous Spirit, loving God, and out of Love doing him Service, and
merely of his Grace, Love, free Favor and Promise expecting their Reward; but
Bondslaves, which out of a fear of Punishment, or hope of Reward do Service,
and expect the Reward for the worthiness sake of their Works. This Covenant is
Hagar.] That is, signified by Hagar, so called for a double respect: First, For
its Condition, because it begets all Children to Bondage. Secondly, For
Subordination, Sarah's Maid; the Law is a Servant to the Gospel, and Gospel
Ends. If, as Mr. Leigh says, Ishmael was not under the Covenant of Grace in
any sense, I do wonder how he can, as he does in other places, make it the
Covenant of Grace, and Circumcision the Seal of that Covenant? for of it was
Ishmael made a partaker, Genesis 17.23, 24. And Abraham took Ishmael his Son, and
all that were born in his House, and all that were bought with his Money,
(according to the appointment of the Covenant, ver. 13.) every Male among the
Men of Abraham 's House, and circumcised the Flesh of their foreskin, in the
self-same day, as God had said unto him. A second Proof for the Confirmation of
what I have laid down under this first Head, that the Covenant mentioned in
Genesis 17. did only hold forth Earthly Things to be enjoyed by the Seed of
Abraham, (by the Seed of Abraham, I intend the great number of his fleshly
Seed, as separated from the Elect which were amongst them.) That this Covenant
did only hold forth Earthly Enjoyments, and that Circumcision was only a Seal
of these things to be enjoyed by them, will further appear from that account
which the Scriptures give us of Esau. If the Covenant mentioned in Genesis 17.
unto which Circumcision is annexed, be the Covenant of Grace, and the
Infant Seed of Believers by virtue of their Parents Faith have a right to new
Covenant-Mercies, and ought to be sealed with the Seal of the Covenant; how
does this agree with Genesis 25.23. And the Lord said unto her, (that is, to
Rebekah) Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be
separated from thy Bowels; and the one People shall be stronger than the other
People; and the elder shall serve the younger. Compared with Romans 9.12, 13. It
was said unto her, (that is, to Rebekah) The elder shall serve the yopnger. As
it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. What shall we say
then? is there Unrighteousness with God? God forbid. He as an absolute
Sovereign over the Works of his hands, may dispose of Persons and Things as
pleases him. But to return to the matter in hand: here is Esau the Seed of
believing Isaac, and so without controversy he had a Covenant-right to what was
intended by the Covenant to the Seed of Abraham as such, yet even while in the
Womb excluded from any share in new Covenant-Mercies: it must then follow, that
this Covenant did not convey new Covenant-Mercies, but was a Covenant of
Peculiarity to the natural Seed of Abraham; others se there is a failure in the
Covenant, but it is the highest Wickedness to imagine, there should be any on
God's part in performing what he covenants to give. But if we look upon the
Covenant here as intending Earthly Blessings, there was no failure of these
Blessings, either to Ishmael or Esau, or to the natural Seed of Abraham from
Jacob, after they were imbodied into a Nation, and had that Church State set up
amongst them, until by aggravating Sins and Rebellion they forfeited their
right to these Covenant-Mercies.

Secondly; As the Covenant mentioned in Genesis 17. carried in the Womb of it the
imbodying of the Seed of Abraham into a separate Nation, in order to have that
Old Testament Church State set up amongst them; so their Deliverance out of
Egypt, and the appointing of the Paschal Lamb, was to show forth to them, that
God was punctual in the accomplishing what was contained in the Covenant. Although
God in Genesis 17. did enter into Covenant with Abraham, and with all his natural
Seed, yet the accomplishment of what was contained in the Covenant, in respect
of the gathering the Seed of Jacob into a National Church, was not accomplished
until many hundred years after. Exodus 2.23, 24, 25. And it came to pass in
process of time, that the King of Egypt died, and the Children of Israel sighed
by reason of the Bondage, and they cried; and their Cry came up unto God, by
reason of the Bondage. And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his
Covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. And God looked upon the
Children of Israel, and God had respect unto them. He remembered what he had
promised in Genesis 17. and so remembers it as to take in hand the accomplishment
of it, Exodus 3.17. And I have said, I will bring you up out of the Affliction
of Egypt, into the Land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites,
and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a Land flowing
with Milk and Honey. This the Apostle calls the entering into Covenant with the
Israelites when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt, which was the
accomplishing of what was contained in Genesis 17. the faultiness of which
Covenant lay in the Promise of Earthly Enjoyments, which were fading and liable
to be lost, and the want of inward Grace, by which God comes to be enjoyed, and
new Covenant-Mercies presented to the Soul. That the Apostle in Heb. 8.7, 8, 9.
compared with ver. 10, 11, 12, 13. does thus lay it down, is plain to every
Person that has not a mind wilfully to shut his Eyes against the Truth. For
the further Confirmation of what is said, look into Deuteronomy. 29.1, 2, 3, 4. These
are the words of the Covenant which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the
Children of Israel, in the Land of Moab, beside the Covenant which he made with
them in Horeb. And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have
seen all that the Lord did before your Eyes in the Land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh,
and unto all his Servants, and unto all his Land; the great Temptations which
thine Eyes have seen, the Signs and those great Miracles: Yet the Lord has not
given you a Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto this
day. Notwithstanding this Chapter does contain in it a renewal of the Covenant
to bring them to the accomplishment of the Covenant, Genesis 17. yet we find not
in the whole Chapter a promise of internal Grace, without which no Person can
be said to be brought into the new Covenant: for notwithstanding the wonderful
Trials that they went through, and the Soul-amazing Deliverances which they
received from God, the holy Spirit being wanting inwardly to fasten these upon
their Hearts, and to soften their Hearts before God; these great Appearances of
God on their behalf quickly wore off their Hearts, and they forgot all his
Benefits. That the gathering the Seed of Israel into a Nation, and the
appointing of the Passover, led to point unto the natural Seed the fulfilling
of what was contained in Genesis 17. which was the enjoyment of Earthly
Inheritances, will appear, in that the admittance unto the Passover run to the
same Persons to whom Circumcision was granted, Genesis 17.13. And that it was to
be a Sign to the natural Seed of God's performing his Promise in bringing them
to the enjoyment of the Earthly Canaan, which was but a Type of that Heavenly
Canaan reserved for the spiritual Seed, does appear from Exodus 12.25, 26, 27.
And it shall come to pass when ye be come to the Land, which the Lord will give
you, according as he has promised, (Genesis 17.) that ye shall keep this Service.
And it shall come to pass, when your Children shall say unto you* What mean you
by this Service? that ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lord's Passover,
who passed over the Houses of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote
the Egyptians, and delivered our Houses: And they bowed the Head and
worshipped. It is clear from a multitude of Scriptures, that from the first
giving forth of the Covenant in Genesis 17. until the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Seed of Abraham from Jacob downwards, were made Partakers of many
outward Privileges, even those of them that were strangers to internal Grace,
which no other People that stand in the outward part of the Worship of God in
Gospel Times can lay claim unto, (viz.) an Entail of a particular Enjoyment of
the Worship of God amongst them for many Generations together. But this will
fall under Consideration when I come to treat of the New Testament Church.

Thirdly; Where internal Grace did accompany these Ordinances of Circumcision,
and the Paschal Lamb, with other parts of the Old Testament Worship, the Elect
Seed were brought to have spiritual Mercies conveyed to their Souls through it.
Abraham has that Honor conferred upon him, to be a Father not only to a
numerous Offspring, who did enjoy an Earthly Inheritance by Covenant-right as
descending from him; but likewise a Father of the spiritual Seed, both Jews and
Gentiles, who should share with him in the same Faith, and so come to share in
those precious Promises made to him as a Believer through the Lord Jesus
Christ. That he stood as a Father to this twofold Seed, does appear from the
words of our Lord, Joh. 8.37. I know that ye are Abraham 's Seed; but ye seek
to kill me, because my Word has no place in you. That is, ye are only of that
Seed, who by virtue of descent from him, do enjoy the Privileges of Earthly
Enjoyments. Ver. 39. They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our Father.
Jesus says unto them, If ye were Abraham 's Children, ye would do the Works of
Abraham. That is; if you were of his spiritual Seed, and of the same Faith with
him, it would show it self by its Works, as Abraham's Faith did, who saw my day
of appearance as a Redeemer, and rejoiced.

Of his natural Seed as such I have already spoken, and the Privileges they
enjoyed. I now come to treat of his Spiritual Seed that did descend from him,
who did not come to their Right by being the Offspring of believing Abraham,
but by being of the same Faith with him; Romans 9.7, 8. Neither because they are
the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children: but in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called. That is, They which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the
Children of God: but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed. That
is, as Isaac's Birth was not by the natural strength of the Parents, but by
virtue of God's Promise, which bound his Truth to set his Omnipotency on work
to perform what he promised; even so it is with all the spiritual Seed. Without
the moving of the same Power upon the Heart to subject the Heart unto him, none
could come into that state which will give its Evidence according to the
Scriptures, that they are of the spiritual Seed. As it was by preaching of the
Gospel unto Abraham, or a renewing of the Promise of a Messiah to come, which
had been given out in the threatening against Satan, Genesis 3.15. that Abraham was
brought into Covenant; so it was by the means which the Wisdom of God did think
fit to make use of to convey the knowledge of the Messiah to come unto the Souls
of these Israelites, who were to be Abraham's spiritual Seed: and the ordinary
means was that Worship appointed by God in the Old Testament Church, to these
that were of years. The way that God takes to convey Grace to elect Infants in
all Ages, being a Secret which he is pleased not to discover unto us, I desire
to leave them to his rich Grace which flows to Sinners through a dear Redeemer,
and to his own way to apply it unto their Souls, and shall return to treat of
the matter in hand. As Abraham was a Father to a twofold Seed, and the
believing Israelites were to proceed from him by Generation, as well as the
Unbelievers; and as both these were to be imbodied together into one Nation and
Church for many Generations, so the natural Seed having the things intended for
them by the Covenant sealed unto them, it was necessary that his spiritual Seed
should have their Covenant-Mercies sealed to them. Abraham received the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised; that he might be the Father of all them that believe. The
outward part of the Ordinance was not the Evidence of the Israelites being
Abraham's spiritual Seed; but that which was figured out by it unto the
spiritual Seed was the Evidence; which was the having their Hearts circumcised,
Corruption removed, and Grace planted in the Soul: for although an outward
Ordinance be the means leading to the inward, where the Spirit concurs with it,
it is from the inward that the Soul receives Comfort, being thereby brought
into a condition to enjoy Communion with God, and through Faith to behold the
Heavenly Canaan before it. As the Paschal Lamb was appointed to figure out to
the natural Seed, that God was accomplishing his Promise in bringing of them to
an Earthly Canaan; so where the spiritual Seed were led by Faith to behold that
the Paschal Lamb was but a Type of the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Passover,
they through Faith were brought to behold that God was upon the accomplishing
of his Promise, in bringing of them to the Heavenly Canaan. The Apostle in Heb.
9.9, 10. shows us that the Old Testament Church State was but a Figure for the
time then present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that could
not make him that did sacrifice perfect, at pertaining to the Conscience, which
stood in Meats and Drinks, and carnal Ordinances imposed on them until the time
of Reformation. Not that the Ordinances were carnal in respect of the things
typified by them, and apprehended through the help of the Spirit by the
spiritual Seed; But, says Mr. Hildersam, such as carnal Men might perform, and
very suitable to the Disposition of a carnal Heart. God by his Wisdom ordering
his Worship in this manner, that so the natural Seed and the spiritual Seed of
Abraham from the first setting up or forming that People into a Church, might
remain imbodied together until the times of Reformation; that is, the New
Testament Church State. Their Privileges by fleshly right do then end, and the
natural Seed cease from being counted any longer a Church or People to God,
but as they fall in with the spiritual Seed of Abraham, and receive the
Qualification which the New Testament Church calls for in order to be a Member
of it. Romans 11.19, 20, 21. Thou will say then, The Branches were broken off,
that I might be graffed in. Well; because of Unbelief they were broken off, and
thou stand by Faith: be not high-minded, but fear. For if God spared not the
natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. These words, I think,
do comprehend the whole matter of which I have been treating in this Chapter:
the Branches that are broken off are the natural Seed of Abraham; or, as Paul
calls them, the Children of the Flesh; such as tho destitute of spiritual Grace
in their Souls, yet by virtue of Birth-Privilege did enjoy, as a Branch from
Abraham, a right of Membership in the Old Testament Church, and a share in the
Worship of it. But the time of the Old Testament Church State being expired,
the aim of the New Testament being to gather together the spiritual Seed of
Abraham; the fleshly Jew must be broken off, and the believing Gentile must
take his place, that so the Church in the times of the New Testament may
consist of the spiritual Seed: and if he spared not the natural Jew, because
there was a want of the Qualification, be not high-minded, but fear; for if
thou want the Qualification, thou have not long to continue a Member of the
Church of Christ in the times of the New Testament. I have in treating of this
Covenant contained in Genesis 17. gone from the common Opinion of Expositors; and
through Mercy, I can appeal unto the Lord, that I have desired sincerely to
follow the leadings of his holy Spirit in his Word. If I have varied in any
thing from the holy Scriptures, which I desire to follow as my Rule and Guide,
if any can show me my Error, and will do it in the Spirit of Meekness, I shall
be greatly obliged to them. I must desire the Reader's favor to overlook the
weakness of the Style in which these Truths are laid down, and to look at the
Truth it self, which shines the clearest when it appears in its own native
Beauty. If it agree with thy Experience, bless God for it; for thou may see
in reading of the Appendix, which contains the Author's Experience and Advice
to his Children, that the Author has nothing to glory in before the Lord: It
was by rich and free Grace alone that he was brought to see the Truth, and to
give Obedience to it: It is through rich Grace that he receives strength to
walk in it; and it is by Grace alone that he hopes to come to that eternal
Blessedness that is held forth by it.

CHAP. IV. Of the New Testament Church, and what is required to be a Member of
it.
BEfore I come to the matter contained in this Chapter, I shall speak of the
Church of Christ in general; and so it comprehends the whole Elect Body, from
the Fall to those that shall be living at Christ's second Personal Appearance.
Ephesians. 3.14, 15. For this cause I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; Of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named. Some of
the Family are gotten to their rest, others are conflicting with the World; and
some have only their being in the Decree of God, to appear at the time
appointed for them. The Church so considered, is the Body of Christ which he
has redeemed by his precious Blood, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such
thing, when presented to the Father at the Last day: But of the Church thus
considered, are many Members who are not brought to be Members of a gathered
Church, constituted according to the Rule of God's Word. That Lot, Job, and his
Friends, were of the Body of Christ, and so Members of the Church, I think no
Christian will deny; yet it does not any where appear that those were Members
of the Old Testament Church, who never imboided together, and so became thereby
visible to the Nations round about them. As Christ in the times of the Old
Testament had many Members who were not brought into the Church, so has he
likewise in the times of the New Testament. The idolatrous Church of Rome has
assumed to her self the name of the Church, or the Spouse of Christ, and so was
owned for many Ages by the great Ones of the World, while the Members of Christ
were not visible to the World, and in many places not one unto another.

In not distinguishing the Church as it is here laid down, some Persons have
driven on strange Designs against God's Children by their Cry, That out of the
Church there is no Salvation: Which is true if we consider the Elect Body, to
whom Christ was given as a Savior; but will not hold true to any particular
gathered Church; for many Members of Christ are so scattered in the World, that
for many Ages it has been, and at this time is morally impossible that they
should be gathered into a Body according to the Rule of the Word. Of the
Church, as taking in the whole Body of the Elect, do I reckon Elect Infants:
Whether only all Believers Infants, or Unbelievers Infants likewise be so, to
whom Grace is applied by the Holy Spirit, I leave as a Secret which God is
pleased to reserve unto himself. But that they are incapable of Membership in a
visible gathered Church in the times of the New Testament, and have no Right to
the two Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, will appear in the
prosecuting of this and the next Chapter, if regard be had to the Holy
Scriptures as a Rule and Guide unto us. By holding forth the Purity of the
Church, I do not thereby unchurch those several sorts of Protestants that
differ from the poor despised Baptists in many things, yet do hold with them
the Foundation, the Lord Jesus Christ as Redeemer, and the one Mediator betwixt
God and Man; in opposition to the many Mediators brought in by the Idolatrous
Church of Rome. Yet if regard be had to the Holy Scriptures as a Rule, many of
the Protestant Churches will appear to have been building upon the Foundation,
Wood, Hay, and Stubble; they have retained in their several Churches something
that has been handed down unto them from the idolatrous Papists, and not from
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. Although God has born with these
Churches several Ages, as he bore with the Churches of Asia, yet it is visible
that his Presence is greatly withdrawn from them, and may end in the
unchurching of them, when the Church comes wholly to be delivered out of her
Wilderness State, if there be not a hearty and speedy return unto him.

Having by way of Introduction opened the way into what remains chiefly to be
considered in this Chapter, I shall lay down these two general Heads, as that
which may take in the whole matter.

First, Treat of the Nature of the Publication of the Gospel under the New
Testament.

Secondly, What is required to be admitted a Member of the visible Church,
according to the Rule laid down in it.

First, I shall treat of the Nature of the Publication of the Gospel under the
New Testament; and that is in a different manner from the Publication of it in
the times of the Old Testament. The Lord Jesus Christ was then held forth under
such Types and Figures, that the end for which they were instituted in the
Church, was beheld with great difficulty; so that the Saints themselves that
were waiting for his coming, were ignorant of the manner of it, and the nature
of that Deliverance that should be wrought by him, being much upon the
expectation of a visible Kingdom in this World, and outward Glory attending of
it, not being brought clearly to distinguish betwixt his first and second
Appearance: But as the Apostle says, Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times and
diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all
things. The New Testament which was given forth by the Lord Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, does take off the Vail from the Old; and as to that part of it
which concerns the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, is an Exposition of it. Our
Lord tells the Woman of Samaria, John 4.23. But the hour comes and now is,
when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for
the Father seeks such to worship him. Under the times of the Old Testament
the Worship of God lay much outward, the Body being greatly exercised in it;
they had killing of Sacrifices, they had material Fire to burn the Sacrifice
withal, and material Salt to season the Sacrifice. But under the New Testament
the Worship most of all concerns the Soul; it is so far spiritual, that the
Spirit of God must be the Unfolder of it, and calls at the first glance for the
Soul to apprehend the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Person held forth in it.
For without a Heart true unto him, no acceptance of the Worship, neither the
Worshipper: The Salt which our Worship must be seasoned withal, must be inward
Sincerity; the Fire inward Zeal, engaging the Heart with God, when exercised in
the worshipping of him, which will not fail to keep the Body in a decent
Posture with it. How low does the Apostle go when he speaks of the Old
Testament Worship? Heb. 10.1. For the Law having a shadow of good things to
come, and not the very Image of the things can never with these Sacrifices
which they offered year by year continually, make the Comers thereunto perfect.
By the Law the following words show he intends the Ceremonial Law, which was
appointed by God during that Dispensation to typify out that which is with such
Clearness presented unto us in the New Testament. And in comparing of these
together, the Apostle does not vouchsafe to grant unto the Ceremonial Law to be
an Image of the other, but a Shadow; a Shadow is not so much as an Image, nor
an Image so much as the thing it self. It is a Metaphor taken from Painting:
Painters are wont with Chalk or a Coal, to draw out the thing which they
propose to themselves to express. Which rude Picture is called a Shadow for the
obscure Representation: Then with the Pencil they bring on the lively Colors,
that it may be a distinct and express Likeness of a thing; which is properly
called an Image. There being so vast a Difference in the Matter of the Worship
betwixt the Old and New Testament, it is very strange to me to see holy Men run
back to the Old Testament, to warrant their Practice for such things, which
they want a Warrant for from the New.

Having found out the nature of the Publication of the Gospel under the New
Testament, it will not be very difficult to find out what fort of Persons are
the visible Members of the Church: which leads me to the next thing to be
handled; What is required to be admitted a Member of the Church according to
the Rule laid down in the New Testament. And that is a laying hold of the Lord
Jesus Christ by Faith, and of that rich and free Grace which is extended to
Sinners from God the Father through him, accompanied with an outward Profession
of their Faith before those to whom they join themselves in Church Fellowship,
and an outward Declaration of their sincere desire to walk with the Church as
Members of it, according to the Rule of the Word.

They first, says the Apostle, gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us by
the Will of God. It is impossible but Hypocrites and Formalists should creep
into the Church, because Man judges only by outward appearance: it is God
alone that can behold the Heart. However, the admittance of them depends upon
the Church's Judgment, and the Church receives them as sincere, and not as
Hypocrites or Formalists; for if either of these were discoverable before
admittance, the Church would not accept them; Acts 8.13. Then Simon himself
believed also, and was baptized. By believing must be meant an outward
Declaration of his believing; for it does appear that his Heart had not laid
hold of the Lord Jesus Christ; for if it had, he would not have been so
ignorant how the Gift of the Holy Ghost was given, so as to think to procure it
by Money: but being discovered, the Apostle Peter tells him, Thy Money perish
with thee; ver. 23. For I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in
the Bond of Iniquity. That is, notwithstanding thy outward Profession of Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ, thou art in a state of Sin and Impenitency, which, if
continued in, will at last bring forth the Bitterness of eternal Punishment. To
prove that the New Testament does require a Work of true Conversion upon the
Heart, as that which qualifies or fits a Person to be a Member of the visible
Church; and that no pretense of fleshly right, as being of believing Parents,
will do it, I shall offer these following Reasons. First; Because the Entail
which gave the fleshly Seed right of Membership to the Church, ended with that
Old Testament Church State: for although the grievous and abominable Sins of the
Israelites did cause the Lord to bring very heavy Judgments upon them, and
often to send them into Captivity before the face of their Enemies, yet they
were not unchurched; neither was the Worship of God taken from them for their
Wickedness, and given to another People: and the great Reason was, because it
was by an Act of Grace, that this Favor was granted to the Seed of Abraham,
that they should be separated from the rest of the Nations, and have the
Worship of God set up amongst them. And the same Grace that extended this
Favor to them above the rest of the World, was pleased that an Entail to
secure the continuance of the Favor granted until the coming of the Messiah,
should be a part of the Grant it self; as appears from the words of Jacob, Genesis
49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
Feet, until Shilo come. He speaks it with a shall not, to show, that although
their Sins might bring other Judgments upon them, yet this Judgment was
reserved to fall upon them for their slighting the Messiah. The Lord Christ
lays this before the Jews in the Parable of a Householder planting a Vineyard,
Mat. 21.33. Hear another Parable: There was a certain Householder which planted
a Vineyard, and hedged it round about, and dug a Wine Press in it, and built
a Tower, and let it out to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country. This
Householder is God the Fathers; this Vineyard which he plants is his affording
the People of the Jews the Privilege of having his Worship set up amongst them;
and hedged it round about, for distinction, to show that it was a Favor
granted only to that People, for the rest of the Nations had not that Privilege
granted to them; and dug a Wine Press in it, that is, appointed such
Ordinances as were the instrumental Means in the hand of the holy Spirit, to
bring the Elect that were amongst them into Communion with God: built a Tower,
that is, the glorious Temple; and let it out to Husbandmen, and went into a far
Country; that is, gave forth a Grant with an Entail, that they should enjoy it
for many Generations, until the ruining of their Church and State for their
grievous Sin in crucifying the Lord Jesus Christ. Ver. 38, 39, 40, and 43.
Therefore say I unto you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given
to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. By the Kingdom of God he means
his Worship, which is the instrumental Means to fit for the Kingdom of Heaven.
The Old Testament Church State being ended, that which secures the continuance
of the New Testament Worship amongst any People, is the improving of it to
God's Glory, and the good of their immortal Souls. God's removing of his
Worship from Asia into Europe, from one Nation of Europe to another, from one
City to another, is a sufficient Evidence to us upon what terms his Worship is
continued amongst us. When the Churches in Asia were threatened with a
Dissolution, no mention of a Covenant made with their believing Fathers, or
their being saved by their Parents Faith; Rev. 2.5. Remember from whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works; or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent.
So that it is plain, that it is not by any Right descending from believing
Parents to Children, that they are admitted Members of the New Testament
Church, or have the Worship of it continued amongst them. I do foresee that
this will go to the quick with a great many Persons, whose Cries are, if the
Children of believing Parents be not admitted to be Members of the New
Testament Church, you make their State and Condition to be worse under the New
Testament, than under the Old. To which I answer, that I do not straiten the
Privileges of Believers Children; for I showed before, that Salvation does not
wholly depend upon Church Membership, or upon the admittance to outward
Ordinances; for many of God's Children were saved who were not admitted to be
Members of a visible Church: yet I do still own it is a great Privilege where
it has its Warrant from the Word of God; for then they may expect his Blessing
upon it, to answer the end for which he appoints it.

Some Persons do say that believing Parents Children are not admitted to
Membership into a visible Church, but God with the believing Parent does take
their Infant Seed into the Covenant of Grace. But they do not consider that
Infants admittance to the Ordinance was by virtue of a right of Membership, as
Members of the visible Church under the Old Testament. That Believers Childrens
Privilege is better than theirs that are Unbelievers, does appear in this; that
those of them that die in Infancy have the Prayers of their believing Parents
put up for them, in the Name of him through whom rich Grace has been extended
unto them: and I think a Heart drawn out to wrestle with God by the believing
Parent on behalf of a dying Infant, and a Heart enabled to leave the dying
Infant to the rich Grace of God which flows through the undertaking of the
blessed Jesus, will yield a more abiding Comfort to the Parent than a pretended
federal Holiness will afford them; the Parent many times at the same time being
under the sense of inward Corruption. And as to these Children of believing
Parents that are grown to years of Understanding, and are not as yet admitted
to be Members of the visible Church, if the Parent be found in the discharge of
his or their Duty to them, they will in Truth and Faithfulness lay before them
what is required to their orderly admittance, and will seek to the Lord for
them that they may enter in at the right Door; for the Heart comes not to the
Enjoyment of God, neither to receive Comfort from Ordinances, but as it first
is brought into a right frame, and has its Warrant from the Word of God that
it is in the way of his Appointments: the Worship must be in Spirit and in
Truth.

Secondly, A second Reason why the New Testament does require a Work of true
Conversion upon the Heart, as that which qualifies or fits a Person to be a
Member of the visible Church, is, because without it the Duties required from
one Member to another cannot be discharged, as they are concerned in one and
the same Interest on the behalf of the Lord Jesus Christ; so there is a holy
Watchfulness required over one another, in order to the faithful discharge of
these Duties which their Lord requires of them. And, says the Apostle, if one
Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or one Member be honored, all
the Members rejoice with it. Where a Church is imbodied together according to
the order of the New Testament, our Lord has left us an excellent Rule to walk
by, that so these things that may tend to bring Dishonor upon the Church may
be stopped when they first begin to break forth; or otherwise, that things may be
managed in such a way as that the Church may free themselves, of the Offender.
Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go
tell him his fault betwixt thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy Brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more; that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be
established. But if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; and
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man and a
Publican. If thy Brother do thee any wrong, or else sin against God, and thou
be privy to it; for that Sin may be said to be against us, which is against
God, in respect of that common Interest that such Persons are engaged mutually
in: If a sinning Member have his Sin laid before him by that fellow Member that
is privy to it, and he bear to be told of his fault, so as to be brought to an
acknowledgment of it before the Lord, and to repent of it and return from it,
then that Member is gained: but if he be stubborn, let him be again admonished
before, Witnesses, not one only, but two or three Witnesses, that so it may
appear that means are made use of for the reclaiming of the Offender. But if he
shall neglect to hear these two or three Witnesses, then tell it to the Church;
that is, let his Offense, and his persisting in it after Admonition, be laid
before the Church to whom the Offender belongs as a Member: but if he neglect
to hear the Church in admonishing of him of his Offense, then let him be unto
thee as an Heathen Man and a Publican; that is, as a Person that is a Stranger
from the Church, and not belonging to it.

Thirdly, A third Reason why the New Testament requires a Work of true
Conversion upon the Heart, as that which qualifies or fits a Person to be a
Member of a visible Church, is, because as every Member does receive Grace in a
measure, so it is their Duty to communicate of that Grace to their fellow
Member, holding the Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, who by Faith ties and knits
every Member of the Body unto him; and from that fullness that is in him gives
forth Nourishment to every individual Member; so that as they grow up by the
strength of Grace, they are enabled to add something to the edifying and
strengthening of their fellow Members, and to add to the Beauty of the Church to
whom they do belong: for although many Men that are Members of the Church may not
have received such Gifts as to fit them for public Exercise in the Church,
much less Women, who are strictly forbidden the contrary, 1 Cor. 4.34, 35. yet
in their private Discourses one with another, whether Men or Women, if the
Matter which they discourse of tend not to the advancing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the exalting of the Grace of God through him, by which they may be
edified, such Persons little consider what is required of Church Members, in
order to the discharge of their Duty to God, and to one another.

CHAP. V. Of the Ordinances of the New Testament Church, what is required to
fit for the partaking of them; and what they do hold out when administered
according to the Rule of the Word.
THE Apostle Paul lays open the different state of the Church under the Old and
New Testament in Heb. 3.5, 6. And Moses verily was faithful in all his House as
a Servant, for a Testimony of those things which were to be spoken after. That
is, Moses was faithful in giving forth the Pattern of the Old Testament
Worship, which was figurative of what was to be done by the Messiah at his
appearance in the state of his Humiliation. He by his appearance performing
what was figured out by the Old Testament Worship, it must follow that there
was an end put to that Worship, and with the Worship to the Church State
likewise. Ver. 6. But Christ as a Son over his own House: whose House are we,
if we hold fast the Confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope unto the end.

The New Testament Church has the honor to have the Son of God to be the
first Discoverer, by his own Mouth, what was required to be a Member of it, and
to be the Appointer of the Ordinances to be continued in it: Mat. 16.15, 16,
17, 18. He says unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered
and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and
said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona; for Flesh and Blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. And I say unto thee,
that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church; and the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it. Leigh upon the words faith, that it was
the Judgment of Hilary, Cyril, Chrysostom, Theophilact and Ambrose, that by the
Rock is not meant Peter's Person, but the Faith which he had professed in
Christ: an inward discovery of the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, accompanied with
an outward Profession of the fame, is the Matter of which the New Testament
Church is built. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. To whom coming, as to a living Stone,
disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of God, and precious; ye also as lively
Stones, are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Every Member of the
Church is not fitted to be a Publisher of the Gospel, but every Member of the
Church, if such an one as the Word requires, is brought through Christ to
receive the Grace of God; and from an inward feeling of this Grace received, to
offer up a thankful Heart devoted to him. For the gathering in of such Members
into the New Testament Church is the Commission given forth to the Apostles;
and direction is given to admit Persons thus gathered to the initiating
Ordinance of Water Baptism, as appears from the words of the Commission, and
the Practice of the Apostles by virtue of the Commission, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All Power is given unto me in
Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always
even unto the end of the World. Here three things lie fair from the words
without any wresting of them: First, Outward Teaching, the instrumental Means
appointed by Christ, and made use of by the Holy Ghost to bring to the inward
knowledge of him, and the acceptance of Grace through him, thereby to be made
fit Matter for the Church under the New Testament. This I have spoken so fully
to in the last, and in this Chapter, (that the visible Church of Christ under
the New Testament does consist of such as are called out of the World by true
Conversion, to lay hold of the Lord Jesus Christ, and Grace through him, that I
need not enlarge upon this first Head. The second thing contained in the
Commission, is the admittance of such to the initiating Ordinance of Baptism:
Acts 2.41. Then they that gladly received the Word, were baptized; and the same
day were added to them about three thousand Souls. Thirdly, Here is the
continuation of what is commanded by the Commission, in these words, And lo, I
am with you always unto the end of the World. The Apostles lived not till the
end of the World, therefore I am with you and your Successors, who shall be
fitted by me for the preaching of the everlasting Gospel, appointed to gather
the Elect unto God, until this World come under a Dissolution. As by the
Commission, and the Practice of the Apostles upon the Commission, Baptism is
appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ, as the initiating or entering Ordinance
into a visible Church of Christ under the New Testament; so his last Supper is
appointed by him to be practiced by these that are in a visible Church State,
Luke 22.19, 20. And he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you; this do in remembrance of
me. Likewise the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood, which is shed for you. The Apostles were the visible Church at that
time, and to them does he appoint the Supper Ordinance; and from the
Appointment of Christ, does Paul recommend the Practice, and the continuance of
this Ordinance to the Church of Corinth. After he had condemned their sinful
abuse of the Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11. from ver. 20 to 23. at ver. 23, and 24. he
lays before them how that Ordinance was appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ to
be continued in his Church: For I have received of the Lord, that which I also
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, took Bread: And when he had given Thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat; this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of
me. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood; this do ye, as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me. As the Ordinance of Baptism was appointed by Christ to be
administered to those who were qualified according to the Rule of the Word to be
Members of the Church; so it was appointed likewise to be the entering
Ordinance into a visible Church State, and the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper
to these that were visible Members: Which serves to clear up the former part of
this Chapter, what the Ordinances are, and what is required to fit for the
partaking of them.

The second branch of this Chapter is what they do hold out when administered
according to the Rule of the Word.

First, To have the Ordinances administered according to the Rule of the Word,
there is required, that the Administrator, the Subject to whom the Ordinance is
administered, and the Way of the Administration, have its Warrant from the Word
of God; for God is a God of Order, and not of Confusion. In the second Part of
this Book, and the third Chapter, I showed that there was an extraordinary and
ordinary Qualification: The extraordinary Qualification was that of the
Apostles, who had a large extensive Power accompanying them, granted by Christ
for the first planting of the Churches. That this Office of Apostleship is
ceased is clear, seeing there is no appearance of the Qualifications to that
great Work in any of the Dispensers of the Gospel in these latter Ages; so that
for any Person either to preach or administer the Ordinances as sent out by
Christ as Apostles, favors of Pride and Presumption. But there is a more
ordinary Qualification from Christ to dispense the Gospel, which depends upon
the Inlightnings of the Spirit in the Word, and a Gift of Utterance to declare
it unto others; and for the carrying on of this Work, God has pleased to raise
up several Persons to dispense his Truth before they bore any Office in the
Church, or over it. But the Administration of the Ordinances of Christ being
that which particularly concerns the Church, it seems to me by the Rule of the
Word, that before such Administration of the Ordinances, there should be a
setting apart of fit Persons for Office by the Church, and an Approbation of
their Choice by the Elders of other Churches, together with the laying on of
Hands, and likewise a solemn and earnest seeking unto Almighty God, through
Jesus Christ, for a Blessing upon the Persons whom they have chose: And this is
to be done as a previous Qualification whereby to invest such Persons into a
Right duly to administer the Ordinances. I do remember that after God had fully
convinced me of the Ordinance of Believers Baptism, I went a great many miles
to come under the Ordinance; but the Person to whom I went not being able to
give me a satisfactory account of his regular Admittance as an Administrator, I
was constrained to return unbaptized, although at that time I had a very great
desire to have been made a Partaker of that despised Ordinance. This may serve
to show, that to have the Ordinances administered according to the Rule of the
Word, there should be a fit Administrator.

Secondly; To the orderly Administration of the Ordinances there is required a
right Subject, or such a Person as the Rule of the Word does require. And,
first, I shall show the Qualifications required of those that come to the
Ordinance of Baptism, and that is, Repentance for Sins that are past, Faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and a seeking unto God through him for pardoning Grace
and Power to walk with him. Acts 22.16. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and
be baptized, and wash away thy Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord. Compared
with Chap. 8.37, 38. And Philip said, If thou believe with all thine Heart,
thou may; and he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. And he commanded the Chariot to stand still; and they went down both into
the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.

As the Rule does require a Qualification to fit Persons for the orderly
admittance to the Ordinance of Baptism, so does it likewise for the orderly
admittance to the Lord's Supper. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29. Wherefore, whosoever
shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But let a Man examine himself, and so
let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup: For he that eats aad
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lord's Body. He that eats and drinks unworthily, that is, as an
ignorant Person; not discerning the Lord's Body, that is, not having any inward
apprehension of him by Faith upon their own Souls, or come not with that holy
humble Reverence, and with that due regard which belongs to such an holy
Action. If it be so that the Rule does require Qualifications of those that
come to the Ordinances, then it does condemn the Practice of such who do
administer without any regard whether the Qualification be there or no. And,
secondly, It greatly condemns such who under the pretense of a spiritual
Baptism, and a spiritual Supper, do lay aside the Ordinances which Christ has
appointed in his Church. The more clear the Evidences are of the Work of the
Holy Ghost upon the Heart, it tends to hold forth the Persons right to the
Ordinance of Baptism. Acts 10.47. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should
not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? We may in
these words behold the different Path that Truth and Error does walk in: Error
makes a pretended Enjoyment of the inward, a ground to lay aside the outward;
Truth makes the real Enjoyment of the inward, the Qualification it self to
partake of the outward; and the more clear that the Enjoyment of Christ by the
Holy Ghost does outwardly manifest it self, it leads the Administrator unto a
cheerful administering the Ordinance to such Persons. And he (Peter) commanded
them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord.

Those that do lay aside the Supper-Ordinance, do say that Christ is come, and
therefore the Supper-Ordinance is of no longer continuance. But if such Persons
would seriously consider what the coming of Christ is which they speak of, they
would do well; for if by coming inwardly into the Soul, and the Holy Ghost's
manifesting him in the Soul by the Glass of the Gospel, be meant, this is the
Qualification to come to the Ordinance, and so he is come to every sincere
Christian. 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom tho now ye see
him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.
Compared with Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith: This
dwelling of the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, is the inward discerning of him in
his Sufferings; which being wholly wanting in those that do partake of the
outward part of the Ordinance, they eat and drink Damnation to themselves, not
discerning the Lord's Body. But if by being come, they intend such a coming as
to exclude the Expectation of the second Personal Appearance of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Whom, the Apostle tells us, Acts 3.21. the Heaven must receive until
the Restitution of all things; then they destroy one of the Articles of the
Christian Faith. The Saints in this day do in a measure witness with the
Apostles the inward Enjoyment of him by Faith; and by the same Faith that they
lived in, do expect the personal return of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle
John speaks fully to this, in 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God,
and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. They could not be
brought into the state of Children without the inward Enjoyment of the Lord
Jesus Christ by Faith; for this is the Evidence of Sonship: and it does not yet
appear what we shall be in Eternity; we do but as in a Glass behold the Glory
that the Children shall there be made partakers of: but we know, that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. Not alone we
know that he is ours, but we know that he will hold and keep us till we enjoy
eternal Glory with our Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, at his second personal
Appearance; then shall our vile Bodies be changed like his glorious Body, and
we be ever with the Lord.

The next thing to be treated of is, that the way of administering the
Ordinances be kept to according to the Rule of the Word, and that is as to the
Ordinance of Baptism, a burial of the Body in Water in the Name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Buried with him by Baptism into Death. Leigh
in his Note upon the words of Romans 6.4. The Apostle (says he) alludes to the
manner in which Baptism was then administered, which was to plunge the Baptized
in the Water; after which they put on new Garments; whence those manners of
speaking used in Scripture, to put on Christ, to put off the old Man and put on
the new. Mr. Perkins agrees with Leigh as to the manner of Administration of
the Ordinance of Baptism in the Primitive Church, and tells us that it was
altered from plunging of the Body under Water, to sprinkling in the Face, by
reason of the Coldness of this Northern Climate; but from whence the Power is
derived to make any alteration in the Ordinance from its Primitive Institution,
this that holy Man shows not; as if the Elements were not subject to the Power
of God, and he were not sufficient to preserve his Children in their Obedience
to him in his own Appointments.

Secondly, The way of administering the Supper-Ordinance we have set down by the
Lord Jesus, who was the first Administrator, Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. And as they
were eating, (that is, the Passover) Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body.
The Bread put for the thing signified by it, which was the Body of Christ. Ver.
27. And he took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it. Ver. 28. For this is my Blood (that is, a Sacrament, or figure of
his Blood poured forth) of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of Sins.

This leads me to the next thing, What the Ordinances do hold forth when
administered according to the Rule of the Word.

I shall first treat of the Ordinance of Baptism, which consists of two parts,
the one outward, the other inward; the outward part I have spoken to already,
which is a Burial of the Body in Water; the inward part figured out by the
outward, is the Burial and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 6.4, 5.
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of Life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. As the outward
Declaration of the Gospel is the instrumental Means in the hand of the Holy
Ghost, to convey that which is held forth by it, which is the Lord Jesus
Christ, unto the Soul; so is the Ordinance of Baptism the Means appointed by
the Lord Jesus Christ, and made use of by the Spirit to convey that which is
held forth by it. The outward of it self conveys nothing, it is only made use
of by the holy Spirit to set before the Soul what is figured out by it. The
Burial of the Body holds forth the Burial of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Benefits which we receive by it, which is a discharge from the Penalty of Sin;
and our rising out of the Water, his Resurrection, and the Benefits which we
receive by it, which is to walk with God in newness of Life, by Power received
from the Father, through the Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ. The holy
Spirit accompanying the Ordinance, does let the Soul see what Christ has gone
through to free it from Hell, and to procure for it the Enjoyment of Heaven;
which inward sight by Faith knits the Soul to the Person of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The Apostle calls it a being planted into the likeness of his Death,
and into the likeness of his Resurrection. The Believer is let into Christ, so
as to draw that spiritual Life, by which he lives unto God, from the Lord Jesus
Christ; he not only lives in the Enjoyment of the Father, but does likewise
convey of that spiritual Life unto all his Members, in a measure. For the
further clearing up and confirming the truth of what is held forth by the
Ordinance of Baptism, I shall open the Apostle's words in 1 Pet. 3.19, 20, 21.
By which also he went and preached unto the Spirits in Prison; ( He, the Lord
Jesus Christ in his Divine Nature, went by Noah's Ministry, and preached
Repentance, while the Ark was building, to those Souls who for their
Impenitency were cast into the Prison of Hell.) Which sometime were
disobedient, when once the Long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the Ark was a preparing, (the Forbearance of God toward the old World.
continued, and Noah preached Repentance to them) wherein few, that is eight
Persons, were saved by Water. The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism, does now
save us, (not the putting away the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The outward part,
which is Water, and which puts away the filth of the Flesh by the burial of the
Body in it, is not that which saves, but it is a Figure of that which does
save; the Spirit accompanying the Ordinance when it is administered, by the
answer of a good Conscience toward God; that is, the answer of a believing
Heart, which by Faith lays hold of that which is figured out by it, the Lord
Jesus Christ in his Death and Resurrection.

The Lord's Supper has likewise two parts, an Outward and an Inward; the
Outward part, is the Bread broken and eaten, the Wine poured forth and drunk by
the Believer; the Inward part is his Flesh crucified, and his Blood shed for
the sake of his Members. Luke 22.19, 20. And he took Bread, and gave Thanks,
and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body which is given for
you: this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you. The Martyrs,
being pressed by the Papists to show how the Lord Jesus Christ was present in
this Ordinance, owned, that as Bread and Wine was apprehended by the Body in
feeding upon it to its Nourishment; so the Flesh and Blood of Christ was
apprehended by the Soul in feeding upon him to the nourishing of the Soul. The
Bread and Wine is not the Body, but a Sacramental Figure by which the Body of
Christ is represented to us: 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this Bread
and drink of this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come.

PART IV. Being an Appendix which the Author leaves for a Legacy to his
Children.
GENESIS 18.19. For I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment;
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.


WHAT I shall leave with you, my Children, I shall comprehend under these two
general Heads.

First, Lay before you the way that God has taken to bring my Soul to the
Enjoyment of himself by Faith.

Secondly, The Counsel and Direction which I recommend unto you, if I should be
shortly removed from you.

First, I shall lay before you the way that God has taken to bring me to the
Enjoyment of himself by Faith.

I was in my younger years exceedingly beloved of my Mother, so that her very
Life seemed almost bound up in me; and tho I do believe she had a Work of Grace
upon her Soul, yet her Love to me did not run in that pure Channel which it
ought to have run, that is, to have made my immortal Soul the great Object of
her Love and Care: But her Indulgence to me in my tender years tended greatly
to heighten Sin and Corruption in my Soul; for I chose for my Companions the
profanest Boys in Bridlington; and although I was not gotten to such a pitch of
Profaneness as some of them, yet I took delight to hear them belch out their
Wickedness; and frequently at our Meetings we had profane Ballads, which I was
as industrious to learn to sing as any of them: my poor Mother did know of my
Companions, but I do not think that she did believe that they were altogether
so wicked as they were, for they generally appeared moderately sober before
her. I do think that it is one of the greatest Duties that belongs to Parents,
to endeavor to cast their Children among other sober Children; for what avails
all Admonition that can be given to a Child, if as soon as we have done, we
deliver it up into Temptation? I do not think that it is in Parents power to
give a Principle of Grace to their Childen, but it may be in their power to
give a check to the outbreakings of Corruption, which may greatly hinder its
growth: Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is
old, he will not depart from it.

When I was about seven years old, and a Scholar at the Free School, a
wonderful Providence did befall me: Being at play with about forty Scholars with
me in the Green before the Church, and a poor Woman at the Well-side drawing
Straw, I laid my Breast over the great blue Stones that lay about the Well, to
sail my Ship in it, it being full of Water, and so went head forward down into
the Well; neither my Play-fellows seeing me fall into it, nor the poor Woman
that was by: but although no Eye saw me, yet the Eye of the Almighty was over me,
and his sparing, pitying Love was toward me, being very unfit to go into
Eternity, having no knowledge of God, neither of the worth of my precious Soul;
and he by his Wisdom opened a way to save me in such a manner, that all
concerned in me might know that he had done it. A poor old Woman, whose Name
was Alice Brown, that lived right against the Well, had hung on a Pan with
Water to lay Leven, but a lump of Soot fell down out of the Chimny (which had
been swept but three days before) into her Pan, so that she cast out the Water
and came to the Well for more, and seeing me, gave a sudden skreek; the poor
Woman, who was a common Harlot, that was drawing Straw, supposing it to be her
Boy, my Mother having a little before given her some of my old Clothes, laid
her hand upon the Stones, and leapt directly into the Well, which was up to her
Breast in Water, and catching me in her Arms handed me out, with very little
discovery of Life in me. This amazing Providence had not the least effect upon
me to frighten me out of my Sins; but being well recovered, I became more
sinful than before; and that which tended to heighten it, was that I made this
Harlot's Son, who had been the Instrument in saving me, my chief Companion. In
this course I continued, until I was about thirteen years of Age. Being a dull
Scholar, and my Master churlish to me, and beating me about the Head, I was
almost stupefied; and growing melancholy, I was judged to be gone into a
Consumption: My Mother advising with Dr. Korbat about me, he advised her to
take me from the School, which she did; but my Father, that I might not forget
to read English well, borrowed for me Fox's Acts and Monuments, which I began
to take great delight in: And the first thing that fastened upon my Heart to do
me good, was a Letter of Bilnay's to Dunstal the Popish Archbishop of York, in
the Reign of Henry the Eighth, wherein that holy Martyr laying before the
Bishop the manner of his Life, that he was a Mass-Priest to pray Souls out of
Purgatory; Reading, says he, Tindal's New Testament, at the last I came to
hear of Jesus: Which Passage was fixed upon my Heart as if it had been written
upon it. Leaving the Book, I went out, and began with great deliberation to
consider of this Passage, and the reason that should make this holy Man and
others give up their Lives with such cheerfulness in the Fire, whenas, by
conforming to the Public Worship, they might many of them have lived in great
Prosperity.

I begun to think of a future state, and the manner of Life that I had led in
the World, to the great dishonor of that God that gave me my Being; my Sins
were then set in order before me, and I began to be filled with such inward
Guilt and Fear, that I was many times afraid to be alone, yet never made my
Condition known to any Person, but often bewailed it before God, and resolved,
which I was enabled through Mercy to perform, to turn my Back on my former
vicious Company, and betook my self to a very retired Life, even beyond the
most young Men that I was acquainted with, not daring to allow my self the
Pleasures of youthful Vanities. My Mother being a Hearer of Mr. Luck, I
frequently went with her, and was much affected with his preaching; but two
things fell out which wholly alienated my Mind from him, and indeed almost from
all Dissenting Ministers, for his sake.

The Act against seditious Conventicles coming forth, forbidding all Persons
above four besides the Minister to assemble together, under pretense of the
Worship of God; after Mr. Luck had finished his Exercise on the Lord's Day
before the Act took place, two Rooms being full of Hearers, he stood up and
acquainted them with the Act, and that he could no longer preach to above four,
as the Act directed. A second thing that gave me the greatest Offense was, that
going with my Mother to hear him after the Act was in force, four Persons were
gotten there before us, and the Door locked; we desired to let be in, and were
not willing to be denied, until we were refused by himself, which caused me to
break forth into this or the like Expression, That it could not be, that he was
a Minister of the Gospel, who was more afraid of Man than of God; and for my
part I would never go to hear him more. That which heightened my Aversness to
him, was my Father's frequent upbraiding of us with our careless Shepherd, who
in time of danger was ashamed to own his Flock. From that time I began to have
a particular Eye upon the poor despised Quakers, whom I looked upon as the only
People God had in the World; for although I had shaken off sinful self, I had not
shaken off righteous self; and by reading a multitude of their Books, I was
more and more confirmed in their Foundation-Principle, of the Light in every
Man, which convinces him of Sin, being the Light of Christ, which, from an
experienced Heart I have cause to speak it, is no other but the Light of the
first Covenant, that shows Man his state and condition he is in by Sin, but
leads not into the Gospel Dispensation: but as the Light, according to the
tenor of the first Covenant, calls for an Obedience to the Law, so by keeping
up to a strict walking according to its requirings, much inward Peace is
gained; and this I very well remember, that having through Temptations
outwardly, and from Corruption inwardly been led into Sin, this Light, which is
God's Witness in the Souls of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, did begin to
accuse me, and I felt inward Guilt, and fear of Punishment arising in my
Breast, which made me look for some trouble or other befalling me for running
in the way of Sin, and very seldom missed of it; which Trouble was an
instrumental means to drive me to my Knees to bewail my Condition before God,
and frequently with great earnestness of Heart have besought him that I might
come to a sinless state, never to go astray from him: but to witness a being
led out to behold the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, either as a Redeemer, or as
Mediator betwixt God and Man, from any inward Work of God upon my Heart, I did
not in the least experience; although I do believe all that knew my Conversation
will say that it was very strict, yet under the leadings of this first
Covenant-Principle. And mark it, my Children, this I leave with you* (as one
that, to the praise of rich Grace be it spoken, has found Mercy at the hand of
God) that it is not your joining with the purest Truths of Christianity that
ought to be the Evidence to your selves of your being such as God will own for
Christians, but it is the Principle by which your Hearts are guided in the
Worship of Christ, whether private or public, that must be the Evidence. A
Christian that is brought to walk with God by the Spirit of Adoption, is taken
off the old Foundation and set upon a new Foundation; his hope of enjoying
eternal Life is fixed upon his Union with the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith,
through whom eternal Happiness is secured unto him in such a way as is
impossible it should miscarry. But this I shall speak to by and by, when I come
to show you how my Soul closed with the Lord Jesus, and return to speak a
little further of that poor despised People called Quakers, who I did believe
were in the Favor of God above any People in the World: and although I did not
join with them so far as publicly to meet with them at their Worship, yet I
gave frequent Testimonies how highly I esteemed them. The Persecution upon the
account of their Consciences increasing, about the year Eighty three, I did
endeavor to shelter them what in me lay, by persuading the Towns Officers to
endeavor to baffle the Informers; and being chosen an Overseer of the Poor at
that time, and so being enjoined by Warrant to take their Goods, I was driven
into grievous Perplexity, not knowing which way to turn me; for I was
grievously afraid of the Justices on the one hand, and utterly averse to such
an Act on the other hand, believing them to be God's People, which caused me to
shed a great many Tears in secret before God for Counsel and Direction: and
blessed be his holy Name he did not leave me, but opened a way for my Escape,
which Mercy I desire to keep in remembrance while I am in this World. The night
before the Warrant was to be executed, I was very sick all the night, but in
the morning something better; the Officers meeting together about that wicked
Work, to which they were all averse, sent for me, but my Excuse of not being
well would not serve their turn, but they proceeded by Lot to take the Houses
of that poor People, and sent me my Lots, which I received with a great deal of
joy; seeing they desired me either to send Money, or get one to officiate. I
sent them the Money rejoicing, and upon my Knees blessed God for that great
Mercy: and tho the poor Quakers did offer me my Money again, yet I durst not for
Conscience sake receive it. I leave this with you as my Judgment, that a
misguided Conscience ought to be informed, not forced; God has appointed other
ways in his Word to reclaim those that are in an Error, than by ruining Men's
Persons and Estates.

The Liberty for Dissenters being granted by King James, I was brought to hear
five or six dissenting Ministers at Richard Cockeril's, which through the
Blessing of God so far wrought upon me, as to take off that Prejudice that I
had conceived against them; but my Understanding remained dark without any
inward discovery of the precious Doctrine of the Gospel, until I sat under the
Ministry of Mr. Humphreys, being before that time a high Asserter of Free Will
and general Redemption, which naturally falls under the first
Covenant-Principle. His Personal Failings, which brought a stain upon the
precious Truths f the Gospel, through Mercy I abhorred, and took the freedom at
times to speak to him about it; yet his Doctrine which he preached was the
instrumental means to bring me and many other poor Sinners to join with the
Truth, which through Mercy I was enabled to do upon the account of its own
Worth and Excellency. And mark it, my Children, that which must establish your
Hearts in the Truths of God, must be the holy Spirit's inlightening your Souls
to behold the Truth in the Scripture-Glass, and inabling your Souls to see a
native Beauty and Excellency in it, above any Luster that the Creature can put
upon it by any Rhetorical Florishes whatsoever. I cannot see what solid ground
Persons can have to lay claim to an Interest in the Foundation-Truths of
Christianity, before the charming Simplicity that does appear in Truth does
allure and win upon the Heart to lay hold of it. When the holy Spirit does
present Truth unto the Soul, it puts such a Divine Authority into it, as
constrains the Soul to bow before it, and to submit unto it.

That Scripture which the Holy Ghost was pleased to make use of to present the
Lord Jesus Christ unto my Soul, and to seal unto it an Interest in God as my
God through him, was the words of Christ to Mary, Joh. 20. the latter part of
the 17th Verse, Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father and
your Father, to my God and your God. In which words the Lord Jesus Christ was
presented unto my Soul, as the Person by whom we are brought into relation with
God; and so was I enabled to lay hold of him with my whole Heart as the Person
that opens the door of Grace and Mercy; and under the inward sense and feeling
of that Grace and Mercy which I did then receive from my heavenly Father, as an
Evidence of his accepting of me through his Son, my Heart was exceedingly
melted before him, and drawn forth by the Spirit of Adoption into such a
familiarity with him as to lay open my Heart before him, being not then afraid
to let him know the worst of my Condition, from that Confidence that I had in
that blessed Mediator that stood betwixt us. I then experienced a new Principle
begotten in my Soul, which knit my Heart to the Person of the Lord Jesus; I
felt my Heart leaning toward him for Security and Safety: and while the inward
Evidence of my Union with him did last, I looked upon my self to be without the
reach of the Tempter; and although many Clouds and Temptations have been upon me
since the time of my first closing with him, yet he has not suffered me to be
overwhelmed by them, but in the midst of Troubles has discovered himself unto
me. And this frequently I have experienced, that when some sudden surprising
Providence has fallen upon me, that seemed to be of a frowning nature, my Soul
being roused, did shake it self to see if it is spiritual Strength remained. Its
first search has been after its Union with its Lord, and to get the Heart
raised to God through him. If Grace remained so as to keep the Heart knit unto
Christ, to wrestle with the Father through him, generally slavish Fear fled
away, and a submissive frame of Spirit took place of it, to be disposed of by
God according to his Wisdom; and before the Trouble was wholly over, some
comfortable Scripture was born in as an earnest that the Deliverance was
coming. My hope for Heaven lies in this, that I am in the way that all the
Flock have walked in unto this day. For the New Testament stands upon the
Credit and Authority of the Old: If the Messiah were yet to come to work out
Man's Salvation, the Old Testament Prophecies concerning him could have their
Accomplishment in no other way than they are laid down fulfilled in the New, in
the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of Sins. And besides this, my Heart has been inwardly made sensible
of the preventing Grace of God put forth outwardly toward me, and his
pardoning and renewing Grace has been manifested inwardly in me. First, His
preventing Grace has been put forth outwardly toward me, in that tender
Watchfulness that my Heavenly Father has showed toward me to this day. How
many times have I been in danger of being led away by grievous Temptations, and
have been without the sense of the danger that I was in, and yet something has
fallen out that has prevented my falling by the Temptation; and afterward I
have been made sensible of the Danger and of the Mercy received? This was a
great means of settling my Soul in the Doctrine of Election; for I was many
times constrained to cry out, Why do thou manifest such Grace unto me a
worthless Creature! For, my Children, I must acknowledge, as standing under the
first Covenant I was a Sinner before God, and liable to his Justice: His
condemning of me could have been no Injustice in him, therefore his dealing
with me in Mercy's way must lead me to acknowledge that it is by Grace I stand.
Secondly, His pardoning and renewing Grace has been manifested inwardly in me.

1. His Pardoning Grace has been manifest in me; I have many times come before
God laboring under inward Guilt, and have experienced a removal of the Guilt
in the Gospel way. For although the Lord Jesus Christ did by his Death give a full
Satisfaction to Justice for all the Elect that were given him of the Father;
yet while the Elect are on this side Eternity, and through frailty liable to
fall into Sin; after Sin committed there can be no inward Peace enjoyed until
the Soul be led forth anew by a Renewed Act of Faith upon a suffering Jesus,
and a suing by sincere Repentance unto the Father, for pardoning Grace upon the
account of his Worthiness. And as to the Praise of the rich Grace of God I have
experienced his pardoning Grace, so I hope, to the Praise of the same Grace I
can say it, that I do experience Renewing Grace: I do indeed feel my time to be
a continual Warfare according to the words of the Apostle, Gal. 5.17. For the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these
are contrary one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.
Grace is often foiling Corruption, but has not destroyed it; the growth of it
is hindered, but the Seeds of it remain; it is an Enemy that lies continually
lurking to watch for Advantage; and although it cannot regain such a Power as to
destroy my Soul, yet it keeps so much Power as to disturb it. My Soul sometimes
goes mourning before God under the sense of the remaining strength of this
Adversary, and how hardly is Grace put to it to quit the Soul out of its hands?
But here lies my Security, I am brought within the compass of the Father's
unchangeable Love, within the compass of the Sons Intercession, and under the
Leadings of the Holy Ghost. First, I am within the compass of the Father's
Love, being one of the Seed given to Christ; and according to the Tenor of the
Covenant do I experience the Father's dealings with me; Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32,
33, 34. If his Children (that is, the Elect Seed given to Christ, ver. 27, 28.)
walk not in my Judgments; If they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: Then will I visit their Transgression with the Rod, and their
Iniquities with Stripes. Nevertheless, my Loving Kindness will I not utterly
take from him, nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not
break. Here is my Mercy, that I do experience my Father's dealing with me to be
according to the Tenor of the Covenant, that his Providence toward me brings
Frowns with it against Corruption, and that he has enlightened my Soul to see
it; Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach
him out of thy Law. Frowning Providence are not of themselves Mercies; but the
Spirit's accompanying them, and working by them upon the Soul, to bring the
Soul to a sensibility of its State, and enabling, the Soul to seek to God and
to enjoy Comfort from him through Faith, when denied Comfort from the World.
It Is this that gives the Evidence that they are sent in Mercy, when corrupt
Nature is subdued by them, and inward Grace is stirred up to put forth the
greater Fervency to God, and for God, in Duty, that we may be serviceable to
him in our Generation. The Apostle in Heb. 12.8. lays this down as the common
way of God's dealing with his Children, and fixes Bastardy upon those that are
not thus dealt with: But if ye be without Chastisement, whereof of all are
partakers, then are you Bastards and not Sons. Mark it, my Children, I do not
say God does not give Prosperity to none of his Children in this World; but
where he does give it, he usually brings humbling Providence before it, that
so the Soul may not be prejudiced by it. Joseph and David were both exalted to
a very high state in this World; but what great Afflictions did they go through
before they were brought to it? according to the words of the Prophet; It is
good for a Man that he hear the Yoke in his Youth. And it has been my
particular Observation, That where great plenty of this World's Goods are given
to any of God's Children, they have had a pricking Thorn put into some of their
outward Enjoyments, that they might not rest in these things as their Portion.

Secondly; I am one of those for whom the Lord Jesus Christ is interceding, and
interested in him as a Member of his Mystical Body: Father (says Christ) keep
through thine own Name those whom thou have given me, that they may be one as
we are. He intercedes that we may be prepared for Glory, and that we may be
brought to the enjoyment of Glory: Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my Glory
which thou have given me. This Prayer, says a holy Man, although it was prayed
here on Earth by the Lord Jesus Christ in the state of his Humiliation, yet the
Matter contained in it does suit his State of Exaltation, and is a short
Epitome of his Intercession, as the Church's Head, now at the Right Hand of his
Father, until every Member of his Mystical Body be brought to the Mansions of
eternal Rest. The Apostle in Heb. 6. from v. 13 to 20. having laid down the
Unchangeableness and Immutability of the Father's Council concerning the Elect,
and how for their Encouragement he had bound himself not only by Word but by
Oath, for the performance of the things contained in the Promises, and having
showed how the Flock do anchor upon their Father's Immutability as that which
is both sure and steadfast, and enters into that within the Vail; Faith does not
content it self only with the Promises, but pierces into Heaven to God
himself; and the Soul there for its further Encouragement beholds the blessed
Mediator interceding on its behalf, ver. 20. Where the forerunner is for us
entered, even Jesus. All the Promises of God the Father being made to our Nature
first as it is united to his Son the Eternal Word; our Nature in him being
brought to the Enjoyment of that Glory contained in the Promises, does on the
behalf of the Elect intercede that every individual Person that belongs unto
him, may be brought to be sharers with him. Your Father through Faith has a
well-grounded hope that he is one of the number for whom his blessed Lord is
interceding, and doubts not but in a little time to be a sharer in that part of
his Intercession which leads to enjoy eternal Glory through him.

Thirdly; I am one of those that are under the leadings of the Spirit of
Adoption, which is that inward Witness which the Scripture speaks of: He that
believes in the Son of God has the Witness in himself: For God (says the
Apostle) who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6. That is, The way that God does take to exalt his
Grace and Mercy to his Elect, is in a way that does agree with his Justice. He
beholds the eternal Word Creator united to the Childrens Nature, by it giving
Satisfaction to Justice. The stoppage of Grace being removed, Grace does shine
down upon them. The Spirit of Adoption, which is the inward Witness, meets
Grace in the way that it comes forth. The Soul admires the Wisdom and Goodness
of God in appointing the way of its Salvation in such a way as exalts Grace,
and wrongs not Justice; Grace being no less to us by making its way through
Christ to us, because it was the Father that appointed the Son this Work; and
it was to answer the Father's Will that he performed it. This inward Witness
incourageth a poor Sinner that is weary of Sin to go to Christ, and to God
through him. For although there seems a great distance betwixt a poor guilty
Sinner and a holy God, to behold each of them as they are in themselves, yet
this middle Person, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Reconciler, or the maker
up of the Breach betwixt them, being inwardly discovered in the Gospel-Glass by
the Holy Ghost working with it; those who were far off before are brought nigh
by the Blood of this blessed Jesus. Divine Love descends, Faith enables the
Soul to mount up, and with Wings to ascend. We love him, says St. John,
because he first loved us.

This Light of the Holy Ghost is a distinct thing from the first
Covenant-Principle. That lays the Soul under Guilt for Sin, but takes not in
the way of Reconciliation: The Holy Ghost takes in the way of Reconciliation,
and gives Evidence of the Souls Interest in it. It is by the Apostle called the
Spirit of the Son, because it is by the Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ
that the Holy Ghost is sent; and because it leads the Soul to pay the Tribute
of Divine Honor to him, as being the way to the Father. It leads the Soul
wholly in another way than the first Covenant-Principle leads in. Its Motives
by which it stirs up the Soul to watch against Sin are from Mercy and Goodness,
that is, spiritual Mercies received by the Soul. The first Covenant-Principle
breaks the Soul off from Sin, by showing the Wrath and Misery that attends it:
The Holy Ghost stirs up the Soul to set a Watch against the first motions of
Lust, by discovering the loathsome nature of it; which if the Soul joins with
it, will thereby be unfit for Communion with God. As it is by the Holy Ghost
that Sanctification is carried or. in the Soul to prepare it for the Enjoyment
of God in Glory, so the Apostle seems to put the Cure of the Bodies of the
Saints, even when they are under a Dissolution, upon the Holy Ghost, in order
to their recovery out of that state; Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you. I
have gone through the first Head, and laid before you the dealings of God with
me, in bringing of me to the Enjoyment of himself by Faith, and shall now
proceed to the second Head.

Secondly; The Counsel and Direction which I recommend unto you, if I should be
shortly removed from you.

1st. Endeavor to get imprinted upon your Hearts the thoughts of God in his
Sovereignty over you, and those outward Providence which he exercises toward
you. God is so incomprehensible in his Being, that he cannot be fathomed by the
Creature. What an Awe and Reverence of him has the Consideration of his
Incomprehensibleness made upon the Hearts of his dearest Children? In his
discovering of himself to them in the greatness of his Power, how has he
treated them as Worms and nothing Creatures? And they in their expressing of
themselves before him; their Language has carried in it the Evidences of a
humble Heart: Psalm. 22.4, 5, 6. Our Fathers trusted in thee: they trusted and
thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted
in thee, and were not confounded. But I am a Worm, and no Man; a reproach of
Men, and despised of the People. We see here the Psalmist David, who is
recorded to be a Man after God's owh Heart, how he expresses himself before
God: First, In acknowledging God in his Power to deliver: And then, secondly,
In acknowledging his Unworthiness to be delivered by him, in these words, I am
a Worm, and no Man. The clearer Discovery that the Soul gets of God in the
Absoluteness of his Power, and that incomprehensible Greatness he is invested
withal, has that Effect upon the Heart as to lay it in the Dust before him.
Remember, my Children, that in your Creation you were in the hands of the wise
Creator, as the Clay is in the hand of the Potter; The forming and the
fashioning of you lay wholly in his own Will and Pleasure: Psalm. 119.73. Thy
hands have made and fashioned me: give me Understanding, that I may learn thy
Commandments. That there is no defect in the Members of your Bodies is a Mercy
to you; but that there is no defect in the Faculties of your Souls is a greater
Mercy. What great Obligations are you under to the great Creator, seeing you
have received your Being from him?

2. Consider how the Creator has disposed of you, and how his Providential
Dealings are toward you; Acts 17.26. And has made of one Blood, all Nations
of Men, to dwell on the face of the Earth, and has determined the Times before
appointed, and the Bounds of their Habitation. That is, He has determined the
time that he allows every one in this World, and their place for a Habitation
in it. How bountiful is the great Creator unto you, that he should appoint you
your place in England, and not in India, or some other dark place of the World,
that is full of the Habitations of Cruelty! that your Lot should be hitherto,
to have a full supply of outward Necessaries, whereas many others are attended
by great outward Wants and Penury.

3. Consider God's Providential Dealings toward you; that your Parents have
been hitherto continued, and made a Blessing to you, that they have not been
wanting to your outward Man by their utmost care to provide for it: But above
all, what a Blessing have they been made unto you as to your Souls, if it be
but sanctified unto you? What proof have your poor Parents given of their Care
over your Souls, in giving you your Education in such a way as has been a
means to bring them under great outward Straits, their Eyes being fixed upon the
good of your immortal Souls in what they have done, that you might not be
exposed to the Temptations that attend a multitude of profane Children? If
under all these Mercies your Hearts remain hard and insensible, it is a full
Proof that you are in an unconverted State.

4. Consider what Duties your Creator requires of you, and the Penalty annexed,
where there is a failure of it. As the great Creator has put the World and
what is in it under Man* that all the Creatures might be made serviceable unto
him; so has he put Man under a Law, and has annexed a severe Penalty unto it,
that so Man might know that he does owe a Subjection to his Creator, who has
an absolute Sovereignty over him to dispose of him as he pleases. It was the
Creator's Pleasure to put Man under a Law, and endue him with a Light that led
to the Obedience of it, that so the great Creator in his proceeding with Man in
a way of Punishment, for the breach of that Law which he put him under, might,
appear to be just and righteous, Hosea 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thine help. That God does not proceed in a way of Justice
against all the fallen Children of Adam, who are as a polluted Lump before him,
proceeds from his condescending Goodness; and that he does lead some into the
state of Children, while the great multitude are left to be dealt with in a way
of Justice, as standing under the first Covenant, is the good pleasure of his
Will. As he is not the Author of Sin; so in dealing with Sinners, he may either
inflict Punishment according to the first Covenant, or he may extend Mercy in
Mercy's way. Have you a care, while you think with Free-willers to vindicate
the equitable Right which all Men have in God as their Creator, you entrench
not upon his Sovereignty. That God as a Sovereign Being does bestow outward and
inward Mercies according to his own Pleasure, is evident to the very reason of
those that partake of each of these Mercies; and yet that does not exclude
Man's Endeavors for the getting the former, neither Christian Duties as the
way which we are led to receive the latter. That Heathen King Nebuchadnezzer,
when he was brought down from his Seat of Pride, did acknowledge God's
Sovereignty, and his right of disposing of all these outward things to whom he
pleases. Dan. 4.35. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as
nothing: and he does according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? As he has the sole right in disposing of Kingdoms, in pulling down
one and raising up another; so likewise in lesser things his right of disposal
of all things does daily manifest it self, according to the words of Solomon,
Eccles. 9.11. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is not to the
swift, nor the Battle to the strong, neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor yet
Riches to Men of understanding, nor yet Favor to Men of skill, but time and
chance happens unto all. God's right of disposal is no bar to your
providential Care how to live in the World, and making use of means that his
wise Providence does hand out unto you: But yet you must know that God does
reserve in his own hands the Power to check the Endeavors of the Creature as
often as he pleases, that so his Sovereign Right may be kept up amongst them.
Secondly, God's Sovereign Right in disposing of spiritual Mercies, is likewise
evident to those who are made Partakers of them. Romans 3.9. What then? are we
better than they? No in no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under Sin. That is, in respect of their State and
Condition, as standing under the first Covenant, they were liable to be dealt
with in a way of Justice, as well as others. And this meets the Experience of
every sincere Christian: The Sentence of the Law is laid open before them, and
the Justice of the Law to them-wards is presented unto them. So that all Pleas
that the Soul can make upon the terms of the first Covenant are wholly
silenced; and the only Plea left is the Plea of the Prodigal, Lord, be merciful
unto me a Sinner. But mark it, ray Children, the Scripture does not express the
Procedure of the General Judgment to be according to the Decrees of God, but
according to Man's Obedience to that measure of Light that he receives from
God, and his neglect of Duty according to its requirings. And yet I am fully
satisfied that the Salvation of the Elect will appear then more clearly to be
of Grace than now it does, that Heaven may indeed be a Life of Praise. Mark it,
my Children, the Scripture does with great plainness show the state of those
that are standing under the Law; the Laws Threatenings against them: it does
likewise with, great plainness show the state of those that are really in the
Covenant of Grace, and the Privileges that such Persons are made partakers of
that are in this well-ordered Covenant: Now your great Work is to bring your
Hearts to the Glass of the Law, and to the Glass of the Gospel, that so you may
find your State and Condition; whether your Hearts move to Godward, according
to the Light of the first Covenant; or that you receive Light and Life from the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Righteousness. Is that Virtue drawn down from him
by Faith that gives motion to Duty? Is it through him that Communion with the
Father is enjoyed? Is it through him that Communion with the Father is
continued? Communion with the Father depends upon Union with the Son, as
Mediator, the way to the Father: this you will experience by bringing your
Hearts to the Glass of the Gospel, if you be in the Covenant of Grace. The
Scripture shows, that in God's bringing the Heart over to himself, by Light,
first received, he calls to believe in Christ, and then to a sincere
performance of Duty from Gospel Light, the means to lead to the Enjoyment of
Christ, and through him to God, as our God: the Heart subjected to God as our
God, engaged to him by Faith, and sincerely following him, the Evidence of our
Interest in him. But if you stick in the Birth, and are ashamed to follow the
Light by a sincere Obedience, because of the Reproach that does attend the good
Ways of God, you thereby make it appear, that you prefer Man before God; and
although the Light you have receivd may tend to quiet Conscience at present, it
will but tend to heighten and aggravate your Misery in Eternity.

5. Endeavor to get imprinted upon your Hearts the remembrance of Death and
Eternity, the certainty of it, and the suddenness of it to many. When you see
Death surprizingly stealing upon Persons of your Age, let it be as a warning to
you to search into your fitness for it; remember there is no Work nor Device in
the Grave: If out of Christ, when Death comes to you, then miserable for ever;
if in Christ when Death comes, happy for ever.

6. Take care to get your Judgments thoroughly informd, and settled in the
Foundation-Principle of Christianity: Other Foundation can no Man lay than that
which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ, an all-sufficient Savior.
Remember you must always go empty to him, but have a care of returning empty
from him. Have the Saints in all Ages beheld such an Excellency in him, and can
you see none? It Is a sign your Hearts are not right with him; you talk of what
you do not enjoy. To you that believe, says the Apostle, he is precious: it is
such a Faith as gives a view of his Person in the Gospel-Glass.

7. Endeavor to be much in the inward experimental, part of Religion. Have a
care of sticking in the true Form without the Power; and have a care of a
pretended Power without the true Form. If you stick in the purest Form without
the Power, you get no further than Formalists, and are no better than a
lifeless Image without Motion in God's account: For Revealed Religion was
appointed to bring the Heart to Communion with God; and where this is not
attained, the great Design of God in giving forth Revealed Religion is lost.
Have a care of a pretended Power without the true Form; for by this you will be
laid open to the Transformings of Satan, and to his Deceivings as an Angel of
Light. Lend not an Ear to that Spirit that gets above the holy Scriptures as a
Rule and Guide. How many Persons who have seemd to be in a hopeful way in the
Truths of Christianity, have been led into Bypath through Satan's Wiles? and
many sincere Christians have so far fallen as to lose much of their former
Experiences.

8. If the Lord in Mercy to you make you fit Matter of a Gospel Church, and
afford you the Means of giving up your selves to other Christians, that are
gathered together according to the order of the Gospel, upon a Profession of
Faith and sincere Obedience, neglect not so great a Mercy: you may then be
serviceable unto others, by the exercising of the Gifts given you; which may be
for others Edification, and Improvement to your selves; and your Hearts may be
warmed by the Gifts and Graces of other Christians. Besides, your Mercy will be
very great in having the watchful Eye of sincere Christians over you, to
encourage you in your Christian Course, and to be faithful Reprovers of you, if
they see that you do not walk orderly, according to the Rule of the Gospel.
This is one of the great Privileges that attend those that are in
Church Fellowship; Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such an one in the Spirit of Meekness; considering
thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Two (says Solomon) are better than one,
because they have a good Reward for their Labor; for if they fall, the one
will lift up his Fellow; but woe to him that is alone when he falls, for he
has not another to help him. If two Christians may be serviceable one to
another, how much more to have a considerable number of sincere Christians
watching over you?

9. Endeavor to get imprinted upon your Hearts, that the Life of a Christian
while he is passing through this World, is a Life of Prayer. When God takes
Persons into Covenant with him, he pours out upon their Souls the Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication. Prayer is the Intelligencer betwixt the Saints here on
Earth, and their Father now in Heaven; it is that which keeps God's Ear open to
us, and our Hearts open for him. The blessed Jesus, speaking of John's
Ministry, the effect it had upon sinners to bring them to a sincere Repentance,
and by strong Cries to lay open their state before God, he tells us, Mat.
11.12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by force. He compares these poor
returning Penitents, to a Company of Soldiers drawn up in Battelarray, to
force their Entrance into a Fort or Castle; their Cries here on Earth piercing
into Heaven. Prayer made God use that familiar and condescending Expression to
Moses concerning the People of Israel, Exodus 32.9, 10, 11. And the Lord said
unto Moses, I have seen this People, and behold, it is a stiff-necked People.
Now therefore let me alone, that my Wrath may wax hot against them, and that I
may consume them: and I will make of thee a great Nation. And Moses besought
the Lord his God, and said, Why does thy Wrath wax hot against thy People,
which thou have brought forth out of the Land of Egypt? You may see in these
and the following words to the 15th Verse, what prevalency Prayer has upon God
when it is put up on the behalf of others, much more when it is on our own
behalf.

In treating of this Subject, I shall,

First, Show what Prayer is, and the nature of it.

Secondly, I shall show the necessity of the continuance of it, while we are on
this side Eternity.

First; I shall show what Prayer is, and the nature of it. We may take Prayer,
according to Scripture, under a twofold Consideration. First, As proceeding
from the Spirit of Bondage. And here the Heart does not cry unto God from an
inward sight and feeling that it is interested in God, but by the light of the
first Govenant: It looks upon God as Creator, and as having an Ability in him
to supply Nature's Wants, and to deliver from approaching Misery: This Prayer
is Nature's Cry, and is oftentimes put forth with a great deal of Earnestness,
where there is no Evidence of an Interest in God, or Communion with God. But
that Prayer which. I design to lay open, is the Work of the Spirit of Adoption
upon the Hearts of the Saints; and this consists in these three parts: 1st. In
giving inward Light to see the things necessary to be prayed for. 2dly. In
giving Life and Motion to the Faculties of the Soul, that so the Soul may be
engaged in the Duty. 3dly. In leading the Soul in the way by which an Entrance
is obtained into Heaven.

First, I shall* show the nature of the Inlightnings of the Spirit in the Duty
of Prayer, how they are discovered in the Soul of Man.

1. The Inlightnings of the Spirit are discovered in the Soul of Man by
discovering the inward Frame that the Soul is in. The Hearts of the unconverted
World are always in an ill Frame; and that which is their great Misery, they
want Light to see it: but if the Saints be in an ill frame, they are in Mercy
brought to see it, remaining Corruption is discovered; deadness, and dullness,
and wandering of the Heart from God is discovered; the holy Spirit gives Light
that the Heart may be rectified and made fit for Communion with God, because
therein lies Man's chief Happiness. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out
of it are the issues of Life.

2. The things that concern the outward Man are through the Inlightnings of the
holy Spirit beheld as of less Concern and Worth, although they do lie next to
Sense; and the Hearts of the Saints have been enabled to get above them, and to
part with them, when they stood in Competition with the sincere performance of
those Duties which God called them to. The Inlightning of the Spirit does
concern it self for the outward Man, but it is that Nature may be satisfied,
and not Lust gratified; it is that such a Supply may be given, as Nature may be
kept from Temptations, not that we may run into Temptations. Remove far from me
Vanity and Lies; give me neither Poverty nor Riches; feed me with Food
convenient for me; lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain. While the Heart
is without the Inlightnings of the Spirit, it is made a Servant to those things
that are most obvious to Sense. Daily Experience shows us, that the Heart of
every unconverted Sinner does place its Satisfaction in the enjoyment of these
things, although they end in Death: so that the Inlightnings of the holy Spirit
are absolutely necessary in the Duty of Prayer.

3. The holy Spirit gives inward Life and Motion to the Faculties of the Soul,
that so the Soul may be engaged in the Duty; Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit
also helps our Infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought; but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with Groanings which
cannot be uttered. That is, the Spirit follows the Inlightnings with inward
Life and Motion, by which the Heart is set a working after God, for the removal
of that which stands in the way of Communion with him; and for the obtaining of
it, there is an inward sensibility does accompany the Matter which we present
unto God in Duty; not only the things we pray for are presented unto God as
those we have need of, but the Heart goes along with them, that our Heavenly
Father may see we are in earnest with him; Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I
lift up my Soul. Compared with Psalm. 119.20. My Soul breaks for the longings
that it has to thy Judgments at all times. The holy Spirit draws out the Heart
with such earnestness unto God, as if there were a Separation going to be made
betwixt* the Soul and the Body.

4. The holy Spirit does lead the Soul in the way by which Entrance is obtained
into Heaven. We must distinguish betwixt the Spirit's Intercession in us, and
the Son's Intercession for us. The Spirit's Intercession in us, is that
supplicating, begging frame which the holy Spirit does enable the Soul to
express it self in, when it appears before God: yet this through the weakness
of the Creature, is attended with a great deal of Imperfection. But the
Intercession of the Son for us, as Mediator, the Church's Head, is that upon
which our admittance into Heaven is granted. His Prayer is a perfect Prayer,
and carries Incense along with it to perfume ours: Rev. 8.3. And another Angel
came and stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censer; and there was given him
much Incense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints, upon the
Golden Altar which was before the Throne. This Angel is the Angel of the
Covenant, the Lord Jesus Christ, as Mediator, and the Church's Head; the Censer
is his holy glorified Body, the Man Christ; the Incense is his Divine Nature,
the Perfume of which perfuming the Supplications, or Prayers of the Saints, and
ascending with them before God, gains acceptance. That Spirit that would assume
a right of giving Salvation by Man's Obedience to it, its Work is as opposite
to the leadings of the Holy Ghost as Light and Darkness. For as the Declaration
of the Gospel leads to the Lord Jesus Christ, as God-Man in one Person, our
Emanuel, as Redeemer, and as Mediator, who is able to save all those that come
to God by him; so with this does the Holy Ghost agree in his inward Witness in
the Souls of the Saints: Joh. 15.26, 27. But when the Comforter is come, whom I
will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds
from the Father, he shall testify of me. And ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from the beginning. This is that new and living
way which the Apostle speaks of, which gives Boldness in our approaching before
God: Heb. 10.19, 20. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the
Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh. The Holiest,
that is, into Heaven, of which the Sanctum Sanctorum under the Law was a Type;
by a living way, that enlivens the Person that walks in it, boldness, or a holy
freedom being given to plead with God, which yet causes great Humility in the
Soul, its acceptance with God being grounded upon the account of another's
Worthiness (which by Faith the Soul is enabled to behold) and not upon the
account of its own Worthiness. This is the Way that meets the Experience of the
Saints that are now upon the Earth; this is the Way that the Flock walked in
who are gone to Heaven before us; we may say we are compassed about with a
Cloud of Witnesses.

The second part of this Head of the Duty of Prayer, is to show the necessity
of the continuance of it while we are on this side Eternity.

1st. Because we have a multitude of Temptations attending of us outwardly.

And, 2dly. Because the Soul does too readily join with the Baits that gratify
corrupt Nature.

First, I shall show you that we have a multitude of Temptations attending of
us outwardly. The World is gotten to a very high pitch of Atheism and
Profaneness; Christianity, as to the Power of it, is not only removed, but
Persons have lost that Morality that former Ages did enjoy. You can hardly deal
in the World now but you are in danger every moment to be carried away with the
Stream; the Difficulties of getting an outward Support for the Body being
great, Satan takes the advantage of it to draw out the Corruptions of Men's
Hearts after these things, so as to hurry them forward in their Endeavors to
keep, and to gain a share in this fading World without any Consideration. Where
is the Person that has the Fear of the Almighty before him, and an inward
Tenderness lest he should offend him? Did David take up this Complaint, Woe is
me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tenths of Kedar! My Soul has
long dwelt with him that hates Peace. What cause have we every day to take up
the same Complaint, if we look upon the Immorality of the Times we live in?
most Persons being at Peace with the ways of Sin, but unwilling to be brought
to the Enjoyment of that Peace which the ways of Holiness do afford. Surely, my
Children, if God in Mercy to your Souls open your Understandings to see that
great danger that your precious Souls are in, you will see a great necessity
laid upon you to keep close to God by the great Duty of Prayer, that you may
stand in his Counsel, and that he may undertake to lead you in a safe way, that
so you may be kept from the Pollutions of the times you live in. If the Lord be
so gracious to you, as by his Providence to open a door for you, by which you
may get daily Bread, in a way that does not expose you to those great
Temptations that many are exposed to, tho it be in a lower station in the
World, make choice of it before Greatness in the World with Temptations.
Consider the wise Man's words, Prove. 28.22. He that hastes to be rich, has an
evil Eye, and considers not that Poverty shall come upon him. It Is Corruption
that insatiably drives him forward, and suffers him not to consider how he is
heaping Sin upon his Soul while he is gathering together these worldly things.
Although God do let such Persons live out their days with the Enjoyment of these
outward things, yet what a heap of Guilt do such Persons carry with them into
Eternity? Remember what the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.9. For they that will be
rich, fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition.

Another great thing that shows the necessity of the continuance of the Duty of
Prayer as long as we are on this side Eternity, is, that till then Satan has
not his Power of tempting of us wholly taken from him. It is the great Mercy of
God's Children, that the Rage of this devouring Lion is limited; that he has
not liberty to execute all that Rage against them which is in him: But daily
Experience shows us that the Father is pleased to give Satan so much Power
against his Children, as to vex and grieve them with those violent Temptations
he at times suggests into them. Now the only way to escape this Adversary, and
to be strengthened against his Temptations, is to keep up Communion with God by
Prayer; for so long as God is inwardly enjoyed he cannot enter. The Apostle in
the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chap. 5. v. 17. says, Pray without
ceasing. He does not mean that we should be always in the exercise of that
Duty, but that we should endeavor to have our Hearts always in a frame for it.

But, secondly, The necessity of the continuance of the Duty of Prayer does
appear while we are on this side Eternity, because the Soul does readily too
often join with the Baits that gratify corrupt Nature. The Body is yet
unredeemed, and therefore desires to be gratified in those things that delight
the outward Man: the Senses are as Doors and Windows unto the Soul to let in
those outward Objects, which are as so many Baits and Snares to, draw away the
Soul after them. There is no keeping the door of the Heart shut against these
things, but as the Soul is led up by Faith to Objects of a higher nature; and
the Duty of Prayer is one of the great means made use of by the Spirit to give
the Soul a view of those things that are of a more excellent nature than these
earthly things are.

Again, Endeavor to get imprinted upon your Minds the necessity of an even
composed frame of Spirit under the various changes of God's Providence. You
know what is past, but you know not what is before you; whether Prosperity or
Adverversity be appointed for you: Have a care that with the change of
Providence there be not a change of your Hearts for the worse: Does not daily
Experience show us that changes of Providence to poot unconverted Sinners have
this effect upon them? What a change has a sudden Advancement to a higher
Condition in the World made upon many unconverted Sinners? They have hardly
known how to behave themselves toward those that were their Familiars while
they were in a low Condition, much less how to carry themselves toward God who
advanced them in the World. This change from a low state in the World to a
higher, has been a means greatly to eat out that Life and Power that has been
in God's Children when in a low Condition: What a Change did it make in Joseph,
that in discoursing with his Brethren, he so far forgets himself, as to make
use of the Courtly Oaths that were then in fashion? By the Life of Pharaoh, ye
are Spies. Again, What an effect upon Persons has a sudden change of
Providence had, when they have been surprizingly brought down into a low
Condition in the World, while they have been in an unconverted state, that they
knew not the way to go to God that they might humble their Souls before him?
Through the strength of Temptations accompanied with their Corruptions, they
have been so overwhelmed that they have broken out in unbecoming Expressions
toward God, and in a desperate manner have laid violent hands upon themselves:
yea, some of God's Children when they have been under dark Providence for want
of a settled frame, have showed too much of a fretful impatient Spirit, and,
like the Israelites, have been filled with Murmurings and Repinings. O,
endeavor to learn the Apostle's Lesson, Phil. 4.11. Not that I speak in
respect of want: for I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content. That you may learn this Lesson, take these following Directions.

1. Endeavor to get your Minds exercised with the thoughts of God as to that
absolute Power which he has over you, and all his Creatures; that to him
belongs the right of disposing of you, and the things that he has for a time
given you, even as pleases him; that to you belongs a humble submissive frame
of Spirit as you are his Creatures, much more if he have brought you into the
state of Children.

2. Endeavor to see if you cannot find some of God's rational Creatures, and
some of his dear Children in one respect or other exercised with greater
Difficulties than you are: having found some under greater Straits than your
selves, search into your Hearts and Lives, and see if you can find any moving
Cause there why he should not deal with you as with those that you behold in a
worse Condition, and so learn Submission to him.

3. Look into the Scripture-Glass, and there behold that the way God has taken
with his Children to burn up the dross of Corruption, and to fit the Soul for
himself, is by afflicting Providence: Isa. 48.10. -- I have chosen thee in the
furnace of Affliction. And let this be a means for you to press after the same
sanctified use of it: when it has answered the end for which it was brought
upon you, the Providence will be changed, or you taken from under it home to
your Father's House.

5thly. Endeavor to get imprinted upon your Minds the necessity of having your
Zeal in the Worship of God regulated by the Word of God. It is good for to be
zealously affected always in a good thing; mind that it be from the
Inlightenings of the Spirit within you that you are led to behold the Truth in
the Letter of the holy Scriptures; and that by comparing Scripture with
Scripture you receive full satisfaction concerning the Truth you lay hold upon.
Let this go before, and then your Zeal in worshipping of God by it, and in
bearing a Testimony for it, follow after. How many Persons are exceeding
zealous for things which they practice in their Religious Worship, that they
have no ground for from the holy Scriptures, and do place all their hope in
this their superstitious Zeal, not being brought in the least to witness the
dealings of God with their Hearts? What mischievous work has blind Zeal made
in the Christian World? All the Sufferings and Troubles that have befallen the
Children of God in all Ages have come in by it: true Zeal desires to destroy
Error, and to save the Person that is carried away with it; false Zeal falls
upon the Person, and endeavors to ruin the outward Man for the pretended
Errors of the inward Man. Where Persons are one with you in the Foundation, and
do walk with God by Faith answerable to their discoveries of Truth, tho you
should differ from them in many other things, let your Moderation be shown
toward them. And for those that may differ from you in the Public Worship of
God upon further discoveries of Light received, have you a care of condemning
any such of being guilty of Error, before you are able from the Letter of the
Scripture to lay open their Error. It is the Scripture laid down in the Letter
that is the Rule, and not Men's Consequences from it; Consequences may be
allowed to strengthen the Rule, but must not be allowed to be added to it.

6thly. Endeavor to get imprinted upon your Minds the necessity of a holy
Conversation before Men; this is that which keeps up the Credit of Religion in
the World in despite of all its Adversaries: The World knows how to deal with
Religion when they meet it in a loose Professor, but they know not what to say
to it, nor how to deal with it, when they meet it in a sincere self-denying
Christian, whose Conversation pleads for the Reality that is in Truth, and
gives a check to the Opposers of it. By a holy Conversation we vindicate the
Interest of the Son of God in the World, and do invite poor Sinners that are
convinced of the Evil that is in Sin, to come and taste of that pleasant Fruit
that the ways of Holiness do afford to those that walk in them. There is a
great difference betwixt the ways of Sin and Holiness; Sin, tho it affords a
seeming Pleasure in the committing of it, yet draws after it Guilt and Misery;
Holiness, tho in the Acts of it we receive Reproach from the profane World, a
train of inward Peace and Comfort does follow it. A Profession of Words cannot
be taking to any Person where the Conversation does speak a quite contrary
Language: To be loose in Conversation under a pure Profession, is for a Man to
contrive how he may make himself the miserablest of Persons when he comes in
Eternity. The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Gospel, in Chap. 35. v. 8. says,
And an Highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of
Holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those: the
wayfaring Men, tho Fools, shall not err therein.

It shall be called the way of Holiness, the unclean shall not pass over it.
Where pardoning Grace is inwardly received for all Sins, the Soul under the
sense of Divine Love, has an inward hatred against the very nature of Sin
begotten in it, and an inward yearning after Holiness, as that which adds
Strength and Vigor to the new Creature in the Souls of the Saints. Where there
is inward Strength and Vigor in the Soul against that Corruption which hinders
Communion, there will be a watchfulness against those things that tend to the
dishonouring of God by our Conversation. Holiness inwardly, and sincere
Obedience outwarldy, are so inseparable, that whoever has the one, it is
impossible but he must have the other. As by a growth in Sin Sinners do ripen
for Hell and eternal Misery; so by Holiness Saints do ripen for Heaven and
eternal Glory. Holiness makes us meet for the Heavenly Canaan; without Holiness
no Communion with God in this Life; without Holiness no Enjoyment of God in
Glory: and as it makes us meet for the new Jerusalem; so without Holiness no
entering into that holy City; Rev. 21.27. And there shall in no wise enter into
it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works Abomination, or makes a
Lie; but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life. I shall conclude
this Book, and my Directions to you, with the words of the Apostle Paul to the
Philippians, Chap. 4. v. 8, 9. Finally (my Children) whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any Virtue, think on these things. Those things which you
have both learned and received, and heard and seen of me, do; and the God of
Peace shall be with you.

FINIS.
The Contents.
PART I.
Chap. I. OF the first Adam, the Excellency of the State in which he was
created. page 1. Chap. II. Of the Nature of the first Covenant-light in the
state of Innocence. page 4. Chap. III. Of Adam's Fall; the miserable change of
his Condition thereby; how all his Offspring were included in it. page 13.
Chap. IV. Of God's Image on the Heart of Adam; how it discovers it self in the
Hearts of his fallen Children. The nature of the leadings of that first
Covenant-light, and the Condition of those that stand under the highest
attainment of it. page 25.
PART II. Clearing, that the Covenant of Grace and Redemption is but one and
the same.
Chap. I. Of Election bottomed on the Sovereignty of God. How the Eternal Word
united to Man's Nature is chose by electing Love as the Head of the Elect, etc.
page 38. Chap. II. Of the Redemption of the Lord Jesus, in two parts: 1.
Perfect Obedience to the Law. 2. Satisfaction to the Penalty of it for the
Elect, etc. page 47. Chap. III. Of Christ's Mediatorship, in two parts: 1. In
sending the Spirit to fit for the publishing of the way of Salvation. 2. For
the Spirit's accompanying the outward Declaration by opening the Heart, etc.
page 61.
PART III.
Chap. I. Of the Publication of Gospel Grace from the Fall to Abraham; the
Church State during that Dispensation. page 87. Chap. II. Of the Covenant made
with Abraham, and of the Old Testament Church State; what was required to be a
Member of it. page 92. Chap. III. Of the Ordinances of the Old Testament
Church: what they pointed at to the carnal Seed of Abraham, and what to his
spiritual. page 97. Chap. IV. Of the New Testament Church, and what is required
to be a Member of it. page 116. Chap. V. Of the Ordinances of the New Testament
Church; what is required to fit for the partaking of them; and what they hold
out when administered according to the Rude of the Word. page 132.
PART IV.
Being an Appendix which the Author leaves for a Legacy to his Children. page
149.
Advertisement.
Lately published, The Paraselene. dismantled of its Cloud; or Baxterianism
Barefaced (...) from a literal Transcript of the Judgment of Mr. Baxter and
others, in the most radical Doctrines of Faith compared with those of the
Orthodox, both Conformist and Nonconformist, and transferred over by way of
Test to the Papist and Quaker. By Thomas Edwards, Esquire Sold by John Darby in
Bartholomew-Close, John Marshal at the Bible in Grace-church street, Eben.
Tracy at the three Bibles on London Bridge, and Eliz. Harris at the Harrow in
Little (...). Price bound 6 s.


