REASONS Assigned by WILLIAM PRYNNE, etc.
BEing on the 7 of this instant June 1649 informed by the Assessors of the
Parish of Swainswicke, that I was assessed at 2 l. 5 s. for three months
Contribution, by virtue of a (pretended), Act of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, bearing date the 7 of April last, assessing the Kingdom at ninty
thousand-pounds monthly, beginning from the 25 of March last, and continuing
for six months next ensuing, toward the maintenance of the forces to be
continued in England and Ireland, and the paying of such as are thought fit to
be disbanded, that so Free Quarter may be taken off; whereof 3075 l. 17 s. 1 d.
ob. is monthly imposed on the County, and 2 l. 5 s. 3 d. on the small poor
Parish where I live; and being since on the 15 of June required to pay in 2 l.
5 s. for my proportion: I returned the Collector this Answer, That I could
neither in Conscience, Law, nor Prudence in the least measure submit to the
voluntary payment of this illegal Tax, and unreasonable Contribution, (after
all my unrepaired losses and sufferings for the public Liberty) amounting to
six times more then Ship Money, (the times considered) or any other illegal
Tax of the late beheaded King, so much declaimed against in our three last
Parliaments by some of those who imposed this. And that I would rather submit
to the painfullest death and severest punishment the Imposers or Exactors of it
could inflict upon me by their arbitrary power (for legal they had none) then
voluntarily pay, or not oppose it in my place and calling to the uttermost,
upon the same, if not better reasons as I oppugned See my humble Remonstrance
against Ship Money.
Ship Money, Knighthood, and other unlawful impositions of the late King and
his Council heretofore. And that they and all the world might bear witness, I
did it not from mere obstinacy or fullennesse; but out of solid real grounds
of Conscience, Law, Prudence, and public affection to the weal and Liberty of
my native Country (now in danger of being enslaved under a new vassalage, more
grievous then the worst it ever yet sustained under the late, or any other of
our worst Kings) I promised to draw up the Reasons of this my refusal in
writing, and to publish them so soon as possible to the Kingdom, for my own
Vindication, and the better information and satisfaction of all such as are any
ways concerned in the imposing, collecting, levying or paying of this strange
kind of Contribution. In pursuance whereof, I immediately penned these ensuing
Reasons; which I humbly submit to the impartial Censure of all conscientious
and judicious Englishmen; desiring either their ingenuous Refutation, if
erroneous; or candid Approbation, if substantial and irrefragable, as my
conscience and judgment persuade me they are, and that they will appear so to
all impartial Persons, after full examination.

First, By the fundamental Laws, and known Statutes of this Realm, No Tax,
Tallage, Aid, Imposition, Contribution, Loan or Assessment whatsoever may or
ought to be imposed or levied on the free men and people of this Realm of
England, but by the WILL and COMMON ASSENT of the EARLS, BARONS, Knights,
Burgesses, Commons, and WHOLE REALM in a free and full PARLIAMENT, by ACT OF
PARLIAMENT: All Taxes etc. not so imposed, levied (though for the common
defense and profit of the Realm) being unjust, oppressive, inconsistent with
the liberty and property of the Subject, Laws and Statutes of the Realm; as is
undeniably evident by the express Statutes of Magna Charta, cap. 29.30. 25. E.
1. c. 5, 6. 34. E. 1. De Tallagio non concedendo c. 1. 21. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n.
16. 25. E. 3. c. 8. 36. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 26. 45. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 42. 11.
H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 10. 1. R. 3. c. 2. The Petition of Right, and Resolutions
of both Houses against Loans, 3. Caroli: The Votes and Acts against Ship Money,
Knighthood, Tonnage and Poundage, and the Star Chamber this last Parliament,
17. and 18 Caroli. And fully agreed and demonstrated by Mr. William Hackwell in
his Argument against Impositions; Judge Hutton and Judge Crook in their
Arguments, and Mr. St. John in his Argument and Speech against Ship Money, with
other Arguments and Discourses of that subject: Sir Edward Cook in his 2
Instit. (published by Order of the Commons House) page 59.60. etc.
527.528.529.532.533, etc. with sundry other Records and Law Books cited by
these great Rabbis of the Law, and Patriots of the Peoples Liberties. But the
present Tax of Ninety Thousand pounds a Month, now exacted of me, was not thus
imposed. Therefore it ought not to be demanded of, nor levied on me; and I
ought in conscience, Law, and prudence to withstand it as unjust, oppressive,
inconsistent with the Liberty and Property of the Subject, Laws and Statutes of
the Realm.

To make good the Assumption, which is only questionable.

First, This Tax was not imposed in, but out of any Parliament, the late
Parliament being actually dissolved above two months before this pretended Act
of these Tax-imposers taking away the King by a violent death, as is expressly
resolved by the Parliament of 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 1. by the Parliament of 4.
H. 4. and 1. H. 5. Rot. Parliam. n. 26. Cook 4 Institutes p. 46. and 4. E.
4.44. b. For the King being both the Head, beginning, end and foundation of the
Parliament (as Modus tenendi Parliamentum: and Sir Edward Cooks 4. Instit. p.
3. resolve) which was summoned and constituted only by his Writ now See 1 E. 6.
cap. 7. Cook 7. Report. 30.31. Dyer 165. 4. E. 4.43.44. 1 E. 5.1. Brook
Commission. 19.21.
actually abated by his death: and the Parliament (as is evident by the clauses
of the several Writs of Summons to Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 1.
Cook. 4. Instit. p. 9.10.
the Lords, and for the election of Knights and Burgesses, and levying of their
wages) being only PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRUM, the Kings Parliament that is dead, not
his Heirs and Successors; and the Lords and Commons being all summoned and
authorized by it to come to HIS PARLIAMENT, there to be present, and confer
with HIM (NOBISCUM, not his Heirs and Successors) of the weighty and urgent
affairs that concerned (NOS) HIM and HIS KINGDOM of England; and the Knights
and Burgesses receiving their wages for, Nuper ad NOS ad PARLIAMENTVM NOSTRVM
veniendo, etc. quod sommoneri FECIMVS, ad tractandum ibidem super diversis and
arduis Negotiis NOS and Statum REGNI NOSTRI tangentibus, as the tenor of the 5.
Ed. 3.6. part. 2. Dors. Claus. Regist. f. 192.200.
Writs for their wages determines. The King being dead, and his Writ and
Authority by which they were summoned, with the ends for which they were called
(to confer with HIM, about HIS, and HIS KINGDOMS affairs etc. being thereby
absolutely determined, without any hopes of revivall; the Parliament it self
must thereupon absolutely be determined likewise (especially to those who have
disinherited HIS HEIRS and SUCCESSORS, and voted down our Monarchy it self) and
these with all other Members of Parliament, cease to be any longer Members of
it, being made such only by the King's abated Writ; even as all Judges,
Justices of peace, and Sheriffs made only by the Kings Writ or Commission, not
by Letters Patents, cease to be Judges, Justices and Sheriffs by the Kings
death, for this very reason, because they are constituted Justiciarios and
Vicecomites NOSTROS ad Pacem NOSTRAM etc. custodiendam; and he being dead, and
his Writs and Commissions expired by his death, they can be his Judges,
Justices and Sheriffs no longer to preserve HIS Peace, etc. (no more then a
wife can be her deceased Husbands Wife, and bound to his obedience, from which
she was losed by his death, Romans 7.2.3.) And his Heirs and Successors they
cannot be, unless he please to make them so by his new Writs or Commissions,
as all our 4 Ed. 4.44. 1 E. 5.1. Brook Commissions. 19.21. and Officer, 25.
Dyer. 165. Cook 7. Report. 30.31. 1 E. 6. c. 7. Daltons Justice of Peace. c. 3.
p. 13. Lambert p. 71.
Law Books and Judges have frequently resolved upon this very reason, which
equally extends to Members of Parliament, as to Judges, Justices and Sheriffs,
as is agreed in 4 E. 4.43.44. and Brook, Office and Officer, 25. Therefore
this Tax being clearly imposed not in, but out of, and after the Parliament
ended by the Kings decapitation, and that by such who were then no lawful
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Members of Parliament, but only private men,
their Parliamentary Authority expiring with the King, it must needs be
illegal, and contrary to all the forecited Statutes; as by the Convocations
and Clergies Tax and Benevolence granted after the Parliament dissolved in the
year 1640, was resolved to be by both Houses of Parliament, and those adjudged
high Delinquents who had any hand in promoting it.

2. Admit the late Parliament still in being, yet the House of Peers, Earls and
Barons of the Realm were no ways privy nor concentivg to this Tax, imposed
without, yea against their consents in direct affront of their most ancient
undubitable Parliamentary Right and Privileges, (these Tax-masters having
presumed to vote down and null their very House, by their new encroached
transcendent power) as appears by the title and body of this pretended Act,
entitled by them, An Act of THE COMMONS assembled in Parliament: Whereas the
House of Commons alone, though full and free, have no more lawful Authority to
impose any tax upon the people, or make any Act of Parliament or binding Law
without the Kings or Lords concurrence, then the man in the moon, or the
convocation Anno 1640. after the Parliament dissolved (as is evident by the
express words of the forecited Acts, the Petition of Right it self; Acts, for
the Trienniall Parliament; and against the proroging or dissolving this
Parliament, 17. Caroli: with all our printed Statutes, 14. R. 2. n. 15. 11. H.
4. n. 30. 13. H. 4. n. 25.
Parliament Rolls, and 4 H. 7.18. b. 7. H. 7.14.16. 11. H. 7.27. Fortescue c.
18 f. 20. Dyer 92. brook Parliament. 76.197. Cooks 4. Institutes p. 25.
Law Books:) they neither having nor challenging the sole Legislative power in
any age; and being not so much as summoned to, nor constituting members of our
See the Freeholders grand inquest, and my Plea for the Lords.
ancient Parliaments (which consisted of the King and Spiritual and Temporal
Lords, without any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses as all our Histories and
Records attest) til 47 H. 3. at soonest; they having not so much as a speaker
or Commons House til after the beginning of King Edward the third his reign, as
never presuming to make or tender any Bills or Acts to the King or Lords, but
Petitions only for them to redress their grievances and enact new Laws, til
long after Rich. the seconds reign, as our Parliament Rolls, and the printed
prologues to the Statutes of 1.4.5.9.10.20.23.36.37. and 50. Ed. 3. 1. Rich.
2.1.2.4.5.7.9.11.13. Hen. 4.1.2.3.4.8.9. Hen.
5.1.2.3.4.6.8.9.10.11.14.15.29.28.29.39. Hen. 6.1.4.7.8.12.17. 22. Ed. 4. and
1. Rich. 3. evidence (which run all in this form. At the Parliament holden etc.
by THE ADVICE and AS SENT OF THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL and at THE
SPECIAL INSTANCE and REQUEST OF THE COMMONS OF THE REALM, (BY THEIR PETITIONS
put in the said Parliament, as some Prologues have it.) Our Lord the King has
caused to be ordained, or ordained CERTAIN STATUTES etc.) where the advising
and assenting to Laws is appropriated to the Lords; the ordaining of them to
the King; and nothing but the requesting of, and petitioning for them both from
King and Lords to the Commons, in whom the Legislative power principally if not
solely resided; as is manifest by the printed Prologue to the Statute of
Merton. 20. Hen. 3. The Statute of Morteman. 7. Ed. 1. 31. Ed. 1. De Aspertatis
Religiosorum. Therefore this Tax imposed by the Commons alone without King or
Lords, must needs be void, illegal, and no ways obligatory to the subjects.

3. Admit the whole House of Commons in a full and free Parliament had power to
impose a Tax, and make an Act of Parliament for levying it without King or
Lords; (which they never did nor pretended to in any age) yet this Act and Tax
can be no ways obliging, because not made and imposed by a full and free House
of Commons, but by an empty House, packed swayed, overawed by the chief
Officers of the Army, who have presumed by mere force and armed power, against
law and without president, to seclude the Major part of the House, (at least 8
parts of 10) who by law and custom are the House it self, from sitting or
voting with them, contrary to the Freedom and Privileges of Parliament;
readmitting none but upon their own terms. An usurpation not to be paralleld
in any age, destructive to the very being of Parliaments; Cooks 4. Institues p.
1.
Where all Members ex debito Justiciae, should with have equal Freedom meet and
speak their minds: injurious to all those Counties, Cities, Boroughs, whose
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses are secluded, and to the whole Kingdom; yea
contrary to all rules of reason, justice, policy, conscience, and their own
Agreement of the people, which inhibit the far lesser part of any Council,
Court, or Committee, to over-sway, seclude or forejudge the major number of
their Assessors and fellow Members, over whom they can no ways pretend the
least jurisdiction, it being the high way to usher Tyranny and confusion into
all Councels and Realms to their utter dissolution, since the King alone
without Lords and Commons, or the Lords alone without King or Commons, may by
this new device make themselves an absolute Parliament to impose Taxes and
enact Laws without the Commons, or any other forty or fifty Commoners meeting
together without their companions do the like, as well as this remnant of the
Commons make themselves a complete Parliament without King, Lords, or their
fellow Members, if they can but now or hereafter raise an Army to back them in
it, as the Army does those now sitting.

4. Suppose this Tax should bind these Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, whose
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses sat and consented to it when imposed, (though
I dare swear imposed against the minds and wills of all or most of those they
represent; (who by the Declaration Nov. 28. and 30. 1948.
Armies new Doctrine, may justly question and revoke their authority for this
high breach of Trust; the rather, because the Knights and Burgesses assembled
in the first Parliament of E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 8. Did all refuse to grant a
great extraordinary Subsidy then demanded of them (though not comparable to
this) for the necessary defense of the Kingdom against Foreign enemies, till
they had conferred with the Counties and Buroughs for which they served, and
gained their assents:) Yet there is no shadow of reason, Law, or Equity, it
should oblige any of the secluded Members themselves, whereof I am one; or
those Counties, Cities, or Buroughs, whose Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
have been secluded or scared thence by the Armies violence, or setting Members
illegal Votes for their seclusion; who absolutely disavow this Tax and Act as
un-Parliamentary, illegal, and never assented to by them in the least degree;
since the only 39. Ed. 3.7. 4. H. 4.10. Brook Parlia. 26.40. Cook 4. Instit. p.
1.25.26. 1. Jac. chapter 1.
reason in Law or equity, why Taxes or Acts of Parliament oblige any Member,
County, Borough, or Subject is, because they are parties and consenting
thereunto either in proper person; or by their chosen Representatives in
Parliament; it being a received Maxim in all Laws, Quod tangit omnes, ab
omnibus debet approbari. Upon which reason it is judged in our 49. Ed. 3.18,
19. 21. H. 7.4. Brook customs 6.32.
Law Books, That Bylaws oblige only those who are parties, and consent unto
them, but not strangers, or such who assented not thereto. And (which comes
fully to the present case) in 7 H. 6. 35. H. 6.34. Brook Ancient Demesne 20.
and Parl. 17.101. It is resolved, That Ancient Demesne is a good plea in a Writ
of Waste upon the Statutes of Waste, because those in Ancient Demesne were not
parties to the making of them, FOR THAT THEY HAD NO KNIGHTS NOR BURGESSES IN
PARLIAMENT, nor contributed to their expenses. And Judge Brook Parliament 101.
has this observable Note. It is most frequently found, that Wales and County
Palatines, WHICH CAME NOT TO THE PARLIAMENT (in former times, which now they
do) SHALL NOT BE BOUND BY THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND: for ancient Demesne is a
good Plea in an action of wast, and yet Ancient Demesne is not excepted: and it
is enacted, 2. Ed. 6. c. 28. that fines with Proclamation shall be in Chester,
for that the former Statutes did not extend to it: and it is enacted, That a
Fine and Proclamation shall be in Lancaster. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 26. And a
Proclamation upon it a exigent is given by the Statute in Chester and Wales, 1.
E. 6. c. 20. and by another Act to Lancaster, 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 26. And the
Statute of Justices of Peace extended not to Wales and the County Palatine; and
therefore an Act was made for Wales and Chester, 27. H. 8. c. 5. who had
Knights and Burgesses appointed by that Parliament for that and future
Parliaments by Act of Parliament, 27. H. 8. cap. 26. since which they have
continued, their wages being to be levied by the Statute of 35. H. 8. c. 11.
Now, if Acts of Parliament bound not Wales and County Palatines, which had
anciently no Knights nor Burgesses in Parliament to represent them, because
they neither personally nor representatively were parties and consenters to
them; much less then can or ought this Leavie, Tax, and illegal Act to bind
those Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, or those Counties, Cities and Buroughs
they represented, who were forcibly secluded, or driven away from the
Parliament by the confederacy, practice, or connivance at least, of those now
sitting, who imposed this Tax, and passed this strange Act; especially, being
for the support and continuance of those Officers, and that Army who
traitorously seized and secluded them from the House, and yet detain some of
them Prisoners, against all Law and Justice. The rather, because they are the
far major part (above six times as many as those that sat and shut them out)
and would no ways have consented to this illegal Tax, or undue manner of
imposing it, without the Lords concurrence, had they been present. And, I my
self, being both an unjustly imprisoned and secluded Member, and neither of the
Knights of the County of Somerset, where I live, present or consenting to this
Tax or Act, one or both of them being forced thence by the Army, I conceive
neither my self, nor the County where I live, nor the Borough for which I
served, in the least measure bound by this Act or Tax, but clearly exempted
from them, and obliged with all my might and power effectually to oppose them.

If any here object, Object.
That by the custom of Parliament 40 Members only are sufficient to make a
Commons House of Parliament, and there were at least so many present when this
Tax was imposed: Therefore it is valid and obligatory both to the secluded
absent Members, and the Kingdom.

I answer, Answ.
First, That though regularly it be true, that forty Members are sufficient to
make a Commons House to begin prayers, and businesses of lesser moment in the
beginning of the day, till the other Members come, and the House be full; yet
forty were never in any Parliament reputed a competent number to grant
Subsidies, pass, or record Bills, or debate or conclude matters of greatest
moment; which by the constant Rules and usage of Parliament, were never
debated, concluded, passed, but in a free and full House, when all or most of
the Members were present, as the Parliament Rolls, Journals, Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, Sir Edward Cooks 4. Institutes, p. 1.2.26.35.36. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 1. etc: 39. E. 3.7. Brook Parliament. 27. 1. Jacobi,
c. 1. and the Records I have cited to this purpose in my Levellers levelled, my
Plea for the Lords, and Memento, p. 10. abundantly prove beyond contradiction;
for which cause the Members ought to be fined, and lose their wages, if absent
without special License, as Modus tenendi Parliamentum, as 5. R. 2. Parl. 2. c.
4. 9. H. 8. c. 16. and A Collection of all Orders, etc. of the late Parliament,
pa. 294.357. with their frequent summoning and fining absent Members, evidence.

Secondly, Though forty Members only may peradventure make an House in cases
of absolute necessity, when the rest through sickness, and public or private
occasions, are volutarily or negligently absent; and might freely repair
thither to sit or give their Votes if they pleased: yet forty Members never yet
made a Commons House by custom of Parliament (there being never yet any such
case till now) when the rest (being above four hundred) were forcibly secluded,
or driven thence by an Army, through the practice or connivance of those forty
sitting, of purpose that they should not over nor counter-vote them; much less
an House to sequester or expel the other Members, or impose any Tax upon them.
Till they show me such a Law, Custom, or President of Parliament (not to be
found in any age) all they pretend is nothing to purpose, or the present case.

Thirdly, Neither forty Members, nor a whole House of Commons were ever enough
in any age, by the Custom of Parliament or Law, of England, to impose a Tax, or
make any Act of Parliament, without the King and Lords, us I have See my Plea
for the Lords, and Levellers levelled.
already proved; much less after they ceased to be Members by the Parliaments
dissolution through the Kings beheading: Neither were they ever invested with
any legal power to seclude or expel any of their Fellow Members (especially,
if duly elected) for any Vote wherein the Majority of the House concurred with
them, or differing in their consciences and judgments from them; nor for any
other cause, without the Kings and Lords concurrence (in whom the ordinary
judicial power of the Parliament resides) as I have undenyably proved by
presidents and reasons in my Plea for the Lords, p. 47. to 53. and Ardua Regni,
which is further evident by Claus. Dors. 7. R. 2. m. 27. and Mr. Seldens Titles
of Honor, p. 737. Baronet Camoyes Case, discharged from being Knight of the
Shire by the Kings Writ and Judgment, because a Peer of the Realm; the practice
of sequestring and expelling Commons by their fellow-Commons only, being a
late dangerous, unparliamentary usurpation (unknown to our Ancestors)
destructive to the privileges and freedom of Parliaments, and injurious to
those Counties, Cities, Buroughs, whose Trustees are secluded; the House of
Commons it self being no Court of Justice to give either an Oath or final
Sentence, and having no more Authority to dismember their Fellow Members, then
any Judges, Justices of Peace, or Committees have to dis-judge, dis-justice, or
dis-committee their fellow Judges, Justices and Committee Men, being all of
equal authority, and made Members only by the Kings Writ and Peoples
Election, not by the Houses, or other Members Votes; who yet now presume both
to make and unmake, seclude and recall, expel and restore their Fellow Members
at their pleasure, contrary to the practice and resolution of former ages, to
patch up a factious Conventicle in stead of an English Parliament. Therefore
this Objection no ways invalids this first Reason; why I neither can nor dare
submit to this illegal Tax in Conscience, Law, or Prudence, which engage me to
oppose it in all these respects.

Secondly, Should I voluntarily submit to pay this Tax, and that by virtue of
an Act of Parliament made by those now sitting, (some of whose Elections have
been voted void; others of them elected by new illegal Writs under a new kind
of Seal, since the Kings beheading, as the Earl of Pembroke, and Lord Edward
Howard, incapable of being Knights or Burgesses by the Common Law and Custom
of Parliament, being Peers of the Realm (if now worthy such a Title) as was
adjudged long since in the Lord Camoyes case. Claus. Dors. 7. R. 2. m. 32. and
asserted by Master Seldom in his Titles of Honor: part. 2. cha. 5. p. 737.
Seconded by Sir Edward Cook in his 4. Institutes. p. 1.4, 5, 46, 47, 49.) As I
should admit these lawful Members, so I should thereby tacitly admit, and ex
post facto assent to some particulars, against my knowledge, judgment,
conscience* Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, Protestation, and Solemn League and
Covenant, taken in the presence of Gyd himself, with a sincere heart and real
intention to perform^ the same, and persevere therein all the days of my life,
without suffering my self directly or indirectly, by whatsoever Combination,
persuasion or terror to be withdrawn therefrom. As First, That there may be
and now is a lawful Parliament of England actually in being and legally
continuing after the Kings death, consisting only of a few late Members of the
Commons House, without either King, Lords or most of their fellow Commons:
which the very Consciences and judgments of all now sitting, that know any
thing of Parliaments, and the whole Kingdom if they durst speak their
knowledge, know and believe to be false, yea against their Oaths and Covenant.
Secondly, That this Parliament (so unduly constituted and packed by power of an
Army combining with them) has a just and lawful Authority to violate the
Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the constitution of our
Parliaments themselves; imprison seclude, expel most of their fellow Members
for voting according to their consciences; to repeal all Votes, Ordinances and
Acts of Parliament they please, erect new Arbitrary Courts of war and Justice
to arraign, condemn, execute the King himself, with the Peers and Commons of
this Realm by a new kind of Martial Law, contrary to Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, and Law of the Land* disinherit the Kings Posterity of the
Crown, extirpate Monarchy and the whole House of Peers, change and subvert the
ancient Government, Seals, Laws, Writs, Legal proceedings Courts, and coin of
the the Kingdom; sell and dispose of all the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, goods of
the Crown, with the Lands of Deans and Chapters, as they think meet; absolve
themselves (like so many antichristian Popes) with all the Subjects of England
and Ireland, from all the Oaths and engagements they have made TO THE KINGS
MAJESTY, HIS HEIRS AND SUCCESSORS: yea, from their very Oath of Allegiance,
notwithstanding this express clause in it (which I desire may be seriously and
conscienciously considered by all who have sworn it) I do ^eleive and in
Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, NOR ANY PERSON WHATSOEVER HAS
POWER TO ABSOLVE ME OF THIS OATH, OR ANY PART THEREOF, which I acknowledge by
good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto me, and DO RENOUNCE ALL
PARDONS AND DISPENSATIONS TO THE CONTRARY: dispense with our Protestations,
Solemn League and Covenant, so lately zealously u^ged and enjoined by both
Houses on Members, Officers, Ministers, and all sorts of People throughout the
Realm: dispose of the Forts, Ships, Forces, Officers and Places of Honor,
Power, Trust or profit within the Kingdom to whom they please; to displace and
remove whom they please from their Offices, Trusts, Pensions, Callings, at
their pleasures without any legal cause or trial: to make what new Acts,
Laws, and reverse what old ones they think meet, to ensnare inthrall our
Consciences, Estates, Liberties, Lives: to create new monstrous Treasons never
heard of in the world before; and declare real treasons against King,
Kingdom, Parliament, to be no treasons, and Loyalty, Allegiance, due obedience
to our known Laws, and conscientious observing of our Oaths and Covenant (the
breach whereof would render us actual Traitors and pernicious persons) to be
no less then High Treason, for which they may justly imprison, dismember,
disfranchise, displace and fine us at their wills (as they have done some of
late) and confiscate our persons and lives to the Gallows, and our estates to
their new Exchequer; (a Tyranny beyond all Tyrannies ever heard of in our
Nation, repealing Magna Charta, c. 29.5. E. 3. c. 6.25. Edw. 3. cap. 4.28. Ed.
3. c. 3.37. E. c. 18.42. E. 3. cap. 3.25. Ed. 3. cap. 2.11. R. 2. c. 4.1. H. 4
c. 10.2. H. 4. Rot. Par. 11. N. 60. 1. E. 6. c. 12.1 m. c. 1. The Petition of
Right, 3 Caroli, and laying all our Laws, Liberties, Estates, Lives in the very
dust after so many bloody and costly years wars to defend them against the
Kings invasions) raise and keep up what force they will by Sea and Land, to
impose what heavy Taxes they please, and renew, increase, multiply and
perpetuate them on us as long as they please to support their own encroached
more then Regal, Parliamentall, Super-transcendent Arbitrary power over us,
and all that is ours or the Kingdoms, at our private and the public charge,
against our wills, judgments, consciences, to our absolute enslaving, and our
three Kingdoms ruin, by engaging them one against another in new Civil wars,
and exposing us for a prey to our Foreign Enemies. All which with other
particulars lately acted and avowed by the Imposers of this Tax, by color of
that pretended Parliamentary Authority by which they have imposed it, I must
necessarily admit, acknowledge to be just and legal by my voluntary payment of
it, of purpose to maintain an Army to justify and make good all this, by the
mere power of the Sword, which they can no ways justify and defend by the Laws
of God or the Realm, before any Tribunal of God or Men when legally arraigned
as they shall one day be. Neither of which I can or dare acknowledge without
incurring the guilt of most detestable Perjury, and Highest Treason, against,
King Kingdom, Parliament, Laws and Liberties of the People: and therefore
cannot yield to this Assessement.

Thirdly. The principal ends and uses proposed in the pretended Act and
Warrants thereupon for payment of this Tax are strong Obligations to me, in
point of Conscience, Law, Prudence, to withstand it; which I shall particularly
discuss.

The First is, the maintenance and continuance of the present Army and forces
in England under the Lord Fairfax. To which I say, First, as I shall with all
readiness, gratitude and due respect acknowledge their former Gallantry, good
and faithful Services to the Parliament and Kingdom, whiles they continued
dutiful and constant to their first Engagements and the ends for which they
were raised by both Houses, as far forth as any man; so in regard of their
monstrous defections and dangerous Apostasy from their Primitive obedience,
faithfulness and engagements in disobeying the Commands and levying open war
against both Houses of Parliament, keeping an horrid force upon them at their
very doors, seizing, imprisoning, secluding, abusing and forcing away their
Members, printing and publishing many high and treasonable Declarations against
the Institution, Privileges, Members and Proceedings of the late, and being of
all future Parliaments; imprisoning, abusing, arraigning, condemning and
executing our late King, against the Votes, faith, and engagements of both
Houses, and disinheriting his Posterity, usurping the Regal, Parliamental,
Magistratical and Ecclesiastical power of the Kingdom to their General Council
of Officers of the Army, as the supreme swaying Authority of the Kingdom, and
attempting to alter and subvert the ancient Government, Parliaments, Laws and
Customs of our Realm: And upon serious consideration of the ordinary
unsufferable Assertions of their Officers and Soldiers uttered in most places
where they quarter, and to my self in particular, sundry times. That the whole
Kingdom, with all our Lands, Houses, goods, and whatsoever we have, is theirs,
and that by right of conquest, they having twice conquered the Kingdom: That we
are but their conquered slaves and Vassals, and they the Lords and Heads of the
Kingdom: That our very lives are at their mercy and courtesy. That when they
have gotten all we have from us by Taxes and Free Quarter, and we have nothing
left to pay them, then themselves will self upon our Lands as their own, and
turn us and our Families out of doors. That there is now no Law in England (nor
never was if we believe their lying Oracle Peter's) but the sword; with many
such like vapouring Speeches and discourses, of which there are thousands of
witnesses: I can neither in Conscience, Law nor Prudence assent, much less
contribute in the least degree, for their present maintenance, or future
continuance, thus to insult, inslave, and tyrannize over King, Kingdom,
Parliament, people at their pleasure, like their conquered vassals. And for me
in particular to contribute to the maintenance of those, who against the Law of
the Land, the privileges of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject, pulled me
forcibly from the Commons House, and kept me prisoner about two months space
under their Martial, to my great expense and prejudice, without any particular
cause pretended or assigned, only for discharging my duty to the Kingdom, and
those for whom I served in the House, without giving me the least reparation
for this unparalleled injustice, or acknowledging their offense (and yet
detain some of my then Fellow Members under custody by the mere power of the
Sword without bringing them to trial) would be not only absurd, unreasonable,
and a tacit justification of this their horrid violence and breach of
privilege, but monstrous, unnatural, perfidious, against my Oath and Covenant.

2. No Tax ought to be imposed on the Kingdom in Parliament it self, but in
case of necessity, for its common Good, as is clear by the Stat. of 25. E. 1. c
6. and Cooks 2 Instit. p. 528. Now it is evident to me, that there is no
necessity of keeping up this Army for the Kingdoms common Good, but rather a
necessity of disbanding it, or the greatest part of it, for these reasons: 1.
Because the Kingdom is generally exhausted with the late 7 years Wars, Plunders
and heavy Taxes; there being more moneys levied on it by both sides, during
these eight last years, then in all the Kings Reigns since the Conquest, as
will appear upon a just computation: all Counties being thereby utterly unable
to pay it. 2. In regard of the great decay of Trade, the extraordinary dearth
of cattle, corn, and provisions of all sorts; the charge of relieving a
multitude of poor people, who starve with famine in many places, the richer
sort eaten out by Taxes and Free Quarter, being utterly unable to relieve them.
To which I might add the multitude of maimed Soldiers, with the widows and
children of those who have lost their lives in the Wars, which is very costly.
3. This heavy Contribution to support the Army, destroys all Trade, by
fore-stalling and engrossing most of the moneys of the Kingdom, the sinews and
life of Trade; wasting the provisions of the Kingdom, and enhansing their
prices, keeping many thousands of able men and horses idle, only to consume
other laboring men's provisions, estates and the public Treasure of the
Kingdom, when as their employment in their trades and callings, might much
advance trading, and enrich the Kingdom. 4. There is now no visible Enemy in
the field or Garrisons, and the sitting Members boast there is no fear from any
abroad, their Navy being so Victorious. And why such a vast Army should be
still continued in the Kingdom to increase its debts and payments, when charged
with so many great Arrears and debts already, eat up the Country with Taxes and
Free Quarter, only to play, drink, whore, steal, rob, murder, quarrel, fight
with, impeach and shoot one another to death as Traitors, Rebels and Enemies to
the Kingdom and Peoples Liberties, as now the Levellers and Cromwellists do,
for want of other employments, and this for the public good, transcends my
understanding. 5. When the King had two great Armies in the Field, and many
Garrisons in the Kingdom, this whole Army by its primitive Establishment,
consisted but of twenty two thousand Horse, Dragoons, and Foot, and had an
Establishment only of about forty five thousand pounds a month for their pay;
which both Houses then thought sufficient, as is evident by their Collect. etc.
page 599.^^6.
Ordinances of Febr. 15. 1644. and April 4. 1646. And when the Army was much
increased without their Order, sixty thousand pounds a month was thought
abundantly sufficient by the Officers and Army themselves to disband and reduce
all super-numeraries, maintain the Established Army and Garrisons, and ease the
Country of all Free Quarter; which Tax has been constantly paid in all
Counties. Why then this Tax to the Army should now be raised above the first
Establishment, when reduced to twenty thousand, whereof sundry Regiments are
designed for Ireland, (for which there is thirty thousand pounds a month now
exacted besides the sixty for the Army) and this for the common good of the
Realm, is a riddle unto me, or rather, a Mystery of iniquity, for some men's
private lucre, rather then the public weal. 6. The Militia of every County
(for which there was so great contest in Parliament with the late King) and
these persons of livelihood and estates in every Shire or Corporation who have
been cordial to the Parliament and Kingdom heretofore, put into a posture of
defense under Gentlemen of quality and known integrity, would be a far better
Guard to secure the Kingdom against foreign Invasions or domestic
Insurrections, then a mercinary Army of persons and soldiers of no fortunes,
and that with more general content, and the tenth part of that charge the
Kingdom is now at to maintain this Army, and prevent all danger of the undoing
pest of Free Quarter. Therefore there is no necessity to keep up this Army, or
impose any new Tax for their maintenance, or defraying their pretended arrears,
which I dare averr, the Free Quarter they have taken in kind, and levied in
money, if brought to a just account, as it ought, will double if not treble
most of their Arrears, and make them much indebted to the Country. And no
reason they should have full pay and Free Quarter too, and the Country bear the
burden of both, without full allowance of all the quarters levied or taken on
them against Law, out of their pretended arrears.

And if any of the sitting Tax-makers here object, Object.
That they dare not trust the Militia of the Cities and Counties of the Realm
with their own or the Kingdoms defense: Therefore there is a necessity for them
to keep the Army, to prevent all dangers from abroad, and Insurrections at home.

I answer, Ans.
1. That upon these pretenses these new Lords may intail and enforce an Army,
and Taxes to support them, on the Kingdom till Doomsday 2. If they be real
Members who make this objection, elected by the Counties, Cities and Buroughs
for which they serve, and deriving their Parliamental Authority only from the
people (the only new fountain of all Power and Authority, as themselves now
dogmatize) then they are but the Servants and Trustees, who are to allow them
wages, and give them Commission for what they act. And if they dare not now
trust the people, and those persons of quality, fidelity, and estate, who both
elected, entrusted and empowered them, and are the primitive and supreme Power;
it is high time for their Electors and Masters the people, to revoke their
authority and trusts, and no longer to trust those with their purses,
liberties, safety, who dare not now to confide in them, and would rather commit
the safeguard of the Kingdom to mercinary, indigent soudiers, then to those
Gentlemen, Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, and persons of Estate who elected
them, whose Trustees and Attourneys only they profess themselves, and who have
greatest interest both in them and the Kingdoms weal, and those who must pay
these Mercinaries, if continued. 3. The Gentlemen and Freemen of England have
very little reason any longer to trust the Army with the Kingdoms, Parliaments,
or their own Liberties, Laws and Privileges safeguard, which they have so often
invaded; professing now that they did not fight to preserve the Kingdom, King,
Parliament, Laws, Liberties and Properties of the Subject; but to conquer and
pull them down, and make us conquered slaves in stead of freemen: averring,
that all is theirs by conquest. And if so, then this Army is not, cannot be
upheld and maintained for the Kingdoms and peoples common good and safety, but
their enslaving, destruction, and the mere support of the usurped Power,
Authority, Offices, Wealth, and absolute Domination only of those who have
exalted themselves for the present above King, Parliament, Kingdom, Laws,
Liberties, and those that did entrust them, by the help of this trust-breaking
Army, who have stained all the glory of their former Noble Victories and
Heroic Actions, by their late degenerous unworthy practices, and are become a
reproach to the English Nation in all Christian Kingdoms and Churches.

The second end of this heavy Tax, is the support and maintenance of the
Forces in Ireland, for which there was only twenty thousand pounds a month
formerly allowed, now mounted unto thirty thousand.

To which I answer in the first place, That it is apparent by the printed
Statutes of 25. E. 1. c. 6. 1 E. 3. cap. 5.7. 18. E. 3. c. 7. 25. E. 3. c. 8.
4. H. 4. cap. 13. Cooks 2 Institutes p. 528. and the Protestations of all the
Commons of England in the Parliaments of 1 H. 5. nu. 17. and 7. H. 5. n. 9.
That no freeman of England ought to be compelled to go in person, or to find
Soldiers, Arms, Conduct-money, Wages, or pay any Tax for or toward the
maintenance of any foreign War in Ireland, or any other parts beyond the Sea,
without their free consents in full Parliament. And therefore this Tax to
maintain Soldiers and the War in Ireland (neither imposed in Parliament, much
less in a full and free one, as I have proved) must needs be illegal, and no
ways obligatory to me, or any other. 2. Most of the ancient Forces in Ireland
(as the British Army, Scots, and Inchiqueen's) toward whose support the
twenty thousand pounds a month was designed, have been ever since declared
Rebels, Traitors, Revolters, and are not to share in this Contribution: and
those now pretending for Ireland, being members of the present Army and to be
paid out of that Establishment, there is no ground at all to augment, but
decrease this former monthly Tax for Ireland, over what it was before. 3. Many
of those now pretending for Ireland, have been the greatest obstructers of its
relief heretofore: and many of those designed for this Service by lot, have in
words, writing, and print protested they never intend to go thither, and
dissuade others from going, yet take free quarter on the Country and pay too
under that pretext. And to force the Country to pay Contribution and give
Free Quarter to such Cheaters and Impostors, who never intend this Service, is
both unjust and dishonorable. 4. If the Relief of Ireland be now really
intended, it is not upon the first just and pious grounds, to preserve the
Protestant party there from the forces of the bloody Popish Irish Rebels, with
whom (if report be true) these sitting Anti-Monarchists seek and hold
correspondence, and are now actually accorded with Owen Ro-Oneal and his party
of blodiest Papists; but to oppose the Kings interest and title to that
Kingdom, and the Protestant remaining party there adhering to and proclaiming,
acknowledging him for their Sovereign; least his gaining of Ireland should
prove fatal to their usurped sovereignty in England, or conduce to his
enthroning here: And by what Authority these now sitting can impose, or with
what conscience any loyal Subject who has taken the Oaths of Supremacy,
Allegiance, and Covenant can voluntarily pay any contribution to deprive the
King of his hereditary right and undoubted Title to the Kingdoms and Crowns of
England and Ireland and alter the frame of the ancient Government and
Parliaments of our Kingdoms See a Collection p 94, 95 99 698.700.877, 878.
Remonstrated so often against by both Houses, and adjudged High Treason in
Canterburies and Strafffords cases, for which they were beheaded and by
themselves in the Kings own case, whom they decolled likewise) without
incurring the guilt of Perjury and danger of High Treason, to the loss of his
life and estate, by the very laws and statuts) yet enforce, transcends my
understanding to conceive: Wherefore I neither can nor dare in conscience, law
or prudence submit to this contribution.

Fourthly. The coercive power and manner of levying this contribution,
expressed in the Act, is against the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the
Subject, which is threefold.

First, Distress and sale of the goods of those who refuse to pay it; with
power to break open their Houses (which are their Castles) doors, chests, etc.
to distrain; which is against Magna Charta. cap. 29. The Petition of Right; The
Votes of both Houses in the case of Ship-mony, 1 R. 2. c. 3. and the resolution
of our Judges and Law Books. 13. Ed. 4.9.20. E. 4.6. Cook. 5. Report. f. 91.92.
Semaines case, and 4. Inst. p. 176, 177.

Secondly, Imprisonment of the body of the party till he pay the contribution,
being contrary to Magna charta; The Petition of Right, The resolution of both
Houses in the Parliament of 3 Caroli in the case of Loanes; and 17 Caroli, in
the case of Ship-mony, the judgment of our Judges and Law Books collected by
Sir Edward Cook in his 2 Insti. p. 46. etc. and the Statu. of 2 H. 4. Rot. Par.
n. 6. unprinted, but most express in point.

Thirdly, Levying of the contribution by soldiers and force of arms, in case
of resistance, and imprisoning the person by like force: adjudged High Treason
in the cases of the Earl of Strafford, and a levying of war within the Statute
of 25. Ed. 3. by the late Parliament, for which he lost his head: and so proved
to be at large by Master St. John in his Argument at Law at the passing the
Bill for his attainder, Printed by Order of the Commons House.

Fourthly, (Which heightens the illegality of these illegal means of levying
it) if any person whose goods are destrained, or person imprisoned for this
illegal tax, shall bring his Action at Law, or an Habeas corpus for his
relief. The Committee of Indemnity will stay his legal proceedings, award
cost against him; and commit him a new till he pay them, and release his suits
at Law, and upon an Habeas corpus, their own Sworn Judges created by them, dare
not bail but remaund him against Law. An oppression and Tyranny, far exceeding
the worst of the Beheaded Kings; under whom the Subjects had Free-Liberty to
sue and proceed at Law both in the cases of Loanes, Shipmony and Knighthood,
without any Councel-Table, Committee of Indemnity to stop their suits, or
enforce them to release them; and therefore in all these respects (so repugnant
to the Laws and Liberty of the Subject) I cannot submit to this illegal Tax,
but oppugn it to the utetrmost, most invasive on our Laws and Liberties, that
ever was.

Fifthly, The time of opposing this illegal Tax, with these unlawful ways of
levying it, is very considerable and sticks much with me; it is (as the
Imposers of it declare and publish in many of their new kind of Acts and
devices) in the first year of Englands Liberty, and redemption from thraldom.
And if this unsupportable Tax, thus illegallly to be levied, be the first
fruits of our first years Freedom, and redemption from thraldom, how great may
we expect our next years thraldom will be, when this little finger of theirs
is heavier by far then the Kings whole loins, whom they beheaded for Tyranny
and Oppression?

Sixthly, The Order of this Tax (if I may so term a disorder) or rather
newness of it, engages me, and all lovers of their Countries Liberty,
unanimously to withstand the same. It is the first, I find, that was ever
imposed by any who had been Members of the Commons House after a Parliament
dissolved; the Lords House voted down, and most of their fellow-Commoners
secured or secluded by their connivance or confederacy with an undutiful Army.
Which if submitted to, and not opposed as illegal, any forty or fifty
Commoners, who have been Members of a Parliament, gaining Forces to assist and
countenance them, may out of Parliament now, or any time hereafter, do the
like, and impose what Taxes and Laws they please upon the Kingdom, and the
secluded Lords and Commons that once sat with them, being encouraged thereto
by such an unopposed precedent. Which being of so dangerous consequence and
example to the constitution and privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the
people, we ought all to endeavor the crushing of this new Cockatrice in the
shell, lest it grow to a fiery Serpent, to consume and sting us to death, and
induce the Imposers of it, to lade us with new and heavy Taxes of this kind,
when this expires (which we must expect, when all the Kings, Bishops, Deans and
Chapters Lands are sold and spent) if we patiently submit to this leading
Decoy; since Matt. Paris, p. 517.
Bonus Actus inducit consuetudinem, as our Ancestors resolved, Anno 1240. in
the case of an universal Tax, demanded by the Pope; whereupon they all
unanimously opposed it at first; Ovid. de Remed. Amo^is.
Opprime dum nova sunt subiti mala semina morbi:
Principiis obsta; sero medicina paratur
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras,
being the safest rule of State-physick we can follow in such new desperate
Diseases which endanger the whole Body-politick. Upon which grounds the most
conscientious Gentlemen and best Patriots of their Country opposed Loans, Ship
money, Tonnage, Poundage, Knighthood, and the like late illegal Impositions of
the King and his Council in the very beginnings of them, and thought
themselves bound in Conscience, Law, Prudence so to do, though there were some
colorable reasons and precedents of former times pretended to countenance
them. And if these Worthies conceived themselves thus obliged to oppose those
illegal Impositions of the King and his Council, though countenanced by some
Judges opinions as legal, to their immortal honor, and high esteem both in
Country and Parliament, who applauded them as the principal maintainers of
their Countries Liberties; then much more ought I, and all other tenderers of
their own and Countries Freedom, to oppose this illegal dangerous Contribution
imposed on us by a few Fellow Subjects only, without, yea against all Law or
Precedent to countenance it, being of greater consequence, and worser example
to the Kingdom, then all or any of the Kings illegal projects or Taxes.

Seventhly, the excessivenesse of this Tax, much raised and increased, when we
are so exhausted, and were promised and expected ease from Taxes, both by the
Army in their Remonstrance, November 20. 1648. and by the Imposers of it,
amounting to a sixth part, if not a moiety of most men's esta^es, is a deep
Engagement for me to oppose it; since Taxes, as well as Mag. Chart. c. 14. 14.
E. 3. c. 6. Cook 2. Instit. page 26.27.169.170.
Fines and Amerciaments ought to be reasonable; so as men may support
themselves and their Families, and not be undone, as many will be by this, if
forced to pay it by Distress or Imprisonment. Upon this ground, in the
Parliaments of 1 and 4 Edward the Third we find diverse freed from payment of
Tenths, and other Taxes lawfully imposed by Parliament, because the People were
impoverished and undone by the Wars, who ought to pay them. And in the
printed Statutes of 31 Henr. 6. c. 8. 1 Mariae c. 17. to omit others, we find
Subsidies mitigated and released by subsequent Acts of Parliament, though
granted by precedent, by reason of the peoples poverty and inability to pay
them. Yea, sometimes we read of something granted them by the King, by way of
aid, to help pay their Subsidies, as in 25. E. 3. Rastal, Tax 9. and 36 E. 3.
c. 14. And for a direct president in point: When Matt. Paris, p. 516.
Peter Rubie the Pope's Legate in the year 1240. exacted an excessive unusual
Tax from the English Clergy; the whole Clergy of Berk-shire (and others) did
all and every of them unanimously withstand it, tendering him diverse reasons in
writing of their refusal, pertinent to our time and present Tax; whereof this
was one, That the Revenues of their Churches scarce sufficed to find them
daily food, both in regard of their smalnesse, and of the present dearth of
Corn; and because there were such multitudes of poor people to relieve, some
of which dyed of Famine, so as they had not enough to suffice themselves and the
poor. Whereupon THEY OUGHT NOT TO BE COMPELLED TO ANY SVCH CONTRIBVTION: which
many of our Clergy may now likewise plead most truly, whose Livings are small,
and their Tithes detained; and diverse people of all ranks and callings, who
must sell their stocks, beds, and all their household stuff, or rot in prison,
if forced to pay it.

Eighthly, the principal inducement to bring on the payment of this Tax, is a
promise of taking off the all-devouring and undoing Grievance of Free Quarter:
which has ruined many Countries and Families, and yet they must pay this heavy
Tax to be eased of it for the future, instead of being paid and allowed for
what is already past, according to A Collection, etc. page 771.
former engagements. Against which I have these just exceptions.

1. That the taking of Free Quarter by Soldiers in men's Houses, is a grievance
against the very Common Law it self, which defines every man's House to be his
Castle and Sanctuary, into which none ought forcibly to enter against his will;
and which with his goods therein he may lawfully See Cook, 5. Report. fol. 91,
92. Semans Case. 7 Rep. Sendels case. Lambert f. 179. Daltons Justice of Peace,
224. 24 H. 8. c. 5
fortify and defend against all intruders whatsoever, and kill them without
any danger of Law: Against all the Statutes concerning See Rastal Title
Purveyers.
Purveyers, which prohibit the taking of any men's goods or provisions against
their wills, or payment for them under pain of Felony, though by Commission
under the great Seal of England. Against the express Letter and Provision of
the Petition of RIGHT, 3. Caroli. Condemned by the Commons House in their An
exact Collection, p. 7
Declaration of the state of the Kingdom of the 15. December, 1641, and
charged as an Article against King Richard the second when deposed, in the
Parliament of 1 H. 4 nu. 22. Yea, it is such a Grievance, as exposes the
houses, goods, provisions, moneys, servants, children, wives, lives, and all
other earthly comforts we enjoy, to the lusts and pleasure of every domineering
Officer, and unruly common Soldier. And to impose an unjust, heavy Tax, and
induce people to pay it upon hopes of freeing them from Free Quarter, is but to
impose one grievance to remove another.

2. There have been many promises, Declarations and Orders of both Houses and
the General, for taking off Free quarter heretofore, upon the peoples paying
in their Contributions beforehand, as now: and then none should Free Quarter
on them, under pain of death; Yet no sooner have they paid in their
Contribution, but they have been freequartered on as much or more then
formerly: the Soldiers, when we tell them of any Orders against Freequarter,
slighting them as so many wast papers, and carrying themselves more unruly: And
when complaint thereof has been made to the Officers, Members, or the
Committee for the Army, or in the House; answer has still been made, That as
long as there is an Army on foot, there will be freequarter taken, and there
can be no prevention of it, there being a necessity of it: and when any have
craved allowance of it, they have found so many put-offs and delays, and such
difficulties in obtaining it, that their expenses have equalled their
allowance; and after allowances made, the moneys allowed have been called for
again. So as few have had any allowance for quarters, and given over suing for
them, being put to play an after-game to sue for them after all their
contributions first paid, and not to deduct them out of their Contributions,
which they are still put to do. This pretext therefore of taking away
Free Quarter, is but a shoo-horn to draw on the payment of this Tax, and a fair
pretext to delude the People, as they find by sad experience everywhere, and
in the County and Hundred where I reside. For, not to look back to the last
years free quarter taken on us (though we daily paid our Contributions,) In
April and May last past, since this very Tax imposed for taking away
Free Quarter, Colonel Harrisons Troopers under the command of Captain Spencer,
(who quartered six days together in a place, and exacted and received most of
them 3 s. others 3 s. 6 d. and the least 2 s. 6 d. a day for their Quarters,
telling their Landlords, that their Lands, and the whole Kingdom was theirs)
have put Bathwick, Bathford, Claverton, Comb, Hampton, Toustock, Walcot and
Wedcombe, small parishes in our Hundred and Liberty, as they will prove upon
Oath, and given it me under their hands, to 94 li. 4 s. 3 d. charge; beside
what quarters in other parishes of the Hundred Sir Hardresse Wallers Soldiers
upon pretext of collecting arrears of Contribution not due from the hundred,
put it to at least 30 l. charge more for free quarter, they being very rude and
disorderly; and no sooner were we quit of them: but on the 22 and 23 of May
last, Col. Hunks his Foot under the conduct of Captain Flower and Captain Eliot
pretending for Ireland, but professing they never intended to go thither,
marching from Minehead and Dunster (the next Western Ports to Ireland further
from it to oppress the Country, put Bathwick, Langridge, Witty, Batheaston,
Eutherin and Ford to 28 l. 7 s. and Swainswicke, where I live, to about 20 l.
expenses for three days Freequarter (by color of the Generals Order dated the
first of May) being the rudest and deboistest in all kinds, that ever quartered
since the Wars, and far worse then the worst of Goring's men, whereof some of
them were the dreggs; and their Captain Flower, a Cavalier heretofore in arms
(as is reported) against the Parliament. Their carriage in all places was very
rude, to extort money from the people, drawing out their swords, ransacking
their houses, beating and threatening to kill them, if they would not give them
two shillings six pence, three shillings, three shillings six pence, or at
least two shillings a day for their quarters, which when extorted from some,
they took free quarter upon others, taking two, three, and some four quarters a
man: At my house they were most exorbitant, having (as their Quartermaster
told me, who affirmed to me they had twice conquered the Kingdom, and all was
theirs) directions from some great ones above, from some others in the Country
(intimating some of the Committee) and their own Officers (who absented
themselves purposely, that the Soldiers might have none to control them) to
abuse me. In pursuance whereof some thirty of them coming to my house, shouting
and hollowing in a rude manner on May 22, when their Billet was but for twenty,
not showing any Authority, but only a Ticket, [Mr. Prynne -- 20] climbed over
my walls, forced my doors, beat my servants and workmen without any
provocation, drew their swords upon me (who demanded whose Soldiers they were,
by what authority they demanded free quarter, my house being neither Inn, nor
Alehouse; and Free quarter against Law and Orders of Parliament, and the
Generals) using many high provoking Speeches, brake some of my windows, forced
my strong-beer cellar door, and took the key from my servant, ransacked some of
my chambers under pretext to search for Arms, taking away my servants clothes,
shirts, stockings, bands, cuffs, handkerchiefs, and picking the money out of
one of their pockets; hollowed, roared, stamped, beat the Tables with their
Swords and Muskets like so many Bedlams, swearing, cursing, and blaspheming at
every word; brake the Tankards, Bottles, Cups, Dishes wherein they fetched
strong beer against the ground, abused my maidservants, throwing Beef and
other good provisions at their heads, and casting it to the dogs, as no fit
meat for Soldiers, and the Heads and Conquerors of the Kingdom, as they called
themselves; searched the outhouses for Turkies, which they took from their
eggs and young ones, Veal and Mutton being not good enough for them: They
continued drinking and roaring before, at, and after Supper, till most of them
were mad-drunk, and some of them dead-drunk under the Table. Then they must
have 14 beds provided for them (for they would lie but two in a bed) and all
their linen washed: My Sister answering them, that there were not so many beds
in the house, and that they must be content as other Soldiers had been, with
such beds as could be spared; they thereupon threatened to force open her
chamber door, and to pull her and her children out of their beds, unless she
would give them three shillings a piece for their beds, and next days
quarters; and at last forced her for fear of their violence (being all drunk)
to give them eighteen pence a piece, as soon as they were forth of doors, and
six pence a piece the next day, if they marched not; whereupon they promised to
trouble the House no more. Upon this agreement all but eight (who were gone to
bed) departed that night, and the rest the next morning. But I going to the
Lecture at Bath, some thirty of them in my absence came about ten of the clock,
notwithstanding the moneys received of my Sister for their Quarters, re-entered
the house, and would have Quarters again, unless she would give them three
shillings a piece; which she refusing, they thereupon abused and beat the
servants and workmen, forced them to drink with them all that day and night,
swearing, cursing, roaring like so many Furies and Devils, brake open my
Parlour, Milk-house, and Garden-doors, abused my Pictures and brake an hole in
one of them; hacked my Table-boards with their swords from one end to the
other, threw the chairs, stools, meat, drink about the house; assaulted my
Sister, and her little children and Maidservants with their naked swords,
threatening to kill them, and kick them to gelly, shot at them with their
Muskets, forced them out of the House to save their lives: which I hearing of,
repaired to my house, and finding them all so Bedlam mad, and that they would
not hearken to any reason, nor be quieted, I thereupon rode to seek their
Captain and Officers at Bath, who purposely absented themselves; and not
finding them till the next morning, I acquainted the Captain then, (as I had
done the first night by Letter) with all these unsufferable outrages of his
Soldiers (contrary to the Generals Orders to carry themselves civilly in their
quarters, and abuse none in word or deed) which would render him and them
odious, not only to the Country and Kingdom, but all Officers and Soldiers
who had any civility in them, and be a disparagement to the General, by whose
Proclamation he ought to be present with his Company to keep them in good
order, under pain of cashiering: And therefore I expected and required Justice
and Reparations at his hands; the rather, because I was informed by some of his
own Soldiers and others, that they had not been so barbarously rude, but by
his encouragement, which if he refused, I should complain of him to his
Superiors, and right my self the best way I might. After some expostulations,
he promised to make them examples, and cashier them, and remove them forthwith
from my house: But the only right I had, was, that more of his company
repaired thither, making all the spoil they could, and taking away some brass
and Pewter, continuing there till near four of the clock; and then marched away
only out of fear I would raise the Country upon them; many of whom proffered me
their assistance; but I desired them to forbear till I saw what their Officers
would do; who in stead of punishing any of them, permitted them to play the
like Rex almost in other places where they quartered since, marching but three
or four miles a day, and extorting what moneys they could from the Country by
their violence and disorders. Now, for me or any other to give moneys to
maintain such deboist Bedlams and Beasts as these ( who boasted of their
villainies and that they had done me at least twenty pounds spoil in Beer and
Provisions, drinking out five barrels of good strong Beer, and wasting as much
meat as would have served an hundred civil persons) to be Masters of our
Houses, Goods, Servants, Lives, and all we have, to ride over our heads like
our Lords and Conquerours, and take Free quarter on us, amounting to at least a
full years contribution, without any allowance for it, and that since the last
Orders against Free Quarter, and warrants for paying in this Tax to prevent it
for the future, issued; is so far against my reason, Judgment and conscience,
that I would rather give all away to suppress, discard them, or cast it into
the fire then maintain such graceless wretches with it to dishonor God,
enslave, consume, ruin the Country and Kingdom; who every where complain of
the like insolences; and of taking free quarter since the 9 of June, as above
two hundred of Colonel Coxe his men did in Bath the last Lords day; who drew up
in a body about the Majors House, and threatened to seize and carry him away
prisoner for denying to give them free quarter, contrary to the New Act for
abolishing it. Lastly this pretended Act implies, that those who refuse to pay
this contribution without distress or imprisonment shall be still oppressed with
freequarter: And what an height of oppression and injustice this will prove not
only to distrain and imprison those who cannot in conscience, Law or prudence
submit to this illegal Tax, but likewise to undo them by exposing them to
free quarter, which themselves condemn as the heighst pest and oppression; let
all sober men consider; and what reason I and others have to oppose such a
dangerous destructive president in its first appearing to the world.

Ninethly, The principal end of imposing this Tax to maintain the Army and
forces now raised, is not the defense and fafety of our ancient and first
Christian Kingdom of England, its Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, and Religion,
as at first, but to disinherit the King of the Crown of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, (to which he has an undoubted right by common and Statute Law; as the
Parliament of 1 Jacobi. chapter 1. resolves) and to levy war against him to deprive
him of it: To subvert the ancient Monarchical Government of this Realm, under
which our Ancesters have always lived and flourished, to set up a New
republic, the oppressions and greivances whereof we have already felt (by
increasing our Taxes, setting up arbitrary Courts and Proceedings to the taking
away of the lives of the late King, Peers, and other Subjects against the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, creating new monstrous Treasons never heard off
in the world before, and the like) but cannot yet enjoy or discern the least
ease or advantage by it; To overthrow the ancient constitution of the
Parliaments of England, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, and the Rights,
and Privileges thereof. To alter the fundamental Laws, Seals, Courts of
Justice of the Realm, and introduce an arbitrary Government at least, if not
Tyrannical, contrary to our Laws, Oaths, Covenant, Protestation, See an Exact
collection: and a collection of public Orders and p. 99.698.700.877.878.
public Remonstrances and Engagements to the Kingdom and foreign States, not
to change the Government, or attempt any of the premises. All which being no
less then High Treason by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, (as Sir Edward
Cook in his 4 Institutes chapter 1. and Mr. St. John in his Argument at Law, upon
passing the bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford (both printed by the
Commons special order) have proved at large by many presidents, Reasons,
Records; and so adjudged by the last Parliament in the cases of Strafford and
Canterbury, who were condemned and executed as Traitors by judgment of
Parliament, and some of these now sitting, but for some of those Treasons, upon
obscurer Evidences of guilt, then are now visible in others:) I cannot, without
incurring the Crime and Guilt of these general High Treasons, and the eternal,
if not temporal punishments incident thereunto, if I should voluntarily
contribute so much as one penny or farthing, toward such Treasonable and
disloyal ends as these, against my Conscience, Law, Loyalty, duty, and all my
Oaths and obligations to the contrary.

Tenthly, The payment of this Tax for the premised purposes, will (in my poor
judgment and conscience) be offensive to God and all good men, scandalous to
the Protestant Religion, dishonorable to our English Nation, and
disadvantagious and destructive to our whole Kingdom, hindering the speedy
settlement of our Peace, the re-establishment of our Laws and Government,
establishing of our Taxes, disbanding of our Forces, revivall of our decayed
Trade, by the renewing and perpetuating our bloody uncivil Wars; engaging
Scotland, Ireland, and all foreign Princes and Kingdoms in a just War against
us, to avenge the death of our late beheaded King, the dis-inheriting of his
posterity, and restore his lawful Heirs and Successors to their just,
undoubted Rights, from which they are now forcibly secluded; who will
undoubtedly molest us with continual Wars (whatever some may fondly conceit
to the contrary) till they be settled in the Throne in peace upon just and
honorable terms, and invested in their just possessions. And therefore I can
neither in conscience, piety nor prudence, ensnare my self in the guilt of all
these dangerous consequences, by any submission to this illegal Tax.

Upon all these weighty Reasons, and serious grounds of Conscience, Law,
Prudence, (which I humbly submit to the Consciences and Judgments of all
conscientious and Judicious persons, whom they do or shall concern) I am
resolved by the assistance and strength of that Omnipotent God (who has
miraculously supported me under, and carried me through all my former
sufferings for the Peoples public Liberties with exceeding joy, comfort, and
the ruin of my greatest enemies and Opposers) to oppugn this unlawful
Contrbution, and the payment of it to the uttermost, in all just and lawful
ways, I may; And if any will forcibly levy it by distress or otherwise,
without Law or Right (as Thieves and Robbers take men's goods and Purses) let
them do it at their own utmost peril. And I trust God and men will in due
season do me justice, and award me recompense for all the injuries in this
kind, and any sufferings for my Countries Liberties. How-ever, fall back, fall
edge, I would ten thousand times rather lose life, and all I have, to keep a
good conscience, and preserve my native Liberty, then part with one farthing,
or gain the whole world with the loss of either of them; and rather die a
Martyr for our Ancient Kingdom, then live a Slave under any new Republic, or
remant of a broken, dismembered, strange Parliament of Commons, without King,
Lords, or the major part of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Realm,
in being subject to their illegal Taxes, and what they call Acts of
Parliament, which in reality are no Acts at all to bind me, or any other
subject, to obedience, or just punishment for Non-obedience thereunto, or
Nonconformity to what they style the present Government of the Armies
modeling, and I fear, the Jesuits suggesting, to effect our Kingdoms and
Religions ruin.

WILLIAM PRYNNE.
Swainswick, June 16. 1649.
PSALM. 26.4, 5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go with
Dissemblers: I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit
with the wicked.


FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the drawing up of the precedent Reasons, I have met with a Printed
Pamphlet entitled, An Epistle written the 8 th day of June, by Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn, to Master William Lenthall Speaker to the remainder of
those few Knights, Citizens and Burgesses that Col. Thom. Pride at his late
purge thought convenient to leave sitting at Westminster (as most fit for his
and his Masters designs to serve their ambitious and Tyrannical ends, to
destroy the good old Laws, Liberties and Customs of England, the badges of our
Freedom, as the Declaration against the King of the seventh of March, 1648,
page 23. calls them) and by force of Arms to rob the people of their lives,
estates and properties; and subject them to perfect vassallage and slavery etc.
who (and in truth no otherwise) pretendenly style themselves, The Conservators
of the Peace of England, or the Parliament of England, entrusted and authorized
by the consent of all the people thereof, whose Representatives by Election (in
their Declaration last mentioned, p. 27. they say) they are; although they are
never able to produce one bit of a Law, or any piece of a Commission to prove,
that all the people of England, or one quarter, tenth, hundred or thousand part
of them, authorized Thomas Pride, with his Regiment of Soldiers to choose them
a Parliament, as indeed it has de facto done by this PRETENDED
MOCK-PARLIAMENT: And therefore it cannot properly be called the Nations or
Peoples Parliament; but Col. Prides and his Associats, whose really it is: who
although they have beheaded the King for a Tyrant, yet walk oppressingest
steps, if not worst and higher.

In this Epistle this late great Champion of the House of Commons and sitting
Junctoes Supremacy both before and since the Kings beheading, (who with his
Brother His Petition and Appeal and his Arrow of defiance. See M. Edwards
Gangrena, 3. pa. page. 154. fol. 204.
Overton and their Confederates, First cried them up as, and gave them the
Title of, The Supreme Authority of the Nation: The only Supreme Judicatory of
the land: The only formal and legal Supreme power, and Parliament of England,
in whom alone the power of binding the whole Nation by making, altering or
abrogating Laws, without either King or Lords, resides, etc. and first engaged
them by their Pamphlets and Petitions, against the King, Lords and Personal
Treaty, as he and they print and boast in Page 11.29.
this Epistle and other late Papers) does in his own and his Parties behalf (who
of late so much adored them, as the only earthly Deities and Saviors of the
Nation) now positively assert and prove.

First, that Page 34.35.
Commissary General Ireton, Colonel Harison with other Members of the House,
and the General Council of Officers in the Army, did in several meetings and
debates at Windsor immediately before their late march to London to purge the
House, and after to Whitehall, commonly style themselves the pretended
Parliament (even before the Kings beheading) a MOCK PARLIAMENT, a MOCK POWER, a
PRETENDED PARLIAMENT; and NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL: And that they were absolutely
resolved and determined TO PULL UP THIS THEIR OWN PARLIAMENT BY THE ROOT, and
not so much as to leave a shadow of it; yea and had done it if we (say they)
and some of our then FRIENDS in the House, had not been the Principal
Instruments to hinder them: We judging it then of two evils the least, to choose
rather to be governed by THE SHADOW OF A PARLIAMENT, till we could get a real
and a true one (which with the greatest protestations in the world they then
promised and engaged with all their might speedily to effect) then simply,
solely and only by the will of Swordmen, whom we had already found to be men
of no very tender consciences.

If then these leading, swaying Members of the new pretended purged Commons
Parliament and Army, deemed the Parliament even before the Kings beheading, a
Mock-Parliament, a mock-power, a pretended Parliament, yea, no Parliament at
all; and absolutely resolved to pull it up by the roots as such, then it
necessarily follows, First that they are much more so after the Kings death, as
by their suppression of the Lords House and purging of the Commons House to the
very dregs, in the opinions and consciences of those now sitting, and all other
rational men. And no ways enabled by law to impose this or any other new Tax
or Act upon the Kingdom, creating new Treasons and Penalties, Secondly, that
these grand saints of the Army and Statesmen of the Pretended Parliament
knowingly sit, vote and act there against their own judgments and consciences,
for their own private, pernicious ends. Thirdly, that it is a baseness,
cowardice, and degeneracy beyond all expression, for any of their
Fellow Members now acting, to suffer these Gr^n^e^s in their Assembly and Arms,
to sit or vote together with them, or to enjoy any Office or command in the
Army, or to impose any tax upon the People to maintain such Officers, Members,
Soldiers, who have thus vilified, affronted their pretended Parliamentary
Authority, and thereby induced others to contemn and question it: and as great
a baseness in others for to pay it upon any terms.

Secondly he there affirms that Page 26, 27
Oliver Crumwell by the help of the A^my at their first Rebellion against the
Parliament, was no sooner put up, but like a perfideous, base, unworthy man,
etc. the House of Peers were his only white boys, and who but Oliver (who
before to me had called them in effect both Tyrants and Usurpers) became their
Proctor, where ever he came; yea, and set his son Ireton at work for them also;
insomuch that at some meetings, with some of my friends at the Lord Whartons
lodgings, he clapped his hand upon his breast, and to this purpose, professed in
the sight of God upon his conscience THAT THE LORDS HAD AS TRUE A RIGHT TO
THEIR LEGISLATIVE and JURISDICTIVE POWER OVER THE COMMONS, AS HE HAD TO HIS
COAT UPON HIS BACK, and he would pocure a friend: viz. Master Nathaniel
Feinnes, should argue and plead their just right with any friend I had in
England. And not only so, but did he not get the General and Council of War
at Windsor (about the time that the Votes of no more addresses were to pass)
to make a Declaration to the whole world declaring, THE LEGAL RIGHT OF THE
LORDS HOUSE and THEIR FIXED RESOLUTION TO MAINTIAN and UPHOLD IT? which was
sent by the General to the Lords by Sir Hardresse Waller: and to indear
himself the more unto the Lords (in whose House without all doubt he intended
to have sat himself, he requited me evil for good; and became my enemy to
keep me in Prison, out of which I must not stir, unless I would stoop and
acknowledge the Lords jurisdiction over Commoners; and for that end he sets his
agents and instruments at work to get me to do it: yet now they have suppressed
them. Whence it is most apparent. 1. That the General, Liutenant General
Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, and other Officers of the Army now sitting as
Members, and overruling all the rest, have willingly acted against their own
knowledges, Declarations, Judgments, Consciences in suppressing the Lords
House; and depriving them of their Legislative and Jurisdictive Right and
power, by presuming to make Acts, pass sentences, and impose Taxes without
them, or their assents in Parliament. 2. That this Tax enforced upon the
Commons and Kingdom, for their own particular advantage, pay and enrichment, is
in their own judgment and conscience, both unjust and directly contrary to the
Laws of the Realm, being not assented to by the Lords: and therefore to be
unanimously and strenuously opposed by all who love their own or Countries
Liberty, or have any Nobility, or Generosity in them.

Thirdly, he Page 34, 39, 40.56, 57.
there asserts in positive terms in his own behalf, and his confederates; That
the purged Parliament now sitting, is but, a pretended Parliament, a
mock-Parliament; yea, and in plain English, NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL, but the
shadow of a Parliament. That those company of men at Westminster, that gave
Commission to the High Court of Justice to try and behead the King, etc. were
no more a Parliament by Law, or Representatives of the people, by the rules of
Justice and Reason, then such a company of men are a Parliament or
Representative of the People, that a company of armed Thieves choose and set
apart to try, judge, condemn, hang, or behead any man that they please, or can
prevail over by the power of their swords, to bring before them by force of
arms, to have their lives taken away by pretense of Justice, grounded upon
rules merely flowing from their wills and swords. That no Law in England
authoriseth a company of servants to punish and correct their Masters, or to
give a Law unto them, or to throw them at their pleasure out of their power,
and set themselves down in it; which is the Armies case with the Parliament,
especially at Thomas Pride's late purge, which was an absolute dissolution of
the very Essence and being of the House of Commons: to set up indeed a
MOCK-POWER, and a MOCK-PARLIAMENT; by purging out all those, that they were any
way jealous of, would not Vote as they would have them; and suffering and
permitting none to sit but (for the major part of them) a company of absolute
Schoolboys, that will, like good Boys, say their Lessons after them their
Lords and Masters, and vote what they would have them: and so be a skreen
betwixt them and the people, with the name of Parliament, and the shadow and
imperfect image of legal and just Authority to pick their pockets for them by
Assessments and Taxations; and by their arbitrary and tyrannical Courts and
Committees (the best of which is now become a perfect Star Chamber,
High Commission, and Councel-board) make them their perfect slaves and vassals.
With much more to this purpose. If then their Principal admirers, who
confederated with the Army, and those now sitting, in all their late
proceedings; and cried them up most of any, as the Parliament and supreme
Authority of England, before, at and since the late force upon the House, and
its violent purgation, do thus in print professedly disclaim them, for being
any real Parliament or House of Commons, to make Acts or impose Taxes upon the
people; the secluded Members, Presbyterians, Royallists, and all others, have
much more cause and ground to disavow and oppose their usurped Parliamentary
authority and illegal Taxes Acts, as not made by any true English Parliament,
but a Mock-Parliament only.

Fourthly, He therein further averrs: Page 52.53.56.57.58.59.
That the death of the King in Law indisputably dissolves this Parliament, ipso
facto, though it had been all the time before never so entire and
unquestionable to that very hour. That no Necessity can be pretended for the
continuance of it; the rather, because the men that would have it continue so
long, as they please, are those who have created these necessities on purpose,
that by the color thereof they may make themselves great and potent. That the
main end wherefore the Members of the Commons house were chosen and sent
thither, was, To hear and conferr with King Charles and the House of Peers,
about the great affairs of the Nation, etc. And therefore are but a third part,
or third estate of that Parliament, to which they were to come and join with,
and who were legally to make paramount and binding Laws for the people of the
Nation. And therefore having taken away two of the three Estates that they were
chosen on purpose to join with to make Laws; the end both in reason and Law of
the peoples trust is ceased: for a Minor joined with a Major for one and the
same end, cannot play Lord paramount over the Major, and then do what it
please; no more can the Minor or a Major; viz. one Estate of three, legally or
justly destroy two of three, without their own assent, etc. That the House of
Commons sitting freely within it is limited time, in all its splendour of glory,
without the awe of armed men, neither in Law, nor in the intention of their
Choosers were a Parliament; and therefore of themselves alone have no pretense
in Law to alter the Constitution of Parliaments, etc. concluding thus: For
shame let no man be so audaciously or sottishly void of reason, as to call Tho.
Prides pitiful Junto A PARLIAMENT, especially those that called, avowed,
protested and declared again and again those TO BE NONE that sat at
Westminster the 26, 27. etc. of July 1647. when a few of their Members were
scared away to the Army, by a few hours tumult of a company of a few disorderly
Apprentices. And being no representative of the People, much less A PARLIAMENT,
what pretense of Law, Reason, Justice or Nature can there be for you to alter
the constitution of Parliaments, and force upon the people the show of their
own wills, lusts and pleasures for Laws and Rules of Government, made by a
PRETENDED, EVERLASTING, NULLED PARLIAMENT, a Council of State, or Star chamber
and a Council of War, or rather by Fairfax, Cromwell, and Ireton.

Now if their own late confederates and creatures argue thus in print against
their continuing a Parliament, Jurisdiction, Proceedings, Taxes, and arbitrary
pleasures, should not all others much more do it, and oppose them to the
utmost upon the self-same grounds?

Fifthly, He there likewise affirms, Page 53.54.59 41.
That those now sitting at Westminster have perverted the ends of their trusts
more then ever Strafford did: 1. In not easing the people of, (but increasing)
their greivances. 2. In exhausting of their Estates to maintain and promote
pernicious Designs to the peoples destruction. The King did it by a little
Ship Money and Monopolies; but since they began, they have raised and extorted
more money from the people and Nation then half the Kings since the Conquest
ever did; as particularly: 1. by excise, 2 Contributions. 3. Sequestrations of
lands to an infinite value. 4. Fifth parts. 5. Twenty parts. 6. Meal-mony. 7.
Sale of the plundered goods. 8. Lones. 9. Benevolences. 10. Collections upon
their fast days. 11. New impositions or customs upon Merchandise. 12. Guards
maintained upon the charge of private men. 13. Fifty Subsidies at one time. 14.
Compositions with Delinquents to an infinite value. 15. Sale of Bishops lands.
16. Sale of dean and Chapters lands: and now after the wars are done. 17. Sale
of King, Queen, Prince, Duke, and the rest of the Childrens revenues. 18. Sale
of their rich goods which cost an infinite sum. 19. To conclude all, a Taxation
of ninety thousand pounds a month: and when they have gathered it pretendingly
for the Commonwealths use, divide it by thousands and ten thousands a piece
amongst themselves, and wipe their mouths after it, like the impudent Harlot,
as though they had done no evil; and then purchase with it public Lands at
small or trivial values: O brave Trustees! that have protested before God and
the World, again and again in the day of their straits, they would never seek
themselves, and yet besides all this divide all the choicest and profitablest
Places of the Kingdom among themselves. Therefore when I seriously consider,
how many men in the Parliament and elsewhere of their Associates (that judge
themselves the only Saints and Godly men upon the earth) that have considerable
(and some of them vast) estates of their own inheritance, and yet take five
hundred, one, two, three, four, five thousand pounds per annum Salaries, and
other comings in by their places, and that out of the too much exhausted
treasury of the Nation, when thousands not only of the People the of world, as
they call them, but also of the precious redeemed lambs of Christ, are ready to
starve for want of bread. I cannot but wonder with my self, whether they have
any conscience at all within them or no; and what they think of that saying of
the spirit of God, That whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother
has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him (which he
absolutely does that any way takes a little of his little from him) how
dwells the love of God in him) 1 John 3.17. These actions and practices are
so far from being like the true and real children of the most High, that they
are the highest oppression, theft and murder in the world, thus to rob the
poor in day of their great distress by Excise, Taxations etc. to maintain their
Pomp, Superfluities and Debauchery, when many of those from whom they take it,
do perish and starve with want and hunger in the mean time, and be deaf and
Adamant-hearted to all their TEARS, CRIES, LAMENTATIONS, MOURNFUL HOWLINGS,
GROANS. Without all doubt, these pretended, Godly Religious men, have got a
degree beyond those Athests or Fools, that say in their hearts, there is no
God. Psalm. 14.1. and 53.1.3. In quite destroying the peoples essential
Liberties, Laws and Freedoms, and in leaving them no Law at all (as Mr. Peter's
their grand Teacher averred lately to my face we had none) but their mere will
and pleasures; saving Fellons Laws, or Martial Law, where new Butchers are
both informers, Parties, Jurymen and Judges, who have had their hands imbrewed
in blood for above these seven years together, having served an apprentiship to
killing of men for nothing but money, and so are more bloody then Butchers that
kill sheep and calves for their own livelihood; who yet by the Law of England,
are not permitted to be of any jury for life and death: because they are
conversant in shedding of blood of beasts, and thereby, through an habit of it
may not be so tender of the blood of men, as the Law of England, Reason, and
Justice would have them to be. Yea, do not these men by their swords, being but
servants, give what Laws they please to their Masters the pretended Lawmakers
of your House now constituted by as good and legal a power, as he that robs and
kills a man upon the hgih-way? And if this be the verdict of their own
Accomplices and Partisans concerning them and their proceedings, especially
touching their exhausting our Estates by Taxes, and sharing them among
themselves in the times of famine and penury (as the great Officers of the Army
and Treasurers who are Members now do, who both impose what Taxes they please,
and dispose of them to themselves and their creatures as they please, contrary
to the practice of all former ages, and the rules of reason and justice too)
are not all others bound by all bonds of conscience, Law, Prudence to withstand
their impositions and Edicts unto death, rather then yield the least submission
to them?

Sixthly, He there avers, proves and offers legally to make good, before any
indifferent Tribunal, that the Page 2.15.27, 29.33.34.35.41.53.57, 58, 59
64.^4.75.
Grandees and overruling Members of the House and Army are not only, a pack of
dissembling, Juggling Knaves and Machevillians, amongst whom in consultation
hereafter he would ever scorn to come, for that there was neither faith, truth
nor common honesty amongst them: but likewise Murderers; who had shed men's
blood against Law, as well as the King, whom they beheaded; and therefore by
the same Texts and arguments they used against the King, their blood ought to
be shed by man, and they to be surely put to death without any satisfaction
taken for their lives, as Traitors, Enemies, Rebels to, and See Page 31.32.
conspirators against the late King (whom they absolutely resolved to destroy
though they did it by Martial Law) Parliament Kingdom and the peoples Majesty
and Soveraignity; That the pretended House and Army are guilty of all the late
crimes in kind, though under a new Name and notion, of which they charge the
King in their Declaration of the 17. of March 1648. that some of them more
legally deserve death, then ever the King did: and considering their many
Oaths, Covenants, Promises, Declarations, and Remonstrances to the contrary
(with the highest promises and pretenses of good for the people and their
declared Liberties that ever were made by men) the most perjured, pernicious,
false, faith and Trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the world: and
ought by all rational and honest men to be the most detested and abhorred of
all men that ever breathed, by how much more under the pretense of friendship
and brotherly kindness they have done all the mischeife they have done in
destroying our Laws and liberties; there being no Treason like Judas his
Treason, who betrayed his Lord and Master with a kiss, etc.

Seventhly, He there asserts. P. 57.34.
That whosoever stoops to their new change of Government and Tyranny, and
supports it, is as absolute a Traitor both by Law and Reason, as ever was in
the world; If not against the King, PRINCE CHARLES, (heir apparent to his
Fathers Crown and Throne) yet against the peoples Majesty and Sovereignty. And
if this be true* as it is, That this purged Parliament IS NO PARLIAMENT AT ALL;
then there is neither legal Judges nor Justices of Peace in England. And if so,
then all those that are executed at Tiburne etc. by their Sentence of
condemnation are merely murdered, and the Judges and Justices that condemned
them are liable in time to be hanged (and that justly) therefore, for acting
without a just and legal Commission: either from TRVE REGAL OR TRVE
PARLIAMENTARY POWER: (except in corporations only where they proceed by ancient
Charters in the ancient Legal form).

And if this be Law and Luke 19.14 27. c. 12.13 14.
Gospel (as no doubt it is) then by the same reason, not only all legal
proceedings, Indictments, Judgments, Verdicts, writs Trials, Fines, Recoveries,
Recognisances, and the like before any of our new created Judges and Justices
since the Kings be heading in any Courts at Westminster, or in their Circuits,
Assisses, or quarter Sessions, held by new Commissions, with all Commissions
and Proceedings of Sheriffs, ate not only merely void, illegal, and coram non
judice to all intents, with all Bills, Decrees, and Proceedings in Chancery, or
the Rolls; and all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, now acting, and Lawyers
practicing before them in apparent danger of High Treason both against King,
Kingdom, they neithver taking the Oaths of Judges, Supremacy or Allegiance as
they ought by Law; but only to be true and faithful to the new erected State;
but likewise all votes and proceedings before the pretended House or any of
their Committees, or Sub-Committees in the Country, with all their grants and
Offices, Moneys, Salaries, Sequestrations, Sales of Lands or goods Compositions
etc. mere Nullities and illegal acts, and the proceedings of all active
Commissioners, Assessors, Collectors, Treasurers, etc. and all other Officers
employed to leavy and to collect this illegal tax to support that usurped
Parliamentary Authority and Army, which have beheaded the late King,
dis-inherited his undoubted Heir, levied war against and dissolved the late
Houses of Parliament, subverted the ancient Government of this Realm, the
Constitution and Liberties of our Parliaments, the Laws of the Kingdom, with
the liberty and property of the people of England, no less then High Treason in
all these respects as is fully proved by Sir Edward Cook in his 3. Institutes,
chapter 1.2. and by Mr. St. John in his Argument at Law at the attainder of the
Earl of Strafford, both published by the late Commons House Order; which I
desire all who are thus employed, to consider, especially such Commissioners
who take upon them to administer a new unlawful Ex Officio Oath to any to
survey their Neighbors and their own estates in every parish and return the
true values thereof to them upon the new proved rate for the 3 last months
contribution, and to fine those who refuse to do it (a mere diabolical
invention to multiply perjuries to damn men's souls invented by Cardinal
Woolsy, much inveighed against by Father Latymer in his Sermons, condemned by
the express words of the Petition of Right providing against such Oahes; and a
snare to enthrall the wealthier sort of people by discovering their estates to
subject them to what future Taxes they think fit) when as the whole House of
Commons in no age had any power to administer an Oath in any case whatsoever,
much less then to conferr any authority on others to give such illegal Oaths,
and fine those who refuse them, the highest kind of Arbitrary Tyranny both
over men's Consciences, Properties, Liberties; to which those who voluntarily
submit deserve not only the name of Traitors to their Country, but to be Exodus
21.5.6.
boared through the ear, and they and their posterities to be made Slaves for
ever to these new Tax-masters and their Successors; and those who are any ways
active in imposing or administering such Oaths, and levying illegal Taxes by
distress or otherwise, may and will undoubtedly smart for it at last; not only
by Actions of Trespass, false imprisonment Account etc. brought against them
at the Common Law, when there will be no Committee of Indemnity to protect them
from such suits, but likewise by inditements of High Treason, to the deserved
loss of their Estates, Lives, and ruin of their families when there will be no
Parliament of purged Commoners, nor Army to secure, nor legal plea to acquit
them from the guilt and punishment of Traitors both to their King and Country;
pretended present sordid fears of loss of Liberty, Estate, or the like being no
See 1. H. 4 Rot. Parl. n. 97.
excuse in such a case and time, as this, but an higher aggravation of their
crime: the Rev. 21.8.
FEARFUL being the first in that dismal List of Malefactors who shall have
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death; even by Christ's own sentence.

John 18. verse. 38. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.


FINIS.
Objection.
IF any object, This Objection must be added just before: Secondly, Should I
voluntarily submit, etc.
that true it is, the Parliament by the Common Law and custom of the Realm
determines by the Kings death; but by the Statute of 17. Caroli: which ena^ts,
That this present Parliament now assembled shall not be dissolved unless it be
by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; continues this Parliament
still in being notwithstanding the Kings beheading, since no Act of Parliament
is passed for its dissolution. The only pretext for to support the continuance
of the Parliament since the Kings violent death.

To this I Answer, Answ.
that it is a Maxim in Law; That every Statue ought to be expounded according
to the intent of those that made it, and the mischiefs it intended only to
prevent, as is resolved in 4. Ed. 4.12. 12. Ed. 4.18. 1. Hen. 7.12.13. Plowd.
Com. f. 369. and Cooks 4. Instit. p. 329.330. Now the intent of the Makers of
this act, and the end of enacting it, was not to prevent the dissolution of
this Parliament by the Kings death (no ways intimated or insinuated in any
clause thereof, being a clear unavoidable dissolution of it to all intents not
provided for by this Law) but by any writ, or Proclamation of the King by his
Regal power without consent of both Houses; which I shall manifest by these
ensuing reasons.

First, from the principal occasion of making this act. The King (as the
Commons in their Exact Collect. p. 5.6.
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom. 15. December. 1642. complain) had
dissolved all former Parliaments during his reign without and against both
Houses approbation, to their great discontent and the Kingdoms prejudice, as
his Father King James had dissolved others in his reign: and during their
continuance adjourned and prorogued them at their pleasure. Now the fear and
preventing of the like dissolution, prorogation or adjournment of this
Parliament after the Scottish Armies disbanding, before the things mentioned in
the preamble were effected by the Kings absolute power, was the only gronud and
occasion of this law (not any fear or thoughts of its dissolution by the Kings
untimely death, then not so much as imagined being before the wars or Irish
Rebellion brake forth) The King very healthy not ancient, and likely then to
survive this Parliament and many others in both Houses judgment, as appears by
the bil for Triennial Parliaments. This undeniable Truth is expressly declared
by the Commons themselves in their foresaid Remonstrance: Exact Collection p.
5.6.14.17. compared together, where in direct terms they affirm; The ABRUPT
DISSOLUTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT is prevented by another bil by which it is
provided it shall not be dissolved or adjourned without the consent of both
H^uses: In the bil for continuance of this present Parliament there seems TO BE
SOME RESTRAINT OF THE ROYAL POWER IN DISSOLVING OF PARLIAMENTS; NOT TO TAKE IT
OUT OF THE CROWN, BUT TO SUSPEND THE EXECUTION OF IT FOR THIS TIME and OCCASION
ONLY; which was so necessary for THE KINGS OWN SECURITY and the public Peace,
that without it we could not have undertaken any of these great charges, but
must have lest both the Armies to disorder and confusion, and the whole Kingdom
to blood and rapine.

In which passages we have a clear resolution of the Commons themselves,
immediately after the passing of this Act; that the scope and intention of it
was only to provide against the Kings abrupt dissolution of the Parliament by
the mere royal power in suspending the execution of it for this time and
occasion only; and that for the Kings own security, (not his Heirs and
Successors) as well as his peoples peace and safety. Therefore not against any
dissolutions of it by his natural (much less his violent) death; which can no
ways be interpreted, an Act of his Royal power, which they intended hereby, not
to take out of the Crown, but only to suspend the execution of it for this time
and occasion, and that for his security: but a natural impotency, or unnatural
disloyalty, which not only suspends the execution of the Kings power for a
time, but utterly destroys and takes away him and it without hopes of revival
for ever.

Secondly, The very title of this act ( An Act to prevent Inconveniences which
may happen by the UNTIMELY adjourning, proroguing or DISSOLU^ION of this
present Parliament) intimates as much, comp^red with the body of it, which
provides, as well against the adjourning and proroguing of both or either Houses
without an Act of Parliament, as against the dissolution of the Parliament
without an Act. Now the Parliament cannot possibly be said to be adjourned or
prorogued in any way or sense, much less untimely, by the Kings death, (which
never adjourned or prorogued any Parliament,) but only his by Proclamation,
writ, or royal command, to the Houses or their Speaker, executed during his
life; as all our Journals, 6. E. 3. Parl. 2 Rot. Parl. 3. 6 5. R. 2. n. 64.65.
11. R 2. n. 14.16.20. 8. H 4. n 2.7. 27. H. 6. n. 12 28. H. 6. n. 8.9.11. 29.
H. 6. n. 10 11. 31 H. 6. n. 22.30.49.
Parliament Rolls and Cook 4. Instit. p 25. Dyer. f. 203.
Law Books resolve, though it may be dissolved by his death, as well as by his
Proclamation, writ, or royal command. And therefore this title and act coupling
adjourning, proroguing and dissolving this Parliament together without consent
of both Houses, by act of Parliament, intended only a dissolution of this
Parliament by such Prerogative ways and means by which Parliaments had
formerly been untimely adjourned and prorogued as well as dissolved by the
Kings mere will without their assents; not of a dissolution of it by the Kings
death which never adjourned nor prorogued any Parliament, nor dissolved any
formerly sitting Parliament in this Kings reign, or his Ancestors since the
death of King Henry the 4th; the only Parliament we read of dissolved by death
of the King since the conquest; and so a mischief not intended nor remedied by
Act.

Thirdly, The prologue of the act implies as much; Whereas great sums of money
must of necessity be SPEEDILY advanced and procured for the relief of HIS
MAJESTY'S ARMY and PEOPLE (not his Heirs or Successors) in the Northern parts:
etc. And for supply of other HIS MAJESTY'S PRESENT and URGENT OCCASIONS (not
his Heirs or Successors future occasions) which cannot be so timely effected as
is requisite, without credit for raising the said moneys; which credit cannot
be attained, until such obstacles be first removed as are occasioned BY FEAR,
JEALOVSIES and APPREHENSIONS OF DIVERSE OF HIS MAJESTY'S LOYAL SVBJECTS THAT THE
PARLIAMENT MAY BE ADJOVRNED, PROROGVED OR DISSOLVED (not by the Kings sudden or
untimely death, of which there was then no fear, Jealousy or apprehension in
any his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, but by his Royal Prerogative and advice of
ill Counselors) before justice shall be duly executed upon Delinquents; (then
in being, not sprung up since) public grievances (then complained off)
redressed, a firm peace betwixt the two Nations of England and Scotland
concluded and before sufficient provisions be made for the repayment of THE
SAID MONYES (not others since) so to be raised: All which the Commons in this
present Parliament ass^mbled having duly considered, do therefore humbly
beseech your Majesty that it may be declared and enacted etc. All which
expressions, related only TO HIS late Majesty only, not his Heirs and
Successors; and the prnicipal scope of this act, to gain present credit to
raise moneys to disband the Scottish and English Armies then lying upon the
Kingdom; being many years since accomplished, yea and justice being since
executed upon Strafford, Canterbury, and other Delinquents then complained of;
the public greivances then complained of (as Starchamber, High Commission,
ship money, Tonnage and Poundage, fines for Knighthood, Bishops votes in
Parliament with their Courts and jurisdictions, and the like redressed by Acts
soon after passed, and a firm peace between both Nations concluded before the
wars began; and this preambles pretentions for this act fully satisfied diverse
years before the Kings beheading; it must of necessity be granted, that this
Statute never intended to continue this Parliament on foot after the Kings
decease; especially after the ends for which it was made were accomplished. And
so it must necessarily be dissolved by his Death.

Fourthly, This is most clear by the body of the Act it self: And be it
declared and enacted By THE KING OUR SOVERAGIN LORD, with the assent of the
LORDS and Commonsin this PRESENT PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, and by the authority of
the same, That THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT NOW ASSEMBLED, shall not be DISSOLVED
unless it be By ACT OF PARLIAMENT TO BE PASSED FOR THAT PVRPOSE; nor shall any
time or times DVRING THE CONTINVANCE THEREOF BE PROROGVED OR ADJOVRNED unless
it be By ACT OF PARLIAMENT to be likewise PASSED FOR THAT PURPOSE. And that THE
HOUSE OF PEERS shall not at any time or times DURING THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT BE
ADJOURNED, unless it be BY THEMSELVES; or BY THEIR OWN ORDER. And in like
manner that THE HOUSE OF COMMONS shall not at any time or times DVRING THIS
PRESENT PARLIAMENT be adjourned unless it be BY THEMSELVES, or BY THEIR OWN
ORDER. Whence it is undeniable, 1. that this act was only for the prevention of
the untimely dissolving, Proroguing and adjourning of that present Parliament
then assembled, and no other. 2. That the King himself was the Principal Member
of his Parliament, yea, our Sovereign Lord, and the sole declarer and enacter
of this Law, by the Lords and Commons assent. 3. That neither this Act for
continuing, nor any other for dissolving, adjourning or proroguing this
Parliament could be made without, but only by and with the Kings Royal assent
thereto; which the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament in their Exact
Collect. p. 69.70.736.709.722.
Remonstrance of the 26. of May 1642: often in termin^s acknowledge, together
with his Negative voice to bills. 4. That it was neither the Kings intention in
passing this act to shut himself out of Parliament, or create Members of a
Parliament without a King, as he professed in his (...). c. 5. p. 27. Nor the
Lords nor Commons intendment to dismember him from his Parliament, or make
themselves a Parliament without him: as their foresaid Remonstrance testifies,
and the words of the act import: Neither was it the Kings, Lords or Commons
meaning by this act to set up a Parliament only of Commons (much less of a
remnant of a Commons House selected by Colonel Pride and his confederates of
the Army to serve their turns and vote what they prescribed) without either
King or House of Peers, much less to give them any supertranscendent Authority
to vote down and abolish the King and House of Lords, and make them no Members
of this present or any future Parliaments, without their own order or assent,
against which so great usurpation and late dangerous unparliamentary
encroachments this very act expressly provides in this clause, That the House of
Peers (wherein the King sits as Sovereign when he pleases) shall not at any
time or times during this present Parliament be adjourned (much less then
dissolved, excluded or suspended from sitting or voting, which is the greater,
and that by their inferiors in all kinds, a Fragment of the Commons House, who
can pretend no coulor of Jurisdiction over them, before whom they always stood
bare-headed like so many Grand-Jury-men before the Judges and attended at their
Doors and Bar to know their pleasures:) unless it be by Themselves, or by
their own Order. 5. That neither the King, Lords nor Commons intended to set up
a perpetual Parliament, and intayl it upon them, their Heirs and Successors
for ever, by this Act, which would cross and repeal the Act for trienniall
Parliaments made at the same time; and on the same Brook Parliament. 80.
Relation 85. Dyer. 85.
day in Law: but to make provision only against the untimely dissolving of
this, till the things mentioned in the Preamble were accomplished and settled;
as the Preamble, and those often repeated words, any time or times, during the
continuance of this present Parliament, conclude; and that during His Majesty's
Reign and life, not after his death; as these words coupled with, The relief of
His Majesty's Army and People; and for supply of His Majesty's present and
urgent occasions, in the Preamble manifest. Therefore this Act can no ways
continue it a Parliament after the Kings beheading; much less after the
exclusion both of the King and Lords House out of Parliament by those now
sitting, contrary to the very letter and provision of this Act; by which devise
the King alone, had he conquered and cut off, or secluded by his Forces the
Lords and Commons house from sitting, might with much more color have made
himself an absolute Parliament to impose what Taxes and Laws he pleased,
without Lords or Commons on the people by virtue of this Act, then those few
Commons now sitting since his trial and death do. 6. The last clause of this
Act: And that all and every thing or things whatsoever DONE OR TO BE DONE (to
wit by the King or His authority) for the adjournment, proroguing or dissolving
of THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT, CONTRARY TO THIS PRESENT ACT, SHALL BE UTTERLY VOID
and of NONE EFFECT: Now death, and a dissolution of this Parliament by the
Kings death, cannot (as to the King) be properly styled, A thing done or to be
done (by Him) for the adjournment, proroguing or dissolving of this Parliament,
contrary to this present Act; which cannot make the Kings death utterly void
and of none effect, by restoring him to his life again. Therefore the
dissolution of the Parliament by the Kings death, is clearly out of the words
and intentions of this Act, especially so many years after its Enacting. 7.
This present Parliament and every Member thereof, being specially summoned by
the Kings Writ, only to be HIS Parliament and Council, and to confer with
HIM of the great and urgent affairs concerning HIM and HIS Kingdom; and these
Writs and Elections of them, returned unto HIM and HIS COURT by Indenture, and
the persons summoned and chosen by virtue of them appearing only in HIS
Parliament, for no other ends but those expressed in HIS WRITS; it would be
both an absurdity and absolute impossibility to assert, that the Houses
intended by this Act to continue this Parliament in being after the Kings
beheading or death: unless they that maintain this paradox be able to inform me
and those now sitting, how they can conferr and advise wirh a dead King of
things concerning Him and His Kingdom; and that even after they have extirpated
Monarchy it self, and made it Treason to assert or revive it; and how they can
continue still HIS Parliament and Council whose head they have cut off: and
that without reviving or raising him from his grave, or enstalling His right
Heir and Successor in His Throne to represent His Person; neither of which they
dare to do, for fear of losing their own Heads and Quarters too, for beheading
him. This Tax therefore being imposed on the Kingdom long after the Kings
beheading, and the Parliaments dissolution by it, must needs be illegal and
merely void in Law to all intents; because not granted nor imposed in, but out
of Parliament; by those who were then no Commons nor Members of a Parliament,
and had no more authority to impose any Tax upon the Kingdom, then any other
forty or fifty Commoners whatsoever out of Parliament, who may usurp the like
authority by this president to Tax the Kingdom or any County what they please,
and then Levy it by an Army or force of Arms, to the peoples infinite, endless
oppression and undoing: This is my first and principal exception against the
Legality of this Tax, which I desire the Imposers and Levyers of it most
seriously to consider; and that upon these important considerations from their
own late Declarations.

First, themselves in their own Declaration of the 9th February, 1648. have
protested to the whole Kingdom: That they are fully resolved to maintain, and
shall and will uphold, preserve, and keep the fundamental Laws of this
Nation, for, and concerning the PRESERVATION OF THE LIVES, PROPERTIES and
LIBERTIES OF THE PEOPLE, with all things incident thereunto: which how it will
stand with this Tax imposed by them out of Parliament, or their Act concerning
New TREASONS; I desire they would satisfy me and the Kingdom, before they levy
the one, or proceed upon the other against any of their Fellow Subjects, by
mere arbitrary armed power against Law and Right.

Secondly, themselves in their Declaration, expressing the grounds of their
late proceedings, and settling the present Government in way of a Free State,
dated 17. Martii, 1648. engage themselves: To procure the well-being of those
whom they serve: to renounce oppression, arbitrary power, and all opposition to
the peace and Freedom of the Nation: And to prevent to their power, the
reviving of Tyranny, Injustice, and all former evils (the only end and duty of
all their Labors) to the satisfaction of all concerned in it. 2. They charge
the late King for exceeding all His predecessors in the destruction of those
whom he was bound to preserve; To manifest which they instance in The Loanes,
unlawful Imprisonments, and other Oppressions which produced that excellent
Law of the Petition of Right; which were most of them again acted, presently
after the Law made against them, which was most palpably broken by him almost
in every part of it, very soon after His solemn Consent given unto it. Is not
this the Armies and their own late and present practice?
His imprisoning and prosecuting Members of Parliament, for opposing His
unlawful Will: and of diverse Alderman Chambers the eminentest of them, is yet
since this Declaration discharged by you for his loyalty and conscience only.
worthy Merchants for refusing to pay Tonnage and Poundage, because NOT GRANTED
BY PARLIAMENT; yet And is it not so by you now, and transmitted unto the
Exchequer to be levied?
exacted by HIM expressly against Law; and punishment of many And do not you now
the same, yea, some of those very good Patriots?
good Patriots, for not submitting to whatsoever be pleased to demand, though
NEVER SO MVCH IN BREACH OF THE KNOWN LAW. The multitude of projects and
Monopolies established by Him. His design and charge to bring in Are not the
Generals and Armies Horse and Foot too, kept up and continued among us for that
very purpose, being some of them Germans too?
Germane-Horse, to awe us INTO SLAVERY: and his hopes of completing all by His
grand project of Not one quarter so grievous as the present Tax imposed by you
for the like purpose
Ship Money, to subject EVERY MAN'S ESTATE TO WHATSOEVER PROPORTION HE PLEASED
TO IMPOSE UPON THEM. But above all the English Army was labored by the King to
be engaged against THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT. A thing of that And is it not more
unnatural in those now sitting, to engage the English Army, raised by the
Parliament of England, and covenanting to defend it from violence against the
very Parliament of England and its Members, and that successively twice after
one another, and yet to own and support this Army without righting those
Members?
STRANGE IMPIETY and VNNATVRALNESS for the King of England, to sheath their
swords in one another bowels, that nothing can answer it but his own being a
Foraigner: neither could it easily have purchased belief, but by his succeeding
visible actions in full pursuance of the same. As the Kings coming in person to
the Was not Pride's and the Armies coming thither to seize, and actually
seizing above Forty, and secluding above Two hundred Members, with Thousands of
armed Horse and Foot, a thousand times a greater offense, especially after so
many Declarations of the Houses against this of the Kings?
House of Commons to seize the five Members, whether he was followed with Was
not Humphrey Edwards now sitting, an unduly elected Member, one of them thus
armed?
some hundreds of unworthy debauched persons, armed with Swords and Pistols,
and other Arms; and they attending at the Door of the House, ready to execute
whatsoever their Leader should command them. The oppressions of the
Councell-Table, Star Chamber, High Commission, Court-Martiall, Wardships,
Purveyances, Afforestations, and many others of like nature, (equalled, if not
far exceeded now by sundry Arbitrary Committees and Sub-Committees, to name no
others, in all manner of Oppressions and Injustice) concluding thus: Upon all
these and many other unparalleld offenses, upon his breach of Faith, of Oaths
and Protestations; upon the cry of the blood of England and Ireland: upon the
tears of Widows and orphans, and childlesse Parents, and millions of persons
undone by him, let all the world of indifferent men judge, whether the
Parliament (you mean your selves only which made this Declaration) had not
sufficient cause to BRING THE KING TO JUSTICE: And much more you if you imitate
or exceed him in all or any of these, even by your own verdit?

3. Themselves charge the King with with profuse Donations of salaries and
pensions to such as were found, or might be made sit Instruments and promoters
of Tyranny: which were supplied not by the legal justifiable revenue of the
Crown, but by Projects and illegal ways OF DRAINING THE PEOPLES PVRSES; all
which mischief and grievance they say will be prevented in their free State;
though the quite contrary way; as appears by the late large donation of some
thousands to Mr. Henry Martin, the Lord Lisle, Hon. Martin is accomptable to
the State for above 8700 l. which the Committee of accounts in two years time
could never bring him to account for, and yet has 3000. voted him lately for
moneys pretended to be disbursted: to whom and for whom query.
Commissary General Ireton and others of their Members and Instruments, upon
pretense of Arrears, or Service, some of them out the moneys now imposed for
the releife of Ireland. And must we pay Taxes to be thus prodigally expended?

Fourthly, They therein promise and engage, That the good old Laws and Customs
of England THE BADGES OF OUR FREEDOM ( the benefit whereof our Ancesters
enjoyed long before the conquest, and spent much of their blood to have
confirmed by the Great Charter of the Liberties) and other excellent Laws which
have continued in all former changes, and being duly executed, are THE MOST
JUST, FREE and equal of any other Laws in the world; shall be duly continued
and maintained by them; the LIBERTY, PROPERTY and PEACE OF THE SVBJECT BEING SO
FVLLY PRESERVED BY THEM, and the common interest of those WHOM THEY SERVE. And
if those Laws should be taken away, all Jndustry must cease; all misery blood
and confusion would fellow, and greater Calamities, if possible, then fell upon
us by the late Kings misgovernment, would certainly involve all persons, under
which they must inevitably perish.

5. They therein expressly promise. p. 26. To order the revenue in such a way,
That the public charges may be defrayed; The Soldiers pay justly and duly
settled: That free quarter may be wholly taken away and THE PEOPLE BE EASED IN
THEIR BURDENS and TAXES: Nota.
And is this now all the ease we feel; to have all Burdens and Taxes, thus
augmented; and that against Law by pretended acts made out of Parliament,
against all these good old Laws and Statutes, our Liberties and Properties,
which these new Tax-Masters have so newly and deeply engaged themselves to
maintain and preserve without the least diminution?

Thirdly, Both Houses of Parliament jointly, and the House of Commons severally
in the late Parliament, with the approbation of all and consent of most now
sitting, did in sundry Exact. Collect. p. 5 6.7.14 342.492
Remonstrances and Declarations published to the Kingdom, not only Tax the King
and his evil Counselors for imposing illegal Taxes on the Subjects, contrary
to the forecited acts; the maintenance whereof against all future violations
and invasions of the Peoples Liberties and Properties they made one principal
ground of our late bloody expensive wars; but likewise professed; Exact Collect
p. 28.29.214.263.270.491.492.495 496.497.660.
That they were specially chosen and entrusted by the Kingdom in Parliament and
owned it as their duty to hazard their own lives and estates for preservation
of those Laws and liberties, and use their best endeavors that the meanest of
the Commonalty might enjoy them as their birthrights, as well as the greatest
Subject. That EVERY HONEST MAN (especially THOSE WHO HAVE TAKEN THE LATE
PROTESTATION, and Solemn League and Covenant since) IS BOUND TO DEFEND THE LAWS
and LIBERTIES OF THE KINGDOM against WILL and POWER* which imposed WHAT PAYMENTS
THEY THOUGHT FIT TO DRAIN THE SUBJECTS PURSES, and supply THOSE NECESSITIES
(which their il Counsel had brought upon the King and Kingdom) And that they
would be ready TO LIVE AND DYE with those WORTHY and TRUE-HEARTED PATRIOTS OF
THE GENTRY OF THIS NATION and others, who were ready to lay down their lives
and fortunes for the maintenance of THEIR LAWS and LIBERTIES: with many such
like heroic expressions. Which must needs engage me (a Member of that
Parliament, and Patriot of my Country) with all my strength and power to oppose
this injurious Tax, imposed out of Parliament, though with the hazard of my
life and fortunes; wherein all those late Members who have joined in these
Remonstrances are engaged by them to second me; under pain of being adjudged
unworthy for ever hereafter to sit in any Parliament or to be trusted by their
Counties and those for whom they served. And so much the rather to vindicate
the late Houses honor and reputation from those predictious and printed
aspersions of the beheaded King; Exact Collect. p.
285.286.298.320.322.378.379.381.513.514, 515. etc. 618.619.620.623.647. etc.
671.679. etc. A Collect. etc.p. 100.102. etc. 117.
That the maintenance of the Laws, Liberties, Properties of the People, were
but only gilded dissimulations and specious pretenses to get power into their
own hands, thereby to enable them to destroy and subvert both Laws, Liberties,
and Properties at last. And not any thing like them, to introduce Anarchy,
Democracy, Parity, Tyranny in the Highest degree, and new forms of arbitrary
Government, and leave neither King nor Gentleman: all which the people should
too late discover to their costs and that they had obtained nothing by adhering
to and compliance with them, but to enslave and undo themselves, and to be
last destroyed. Which royal Predictions many complain we find too truly
verified by those who now bear rule, under the Name and visour of the
Parliament of England, since its dissolution by the Kings decapitation, and the
Armies imprisoning and seclusion of the Members who above all others are
obliged to disprove them by their answers as well as declarations to the people,
who regard not words but real performances from these new keepers of their
Liberties; especially in this FIRST YEAR OF ENGLANDS FREEDOM engraven on all
their public Seals, which else will but seal their Selfdamnation and proclaim
them the Archest Impostors under Heaven.

Secondly, Should I voluntarily submit, etc.

ERRATA.
Page 2. line 17. read, Perusers: l. 36. r. argued: p. 3. l. 14. r. by: l. 16.
for 4. r. 14. p 4. l. 29 dele. by: l. 36. r consenting: p. 5. l. 17. for 74 r.
49 H. 3 l. 20. r. and p. 6. l. 2. for Asportatis Religiosorum: The Statute of
Sheriffs, 9. E. 2. and of the Templers 17. E. 2. to mention no more: l. 20.
dele have: p. 7, l. 2. r. swear: l. 7. r. 13 E. 3. l. 15. r. sitting: l. 27. r.
8 H 6. p. 8. l. 4. r. an. p. 9. l. 9. r. read: l 21. dele as; p. 10. l. 13. for
27, r. 32. l. 14. r. Banneret; p. 11. l. 12. r. God: l 37. dele the: p. 12. l,
27, r. perjutious; p. 16. l. 2. r. those.


