AN ACCOUNT OF A Portable Barometer, WITH Reasons and Rules For the Use of it.

How to Weigh the Air, Measure its Height, and foretell all the alteration of
Weather; the Constitution of the Atmosphere, and how the Effluvia keep off the
Air's Gravitation: with a New Account and Experiments, how Rain, Snow, Winds,
Frost, Thunder, Lightning, Hurricans and Tornado's are produced: And an
inquiry, whether the Planetary Beams or Influence can cause an alteration of
weather, to be foretold by them:

With a sensible Demonstration of their Influences, and the insufficiency of
all Hygroscopes, Thermometers, and other Inventions, to discover the
alterations or Weather by.

And lastly, Rules and Experiments for the certain knowledge of all the
alterations of Weather, both in Quantity and Quality.

By GVST. PARKER, Med.

LONDON, Printed for William Haws at the Rose in Ludgate Street, MDCXCX

THE Preface.
THE business of a Portable Barometer have been the endeavors of several Men
above Thirty Years last past: To find out some way or other to put the
Quicksilver Glass into a secure Traveling Posture: at last they got a way to
tie a piece of Leather over the Cistern and round the Tube, and such they
called their Portable Barometers, which the Philosophical Transactions says,
are no ways to be trusted to, by reason of their Intolerable Errors, and
besides are indeed no ways Portable: which this of mine is to every body that
can but walk, and will whether they will or not show any alteration of Weather,
and several other things besides: But this short Account being altogether new,
and I believe the first that ever came abroad of this nature, consisting only
of Experiments and Discoveries of this Instrument, it will I hope (from friends
especially) want the less Apology, both for the Style, Matter, and manner which
is not often so smoth well digested and ordered in a thing that never was
before, as it may be a second time: And I hope the confiderations of the
usefulness of these Barometers in all the following and many other Discoveries
will excuse the rest, not only in what concerns the true Nature, Quality,
Temper and Inclinations of the Air, as to its self and the alterations of the
Weather, but all other Liquids as well which may thus be diverse ways both
weighed and measured at the same time in their Fountains, and thereby discover
many particular qualifications very hard and difficult if not impossible by any
other means, and thereby also in time give a Demonstration of the true System
of all Natural Bodies. And being thus led to the knowledge of their Consistence
will be conducted from thence to their Prima Materia, and so to the Grand
System of the Great World. But as there are some who have gained the way of
making others little upon Trust, so they will abhor the news of any that
undertake to undeceive them, and will neither give themselves, nor others leave
to consider what another have done: Yet if they will set to work and Merit
their own Encomiums with Meum and Tuum, they shall have every thing due to
their Characters from.

Gusts. Parker.

AN ACCOUNT OF A Portable Barometer.
CHAP. I. First what the Portable Barometer is, the Constitution of the
Atmosphere, and how the Effluvia keep off the Airs Gravitation, and are the
cause of the variation of its weight.
WHat I have to offer about a Portable Barometer I once intended to show the
world in another manner, but since that could not be I am unwilling by reason
of the extraordinary service it may be applied to in Philosophy, Hydrostaticks
and Mechanics, they should know nothing of it, yet know no reason after a
great deal of Labor and Charge to give it away, but could rather wish there
were something ordered for a present reward, according to the worth of every
discovery, whereby every improvement would immediately receive a thousand
improvements if it were capable, and the World the benefit at the same time:
And for the Philosophical Reasons of the Natures of these things from Authors I
never saw any, either of Meteors or this, and as I suppose the thing is New, so
I know nothing but what reason has taught me in the use of it, for about two
years and a half. Therefore it cannot be supposed the Method, Reasons or Rules
should be so smooth, Direct and Perfect the first time as they may be
afterward, if I live and do well to make another Edition.

The Portable Barometer is an Instrument that weighs the Air, measures its
Height, and foretells all the alterations of Weather both in Quantity and
Quality, which for the better understanding it will be convenient to tell the
reasons, which I shall do in ten Particulars, Then show the manner in its use,
and settle the Rules, for there is no alteration of Weather, which is not
preceeded by an alteration of the weight of the Air, both for Heat and Cold, as
well as Wet and Dry, which comes to pass in this manner.

The continual motion of the Parts of Matter, of which all things are composed,
and from whence they increase and decay, begets a mighty Emancipation of Atoms,
with constant Emanations from every part of all sorts of Bodies, which being
pressed on every side by the Universal Fluid of Air gives them particular
bounds, and so constitute an Atmosphere or Sphere of Attoms to every Body (and
is thereby also the cause of Electrical Attractions) therefore the great Globe
of Earth and Water, with all its consistent Bodies must needs have very Copious
Effluviums, and so make a very large Atmosphere, being by an Universal Motion
driven from every part of the whole, as far as the Power of that Motion, and
the Pressure of the Air will give leave, which by that Pressure and their own
weight are again returned like random-shot, from whence they are sent: This
Sphere of Atoms (or at least our Hemispherical part thereof) is sometimes
filled with more and less Emanations by the inequality of that Motion several
Undulations, particular Eddies, and the Effluvia Circulations, which in like
manner does more or less keep off the Airs Gravitation whereby a Cylinder of
the Air cannot weigh so much in wet or Winds Weather as it does in dry Weather
(and not as John Smith tells us by his Principle of Philosophy, that the Air is
lighter by being mixed with watery vapors, tho a thousand times heavier than its
self, and mixes Water with Rectified Spirits of Wine for a Demonstration in his
Horological Disquisitions page 75.) I say Winds as well as Wet keep off the
Airs Gravitations for Winds also being only humid bodies sufficiently dilated
and by that Expansive force the struggling Atoms as strangely agitated, with
numerous and powerful Attacks from multitudes of fresh Emancipations and
Eruptions from our Aeolian Globe must needs keep off the Air's Gravitation,
much more then other Pacide Vapors (as I shall further Demonstrate in the third
and fifth Chapters following) which in the Common Barometer make very
considerable alterations, tho there be no Rain, and are easily discovered by
several Hygroscopes by their surprising Gravities, as I shall show in the tenth
Chapter. Thus our Aeolian Effluvia do not only keep off the Gravitation of the
Air, but are the cause of the variation of its weight.

CHAP. II. How Rain and Snow are Generated and Produced, and why they make a
Cylinder of Air lighter, and yet any other particular parcel of Air much
heavier.
WHat I have to say upon the Contents of this Chapter, is not of the prime
cause of Rain and Snow, but only a short account of their Generation and
Production, in relation to their affections of the Atmosphere, for the better
understanding of the nature and use of the Barometer. Rain and Snow, then are
generated of the same matter: But for distinction I will first give an account
of Rain, and then of Snow. Rain is generated of the Effluviums that constitute
our Terraqueous Atmosphere, being by their Emancipated motion in a certain part
thereof driven toward the extremity of the Sun's reflections into a cooler
Region, they soon condense in some little part first, which Condensation
immediately makes room for the natural Elasticity of the Air, which as soon
begins to carry a long with it all the other Effluvia round about to the first
Condensation, where being by this Elastick force, first brought from all the
neighboring parts, the Effluvious Air then runs down by its own weight and
Elasticity from every side to a vast extent, where being heaped and crowded
together, they not only fall by their Innate Gravity, but by the same motion of
Air (which now is Wind) are sent down sometimes with extreme violence, and thus
not only the neighboring Atoms are condensed in a little Cloud and small
Showers, but the whole Hemispherical Effluvia are driven and drawn together and
discharged upon a whole Country or national Horizon oftentimes, till the whole
half Atmosphere is emptied of all those Vapors, and then having made a Current
from every part beyond, all the other Emanations that are raised in other parts
of the world as readily flow hither, to be discharged here in continual Rains
for a long time together, till by a piarticuler Condensation in some other
Place, the course is altered and the Current turned, and then it may be Dry as
long; the Continual stream of Atoms being carried away to other Places to be
discharged there.

The difference between storms or a little wet, and lasting settled Rains, is
that in the first Emancipated Atoms being not so thick or Copious as at other
times in their elevating Motions, become Bounded by Particular Eddies of Air,
which drives them so close together, that by this means they are formed into
Clouds; and by their being driven yet closer together, by the Power and
strength of these Eddies, and the Addition of fresh Matter: The small Atoms
fall so fast one into another by Cold and compressure that very large Drops are
Immediately produced and sent Down with more or less violence according to the
Disposition of their Motion, the Season, and Air.

But in settled Rains, the Effluvious Vapors, having for some time before been
continually filling our Hemesphere, from all parts without any discharge, in a
still and quiet manner without disturbing the Air; at last receive a
Condensation as above in some particular part, which Immediately makes way for
the Airs Elasticity.

But being now every where filled, which these Vapors cannot unbend or move so
fast; yet continually brings the Neighboring Vapors, and so are gently and
continually sent down as long as they last-

Snow is generated of the same Effluvium's or small pieces of moisture when the
Sun is at a convenient Distance, and the Country proper with Hills, Mountains,
and Latitudes. The Calorifick Beams being easily hindered by them, or not tended
far enough for the other, together with the Assistance of the Contrary Motions,
or Interpositions of the Beams of the other Stars; or obstructed by the
Numerous Effluvia that murales or or walls the whole Atmosphere, or by contrary
currants of Air, or Winds: and the Heat being thus or any other ways kept off,
and the Effluvious Vapors continuing their Pneumatick Motions, without any
great pressure, they are not condensed into Drops, but are frozen in their own
shapes, in some little part first: which is quickly extended to all the rest by
the Frigorifick Saline, Particls as they use to tell us, universally dispersed
and mixed with these Atoms. But rather by the former privations, as will be
further demonstrated in the 6 Chapter. Then being driven a little closer they
fall by their own weight in bigger or lesser Flakes, and with more or less
driving according as the Motion, Cold and Pressure is. Then as for Hail, that
is seldom any other ways than in Storms, and is a kind of half frozen Snow and
Rain mixed together. The manner of its generation and Production may be easily
conceived by the account I have given of Rain and Snow with better satisfaction
than what they use to tell us of the drops freezing after they fall from the
Clouds, which is almost impossible. But this being not so directly to my
purpose, I shall say no more of it, but only demonstrate how Rain and Snow
which thus thickens and fills the Air, yet make a Cylinder thereof much
lighter, but any other particular parcel of Air much heavier. The reason why
Snow and Rain make a Cylinder of Air lighter, is that the Effluvious vapors
that constitute the Atmosphere and of which it consists, being so very numerous
from every part of Matter, and so constantly and powerfully sent out, that they
not only make particular streams from the more fluid parts, but an universal
stream from the whole Globe of Earth and Water, and all other consistent Bodies
whatever. This universal stream or flood of Vapors being thus united in all
parts of the world, make an entire screen of condensed or thickened Matter to a
great thickness, being near a thousand times more solid than Air, before they
appear in Clouds, and therefore must needs keep off or stop the Airs
penetration, and thereby its Gravitation, which yet does not require a general
Rain or Snow, for a little that comes by particular Currents or Eddies in
Storms will do it, for they being of no great height, want no great extent, to
hinder both the direct and collateral pressure of the Air, as has been observed
by common Barometers in a little distance. Thus the Ethereal Particles are
always hindered by these Emanation, at all times, but much more in wet than in
dry weather, and the nearer the Earth's Surface, the more they are obstructed,
as appears in the little heights of small Hills, by the same Barometers, so
that it is impossible a Cylinder of Air should weigh so much in wet, as it does
in dry weather, which I shall now demonstrate by Experiments also.

Experiments in weighing the Air.
In weighing the Air with the Portable Barometer the Weights may and do consist
of Ounces, Drachms, Scruples and Grains, and may as well be Pounds, or
Hundreds, but will be most Convenient to have them of one Denomination, and the
bigger or more Weights we use, the greater will be the variation of the smaller
parts (if the Balance be good) to foretell the last as well as other
alterations of weather by, which with small weights except the Balance be very
nice, will not be casie to distinguish so many minute variations as all the
alterations of weather will require; I have therefore a weight consisting of,
or divided into 2000 equal parts for the Middle or Center of variation, and
have not yet observed the weight of Air to vary full 60 such parts, either
above or below that number, that is 120 in all, so if the weight be bigger the
variations will be more, as this of 2000 is 120, if it were 4000, the variation
would be 240 such parts, which is near ten times as much as in the Common
Barometer, but if it be but 1000, the variations will not be above 60 such
parts, which is 3 times as much as the common ones, and to be less will not be
so serviable.

January 3. School/9 a Cylinder of Air weighed but 1951, having been very wet the
day before, and rained all the night presceeding, and now extreme dark thick
weather, but no rain this third day.

Jan. 4. it weighed 1958, being very Cloudy, but no Rain this day neither.

Jan. 6. it weighed 1964, when it rained all the day abundance.

The first of these times the Common Barometer was something below much Rain,
the next the Quicksilver stood at much Rain, and in the last one division above
much Rain.

Sept. 12. School, a Cylinder of Air weighed 2025, it was very fair, clear and
dry.

October. 3. School, a Cylinder weighed 2022, being very fair clear and dry.

December. the 3d. and 4th. School, a Cylinder of Air weighed 2026, being very
fair, yet thawing and a hard frost going away.

In the first of these, the Common Barometer was at fair, and at the second
very near, at the last somewhat above fair.

These I believe are sufficient to prove that a Cylinder of Air does not weigh
so much in wet as in dry weather, but yet a particular parcel of Air as a
Quart, Gallon or Bushel, etc. must needs weigh much heavier in a wet time or
tho only misty, then in a clear Season, it containing so many watery Particles
every where within our reach, that there is not above one third part of pure
Air, if so much as I have several times tried.

October. 21 and 22. School, it rained both days almost from morning to night, and
so much in Buckingham and Bedfordshire, that the like had not been known. On
the 21, I took a Brass Aeolipile, which held something more than a Pint and
half, a little better than eight and twenty ounces of common well Water, this
was made as hot as it would endure, and then the Orifice was very well stoped
with a firm Cement, and so laid to cool, and when it was through cold, in an
exact pair of Scales, it weighed Eight Ounces Seven Drachms and a half, the
Orifice being then opened to let in the Air, it weighed something above 19
Grains more: a Cylinder of Air at the same time weighed 1962, and the
Quicksilver Glass stood 4 below Changeable. The 22 in the morning the same
quantity of Air weighed near 20 Grains, a Cylinder of Air 1963, and the
weather-glass as before.

Jan. 2. School/9, being a very wet day, when a Cylinder of Air weighed but 1949,
the Weather-glass at 2 below much Rain, the emptied Aeolipile contained 21
grains and a half of humid Air.

Jan. the 6. following very wet again, yet a Cylinder of Air weighed 1964, the
Weather-glass three divisions higher than on the second day, but the exhausted
Aeolipile 22 Grains of humid Air this day.

Then on the 12th of Sept. School, when a Cylinder of Air weighed 2025, the
Weather Fair, the Aeolipile heat and weighed as before, would now hold but 15
Grains and a half of Air.

October. 3d following a Cylinder of Air weighed 2022, being very fair and clear,
the Weather-glass very near the same height, the Aeolipile weighed 16 Grains
more when the Air was let in then before.

December. the 4th School, a Cylinder of Air weighed 2026, being very fair but a
little misty, the Weather-glass a little above Fair, the exhausted Aeolipile
near 17 Grains more when the Air was let in, then it did before. This I believe
is sufficient to make good the Title of this Chapter, and prove the truth of a
Paradox or two, that the Ai^ is both lighter and heavier in we^ weather, and
both heavier and lighte^ in dry weather: But there is, nor can be no certainty
in the Aeolipilan way as I shall demonstrate in the 10 Chapter, to foretell any
alteration of weather by.

CHAP. III. How Winds, Storms, Tempests, Hurricanes and Tornados are produced?
THe Portable Barometer, being an Instrument that discovers all the alterations
of Weather, it will be convenient to give some account of Winds also, what they
are, and how produced, for they are as well foreseen by this as any other sort
of weather, and the reason we have had no better knowledge of them, is only for
want of a true method in Science, to direct us in all natural observations to
enlarge and confirm our knowledge, That have kept us from it, therefore what I
have to say of Winds cannot be expected to be either so full or perfect as what
is dilivered of more obvious Subjects, being not so Cogniscible to our Senses,
but are indeed of a Metaphysical Nature, of which few I suppose have made any
great experiments, but only given us some Historical relations of their
strangeness, and tho Winds are only the motions of Air, yet their origines are
almost as various as their motions, and cannot be had from any one cause, but
we must ascend into the Regions of the Air, and descend into the Caverns of the
Earth, and Waters of the Sea, to understand them, for we can never confine
their original to any one efficient, nor (I believe) there never was any single
Theory yet stated, that would resolve the whole Phaenominon of Winds, which may
be generated these six ways, by Rarefaction, Compressure, Elasticity and
Resilition, or by Subterraneal, or Submarine Eruptions. The universal Efficient
of the first four is chiefly the operations of the Sun Beams upon the
Effluvious Air, and that of the other two from Subterranial Vutrano's and Calid
Emotions of Mineral Heterogenities, as I shall successively show.

First, by Rarification, that Air may be dilated to 100, 200, nay 13000 times
its former extent, as the Honorable Esquire Boil, Mersennus and others have
experienced without heat, by removing the Circumjacent Pressure of the other
Aerial Particles, but let this or any such Rarefaction be produced from what
cause soever, either by the Sun Beams, or any other heat, or Condensation of
some particular part, to make room for the natural Expansion of another, the
effects will be all one, a Wind must ensue by the Protrusion of other Air,
which by this means crowd and Superonerate the former spaces, whereby that
wonderful and admirable Emotions of the Atmosphere is produced, we call Wind,
which is more or less violent according to the force and extent of the
Rarefaction.

Secondly, Compressure is another way, by which Winds may be generated, the
Effluvious Air being in continual motion, not in one, but several Currents must
needs produce very numerous undulations, these together, almost as many Eddies,
whether in pure Air, Efflvious Vapors, or Clouds, which in contrary Currents
meet, with more or less violence, according to the Bigness, Strength, and
Density of the Matter, by which means the Wind may (as the pressure is)
violently descend Perpendicularly to the Earth, or being reverted by cross or
collateral obstructions, heaping and pressing Superonerations, makes as violent
Whirl-winds, Hurricanes or Tornadoes, etc. to blow from all the parts of the
Compass at the same time, with amazing Displosions, as if the Heavens and the
Earth were going to be torn in pieces, by these examinating Tempests. But their
several Species is not my present business, only the use of the Barometer, but
if Life and Leisure serve, it may be done in another Edition.

Thirdly, Elasticity the natural springiness of the Air is another cause of
Winds, for tho we suppose our Atmosphere to be in never so still and quiet a
posture, and all things most calm and sedate, yet it is impossible it should be
all of one universal consistency, but must contain a great variety of rare and
dense parts, from the Local Diffirances the Emanations proceed from, either
Waters or Marshes, or dry Lands, and these different degrees of fluid
Densities, being upon a just and true Aequilibrium, a small strenght of other
Elastick Particles between, turns them any way, which immediately make room for
a numerous succession of other Auxiliaries to a vast extent, that carries all
before them in an impetuous Wind. So that whenever any Aereal Particle has
leave to unbend it self in any posture, it immediately gives way to the other
neighboring Particles Expansions, and as the motion is made, to others beyond,
to a mighty extent, by which means their strength is also increased to a mighty
proportion, with the addition of their weight, to their Elasticity, and so
carries all before them to the turning up of the strongest Oaks or Buildings,
which continue till the Elastick Particles are driven to their utmost
extentions, that the other pacid Particles will yield to, and then they begin
again to curl and fluctuate, and by degrees to settle in their native postures,
and a quiet calm, till fresh causes give them new disturbances.

Fourthly, The Resilition of the Atmosphere is another cause that produces
wind, the Effluvious Air being easily taken and brought into currents by
several Meanders, as well in the upper as in the lower Regions; in the upper by
the Sun Beams, or the particular constitution, or local position of the same
Effluviums; and in the lower by the Waters in several Seas and Channels, and
also with several Mountains and Valleys by Land, this tender fluid being so
very tractable, so easily susceptible and long retentive of the last
Impression, that it is a kind of a perpetual Automata, which may by these or
several other ways be brought into Currents; but yet it is almost impossible
these Currents should be continued in even and uninterrupted Orbicular courses,
but must be met or obstructed by several Clouds and Densities in the
Atmosphere, Hills, Mountains, the Sun Beams, contrary Currents of Air,
Provincial Trade or Etesian-winds, Mascarets, etc. any of which obstructions
forthwith begets this Resilition, and that more or less wind, according to the
bigness and strength of the recoyling Protrusions.

Fifthly, Subterraneal eruptions are another cause of Winds, which eruptions
are produced by the Calid Emotions and Effervescencies of Mineral
Heterogeneities that plentifully abound in all parts of the world; and these
Calid Emotions by the mixtures of the Effluvious Acids from Niter, and other
Salts, Vitriols, Sulphurs, Antimony, etc. which will immediately heat only with
a small quantity of fair water (as Spirits of Niter and Vitriol, etc. which are
only their acid salts freed from their more Terrestrial parts, and united with
a little Phlegm, mingled with water will do) the small Partieles of which are
always at hand, and can never be wanting in no such places. And with bigger
additions of other Auxiliaries, are in some places augmented to actual fires,
by which means their acid Salts are made Alcaline, and so furnish the whole
Universe with sufficient matter for Effervescencies, and fermenting Calid
Emotions by the continual actions and reactions of their Acid and Alcaline
Particles, as quick Lime and Water, or these with Sal Armoniack, etc. or any
Acid Spirit with the ashes of Wood, Bones, Coals, or other Alcalies will
immediately heat and boil without fire, with such strength and violence, that
the strongest Vessel cannot contain them. Thus the Subterraneal Caverns are the
Kingdom of Aeolus, and Nature's Chemical Furnaces, where all the numerous
Cranies are Receptacles of Wind, from the internal Vulcano's. Rarefactions,
which are continually sent Night and Day from all those places, and constantly
disturb our Atmosphere more or less, in one place or another, by their powerful
Propulsions: For the Earth is the first Mother of Meteors, and contains all
those restless Spirits and Effervescencies, that afterward raise Storms,
Tempests, Hurricanes, and Tornado's by Sea; several raging Winds and violent
Storms by Land, Thunders and Lightnings in the Air, and Earthquakes under
ground, frequently known to come from the burning Mountains in China, the
Grotto's in Calabria and Sicily: The Alps and many other places of the World.

Sixthly, Submarine eruptions are produced in the same manner under the Sea, as
the others are under the Ground, and generate Winds as they do, and are called
Procella Coeca, they break out in a Cloud or Mist, from under the Water, and
increase and diffuse themselves, till they cover the face of the whole Heavens,
and end in most dreadful Tempests, we have an account of one from our Fleet at
Duncannon, by the Principal Officers to their Superiors in England, related by
Esquire Boil, that in a calm day, there suddenly ascended a black Cloud out of
the Water, hard by them, in shape and bigness of a Barrel, which afterward
ended in so hideous and dreadful a Tempest, that it forced the Ships to Sea
again, in the greatest danger of total destruction, and had like to have cast
them away. So in St. Owen's Bay, in the Isle of Jersey, when never so calm, and
no Wind stirring, these submarine Tempests often appear, and the roaring of the
Waves are heard all over the Isle, and 20 or 30 miles into France, and in the
River Dourdongn near Bourdeaux; the Mascarets swell the Water into Mountains,
and the People cry out Guard le Mascaret in Summer time, and the calmest air.
So the Gulf of Lions often threatens the adjacent Country with a Deluge, the
Lake of Geneva and several other places from the same causes.

CHAP. IV. That violent Tempests, Hurricanes, or Tornadoes, etc. seldom happen
in cold Countries, Winter-seasons, Large Plains or great Seas.
WInds being generated according to the preceding manners, they may consist of
almost infinite variety of Salts, Sulphurs, Spirits, Mineral and Subterraneous
Juices, Damps, and Aeolian Ejections, Mists and rarefied Vapors, Rain, or
dissolved Snow, broken and dissipated Clouds, or agitated Air, and so may be
hot, cold, dry, moist, etc. and thereby also more or less lasting or violent
according to the matter, power and plenty of their Causes, yet must be raised
in natural ways from their Fountains or proper Productions, which are very
easily effected (without recourse to Occult Causes) upon so tender a fluid as
Air, by the foregoing ways in the preceding Chapter, and may be as truly
foretold by the Portable Barometer notwithstanding all this variety, by the
alterations they produce in the weight of the Air, but yet violent Winds,
Storms, Tempests, Hurricanes, Tornadoes, etc. cannot be so easily produced in
cold Countries, hard frosty seasons, large Plains or great Seas, as ^n warmer
Regions, Rockey Countries, or narrow and craggy Seas, for in cold Countries, or
frosty Seasons the Effluvious Air is too much Condensed into a kind of
fixation, and thereby not only keep the Effluvia in the same posture, but walls
in very Atmosphere against all other Pneumatick Attacks whatever, that the most
violent Protrusions of Exotic force can never disorder their Perennial
Structure, but can only displace some outward Particles, which the standing
force of the rest will take no notice of, nor can there be any internal
disturbance to disorder their quiet, for the same cold that fixes the Effluvia
keeps them so, and hinders all other commotions, and also shuts the pores of
the Earth, hinders the Rarefaction of Vapors, and stops all manner of
Effervescencies, and calid Emotions of Subterraneous Mineral Heterogeneous
Spirits and Ejections, whereby the Atmosphere must needs be much more quiet and
free from these raging disturbances in such places and at such times, than in
hot mountainous or rocky places.

And so in large Plains or great Seas there can be nothing to interrupt or
obstruct the currents or course or the Air, but as it comes, so it continues
its progress, and goes away in a great body to a vast distance, and meets with
neither resilitions nor compressions, no Hills, Mountains nor Vulcanos, but is
continued almost in a perennial Course, either with the Sun, Earth or primum
mobile in all such places as well as the whole Torrid Zone, and some degrees on
each side (except in Rocky Countries, narrow Seas, etc.) In Trade, Etesian or
Anniversary Winds, or with the Course of the Sea, or Air and Water, as the
Levant and Provincial Winds in continued Streams, or at most in gentle puffs,
and even Gales created by the motion of particular Clouds, soft Rains, moderate
Storms, or Effluvious Densities that propell the Air before them in such
undulous A sperities, but must be something extraordinary, or a great
Complication of causes that can seldom happen to produce a Hurricane, Tornado,
etc. besides in cold Countries great Seas, large Plains, etc. the chief
material efficients are wanting, a powerful Effervescency, confused Eddies,
Transverse Resilitions, strong Compressions and heaping Superonerations,
therefore besides the freedom from these violent sorts of weather, these places
must needs enjoy more mild and temperate seasons at all times (except heat in
the Torrid Zone) than any other, yet heat and cold as well as all other sorts
of weather, are caused by the particular temperature, disposition of the
Atmosphere, assisted by the presence or absence of the Calorifick Beams, and
constitution of the place, and so may be as well foretold by the alterations
they make in the weight of the Air as any other sort of weather, as I shall
show in the Seventh and Eighth Chapters following.

CHAP. V. That they are easily foretold, because they produce the greatest
variation in the weight of the Air.
WInds being only the motions or agitations of our Effluvious Air, it may at
first seem strange how they should cause so great an alteration in the weight
thereof above any other sort of Weather, and will be almost surprising to see a
Cylinder of Air that now weighs 2020, or more, in a few hours, not to weigh
above 1970 or less, and after the Wind is over, in a little longer time, to
weigh 2020 again, or more than it did before, til^ the matter and causes are
considered* If our Hemispherical part of the Atmosphere continue of an even
thickness and the Effluvia in the same posture, a Cylinder of Air must needs
continue of the same weight; for as there is nothing to alter its density, so
it is impossible it should alter its gravity, and continuing of the same weight,
the Effluvia are neither dispersed, nor more heaped or crowded together,
therefore being still there can be no wind, and the longer it holds the greater
the calm, if it continues two or three days, a Feather will fall perpendicular
from a considerable height, so that let the weight be what it will, or can,
when ever it stands it is always calm, which may be further said to be almost
more than true (if possible) for it may continue to increase or decrease one,
two, or three parts in 24 hours, and yet it will continue calm from the highest
to the lowest variation.

And so for violent Storms, Tempests, Hurricanes and Tornados, they being
produced by such means related in the third Chapter, it will be impossible any
of them should happen, when the weight of the Air does not alter above two,
three, four, five, or six parts in twenty four hours, nor indeed in half that
time, let the alteration be in what part of the variation it will, tho between
2020 and 1980, five or six parts will be near as much as ten in any other part:
for if it be more than 2020, the Air is too dry or fair, so there is nothing to
put it into motion, and if it be less than 1980, it is too wet, or too much
filled, and thickened every where with the Effluvious vapors to receive any
such disturbances; and the reasons why none of these violent tempests never
come when the weight of the Air alters no faster, are that the Effluvious
Vapors come smoothly on, and the Atmosphere thickens by degrees, and by that
means our Hemispherical part thereof is gradually filled to a greater or lesser
depth and thickness, and therefore must be leisurely discharged in the manner
related in the second Chapter about Rain, for thus our Hemisphere is secured
from all manner of violence, from outward attacks, or inward disturbances of
strong Compressions, confused Eddies, and heaping Superonerations; yet when any
of these violent Tempests do come a calm must preceed, and our Hemispherical
part of the Atmosphere must continue very still for some time before (for if
the Air be in motion, tho in never so gentle a course, there can no such thing
happen, because it will be carried off by that current as it comes) that their
productions may be the better collected and kept together; than in such places
as are subject to these violences, they may be reasonably expected from some
Cavernous Vulcanos, Calid Emotions, strong Effervescencies, Subterraneous or
Submarine Eruptions, either single or complicate, from one or more places, the
Emanations being powerfully sent up perpendicularly from the Horizon or
inclining (as the disposition of the Air is) for a considerable time, in such a
calm season, (like smoke from Chimneys) they propel the Air before them, and so
make room for the other Effluvia that follows with the same swiftness, and the
rest of the Atmosphere to unbend, if it inclines with its whole Elasticity,
that makes as quick a current, till the propelled Air being strengthened by a
mighty Turba, can be driven no further, and the other following lowing with as
great strength, they become fenced on every side, with such mighty pressures,
that they fill the whole lower Region, and thereby in a manner keep off the
whole body of superior Air from any gravitation, till at last it is discharged
in so dreadful a manner, with such amazing displosions. And thus these Tempests
by a small inclination at their first risings may be carried a considerable
distance from their local originals, and their skirts may chance to make so
great an alteration in the weight of the Air, that they may be expected there,
if not carefully observed, and so in lesser Storms, and also in showery Seasons
of temperate Countries, the weight of the Air will sometimes alter in this
manner, when no Rain can come within eight or ten miles of the place, but if
these Tempests in their perpendicular ascensions are equally dilated on every
side, they are in a little time discharged very near the place of their first
productions, with more or less violence, according to the plenty of the Matter
and disposition of the neighboring Air.

Thus all these Tempests are easily foretold, for if in two, three, or four
hours time the weight of the Air decreases 20, 30, 40, or 50 parts, we may be
certain some of these sorts of weather will follow, tho sometimes the Winds
will blow when the weight of the Air increases 10, 15 or 20 parts in six, eight
or ten hours, but then it must decrease leisurely before, and a little rain
before it rise. The several sorts of Tempests may be distinguished by the
particular parts of the variation the decrease is made from, with respect to
the Country and Season, yet if it begins about 2015, and decreases to 1980 or
less, it will Thunder tho in Winter; if it begins about 2010, and rest about
1970, it will be only Winds with very little Rain, but such Winds as very
seldom happen. We had an example on the sixth of February School/9, at 10 over
night before, a Cylinder of Air weighed 2011, the same morning at 7 it weighed
1991, at 10 in the forenoon it weighed but 1965, which was 36 parts in three
hours time, and 20 the night before, which were 56 in all, in twelve hours
time. It rested at 1965, till about nine the next morning, at two afternoon it
weighed 1970, and at night it weighed 2011 again, at 7 the next morning, which
was the eighth, it weighed 2022. How strong and tempestuous a wind we had at
that time, not (I suppose) be related, few Houses escaping its fury, and many
Houses and Barns blown quit down; and many thousands of Elms in the Kingdom,
and several Oaks, one near Hamsted 5 miles from London, twisted like a With,
of great Bigness.

CHAP. VI. What Frost and Thunder is? A conjecture at their Causes and
Production.
WHat I have to say upon these two difficult Subjects, is chiefly from
Experiments and Notions that have reciprocally directed one another in some
further and more easy ways of their productions, by the use of this
Instrument, yet am not arrived beyond conjectures, but hope they will elucidate
these things to a further discovery of the very truth it self. Frost and
Thunder then, I believe, are not produced by such means as have been formerly
maintained, the first from nitrous Saline particles dispersed in the Air, and
was only thought to be the last effect or production of Cold, and the other
from Nitro-Sulphureous particles in the same manner dispersed, but then
collected, and afterward by very hard or difficult means set on fire in the
midst of so much Water. But Thunder I suppose may be much easier produced from
a collection of the Solar Rays, by a particular disposition of the Effiuvious
Vapors or Clouds, and Frost by a privation of those and other Calorifick
Corpuscules, which create a certain stifness, from a contrary tendance, and
want of motion. But first of Thunder, our Atmospherical Effluvia having no
other original than the Terraqueous Globe and its productions, how plentifully
soever they are sent from the burning Mountains, Grottos and Vulcanos in Japan,
China, Sumatra, Fez, Fogo, Sicily, the Alps, California, New Spain, or other
places, (some of which are said to cast their Ashes two hundred Miles about)
either of Niter, Sulphur, Bitumine or any other simple or compounded
combustible matter from any other parts all of the Earth or Sea; they are all
too much mixed with the Aqueous Particles that accompany them or the Clouds
they compose, to be set on fire in the Air, or to Thunder there, any other ways
than with their Echos or Winds they produce, they may indeed thunder in these
Vulcanos under the Earth or Water, shake and tear it in a terrible manner, and
produce many fiery eruptions from such places, but can never be re-inkindled in
the Air, or any other distant places from their local originals, for if these
Effluvia of Niter and Sulphur be distilled or sublimed from these places, with
never so great a fire, the first will be liquified with its own Phlegm (after
the manner of other distillations) and the other by these, and other humid
vapors in the thundering Clouds or Air, and so can never be set on fire after
they are raised from their Concrets, for Thunder in the Air, I believe, is
never without a Cloud and some Rain, nor can the spirits of Niter, Sulphur,
Salt, Vitriol, Aquafortis or Regis, produced by these or any other
distillations, being any ways mixed, either with themselves or any other
things, be brought to any more than a heating Bullition, and not to an actual
fire; and if we should suppose the Atmosphere to consist of two third parts of
Niter and Sulphur in substance (when it is impossible there should be one, in
proportion to the other parts of the world) and to be driven never so close by
Winds and Compressions, the other third part will prevent the Ignition of the
rest, which is easily experienced by taking Niter, Sulphur, and Water of each
alike in a Crucible, that will hold two or three times as much, well luted, and
set it on a gentle; fire at first, the Crucible may be very red without any
fire breaking out, and if then a vent be made through the Lute, to let it boil
over, which it will immediately do into the fire, yet it will not kindle till
the water is evaporated. We have another common Experiment in the trial of
Spirits of Wine, with Gunpowder, the most inflammable of any thing we know, by
taking the Spirits of Wine in a Spoon, with some Corns of Gunpowder at the
bottom, and seting it on fire, if there be but a little Phlegm in the Spirits,
the Gunpowder will be left almost dry at the bottom, yet not fired, tho
surrounded with the fire, and kept stirring all the while. Thus it seems almost
impossible Thunder and Lightning should be produced from any thing of Niter or
Sulphur, or any Terrene Effluvia without some other assistance, but rather from
a Concave Collection of the Promethean Fire, by several Nebulous Conical
Profundities, which cannot be when the Air thickens by degrees for continual
Rains, for then the Sun Beams are equally mixed with the Effluvia, only some
few excluded; and the Atmosphere being of one consistency, there can be no such
disturbance but when it is somewhat still, and in a little dryish time and
place, when the Effluvia are sent up by more plentiful streams from some
particular places, and fewer from others, by which, if those streams receive a
circumjacent pressure, by their propulsions through the Effluvious Air, or be
but kept from dilating, they will naturally terminate in Cones, but whether
Conical or Cylindrical, those nearest the Earth will be most united, and
thereby form the Solar Rays into erect or inclining Conical figures amongst the
Clouds, which by the Atmospherical Eddies and Currents, that are then very
deep, both Fire and Water becomes more and more compressed, and cannot be
carried very far before they are dischared, some indirect Coruscations, which
they may gain by that motion, and others in collateral or inclining one, which
they may be brought to in the same manner, so that whenever the Effluvious
Vapors receive or acquire, such a disposition, with sufficient depth and
density, it may Thunder tho in Winter; and for further confirmation, if we take
an ordinary Concave-Glass, and concenturate the Sun Beams, but upon a Basin of
Water, they will quickly put it into a Bullition, and if kept steady upon the
same place for some time, they will at last give it the same motion and sound
of Thunder, with that in the Clouds; but if with a onveniently shaped and sized
Glass, like a Boult-head, with a long neck, being exactly placed and filled
with fair water, and with a good Concave-glass, the Sun Beams be concenturated
upon that solid body of Water in the other Glass, with care to heat it
leisurely, that the fire may not crack the Glass, till thoroughly warm, and then
kept steady upon the same place as before, these Igneous Corpuscles will not
only bring that water to the same Thundering Bullitions with that in the Clouds
by the various impulsive motions of its rising and falling, but these very
Beams by those impulsions will variously penetrate both glass and water in
diverse linghtning flashes. Thus we have no occasion to fill the Air with so
much Niter and Sulphur to save the Phenomenon of Thunder and Lightning, but it
will be sufficient to have it seasoned like other products, then for the
Lightnings coming downwards, either right, side ways, or inclining, and as it
was thought contrary to the nature of other fire, whose flame was also thought
would go no other ways but upwards, till by melting Niter in some Iron or other
Sulphurous Vessels, that spirituous and penetrating Salt by that heat mixing
with the imbibed Oil or concetred Sulphur, as soon as it has acquired a
complete red body of fire (I say a body of fire) whose Atoms having the same
passages, can as well go back, as they came in, and these Saline Particles can
now (we see) by the help of that Oil or Sulphur accompany them with natural
Coruscations, for Niter being made a body of fire that consists of such subtle
or rather spirituous parts, to what part soever the Oil or Sulphur, or any
other combustible matter is contiguous, from thence the flashes must proceed
(there being nothing to hinder) as well downwards, inclining or sideways as
right up, and so from any other body of fire, that is not fuel, as well as
Niter, for Niter is no ways inflammable of its self, which may soon be proved
in a Crucible at any time, but it is impossible the flame of any combustable
matter alone, however disposed should go any other ways than upwards (except
the Air incline it other ways, because the Terrene Propulsions are made that
ways, and increased by the heat if near, and most such things growing liquid,
by inversion, and that weight are extinguished, but yet it is as unlikely if
not impossible that any fiery flashes should be produced from any Terrene
Concrete to be continued to half that strength and distance that Lightning is
known to be of, nor can they by any means be brought to a true resemblance, not
those of Niter and Sulphur, to them of Lightning, whose Rays being universally
defused, are easily collected, and may be compressed a thousand times more than
a little Air in a wind Gun, to solve the Phenomenon of many other Consequences;
but the hardest of all is, that it is often times known to Hail with Thunder
and Lightning, how these Clouds that contain so much fire, should yet freeze
the water is very strange, that it cannot in thundering weather well be thought
to freeze in falling, as was formerly asserted, but rather that in warm
seasons, as some places become dry, so the moist ones send up more plentiful
Effluvia, whereby these plentiful Effluvia become limited to such places, and
more Jejune Effluvia to the dry ones, which being augmented to a sufficient
depth and density, they will both exclude, and collect the Solar Rays at the
same time, the more powerfully by this disposition, and their contrary
qualities; and so may Hail and Thunder at the same time, tho in hot weather,
this also is the reason why commonly the Spring time (and not in Summer) is
more windy and stormy than any other Season, and from hence another of more wet
in Autumn, but will be too much for this short account, tho it would further
elucidate the matter, and give an explication to that of Frost, which I shall
now endeavor to evince by these Experiments.

Frost then being only an ultimate (but may be not the most ultimate) effect of
Cold, is produced by greater or lesser degrees of that, and that not by any
subject of Inhaesion, but by a privation of heat, Paucity of Calorifick
Corpuscles, and want of motion, or lesser agitation, and contrary tendency:
Frost therefore being only an effect, or product of Cold, is either more or
less intense, according to the degrees of its Cause, and cold more or less
freezing according to the privation of heat, and Paucity of Calorifick
Corpuscles. What this heat is, and from whence these Corpuscles come, must
therefore be considered; the heat is of two sorts, either Terrene, or from the
Heavens; the first from several Vulcanos, internal Bullitions, and fermenting
Emotions, all which are subject to intermissions, and obstructions, because
they proceed from no universal matter, or cause, and several subsidences may
both obstruct, and extinguish them; the other from the Heavens cannot be thus
extinguished, but may be several ways hindered or obstructed by Hills or
Mountains, and several dispositions of the Effluvious Vapors, or may be
carried off some other way by the winds or particular currents of Air, or by
the Central motion of the Sun to parts of less heat, or not extended far enough
for the Latitude of the place, these obstructions or privations of heat makes a
Chasm between these and those incorporated in the parts of all natural Bodies,
the incorporated particles (as all heat and fire do) soon fade and die, which
for want of that continuance, as soon leave all the external parts, especially
less active, more extended and therefore more stiff, more porose, and more
bulky, which are the common qualificatiens of Frost, and from these all the
other may be easily deduced.

CHAP. VII. That there never is no settled Frost to hold, when the Air
continues to weigh 2020 or more, nor never no Thunder when it weighs but 1980,
or less.
HAving now given some account what Frost and Thunder is, tho my Experiments
have not enabled me to observe all the circumstances relating to the Title of
this Chapter, we having had no great Frosts or Thunders since I have been
Master of it, yet by reason of many other Meteorological Concurrencies in the
alterations of the weather, which I have often experienced, that are in some
sort like a Magnetic Clinatory, being plainly applied, show only South and
North, yet by these we are also shown East and West, and all the other points
without removing it to them Plains, so I hope by the Experiments I have made in
other alterations, and some few I have made in these, to tell the truth of both
without staying any longer for these sorts of weather besides being but the
reverse of the former Chapter, as to the effects upon the Barometer, it will
the more easily appear.

First, Then there can be no Frost to hold, when the Air continues to weigh
2020 or more, yet no settled fair weather (except Frost) if it weighs 10 or 15
parts less, and yet I believe there have been no lasting Frosts yet known, but
in fair weather, how Frost then which is only an effect of ^he privation of
heat should continue when there is nothing that appears ^o hinder the Sun
Beams, and that ^here should be no such frosty wea^her when the Atmosphere
continues ^o be crowded with the thickest Clouds of Rain, Hail, Snow, Mists, ^r
other Vapors, which seems whol^^ to obstruct, them is somewhat ^range, till we
consider that all these ^ffluvia, whether of Rain, Hail, or ^now, etc. are the
products of some ^^bterraneal Bullitions, or other fermentations, or of the
Sun's reverborations, but let it be from which of them it will, the same
effects will follow, for that Heat or Motion that raises them, or the
Calorifick Corpuscles conjoined, do we see keep them all fluid beneath,
therefore we may be sure there must much more heat contained amongst those
particles that are near a thousand times more dense than those of Air, to
maintain their fluidity, and keep them from freezing, thus it is almost
impossible we should have any Frost on Earth, when we have such a fuming Sea
about us (yet we oftentimes feel it more Cold in such sorts of weather than in
clear and frosty Seasons, because our corporeal Emanations can easier keep of a
lighter than a heavier Medium or Pressure, therefore our Sensories can make no
true distinctions of the degrees of Cold) but as soon as ever the Rain or Snow
is over, it will immediately Freeze, but can never hold when the Atmosphere is
thus filled, for the former reasons, but when the Air weighs 2005, 10, 12 or
15, if the Latitude of the place, disposition of the Country, and Season of the
Year be proper, it will certainly freeze, yet not at the extreamities of the
Sun Beams, or Earths surface first, for those Igneous Atoms incorporated there,
by their own presence, and some few emotions will prevent that, and make the
first beginnings so far in the Air, as those emotions reach from the earth,
which gradually as these emotions, cease and dye for want of renovations, is
extended more and more down, till the outward surface of the earth it self is
thus deprived and frozen, many of which frozen particles being constantly
emitted, do as well fill the Atmosphere as other Vapors, so that the Air can
never weigh 2020 if the frost continues, but less and less by the frosty
emissions filling the Atmosphere, for if it weighs 2020, the Sun Beams will
come unobstructed upon us, and give no place to any such thing, which they can
never do near the Poles, or in other cold Countries, these are the Reasons that
the Quicksilver in the Common Barometers in some places is quit lost below the
Register Plate, and in others far above it, which the Portable one discovers
before hand.

Then for Thunder, if it be produced by the ways related in the former Chapter,
we may be almost sure when the Air weighs but 1980, the Atmosphere will be too
much filled with the Effluvious Vapors, and much more disposed for continual
Rains (which will too much wet the Fulminous Particles) then for Thunder or
Storms, except Jupiter should send a Messenger amongst them, for tho Thunder (I
suppose) is not known to be without Rain, yet it is not known neither I believe
in continual Rains, besides in Summer Seasons and warm weather, the Air does
for the most part weigh the more, and not often times less, not long together,
for if it should I am sure the weather would be very unnatural, as well as
unseasonable to the Summers products, and might rather be called Winter than
Summer; but when it weighs 2014, 2020, 25, 30, or 40, and the weight decreases
15, 20, 25 or 30 parts in 12 or 24 hours, it will be sure to Thunder more or
less according to the parts of variation it has decreased, and the time it was
made in, for then the Sun Beams being more radiant are more powerful, and by
their dispositions in the former Chapter are more easily collected, and thereby
greater Thunders and Lightnings produced, so that when ever the weight of the
Air alters, tho never so much, if it did not weigh above 1980 before the
alteration began, we may be sure there will be no Thunder, but only tempestuous
Winds, and Rains, neither here nor in no other parts of the world, for in cold
Countries it does not often weigh a great deal more, nor in hot ones not often
a great deal lefs, which is easily proved without going into them places, with
several years continuance to make the experiments, and will without doubt be of
further use in many other respects, if improved and applied as it may be to
several other natural discoveries; and by abstractions, in time, to the very
Center of Beings, the Almighty, Grand and Catholic Efficient, that is in and
through all things.

CHAP. VIII. That tho a Cylinder of Air weighs much less in wet or
windyweather, than it does in dry weather, yet in a settled frost, tho the Air
appears never so clear and dry, it weighs much lighter than at any other time.
THis seeming Paradox, and may be that about weighing the winds would both of
them been much more strange, as well as hard and difficult to clear without
this Instrument, which is so easy to carry wherever we go, and as easy at
all times and places to weigh the Air with, That if the Honorable Esquire
Boil had been so happy, he might have known the reason why the Air was so
thick in Nova Zembla, that the Hollanders Clock would not go without the charge
he was willing to give to know the weight of his Aeolipile full of that Air in
the midst of Winter, in his Physico-motion: Exper. page 148. And in his Hist.
of Cold page 91. he has many suggestions about the same Clock, and Captain
James's Clock, and Watch that wintered at Charleton, and at last says they are
but conjectures) for by this it is easier to make a hundred Experiments in
weighing the Air, than one either with an Aeolipile, or the Air Pump, and thus
in time to discover a great many more particulars, hard and unthought of
qualifications that may be would never have been known other ways, for if
according to the Rules, or Laws of Hydrostaticks and Philosophy, several
qualifications of Liquids are discovered by their Gravity, this that both
weighs and measures at the same time must needs discover many more in all
natural bodies, as well as this of Air, and has already discovered some much
more subtle than the common Air, and will easily go where that cannot, and may
be produced in one weeks time, what this discovery may lead to I know not, but
am sure that which discovered it is capable of many others.

That the Air weighs less in wet or windy weather, than in dry weather our
Experiments proves, and have told the reasons in the Second and fifth Chapters
but how it should weigh less in hard frosty weather, which seems to be more
dry, is yet to be inquired into, for that cannot be from a greater plenty of
the Effluvious Vapors, because by this they are now all imprisoned (in a
manner) within the Earths surface, nor from an extraordinary agitation of the
Air with violent Winds, because there is nothing to put it into such a motion
when the Air is so clear. But because those almost inconceiveable minute
Igneous Particles that are so easy collected in a Concave Glass, and may be
constitute the whole Ether, and disperse themselves throughout all the
Terraqueous Effluvia are by several causes or obstructions mostly hindered, the
other growing Languid fade and die in the same manner as the Atoms of our
common Culinary Fires do, and want a continual supply like them, with other
succedanums to maintain those curious agitations of the Atmosphere, that keep
it from Congelation, these being wanting the Effluvious Vapors become more and
more stiff, unactive, cold, or frigid, and at last to a perfect Gelicidation,
this continuing makes the whole Hemispherical part of the Atmosphere like one
Gelicidium, that with longer time grows thicker and harder, reaching higher and
higher, and so more and more keeps off the Airs Gravitation which it can hardly
penitrate, because Ice is much more inpenetrable than the greatest winds or
Clouds of Rain, Hail, Snow, or other Vapors, whereby a Cylinder of Air must
weigh much less in a long and settled Frost than at any other time, and yet the
Air for the most part much more clear there in the hotest or dryest seasons,
(for they sometimes want a good rain to clear it) it being easier to see
through the straight particles of Ice, than the curvid ones of mists and other
Vapors, and thus places at a further distance may be much more easily seen,
and the Stars more numerous, and yet the refraction very much greater by this
Glaciation, all which Captain James relates in his Journal to the Islands of
Charleton, that on the thirtieth and thirty first of Janury, he saw two third
parts more Stars than ever he had seen before, page 62, and the Cloud in Cancer
full of small Stars, and the Sun to rise twenty minutes before it should, and
set so much later, by reason of this Glaciating refraction page 64. and yet not
more North than we in England, in the Latitude of 52, or little more, page 46.
But the Hollanders at Nova Zembla saw the Sun 14 days sooner than he should
have appeared, by this mighty refraction; this made the Air so clear, yet so
thick (or rather stiff) as Esquire Boil calls it, that the Hollanders Clock
would not go at Nova Zembla, nor Captain James Clock nor Watch at the Island of
Charleton, thus these Herculian Contradictions are reconciled, and the
usefulness of this Instrument further manifested, tho never at the Island of
Charlton, Nova Zembla, or Green-Land to weigh the Air in those places, where an
Aeolipile of Air in the midst of Winter hardly weighs more than this of ours in
clear weather, and the midst of Summer, for I dare undertaken to guess the
exact weight of an Aeolipile of Air with this Barometer in any sort of Weather,
Place or Time, tho according to the Experiments in the Second Chapter an
Aeolipile of Air sometimes weighs lest when a Cylinder of Air weighs heaviest,
and sometimes otherways. I say sometimes, for if it were always, that would as
well foretell the alterations of weather as the Barometer, and thus also,
besides it is easy to prove that Igneous Atoms as well as other Particles have
their proper mediums of Retention as well as Incorporation, and our
Atmospherical Air being so thin a fluid, it can hold them but a little while,
tho never so much incorporated, they having so great a liberty do as swiftly
pursue it, and as quickly arrive at the limits of their Extensions and
Extinctions, therefore it cannot retain them, except it would also prevent
their Extentions, but if the Atmosphere be constantly filled with a great
plenty of Effluvious Vapors, tho the Promethean Fire be wanting, that which
remains and Reverberates with the Terraqueous Emotions constantly assisting
(and being in a thicker medium, tho there be a less degree of heat in
appearance, yet it will be longer retained) will keep it from freezing, all
which is further demonstrable from all other liquids, if heated the thicker
they are the longer they keep hot, or whether actually heated or not, a common
Thermometer will discover River or Pond-water in Winter time, (and sometimes in
a warmer Season) to be hoter than the Air; and Sea or Saltwater to be warmer
than those, and Oil of Tartar or Vitriol hoter than the Salt Water; and
Quicksilver the heaviest liquid we know, which all the world look upon to be
very cold, to be warmer than any of them, and so many others likewise.

CHAP. IX. Whether the planetary Beams or influences can cause an alteration of
weather, to be foretold by them.
WHat some Astrologers have told us about the alterations of the weather from
the Planets, is no ways satisfactory, and very strange it should be continued
down to these times, that some of our Vertuosi have not told us something about
that as well as other natural discoveries, that we might be no longer imposed
upon, by telling us the several sorts of winds and weather, etc. are
appropriated to the several Planets, but have told us neither Reason nor Cause
of this Appropriation, and others that the several Planets are Authors of these
sorts of winds and weather: and another that has writ only of the Weather tells
us the Seven visible Planets in the Skies have their Correspondent ones, in the
Air, and in the Bowels of the Earth, that are night and day at work in making
those forts of weather for us, and thereby undertakes to tell the cause of all
the vulgar Prognosticators errors, and the true way of judging the weather,
with as much truth as the rest: For indeed it is impossible that either Winds,
Rain, or fair weather, Frost, Snow, or Thunder should proceed from the Planets,
they being composed of no such matters, nor are they intelligent to effect it,
yet it must be acknowledged that the Sun and Moon, and the rest of the Planets,
and other Stars have their particular Rays of Light (but whether these Rays of
Light are Beams of fire or not, and differ only in quantity, and not in
quality, as their different lights appear, and from whence they have their
lights, whether inate or not, will be too much for this short account) and that
those from the Sun (especially) at any time of the year (but too apparent to be
questioned in Summer time) are of sufficient power to disperse several Vapors,
Mists and Clouds raised from our Terraqueous Globe, for it is the Earth, and not
the Sun, Moon, or Stars that is the first Mother of Meteors, it is the Terrene
Emotions with some new modifications that gives birth to them all, according to
the first, second, and third Chapters, and not the Planers conjoined in watery
Signs, where may be they placed the watery Windows of Heaven, spoken of in the
seventh of Genesis, that makes their Apertio Portarum, or opening the Gates of
Heaven, and those that rained Fire and Brimstone on Sodom in fiery Signs, and
others in Airy ones, but we never heard what from earthly signs, therefore as
none of these sorts of weather can proceed from the Planets, so neither can
they from any of the Signs, nor the Planets conjoined in them, but the Effluvia
being raised in the preceding manner are indetermined Precisely, both to time
and place, yet by several Eruptions, Propulsions, Rarefactions, Compressions,
and Resilitions they may receive, or meet with as well in their first
ascensions as afterward, they may be driven, spread and discharged to and in
several distant places, without any other assistance, but these chiefly happen
in the Torrid Zone, or in some Hilly or Mountainous Countries, or near some
Vulcanos, etc. by Paroxysms, and not often in more open and plain Countries or
Temperate Climates, and are constant no where, whereby the Effluvia are
sometimes in the first sort of places left, and at most times in other places,
to the disposal of the Beams or Influences of the Heavens, which I believe may
be evinced, of sufficient power to alter and disperse them: First of the Sun
Beams, which in most Countries are known every day they appear, but a few hours
to disperse all foggy Mists and Vapors, and turn a dark Cloudy morning into a
clear and fair Day, not by any occult property, but by a manifest one, as all
other heat in Boiling, Distilling, or other Coction does: and so for winds, the
general or Trade Winds, are always according to the Course of the Sun or Earth,
as far as these Beams and the inferior Tract is conformable or proper, some
degrees beyond the whole breadth of the Zodiac on either side, they constantly
propelling all humid Vapors and Air before them, and so likewise the Monsoons,
which Sir Thomas Herbert in his Travels, says, begin exactly at the Sun's
entrance into a Sign of the Zodiac, and blow half a year constantly that way,
till the Sun enter into the opposite Degree, and then they blow in the same
manner the other way. Captain Swanly says, the Monsoons raigns five months on
one side of the Compass, and five months on the other, and that there are two
months in which they change, are variable (or break up, as some term these
alterations) in March and September, when the Sun crosses the Line, and as long
as the Sun is on the north side of the Equator, to the Tropique of Cancer, the
winds are to the northward, and veery more northerly according to the course of
the months, and when on the South side of the AEquinoctial, the winds blow from
thence in the same manner, and thus also there is half a year of fair Monsoons,
and half a year of Rainy and fowl Monsoons, and that the fair Monsoons blow off
the Shoars, and the Rainy Monsoons on the Shoars, and that near all Lands,
between the Tropicks, Eastwards of Cape-Bon-Esperance in the rainy Monscons
there happen some fair intervals, but in the dry Monsoons seldom any rain, and
to this purpose many other relations might be as easily transeribed, but that
the certain knowledge and experience of all our own, and other Country Seamen
to those places make it needless, thus we see the Beams in those neighboring
Regions are so plentiful and turgid, that they drive all before them in winds,
with constant dry weather, if of the Land side, and with almost continual
rains, if from the Sea, thus also these tumultuous and unequal crowds of
Effluvia make that inequality of heat and cold that Ariesta relates, and
complains of in the burning Zone, where he had the Sun for Zenith and expected
to be scorched with heat, he was forced to go into the Sunshine for warmth,
and that he saw Snow, Hail and frozen water on the tops of Mountains, and the
cold so bitter that all the Grass was withered, and Men and Beasts benumed that
passed that way, page 101 and 109: and this North and South, wind heat and
cold, wet and dry weather proceeded from the Sun's local position, on the North
or South side of their Zenith, or Equator, as his Rays decline from their
perpendicularity, and not from fiery, airy, watery, or earthly Signs, for the
Sun beams are not earthly in us, nor watery in, but fiery in, and always so
powerful in the Torid Zone, that they are the chief efficients of all these
sorts of weather, without any assistance from the other Planets, there being
hardly any room for any of their beams to crowd in.

Secondly, of the beams of the Moon, these being from a lesser light have not
so many manifest operations as those of the Sun, yet are known in several
places of India, and the Torid Zone to cause contractures in the Bodies of
those that are too long exposed to them, as well to the Natives as Strangers,
tho more to the latter, and that several are made Lame, or else have had some
of their Limbs contracted for several weeks, and some for as many months, and
others to their lives end, if they happen to sleep where the Moon shines upon
them, which several of our Seamen who go to those places have also seen, and a
friend of mine, a Relation and Merchant that Traded and Lived sometime in the
Island of Sunda at Achem in Sumatra, and Bantum in Java and had traveled many
other parts of India, assured me he had seen several that had their Limbs
contracted, and their Mouths or Necks so drawn aside and twisted by the beams
of the Moon, that they were very surprising to behold, and that he himself when
he came first into those parts, before he was acquainted with it, took up his
Lodging after an extreme hot day (according to the custom of the place) in the
open air, with slender covering, where the Moons beams could fully come for
good part of the night which being past before he waked, when he went to rise,
he found the left side of his neck, and up to his Ear, and the same Arm and
Soulder (which was very much exposed) so stiff that he was scarce able to stir
himself, and was forced to keep within eight or ten days to be cured, which was
done by the constant use of inward and outward Aromaticks of the Country for
that time, and that the Country people told him the next morning, if he had
acquainted them with his design, or had passed the night where they did, he
would have prevented that mischief by lodging in a place unexposed to the Moons
Beams.

The reasons of these disasters must be that the beams of the Moon like those
of the Sun, do propel the Terrene Effluvia before them, but having no such heat
as they have, these Effluvia thus driven, enter the Pores of the Body in the
exposed parts with a contrary tendency, and much less agitated than the Animal
Spirits and Humors, and thereby cool and obstruct their natural motions, and
circulations, these Nutricious Spirits and Juices being thus hindered, a paucid
Lympha supplies (which has no such motion) and thereby Tumefies, Contracts and
hinders the proper motion of the part it possesses, which the heat of the body
soon exsiccates (may be as it comes), and so confirms it: and as these people
say, it is only the beams of the Moon, so neither can we suppose it should be
any thing else, for it should proceed from the Wind or cold Damps, then it
might be as well when the Moon did not shine upon them, or in some other parts
than those on which it did shine, which is not known, and when they do take up
their lodging in the open air we cannot suppose neither that the Wind should be
concentred upon them through any crack or hole: besides being in the open air,
the continual Streams or Effiuvia of their own bodies both warm and keep off
the neighboring air from every part, equal to the power and strength of their
motions, and so secures them in all places that are but moderately calm and
still. Then for the Beams of the other Planets and Stars, there is none can say
they are refracted, either by the Ether, Air, or Atmosphere, but that they
pass directly down upon us, and so penetrate every part of all these in their
descensions, as we see and know their light is sent down thus far; these beams
therefore having so great a power, (notwithstanding the constant Diurnal
Circumgyration of the Earth or Heavens) to continue their direct courses
hither, must needs move, alter and impell the Effluvious Air before them (but
yet no other ways than according to their direct positions) and so may either
bring or carry from us misty, rainy or snowy Vopours, or otherways may put the
Air into a direct or contrary motion, and so produce Winds, Storms, Tempests,
Thunders, Hurricanes, etc. which may thus be foretold at any time, and from
what quarter the Wind will blow, with as much certainty as their Motions, and
Positions are known, and by this means there will be (or rather is) a new
account of their Aspects, according to the Lines and Angles they make at the
earth, and not amongst themselves, nor from fiery, airy, watery, or earthly
signs, for neither of these can have any respect to us, of which this Barometer
has given a Diagram, that by taking the Planets places from an Ephemeris to
their true places in that, all the alterations of weather, and winds from their
Quarters may be foretold at any time.

And further tho not so proper here, these beams that are able to penetrate,
move and alter the air, which we can no ways subsist, nor live one hour
without, are as capable to penetrate our bodies as that (which we know the
beams of the Sun does, etc.) and move and alter our spirits, and so the spirits
of all other bodies which cannot be less subject to these motions and
alterations than ours are, and if our spirits and the spirits of all other
bodies may be moved and altered by these beams, then these spirits being the
immediate causes, and only principles of Life, Power, Virtue, Force and
Strength, it will be impossible they should be altered and changed, and no
alterations made in the bodies themselves; therefore a less limit of the power
of these beams cannot be set, than what must at length terminate as well in the
bodies themselves. All which I hope to demonstrate further by infalliable
proofs, if life and leisure serve, in a Treatise by it self, what these Beams
and Motions are, that they have power to cause all the alterations of winds and
weather we are acquainted with, and all other common alterations in our and
other Animal Bodies and Spirits, by the Lines and Angles they make at the
Earth, and not by their beholding one another, by Sextile, Quartile, Trine or
Opposition, which may serve till then, for tho it be the first, yet I believe
the most that ever was published before in this way, and question not but
future Observations will confirm (not the Names and Motions, but) the Laws of
the Stars thereby, for from hence there is a reason why the Planets, Poles of
Positions, and the Divisions of the Heavens are taken according to the Latitude
of the Place, in an Oblique Sphere, and many other things as pertinent,
butreferred till then.

CHAP. X. That it is impossible by any Hygroscope, Thermometer or other
Invention to know the true state of the Air.
HAving now given a short account of the preceding Heads, it will be convenient
to say something of the common Instruments that are used to foretell the
alterations of weather by; or that the alterations of the Air are used to have
an influence upon; and such are of three sorts. First such as imbibe the
Effluvious Air, and are Callid Hygroscopes. Secondly, such as have a parcel of
Air included with tinged Spirits and sealed up in Cylindrical Glasses, and are
Callid Thermometers: or thirdly, such as contain some spirituous or other
liquid in a Cylindrical pipe of Glass, closed at one end, and open at the
other, and inverted into an open Vial or Cistern of the same liquor, exposed to
the open Air, and are Callid Thermoscopes or Baroscopes, etc.

The Hygroscopes are of several sorts, but the most Famed one is that of a wild
Oat-beard, described in Mr Hooks Mirrographia, page 147, others are made of
Sheeps Gutts or Fiddle-strings, Pieces of Leather, Ropes, Cords, Sponge, Wool,
Paper or Deal-shavings, etc. and may be made of any other thing that will imbi
be the humid Air, or that the Air can easily penetrate, as Willow, Sallow,
Ozier, Alder, and other soft woods.

That of an Oat-beard turns and unturns in dry and moist weather, and is fitted
with an Index that points to all the variations; Sheeps-guts, Fiddle-strings,
Pieces of Leather, Ropes and other Cords are fastened against some Wall, Board
or Timber, and extended either Horizontally or Perpendicularly, and then a
convenient weight hung on the middle or other end will rise and fall in wet and
dry weather.

Sponge, Wool, Paper, or Deal-shavings, etc. are tied together with some
string, or in a thin Silk or Linen Case, or Bag, in a round or oval form or
balance, with Scales and Weights, which will be heavier or lighter in wet or
dry weather.

The imperfections of all which are easily seen, first, in respect of
themselves and their adjustings; and secondly, in respect of the alterations of
the Air, in respect of themselves, the Oatbeards will in a little time grow
much more stiff, hard, close, and brittle, and instead of two, three, or four
times turning about will not turn once, and not long before it will not move at
all, which it gradually comes to as it grows more and more Ramalious, or sare
and Dead, for which reason also there can be no certain adjusting of that, for
by the time it can be adjusted at first, the Texture of its parts will be so
much altered in relation to its motion, that it will want a new adjustion, and
so Sheeps-gutts, Fiddle-strings, Pieces of Leather, Ropes, or other Cords, do
all alter in the same manner; nor can Sponge, Wool, Paper, or Deal-shavings,
or any other such thing? be preserved or any ways secured from the same
inconvenience? but if they could, it would yet be impossible they should show
any alteration of weather with any manner of certainty, for as they only
imbibe, and are receptacles of the subtle Humid Vapors, that sometimes fill
the lower Regions before it rains, so they can show no other alterations, but
what they make in their coming and going, which are sometimes much more in
Mists after it has rained, or when there is no rain follows, or upon the going
a way of a Frost, or melting of a Snow, than at coming of the greatest rains,
and so on the contrary, when these Vapors cannot come so low in frosty or
windy weather, they will show no alteration till after the rain is come, and
Snow seldom makes any alterations in them, except it melts as it falls: And in
Summer time and dry Seasons, it is so also, no alteration till the rain is
coming, or that it have rained, but if a misty morning happen, they will alter
much more. Besides, if all these inconveniences could be prevented, they
cannot well be put into a traveling Security, by reason of the several
alterations they will be subject to from the heat of the Body, Warmth, and
Fires in Houses, and the different tempers of the Air abroad.

Secondly, those that have a parcel of Air included with tinged Spirits, and
sealed up in Cylindrical Glasses, these for distinction are called Hermetick
Thermometers, and of a later invention, and thereby thought by some to exceed
all other discoveries for heat and cold, but are not pretended, nor intended,
to show any thing else, which by the natural Expansion and Contraction of the
included Air with heat, and cold, gives way for the rising and falling of the
Spirits, and have no manner of tendency for wet and dry, and therefore of very
small use or service; for we know the weather is sometimes very cold, yet fair
and dry, and sometimes as cold when it rains, snows, or blows, and sometimes
fair and dry in hot weather, and sometimes as wet or windy. But as the former
are deficient in wet and dry, so are these in heat and cold, and it is
impossible they should show any truth in what they pretend, for no body has yet
told us the proportion between the Head and the Cylinder, nor can they make two
to rife and fall alike, with the same Spirits, nor have they told us what is
best to put in them, whether Spirits of Wine, Vinegar, Salt, Vitriol, Tartar or
Sulphur, or Oil of Turpentine, Amber, Wax, or Anis, etc. or other things,
besides all liquids are expanded, and contracted with Heat and Cold, so
apparently, that our Seamen have observed their Ships to draw less Water in
Cold and Frozen Countries (tho the Water is not in those places so Salt,
therefore not naturally so heavy) than they do in warmer places, so that the
Water is thicker and heavier in cold than in warmer places, and seasons: and
the Honorable Esquire Boil has observed it to Dilate and Contract it self in
the same day, by a Hermetick Glass Bubble, that would sink in Water at noon
time, and rise and swim night and morning. Therefore if Water will thus visibly
Dilate and Contract it self in such large quantities and places, it will be
much more so in the slender stem of a Thermometer, and any sort of volatile
spirits, a great many times more than Salt or other Fountain Water, and thus
also some Spirits will Dilate and Contract more than others, which makes all
these things the more uncertain, and no body knows how much these spirits will
Dilate and Contract themselves by Heat or Cold; yet there is a way to make a
Thermometer free from all these exceptions, which I have performed in another
way: then for the other sorts that are called Thermoscopes, etc. that alter
both with Heat and Cold, Wet and Dry, by having Air in the top of the Cylinder,
and exposed to the pressure of the air at the bottom, these are the greatest
confusion that can be, for they show nothing of truth but by chance, nor can
any body tell when they do, or do not, for if it be cold and wet, the cold will
contract the air above to make it rise, and the wet will lighten the
Atmospherical Cylinder to make it sink, thus it is unpossible it should rise
and fall at the same time, and so in hot and fair weather, the heat will dilate
the air above to make it sink, and in fair weather the Atmesphere presses the
heaviest at the bottom, to make it rise, and thus whenever they rise or fall no
body can tell whether it be for heat or cold, wet or dry weather.

Then for the Quicksilver-Glass, or Common Barometer, there is none that have
them but know they will sometimes fall or sink very considerably, yet no rain
follow, and at other times rain if it sink never so little, and again sometimes
it will be fair, tho it rise, but little, and at other times very wet when it
rises considerably: Nor have they given us any certain rules to know when it
will rain or be fair, so that all these Instruments are very imperfect and can
no ways be trusted to. And thus I have told the Reasons, and next for the Use
of that, that will do all these things.

CHAP. XI. The use of the Portable Barometer, how to weigh the Air, Measure its
Height, and foretell all the alterations of weather.
HAving now given a short account of the reasons for the use of this Barometer,
and the insufficiency of all others to foretell any alteration of the weather
by, it will now be convenient to show how to use it, to weigh the Air, Measure
its height, and foretell the alterations of the weather by it. First how to use
it.

Let the Barometer hang perpendicular in one hand, and by more o^ less weights
with the other bring i^ to a true Aequilibrium or even Balance, so have you the
exact weigh^ of any quantity of Air you desire, an^ the measure of its height,
by the second and fourteenth of the Twelfth of Euclid's Elements of Geometry.
First, by the second of the Twelfth thus;

Circles are in the same Ratio, as are the Squares of their Diameters, which is
thus wrought as the Square of the Standard Diameter is to the Square of the
Diameter proposed; so is the weight of this to the weight of that, and the
bigness of the former, to that of the latter.

Then by the fourteenth of the twelfth, that Cylinders and Cones, having the
same Base, are in the same Ratio as are their heights, which are thus wrought,
as the Base of the Standard Cylinder or Cone, is to the Base of the Cylinder or
Cone Proposed, so are the heights of those, to the heights of these, and the
Contents of the former to those of the later, thus we have not only the exact
weight of any parcel or quantity of Air at any time, but the measure of its
Height at all times, and in all places.

And thus also we may weigh any other liquid in its Fountain, and measure its
Depth: If we desire only its weight, we need only to put in the Instrument to
balance any particular quantity, so we have the exact weight by measure, but if
to measure the Depth as well, it must be balanced at the bottom, whereby we
have the Depth by weight, and the weight of what quantity we please. Thus these
instruments will be of service for a thousand uses in Weighing, Measuring,
Gaging, Surveying the Heights, Depths, Weights, Extentions of all manner of
Liquids from one drop or grain of any thing, to a Fountain of Sea or Air, and
by that means discover both their Quantities and Qualities.

2. For the alterations of the weather; they are known by the variations of the
weight of the Air according to the former Chapters, the Increase and Decrease
of which variation I have not yet observed to be more than one in Twenty, Ten
in two Hundred; or a Hundred in two Thousand Parts, but will suppose it may
alter a hundred and twenty in two Thousand Parts, so that if a Cylinder, Cone,
or other Particles of Air weighs now two thousand Grains, Scruples, Drachms,
Ounces, Pounds, or Hundreds, it may sometimes weigh two thousand and Sixty, and
at other times not above one Thousand Nine Hundred and Forty, (the reason why I
make use of this number of weights, I have told in the Second Chapter.) The
parts of which variation may be thus called Hard-frost Frost Frost Snow Rain
Rain Changeable Stormy Fair Set-fair very-dry 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
2000 2010 2020 2040 2060 Hard-frost Frost Wet very wet Rain Cloudy Changeable
Fair Set-fair very-dry

The words above the Figures as the Air grows heavier, and those below it as
the Air grows lighter, but for the exact knowledge of the weather, to foretell
all the alterations in quantity and quality, we must observe the rules in the
following Chapter: And thus I have by two plain and easy Geometrical
Propositions shown the manner, and now give the World leave to judge of the
Probability, Possibility, and usefulness of this Instrument, in many other
things, than can possibly be thought of, or applied to in this Age, and to
consider if they please, what it may lead to further in diverse other respects,
and what additions they may in time be able to make to it, for it is capable of
many improvements, and will recompense the Industrious that understand it with
several advantages in their own private business, if they bestow but one tenth
part of the time, pains, and cost, upon it that I have done.

CHAP. XII. Rules for the more certain knowledge of all the alterations of
weather, both in quantity and quality.
FIrst, to have the Barometer always with us, that we may always know the
weight of the Air, and how it has been two, three or four days before, whether
growing lighter or heavier, and in what part of the variation it is. Then first
in Summer it may weigh near 2060, and if it decrease 3 or 4 parts in 24 hours,
it may hold till it comes to 2010, before it rains, which will be but little.

2dly. If it decrease from about 2060, to 2040 in 24 hours or less, it will be
windy, yet clear and dry, but it will hold but a little while, for it will soon
increase again, but this seldom happens.

3dly. If it weighs 2040, and decreases 16, 18 or 20 parts in 24 hours the wind
will blow, and it will rain a little, but it will be only a Storm, and after
that it will increase again in an hour or two, and be fair.

4ly. If it weighs 2030 and decrease to 2020 in 18 or 24 hours, it will be
windy for a day, but if it rain it will be only a small shower or two of a few
minutes continuance.

5ly. If it weighs about 2030 and decrease 2 or 3 parts in 18 or 24 hours, it
may decrease to 1980 or less before it rains, which will then be for a whole
day, with a soft driving wind.

6ly. If it weighs 2030, and decrease to 2000 in 18 or 24 hours it will
Thunder, Lighten, Rain and Blow in a very violent manner, and pour down a Sea
of water in a few hours, with terrible Displosions of Wind and Thunder, hardly
to be distinguished.

7ly. If it weighs about 2030, 2026 or 24 and decrease to 1990, 1985, or 80, in
16 or 18 hours, it will be a most violent Hurricane with most violent Winds,
Thunders and Lightning, as if the whole Heavens were on fire, with as violent
rain poured down by whole Seas, for some hours or half a day together.

8ly. If it weighs about 2020, and decreases to 1980 in 18 or 24 hours it will
Rain, Thunder and Lighten, and be as great a Tempest as we commonly have in
these parts, and may hold the bigest part of a day, or night as it begins.

9ly. If it weighs but 2010, and decrease to 1980 in 18 or 24 hours, it will
Thunder and Lighten and be very Windy and Tempestous with large Hail and Rain,
to the turning up of several Houses and Trees, tho in January.

10ly. If it weighs about 2010, and decrease to 1980, 1975 or 70 in 12 or 16
hours it it will be Windy to a Miracle with little or no rain, but if it be 24
or 30 hours, in making this decrease it will then be Windy and Rainy with Hail
and Thunder.

11. If it weighs about 2000, and decrease to 1980 or near the matter, in 18 or
24 hours it will be stormy with Rain and Hail and Winds, but calm intermissions.

12. If it weighs but 1990, and decrease to 1970, 65 or 60 in 18 or 24 hours,
it will be very tempestuous with Wind, small Hail, Rain and Thunder, but most
Wind, and that Wind like Thunder.

13. If it weighs about 1990, and decrease 2 or 3 parts in 24 hours, if it
decrease never so long it will rain all the while, but if it stands or increase
a little, tho it weighs but 1970 or less it will be fair.

14. If it weighs but 1980, and decrease 2 or 3 parts in 24 hours there will be
very cold Rain all the while, and if it weighs but 1970, and so decreasing it
will Snow tho at Midsummer and be very cold and very wet, more like Winter than
Summer.

15. If it weighs but 1960 as, it cannot weigh much less two days together in
Summer, so we may be sure it will be very cold wet and winterly.

16. And from what weight soever it decreases 3 or 4 parts in 12 hours, if it
have stood 2 or 3 days before, it will be windy with fresh and pleasant Gales:
And if it increase 5 or 6 parts in 12 hours from any weight, after it have
stood as before, it will be a little windy.

There should be 3 or 4 Rules more for the increase, but that being for the
most part fair or windy, except between 1980 and 2000, they may be omitted for
the present: Thus for the decreasing to the Winter, and tho Winter have brought
it to so small a weight, yet it will not hold, except it begins about 2000 or
1995 at least.

17. Therefore if it continues to weigh 2000 or 1995 parts, two or 3 days in
Winter, it will freeze, and the longer it holds, of that weight the more, but
if it increase 2 or 3 parts in 24 hours, two or three days together it will go
away, and if it decrease two or three parts in 24 hours, it will continue and
Freeze harder and harder, as long as it so decreases, till at last it may not
weigh above 1945 or 1950, and yet it will be very fair and clear, but very
sharp Frost as long as it holds of that weight

18. Thus being of the least weight it can be, if it increase from 1945 or 50,
to 1960 in 24 hours, it will be windy, but very clear and extreme sharp and
freezing; and so also if the weight decrease from 1960 to 1950 or less in 24
hours time, it will be such a freezing wind, but if it increase or decrease but
one or two parts in 24 hours between these two, there will be very little
alterations, only clear and freezing.

19. If it increase from 1960 to 1970 in 24 hours, it will Snow the next day in
Storms, but it will soon be over, and decrease again, but if it increase from
1960, 2 or 3 parts in 24 hours till it weighs 1970, or 1975, it will Snow
considerably, and if in Snowing the weight increase, it will Snow the more, but
if it decrease it will be the less.

20. If it increase from 1970 to 1980, or 1985 in 24 hours time, it will be
very windy, and at last Rain, and then decrease again, and Thaw, but if it
increase again, the Frost will not remain, as it will notwithstanding the rain
if it decrease, and if it increase 2 or parts in 24 hours till it weighs 1980
or 85 the frost will certainly go with plenty of rain.

21. If it increase from 1980 to 1990 it will be fair and freeze again, and if
it increase 2 or 3 parts in 24 hours will hold till it weighs 2318 or 2020, but
then it will grow warm and misty (first thawing in the Air) and the frost will
go away without rain, nay so much without, that it will be fair and clear all
the while it is going, tho in the midst of Winter.

22. If it increase from 1999 to 2000 in 12 or 16 hours it will be windy the
same day, and then decrease a little and rain the next, but if it increase but
a little it will hold fair and be calm.

23. If it increase from 2000 to 2020, 2030, or 40 in 18 or 24 hours it will be
windy, but fair, yet rain the next day by storms, and after that a settled warm
rain, but if it increases leisurely it will hold fair all the while.

24. If it increase to a bigger weight, it will be more like Summer than
Winter, very fair clear and warm, without any frost. The truth of all which is
very plain from the former Chapters, and the following Experiments.

In December 1696, when I was sure I could weigh and measure any parcel of Air,
observing some alterations of weather, that I could not then give any reason
for, I bought a common Barometer or Quicksilver-Glass, and then an Hermetick
Thermometer, by which I made several other sorts to compare my own, and all
their differences with the alterations of the weather in a Diary, which I
continued to June 1699, on the 12 of January 96/7 a frost began (which proved
to be the hardest since the great one, 13 years before;) the Air weighed that
day 1996 and continued with very little alteration till the 16th, after which
it decreased 2 or 3 parts, and sometimes 4 in 24 hours, to the end of the
month, when it weighed but 1950; the second of February it increased a little
and weighed 1962; on the fourth when there was so sharp a freezing wind, that
my hand on the Iron handle of a Pail or Well-Bucket, it would cleave so fast to
it that it was ready to pull off the skin to take my hand off again, or to try
with my finger as several others did, by dabbing on a fresh place of the Iron,
it immediately stuck so fast it made it very sore to pull off, and could not
endure to do it above a time or two. After the fourth it decreased again till
the seventh, when it weighed but a little above 1949, where it continued 12
days to the 19th, and was very sharp, but after that it began to incerase again
slowly, till the 6th of March, when it weighed 1968, and went a way a few days
after. About the 20th of January when the weight of the Air was abated about 19
parts, and the Quicksilver sunk between three and four tenths, I began to think
the weather would alter in a few days to Rain or Snow, but weighing thus till
the end of the month, the Air growing lighter and lighter all the while, and
the Quicksilver at last near half way below Rain, and yet the weather clear,
and more sharp and freezing by the Hermetick Thermometer, was I thought the
strangest thing that could happen, I therefore weighed and measured several
quantities or particles of Air, in Cylinders, Cones, Globes and other figures
of several dementions, some times 18 or 20 times in a day in several distant
places, Tops of Hills, Valleys, Deepwells, Mines, and Coal-pits, warm fire
Rooms, Stoves, and open Air; And thus at last with a great deal of Pains and
Cost found the Air it self was frozen, and thereby kept off the Superior
Gravitation, and by continuing these means, the reasons of all the other
alterations of weather as well hot as cold, wet and dry, Wind, and Thunder, etc.

November the 28th 1697, a little frost began of about 8 days, that day the Air
weighed 1972, the 30th it weighed 1997, the 3d of December it weighed 2022, the
5th 2034, being very fair all the while (and froze very hard about the 1d and
2d) the next day it grew warm, but then decreased to 2003 in 24 hours, there
was first a little Snow, then small Rain, and the frost went away.

But December the 3d School having been frosty for sometime, the weight of the
Air increased to 2020, the 4th was very fair yet thawed apace, the mornings and
evenings a little misty with the thaw, but otherways very clear and so went
away without any Rain.

The 29th. of October at night 1697 the Air weighed 2018 the next morning it
weighed but 1996, the day was very windy but no Rain.

But the effects of the Greatest wind that have been for many years are related
in the 5th Chapter.

April the 10th 1699, the Air weighed but 1978, the 11th it weighed 1996, there
was first a little small rain, but after that very windy, the 12th in the
morning at six it weighed 2018, at 10 but 1990, at 12 1988, about 3 or 4 in the
afternoon, being near Maidenhead, there was a very strange and unusual Tempest
in the adjacent parts of Buckingham, and Barkshire, of Wind and Thunder and
Lightning, with Hail, and Rain, with that violence or strangeness, that the
Displosive Crackes of Wind and Thunder were hardly to be distinguished.

April the 16th following, being near London at noon the Air weighed 2005, at 9
at night but 1987, the 17th at 6 in the morning it weighed but 1970, about 2
afternoon it began to be a little Stormy, and at 4 a great Tempest of Thunder
and Lightning, Hail and Rain. I have many other remarkable alterations of Rain,
Snow, Cold, Hot, Wet and Dry weather, but reserve them with the several other
things for another opportunity.

ADDENDA.
SInce the former sheets were in the Press the continual use of this Barometer
has discovered several other things that former Ages were used to think too
Good for their Enemies, or Ungratitude, which, may be, was the Reason that have
hindered us from those Advantages: Some of these are, First, the true Cause or
Reason of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, in so plain and satisfactory a
manner, that it leaves no room for the lest scruple about it, and Salves all
the Appearances (with Mathematical Certainty) of that hitherto unknown mighty
work of nature, why the highest and lowest Spring and Nape Tides, are
Constantly about three days after the Change, Full and Quarters of the Moon;
And why the Spring and Nape Tides are so much greater in March and September
than at any other time of the year, And why there is 15 or 16 Foot Difference
between high and low Water in some Places, and not above 3 or 4 in others: And
though I have neither had neither time nor opportunity to observe it, since I
Discovered it, yet I am sure it is not the Moons being upon a Certain Meridian
that makes it high or low Water at that time, the same day, but a Particular
and Proper Distance of the Sun and Moon, 24 hours, or more, before that time,
All which is as Plain as the Tides are visible.

And immediately after it discovered the true Reason of the Magnetic Needles
Pointing to the North and South, and of its variations: And that many other
things so Placed will have the same Tendences, as I soon Experienced. After
which, I tried several others Exactly fitted in as many Fluid Currents, which
all stood the same way: For if they were nicely fitted in true Aequilibrium,
and Both Ends of equal distance from the Center they would not Point but Lie
Cross the Current: But if being in Aquilibrium, one End were longer than the
other, they would not lie Cross, but Point, and which End that was, may easily
be guessed. From whence we may be sure the Longitude Can never be truly found
by the Variation, or the Variation of the Variation, as some have thought.

It has Discovered several other things about the Prime and original Cause of
Winds, Rain, Hail, Frost, Snow, Thunder, and other Meteors: what it is that
gives the Air that motion we call Wind originally, and what Gathers Clouds, and
Condenses the Effluvia into Rain, That it is not the influence of or, nor the
Centeral motion of the Sun, nor always the Latitude of the Place that makes
Warm or Cold Weather: But that the Clouds do always Concenturate the Sun Beams
to make Thunder, with a further most Plain and Sensible Demonstration of the
Influence of the Stars (that are so sweet and binding, and in their Courses
fought against Sisera) in all Respects as Apparent as we see and know the
Blowing of the Wind. These if Life and Leisure last, will at some time or other
come abroad, either by themselves, or in another Edition of this, to which by
their Discovery they do more Properly belong.

IN the mean time, if any Gentlemen, Merchants, Seamen or others, desire any of
these Portable Barometers, as They are of real worth in all proceeding ways,
and for many other Discoveries, and have been very chargeable, so they will not
be parted with but by Subscriptions, for a Thousand to pay one Guinee a peace
down, for as many as the Subscriber intends to have, to Mr -- whom I shall be
obliged to give a discharge, and return the Money if they be not Delivered in
three months after Subscriptions, but upon delivering the Barometers the
Subscribe to pay half a Guinea a piece more, for as many as he has subscribed
for. So the Subscribers shall have them Complete, as easily Portable in a
manner as a Knife and Fork, or some Ink-Horns, and as seeure to be carried any
where, that neither the heat of the Body, Fire, nor Air, (except put into the
Fire) Frost, nor Wet, can any ways alter. Which if secured from other Makers
would not be sold under two or three Guineas.

THE Table or Contents.
CHAP. WHat the Portable Barometer is, the Constitution of the Atmosphere, and
that the Effluvia keep off the Airs Gravitation, and are the Cause of the
variation of its weight. Page 1 Chap. 2. How Rain and Snow is Generated and
Produced, and why they make a Cylinder of Air lighter, and yet any other
particular parcel of Air much heavier. Page 7 Chap. 3. How Winds, Storms,
Tempests, Hurricanes, and Tornados are produced. Page 19 Chap. 4. That violent
Tempests, Hurricanes, Tornados seldom happen in cold Countries, Winter Seasons,
large Plains or Great Seas. Page 28 Chap. 5. That they are easily foretold,
because they produce the greatest variations, in the weight of Air. Page 32
Chap. 6. What frost and Thunder is, a Conjecture at their Causes and
Productions. Page 39 Chap. 7. That there never is no settled Frost to hold when
the Air continues to weigh 2020 or more, nor never no Thunder when it weighs
but 1980 or less. Page 42 Chap. 8. That tho a Cylinder of Air weight much less
in wet or windy weather than it does in dry weather, yet in a settled frost tho
the Air appears never so clear and dry, it weighs much less than at any other
time. Page 48 Chap. 9. Whether the Planetary Beams or Influences can cause an
alteration of the weather to be foretold by them. Page 55 Chap. 10. That it is
impossible by an Hygroscope, Thermometer, or other Invention to know the true
state of the Air. Page 82 Chap. 11. The use of the Portable Barometer, how to
weigh the Air, Measure its Height, and foretell all the alterations of weather.
Page 86 Chap. Rules for the more certain knowledge of all the alterations of
weather both in quantity and quality. page 91.
FINIS.
Books Printed for W. Hawes, at the Rose in Ludgate Street.
A True Account of Germany, its Strength, and Power; together with a Discourse
of War and Peace, with Remarks and Maxims of Charles V. late Duke of Lorrain,
General of the Emperor's Forces. From a Manuscript left by him, and never
Printed before.

A New English Dictionary with the Terms of Gypsies, Beggars, Thieves, Cheats,
etc. Useful for all sorts of People (especially Foreigners) to secure their
Money, and preserve their Lives, beside, very Diverting and Entertaining, never
Printed before. by Edward Bellamy of Gray's Inn, Gent.

Ten Pleasant and Delightful Novels, VIZ. Rival Ladies. The Mistake. The
Generous Lover. The Libertine The Virgin Captive. The Perfidious Mistress. The
Metamorphos'd Lover. The Imposter out Witted. The Amorous Miser. The Pretended
Alchymist.


Being Collected and Printed in 1. Voll.


