DEMOPHILOS, OR THE ASSERTOR OF THE Peoples Liberty.

PLAINLY Demonstrating by the Principles even of Nature it self, and by the
Primitive Constitutions of all Governments since the Creation of the World.

That the very Essence and the Fundamental of all Governments and Laws, was
merely the safety of the People, and the (...)ancement of their Rights an^
(...)erties.

To which is added (...) General Consent of all Parliaments in the (...), and
the Concurrence of threescore and two (...) since first this Island was visible
in earnest, and (...)merce with other Nations, has been (...) (...) (...) and
Neglect.

By William Prynne (...) Bencher of Lincolns-Inne.

LONDON, Printed for Francis (...) in the Old Bailey. 1658.

To the imprejudiced Reader.
BEing importunately solicited by Mr. William Shepherd, a Lawyer, specially
employed by some Swordmen and Grandees at White Hall, ( from whence he came to
visit me at my Study in Lincolns Inn, within two days after their resolution
to call a new Assembly at Westminster, ^herewith he acquainted me) to regulate
the abuses in the execution of our Laws; that I would consider of such abuses
of this Nature, as I had observed, for him to present to that Assembly to be
reformed by them, being one chief end of their meeting; which I then informed
him, I had no time to do, being ready to take my Journey into the Country; and
that Sir John Davis in his Epistle to his Irish Reports, had written so much in
justification of our Laws, as would satisfy and filence all soldiers and
others that ignorantly censured them. He thereupon desired me at my vacant
times, to consider of this his motion in the Country, for the public good.
Which I ^nce calling to mind, and considering that in the Par^iament of 5 R. 2
(...). Parl. n. 17, 18. it was the re^olution both of the Commons and Lords (
(...) redress of their public Grievances and oppressio^s) Reformalio (...) d
bet (...) in ca pite, et sic (...) Gradu gradatim ad imum.
that Reformation (...) ought to begin in the Head, and so gradually from the
Highest (...) to the Feet: and that it will be both^ bootlesse, impolitick, and
ridiculous for any public or private State-Physicians, or Reformers, to spend
their time and pains only to cure some small scratches, or cuts in the toes, or
fingers; or breaches in the tyles or seeling of our State and Laws, ( as some
Mountebancks, and Pseudo-politicians now do) and in the mean time to overpasse,
neglect, if not increase, dilate the large deadly wounds, in the very Head,
Heart, Vital Parts; and most dangerous Breaches, Underminings in their very
Foundations, which threaten present death, and sudden Ruin to the whole Body
of our State, Laws, Nation, if not speedily healed, repaired with all possible
care and diligence, by the most skillfall Artists and Philopaters, sufficiently
qualified for such a desperate difficult public cure, Repair, and with sincere
self-denying public spirits, courageously addressing themselves with all their
skill, might, to this necessary Heroic work. And withal observing, that there
can be no health, ease, rest, quiet, but perpetual pain, languishing,
consumption, torture, decay in the Body politic of our Nation, as in the Body
n^tural, so long as there is any dislocation, fraction, convulsion, wound,
malady in the Bones, Nerves, Arteries, or chief Parts and members thereof. And,
then remembering that serious Protestation, and solemn League and Covenant,
which I my self, ^ll members of the late Parliament, most Persons in late
power, and the generality of all the well-affected people, to public Laws,
Liberty, Justice, Religion, in our three Kingdoms, (...) long since took in
the presence of the most High God, Angels, and Men with hands li^ted^ up to
Heaven, and then subscribed with those hands; That they shall with sincerity,
reality, and constancy, in their several Vocations, endeavor with their
Estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights, Privileges, Laws and
Liberties of the Parliaments and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
etc. And in this common cause of Liberty and peace of the Kingdoms, assist,
and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the
maintaining and pursuing ther^of; and not suffer themselves directly or
indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror to be divided or
withdrawn from this blessed union, etc. but shall all the days of their lives,
zealously, and constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote
the same according to their power, etc. ( which Solemn League and Covenant I
find subscribed in At the end of the solemn League and Covenant, printed by
b^th Houses orde^s by it self, and sent into all Counties: and in A Collection
of Ordinances, p. 426, 427, 128.
print, by William Lenthal Speaker, Robert Nicholas, Gilbert Pickering, Oliver
Cromwell, Philip L. Lisle, William Ellis, Oliver Saint-John, Miles Corbet,
John Lisle, Francis Rous, Nathaniel Fyennes, Edmund Prideaux, John Glynn,
Bulstrode VVhitelocke, Edward Montagu, and others in greatest present power and
employments, whom I desire now to remember, and perform the same effectually,
as they shall answer the contrary at that great day, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed, according to those their printed subscriptions
thereof, for all the good ends therein prescribed.) I^ thereupon apprehended I
could not perform a more seasonable, acceptable, or beneficial service to my
naaive Country in pursuance of the Protestation, and solemn League and
Covenant, ( lying still as sacred Bonds upon my conscience,) that to draw up
this summary Collection of the principal fundamental hereditary Rights,
Liberties, Properties of all English Freemen, both in relation to their
Persons; Estates, and free-Elections (most mortally wounded, more dangerously
under-mined, shaken, subverted by force and fraud of late years, since our
Parliamentary and Military contests for their defense, to the vast effusion of
our Treasures and Blood, (by some who were most deeply engaged in their
Protection and preservation) than in the very worst of former ages, under our
late or ancient Kings, in every particular branch:) And of the several
memorable Votes, Resolutions, Declarations, and Acts of Parliament, for their
Vindication and Corroboration, in the happy Parliament of 3 Caroli; ( remembered
and ratified likewise, in the last Parliament of King Charles) as the most
sovereign Balm, the most effectual materials prepared, applied by the
l^arnedest, skilfullest, wisest State-Physicians and Builders in those
Parliaments, to heal and close up the mortal wounds, the perilous Breaches, our
late Kings See the commons Remonstrance 15 December. 1641. Exact collection p. 4,
5, etc.
Jesuitical, arbitrary, tyrannical, ill-counsellors, and other Viperous
self-seeking projectors had formerly made in them, to the impoverishing,
oppressing, enslaving of the People, and endangering the utter subversion both
of our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Properties,^ Government, Parliaments,
Kingdoms, Religion; now in a more desperate deplorable condition than ever,
unless speedily revived, by the fresh application of these healing Cordials,
reunited, repaired, supported with, these sementing Ingredients by some expert,
active Chirurgians and Master Builders, to whom I humbly recommend them; as a
brief Corollary to the first and second part of my seasonable, legal and
Historical Vindication and Collection of the good old fundamental Liberties,
Franchises, Rights; Laws of all English Freemen; till God shall enable me to
complete the remaining parts thereof, in their Chronological series of time;
the best Legacy I can leave behind me to my Native Country, and the whole
English Nation, whose real Liberty, Weal, Tranquillity, Prosperity, ( next to
Gods glory and the safety of our endangered Church and Religion) has been the
sole scope, end, of this, and all other his publications; who, though
ingratefully, despitefully requited for most of them, would repute it his
greatest infelicity to be enforced (or hear other Cordial State-Physicians
compelled) now at last to say of England, as Gods people once did of Babylon,
Jer. 51. 8, 9, 10. Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed, howl for her,
take balm for her pain; If so be she may be healed. We would have healed
Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her, and let us go every one into his
own Country; for her judgment reaches unto Heaven,^ and is lifted up even to
the Skies. Yet the Lord has brought forth our righteousness: as he has
(maugre all Enemies, Oppositions, Slanders) the righteousness of him, who
desires thy kind acceptance of this Breviary, and prayers for Gods blessing
upon this, and all other his real endeavors for sick, desperately-wounded
Englands cure;

Swainswick September. 6. 1656. William P^nne.

A Summary Collection of the principal fundamental Rights, Liberties,
Properties of all English- Freemen, etc.
THe Liberty of the Subjects Persons having in the three first years of our
late King Charles his Reign been very much invaded, endangered, undermined, 1.
By Imprisonment of their Persons, by the Lords of the Council, without any
special Legal cause assigned in the Warrants for their commitment, but only the
Kings command; 1. By honorable banishments upon pretense of foreign employments;
3. By confinements to particular places; 4. By remanding and not bayling them
by the Judges upon Habeas Corpora sued forth by them; 5. By Commissions for
Trials of Soldiers and others for their live, by Martial Law, in times of
peace, when other Courts of Justice were open; and the like. The properties of
their Goods and Estat^s being likewise much encroached upon, and in a great
measure subverted, 1 By forced Loans and contributions. 2. By Lieutenants and
Deputy Lieutenants exorbi^ Powers, and new rates, taxes, imposed on, and forced
from them, without grant in Parliament, for billeting Soldiers, and quartering
Soldiers in men's Houses^ against their wills till they paid those rates. 3. By
exacting Tunnage, Poundage, New customs, and impositions without special grant
and act of Parliament. 4. By an intended Commission of Excise, (never put in
execution) and other particulars of like nature. And the Liberty of their
Free-elections, much impeached by Lieutenants, and others Letters, menaces,
summoning of trained Bands to elections, and the like indirect courses.
Whereupon the Parliament begun on Monday, 17 Martil, 3 Caroli, in the year of
our Lord 1627, to vindicate these their infringed Liberties, properties,
freedoms, and preserve them from future violations of this nature; after many
learned Arguments by Sir Edward Cook, Mr. Noy, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Littleton, Mr.
Masen, Mr. Creswel, Mr. Shervile, Mr. Sherland, Mr. Bancks, Mr. Rolls, Mr.
Ball, with other Lawyers, and able Members of the Commons House, passed their
(...) Votes against them, Nemine centradicente; fit now to be revived,
re-established, after more dangerous avowed public Violations of our
hereditary Fundamental Liberties, Properties, by the greatest pretended
Military and civil Champions for, and Patrons, Assertors and Protectors of
them, than any in former ages, as the probablest means under God then, and now
to cure the mortal distempers, and repair the sad divisions, (...), desolation
of our Land, 2 April 1628.
Resolved upon the Question.

1. That See the great Charter of King John. Mat. Paris p. 248. Magna Charta. 9
H. 3. c. 29. 5 E. 3. c. 9. 25 E. 3. c. 4 28 E. 3. c. 3. 37 E. (...). c. 18. 42
(...). 3. c. 3. 2 H. 4. (...). Parl. (...). 60. 69. The Petition of Right. 3
Caroli.
no Freemau ought to be committed, detained in Prison, or otherwise restrained
by command of the King, or privy Council, or any other, unless (...) cause of
the commitment, restraint or deteiner be expressed, for which by Law he ought
to be committed, detained, or restrained.

2. That a Writ of Habeas Corpus, may not be denied, but ought to be granted to
every man, that is committed, or detained in Prison, or otherwise restrained,^
although it be by command of the King or Prioy Council, or any other, he
praying the same.

3. That if a Freeman be committed or detained in Prison, or otherwise (...) by
command of the King or Privy Council, or any other, no cause of such
commitment, deteiner or restraint being expressed forthwith, for which by Law
he ought to be committed, restreined or detained, and the same being returned
(...) an Habeas Corpus granted for the same party, that then he ought to be
delivered or bayled.

4. 4 April 1628.
That no Freeman ought to be confined to his House, or any other place, by any
commaud of the King or Privy Council, or any other, unless it be by Mag.
Charta, 9 H. 3. c. 29. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Jac. c. 5. Daltons Justice of Peace, c.
45. (...) H. 5. c. 8.
Act of Parliament, or by other due course, or Warrant of Law.

5. 7 May, 1628.
That the Commission for martial Law, and 9 H. (...) 3. c. 29. 5 E. 3. c. 9. 25
E. 3. c. 4. 28 E. 3. c. 3. 15 E. 3. c. 1, 2 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 43. 44, etc.
(...) of Right, 3 Caroli. See My Discovery of Freestate Tyranny, p. 39, 40, 41.
all other of such nature, to be executed within the Land at such times as were
appointed by this Commission, (then questioned, to wit in times of peace, when
the Kings Courts of Law were open, and other Legal trials might be had by
Juries in Courts of Justice) are against the Law.

6. That Petition of Right, 3 Caroli.
billetting and placing of Soldiers or any other person in the House of any
Freeman, against his will, is against the Law.

7. 4 April, 1628.
That it is the Mag: Charta, c. 30. 25 E. 1. c. 5, 6. 34 E. 1. De Tallagio non
concedendo, c. 1. 14 E. 3. stat. 1. c. 21. stat. 2. c. 1. 15 E. stat. 3. c. 5.
27 E 3. stat. 2. c. 2. 38 E. 3. c. 2. 1 R. 3. c. 2. 21 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 16.
25 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 16. 36 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 26. 45 E. 3. rot Parl, n. 26.
1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 32. 43. 11 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 50.
ancient and undoubted Right of every Freeman, that he has a full and absolute
propriety in his goods, and Estate; And, that no taxes, Tallages, loan,
bonevolence, or other charge ought to be commanded, imposed, or levied by the
King or his Ministers, without commou consent by Act of Parliament.

All which Votes were drawn up, and inserted into^ the Petition of Right,
assented to by the Lords, and at last by the King himself in his Answer to that
petition, as the ancient Fundamental Rights and Liberties of all English
Freemen. And therefore after all our late Parliamentary and Military contests,
wars for their defense; fit to be confirmed, ratified by all sorts of Domestic
ways and policies, by which the great Charter was See rot. Par. 17 Iohannis
22, 23, 24. dors. Mat. Paris p. 243 to 255. 305 to 312. 838, 839. 878. 890.
892. 938, 940, 941, 960. and 25 E. 1. c. 1. etc. 28 E. 1. c. 1. and Claus. 28
E. 1. m. (...), 8.
anciently confirmed, and all violations of them exemplarily punished, without
any further argument or debate, being indisputable principles and foundations,
whereon all our Liberties, Properties, as English Freemen, are bottomed. To
which end I would advise that all Civil and Military Officers whatsoever, as
well Supreme as subordinate; all Members of Parliament, Barresters, Attorneys,
Graduates in our Universities, Steward of Leets and Court Barons throughout
(...) Dominions, should from time to time, upon, and at their investitures into
their several Offices, Trusts, or taking their Degrees be corporally sworn To
defend and maintain the Great Charter of England, the Petition of Right, and
other Fundamental Laws of this Land; together with the ancient undoubted
Rights and Liberties of our English Parliaments, (according to their late
Protestation, and Solemn League and Covenant) And that all Justices of (...),
Judges, and Justices of the Peace, should specially be sworn at every Assizes
and Sessions of the Peace in their respective Circuits, Counties, Corporations;
and the Justices of the Kings Bench every Term, amongst other Articles to the
Grand Jury, to give them in charge upon their Oaths, diligently to inquire of
and present all Offenses, Exactions, Oppressions, Taxes, Imposts and (...)
whatsoever, against the Great Charter, the Petition of Right, and other Good
Laws for the preservation of the Liberty, Right, and Property of the Subject,
by any person or persons; to the end, that they may be exemplarily punished
according to Law, by Fines, Imprisonments or otherwise, as the^ quantity and
quality of the Offenses deserve: It being the Exact. (...). p. 20, 21, 309. 326.
Advice, Desire, Proposition, and Petition of the whole Commons house first,
and after of the Lords and Commons house jointly to King Charles in his last
Parliament; to which he readily assented: though never since put into actual
execution; which is now most necessary to be effectually accomplished for the
future, having been so long neglected.

After these Votes, and the Petition of Right passed, several Impositions upon
Wines, Currants, Tobacco, Beer, and the taking of Tonnage and Poundage without.
Act of Parliament, being complained of, it was by special Votes and
Declarations of the Commons House, resolved and declared in the same Parliament.

8. 25 June, 1628.
That the receiving of Tunnage and Poundage, and otber Impositions not granted
by Parliament, it Mag. Charta, 9 H. 3. c. 20. 25 E. 1. c. 1. 6. 34 E. 1. c. 1.
2. 14 E 3. (...). 1. c. 21 (...). 2. c. 1. 35 E. 3. (...). 2. c. 1. 15 E. 3.
stat. 3. c. 5. 1 R. 3. c. 2. 21 E. 3. (...). (...). n. 16. 36 E. 3. (...)..
(...). n. 26. Exact Coll. p. 382, 383, 884, 857, 858.
a breach of the fundamental Libberties of this (...); and contrary to his
Majesty's Regal answer to the Petition of Right: And those declared Public
Enemies, who should thenceforth collect, or pay any Customs, Tunnage, Poundage
or Imposts, not granted by act of Parliament, which was since enacted and
declared for Law in the Exact Collection, p. 789, 790, etc.
two (...) acts for Tunnage and Poundage, in the last Parliament of King
Charles; and all those in a Praemunire, and disablea to sue in any Court of
Justice, who shall presume to levy the same without Act of Parliament. The case
of all Customers, Excisemen and their Instruments, at this present, fit to be
made presidents in this kind for the terror of others.

9. A Commission from the King under the Great Seal of England, directed to 33
Lords and privy Counselors, dated the last of Febr. 3 Caroli, styled, 11, 15,
19 June 1628.
a Commission of Excise, was complained of and brought into the Commons House,
and there read, which commanded them to (...) (...) by Impositions or
otherwise, as they in their wisdoms should find convenient, for^ the safety and
defense of the King, Kingdom and People; the Kings Protestant Friends and
Allies; which without hazard of all could admit no delay, the necessity being
so inevitable, that form and circumstances must rather be dispensed with, than
substance lost. Injoyning the Commissioners to be diligent in the service, as
they tendered the safety of his Majesty, and of his People, Dominions and
Allies. This Commission of Excise by the unanimous Vote and judgment of the
Lords and Commons, was resolved to be against Law, and contrary to the Petition
of Right. And thereupon was cancelled (as such) in his Majestics presence, by
his own command, and was brought cancelled to the Lords House by (...) Lord
Keeper, and by them afterward sent to the Commons: and the Warrant with all
(...) of it were cancelled: and ordered by the Commons, that the Prejector of
it should be found out and punished. Which judgment (...) Collection p. 885.
6. Mr. O: (...). John's speech and (...) (...) receiving (...) p. 13. 15. 16,
(...). (...) my Declaration and (...) (...) the (...) extortion of Excise.
was thrice recited, confirmed, and insisted on by the Lords and Commons, (and
some in greatest present power) the last Parliament of King (...) in printed
Speeches and Declarations. And if this intended Commission of Excise, though
never (...), was thus frequently damned as (...) intolerable and monstrous
Grievance against our Laws, Properties, and the Petition of Right, How much
more are all present Orders, Commissions, Warrants for the actual imposing and
levying all sorts of Excises on such, without any act of (...)?

X. The Commons House in that Parliament, upon solemn Argument and Debate,
concluded; That by the Laws of th is Realm, none of his Majesty's Subjects
ought to be impressed or compelled to go forth of his County to serve as a
Soldier in the Wars, except in (...) (...). 3. (...). 2. (...). 4 (...). 4. c.
(...). 5 E. 3. c. 8. (...) (...) (...). (...). (...) (...) (...).
case of necessity of the sudden coming in of strange Enemies into the
Kingdom; or except they (...) otherways bound by the Tenures of their Lands or
possessions; Nor (...) sent out of the Realm against his Will upon any forein^
employment, by way of an honorable banishment. Which Resolution in the last
Parliament of King Charles was (...) and declared to be the Law of the Land,
and fundamental Liberty of the Subject, by the Exact (...), p. 389, 390, etc,
435, 436, 877, 878, 879, etc. 887.
Act for impressing Soldiers for Ireland; by two D clarations of the Lords and
Commons against the Commission of array; and assented to by the King in his
answer thereunto.

All which unanimous Votes, Resolutions of both Houses, having been (...)
ratified in two several Parliaments in King Charles his Reign (whereof some in
present Power were Members,) and enacted by several Statutes, assented to by
King Charles himself; it must needs be the extremity of Impudency, Tyranny,
Treachery, Impiety, Perjury, Barbarism, for any who have formerly contested
with him in our Parliaments, or in the open field, for all or any of these
premised Fundamental Rights and Liberties of all English Freemen; and who
vowed, protested, covenanted, remonstrated again and again before God and all
the World, inviolably, faithfully, constantly to defend them with their Lives
and Fortunes all their days, in their several places and callings; and who
beheaded him as the Greatest (...) (together with Strafford and C(...)) for
infringing them; to oppose, contradict, violate (...) infringe them all in a
more transcendent public manner, than he or his worst Ministers formerly have
done; and now not really, cheerfully to corroborate, defend, transmit them to
posterity in full vigor, by all good ways and corroborations that possibly can
be devised, without the least opposition and dispute, to make the Nation free,
and their own posterity together with it. 19, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28 May 1628.


XI. After the Petition of Right had passed the Commons House, and was
transmitted to the Lords; the House of Lords desired, that this Clause might be
added^ to the close thereof. We humbly present this Petition to your Majesty,
not only with a Care of Preservation of our own Liberties, but with a due
regard to leave entire that Sovereign Power where: with your Majesty is
trusted, for the Protection, Safety, and Happiness of your People. The Commons
after a long and full Debate, resolved, That this Saving ou^ht to be rejected,
and by no means to be added to this Petition; though very Specious in show and
words; for that it would be destructive to the whole Petition; and would leave
the Subjects in far worse condition than it found them. For whereas the
Petition recites, That by the Great Charter and other Laws and Statutes of this
Land, No Loan, Tax, Tallage or other Charge ought to be imposed on the
Subjects, or levied, without common consent by Act of Parliament, Nor any
Freeman of this Realm imprisoned without cause showed, Nor any compelled to
receive Soldiers or Mariners into their Houses against their wills, Nor any
man adjudged to death by Martial Law, in times of Peace, but only by the lawful
trial of his (...), according to the established Laws and Custom of the Realm;
This addition would make the Sense and Construction thereof to be, That the
King by his Ordinary power and Prerogative could impose no Loan, Tax, Tallage,
or other things upon his Subjects without their common consent by Act of
Parliament; Nor imprison any Freeman, without cause showed; Nor billet any
Soldiers or Mariners in men's Houses against their wills; Nor condemn nor
execute any Subject by Martial Law: But yet by his Sovereign power, wherewith
he is int^usted for the Protection, Safety, and Happiness of his people, here
left entirely to him, he may when he saw cause and necessity impose what Loans,
Taxes, Impositions and Charges he pleased on his people, without common
consent^ and Act of Parliament, imprison them without cause showed, quarter
Mariners and Soldiers in their houses against their wills, and condemn,
execute them by Martial Law, upon this pretext, that it was for the Protection,
Safety and Happiness of his people in general; All which himself and his
Council, not the Judges and our Laws, must determine. And so this Addition, if
admitted, would quite overturn the Petition it self, the Great Charter, and all
other Acts recited in it: and give an intimation to Posterity, as if it were
the opinion of the Lords and Commons in this Parliament, that there is a trust
reposed in the King upon some emergent cases and necessities, to lay aside as
well the Common Law, as the Great Charter and other Statutes, which declare and
ratify the Subjects Liberty and Property, by his Sovereign power. And so by
consequence to enable him to alter the whole frame and fabri^k of the
Commonwealth, and dissolve that Government whereby this Kingdom has flourished
for so many year; under his Majesty's most royal Predecessors. Whereas in truth
there is in the King no Sovereign Power or Prerogative royal to enable him to
dispute with, or take from his Subjects that Birthright and Inheritance which
they have in their Liberties by virtue of the Common Law, and these Statutes,
which are merely positive and declarative; conferring or confirming ipso facto
an inherent Right and Interest of Liberty and Freedom in the Subjects of this
Realm, as a Birthright and Inheritance descended to them from their Ancestors,
and descendible to their Heirs and Posterity. But the Sovereign power wherewith
he is entrusted, is only for the protection, safety and happiness of his
people, in preserving this their inherent Birthright and Inheritance of Liberty
and Freedom, and those Laws and Statutes which ratify and declare them. Upon^
these and other reasons alleged by the Commons, the Lords after three large
Conferences agreed fully with the Commons, and rejected this destructive (...)
to the Petition of Right; which the Lords and Commons in their Exact Collect.
p. 885.
Declaration touching the Commission of Array, January 16. 1642. (to which many
now in power were parties) recite, insist on and corroborated in Parliament, as
an undoubted truth. If then the King by his absolute Sovereign power wherewith
he was entrusted, could upon no emergent occasion or (...) whatsoever, violate,
elude, evade, subvert all or any of these fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights,
and Inheritances of the Subject, by the joint unanimous resolution of the Lords
and Commons in these two Parliaments of King Charles; much less then may any
other Person or Persons, or new Powers do it, who condemned him for a Tyrant,
and suppressed Kingship as tyrannical, over. burdensome, dangerous to the
peoples Liberties, Safety, Prosperity, upon any real or pretended Necessity or
Emergency whatsoever. Much less may any true English Parliament permit or
enable them upon any pretense to do it in the least degree, to the prejudice of
(...) after so many public Parliamentary and Military conflicts for these Laws
and Liberties. The rather, because that our Noble Ancestors would admit no
Saving or Addition to the Great Charter, or any (...) for its confirmation,
that might any ways impeach their Liberties, Rights, or Proprieties: And when
King Edward the 1. in the 28 year of his reign upon the Petition of the Lords
and (...), granted a New Confirmation of their Charters, and in the Articuli
super Chartas, cap. 20.
close thereof added this Clause, Salvo (...) Coronae Regis: That the right and
prerogative of his Crown should be saved to him in all things; (Which the Lords
most insisted on, to justify the forementioned rejected Addition to the
Petition of Right) when it came to be proclaimed in London, the people^ hearing
this Clause at the end thereof, added by the King; fell into execration for
that Addition, and the great Earls, who went away satisfied out of Parliament,
hearing thereof, went to the King and complained thereof, who promised to
redress it (as Mr. Seldom then informed the Commons house, out of a Leiger Book
of that year, in the public Library of the University of Cambridge: Whereupon
in the Statute De Tallagio non concedendo, 34 E. 1. the King to please his
discontented Lords and Commons, not only granted, That no Tallage or Aid should
be taken or levied by us or our heirs in our Realm, without the good will and
assent of the Archbishop, Bishops, (...), Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other
Freemen of the Land, c. 1. But likewise added, c. 4. We will and grant for us
and our Heirs, That all Clerks and Laymen of our Lvnd, shall have their Laws,
Liberties, and Free Customs, as they have used to have the same at any time,
when they had them best. And if any Statutes have been made by us or our
Ancestors, or any Customs brought in contrary to them, We will and grant, That
such (...) of Statutes and Customs shall be void and frustrate for evermore:
Yea, King Edward the 3. in pursuance thereof, in the Parliament of 42 E. 3. c.
1. assented and accorded, That the Great Charter and Charter of the Forest, be
holden and kept in all points: And if any Statute be made to the contrary, that
shall be holden for none. And (...). 3, It is assented and accorded for the
good Government of the Commons, that no man be put to answer without Present
(...) before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process, and writ
original, according to the old Law of the Land. And if any thing from
henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in the Law, and holden for
Error. And therefore we all jointly and severally expect and claim the like
Declaration and Resolution in all these particulars, being assented to by King
Charles himself in the Petition^ of Right, and by these ancient Warlike Kings,
and true English Parliaments, from whose vigilance, magninamity, unaminity,
zeal, courage in defense of the^e our fundamental Charters, Laws, Rights,
Liberties, we should now be ashamed to degenerate, after so many years, wars,
and vast expenses for their preservation; and all sacred solemn Protestations,
Vows, Leagues, Covenants, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Ordinances, engaging
us, with our lives and fortunes constantly to defend them all the days of our
lives, against all oppositio^. And if any who pretend to the Name or power of a
Parliament, should now refuse or neglect to do their duties herein, they may
justly expect to be had in perpetual detestation and execration both with God
and all English Freemen.

XII. It was frequently averred, declared 22, 23, 24, 25 March, 1628. and
sund^y days after.
by the Commons in this Parliament; That the old custom and use of our
Parliaments constantly has been, and ought to be, to debate, redress all
public grievances, and reestablish, secure their violated 52 H. 3. c. 5. 25 ^.
1. c. 1, 2, 3. 28 E. 1. c. 1, 2. 1 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. 9. 2 E. 3. 6. 1. 4. 5,
10, 14, 15, 25, 28, 31, 36, 37, 38, 42. 45 E. 3. c. 1. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
12 15 ^. 2. c. 1. 2. 1, 2. 4, 7, 9. 13 H. 4. c. 1, 3, 4. 9 H. 5. c. 1. 2 H. 6.
c. 1. 11 H. 7. c. 1.
Great Charter, Laws, Rights, and Liberties, in the first place of all, before
they debated, or granted any aides, or subsidies demanded of them, (shough
never so pressing, or necessary) it being both dangerous, imprudent, and a
breach of their trusts toward the people who elected them, to play an
Aftergame for their Liberties, Laws, and Grievances, which would never be
effectually redressed after subsidies once granted., VVhereupon they refused to
pass the Bill of Subsidies then granted till the Petition of Right was first
assented unto, enrolled, and their Grievances, redressed by the King.

XIII. They cast Sir Edmund Sawyer, a Member of the Commons House, out of it,
upon solemn Debate; 21 Junii, and 9 April 1628.
committed him Prisoner to the Tower, and perpetually disabled him to serve in
Parliament for the future, for having a chief hand in making a Book of Rates,
for Tunnage and Poundag, and laying imposiiont^ on the Subject, in nature of a
Projector, without grant or Act of Parliament. And likewise suspended Mr. John
Baber (then Recorder and Burgess of Well) only for making a Warrant to billet
Soldiers, on some, of the Townsmen, against the Law, and Subjects Liberty, out
of of fear. Resolving, that all Projectors and Promoters of illegal
impositions, Taxes, (...), Projects out of base fear, (which Mr. Baber) or by
regal' command (which Sir Edmund Sawyer pleaded for his excuse) were unfit to
sit or vote in any English Parliament, and fit to be turned out thence by
judicial sentence, with greatest Insamy. And whether any such be fit to be
Members at any other season, let those whom it concerns determine.

XIV. In this Parliament of 3 Car^li the 19 M^rtii 1627.
Speaker in the close of his first Speech to the King ( according to 6 H. 4. ^.
8. 3 H. 4. n. 8. etc. 9 H. 4. ^. 12, 13, etc 11 H. 4. 1. 10, 11. 13 H. 4.
(...). 10. 11. Cook 4 Inst^t. p. 8.
usual custom in former ages) prayed 3 Privileges in behalf of every Member of
the Commons House; the first whereof was, That for the better attending the
public and important services of the House, all and every Member thereof, and
their necessary attendants may be free both in Person and in Goods from all
Arrests and troubles, according to their ancient Privileges and immunities:
Which the King then readily granted them all, according to the true Rights and
Privileges of Parliament: By the mouth of the Lord Keeper. 29 Martii 1628.
After which Sir Edward Cook (arguing against the King and his Councils power,
to commit men only by special command, without any legal cause expressed in the
Warrant. in the House used this expression. This concerns not only the
Commonalty, but the Lords, and therefore it deserves to be spoken of in
Parliament, because this might dissolve the Parliament and this House: for we
may be then all one after another thus committed, 31 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 26,
27. See my Plea for the Lords, p. 50, 51, 52. and 8 H. 6. n. 57 William
Mildreds cas^, Bu^gess of London.
No Member of Parliament can be arrested but for Felony, Treason, or Peace: And
all here may be committed (under thief pretenses) and then where is the
Parliament? Surely the Lord will be glad of this, i^ concerns them as well as
us. 3 and 5 Maii 16. 8.
Not long after the Common House being informed, that Sir Robert Sta^hop a
Member there of was committed by the Lords of the Council; thereupon the House,
(in whose power it was, either to send an Habeas Corpus, or their Sergeant with
his Mace, for any Member committed, as was resolved the last Parliament before
this, together with the cause thereof) ordered; That their Sergeant should go
with his Mace, and bring Sir Robert Stanhop, with his Keeper, and the Warraut
for his commitment, into the House, the next morning they sat. Who accordingly
brought him, with the Marshal of the Household, and the Warrant, wherein it was
declared, That his commitment was, by the Lords of the Council, for breach of
the peace, and refusing to give Suretiet for the Peace: upon a challenge and a
Duel, intended by him, as the truth of the Case appeared. Whereupon the House
were of opinion; That standing committed for his real breach of the peace, and
refusing to give Sureties, he could not have his Privileges, without giving
good security in the Kings Bench to keep the peace'. And Mr. ^anshaw alleging
That in such caf^s some Members by order of the House had entered into
Recognizances in the Kings Bench in former times, to keep the Pe^ce, a
Committee was ordered to search out the Presidents, and consider of the Case.
But the quarrel being soon after taken up, thereupon the Lords released Sir
Robert without Sureties, to attend the service of the House. On the 28 of April
1627 Sir Simon Steward a Member of the Commons House, being served with a Sub
poena ad audiendum judicium out of the Star Chamber, at the su^e of the Kings
Attor^y, upon a Bill there exhibited against him, for sundry misdemeanors;
complained thereof to the House, and showed that he had been^ enticed to enter
into a Bond and Recognizance of 500 l. not to claim any privilege of
Parliament. The House upon solemn debate hereof, April 20. resolved, That Sir
Simon, notwithstanding this Bond and Recognizance, should have his Privilege
allowed him; because he was elected by, and served for others, and could not
make a Proxy; and because else the House might thereby be deprived of his
attendance by his Censure: Yea this Recognisance, with the Condition thereof (
not to claim his Privilege) were held to be void and against the Law: And by
order of the House, the p^rty who served the Subpoena on Sir Simon Steward, was
sent for as a Delinquent; and Sir Simon commanded to attend the service of the
House, and not the hearing of the cause. Upon this, on the 10th of May, the
Inhabitants of the Isle of Ely exhibited a Petition against Sir Simon to the
House, complaining, that they had exhibited an Information against him in
Starchamber, for taking bribes about pressing of Soldiers as a Deputy
Lieutenant, and defrauding the Country about the Kings composition; which cause
was ready for hearing; Petitioning the House, that he might wave his privilege,
having en^red into a Bond of 500 l. not to claim it. But it was resolved upon
debate, That the Commons House was Judge of any offense done by the Members of
it. And thereupon ordered, That a Committee should examine the Witnesses and
other proofs of the Charge against him; and so this House to proceed to
Judgment against him: Which was done accordingly. To these cases of Privilege
in the Commons House, I shall add another memorable one in the Lords House, in
the second Parliament of King Charles. The King sitting that Parliament,
committed the Earl of Arundel to the Tower, without leave of the House, or
acquainting the Lords with the cause thereof. Whereupon, May 25. 1626. the
Lords drew up and sent this Remonstrance and Petition to the King, entered in
their Journal on record.

The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Peers.
MAy it please your Majesty, We the Peers of this your Realm now assembled in
Parliament, finding the Earl of Arundel absent from his place amongst us, his
presence was therefore called for. But thereupon a Message was delivered us
from your Majesty by the Lord Keeper, That the Earl of Arundell was restrained
for a misdemeanour which was personal to your Majesty, and lay in the proper
knowledge of your Majesty, and had no relation to matter of Parliament. The
Message occasioned us to inquire into the Acts of our Ancestors, and what in
like cases they had done; that so we might not err in a dutiful respect to
your Majesty, and yet preserve our Right and Privilege of Parliament. And after
diligent search made, both of all Stories, Statutes and Records, that might
inform us in this case, We find it to be an undoubted Right and constant
Privilege of Parliament, That no Lord of Parliament, sitting the Parliament, or
within the usual times of Privilege of Parliament is to be imprisoned or
restrained (without Sentence or Order of the House) unless it be for Treason or
Felony, or for refusing to give surety for the Peace. And to satisfy our
selves the better, we have heard all that could be alleged by your Majesty's
learned Counsel at law, that might any way infringe or weaken this claim of the
Peers: And to all that can be showed or alleged, so full satisfaction has been
given, as that all the Peers in Parliament upon the Question made of this
Privilege, has una voce consented, that this is the undoubted Right of the
Peers, and has inviolably been enjoyed by them.

Wherefore we your Majesty's loyal Subjects and^ humble Servants, the whole
Body of the Peers now in Parliament assembled, most humbly beseech your
Majesty, that the Earl of Aruudel (a Member of this Body) may presently be
admitted by your Gracious favor, ^o come sit and serve your Majesty and the
Commonwealth in the Great Affairs of this Parliament.

And we shall pray, etc.

Upon this Remonstrance and Petition sent to the King, the Sea My Ple^ ^or ^he
(...), p. 6.
Peers presently adjourned their house till the next morning, by which time
they expected the Earls release; but not finding him enlarged, the next day May
26. they presently adjourned their House till the 2. of June, refusing to sit,
and resolving not to act any thing till the Earl wa^ released to sit among
them, or the particular cause of his Commitment and seclusion declared to them,
that they might judge of its legality. Whereupon the King was enforced to
release him to satisfy the Lords House: In imitation whereof the Exact
Collection p. 34. to 57, 66, 67. etc.
whole House of Commons the last Parliament of King Charles, upon the Kings
coming into the House to demand the 5 Members he had impeached of High
Treason, January 4. 1641. (which they Voted, To be an high Breach of the Rights
and Privilege of Parliament, and inconsistent with the Freedom and Liberty
thereof) presently adjourned it self, and so did the House of Peers too (upon
his demand of the Lord of Kimbolton) refusing to sit as an House, but only as a
Committee in London, for certain days, till this breach of their Privilages
was repaired, and their (...) restored, vindicated, cleared by the King; who
released all further prosecution against them.

From which Presidents in these Parliaments of King Charles, it is observable

1. That it is an ancient and undoubted Privilege and^ Right of all and every
Mrmber of Parliament, as well Commoner, as Peer, (as likewise of their
necessary Servants and Attendants) to be free from all Arrests, Imprisonments
and restaints whatsoever by the King, Council, o^ any others, except only in
cases of Treason, Felony, and Breach Surety of the Peace: which was then
cleared by 5 H. 4. n. 39. 5 H. 4. c. 6. 8 H. 6. n. 57. 31 H. 6. n. 25, 26, 27,
28. 39 H 6. n. 9. 7 E. 4. n. 36. 4 H. 8. c. 6. 3 Iacobi, the Baron of Wal^ons
case, and Sir George Ha(...) case ^ Caroli, to which the Presidents printed in
Sir Edward Cooks 4 Institutes p. 24, 25. and the Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 1. may
be added; which declares, That the Great men and Commonally of the Realm of
Englaud called or to be called to the Kings Parliament, do enjoy, and were wont
to enjoy, and in time to come ought to enjoy, this liberty or defense in
coming, tarrying, and retorning, not to be arrested, molested, or inquieted;
and gi^es the same Liberty to the Clergy called to the Convocation by the Kings
writs, and to their Servants and Families. Therefore the arresting,
imprisoning, secluding, molesting of any Members of late or present times by
the Army Officers or others, is a most apparent breach of this ancient
Privilege, worthy the severest penalties, and speedy reformation.

2. That the ground and only reason of this Privilege is, that all and every
member summoned to, or elected and returned to serve in Parliament, might duly,
freely, and diligently attend his public trust and service in the Parl.
Without molestation, restraint, seclusion or disturbance: (as these Presidents,
Statutes, and Records resolve:) which all and every of them are bound to do,
under pain of being amerced, sined, and otherwise punished, and of losing
their wages besides; as is clear by the Statute of 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 4. The
King does will and command, and it is assented in the Parliament by the
Prelates, Lords and Commons, that all and singular^ Persons and commonalties,
which from henceforth shall have the summons of Parliament, shall come from
henceforth to the Parliament in the manner as they be bounden to do, and have
been accstomed within the Realm of England of old times. And every person of
the same Realm which from henceforth shall have the said summons, (be he
Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Duke, Earl, Baron, Baneret, Knight of the
Shire, Citizen of City, Burgess of Borough, or other singular Pers^n or
Comminalty) which does absent himself, or come not at the said Summons, (except
he may reasonably and honestly exc^se himself to our Lord the King) shall be
amerced and otherwise punished, as of old times has used to be done within the
said Realm, in the said case, etc. As likewise by the Statutes of 1 H. 5. c. 1.
32 ^. 6. c. 15. 9 H. 8. c. 16. The Act for Triennial (...), 16 Caroli, 31 H. 6.
n. 45, 46. 8 Martii 23 (...). Cooks 4 Institutes, p. 1, 2, 4, 9, 10, 15, 17, 23
24, 35, 42 to 50, and my Plea for the Lords, which you may consult at leisure.
Therefore no member duly summoned or elected, may or ought to be arrested,
secluded, or suspended the Parliament by any Persons or Powers whatsoever, upon
any pretext or new devised Instrument, but only by the House and Parliament it
self, without the highest injustice, affront to the Parli^ment, Member, and the
people who elect him.

3. That the Parliament alone during its sitting, and no other person or powers
whatsoever, is and ought to b^ the sole Judge of the due elections, offenses,
fi^nesse, ejection, seclusion, suspension, imprisonment of the Members of
Parliament. And that no Member in cases of Treason, Felony, or Breach of Peace,
ought to be taken away or detained from the service of the House whereof he is
a Member, until that House has satisfaction concerning the truth of the fact,
and grounds of the Accusation;^ which it is bound to examine, and then to
proceed against him, themselves, if it be proper for the Parliament, or to
suffer him after to be proceeded against elsewhere, as resolved in the
Presidents of Sir Edmund Sawyer, Mr. Baber, Sir Simon Steward, Sir Robert
Stanhop, the Earl of Arundel, the Lord of Kinbolton, and 5 ^mpeached Members,
forecited of late: By sundry ancient Presidents in my Plea for the Lords, p. 33
to 54. My Ardua Regni, and Levellers Levelled, Cooks 4 Inst^tutes, p. 23, 24,
etc. And ^xpresly declared by the Lords and Commons, in their printed
Declaration, October. 23. and Remonstrance November. 2. 1^42. Exact Collection p.
655, 657, 723, 724, 726, 727. Wherefore for any persons or Powers out of
Parliament to arrest, o seclude any Member duly summoned or elected by the
People (especially without, before, or against the judgment of the Parliament,
or withont rendering any reason thereof to the Parliament and People who elect
them) is the highest usurpation over, and affront to the Sovereign jurisdiction
of Parliaments, that possibly can be devised, yea an erection of a supreme new
Power, both over Parliaments themselves, and their Members; and great injustice
to the People, lately Jan. 1648. Sec the History of (...).
voted the Sovereign Power, and only fountain of all lawful Authority in the
Nation.

4. That the Parliaments of England in all former ages, have been very
diligent, vigilant, zealous, resolute, courageous in maintaining these their
ancient undoubted Privileges of their Members, and the Houses of Parliament,
against the least incroachment or violation; not suffering so much as one or
two of their Members at any time (especially in the Parliaments of King
Charles) to be imprisoned, or restrained from the Parliament, for any real ar
pretended causes, without present demanding of him, or them, and examining the
grounds of their restraints, adjorning their Houses, and refusing to sit or act
til^^ till their Members were restored, righted, and their Privileges repaired;
And that upon these four grounds, worthy special observation.

1. Because our Parliaments in former times, were constantly adjourned from the
day of their first appearance, till a further time, when any of the Lords,
Knights and Burgesses, by reason of shortness of time, other public
employments, or default of the Sheriffs returns, were absent, and did not
appear, to make up a full Parliament upon the first day of the Summons; which I
have proved by 30 Parliaments, Presidents and Records The Levellers levelled,
^. p. 21 22. My Plea for the Lords, p. 25. etc.
elsewhere cited) in the reigns of King Henry 3. Edward the 3. Richard 3. and
Henry the 4th, (to which some others might be added) to prevent the danger of
acting any thing in a thin or packed House.

2. Because the undue seclusion of any Members duly elected by force or
combination, (especially when others unduly, or not at all elected by the
people, were returned and admitted as Members) has nullified, ma^e void and
rep^aled all the Acts and Proceedings of former Parliaments, thus fraudulently
packed for sinister private ends; as being no Parliaments at all in law or
truth, but a packed, Conventicle and Confederacy; as the printed Statutes of 21
R. 2. c. 12. ^ H. 4. c. 3. and rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 22, 23. 38. 48. 66. 70. 38
H. 6. n. 35. 39 H. 6. c. 1. 17 E. 4. c. 7. And the Statutes of 10 H. 7. c. 23.
made in Ireland, will resolve the perusers of them, being over-tedious to
transcribe.

3. Because else the King and his Council, or others might as well summon what
Nobles, Counties, Cities, Boroughs they pleased to the Parliament, and omit
whom else they pleased out of the Summons, without any Writs directed to them;
and seclude or admit whom they pleased, when summoned, elected, returned to
serve in Parliament; contrary to the Mat. Par^s Hist. Anglie, p. 247. See My
Pl^a for the Lords, p. 5, 6.
Great Charter of King John, and the Statute of 5 R. 2. c. 4.^ which expressly
prov^de, That all the (...), Citizens B^gesses, (...) and (...) shall be
Summon^ to every Parliament. And if any Sheriff of the Realm be from henceforth
negligent in making his returns o^ Writs of the Parliament, or that he leave
out of the said Returns any Cities or Boroughs which be bound, or were of old
time wont to come to the Parliament, he shall be (...) or otherwise punish^d,
i^ the mann^r as was accustomed to be done in the said cas^ i^ im^s past. They
being all to be summoned as formerly, ex debito Justiciae, as Sir Edward Cook
resolves in his 4th Institutes, p. 1. printed by the Common^ House speci^l
Order: else the Parliament will be Void and Null, as the Statute of 10 H. 7. ^.
a 3. for Ireland declares, resolving the Patent of Drogheda to be void, upon
this reason.

4. Because (as both Honses of Parliament resolved in their ( k) Declaration of
October 23. and Remonstrance. ^xact Collecton, p. 655, 657, 723, 724, 726, 727.
November. ^. 1642. published in print to all out 3. Kingdom^ and the World,
(penned and assented to by some Grande^s in present power) (...) King or any
prevailing party whatsoever might else at any tim^ secludo and pull out of the
House of Parliament all such Members as they sound (...) and opposite to their
(...); Mak^ whom and how many Members they pleased a Major part, to carry on
t^eir designs, and thereby destroy the whole Body of the Parliament by pulling
out the principal Members, and pull up their Privileges by the roots. A
treachery, injury, innovation, not to be tolerated or connived at in the least
Degree, after so many Protestations, Vows, Solemn Leagues, Coven^,
Declaration, Remonstrances, both by the Parliament and Army, and so many years
bloody Wars, for defen^ of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament. I shall
therefore close up this particular with the memorable words of Lord and
Commons forenamed Remonstra^, which I desire all Swordmen, the whole Nation,
and those especially who were then Members, to take special noti^e of. Exact Co
lect^on p. 7 24.
This Privilege of the Members seclusion from the House, and arrests (fore
mentioned) is so clear and essential a Privilege of Parliament, that the whole
Freedom of Parliament depends upon it. For who sees not, that by this means
under false pretenses of Crimes and Accusations, such and so many M^mbers of
both or either House may be taken out of it at any time, by any persons to
serve a torn, and to make a major part o^ whom they will at pleasure. And
therefore as the Freedom of the Parliament depends in a great part upon this
Privilege, and the Freedom of this Nation upon the Freedom of Parliaments; We
have good ^ause to believe, that the People of England, knowing that their
Lives and Fortunes are bound up in this B^ndle, will venture their Lives and
Fortunes in this Quarr^l, Accursed, and for ever exe^rated then let all those
Swordmen and Innovators be, who by any Matchiavilian Policie^, Eugines, or
Instruments whatsoev^r, shall endeavor to deprive the Parliaments and People
of England, of thi^ their ancient ess^ntial Privilege and Freedom^; or
necessitate them once again to venture their Lives or Fortunes in this quarrel,
to maintain or regain the same by a New war or insurrection, against the
Imprisoners or Secluders os any of their duly elected and best respected
public Trustees out of our Parliaments in time to come (as they have often times
done for some years bypast) ^o the subversion of Parliaments and Peoples
general affront and discontent. To prevent which danger, I could heartily wish,
that a free Legal English Parliament might be duly summoned, either by the
Peers of the Realm, or by the Freeholders, Freemen, and Burgesses of every
County, City, and Borough, in their default, a^ording to the late Act for
tri^nial Parliaments, yet in force (to which many^ in present power were
assenting) to redress all high violations of our Parliaments just Rights and
Privileges, and prevent the like for the future, reform all public Grievances,
remove all unrighteous oppressions, compose our manifold sad Divisions,
Schisms, Fractions both in Church and State, and settle our three distracted
Kingdoms in such unity, peace, prosperity, after all our destructive wars, as
all good men long, pray for, and none but Traitors, or professed Enemies to our
Tranquillity and Welfare, can or dare oppose.

15. The whole House of Commons ( m) impeached, and the Lords House judicially
sentenced Dr. Manw^ring (then a Member of the Convocation) for preaching before
the King, and publishing in print in two Sermons, entitled Religion and
Allegiance, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and propriety of
the Subject,

1. That the King is not bouud to keep and observe the good Laws and customs
of the Realm, concerning the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, who
undoubtedly inherit this Right and Liberty not to be compelled to contribute
any tax, tallage, aid, or to make any loans, not set or imposed by common
consent, by Act of Parliament: And that his Royal will and command in imposing
Loans, Taxes, and other Aids without Common consent in Parliament, does so far
bind the conscience of the Subje of this Realm, that they cannot refuse the
same without pe^il of damnation.

2. That those his Majesty's Subjects who refused the Loan imposed on them, did
therein offend against the Law of God, against his Majesty's supreme Authority:
and by so doing became guilty of impiety, disloyalty, rebellion, disobedience,
and liable to many other Taxes and censures.

3. That authority of Parliament is not necessary^ for raising of Aids and
Subsidies, That the slow proceedings of such Assemblies are not fit for the
supply of the urgent necessities of the State, but rather apt to produce sundry
Impediments to the just designs of Princes: and to give them occasion of
displeasure or discontent.

For which Sermons and positioris the Lords House adjudged, 1. That this Dr.
Manwaring (notwithstanding his humble Petitions, and craving pardon for these
offenses) shall be imprisoned during the pleasure of the House. 2. That he be
fined 1000 l. to the King. 3. That he shall make such a submission and
acknowledgement of his offenses, as shall be set down by a Commit in writing,
both at the Lords Bar and in the House of Commons (which he accordingly made.)
4. That he shall be suspended for the time of three years from the exercise of
the Ministry. 5. That he shall be for ever disabled to preach at the Court
hereafter. 6. That he shall be disabled hereafter to have any Ecclesiastical
dignity or secular Office. 7. That the same Book is worthy to be burnt, and
that for the better effecting thereof, his Majesty may be moved, to grant a
Proclamation to call in the said Books, that they may be burnt accordingly in
London, and both Universities, and for inhibiting the printing hereof upon a
great penal^y. Which was done accordingly.

Whether some late Court-Chaplaint, or Parasites have not incurred the like
offenses, and demerit not as severe a censure as he, for some Sermons, and
printed Pamphlets, Artic. 27, 28, 29.
Instrurnents of like nature; is worthy the consideration of the next public
Assembly, and future English Parliaments.

XV. The 12, 1^ May 1628.
House of Commons sent for, and committed Mr. Laughton, and Mr John Trelawny,
to the Tower, and Sir William Wray, and Mr. Edward Trelawny, to the Sergeant at
Arms, during the Houses pleasure, and ordered them to make a Recognition of
their^ offenses at the Assizes in Cornwall for interrupting the freedoms of
Elections in that Coun^y; For that some of them being Deputy Lieutenants, and
others of them Justices of Peace of the County of Co^nwal, writ Letters to this
effect. Whereas the safety of the Realm depends upon the Parliament, we the
Deputy Lieutenants and Justices to whose care the County is committed, finding
A. and B. fit persons, have desired them to stand to be Knights, whereof we
give you notice; and advising Sir John Eliot and Mr. Cariton to desist, that
they wished them not to be chosen, and menacing them in this manner, but if you
go on, we will oppose you by all means, lest his Majesty suspect our fidelity;
since you know how gracious you are to his Majesty, and how many ways he has
expressed his displeasure against yon. And his Majesty will conceive your
Election to be an affront to his service, and so we shall draw the displeasure
of the King on us Our hope is that you out of conscience and loyalty will not
seek this place; and we let you know, that if yo^ do, we will oppose you all we
can, etc. And writing Letters to others of the County to this effect. Whereas
unquiet Spirits seek their own ends, we desire men of moderation may be chosen,
and we desire you to give your Voito A. and B, etc. And for that besides these
Letters, they warned the trained Band to attend the day of the election. By
which Letters, Menaces, and Practices they were voted guilty, as practicing to
pervert the freedom of the election of the Knights of that County; and
thereupon thus censured by the House. On the 38 of 28 May 1628.
the same May 1628. Sir John Eliot reported from the Committee sundry
complaiuts against the Lord Mohun, Vice-warden of the Stanneries in Cornwall, by
the Tinners of that County, whereof this was one, That the Tinners in Cornwall,
have time out of mind used to elect a Parliament of Tinners, so often as there
is occasion,^ su^moned ^ver in this manner. The Lord Warden of the Stanneries
grants his Commission to the Vice-Warden, who thereupon directs Sommons to the
4 Majors of the 4 Divisions of the Stanneries, appointing them to elect within
every Division, 6 Tinners to be elected by the Mayor and his Corporation; and
so the parties elected are returned to serve in their Parliment. That the Lord
Mohun being Vice-Warden at Christmas then last past, sent his Warrant to the 4
Majors, commanding them to elect such and such Persons by name to be Tinners
for the Parliament. The Majors obeyed, and summoned the ^en, who met the 4 th
of January last. Upon the meeting, the Tinners questioned the lawfulness of
that Parliament. First, because there was no Commission ( from the Lord Warden,
but only a Letter) and that for a meeting only to confer. 2. For that the
Election was not free and due. VVhereupon that Parliament was dissolved as
void. Upon which the Lord Mohun the 5 of February, sent out new S^mmons to the
Majors, that they should reassemble such and such Persons as he named in his
Warrant; Who meeting together, he persuaded fourteen of them ( against the
Protestation of the other ten) to impose the sum of 500 l. upon the Tinners,
toward the maintenance of their Liberties, as he pretended; and sent forth his
Warrants to collect the Money sitting this Parliament. Which the Tinners
complained of in Parliament, as a great Grievance and impeachment of their
privilege, and freedom of their elections and Parliaments; and was so voted by
the Commons House, and the Lord Mehu^ thereupon summoned to answer the charge.
Whether the Fredom of many late Elections of Members for this Assembly in
Counties and Buroughs, has not been perverted, hindered, abolished, by like
Letters, Menaces from Whitehall, Major Generals, Captains, other Grandees; by
drawing up Troops of armed Soldiers to the places of Election to terrify the
people, enjoyning^ joining such and such persons by prescribed Lists, Letters,
and otherwise to be chosen, such and such to be opposed and not elected, as
being persons disaffected, turbulent, unquiet Spirits, etc. and other indirect
practices; (to make up a packed Court-Coventicle, to carry on private designs,
instead of a New Free state Parliment) is worthy the inquiry and censure of
those whom it most concerns; to preserve and vindicate the Free-dome of
Elections, long since established, against such practices, menaces, force and
terror, by the Statute of 3 E. 1. c. 5. which enacts * Because Elections ought
to be free, the King commanded S^ C^ks 2 ^st. (...) s p 198, 169.
upon great forfeiture, that no great Man, n^r other, by force of Arms, or by
malice or m^nacing, shall disturb any to make free Election. For violating
which Law, and ancient custom, the whole P^rliament of 1 H. 4. rot:
Parliamenti, nu: 36. thus impeached King Richard the 2. when they enforced him
to resign his Crown, for his misgovernment in this particular amongst others.
That although by the Statute and Custom of his Realm, in the Assembling of
every Parliament, h^s People in all Counties of his Realm, ought to be free, to
choose and depute Knights for the said Counties to be present in Parliament,
and to declare their Grievances, and to prosecute remedies thereupon, as it
should s^m expedient to them; Yet the said King, that he might be able in his
Parliaments more freely to obtain the effect of his rash will, frequently
directed his Mandates to his Sheriffs, to cause certain persons nominated by
the King himself, as Knights of the County, to come unto his Parliaments. Which
Knights verily favoring the King he might easily induce, as he frequently did;
sometimes by diven Menaces and tenors, and sometimes by Gifts, to consent to
those things which were prejudicial to the Realm, and very burdensome to the
People, and specially to grant to the said King a Subsidy for certain^ years,
to the over great oppression of his people. Which misdemeanour and incroachment
upon the freedom of his Subjects elections, and packing of Parliaments for
these ends, lost him not only his peoples hearts, but his very Crown, Regal
Power and life. Which others who now tread in his footsteps, and exceed him
herein, may do well, advisedly to consider, for fear of the like impeachment,
and tragical events.

In 11 R. 2. Rot. Claus. dors. 13. The King sent Writs to the Sheriffs of Ke^t,
and all other Sheriffs to summon a Parliament, with this New unusual clause, by
reason of the differences between the King and his Nobles. Eligere homines in
debatis modernis maxim indifferentes. But this being a Novelty, (contrary to
the Freedom of Elections, and the Statute of 3 E. 1. c. 5.) and contra formam
Electionis antiquitus (...), et contra libertatem Dominorum et Communitatis
regni hactenus obtentam. Ideo, therefore this clause was struck out of the
Writs, by order of Parliament ever since. And that Parliament was afterward
repealed, by the Parliament of 21 R. 2. When the Parliament of 6 H. 4. Anno
1404. was to be summoned, the King by pretext of an Ordinance of 45 E. 3. rot.
Parl. n. 13. wrote Letters to the Sheriffs and other Officers; Walsingham,
Hist. Angliae, p. 414. Sir Edw. Cooks 2 Institut. s c. 1: p. 10.
That no Lawyer should be chosen or returned a Knight or Burgess for the
Parliament, yet inserted it not into the Writ, as Walsingham and others
mistake. But the very next Parliament after, 7 H. 4. the Commons grievously
complained against the interruption of the Freedom of their Elections by these
Letters; Whereupon, to prevent the like incroachment and int^rruption for the
future, at the grievous complaint of the Commons, of the undue Election of the
Knights of the Co^ties for the Parliament, which be sometimes made at the
affections of Sheriffs and otherwise, against the form of the Writs, to the
great slauder^ of the Counties, and hinderance of the business of the
Comminalty in the said County; it was ordained and establishid 7 H^ 4. c. 11.
by a special Act yet in force; that all that attend to the Election of the
Knig^ts in the full County, shall proceed to the Election freely and
indifferently, notwithstanding any Request or Commandment to the contrary. By
virtue of which Acts and premises all late Letters to Major Generals and
Sheriffs with like or worser clauses to restrein the people in the freedom of
their Elections, must be void and illegal. In 18 H. 6. n. 18. A New Election
and Writ was awarded and sent to the Sheriff of Cambridge, with proclamation,
That none should assemble with names to the New election, nor intermeddle in it
without warrant of Law, the former election being vacated by reason of the
force and disturbance. Anno 38 H. 6. there was a Parliament summoned at
Coventry on the 2. of November, wherein diverse Knights and Burgesses were
returned by the Sheriffs, nominated only by the Kings Letters (surreptitiously
procured frrm him by diverse seditious and other evil disposed persons, to
destroy and suppress others of a contrary party) without any election by the
people: This packed Parliament ordered, That they should stand and serve as
Knights and Burgesses, though they were not elected nor duly chosen, and that
the Sheriffs should not incur the penalties of the Stacu^e of 23 H. 3. c. 11.
as appears by 38 H. 6. n. 35. and the Statute of 39 H. 6. c. 1. But what was
the issue? The very next year a new Parliament being summoned, the first Act
they made, was, to declare this Parliament, and all Acts, Statutes and
Ordinances made therein, to be null and void, and of no force and effect:
Because it was unduly summoned, a great part of the Knights sor diverse Counties
of this Realm, and many Burgesses and Citizens for diverse Boroughs and Cities
in the same Appearing, were named, returned and accepted, some of them without
due and free^ election, some of them without any election, against the course
of the Kings Laws, and the Liberties of the Commons of the Realm; by the means
and labors of the said seditious Persons, etc. As the Statute of 39 H. 3. c.
1. (worthy perusal and consideration of this next Assembly) resolves in
positive terms, though not one of those then duly elected by the people was
secluded. Which I desire all our ignorant violent Swordmen, young Statesmen,
and Instrument-makers to take Notice of, for fear all their Conventions, Acts
and proceedings prove mere Nullities in conclusion, upon this account of unfree
and undue elections, and seclusions of Members duly elected, against Law, and
the Parliaments, Peoples Rights and Privileges.

16. In this Parliament of 29. (...) 3^ M^, 1628.
3 Caroli, the Attorneys of York complained to the Commons House, that King
Charles in the second year of his reign had granted to Sir Thomas Mounson by
Patent, the sole making of all Bills, Declarations, and Informations before the
Counsel of York, and like wise the sole making of Letters Missives and Process
in that Court for 3. Lives. The Committee of Grievanc^, and after that the
whole House of Commons in the Parliament of 18 Iacobi, and after that in the
Parliament of 19 Iacobi 29 November. adjudged the like Patent as this made by
King James to John Lep^on 4 Iacobi of this Office, To be a Grievance and
Monopoly, both in the creation and execution. And the whole Committee of
Grievances, and Commons House upon the Report and full debate of this Patent to
Sir Thomas Mounson, adjudged it likewise to be a Grievance, both in the
Creation and Execution, in respect of Bills, Declarations, and Informations;
though not in respect of Letters and Process; the sole making whereof the King
might lawfully grant upon the erecting of this Court by a special Patent, but
being mixed with Bills, Declarations and Informations in the same Patent, they
adjudged the whole Patent to be a Grievance, (as they likewise resoved the Earl
of Holland his Patent of Exchange, for the sole buying of Gold and Silver, to
be a Monopoly and Grievance, both in the creation and ex^ion, June 23. 1628.)
And that principally for 3 Reasons. First, because it was a See Cooks 11.
Report, f. 84,. 85, etc.
Monopoly within the Statute of 21 Jacobi, tending to the prejudice of the
Attorneys of York in their very Profession of making Bills, Declarations and
Informations, which they anciently made; and likewise of the people, who must
dance attendance on this sole Secretary and his Clerk, til they were at leisure
to dispatch their Bills and Declarations. 2ly, Because upon the making of Bills
and Declarations men must show their evidences to this Patentee and his Clerks,
and trust them with them, as in cross Bills they must see the evidences of both
parties, which would be very mischievous and prejudicial to the Clients. 3ly,
Because this would erect a New fee, and bring a New charge upon the people:
Which fee Lepton took for the execution of his Patent, though Mounson had not
yet taken any New fee. And whether the old Court project (which I formerly
twice quashed) now about to be revived, as I hear, of erecting Registers in
every County, to record all Morgages, Feoffments, L^ases, Sales of Lands,
Statutes, Fines and Obligations made therein, to prevent fraudulent
conveyances, and other mischiefs, as the Projectors pretended; but in truth to
put a new charge, (...), and intolerable vexation upon all sorts of people, to
their intolerable prejudice, and vast expense os many thousand pounds a year
for fees, and traveling charges, which these Projectors only aim at for their
private Lucre, and to discover all men's real and personal Estates (as King
Richard the first, and his Successors did the English Jews estates and wealth,
by the self same device, and then seized and confiscated them at their
pleasures; as you may read at large in the First and Second part of my S^ort
(...) to the I^ws long discontinued bar^d Remitter into^ Englaud,) will not
prove a greater Grieviance than this Patent, for the self same reasons, and
sundry others. Whether the Committee for sole approbation of Ministers to
livings, who must all post up to London, and there dance attendance sundry
weeks or Months to their vast expense; and ost times return at last with^t
their expected preferments, without any sufficient cause alleged either to
their Patrons or themselves, being held fit for other livings, but not for
those to which they are presented especially if benefices of good value or
note, to which some of the Approvers their Friends or kindred have an eye). And
the New fees there paid to their Clark and Register for approbations and
admissions, be not as great a Grievance ^ See my humble Remon^ance against
ship-mon^y. p. 8.
and Monopoly, as this of Lepton and Mounson, fit to be redressed; I refer to
the approaching As^emblie, and others to resolve, upon full debate, and sundry
complaints I have heard made by diverse against their Proceedings, and New
erected Fees; Which cannot be created but by act of Parliament, as is resolved
13 H. 4. 14 Brook Patents 100. Fi^zh. Not. Brev. f. 122. Cook 11 Report.
Darcies Case sol. 86. b.

17. They appointed a 24 and 28 (...). 2 and ^il. 19. (...), etc. 1628.
special Committee to hear, examine, report, punish the manifold complaints of
the ^ounties, and Corporations of England, against the New exorbitant power and
proceedings of L^enants and Depu^y-Lieutenant, in quartering Soldiers in men's
Houses against their wills, in imposing rates and taxes on the Country without
Act of Parliament for the payment and bi^ing of Soldiers, and levying them by
Soldiers on such as resused to pay them, by quartering Soldiers upon them
till paid, or imprisoning, or v^xing the Refusers. For which these Lieutenants,
DeputyLieutenants, and Officers of the Soldiers were sent for as Delinquents,
and their New power and proceedings voted to be contrary to Law, and the
Subjects Liberties, P^icious to the Country, and dishonorable to the^ King. And
whether the late erected New Powers of our Major Generals, and their Deputies
throughout England be not such (in imita^on of Hovenden Ann^: pa^s post^ p 700
(...) 736. (...) Hist. l. 4. c. 14 to 19. God^n in his life p. 247 to 271. My
new Discov^y of (...) Tyranny p. 77. etc.
Will. Longcham) the first Protector in the Reign of Richard the first, who
placed in every County armed Troops of Mercinary Soldiers, under New Governors
of his own Creatures, to overawe and enslave the People, and impose what Taxes
and exactions he pleased, under pretext of preserving the public Peace, and
suppressing thieves and Tumults, yet was sham^lly stripped of all his Authority,
and forced to fly over Sea, disguised in women's apparel, within one year
after, not withstanding all his Guards, or Gar^isons; or of the Sec Tur^, (...)
(...) and (...) (...). 1634.
Turkish (...), and Beglerbegs, as most Patriots of their Countries Freedom,
and the ordinary people mutter) and their exorbitant Tyrannical proceedings in
apprehending, taxing, decimating, dis-officing, dis-franchising, and
sequeltring all sorts of men in Counties and Corporations at their pleasure; in
controuling all Officers and Ministers of Justice; in intermedling with all
mensutes and causes upon any informations, or Petitions, after Judgments,
Verdicts, Decrees, and whiles pending or ended in any Courts of Law or equity;
in summoning the parties to appear, before them, and committing, menacing them
for not appearing; in usurping all the Civil as well as Military Power and
Jurisdiction into their own hands; in levying illegal Taxes by Soldiers, and
quartering them upon Refusers, (adjudged High Treason in Straffords Case, for
which he lost his Head) sequestring Ministers at their pleasures, and taking
upon them to nominate all Iurymen, and New Parliament men to the Sheriff, as
some of them have done, and commit men to Prison upon civil causes or suits; I
leave to all such who have taken the Protestation, the solemn League and
Covenant, to all Lovers, Patrons of English Liberties, and Declamers, Engagers
against arbitrary Tyranny, yea to^ the Consciences of all those army Officers,
Sculdiers, and Major Generals themselves to resolve, who were penners,
subscribers, approvers, applauders of, or assenters to the printed Engagements,
Remonstrances, Representations, Proposals, Desires, Letters, and Resolutions
for s^ling this Nation in its just Rights, the Parliament in their just
Privileges, and the Subjects n their just Liberties and Freedoms, published in
the name of the General and general Council of the Army, and of all officers
and Soldiers of the Army, in one Volume, London 1647. Which how sincerely they
have since (for the most part of them) performed, let God, their own
consciences, and our whole Nation determine. To expiate which former guilt, let
them now at last upon second and sober thoughts, effectually make them all
good, to avoid the perpetual infamy of the most detestable Perjury, Treachery,
Hypocrisy, Fraud, Impiety, Apostasy, Tyranny, (...) that ever any Christian
Saint-like Army and Officers were guilty of in the eyes of God or men, which
else they will incur: and for the present settlement of our three Nations, in
their L^berty, Peace, and Christian Unity, without more effusion of English,
Scottish, or Irish blood, to regain those just fundamental old Rights,
Liberlies, Privileges, Freedoms, Laws, for which they first took up Arms (in
reality or pretense at least) against the beheaded King, transmitted to them by
their Ancestors, and their richest Birthright, and best Inheritance, as
therefore most unfit to be all betrayed, surrendered, lost, subverted now,
without any further dispute, after so many years conflicts for their
preservation.

I shall close up all with this memorable Petition of the whole House of
Commons to the late King, by the Speaker and Whole House at Whit^all
(concerning the intolerable Grievance of billetting and keeping of Souldiers^
amongst them, but for a few months only) in that Parliament of 3 Caroli, April
24. 1628. which the King then granted, and provided against for the future. in
the P^ition of Right (though since condemned See the Decl^ation of Much 17. 16.
3. with the sentence against him.
as the worst and greatest of Tyrants by some, who succeeed him at Whitehall)
And therefore is much more just and reasonable to be granted by them now, for
the Peoples case, after so many years of incessant Contributions, quartering
and continuing of armed Mercinary Soldiers amongst them, Winter and Summer,
without any actual employment for them, but to ter^ifie, seize, imprison,
Guard, oppress, enthrall, impoverish, di^-inherit of all hereditary Liberties,
rights, privileges, our English Freemen at their pleasures, and to overawe,
force, dissolve, even Parli^ments themselves, and secure, seclude their
Members, for whose Protection they were first raised; When as the Parliament
of 5 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 1. was adjorned for 3 days space, because great force
of armed men, and others arrayed in Warlike mann^r, came to the Parliament, by
reason of the great debate between the Duke of Lancaster and the Earl of
Northumberland. And the Parliament of 11 R. 2. and 21 R. 2. were both repealed,
because they were held with many armed men, and Archers, who overawed,
enforced them to consent to bills against their wills: as the printed Statute
of 21 R. 2. c. 12. and 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 20, 21, 22, 38, 70. a^ large
inform us; so inconsistent are force and arms with the freedom and essence of
a true English Parliament; as the armies Confederates in their own Ordinance of
20 August 1647. the Speakers own printed Letter July 29. 1647. with the Solemn
Protestation of the prisoned and secluded Members, December 11, and Febr. 13.
1648. will further resolve the Nation, and Soldiers, against whose billetting,
and scatering abroad in companies here and there, in the heart and bowels of
the Kingdom, to inthrall and oppresse^ it, the whole Commons House then thu^
petitioned.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty:
IN all humbleness complaining, shows unto your m^st Excellent Majesty, your
loyal and dutiful C^mons now in Parliament Assembled. That (...) as, by the
Fundamental Laws of this your Realm, ver^ Freeman has, and of Right ought to
have, a full and absolute propriety in his goods and estate, and that therefore
the billetting or placing of Soldiers in the House of any such Freeman against
his Will, is directly contrary to the Laws under which we and our Ancestors
have been so long and happily. Governed. Yet, in apparent violation of the said
ancient and undoubtted Rights of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects of this your
Kingdom in General, and to the grievous and insupportable vexation and
detriment of many Counties and persons in par^icular, A new and almost unheard
^f way has been invented and put in practice to l^y Soldiers upon them,
scattered in companies here and there, even in the heart and bowels of this
Kingdom, and to compel many of your Majesty's Subjects to receive, and lodge
them in their own Houses, and both themselves and others to contribute toward
the maintenance ^f them; to the exceeding great disservice of you Majesty, the
general terror of all, and utter undoing of many of your good people. In so
much (...) we cannot su^iciently recount; nor in any sort proportionably to the
sense we have of ou^ present misery, herein are we able to represent to your
Majesty, the innumerable mischi^fs and most grievous exactions, that by this
means alone we do now suffer; whereof we will not p^sume to trouble your sacred
Ears, with particular inform^tion. Only most gracious Sovereign, we beg leave
to offer unto your gracious view,^ and (...) consideration, a few of them in
general.

1. The service of Almighty God is hereby greatly ly hindered, the And now in
more places the Soldiers have wholly withdrawu them both from our Churches and
Ministers. See Mr. Edwards Gangr^na.
people in many places not daring to repair to their Churches, lest in the mean
time the Soldiers should rifle their Houses.

2. The ancient good Government of the Country is thereby neglected, and almost
contemned.

3. Your Officers of Justice in performance of their Duties have been resisted
and endangered.

4. The Rents and Revenues of your Gentry are greatly and And are they not much
more so now?
generally diminished; Farmers to secure themselves from the Soldiers
insolence, being by the clamor and solicitation of their fearful and
endangered Wives, and Children, enforced to give up their ancient dwellings,
and to retire themselves into place^ of more secure habitation.

5. Husbandmen, that are as it were the hands of the Country, corrupted by ill
example of Soldiers, are Are they not now so more than ever?
encouraged to idle life, give over their work, and seek rather to live idly
on other men's charges, than by their own labors.

6. Tradesmen and Artificers almost discouraged, being enforced to leave their
Trades, and to employ their times in preserving their families from violence
and cruelty.

7. Markets unfrequented, and our ways grown so dangerous, that your people
dare not pass to and fro upon their usual occasions.

8. Frequent Robberies, Assaults, Burglaries, Rapes, Rapines, murders,
barbarou^ cruelties, and other late most abominable vices, and outrages, are
generally complained of from all parts where these companies have been and made
their abode; few of which insolences have not been so much as questioned, and
fewer, according to their demerit, punished.

These, and many other lamentable effects (most dear and dread Sovereign) have,
by this billetting of Soldiers, already fallen upon your loyal Subjects,
tending no less to the dis-service of your Majesty, than t^ their own
impoverishing, and distraction. So that thereby they are exceedingly disabled
to yield your Majesty those supplies for your urgent occasions which they
heartily desire. And yet they are more p^rplexed with the apprehensi^ns of more
approaching dangers. One in regard of the Subjects at home; the other, of
Enemies abroad. In both which respects, it seems to threaten no small calamity.

For the first, the meaner sort of your People being exceeding poor, whereof in
many places are great multitudes, and therefore in times most se^led, and most
constant administration of Justice, not easily ruled, are most a^t upon this
occasion to cast off the reigns of Government, and by themselves, with those
disordered Soldiers, are very like to ^all into mutiny and rebellion. Which in
faithful discharge of our Duties we cannot forbear most humbly to present unto
your high and excellent Wisdom, being possessed with probable fears, that some
such mischie^s will shortly ensue, if an effectual and speedy course be not
taken to remove them out of the Land, or otherwise to disband those unruly
Companies.

For the second, we do humbly bese^ch your Majesty to take into your Princely
consideration, that many of those Companies, besides their dissolute
dispositions and carriages, are such as profess themselves Are not many
Soldiers now secretly such, and openly Anabaptists, (...), S^ctaries, revilers
of our Church, Ministers? And are not some of their Commanders likewise such?
Papists; And therefore to be suspected, that if occasion serve, they will
rather adhere to a foreign Enemy, (if of that Religion) than to your Majesty
their Liege Lord, and Sovereign: espe^ially some of their Commanders and
Captains, being as Papistically affected as themselves, and having served in
the wars on the part of the King of Spain or Arch. Duchess against your
Majesty's Allies;^ Which, of what pernicious consequence it may prove, and how
prejudicial to the safety of all your Kingdom, We humbly leave to your
Maj^sties high and Princely Wisdom.

And now upon these and many more which might ^e alleged, most weighty and
important reasons, grounded upon the maintenance of the worship and service of
Almighty God, the continua^ of your Majesty's high H^nor and profit, the
preservation of the ancient and undoubted Liberties of your people, and therein
of justice, industry, and valor, which concerns the glory and happiness of
your Majesty, all your Subjects, and the preven^ng of imminent Calamity, and
ruin both of Church and Commonwealth; We your most humble and loyal Subjects,
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, in the name of
all the Commonalty of your kingdom, who are on this occasion most miserable,
disconsolate, and afflicted, prostrate at the Throne of your Grace and Justice,
do most humbly and ardently beg for the present removal of this unsupportable
Burden, and that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to secure us from
the like pressure in time to come. Which King Charles then did by the Petition
of Right, which I shall here insert; because almost quite forgotten by most men
like an old Almanac out of date, especially by our Grandees.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
HUmbly shows, unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled; That whereas it is
declared and enacted, by a Statute made in the time of King Edward the I.
commonly called (...) de Tallagio non concedendo; That no Tallage or ^id shall
be taken or levied by the King or his (...) in this Realm, without the good
will or assent of th^^ Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses,
and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of this Realm. And by an Authority of
Parliament holden the 25 year of the reign of King Edward the 3d. it is
declared and enacted; That from thenceforth, no person should be compelled to
make any loans to the King against his will, because such Loans were against
reason, and the Franchises of the Land. And by other Laws of this Realm it is
provided; That none shall be charged by any Charge or Composition, called a
Benevolence, nor by any such like Charge. By which Statutes before mentioned,
and other the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, your Subjects have
inherited this freedom: That they should not be compelled to contribute any
Tax, Tallage, or Aid, or other like Charge, not set by common Assent by Act of
Parliament. Yet nevertheless of late diverse Commissions (directed to sundry
persons in several Counties, with their instructions) have issued, by pretext
whereof your people have been in diverse places assembled, and required to lend
certain sums of money to your Majesty. And many of them upon their refusal so to
do, have had an Oath not warranted by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm
administered unto them; and h^ve been constrained to become bound to make
appearance, and to give attendance before your Privy Counsel at London, and in
other places: and others of them have been therefore imp^isoned, confined, and
certain otherways molested and disquieted; And diverse other charges have been
laid and levied upon your people in several Counties, by Lord Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of Peace, and others,
by command or direction from your Majesty, or your Privy Counsel, against the
Laws and free Customs of the Realm.

And whereas also by the Statute called the Great Charter of the Liberties of
England, it is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties, or free Customs,^ or
be out lawed, or exiled, or in any manner d^stroyed, nor passed upon, nor
condemned, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the
Land. And in the 28 year of King Edward the 3. it was enacted and declared by
an Authority of Parliament, that no man of what State or condition soever,
shall be put out of his Lands or Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoued, nor
disinherited, nor put to death, without being brought to answer by due process
of Law. Nevertheless against the Tenor of the said Statutes, and other the
good Laws and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided; diverse of your
Subjects have of late been imprisoned without any cause showed: and when for
their deliverance they were brought before your Justices, by your Majesty's
writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should order;
and the Keepers commanded to certify the causes of their deteiner; no cause
was certified but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the L^rds of your Privy Council: And yet were returned back to
several Prisons without being charged with any thing, towhich they might make
answer according to Law.

And whereas of late great companies of Soldiers and Mariners have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the Inhabitants against their
Wills have been compelled to receive them into their Houses, and there to
suffer them to (...), against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, to the great
Grievance and Vexation of the people. And whereas also by authority of
Parliament, in the 25 year of King Edward the third, it was declared and
enacted: That (...) man should ^e forejudged of life or limbs against the form
of the Great Charer: And by other the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, No man
ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws established in this your Realm,
either by the Customs of the same Realm, or by Act of Parliament. And whereas
no Offender of what kind soever is exempted from the proceedings to to be used,
and punishments to be infflicted by the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.
Nevertheless of late time, diverse Commissions under your Majesty's Great Seal
have issued forth, by which certain Persons have been assigned and appointed
Commissioners, with Power and Authority to proceed within the Land, according
to the custom of Martial Law, against such Soldiers or Seamen, or other
dissolute Persons, joining with them, as should commit any Murder, Robbery,
Felony, Mutiny, or other Outrage or misdemeanour whatsoever; and by such
Summary Caurse and Orders as is agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used in
A^mies in tim^ of Wars, to proceed to the Trials and condemna^ion of such
Offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death, according to the
Law Martial. By pretext whereof, some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by
some of your Majesty's Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the
Laws and Statutes of the Land, they had deserved death, by the (...) Laws and
Statutes also they might, and by no other ought to be judged and executed. And
also sundry grievous Offenders by color thereof, claiming an exemption, have
escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that d^vers of your Officers and Ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused or forborne to proceed against such Offenders according to the
same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense, that the said Offenders were punishable
only by Martial Law, and by Authority of such Commissions as aforesaid. Which
Commissions, and all other of like nature, extended to any except Soldiers, or
Mariners, or to be executed in time of Peace, or when or where, your Majesty's
Army is not on foot, are wholly and directly contrary to the said Laws and
Statutes of this your Real^.

They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent Majesty, that none hereafter
be compelled to make or yield any gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or such like
charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament: And that none be called to
make auswer, or take such Oath, ^r to give attendance, or be confined or other
wise molested or disqu^eted concerning the same, or for refusal thereof; And
that no Freeman in any such manner as is before mentioned, be imprisoned or
detained; And that your Majesty would be pleased to remove the said Soldiers,
and Mariners, and that your People may not be so burdened in time to to come;
And that the aforesaid Commission for proceeding by Martial Law may be revoked,
and anulled; And that hereafter no Commission of like nature may issue forth to
any Person or Persons whatsoever, to be executed as aforesaid; lest by color
of them any of your Majesty's Subjects be destroyed or put to death, contrary
to the Laws and franchises of the Land.

All which, they humbly pray of your most excellent Majesty as their Rights of
Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; And that your
Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, that the awards, doings, and
proceedings to the prejudice of your People in any of the premises, shall not
be drawn hereafter in consequence, or example; And that yonr Majesty would also
be gracionsly pleased for the futher comfort, and safety of your People, to
declare your Royal Will and pleasure, That in the things aforesaid, all your
Officers and Ministers shall serve you, according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Re^lm, as they tender the honor of your Majesty, and the Prosperity of
this Kingdom.

To which Petition King Charles at last gave this full and satisfactory Answer:
Soit droit ^ait come il est desire par le Petition: that is, Let All Right be
done as it is desired by the Petition. To the unspeka^ble joy of this
Parliament and all his Subjects. Adding withal thereunto: I assure you my
Maxim is, That the Peoples Liberties strengthen the Kings Prerogative: and that
the Kings Prerogative is to defend the Peoples Liberties.

The benefit of which most excellent Law, (...), and of all the precedent
Parliamentary Votes, Laws (with the present repealing, and vacating all Acts,
Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Declarations, Resolutions, Judgments, Instruments
repugnant thereunto, as merely void in Law, by the express Statutes of 25 E. 1.
c. 2. 42 E. 3. c. 3. and the Petition of Right) we all now jointly and
severally claim as our undoubted Birthrights, and as the Price, Crown, Trophy,
Guerdon of all our late Parliamentary Counsels, expended Treasures, Bloudsheds,
Wars, Victories, over the real or pretended Enemies of these our just
Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws, and Introducers of an Arbitrary, and
Tyrannical Government repugnant thereunto (wherein many thousands of the
Nobility, Gentry and Commons of the realm of chiefest rank hazarded their
estates, blood, lives in the field, as well as the Army Officers, to preserve
and enjoy the forementioned fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights and Properties)
which we hope no true-bred English Freeman or Swor^man whatsoever can have the
hearts or faces to deny unto us, against all their former Protestations,
Remonstrances, Vows, Oaths, Covenants, Engagements, both to God and the English
Nation, for fear of being made shorter by the head, as the most perfidious
Traitors, or rolled into their graves in blood by the over-oppressed^ enraged
people, as the most insolent oppressing Tyrants, yea tumbled headlong into Hell
flames for all eternity Soul and Body, by God himself, as the most perjured
execrable Hypocrites and Impost^rs that ever England bred.

Gal. 5. 1, 13, 14, 15. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of Bondage. For
Brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty: only use not Liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of
another.

An Appendix to the Premises
IT has been the ancient Pl^t, and long agitated design of Robert Parsons, and
other Jesuits and their Instruments, under pretext of reforming the Common
Laws and Statutes of England, to alter, subvert abolish the Great Charter,
Common fundamental Laws of the Land, and principles of Government, whereon the
Justice of the Kingdom, and Liberty and Property of the Subjects are
established; as I have irrefragably proved at large, by R^bert Parsons his
Memorial for Reformation of England, written at Sevil in Spain, An. 1590. by
William Watson (a seminary Priest) his Quodlibets, printed 1601. p. 92, 94, 95,
286, 330, 332. A Dialogue between a secular Priest and a Lay-Gentleman, printed
at Rhemes 1601. p. 95. William Clark ( a Roman Priest) his Answer to the
manifestation of Father Parsons, p. 74, 75. Robert Parsons own manifestation of
the folly, and bad spirit of certain in England, calling themselves Secular
Priests, f. 55. to 63. Mr. Thomas Smith his Preface to Mr. John Daillae, his
Apology for the Reformed Churches: Cambridge, 1653. p. 12, 13, etc. The
Declaration of the whole House of Commons, 15. December. 1641. Exact. Collection,
p. 3, 4. Ludovicus Lucius, Historia (...), p. 318, 319, 535. and other
Evidences in my Epistle to A seasonable, Legal, and Hist^rical^ Vindication of
the good old fundamental Liberties, Rights, Laws of all English Freemen; and to
A New Discovery of Free State Tyranny, to which for Brevity I refer the Reader.
That it has been the Soldiers and Anabaptists design, endeavor, to put this
their Iesuitical Plot against our Laws in execution, under pretext of reforming
the corruptions in the Law, and Lawyers, by the Tutorship of the disguised
Jesuits (swarming amongst us, and having a Consistory and Council abroad, that
Rules all the affairs of the things of England; as their own General, O.
Cromwell himself avers in positive terms to all our three Nations, and the
world, in his printed Speech in the painted Chamber, September 4. 1654. p. 16,
17.) I have there likewise demonstrated, and is so experimentally visible to
all men by their frequent Consultations, Committees, Treatises, Discourses,
Votes, and Instruments set on work, to regulate our Laws, that it needs do
further proof.

The excellently connatural^ess, convenience of the Laws of England to
Englishmens tempers, is so fully expressed, demonstrated by Fortescue, in his
Book De laudibus Legum Angliae, Glanvill, Britton, and others of ancient, and
by Sir John Davies in his Epistle to his Irish Reports, Sir Edward Cook in his
Epistles to his Reports, Institutes, with others of later times: by the very
New Modellers of our old hereditary Kingdom, into a puny Free State, in their
Remonstrance of March 17. 1648. and by Mr. John Pym, and Mr. Oliver Saint-John,
in their late Parliamentary Speeches, printed by the Commons House special
Orders; that I shall not spend waste-paper to commend them, being the most
excellent Laws of all others in the world, as they all unanimously resolve. I
shall only add to their Encomiums of them: That the extraordinary care,
diligence of our Ancestors, and all our Parliamentary Councels in former ages,
to maintain,^ preserve, defend and transmit to posterity those good old Laws we
now do or should enjoy, with the last long Parliaments impeaching, beheading
Strafford and Canterbury for Arch-traytors for endeavoring to subvert them
with their innovations on the one side, and the late King and his Partisans on
the other side, in above In the Coll^ctions of (...), printed by both Houses
orders.
500 printed Declarations, Orders, Ordinances, Proclamations, Remonstrances;
that the principal end of all their consultations, arms, wars, taxes,
Impositions, expenses of infinite Treasure and Blood, in all the unhappy
contests against each other; was inviolably to defend, maintain our Laws and
the Subjects Liberties, secured by them as their best Patrimony, Birthright,
and Inheritance; the inserting thereof into all their Generals and Military
Officers Commissions, and all Ordinances, to raise moneys for the Armies pay;
is an unswerable evidence of their transcendent excellency, utilility,
preciousnesse, value, esteem, in the eyes of our Parliament and whole Nation:
And a convincing Discovery of the Iesuitical Infatuation, folly, frenzy,
treachery of those Swordmen and their Confederates, who now revile, traduce,
and endeavor all they may, to reform, alter, subvert those very Laws, and
Liberties which they were purposely commissioned, waged, engaged inviolably to
defend, both by the Parliament, and People, and for which end they formerly
professed, declared in many printed Printed 1647.
Romonstrances of their own, they fought and hazarded their lives in the field;
yet now would conquer, and trample under feet, as if they had only fought
against them and our hereditary L^berties confirmed by them.

I must confess, there are some few Grievances, Abuses, not in the Theory, but
Practice of our Laws (introduced by dishonest Attorneys and Sollicitors for the
most part) fit to be redressed by the Judges of the Law, (as some of them have
been upon complaint)^ which I my self had many years since reformed (as I told
M^. Shepherd upon his fore mentioned motion to me) had not those Army-men
violently pulled me with other Members out of the (...); and interrupted the
settlement, peace, liberty, ease from taxes, excise^, and good Government of
the Kingdom, by a happy close with the late King, upon more safe and
honorable terms of Freedom and happiness to the whole Nation and our
Parliaments, than ever we can hope for from our New Governors or Swordmen; to
usurp the Sovereign Power of King and Parliament into their own hands, and
perpetuate our Wars, Taxes, Excises, Armies, and Military Government upon us,
from generation to generation, as experience now manifests beyond
contradiction, not for the peoples safety, ease, wealth, tranquillity, as they
then pretended: which people though they then cried up, January 1648.
voted for the only Supreme Authority; their free elections for the only Basis
of all lawful Magistracy, Power, in and over the Nation, and their safity as
the Supreme Law; yet now they imperiously trample upon as their conquered
slaves, and both by their public speeches, actions, proclaim to all the world,
They now no more value the than they do the very Acornt of the Swine, or dust
of their feet, no further than they are subservient to their own aspiring
designs, and selfish ends.

For those few remaining Abuses in our Laws execution yet unredressed by former
Laws, as they no ways concern the army, or Army Officers as Soldiers, being
out of their calling, Commission, and fit only for Judges, or Parliaments in
their defaults, to redress: So they concern not the generality of the People
(many thousands of them having no suit at Law in all their lives, and the most
of them very rarely) but for the most part only some Litigious, contentious
persons, who out of their pride and animosity, occasion these abuses, and
prolongations of suits in Law, which they^ and others complain against, and
therefore are justly punished and rewarded by them; the expensivenesse and
^ediousnesse of their Law suits, being the best means to correct, cure their
contentious malicious spirits: other suits between peaceable persons being soon
determined without any great expense, or length of time, if diligently
prosecuted by honest Lawyers, Attorneys, and Sollicitors.

But the Grievances these Martial Reformers of our Laws have introduced, under
pretext of reforming some petty Abuses in the practice of the Law and Lawyers,
are of a far more grievous, general, and transcendent nature, subverting the
very F^damental Laws and Liberties of the whole Nation; and burthening them
with two or three Millions of extraordinary Taxes, Expenses every year, whereas
all the abuses in the Law if rectified, amount not to above 5 or 6 thousand
pounds a year at the most, and those voluntarily expended by litigious persons,
not exacted from, or imposed upon any against their Wills, as Taxes, Excises,
Imposts, Tunnage and Poundage now are by the Soldiers, without Act of
Parliament against our Laws. Which if redressed by the Swordmen now, is not ou^
of any affection toward, or design to ease the People, but out of spleen to
the Profession and Professors of the Law, and to increase the Peoples monthly
Taxes to the Soldiers, and maintenance of their new war, to tenfold the value
every year at least, to what they now expend in Law-sutes by reason of these
abuses they would now redress; which will be nothing so grievous, expensive to
the People, as those alterations they intend to make in our Laws and legal
conveyances, which will but multiply Suits, and draw all men's estates into
future seque ^ration in few years space.

There are four thing; specially provided for by our (...) Laws, and the
original constitution of^ our Government, which principally concern all the
Freemen of England in General, above all things else.

1. The Privileges and Fredome of their Parliaments and their Members. 2. The
safety and liberty of their Persons. 3. The propriety of their Estates. 4. The
Free course of Common Law, Right, Juslice.
All which our Army Reformers have lately violated in the highest degree,
beyond the Presidents of the worst of former ages, against all Laws of God and
the Land, their own Commissions, Trusts, Declarations, Pro^estations, Vows,
Leagues, Covenants, Engagements, without any color of lawful Authority; to the
whole Nations intolerable Grievance, Injury, Oppression, Impoverishing,
enslaving, and yet would be reputed the only just, upright, faithful,
righteous, conscientious Protectors, Reformers of our Laws, Grievances,
government, and Gods most precious Saints; and all others mee^ Malignants or
Disaffected persons to Liberty and Reformation, who oppose or dislike their
proceedings, secluding them out of their New Parliaments as such, when elected
most freely by the People.

1. For the Privileges, Freedom of Parliaments, and their Members, formerly
held most sacred and inviolable, See the Epistle and ^ppendix to my Speech in
Parliament, and the History of Ind^pendency.
They have in their own and the Armies name, impeached, imprisoned, suspended
from sitting, many Members of both Houses; marched up professedly against them;
contrary to their Trusts, Commands, and the express Statutes of 5 R. 2. c. 4.
5 H. 4. c. 6. 8 H. 6. c. 1. 4 H. 8. c. 8. forced them to retract their own
Orders, Votes, Ordinances; eject, imprison their own Members, and Vote what
they prescribed them. Since which they imprisoned, close imprisoned my self,
wlth sundry other Members, in remote Castles, sundry years, without any cause,
hearing, or recompence^ for this transcendent injustice; And not content
herewith, they contrary to both Houses Votes seized, impeached, abused,
condemned, beheaded the late King, Cook 4 (...). c. 1. and modus (...) Parliam.
The head of the Parliament; suppressed, abolished the whole House of Lords,
the antientest, chiefest Members of it; secured, secluded the greatest part of
the Commons House; and forcibly dissolved the Parliament it self by the Sword,
without any writ, contrary to an express act of Parliament. And how they have
disturbed, secluded, abused, dissipated, dishoused their own mock-Parliament,
and their Members even in the like manner; How they and their new Instruments
have New-modelled that they now call our Parliaments; how they have deprived
many ancient Buroughs, Cities, of their right of electing Burgesses, or of so
many Burgesses as they ought, contrary to their Charters, and the express
Statutes of 5 R. 2. c. 4. 1 H 5. c. 1. 32 H. 6. c. 15. 9 H. 8. c. 18; disabled
many thousands of their Votes in Elections, who have Voices, and enabled others
to be Electors who have no Votes by our Laws; incorporated Scottish, and Irish
Knights, Burgesses as Members into their late Parliaments, and interrupted the
Freedom of Elections, by Letters, Menaces, armed Troops, Soldiers, and other
indirect means, against the Statute of 3 E. 1. c. 5. the great Charter, and
Constitutions, Laws, Rights, Privileges of our Parliaments; (to make what
Persons and Number of their own creatures they please, a pretended Parliament,
to bind our three Nations (by color of a void, illegal Instrument, made
suddenly by a few Privadoes of their own in a corner; having no more legal force
to bind our three Nations or Parliaments, than a Fiddle-string, or the new
Cords wherewith the uncircumcised Philistines by their treacherous Dalilah
bound Sampson of old; which he brake from off his arms like a thread, Judge. 16.
12.) All which is so well known to themselves, and others, that I shall not
insist any further^ thereon. And are not all and every of these far greater
abuses, and of more general important concernment to the whole Nation, than any
they would now reform, or declaim against in our Laws, or Lawyers? fit now to
be redressed? being adjudged no less than High Treason in others; not only by
the Sea the (...) to my Speech in Parliament, p. 15, 16.
Parliaments of 4 E. 3. n. 1. 21 R. 2. cap. 12. 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 21, 22.
31 H. 6. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 1, 2. and in Chaloners and Tomkins case June 14. 1647.
in the last Parliament of King Charles, A Collection of Ordinances, p. 200. to
206. but likewise by the Army Officers Their Remonstra^ce and Re^resentation,
Aug. 2. and 18. ^ and 7 (...). 1647. Their Charge, June 14. 1647.
themselves; yea the very groundwork of all the uncapabilities, penalties,
sequestrations, decimations, forseitures, they have imposed on others for
levying war, and adhering unto the late King against the Parliament; which
they but mediately and indirectly opposed and warred against, but themselves
immediately, actually directly warred upon, seized, secured, dissolved,
destroyed, against their Trusts, Commissions to defend both the Parliament and
the Members of it from force and violence: and therefore are the Their (...) of
(...), art. 14. 16.
far greater Delinquents, and incapable to give any voice to elect any Members,
or to be elected or sit in the three next Parliaments, by their own
self-condem^ing Censures, Declarations, Article 14. 16.
New instruments, and Verdicts passed against others; and by St Paul's own
Verdict, Romans 2^ 1, 2, 3. are inexcusable, and shall not escape the judgment
of God: though they escape the sentence of all humane Tribunals, for their
offenses of this nature.

2. For the safety and liberty of their Persons, these Army-Reformers have
contrary to the Great Charter, all other F^ndamental Laws, Statutes, the
Petition of Right it self, and premised Votes in the Parliament of 3 Carol^, in
New-created Military Courts of Justice, impeached, condemned, executed not only
the late King and sundry Nobles, but likewise^ Knights, Gentlemen, and other
Freemen of all ran^ks, callings, without any lawful Indictment or Trial by
their Peers, for offenses not capital by our known Laws; Forcibly apprehended
by armed Troopers, the Persons of Parliament Men, Noblemen, and others of all
sorts; imprisoned, close-imprisoned them in remote Castles, under armed Guards,
and translated them from one Castle to another, and my self amongst others,
without any legal examination, accusation, hearing, or cause expressed;
banished some, and imprisoned others, (yea some of their own MilitaryOfficers,
and greatest Friends) in those foreign I^les, Castles, (whither the Prelates and
Old Council Table Lords, banished me and my fellow-brethren heretofore) without
any legal Sentence; imprisoned, close imprisoned thousands at a time upon
sudden carnal fears and jealousies (unbeseeming Saints, Christians, or men
professing so much faith, confidence in God, and such signal ownings both of
their Persons and present Powers by God himself, as they have done in public
or private from time to time, and having an whole Army to guard them) and
dragging them out of their Houses, beds, in the night by Soldiers, and
shutting them up in inconvenient places; banished multitudes from time to time,
from London and other parts, for sundry months together; confined others to
certain pl^ces; impressed thousands for Land and Sea-services, and foreign
employment (as well Apprentices as others) against their wills, and carried
them away perforce to, and others from foreign Plantations, to the Indies, where
they have lost their limbs, lives, to the ruin of their families and Masters.
Degraded all our Nobles without any lawful cause or hearing, of all their
personal, hereditary Powers, Trusts, Commands: Disfranchised, disofficed
Judges, Justices, Recorders, Majors, Aldermen, Common Council- men, Freemen,
Servants, and many such very lately even by Major Generals, and their Deputies
at their pleasures, taking far more Authority upon them now in all places in
this and other kinds, than ever any Kings of England did, in late or former
ages. And that which transcends all Presidents, imprisoning Lawyers themselves,
as grand Traitors, and Delinquents in the Tower of London, only for arguing
their Clients Cases, according to their Oaths, Duties, in defense of their
Common Fundamental personal Liberty and property, when illegally committed for
refusing to pay unjust Excises and Imposts, without Act of Parliament, in the
la^e case of Mr. Cony, and threatening to imprison others for prosecuting
lawful suits: when as the late King they beheaded for a Tyrant, freely
permitted my self, and other Lawyers, to argue the cases of Knighthood, Loans,
Shipmony, Imposts, Tonnage and Poundage, which so ^uch concerned him, without
imprisonment or restraint. And are not these, with the denying Habeas Corporaes
to some, stoping the returning, or benefit of them when returned, to others,
far greater Grievances, Abuses (which concern every Subject alike, and strike
at the Foundation of all our Liberties) than any these Swordmen dislike or
declame against in our Laws or Lawyers? fit now to be redressed. If any private
person injure any Freeman in any of these kinds forementioned, he may be
remedied and recover damages by an Action of the Case, Trespass, or false
Imprisonment; but being thus injured by our New Whitehall Grandecs, Swordmen,
Soldiers, Committees, Excisemen, Major-Generals, their Deputies, or Deputy
Deputies, who all imprison, dissranchise, oppress men at their pleasures,
(which Fo^ue c. 8. 1 H. 7. 46. 16 H. 6. Fitz. Mons^n. d' Faits 182.
none of our Kings could do) he is now left destitute of all relief or
recompense by Law, or ordinary course of Justice, and imprisoned by Committees
of Indemnity, if he sue, and forced to desist, or release his action, having no
Lawyer who durst to plead his cause, for fear of imprifonment, nor Judge to
release him, for fear of displacing; such is our present,^ worse than Turkish
Thraldom, under these Grand Reformers of our Laws, and Newfound Guardians of
our Liberties, crying out aloud to Heaven and Earth for present redress.

3. For the Propriety of their Estates; so fenced, vindicated, secured by the
forecited Parliamentary Votes, Acts, and Petition of Right; alas! what is
become of it? Have not these Sword-Reformers forcibly disseised, dis-inherited
not only our Kings, Nobles, and other Officers of their Hereditary Honors,
Dignities, Offices, Franchises, but likewise them, and thousands more, their
Heirs, Successors, Wives, Children, Kindred, of their Palaces, Manors, Houses,
Lands, Possessions, Rents, Revenues, real and personal Estates, without any
other Law or Title but (that of Thieves and Pirates, Turks and See Purch^
pilgrimage ^o. 6. c. 6. and H^yns (...).
Mamalukes) the longest Sword? Against not only all Laws of the Land, but the
very eighth and tenth Moral Command^nts of God himself, now practically quite
expunged out of their Decalogue? And do not all else hold their Lands and
Estates as Tenants at will, to these supreme new LandLords, who upon any N^w
coined Delinquency, or pretended plots, really sequester, or confiscate them at
their pleasures by the self-same Law and Title? Yea where ^s all our Kings in
former ages took Aids and Subsidies from our Ancestors only as See Bast^s (...)
and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Subs^, Tunage and (...).
as their free Gifts and Grants in Parliament, and that in moderate
proportions, to wit, one Fifteen, Tenth or Subsidy, and no more in ancient
times, and but two or three Subsidies and Fi^s of later days, payable at
sundry times, in diverse years, for which our Kings returned them hearty thanks
in their Answers to those Grants, and granted them New (...) (...) c. 37 and 52
H. 3. ^5. 25 E. 3. c. 1, 2. c. 28 H. 8. c. 1. (...). Pa^is Hist. Angli^. 311.
355. 36^ 421. 576. 624. 688. 838. 833. 338. 940, 941. 960.
Confirmations of their Laws, Liber ^ies and the Gr^t Charter, when violated,
together with beneficial General Pardons in recompense of these their Aids and
Subsidies (though for public uses and defense) which they never claimed nor
imposed in the Clergy or (...), but by their several free Grants in full and
free Parliaments, and Convocations of the Clergy, ( as all our Parliament
Rolls, our imprinted Acts, Histories, and 4 (...) c. 1. p. (...) 25 to 35.
Sir Edward Co^k at large inform us) Do not these our New Military Reforming
Sovereigns (as if they were more than Kings) without any free gift, grant, or
Act of Parliament in a full and free Parliamentary Assembly, by their own New
usurped Power, (without any thanks at all to the People, or confirmation of
their violated Laws, Liberties, Privilges, or general Pardons) against all
former Acts, and Parliamentary Votes, impose both on the Clergy and Laity,
against their Wills, (beyond all Presidents of former ages) what excessive
heavy monthly Tax,s Excises, impo^s, tunnage, poundage, and other payments
they please upon the whole N^tion, without intermission (which their
new-modelled Parliaments themselves must, nor alter nor control by the 27, 28,
29 Articles of their Instrument) and levy them by armed Soldiers, Violence,
imprisonments, quartering, and other great penalties, fines inflicted on the
Refusers of them, and dispose of them at their pleasures when levied, without
giving any account thereof to the Nation? yea force them to pay their
contributions some months before they grow due; when no L^nd lord can receive
his Rents, nor Creditor his debts to pay these Taxes, till at, or after the
time they become due? And all to enslave, impoverish the Nation, to carry on
new Wars, without consent of Parliament, and gain new Conquests abroad, whiles
in the mean time our Merchants are robbed, undone, our trading decayed by these
taxe^, war^, and for want of well-guarding the Seas at home. And not content
with these ordin^ry Monthly co^tributions, excises, imports, have not these
Refarmers, without any leg^l Trial, hearing conviction of New Delinquency See
my Gospel plea for the Ministers of the Gospel.
( often endeavoring to take away all Ministers Tithes, though due unto them
Jure divino, as well a^ by the Laws of the Land) exacted the (...) of all
formerly sequestered persons, their heirs and Widows^ estates, improved
according to the best improved value, by a late Decimation, (for which there is
no divine nor ^uman Law or Right) notwithstanding all former compositions,
Pardons under Seal, Articles of War, their own Act of Oblivion, their late
instrument of Government, and oath for (...) observance; besides all our
an^ient Laws, exempting them there from, yea notwithstanding this sacred Canon
Ezech. 18. 20. The Son shall not b^ar the iniquity of the Father; with this
Maxim in our Law, Transgressio personalis moritur cum persona; when as yet many
Sons, yea some Infants are merely decimated (...) their Fathers, and Wives
(...), Dowers charged for their Husbands (...); Nay which is yet more
barbarous, illegal, hundreds of Orthodox, able, godly, learned, Protestant
Ministers of our Church, without any hearing or crime at all, for their former
expiated pardoned mistake, in being addicted to the late Kings party, are not
only turned out of all their livings, lectures, fellowships, schools at once;
but likewise prohibited to preach, teach School, in public or private, or to
be entertained as Chaplains in private Houses, to support themselves, wives,
children; or to administer the Sacrament, or mary any, under pain of
imprisonment, banishment: And may not all our other Protestant Orthodox
Ministers, School Mast^rs, Scholars be thus (...) down, and suppressed at once,
by the like club-law and justice, of which this President is a very sad
presage? Moreover do not these Reformers seize men's Horses, Arms, Swords,
fouling, birding pieces, (yea the very Armorets, Chandl^rs, Arms and Ammuntion,
though their stock, wares, trade, livelihood) at their pleasures, upon every
pretended plot, fear, jealousy? Yea do not Souldie^s, Excise-men and their
agents break open, search, ransack men's Hous^s Studies, Trunks, Chests, both by
day and night, an^ take away their Goods, Chattels, yea their Writ^ngs'
Records, Papers, (as they See my N^w Discovery of (...) (...).
did mine,) ^t their pleasures, against all Law, and many late Parliament^
Votes, Nay have not they forced thousands of all sorts to enter into great
penal Bonds of late, with sureties, both for themselves and all their Serv^nts,
containing strange, unheard of Adjudged illegal 1 ^ 3. c. 15. and 1 E. 3.
(...). 2, 3 4.
illegal Conditions, and forced them to pay, some 10^. others 5 ^. others 2 ^.
6 d. for every Bond, (an unparalleld oppression) though many of them not worth
so much, under pain of Imprisonment, sequestration, and banishment in case of
refusal: to ^mit all other extorted fees by Marshals, Lieutenants, Officers of
the Tower, and others, from Prisoners; by Soldiers for levying pretended
arrears of Taxes, and of Ex^ise-men, and their Instruments? And are not these
more grievous abuses, fit to be redressed, than any coruptions, excesses, fees
in Lawyers, or our Laws? No private Person or Lawyers can take one farthing
from another against his will, nor do the least prejudice to his real or
personal estate against Law, but he may have present remedy for it. But these
New Reformers, by Excises, Imposts, Contributions, Decimations, Sequestrations,
and new-invented forfeitures, can forcibly extort, and levy some Millions of
pounds from the whole Nation, every year, against their wills, all our Laws,
yea strip whole families of their Inheritances, without any remedy by Law or
otherwise: yet this must be no grievance or injnstice at all in them, though
the Highest Treason, and unpardonable crying offenses, in Strafford,
Canterbury, the old Council Table, and beheaded King; but a most righteous
proceeding, necessary to be still pursued if not now established by a New Law,
inabling them still to tax and pollus at their pleasures, without any future
Parliaments, or redress.

4. For the free course of the Common Law, Right, and Justice, according to
Magna Charta. c. 29. We will deny, nor defer to no man Justice or Right. It
was never so much obstructed in any age by any persons, as by these new
Reformadoes of our Laws. Witness their unparalleld late Whitehall Ordinances,
touching their illegal Excises: which not only indempnifie^ all Excisem^, and
their Assistants against all actious (4) 4 (...) and 17 March, 1653. May 4.
1654, etc.
to be brought against the^, or other molestations by all parties griewed; but
expressly requiring, ^njoyning all Courts of Justice of this Commonwealth, and
all Judges and Justices of the same, Sheriffs, Counselors, Attorneys;
Sollicitors, and all other persons to conform themselves accordingly, Without
any opposition or dispute whatsoever; So that now no Court of Justice, or Judge
must or can right; nor any Lawyer, Attorney, Solicitor, or other person,
plead, argue or prosecute any suit at Law against any illegal Excise, Tax or
Imposition, though never so unjust and oppressive; nor against any Leyier of
them, or imprisoner of refusers of them, under pain os being dis-^udged, (like
Thorp, Nudigate, and Rolls of late) or being committed to the Tower, as Mr.
Maynard, Twisden, and Wadham Windham were, for arguing Con^s case against these
Whitehall Ordinances. A slavery worse than that of the Sea my second (...) to
the Jews (...) into England.
English lews of old; To omit all former inforcements of well affected
plundered persons and others, to release their Actions, I^dgements, Executions
against Cavaliers, Soldiers, and others, and to pay them damages, and costs
of ^ute besides, to their undoings, by their Councils of War, and Committees of
Indemnity, of which there are hundreds of sad Presidents; I shall only touch
their new Major Generals, Captains, Lieutenants, and others late Abuses of this
kind, in sending for Lawyers, Attorneys, Sollicitors, Parties, by Soldiers and
other Messengers, and forcing them by menaces, terror, and threatened
imprisonments to release their Actions, Judgments, Executions, and to refer
all suits depending in Courts of Equity or Justice, to their own hearing and
determination. Their examining, controlling, reversing Orders, Judgments,
Decrees, made not only by Judges, Justices, and others, in Courts of Law and
Equity, but even by Committees of Parliament, and the Commons House it self:
their sending for some persons in Custody who refused to attend them, upon
references, and others sundry miles, and making them dance^ attendance on them
from day to day upon bare Petitions and false suggestiou^ of clamorou^ persons,
after several Judgments, Decr^ es in Courts of Justice, Equity, Parliaments,
and former references by the late King, seconded with ^any years quiet
enjoyment, for lands reeovered against them, to their intolerable expense and
vexation. A preparative to ingrosse all Law and Justice for the future into
their own hands alone, and suppress all Courts of Justice, Judges, as dull and
useless tools, as some of late have styled them. And are not these far
heavier, sadder Grievances, abuses worthy redress, than any these Reformers
complain of in our Laws or Lawyers?

If our Swordmen imagine, their Victorious Successes will still bear them out
in all these their illegal extravagances, against all Laws, Tribunals both of
God and Men; let them remember, that T^og ^s Pom (...), and Justin. His^. l. 1.
H^o do^us, l. 1. 2. (...) ^iculus, lib 2.
Cyrus King of Persia, after his victorious conquests of Astyages, Croesus, all
Asia, and the East, with a great part of Scythia, and 30 years reign, with
c^utinual and admirable Success; was at last (after a great victory over the
Scythians) suddenly surprised and slain by Thomyris Queen of Scythia, and his
whole old victorious Army of two hundred thousand Persians put every man to the
sword, not one of them escaping to bring back tidings of this their admirable
universal ^verthrow and slaughter. After which his head was cut off by the
Queens command, and thrown into a Vessel filled with man's blood, with this
exprobation of his cruelty, Satia te sanguine quem sitisti, cujusque
insatiabilis semper fuisti. That Pat^rculus Hist. l. 2. and 3. Plut^rch. in his
Li^e.
P^mpey the Great, that glorious and famous Roman, aster his Conquests of,
(...) 3^ public Triumphs ( decreed him by the Roman Senate) over Europe, Asia
and Africa, (the whole known World in that age) which he had subdued, ^as yet
at last conquered by Julius Caesar his Corrival, and forced to fly into Egypt;
there taken and beheaded by a slav^, and his cark^ss lef unburied o^ the sands,
as a prey to the birds and beasts; so that he who formerly wanted earth for him
to conquer, now wanted earth to^ bury him; such was the vicissitude of his
fortune (as Pa^erculus observes.) And not long after this Great Conqueror
Suctonius, P^utarch, (...), G ^imston, and o ^s i^ his L^.
Caesar, was suddenly stabbed to does in the Senate House by his own Friends in
whom he most confided, for his ambitious Tyrannical usurpations over the Senate
and people; Enough to make all other usurping oppressing Swordmen tremble (not
half so great Conquerors as either of these three) notwithstanding all their
former successes; which should rather ^nmble and make them more just, righteo^
toward the people, for whose Laws and Liberties they pretended they only
fought against arbitrary Tyranny, Impositions and Rapine, than more arbitrary,
insolent, exorbitant, oppressive than those they fought against, and
suppressed; and that upon the consideration of 2 Chronicles. cap. 10. 2 Kings 14. 8.
to 15. Mich. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10. Ierem. 34. 8. to 22. and Romans 11.
17. to 22. which I desire them seriously to peruse and meditate upon at their
leisures.

To these forenamed 4. Generals, I might add their New Voluminous Whitehall
folio Edicts, O^dinances, repealing, altering our former Laws and Statutes in
many particulars, imposing new Taxes, payments, forfeitures, imprisonments,
fines, penalties on the people, aad such as shall infringe them; Their
converting all Prizes taken by their Men of War, to private Uses, and their
public Treasury, without repairing or satisfying our Merchants Losses by
Pyracies and Wars in the first place, by whose Customs and for whose Safety
they are principally maintained, and whose damages should be therefore in
justice, conscience, first repaired; Major Generals and their Deputies
suppressing of Innes, Taverns, Alehouses (like absolute Justices) without any
legal Authority, and then setting them up again soon after, through the
mediation of Friends or money: Their riding in circuit with those who are their
Judges to overawe and control them; their open abetting and countenancing of
causes; their great destruction of the timber of the Nation, against s^ndry^
Statutes, their building of new stately Houses, Gardens, etc. upon the peoples
and the public stock; the sharing of the public Lands and Revenues of the
kingdom amongst themselves, which should defray public expenses, now fit to be
r^formed, as in former ages; Their making Sectaries and illiterate Swordmen,
and other persons of mean quality, who understand neither Law nor Justice,
their Justices of Peace, and Committee men in sundry places, again former
Statutes: Their imposing, administ^ing Oaths to men without any Legal
Commission or Law (as every Swordman now presumes) a Praemunire and grand
Offense in former ages: With sundry more generals, which I pretermit, the
particulars whereof would amount to many Baronian Tom^s, if at large recorded,
being worthy the consideration of the approaching Asse^bly, if not of
reformation. Which Assembly being purposely called, as these Army Officers, and
Major Generals report, and some Whitehall Letters import, for the reformation
of our Laws, and for the healing and closing up of the wounds, breaches of our
distracted, discontent^d Nations; which my skill in Surgery and Politics,
and the method of all former Pa^liaments allu^es me can never perfectly be
healed and closed up, without danger of ^pse and breaking out again with
great^r pain, danger, violence, unless they be first sea^ched, lanced, and laid
open to the bot^om, and then perfectly cleansed, and incarnated; without
leaving any (...) Corruption underneath. I have thereupon (to gratify Mr.
S^heard, and discharge my bounden duty to my Profession and Country) thus (...)
anatomized and ^d them open to pu^ like view, to the end they may (through Gods
blessing) r^ceive a speedy, sound and persect, not superficial palliative C^,
without any other si^ster design. Now the grand (...) bo^ of Souls and States
g^ve so (...) a blessing and success to these few leaves, that they may prove
like the leaves of the (...) of life, Rev. 22. 2. for the ^aling of the
Nations; That God may not now say of England, as he did once of Israel, (...).
30. 13, 14, 15. Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is gri^vous, The^e is
none to plead thy cause that thou may be bound up; tho^ (...) no heal^ng
medicines: All thy lovers have forgotten (...); they seek (...) ^ot; for I have
wounded thee with the wound of on Enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one,
for the multitude of thine iniquities, because thy sins are increased.

FINIS.

