Instructions TO A Nobleman's Daughter CONCERNING RELIGION.

At first designed for One, now directed to all of that Rank, and useful young
Persons of Quality, and others of that Sex.

WITH Sacramental, and other suitable DEVOTIONS.

By John Provoste. M. A.

LONDON, Printed by W. R. for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar, and L. Stokey at the Golden-key over against the Muse-gate at
Charing Cross. 1700.

ERRATA.
PAge. 5. line 19. read despised, p. 8. l. 14. r. Subjects. l. 22. r.
Catechism. p. 10. l. 14. r. capable. l. 25. r. reading. p. 12. l. 12. after
Blessings 2 Comma. l. 13. r. Baptized. l. 19. after understood put a Period. l.
21. r. may. l. 25. r. advance. l. 26. r. not. p. 16. l. 10. r. Epicurus. p. 17.
l. 6. r. no. l. 12. r. Joy. p. 18. l. 6. r. blamable. l. 20. after Pray put a
Semicolon. l. 21. after Heaven put a Comma. p. 20. l. 2. r. understanding. l.
13. r. fashioned. p. 22. l. 13. r. Eyes see. p. 28. l. 6. r. me. p. 33. l. 14.
r. ineffectual. p. 34. l. 18. r. to. l. 20. r. Wise. p. 38. l. 12. r. then. l.
19. r. earliest. p. 39. l. 12. r. themselves. p. 49. l. 2. r. Images. p. 69. l.
23. r. 2 Sacrament. p. 70. l. 16. r. John. p. 18. l. 4. r. Prove. 31.

TO THE Right Honorable THE LADY --
Madam,
I Hope your Ladyship has all the Satisfaction which the Country can give to
any one, or your own Expectation promised to your self, and whereas Expectation
is often raised above Enjoyment, I hope Enjoyment now rises high, and surmounts
all your gay Notions of it* I know, and methinks at this very Instant I have a
sense and a share of that Joy which your Ladyship is affected with upon your
Retreat from the Town: Let that Joy increase, and in the Country, and in every
Place, and in every thing let it still be greater and so much rather, because
it (...) greater than you deserve, (...) same Virtue and Prudence, which make
you deserve it, will be sure to make your J^y, and all Things very Innocent. I
have sometimes exercised your Ladyships Condescension; and with that easy
Mildness, which you show ^n all Occasions, and with which you have already
learned to bear all Evils, you have seemed to bear the Trouble of Reading my
Instructions: But you never had so much Advantage from my Writing, as now, to
satisfy for the Trouble, nor I so good Occasion to give it. I doubt not but
you will have the same Thought of the Occasion, I have my self; and so I may
hope for an Effect equal to it. I have often beheld your growing Piety with a
secret and rising Satisfaction, and I cannot but endeavor to continue and
improve my own Satisfaction, by Exhorting, Advising, Entreating your Ladyship
to continue and improve your Piety. Seeing I have so great a pleasure in the
View, I am become a Party, and my own Interest, that I may have it still,
engages me to do all I can for the enlargement of a thing which gives it: A
thing which is so good in it self, and so advantageous to you, and which you
seem to Repay and Reward for all its Advantage by the graceful Light and Beauty
you reflect upon it; when like a well-set Diamond, it appears in you and
borrows from you. I have with so much Pleasure observed that Piety, which was
your own original Growth; and then with how much more shall I observe, and with
how Innocent a Pride, any part of your piety hereafter, which has been planted
in your Mind by my Endeavor, and which being placed in so Rich, and Noble
Ground, must there be to a Wonder fruitful by your own. I shall see it with a
Joy refined and high, with a greater than that of the King in History, when he
saw the fair and goodly Tree, his own Hand had set, and then his Delight in
Surveying the Growth of the Tree scarce was equal to this of remembering that he
had set it. I should think my self to do Service to the World, in doing this to
your Ladyship, who may be so useful to the World; and to Religion, by the
Influence of your Example; by the Authority of your Interest, and by the
Prudence of your Zeal to make use of both, as of every thing, to the best and
most worthy Purposes. So shall I have, in this my Writing, that glorious Hope
of doing the greatest Good by the shortest way, to many in one; as when the
chief City is taken, all the Neighboring Country very often comes in by an
easy Surrender, or is Conquered with it: And surely the thing will as much
become your Quality as it will be promoted by your Zeal, that there should be a
numerous Train to attend you in your Course of Virtue, and in your Journey
toward Heaven. All the Religious Things, when carried on by you to others,
will at the same time be improved, and become more inviting by their passing
through your Hands, as Liquors take a fragrant, and more grateful taste from the
Vessel through which they pass. When there have been already such shining
Effects of your Virtue, and when the Cause is so fruitful and sure, so generous
and always ready to produce them, I may oblige my self and the World by all my
pleasing and most agreeable Presages, and yet my Gift of Foretelling may not
be, like those Effects, extraordinary; as they who pretend to the Faculty of
declaring things to come, do little more than argue from the same Causes to the
same Effects. The Country gives you leisure, and you want nothing for the
raising a Good Will, to read such things as this before you; and the Country
gives not only leisure, but a new Argument for Religion, because there the
invisible things of God are understood by the things which are made, By every
Flower you gather, and every Fruit you eat, by the meanest Herb you tread on,
and the least thing you see in the Garden, or in the Field. The Country has
already no little part in your Favor, it has so large a Place in your
Affections, that it could lend some even to things less Grateful; the most
disagreeable things would cease to be so, when this should recommend them to
you: But surely the Country will have new Endearments, and more lively Charms,
when you shall begin to apprehend it, as having all the convenience, not only
to breath, but to think more freely too, and as having at the Leisure, and
Liberty, and Enlargment, not only for many other Purposes, but for one thing
which you love more than the Country, and then all things, for Religion. Thus I
have frankly declared the Design of these Papers, and your Ladyship will
generously pardon the length of them, and all their Faults; whereof I think my
self to be guilty with Authority; because the Design is such as gives the
highest Authority to this, and to any other Action, and to all the harmless
Errors of it. When I have freely confessed the Purpose of my Writing, (and this
no worse than what you hear) your Ladyship will give me leave to speak freely
upon it, with all that plainness which good Designs always covet, and
well-meant Instructions choose, and the true Ends of both require. Then may I be
allowed to speak without the Ceremony of Address to your Sex, and your Quality;
that I may thus teach you to forget your Greatness, which you seem already to
know so little of, and to be your self almost a stranger to: The nice
Consideration of it is to be laid aside for the Time by me in Writing, and by
you in Reading. This Boon I ask at the opening of my Discourse, as the Great
Council asks (at the first opening of it,) Freedom of Access and of Speech in
Debates upon Things of public Good. As to the Grandeur of Birth, you have so
much of the Nobility which Virtue gives, that the other is almost sunk in this,
and the greater Light scarce allows the less to be seen. As to the gaudy
Honors of the solemn Regard which such a Birth does always claim, your
Ladyship is to leave this part to others; as that is not, like Virtue, your
own, so the esteem which it should have is not to be from your self; and yet to
that an Esteem is due: Indeed Moses would never have refused to be called the
Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter, and the Grandson of a King, if he had been the
thing which he was called, he would not have Renounced the innocent Glories of
such a Relation, as he did not despise the inglorious Reproach of Christ, if
the Pretense would not have been false Heraldry, and the Advantage only the
enjoying the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. But so great, Madam, is your share,
and so rich you are, in higher Things, that you may reserve enough for your
self, if you resign your Claim of Birth to them who have nothing besides it, to
them who are contented to be still what they were born, and, as if they were
only overgrown infants of one Days Age, have made no Progress since the first
Minutes of Life. I now beg leave to tell strangers, that they are not to take
the length of your Understanding from that of your Age, and to tell your self,
that I have so great an Opinion of your Understanding, and so little of my own,
as to think I could not easily Write any thing upon such a Subject above your
reach: So great is my Opinion too of your Piety, as to think I could not easily
prescribe any thing above your Practice. I am sure, nothing which can have any
part in your Religious well-being, though never so high, can be above my
Wishes, and it is no more beyond my Attempts to enforce it, than beyond yours
to do it. I am sure again, if you are to have every thing I wish, you cannot
have too much of that Wisdom, which (according to the Wise, though Apocryphal
Writers) reaches from one end to another mightily, and sweetly orders all
things.

My willing Consent is always ready for all your Inclinations, and my joining
with you as ready for all your Service. But I would, of all things, carry on
the pleasing Harmony of your good Actions in Consort with you; in nothing so
much you desire, in nothing so much you shall have the Concurrence and united
Force of,

Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble Servant. J. P.

Madam,
I Have asked your leave to direct Instructions to you, and now I presently
take it, as ready to make use of it as you are, I am sure, to grant it, who, as
you are too generous to deny any thing which should advance the Good of others,
so are too wise to refuse that which would promote your own.

The First Advice which I shall offer to you, shall be in the first thing which
Religion taught you.

Let the Catechism never be forgotten: Though it is learned in Childhood, it is
to be remembered still in all the other parts of our Age; therefore indeed
learned in Childhood, that it may not be forgotten, and that it may be useful
ever afterward: As when the Pilot has Sailed very far, and very often, yet he
is not to throw away his Compass, nor to Sail without it. Religion begins thus
in Childhood; if in that Age it begins, much more in our Age of Understanding
it is to be continued, and to be improved, as other things are not less, but
they become greater and stronger too by Time. Religion is much more to be
continued in all the Scenes of Life beyond our Childhood, because we afterward
come to the Age of Practice, which is its chief design, and because our
Understanding is more accomplished afterward, and so we are then more capable
of Advancements in that which is the most noble Exercise of our Understanding,
in Religion. Indeed the first use of our Reason, the first opening of it is to
be in that, because it will be more prepared for a Progress in Knowledge, and
the Child, the yet imperfect Creature, for Seize in Perfection, by making
the first steps in the Understanding of Him who is the Fountain of Knowledge,
and of all Perfection. A particular right He has to the first Fruits of our
Reason, because it is more particularly derived from God, and it is more the
Image of Him from whom it comes, and because the Being of him from whom it
derives its own, is a Principle our Reason is acquainted with as soon as any,
and therefore it should be as soon acquainted with the Worship and the
Knowledge of Him. If our Childhood, amongst its many Pastimes, is to have
Religion for its Business; if that Light and thoughtless Age is in this alone
to become serious and wisely Active, this much more should be our Exercise,
when our Age has all the steady Thought and Reflection, and when all our
Thought is directed to Business, and Things of high and serious Importance, and
when the more we think, we are carried still farther into Religion. If our
Reason at the first glimmering and dawning of it is to begin its day, as we
should every one of our Life, with Religion, much more is this to have
enlargment with our Reason, and to be the greater Light to rule the Day; the
Worship of the Father of Lights, is surely to be much more then our Exercise,
when we are in so much better condition to perform it.

I speak thus of Religious Knowledge, that, when gained in the former, it is
not to be lost in the following part of our Age, because too many think it may
then well be lost, and it was intended only for our Childhood, and when we were
children, we were in Bondage under Rudiments, we spoke as Children, understood
as Children, thought as Children, but we are to put away afterward childish
things. How great, alas, the Misunderstanding, and how fatal the effect, if
there be no recovery from it! How much do they, who thus misunderstand, seem
Industrious to prove themselves Children still? How much happier would they be,
if they were so indeed? They would then have something like Excuse; now they
have not.

All that we did, and learned in the more serious Undertakings of our Childhood
was only designed for Discipline and Method to dispose us for the doing and
learning more hereafter, as he can never be Rich, who keeps not that which he
has gained, and he can never be Skilful in any Art or Science, who forgets the
first Notions of it he once was taught. A Father of the Church said upon a like
Occasion, nothing is to be despised by those who are to be instructed, and led
into the knowledge of things; for if they look upon the first Elements as
little things, how shall they attain the perfect and great things in knowledge?
These early things which the Church has taught us, are not Scaffold work, to be
taken down again, but Foundation, and he that would take away the Foundation,
when the House is near the being, finished, would only undermine it, and never
finish it. Whoever discards the knowledge of the Catechism, when he is no more
a Child, he either at the same time renounces all knowledge of Religion, (but
surely, if that knowledge were necessary in Childhood, it is much more
necessary afterward) or he at the same time designs a much higher Knowledge in
Religion; and because he is still going forward, he leaves the first behind
him, not as too heavy, but as too light, or little to carry with him. Indeed he
must not here forget those things which are be hind, if he will reach forth to
those things which Are before, if he will press toward the Mark of the Prize
of the high Calling. The more he values those other things he would understand,
the more he is to value these first things, without which he cannot understand
the other, and the more Knowledge he has attained, the more humble he is, or
should be, and so not apt to despise the meanest Truth as well as Person; be
owes the greater regard to these original Truths, to which he owes all his
highest Improvements. Indeed they are not the meanest Truths, they are the
first in Order and Dignity, as well as in Time and Place, because they are the
Doctrines of things necessary to Salvation, and no Good so great as Salvation,
no Truth so great, as that which teaches things necessary to it. The other
Doctrines are the Issues of these by a natural Consequence, and so they cannot
be nobler than these, till the Offspring shall claim more Honor than Parents,
from whom they derive all they have. The other parts of Religion are but so
many several Streams that flow from these, which therefore should have all the
Reverence from us, as Fountains had so much from the Heathens, were Sacred, and
were Adored.

The Doctrines of the Catechism are very far from being those of the lowest
Rank, they have so much the Character of the Scripture from whence we received
them (as Fruits have the Nature of the Soil wherein they grow) that however
there are things in the Catechism for the lowest, there are also many for the
highest and most manly Understanding: The things are so high, that they are
subjects more of Belief, then of Enquiry, and yet when they have Mystery enough
to puzzle the Enquirer, they have at the same time Evidence enough to baffle
the Unbeliever; Evidence, like that of Witnesses against a Malefactor, to
Condemn him. The Doctrines still are great, however the style of the Catechism,
like that of the Scripture, be very plain, as the greatest Person may appear in
the plainest Dress: There is so much more of the nicer Art, to reduce sublime
and awful things to easy and familiar Words, and there is more Authority in
such a Language, as there is often a more prevailing Authority in a
condescending and lowly Behavior. That Noble Person had a very just Opinion
The Lady Catherine Manners, afterward Marchioness of Buckingham.
of our Catechism, who acknowledged it to be a plain Summary of saving Truth,
and being of a Roman Catholic Family, and Education, she seemed in this
Acknowledgment to give a generous Pledge, that there should be Success to their
Endeavors, who were Zealous to teach her new and better Principles. The
Religious Beginnings of Childhood are in things necessary to Salvation, that
our happy End, the End of our Faith may be in Salvation it self, our Christian
Beginning is in things more necessary, as in the first part of a Feast we find
the Meats which have more substance, and nourish more. Our first entrance is in
the needful things of Belief and Knowledge, both because this Belief and
Knowledge are the Root to all the goodly Branches of Religion, and there must
be first a Root, before there can be an enlargement of the Tree into spreading
Branches, and useful Fruit, and because the former Time of our Age is not so
capable of, nor has such Occasion and Exercise for the several good Works,
which are the other chief parts of Christian Duty; but it is already capable of
Knowledge, which should prepare us for them.

That being planted in the House of the Lord, you may flourish in the Courts of
the House of our God, in His Church, and you my bring forth more Fruit in your
Age, that you may grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, your reading over the Catechism once every Month of your Life,
and your reading it with all the Wisdom, and careful Observation of your more
perfect Age, would be a most useful Office; when you may be above the giving an
account of it to others, you can never, in a Life of all those Years I wish
you, outlive the Necessity of giving it to your self, and to God. There is a
Precept to all, even to the oldest Christians, for the being ready always to
give account to others, to give an Answer to every Man that asks a Reason of
the Hope which is in them. So needful is the continuance of this first
Knowledge, that you cannot know any thing else aright, without having still an
Eye to this, and then steering by it; you are to take it with you wherever you
go, in whatever you do: It is the Standard, by which all your Knowledge is to
be tried, and it is the Rule, to which all your Practice hereafter is to be
reconciled.

As the Catechism is always to be well remembered, so is it to be well
considered by you. No part of it you are to consider more, than your Vow in
Baptism, and the Explaining of the Commandments in the Catechism; the
Performance of which Commandments (so explained) is one great part of the
Performance of that Vow, and the great, the principal Exercise of your wisest
Age, and of the best Endeavors in all the Time which is to come, and I hope
with a long Train after it of Days and Blessings upon your doing that which you
were not only Baptized, but you were born to the Performance of.

I know you already understand very much in Religion, and often have I
observed, and always rejoiced in observing how much you understood. But now,
That the former Age of your Life, as the first was of the World, may be a
Golden one, That your Knowledge may rise to Practice in the Commandments, and
your Practice may advance to Perfection; that you may not be discouraged in the
Practice (especially in the beginning of it.) I beg leave to advise you, who
understand already so much of Religion, not to misunderstand the Design
thereof, as if Melancholy were a natural Effect of Religion, or were a
necessary Duty of it, as if it denied us a moderate Liberty in worldly
Enjoyments, and required that we should deny our selves this Liberty. Were such
a Notion of Religion a true one, and embraced as true, it might have a dismal
Consequence, that nothing of Religion, besides this Notion, might be embraced
by Persons of your Age, and Sex, and Quality. Your Age, as well as Sex, may be
supposed to love things less difficult or severe, and not to abhor Diversion
and Mirth; your Quality gives a Right, almost a Birthright to that, to which
your other Circumstances may give some Inclination, to Pleasure, and harmless
Enjoyment. Melancholy is very far from being commanded, it is forbidden by
Religion; Excess of that, as much forbidden, as the Excess of Mirth. Religion
forbids not Enjoyment, but abuse, which is no part of the Enjoyment, which
indeed does lessen it, that, and not Religion hinders all. So far Religion is
from hindering, that in its Design it promotes, and in its Practice, in the
present Act it gives a cheerful Mind, and this is one great, this is one
present Reward to the Practice of it: Surely none has so much cause as the
Pious Man for a cheerful Mind, and O let him ever have it, let there be no
Pretense or Bar against his having that which is thus his right, and which God
himself desires he should have. As there was a famous Master who would have
Pictures of Joy to be placed round his School, that his Scholars might have
Images of Delight in their Minds, and Knowledge might become a more inviting
Figure to those who came thither to make Addresses to it. Religion is a thing
of great delight in its Nature, and it is never otherwise, but when it is made
otherwise by us, as the most pleasing Wines by our ill Management, or ill
Keeping may become sower, and very unpleasant. The Fear of the Lord makes a
merry Heart, and gives Joy and Gladness, Ecclus 1.2. So much Religion is a
thing of the noblest Joy, that it gives no little Joy, not only to those who
sincerely Profess, and sincerely Practice it themselves; but even to those who
behold it, when thus Professed and Practiced, in others. I am sure the thing
which is very delightful in its Nature, much more is made so by your Ladyship;
Religion has often appeared to me as having a particular and surprising
Delight, when I have beheld it in your Deportment. The French Philosopher told
one of your Sex, that no Beauty was equal to that of Truth, and the Writer of
his Life makes this Remark, that the Saying was no Complement, and he talked
more like a Philosopher than a Courtier. I am sure, this saying, that the
Beauty of Virtue is above all other, can be no Affront to a Person, who has a
large share of Virtue, and so in the Praises of it. There was a Sect of
Philosophers, which so many of the Noble Youth resorted to in the Time of
Epicus, as to a Court, and which pretended to all the Artful Refinement of Wit;
but here their Wit did not show it self, nor do them Service, when they
professed the Study and Advancement of Pleasure, and yet admitted not any
settled thought of Religion into their Debates upon it: The Epicureans pursuing
Pleasure, and not carrying this along with them, went out of their way all the
time, and the unhappy Men, the farther still they went, still were farther off
from Pleasure, and when there was so much of the Name in their Books and
Harangues, there was little of the thing in their Mind or Condition. It is the
end of a Man, of a wise Man so to order every thing, that he may find a
Pleasure in every thing he does, in all things belonging to him: A wise Man he
cannot be, he has no true Light in his Mind, who with all his busy search can
think of finding Pleasure by any other Light then that of Religion. May every
thing your Ladyship does entertain you with Joy, especially Religion, and this
so much more, because this will give an high taste of Joy to all other things.
The chief delight of Piety is in it self a Delight of the Mind, and not
therefore less, the Pleasures of the Mind are the greatest: But indeed, that
the Mind may be capable of the Religious Pleasure, it must be prepared with a
particular Frame of Spirit, a true and suitable Disposition toward it, as the
Body it self his very little Sense of bodily Enjoyments, if Indisposed. Some
complain they find not that lofty Satisfaction, that Rapture we talk of: But we
never said, there was such a Delight, unless upon a most hearty Trial, and
Religion is not therefore to be blamed, because they are very Blameable; nor is
there any want in Religion, because they never found what they never sought.

May your Ladyship find a Joy in every Act of Religion, especially in Prayer,
which procures strength for the doing all the other Acts thereof, and increase
of Satisfaction in the doing them, and which is it self so pleasant, that it
has a foretast of Heaven, where is fullness of Joy and Pleasure for evermore.
Well may Prayer give us a foretast of Heaven, seeing it carries us thither
every time we Pray as when St. Paul was caught up into the third Heaven; he not
only heard the words which are not to be uttered, but perhaps he tasted the
Enjoyments which are not to be conceived. Prayer carries us up to Heaven, and
then in the return, (as Angels do to those, to whom they give a friendly
Conveyance) it sets us down again gently upon the Earth, and makes Earth it
self more pleasant, when thus it has brought us back from Heaven: The Man who
goes so often thither, must needs return with something of the Pleasures, and
the Riches of the Place, as the Merchant, who Travels often to the Country of
Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, does as often bring from thence some of
the gaudy, and admired, and dazzling Goods.

That you may be prepared for the devout Offices of Prayer, and for all the
exalted Satisfactions of it, be pleased to compose that Mind, which indeed is
seldom discomposed, to fix your Soul for an Attention to the pious Work, and so
God himself will attend, and have a kind regard to the Work, and to the Person.
Before you begin to Pray, you may prepare and fix your Mind by some good
Thoughts, as short as may be, of the Duty you are undertaking, and of the God
you are to Address to in the Duty, and cast off for the Time all your common
Thoughts of worldly Things, that you may think more, and better of the Duty,
and of God. Your Thoughts are always harmless, but they may not so easily be
always useful, nor always Pious in that degree of Elevation, when they are
exercised upon worldly Things, they are formed and fashioned for the time into
a likeness with them; your Mind then complies and condescends to an unaffected
Debasement, it submits and bows down, with a generous Regret, to the Meanness
of the Subject; as the Eagle, with all its greatness, and lofty Flights,
vouchsafes sometimes to lower it self and come down, when its Quarry is near
the Earth. As to the Work you are to undertake in Praying, you may be pleased
to consider, that you intend to ask Blessings for Soul and Body, and particular
Blessings; such, and such things for both; and you may consider particularly,
what things they are you intend to ask. You may not forget, that not only
Prayer is a most holy Work, but if you would obtain what you ask, you are also
to be Holy, before and afterward: Pure Hands should be lift up; if there be
not Purity, there will not be Strength in those Hands, nor in the Prayer. As to
the God you Address to in Prayer, you may consider, that as you are a weak and
needy Creature to want the things you Pray for, so he is a great God, and able,
a bountiful God, and willing to give them: That He may be moved to give them,
you are at all times, but especially in the Praying time, to pay all the
Reverence to your Maker, and the Maker of all the World, to Him who dwells in
Heaven, and Governs on Earth; to Him who dwells in the highest Heavens, knows,
and preserves, and governs all things to the Iowest Earth. You may again
consider, that having retired from your ordinary Company, you are now to
Converse with an higher Being. Indeed the remove from our common Business and
Conversation to Prayer is so great, that we cannot in such a sudden Motion,
without some preparing Thoughts, take off our Mind from things of ordinary
Exercise, and place it on those of Devotion: The distance between these things
is so wide, that however Spirits are said to be very nimble in their Motions,
the Soul cannot pass the next Minute from the one to the other. Nothing more
apt than Conversation to engage our Mind, and after the withdrawing of our Body
from it, the remembrance of its Transactions, whether pleasant or unpleasant,
seems to place us still in the midst of our Company, and detain us with them:
In respect of this Conversation, that with God is a thing altogether new, it is
more refined and excellent, and therefore we cannot so very soon be capable of
it, as he who has Conversed with Peasants and the meanest Persons, does not
thus become the most Accomplished Man for the higher approach to the Presence
and Thrones of Princes. Very narrow and imperfect is all our Correspondence
with Spirits, and even with those who, as some imagine, have a nearer Alliance
to Matter, and so to us: Our Eyes sees nothing, our Understandings very little
of them; no Sense or Faculty is satisfied in the enquiry into them; whenever we
perceive their being near us, we almost covet to be farther from them, we
entertain them with a Reverence very like Amazement and Horror. If our
Disadvantages be such in all our Intercourse with Spirits, much more in that
with the Father of Spirits: And then should not Israel in the softer meaning,
prepare to meet his God? And thus we shall make those Disadvantages as little
as may be to us; at least we shall be so prepared for our attending God, as Men
put on the best Dress they have, when they are to wait on Persons much above
them.

I have here allowed my self so much more enlargment on the necessity of
forming our Minds into a suitable Frame, before our Praying, because otherwise
there can be little Thought in our Prayer, and less Affection, and the Prayer
which wants either, must want Success: Therefore is there so extraordinary
Success to so many Prayers; they may well not have it, when they do not deserve
it, and they cannot deserve what they seem not to desire.

If your other Engagements will comply with so many Times; let your Prayers be
thrice in a Day, in the Morning the first Business, at Night the last, and at
Noon before your Dinner; because a Work so Carnal as Eating, would make you
less disposed for a Work so Spiritual as Praying; and because this deserves a
place before every other Business, and it is to be our Meat thus to do the Will
of Him who sent us, and thus to pray for Grace that we may do the Will of him
that sent us into the World. Your Prayers are to be Public and Private, not
only private, but public upon every Opportunity, not only public, but private
too, and you constant in the Seasons of both. As to public Prayers, the Church
has prescribed, and who has a better Right to prescribe? Who could have better
Success? As to private, your own Devotion will soon be skilful, and the Advice
of Pious Books will give you Laws: Such Laws your Books will be ready to give,
and you to obey.

I would advise your having not only particular Times, but a particular Place
for your Private Devotion, and so, if the Place be not reserved for this use
alone, yet the Duty it self should be always performed in that place, reserved
for that alone: Then as often as you come near this Religious Apartment, some
good Thought will come near you too, when you shall remember the Business you
have there often done, and you are now to do: There may well be some Virtue in
that Air, which has been made fragrant and so often sweet with the Incense of
your Prayers.

The Grace of God is the chief thing you are to pray for, because all other
things will follow this. You are to pray for Grace, that it may instruct you in
all such things in which a Christian is to be instructed, and may turn your
Thoughts toward Religion, and your Inclinations to a Desire for the Benefits
thereof. You are to pray for Grace, that it may direct and move you to enter
upon a solemn Course of Religion, direct and give Strength to the whole
Practice of it, guard your Age so tender against the many Temptations of the
World, and fix it against the several Misfortunes thereof upon the true
Foundations of Religion and Prudence, and give it a true Notion of the World:
Then will you know that this gaudy World is a place of Vanity, and that nothing
but Religion can make it a place of Satisfaction, and so you will know the
wisest thing which can be known by Man in the whole Circle of his boasted
Learning: Pity it is that we do not know it sooner, that only many Years and
many Misfortunes should teach it, more Years than have yet past over your Head,
and worse Misfortunes then (I hope) will ever come near your Condition; though
indeed the being above Misfortunes is not one of those peculiar Privileges
belonging to Birth and Quality. Let my Experience be yours, let not this be one
of the dear bought things your Sex is said to covet: But as the Complaisance of
our Sex delights to present costly things to yours, may the Experience be
purchased only at my Cost, and teach us both. And as the Gallantry of our Sex
very often exposes it self for the Safety and the Interest of yours, so let the
Danger and the Evil be only mine.

Dear bought Experience taught me what it true,
And Friendship bids me tell that Truth to you.
You are to pray for Grace, that it may now betimes prevent your being guilty
of those Sins, which many young Persons begin too soon to be guilty of and
which sooner or later are to have a Repentance, and the Repentance is to have
so much cost, in Tears and Sighs, in painful Thought and unpleasant
Remembrance: Surely those Sins are Diseases of the most Dangerous Kind, which
we should rather choose to prevent then to remove, and when they have
entertainment from our Youth, they are like that forward Fruit which is very
unwholesome and will soon be rotten. You are to pray for Grace, that it may
guide you through this Life to a better; as happy as I wish your present Life,
there is yet one far more happy, which I doubt not, you wish your self; and
which that Grace is to guide you to, and moreover it is to guide you through
the several parts of your present Life with all the Success and Blessing in all
the Management of it. As you are to pray for your self, so for those next to
your self, your near Relations, and for all good things to them, Spiritual and
Temporal. The Advice you are ready to prevent, because the Office, I know, is
very pleasing to you, who pay so much Duty, where you ow it, and so much Love
to your other Relations, more (I had almost said) than you can be supposed to
owe. You are not only to pray for what you want, but to give thanks for your
not having wanted many things, for those you have enjoyed from the first day of
your Life unto this, for your Noble Birth, and wealthy Fortune, and Virtuous
Education. Such a Thanksgiving to God will require a Prayer to him for all the
Endowments of Mind suitable to such a Birth, and Fortune and Education, and for
the making these his Favors useful to the Glory of him you pray to; and him
who gave them. You are to pray for a low Opinion of all this World, and of one
part of it more than all, of your self, that your heart may not be haughty, nor
your Eyes lofty, and you may not exercise your self in great matters, nor in
things too high for you, Moreover you may pray, that to your other, to your
many earthly Goods may be added that of Health, in order to your being more
capable of making the best use of all, your doing more service to God, more
good to others. You may pray that in this your walking through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death God would make you to fear no Evil, and make his Goodness and
Mercy to follow you all the Days of your Life, that so you may dwell in the
House of the Lord for ever, dwell in his House here, and in that other not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Your prayers upon these several occasions
are to be short, and then may be more servent, and what is wanting in length
may be supplied in a more warm Devotion, which is to God more pleasing; a warm
Devotion more pleasing to God, then a Burning Sacrifice. The Force of our
Prayers, when more close and united, in a narrower Room, in less Time and fewer
Words, may be stronger, and as that Force is stronger, the Prayers will be more
earnest. The Orator must weep himself, if he will be sure to have his hearers
weep: Much more we must be earnest in praying if we expect that God will be
moved in hearing, that he will show to us a part of the strange Affection he
has to Mankind which the Prophets have told us of, and which only their Flights
can describe. It is one design of Prayer to unite us to God, and so much it
does unite us to him, that our Affections and his are almost to the same; as we
are affected more or less in the presenting our Prayer so is he in the
receiving it.

I pretend not here to have given all the Rules which are necessary for Prayer,
but some more particular to to your Ladyships Quality and Age I have designed
to give, and then to recommend your Learning of other more general Rules for
Prayer and for all things from the Books of Religious Wisdom, those which you
are not a Stranger to, and which, I am sure, you will be every Day more
acquainted with. The Books are to be few and chosen, and so much the rather
should yours be chosen, because in every Kind you deserve the best: Few Books,
that they may be read, and chosen, that the reading may be useful.

At the same time you read the Writings of others, let this of all things be
written upon your mind, that whereas there are several parts of Religion, the
chief part is practice, and a living in obedience to the Commands of God, and
that all pretending to Religion is trifling without it, and that still the
Older you are, the more Practice is required.

In order to your being moved to live in a Religious Method of all this
Practice, you may be assured that your Life can never be happy without
Religion, and then what is to make your whole Life happy, is to be it self a
greater part of it, is to be indeed begun in the first Seasons of Life, and so
continued to the last. If the beginning afterward were not late and
ineffectual, yet it would be less certain and more difficult, the beginning
sooner will by the long and early custom make Religion that which I so much
desire it may be to you, and may be accounted by you, a delightful thing, the
most delightful in the World. Religion I have declared before to be a thing
which has all the Refinement and Delicacy of Pleasure; and then why should we
lose so much Pleasure all the time we are not engaged in the Interests of
Religion? Youth is the time, in which we think we have a Claim to Pleasu e; and
then, if it covet all other Pleasure, why not the truest and highest Joy, and
why not Religion, which alone can give this, which alone can secure the other?
We can no more be happy too soon then too much; and all the Wit and all the
Power of Man cannot order an happy Life without ordering the Life to be first
Religious.

This Truth is as great as evident; O that all those would consider it, to whom
the considering of it would be useful, that is, all Mankind. And seeing it is
the Desire of every Man to be happy, there should be this other Desire of the
Good and the Wise, that every Man would consider and every Man would do what is
necessary to make him, as he desires to be, very happy.

Be pleased to remember that high degree in the World does not make Virtue a
lower or a needless thing; and that Riches make Religion still more needful,
because Riches have many Dangers, against which Religion only can give
Security, and because when there is such a plenty of other things, it is pity
there should be a want of that alone. Riches are coveted too much, Religion too
little; and yet this should be more desired, if not for its own sake, at least
for the sake of Riches, which, if they are never so much desired, never so much
possessed, are yet no Blessing without Religion. You may remember also that Noble
Blood, a Body Highborn does not make us so great as that Nobler sort of Mind,
which shows its heavenly Birth in heavenly Actions. You may not forget that no
Beauty does so charm, no Dress so adorn, as Virtue always does, no Conversation
is so truly delightful, as a devout Communion in Gods worship, no Behavior and
Accomplishment has so lovely a Grace, as that of Reverence in the Worship of
him who cannot have too much: Happy we, if from the best of us he could have
enough; but we must be contented, as God is satisfied, with our being Servants,
though unprofitable. Noble Birth, and Beauty, the Arts of Conversation and
Behavior, and all the Glories of Dress, which are things very much admired,
will deserve much more to be so, when joined to Religion, and when they have
the great Advantages which Religion gives them: Indeed this gives the greatest,
because it is greater, it is better then all things. All the things you can
desire (or others can desire, can Love in you) are not to be compared unto it,
the gain thereof is better than fine Gold, it is more precious than Rubies, and
its ways are ways of pleasantness. So says Solomon, and the same Author says, a
Gracious Woman retains Honor. He had high Birth himself, and so much of it,
that the Haughty Ethiopian Emperors; amongst all their Bulky and noisie
Titles, are proud of nothing more then that they have (as they pretend) Royal
Blood flowing from him. Solomon had a King his Father, and his Father the chief
Head of a Family of Kings, the first and last settled Royal Family in Israel;
Solomon was a King himself, and as he had Riches and Greatness, to make him
awful, so he had Beauty and Wisdom, and all the Charms of Wit and Conversation
and Language to make him lovely to Mankind: Grace was poured into his Lips, and
he was fairer then the Children of Men, he dwelt in Ivory Palaces, and his
Garments were perfumed with Myrrh and Aloes and Cassia, and Kings-Daughters
were among his Honorable Women. In the same Psalm his Queen too is described,
and in vain had she been brought unto the King in Raiment of Needlework, and in
vain she had stood at his right hand in Gold of Ophir, and her clothing of
wrought Gold, if she the Daughter as well as Wife of a King had not been all
glorious within as well as she was without in all her Egyptian Glory; the King
would never have so much desired her Beauty, if she had not hearkened and
considered, inclined her Ear and Worshipped.

A Writer of your Sex brings in the Shepherd professing all the Rapture of
Esteem, and something more the Passion to the Sheperdels, not for those
Endowments, which are commonly treated with all the softer Language and
respectful Names, but for other and greater things.

Yet not for these do I Alinda Love,
Hear then what it is that does my Passion move:
That thou still earliest at the Temple art
And still the last that does from thence depart,
Pan 's Altar is by thee the ofinest pressed,
Thine's still the fairest Offering and the best;
And all thy other Action seem to be
The true Result of unfeign d Piety.
These Perfections shined through all the shade of that Meaness which Poetry
had dressed her in, and her own Humility was ready to put on; and they discovered
to every admiring Eye the Noble Lady (for so she was) under the borrowed
Disguise of a Shepherdess.

I have spoken so much more upon Noble Birth, because as that is a very great
Blessing in it self, so it has been to some a very great Evil, to those who
have so valued themselves, or have been taught by others, attending them, so to
value themseves upon it, as to imagine they wanted nothing else, and were above
the being good, above that very thing which would make them still more Noble,
and would give them an higher Rank then Birth had given them, would place them
above all things besides it self. I have all the high regard to Noble Birth,
especially to that which your Ladyship derives from a Family I have so peculiar
an Honor for: I would only advise all Persons who are born in Greatness not to
have too high a Regard for it in one Sense, and scarce high enough in another.
The general Precept of the Philosopher seems to be particular to them in its
design, that men should reverence themselves: Surely they should teach others
to pay Honor to them by doing Honor to themselves, they should have a
Reverence for the Memories and the Venerable Ghosts of their Ancestors, in not
embezzling the Honor as well as the Estate which they bequeathed, and in
acting so that their Ashes may not be disturbed, nor they dead once more in
those whom they left behind to represent them. Virtue did first give Honor and
Title; and that is still necessary to preserve it. Honor acquired by Virtue is
greater than that of Inheritance, and when the Honor which was first the
Reward of Virtue is carried down to others as the Gift of Inheritance, these
indeed are Noble once, the first Day of their Birth: But, if they continue and
enlarge those virtuous Actions of their Ancestors, they make themselves Noble
anew, every Day of their Life, confirm and enlarge their original Right to the
Honor they received from others, and then begin to make it their own. Jehu
could not choose but pay a regard to Birth, in the midst of all his Holy Rage,
and the Wickedness of Jezebel, in whom there was but one thing to give her any
claim to a regard, and for the sake of that one thing she had it, she was to
suffer less Dishonor in her Death, because she had so much honor in her
Birth, Go, bury her, for she is a Kings Daughter. The Son of God, who
vouchsafed to be born, as Man, in all the Forms of Meanness, chose a Noble man's
Daughter for the Subject of a Miracle to raise her when dead, and so a
Noblemans Son, to rescue him from Death. I have not designed one word to lessen
Birth, but all to make it greater, by Virtue added to it, and adorning it.

With the same design I have spoken of Riches and Pleasures, and all the
desirable Advantages of the World, and which are only of this World: I would
not have them excluded, I would have those who possess them not to love them
better than themselves, and not to exclude Religion, and then Happiness too,
which never goes in to any Place, but where Religion goes in before it. The
Things of the World have too much wrought on many Aged, and not Imprudent
Persons: Much more then is there need of Caution to one of your Age, and your
Quality, when too many of the same greater Figure have abused their worldly
Advantages, being first abused themselves by the ill Counsels of those who have
been too near them. Indeed your Ladyship gives me no occasion to suspect that
you had ever any to Misguide you, or that you are to be Misguided, when I by a
delightful Experience have viewed so much Virtue, as should either make me
think you had never been attacked by ill Counsels, or you had always Virtue,
Strong and Wise, to conquer them. There are Persons in the World, (and may you
be always one of those) upon whom Ill Advice is no less ineffectual then Good
is very often on others, ill things cannot stand before them, and, as no
venomous Beast can live in some Climates, they dye as soon as they come near
them, or within the fatal Air of this so mighty Innocence. There is a Serpent
to every Daughter of Eve, as well as there was to Eve her self, and so to every
Son of Adam: But however the Serpent be more subtle then any Beast of the
Field, there are those who will be innocent, be he never so Crafty, and they
will not eat of the Fruit, and without eating of it their Eyes are opened, and
they know Good and Evil, and so as to pursue, and to avoid. Every good Person
has something of an Exorcist, in him the Apostolical Power of casting out
Devils is hot lost, to him it is continued, the evil Spirit cannot bear his
Presence, as he could not bear that of Christ, when he sell down before him,
and cried out, I beseech thee torment me not. Besides the many Temptations from
others, there is a Tempter within our selves, there is a Principle of Vanity in
the Nature of Man, in this too earthly Nature, which carries us on to these
Vain Earthly Things with a fierce Desire, as fierce alas, as if they were not
Vain: From this Principle, which seems to be almost as old as our Nature, rise
all the Sins of our following Life, these are only so many irregular ways into
which our Inclinations divide themselves for the Pursuit of earthly Things.
From this Principle of Corruption in our Souls, rise all our Sins, as from
another of natural Corruption in our Bodies do rise the several Diseases of
them. The best of us therefore may have need to be upon our Guard against the
Things of the World, and good Reason there is to keep low, and to correct
betimes that prevailing Cause of Corruption by Advice, and by Endeavor.

In order to your successful Progress in this Course of Religion, you will, (I
am sure) be easily, and soon Exhorted to have (shall I say?) Or to continue a
suitable and devout Regard to that Day of the Week, which is particularly
designed for Religious Offices. The Day, which is set apart, and for something,
and that can be no other than holy Duty; the Day, which we call the Lord's Day
in a profane Jest, if we do not keep it to the Lord, if our use of it be
Profane, that is, not Religious. He who regards a Day, regards it unto the
Lord. Man is Born to Labor, (as Job has told us) he is designed by God to be
always in Action, and that Action as much as may be worthy of himself, and
useful to himself, or others: They who have the lowest Respect for this Day,
pretend not then to do the Business of their particular Calling; and therefore
should they not do that of their general Calling, as they are Christians? This
one Day was not set apart, only to be a Blank, a void Space in our Time, and to
have nothing written upon it: If we could be contented to lose one Day, as to
our own Interest, in every Week of so short a Life, yet God is not willing to
allow the loss of one, as to his Service, we complain, says a Learned Heathen,
that Life is short, and Time is swift, and yet like Men, very Unthrifty, and
very Poor, we mispend our too little time, as if we had too much. Whatever time
we mispend, we should take care, like Men luxurious in their Expenses, and yet
still just in there Principles, to mispend none but our own Indeed, if we should
take this Care, we should mispend no Time, because none is ours, much less that
which God has made His more than any other, His in a peculiar manner: Not only
God, but Man; all the Authority of Man, that of the Church, and that of the
State has made it God's own Time: And if any Sacred Thing, which one Man gave
to God, another cannot take away but with the blackest Guilt, much less that
which God has given to himself, and Man gave to God. Our using well this part
of our Time will prevent our abusing every other part, because it will advance
us to such a State of Mind, it will lead us into such Rules of Life, that we
shall learn to be always careful, and resolve to be always good. Surely we
shall be so, if we remember an Apostles Saying, that we are not our own; and
then not our Time; because if we our selves are not our own, then not any thing
belonging to us, which can be held no otherwise than our Being is, and must
pass over with our selves to the great Sovereign Lord.

You are ready, (I know) to keep this Day with all the solemn Care, and you are
to perform the Duties of it with all the solemn Reverence. The fixed and
ordinary Duties of it are Praying, and Hearing, Meditation, and Reading, and
Acts of Charity; and moreover there is an extraordinary Duty, the receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, seeing your Years now meet, and come up to your
devout Inclinations, and Time now almost overtakes your Piety and Prudence,
which (as swift as Time is) have been so much before it. Since this is so great
which now we see, how great must that be, which we may expect; the good Things
we view at a distance, though so far off, yet appear not little, they already
entertain our Eyes with a pleasing Prospect, and fill our Minds with amusing
Thought and the brightest Image, when we look forward to the Seasons of full
and ripe Perfection, of which we have the first Fruits now already. That the
Sacrament of Perfection may give you a large share thereof, and hasten it upon
you, and so gratify your eager Zeal and our swelling Expectation, you will not
fail to receive the Sacrament as often as you have Opportunity to receive it.
No mean believe me, between not receiving, and refusing; if you do not receive
it, you refuse it; and be pleased to consider how heinous the Crime must be to
refuse, when God does offer, not to come, when God invites. Every time the
Sacrament is to be administered, it is offered to all the Persons of the Place,
as much to each of them, as if it were offered in express words, and by name to
every single Person only and not to the rest, for him only provided. And then
you may begin to think how condescending a thing it is for a great Man, for one
much greater than our selves to order a particular entertainment for us, and
how indecent a thing to deny our Presence.

That you may hereafter receive this Sacrament with advantage, and now perform
with advantage the other Duties of Worship, which already you are not more
capable of then zealous for, I would propose few things more and sooner than a
Constancy to the Church of England, in which the Performance of all those
Duties is so strictly required, and the manner of performing them so well
prescribed. A Church it is, which cannot fail to be agreeable to you, because
it so well instructs you in Religion, in no part whereof you would be ignorant,
it is so ready to promote your Knowledge in every part, which you are so eager
to improve: A Church, which the more you understand, is still the better
satisfied, and her Satisfaction is still made greater by yours, instead of
envying you your own Knowledge, or denying you a share in that of others by
Instruction. I would recommend a Constancy to the Communion of the Church with
full Judgment of your Mind, and sincere Good Will of your Soul, that Soul,
which is to have so much Advantage from that Communion. When I give this
Advice, I offer it with all the Sincerity which becomes the Subject of Advice,
Religion, and which becomes a Man who has all the Zeal for the well-being of
the Person to whom he offers it, for this well-being in every thing, especially
in Religion. I would be sure to be thus sincere, when I propose this (I am
sure) wholesome Counsel, and therefore in that very Instant I for the time
endeavor to forget my own being a Member of this Church, I separate in my
Thoughts my being so from my Advice to you to be so forever. I do not exhort
you to this Communion, because I live within it, but because it is the best for
your Eternal Welfare, and for my own. And so I am not partial to my self in my
inviting you to my own Church, as some are fond of every thing they meet with
at their own House. But I should be indeed very partial, if I should reserve
good things to my self, if I should not exhort you to a Communion with that
Church, which is, and which upon all my Experience and all my Consideration I
have found to be the best, and which I therefore chose at first, therefore now
continue in. As Christ's Disciples said upon a like occasion, Whither shall we
go? So may I say, if we are not to continue in this Church, to what other shall
we go? What necessary thing for the Souls of Men can any other give, which we
have not here? Surely if Men will be hearty in any Religion, they will not fail
of embracing ours, when they have heartily enquired what it is, and they truly
know, how much it deserves to be embraced. Therefore perhaps so many Atheists
oppose our Church with a particular Fury, and so many, when they have revolted
from it, have soon become Atheists afterward, their denying all Religion has
been the next Step to the denying one, of which a less thing can scarce be
said, then that is as good as any. Others going from it have indeed not known
whither to go, they have roved about in a Circle of Error, have gone backward
and forward in an endless Maze of Religions, and whereas once there was a
Promise to move the Earth, if there were but found a Place to stand on, the
Religious world turns round with them, because they have not such a place. When
Cain went out from the Presence of the Lord, he became a Fugitive and a
Vagabond in the Earth, and his Punishment in this Sense too was greater than he
could bear: The Spirits of ill Men some imagine to have their wandering in the
air for a part of Punishment, the worst of Spirits and the Prince of the Air
gave this Account of himself, that he went to and fro in the Earth, and walked
up and down in it. So the departing from our Church has been punished in many
with their being never fixed, who would not be fixed where they might, where they
should have been very steady. Never indeed shall they find the Truth, who are
always seeking, and will never believe, they have found it, as they cannot be
long in a right way, who will change their way every Minute and every step. The
pursuing as well as the renouncing every Religion is an ill extreme; the
seeking thus for ever is one ill extreme as well as the not seeking any is
another. There can be no reason at any time to forsake our Church; no reason to
be always forsaking one, and running into another.

I insist so much more on this Plea for our Communion, not only because the
Subject is very pleasing to my self, but also very advantageous it is to you.
Indeed to your thoughts of this best Church I would give the best Impressions,
that you might be above the Danger of receiving any of the worse kind
hereafter, that you might be fixed before at this your Age, which is so capable
of Good, and so liable to Ill, and besides the Tenderness of your Age there is
the Softness of your Sex to make you the more disposed for the taking of any
sort of Stamp or Impression. You will forgive this my troublesome, however
zealous, Industry to see you settled in true Principles, and in strong
conviction of that Truth, because Inconstancy (as you read before) in Religion
is a thing so Dangerous, and Constancy in a false one is a thing so fatal.

Moreover Attempts have been very often made upon those of just Sex for the
betraying of them into a false Religion, and too often those attempts have bin
successful. My desires are so much more importunate for your continuing in a
Religion (which has so much reason for it) in a good Religion upon very good
Reason, because they who at first took Religion by that handle, and afterward
held it there are said in Scripture to be Noble; the doing so was a mark of a
Generous Spirit, and such a Spirit is very suitable to such a Quality as yours,
and no less suitable to Religion.

Many are the Arguments I could urge to prove the Necessity and the Advantage
of your being a Daughter of the Church, as well as of your Noble Parents. But
all such Arguments would as much be lost upon you, who have little need to be
convinced, as they are too often upon others in a worse Sense, who resolve not
to be so. I shall offer no more Arguments, then two, and those, as very
peculiar to your Quality and more exalted State: one I borrow from him who had
no such Zeal for the Church as should make him partial to it, but approaching
Death, which makes so many wise, and many sincere, taught him to confess, that
the People of England being naturally inclined to Freedom, and bred in Riches
and Plenty can hardly be induced to embrace any Religious Discipline which may
abridg their Liberty, and Pleasures: That is, any other Discipline then this of
the Church, which at the same Time it allows us Liberty and Riches and
Pleasures, does prefcribe our not abusing them to our own greatest
Disadvantage, and moreover our using them to the Advantage of others, and of
Religion. I now may add my other Argument, the Order and Decency of our
Worship, which makes it very natural to Persons of your Nobler Rank, who are
distinguished from others by order (that of High and Low in the different
Figures of the World) and by Decency, their having so much of it in their
appearance: They have all the Forms of Address paid to them, wherever they
vouchsafe to appear, and therefore something is to be paid by them to the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth. So K. David argued, and that generous
Devotion, which was so much his Virtue and his Glory, made him, apt to argue,
See now I dwell in a house of Cedar, and the Ark of God dwells within
Curtains. And so God himself did argue, offer it now unto thy Prince, will he
be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person?

From this my naming of order in Worship I will take occasion to recommend it
in all other things: And so much rather, because if there be a Rule for all
other things, much more will there be one for Religion, and when all things are
done in order, they will be done with ease, and be finished each of them in
very good time, and so there will not be a want of time, and a want of Thought
free and disengaged, for Prayer and other Works of Religion. To do things in
order, even those of our Busy and common Life, is so far a part of Religion,
as we thus imitate God, who is not the Author of Confusion, who made, and who
preserves all things still, in number weight and measure, who has fixed the
times for Night and Day, for Summer and Winter, and for every thing, who has
taught those Creatures Order which know little else: He has appointed the Men
for Seasons, and the S^^ knows his going down, the Stork in the Heaven
knows her appointed Time, and the Turtle and the Cra^e, and the Swallow
observe the time of (...) That Wisdom of Solution, the Fame whereof was in all
Nations rou^^^^ bout, not only showed it self in Reigning so as that Judah and
Israel dwelt safely, every Man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree; not only
in speaking Three Thousand Proverbs, and in speaking of Trees, and Beasts, and
Fowl; his Wisdom also appeared in the Order of his private Business, that of
his Family, and the Queen of Sheba admired it in this Order, as well as in
greater Things. His Wisdom taught him to prescribe, as always to himself, so to
others fixed Times for all things, and then to declare that, To every thing
there is a Season, and a Time to every purpose under Heaven. But here some may
be ready to say, that when each Affair is performed in all this Method, and at
allotted Times, the Man becomes a Slave (and no worse Slave then he who is his
own) the Rule is a Chain, and Life is a Toil, as he who observes the strict
Rules of Physic is very far from being happy, or being easy. I intend not the
observing of Order with this Anxious Care, and as if the thing must be done in
this very manner, and not otherwise, whatever happens, but only that it be for
the most part observed, and when it may be so with little trouble, and with the
common Foresight of every prudent Person; and then there will be something of
Order, even in the not observing of it. Otherwise Order would be a thing too
Nice for the State of Man, as some things are too fine to be used, or to last.
Our present State will not be so regular as a good Man would have it, nor so
Uniform; and all of a piece, and color, as a wise Man would make it, our whole
Condition, when on Earth, is uneven, like the Earth it self, which is divided
into Hills and Plains, and rough Way as well as smooth. No Rule of Acting can
pretend to a greater Name than that of a Law, nor to greater Authority; and
seeing we live not under Persian Emperors, every Law upon a new Overruling
Occasion may be Repealed, or be Suspended. Order is not to be Superstition and
Caprice, like that of the Orator, who made use of his angry Eloquence in a
Lawsuit, Commenced against the innocent Roman that ruffled and discomposed his
Gown. We are not to be Martyrs for our Rule, as the Man in the Greecian
Commonwealth was to die for the new Law which he proposed; and we are not to
observe the Rules of our appointed Order, as a Pedant those of his Grammar, or
as a Monk professes to observe those of his Society. Living in method, without
the Severity of living thus, will be so far from being a Toil, that it will
make every thing else to cease from being so; there will be Ease in every
Business, and the greatest in the Mind; when (...) is no Hurry without, there
will be none within. Not only Use will make Order so familiar, but it will make
it self so pleasant, that we shall not be afraid of it, we shall choose and
covet it, as we choose the Traveling in an open Road, and find it much more
easy, and we covet the Sailing by a Compass, and find it much more safe.
Indeed a Physician of elder Times prescribed this Rule of Health, that none
should be observed: But if none, then not his own, and then not his against
every Rule.

That the Order, which I know to be so useful in all our Life, and to be so
needful in the best part of Life, in Religion, you may be sure to observe in
this better part; when you enter upon any Action, consider, first, whether the
thing you would do be Lawful, whether God has not forbidden it, and whether the
best, and the wisest Men would not forbid it, and advise against it. Very great
Reason there is to consider thus, because you will otherwise have no Blessing
from that God, from whom, I hope, you will have an overflowing Plenty of it; no
Blessing so as to finish the Action you begin, or no Blessing afterward, so as
to have any good Effect rising from it: And surely all that Prudence, which
your present Behavior gives us a Promise of, will not give you leave to think
of doing any one thing in vain, much less that which should be worse than Vain,
should be hurtful. Be pleased to consider first, whether the Thing have any
sinful part, and not first, what Pleasure it may have, and what Profit; because
our greatest Profit is in Religion, and in Religion should be our greatest
Pleasure; and because Religion should be the governing Principle of all our
Actions, and should be always at the Helm to guide them, and is always the most
faithful Oracle to be consulted upon the Issues of them. So a great Man says, a
Prince, as Pious as Great, I have set the Lord always before me, therefore I
shall not be moved, Psalms 16. I shall neither do, nor suffer Ill, I shall be
sure in my Actions, and safe in my whole Condition. The not considering in our
first Steps of Action, whether it be such as we should go any farther in it,
whether it be good or not, is an ill Thing it self, much worse than at first
sight it seems to be, it leads us into Profaneness, and a Contempt of Religion;
and therefore in Scripture it is a Mark hereof: Indeed so much rather it is a
Mark of Profaneness; because this very thing is a first Principle of Religion,
that our Actions should begin from Him, from whom all Creatures had their
beginning, and because, if Religion does not come in at first, it comes in
seldom afterward; either that withdraws upon the contempt, or we make the
first contempt greater still, and we hardened Men too soon learn to forget what
before too boldly we had despised. The Action begins in disorder, which gives
the first place to Profit or Pleasure, and it cannot but end as it began.

Remember always your Confirmation, that is, this your Dedication of your self
to God (as the Jews had an yearly Remembrance of the Dedication of the Temple)
your taking the Vow upon your self which in your Baptism you made by others;
and that you always may remember it, be pleased to read the Form of
Confirmation once every Quarter of the Year. This was a Sacred tie, and the
first with which you by your own act bound the first and tender part of your
Life, and, I know, the Bond was not uneasy or too stiff for the tenderness of
it, but, in Solomon's Language, an Ornament of Grace unto your Head, and a
Chain about your neck; and to be bound continually upon your heart. This was
one of the most awful, the greatest Acts of Religion, you ever yet performed,
because it was the sealing of a Covenant between God and your self in most
awful manner, the Covenant made in Baptism, but sealed in Confirmation. You
then declared what you would do, and you obliged your self to the doing of it
in your whole following life, and the Bishop declared what God would do at the
same time he prayed to God for it, that he would assist you in, and reward you
for the performing your pious part. How great and solemn was the Engagement,
when the Bishop asked you with others, Do ye here in the presence of God and of
this Congregation renew the solemn Promise and Vow that was made in your Name
at your Baptism, ratifying and confirming the same in your own Persons and
acknowledging your selves bound to believe and to do all those things which
your Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for you. How great and solemn was
the Bishops Prayer, when the Venerable Man invested with heavenly Power, and
with all things to give commanding Authority to his Person, and a Religious
Grandeur to the performance, laid his hand upon you; as if he would convey a
part of that precious spiritual Ointment, which had been poured on his Head, to
yours, like the Oil running down from Aaron 's head, and so spreading farther
to the parts below. At the same time the Bishop laid one hand upon your Head,
he lift up another to that Heaven from whence his Power was derived, in Prayer
for you, Defend, O Lord, this thy Servant with thy heavenly Grace, that she may
continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy Holy Spirit more and more;
until she come into thy everlasting Kingdom, Amen. I have indeed a particular
reason for recommending all the nice and serious respects to your Confirmation,
not only because of the useful Greatness of the thing itself, but also because
of the extraordinary regard I ow it, as well as you, seeing I bore a part
therein, had the Honor to attend you in it, and present you to it.

My Lord your Father, as he observed me to be always, so upon this occasion
save me to be most particularly concerned for your Spiritual Interests, he did
me the Honor to think favorably of me, and was willing to believe that this
my zeal (for your Confirmation) had a Knowledge with it, and at the same time to
wish (I may suppose) that in order to the having such a Zeal, others might have
such a Knowledge, and therefore he asked me what Proof I had from Scripture for
the practice of Confirmation: My Answer was to this purpose, that 1. however it
is Sacrament to some, it is not to us, but indeed it follows one, and being not
essential, but very useful in Religion, like many other useful and yet not
absolutely necessary things, it might not be expressly commanded, and not so
expressly found in Scripture, which is a particular and a standing Rule only for
things absolutely necessary to Salvation. In other things the Church may know
that they advance the great ends of Religion, and then it wants for their use
no other Command besides its own. But 2dly. Confirmation has a proof from
Scripture, Acts 8. The first Christians of Samaria were baptized upon the
preaching of Philip, v. 12, and after their Baptism the Apostles sent Peter and
Johh to pray for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. v. 14.15. then
laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost, v. 17. that
is, were Confirmed.

Your Baptism placed you in the Christian Church; but your being there was
declared, and you engaged your self to the abiding there, in your Confirmation:
As an Ambassador may be sometime unknown in the Kingdom he is sent to, but he
is not supposed, or declared to be there, till his public Entry, and then he
begins public Action. When you were to be Confirmed, your Age made your
beginning of Religious Action very seasonable, and your Confirmation made your
going on therein very necessary, has given it all the obliging Circumstances.
Go on therefore, as you have begun, and do, as you are obliged, and go forth in
the strength of the Lord God, and pray for a double Portion of that his
Strength, and say; Give me, O my God, a zealous and steady Piety, a most devout
and flaming Love of thee, O my Creator, whom I ought to remember now in the
Days of my Youth, and the Days of my Pleasure, and I am also to remember those
other Evil Days, which as far they are from me now, yet will come, and the
years will draw nigh, in which I shall say I have no Pleasure. So shall your
Confirmation be repeated upon you from God every day of your Life, and, in the
Strength he gives, you shall become great in Religion, and go so far therein,
as only those have gone, whose shining Example was a Light in your way, and
taught you to go forth betimes, as they did before you, and as too few do after
them. Our Virtue and our Age, in the common View of Mankind, pass through the
same degrees, and their Progress often is the same, as there is not ripe and
well grown Fruit without a Bloom before, which pleases so much at present, and
promises so much hereafter. We have often had a surprising Account of some
younger Saints, what good and excellent things they said, what great and
excellent things they did. Indeed we have heard wonderful Descriptions of the
Virtues of the blessed Virgin in the first part of her Age, and so the Life of
the Mother almost becomes as much a Miracle as the Birth of the Son: That such
particular relations were true we have no proof, and they have no credit; but
the foundation of them is not without its truth, that she whose Piety was so
eminent afterward, it is most likely, could never have attained those glorious
improvements, without beginning sooner than others too often do; she could
never have been so highly favored of God, if God had not been highly and early
beloved of her, if she had not been a Virgin as much in her Mind, as otherwise,
if her Purity had not been great in the first outgoings of her Life, though her
first Conception was not undefiled.

Your Confirmation leads you to Prayer, because you are afterward to beg Grace
of God for your being able to answer all those holy ends of your Confirmation,
and because this leads you into Religion, the first Act whereof is Prayer.
Seeing Prayer is the first Act of Religion, that your beginning may not be an
Error, and seeing it is an immediate Address to God, that it may be with all
the Caution and Reverence of Approach, I would direct you here, and I now
propose the use of Three Prayers to you, which have a particular Respect to
your own Condition, and may be added one of them still to your other Prayers,
at your three daily Times of Praying.

A Thanksgiving for Great Birth, and a great share of Earthly Goods.
O Merciful Father, and the God of all the Families of Israel, thou did make
me to hope when I was yet upon the Breasts, I was cast upon thee from my Birth,
and from my first Hours thou wast my God. Thy Blessings in that my Birth were
some of them common to me with others, and I praise thee for them; But some
thou gave me, O my gracious God, more peculiar to my self, and for these too
I praise thee. For my noble Birth, and for all the following Advantages of it,
those of Fortune, and those of Education, for all I praise thee, and make me to
praise thee in all those Advantages, by directing and improving them all to thy
Glory, and not admiring my own therein. Thou have called me to Glory and
Virtue, and to no Virtue more than to Humility: May I be humble always before
thee, and always consider, that all Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness
thereof is as the Flower of the Field, the Grass withers the Flower fades,
and the Fashion of this World, as Gaudy and Beautiful as it is, passes away.
So, when I thus consider, and when I am thus humble, may I have a Name better
than that of Sons and Daughters, an everlasting Name which shall not be put
out, that in Heaven it self, through him who had his Birth from thee, and was
thy firstborn Son, through Christ my Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for a lively Sense of Religion, and a sincere Love thereof.
LET thy Tabernacles be amiable to me, O Lord of Hosts, let my Soul long, and
even faint for the Courts of the Lord, and my Heart and my Flesh rejoice in
God. Make my Soul to thirst for God, for the living God; when shall I come and
appear before God? Make thou the Mighty to give unto the Lord, to give unto the
Lord Glory and Strength, to give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name, to
Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so let my Soul pant after thee, O God. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, and is there any thing upon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee? O
let thy Desire be also to the Work of thine own Hands, to Crown me with Mercy
and loving Kindness, in this, and in another Life; through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A Prayer for other Graces and Virtues, and Religious Accomplishments.
I Acknowledge, O Lord, that every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is from
above; and seeing thou art so ready to give it, I rejoice that it is from thee;
and because it is all from above, I therefore here below lift up mine Eyes unto
the Hills, from whence comes my Help. Bless me with all those Virtues, which
are suitable to my Sex, and and my Condition, and my Age, and which are to make
my Passage through this World easy, and that into another safe. With the many
Goods of this World, by thy Grace give me a wise Contempt of it, and the lowest
Opinion of all Earthly Things, as thou have given me by thy Bounty, a very high
Portion of them: Grant me Prudence, and innocence, and Success in all my
Actions concerning them, and yet Meekness and Patience hereafter in all the
Evils which thou may design for my Trial, and which may disturb my
Enjoyment. Give me Vigor of Understanding, and all the goodly Endowments of
it, instruct and improve my Soul in a daily Increase of all useful Knowledge:
Enlighten it with the Knowledge of thy self, the Father of Lights, and the only
true God, the Knowledge of whom is eternal Lise; that I may thus go from
Strength to Strength, till I appear before the God of Gods Zion, and then
appear in the Glory and the Purity of Souls which follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes, and are the first Fruits to God, and to the Lamb, and are without
spot before the Throne of God: O grant me a place before thy Throne, for the
sake of him thy Lamb, and my Redeemer Jesus Christ. Amen.

Let your Life be divided, the Religious part of Life, betwixt Prayer and
Practice, and let no Variety divert you more than the daily Returns of Duty in
passing from the one to the other: Neither is to exclude, but each is still to
bring in the other; because by Prayer you gain a Power for holy Actions, and
that Power is executed by Practice, and any such Power is like a Law, without
Execution very Fruitless. A Virtuous Woman, with the Addition of Greatness, is
a public Good, and her Influence is boundless, and so as to make Virtue a
public and common Good in the best Sense, by making others like her self: In
your being one of the Virtuous Number, how much Honor shall you add to your
Honorable Family? How much Happiness to that other Family, into which
hereafter Marriage shall Transplant you? To both Families, and to your self a
greater Happiness I cannot wish, than the Enlargment of those Virtues which
shine forth already, nor to my self a nobler Satisfaction, than that Success of
all this my Advice, which is not doubted by him who gives it. How great a
Blessing is such a Woman I spoke of? Her Price is far above Rubies, above those
she is adorned with. How great Things are said of her by a mighty King, and a
Wise one, by Lemuel, who could not choose but be a skilful Judge of Virtue,
when he had so much Experience in Vice; as skilful a Judge in the Perfections
of the Sex, as when two contended for the Child, he showed himself in the
Rights thereof. That Description, Prove. 1. is a part of the Prophecy his Mother
taught him, verse. 1. whose particular Conversation with her own Sex, must needs
make her learned in the Accomplishments of it? The Woman there described is a
Person of Honor and Wealth, and so great enough to have her Picture drawn by a
King, and the Colors to be given him by the Mother of a King: Honor her
Clothing first, and then Silk and Purple, her Covering of Tapestry, and all
her Household Clothed with Scarlet, her works praise her in the Gates, and her
Husband is known in the Gates, (a Place of Judgment, and Authority, and
Greatness) when he sits among the Elders (or Governors) of the Land, 22,
23.31, 25. Nor is her Greatness made therefore doubtful, because her Industry
so active in all Kinds of Work is a part of her Character and her (...) for the
greatest Persons of that Age chose the same Industry for their Exercise. That
when many Daughters have done Virtuously, you may, if not excel them all, as
Verse 29, yet imitate the Virtues they excel in; your Practice is to be a Copy
from that charming Picture in one part more than all, and that one Work in
which her Hands were exercised I would recommend to you more than all the rest,
in which she used them, she stretches forth her Hand to the Poor, yea, she
reaches forth her Hands to the Needy, v. 20.

And here I would make it one part of my Counsels, that amongst other Books of
Scripture, you would read not only the last Chapter of this Book, but would
begin at the first, and so go on and read all the Book, which has not only, as
other Proverbs, shortness and Wit in the Language, but great Wisdom, and
profound Thought in the Sense, and such as would direct the several Motions of
your Life in the use. However it was Written by a King, who as such, had
greater Advantage from the high Throne he sat on to view all Affairs, and to
advise upon them, yet was it not Written to Kings alone, but to all their
Subjects, and to all Mankind. When there has been so much Care and Expense to
teach you every thing of common Behavior, you should much more learn those
higher Arts of prudent Conduct, and those which will give you true
Accomplishment, will make you agreeable, not only to others, in your outward
Deportment, but to your self, in your inward satisfaction. As you should
observe a regular Method in all things you are to do, so should you at all
times have something to be done. A Thought it is most worthy of a great Person
to think her self made for Action, because as Happiness, the highest State to
which Mankind can be advanced, is in Action, so Greatness is more in Action
then in Condition: The latter kind of Greatness does follow the other, and is
only an unfinished Piece without it. When I speak of Action, I intend not your
being always exercised in things high and serious, but only your being always
in some Exercise, and so when the thing it self may not be of such a solemn
Importance, yet it may have this Praise at least, that it is very Innocent:
Then your being employed therein will preserve you also Innocent, and if
sometimes little good be done to others, or your self, yet your doing great
Evil may be prevented. I intend not any sort of Exercise which should have Toil
to Body or Mind, but only that which should be advantageous to both without
oppressing either. Amongst the many sorts of Exercise, Reading deserves a
place, indeed it should have the chief, because you will then do right to the
principal part, to your Understanding, in improving that which I know is so
capable of Improvement; and because your Reading will furnish you with so many
useful Notions to make you happy in your Life, Wise in your Deportment, and
both Wise and Happy in Religion. Some good Thought of the Book will have a
second Printing within your Mind: Be your Reading never so unconcerned and
easy, it will be sure to leave some Impression, as often our Motion, be it
never so nimble and light, will yet leave a Mark behind it. And thus like her
whom our Prince of Poets describes (and as he seems so be in love with her
Perfections, so every one would be with his Description of them) you will have

In your Mind the wisest Books,
As in your Face the fairest looks.
A modern Writer, in his Remarks upon a neighboring Nation, observes the
Conduct of its great Ladies to be such, that he never heard of any one there
who had been accused of Vice; he supposes this steady Virtue to have no other
Cause, than that they are always busy, and so they are not at leisure for
Thinking, and less for doing Ill, and then too they give no occasion to others
to think Ill, not of them. A Nobleman of this Kingdom, and lately a Minister of
State, advised his Daughter to Read, or to hear Reading two or three Hours
every Day: And surely, if he always gave as good Advice to his Prince, for the
Management of Public Affairs, as here he did to his Daughter, for the
Advancement of her Virtue, and private Wisdom, he was one of the best Statesmen
in the World. I have seen a Collection of Prayers, and Spiritual Rules, Written
by a very great Person of your Sex, and of our Nation, when very young, from
the Books she Read, not only to make the Writing an Exercise, and Action of the
better sort, but that she might fix what she Read with the greater Force upon
her Mind, and that the best part of what she had found in other Books, she
might always find again in her own, it might be always ready for her View, and
for her Use. And here I cannot choose but wish that the young Nobility of the
other Sex would make Reading much more their Practice; they would find it very
useful to them, and themselves more useful to their Country. At the same time I
beg leave to offer an humble Proposal, and well designed Request to their
Parents, that they would make the Education of their Sons one great part of
their Care, and their Improvement in Learning one great part of their
Education. I know the Failure in the present Method of Education, I have often
declared against it, and often bewail it. Never did any Nation understand
Greatness more than the Romans, and in that Glorious Age when Rome had the
largest share of it, her Emperors and Noblemen esteemed themselves greater as
they were more learned. They never thought there was any Attainder in Knowledge,
nor did that, which was to exalt their Soul, debase their Blood. So high was
their Ambition to excel in Letters as well as in War and Policy, that one of
their Emperors resented his Boldness as a Crime of High treason, who pretended
to a more refined Skill in one sort of Learning, which was the darling
Inclination the Mistress of his Prince, and in which he would not admit a Rival
as well as not a Partner in his Empire. It has been often said, that those of
our Sex have no Advantage above the other, in respect of Learning, but what
Education gives them: I hope they will not in flaming Complaisance renounce one
advantage that of Learning, by denying themselves another, this of Education,
nor think it a mark of good Breeding to neglect a chief part thereof. Let there
be no occasion for the other Sex to upbraid our own, none for ours to be
conquered by them as much in understanding as in Love: And at the Weapon which
we have called our own, that of Knowledge. If we are conquered, let us like
vanquished Forces rally again, and retrieve our Honor, as Armies have sometime
done, when the Women have met them in their Flight, upbraiding and insulting
over them more than their Enemies, and yet at the same time less angry with
them, for not acting like Men; then with themselves for not being so.

Let the doing good to others, and in them to your self as to the welfare of
your Soul be the chief end of your Life, as you will find it one of the chief
Delights thereof. In every Action consider how far in the course thereof you
may do good to others, and be sure to follow it on that side of it, in which it
leads you to the doing good, and as more is to be done, so much more pursue it.
Every one is Born for the doing this, much more those of such a Birth as yours:
They are born and placed on higher ground above others, that they may have a
free and boundless prospect of the wants of others, and that all the kind
effects may in a gentle stream flow down to those beneath them, as the Springs
first rise in the highest places to refresh the Country all around, and the
humble Valleys are enriched by what flows down from the Hills above them. The
Great and the Noble are not more distinguished from the common Orders of
Mankind by their Condition, then by this privilege of it, the imparting all the
generous advantages to others, and as their condition is better than that of
others, so they are to make the condition of others too better than they found
it. They are distinguished by the greatness of their Fortune, as they are able,
and by the greatness of their Mind, as they are ready for all useful Offices.
They are like the Stars which have their lofty and glittering place in the
World, not to be admired by the other lowly Creatures, not to dazzle all things
under them with their brighter Glory, but to guide and cherish them with their
Light and Influence. The esteem which they receive from Men, they are to give
to God, they are to^ convey it farther still, and carry it up to Him who is
indeed the Fountain of Honor, who is higher than the highest, to Him whose
Stewards they are as well in the Honor they receive as in the Riches they
possess. When the late Earl of Rochester began to have very solemn
apprehensions of another State, and very zealous thoughts of a Soul and of
Spiritual things in this, when with all the flaming Piety of a Saint, and all
the careful Tenderness of a Father he began to be concerned for himself, and
for those next to himself, his Children, he wished that his Son might become an
honest and religious Man, and so what he never could be otherwise, a Blessing
and Support to his Family, that he might never be a wit, that is, one of those
wretched Creatures, who value themselves upon their despising God and Religion,
his Being and his Providence: This Nobleman complained, that his Children were
brought into a vicious world, and declared, that no Fortunes or Honors were
equal to their possessing the Love and Favor of God. If there could be need to
urge your willing Virtue with new Engagements, I should tell you that you may
think your self still more engaged to adorn your Birth, and each prerogative of
it with good Actions, to enlarge your Interest, which is so great already, in
the World by doing them, because your Sex has no other way to raise its
Interest, no other passage to Esteem and Power: Our Sex has many advantageous
ways, as many as there are ingenuous Professions, yours does seem to be so much
designed for Virtue, that it almost seems to be your Profession, and you to
have no other, that you might be at free leisure for it, and be devoted to it.
There should be the same standard of Nobility in the thoughts of those who have
it, which there was in China for many hundred years, where as the Emperor
himself (who was called the Son of Heaven) was very learned and good, so the
Nobility of those under him and deriving from him was not from Birth, but from
a likeness to him in great advancements of Knowledge and Virtue. It is a Notion
which often returns upon me, that when I look round the World, amongst the many
entertaining Objects I meet with there I find none that comes near my eye with
so much delight as a Person very Great and very Good. Virtue and Beauty are
often said to make a Masterpiece in the mixture: But Virtue and Greatness, when
joined together, make up something yet more perfect; Virtue, when placed so
high, is not only seen better, it is seen more Glorious. We now behold, with
too much evidence, Christian Piety in a great Decay, which yet, while it is so
great in some, is lamented by others; If Religion must not live, there are
Surviving Friends to attend the Funeral, and to bewail the Death: But then how
importunate are to be their Prayers, how Serious are to be their endeavors,
that Christian Religion now in its lower state of decay and corruption may have
at least one advantage, which it had not in its first sat of purity and
perfection, that many Mighty and many Noble may be called, and they not only
for their own sake, but for the sake of others, that by the prevailing force of
their Example and their Power many others may be called as well as they.

There is an argument for Religion not only from your Quality, but from your
Sex. The Religious engagements are so much stronger upon your Sex, because that
tenderness of mind, which is so natural to it, is no less natural to the
Particular Spirit of Devotion, and to the general Spirit of Christ's Religion,
and because while Men are engaged in the business and noise of the World, and
many in the most noisie part thereof, in War, you may enjoy a devout rest at
home, your Closet knows nothing of tumult, there at least is peace and leisure.
All who have a passion for Piety have at the same time another, they are
concerned with zeal that it may flourish in your Sex, and so may spread it self
and flourish in the World, that the famous Saying upon Truth may have its
accomplishment in Piety, and this, when appearing in a Form so beautiful, may
strike the eyes and charm the affections of all who behold it. Christian
Religion, in the first Ages of it, did sometimes ow the multiplying of its
Numbers to the Zeal of your Sex: And so may still the Holiness so much designed
and promoted by that Religion have a Glorious enlargement from it. Not only
the Believing Wife then did sanctify the Unbelieving Husband, but the Pious
Woman now may sanctify the less pious Man, and her Example not only reproach
him for not being good, but invite him to the being so hereafter. St. Hierom
declared that the propagation of Virtue as much as that of the World it self
was due to your Sex, and therefore, when dissatisfied with the general
corruption of Mankind he fled into retirements from them, and instead of an
abode with them chose to dwell with the Wild beasts of the Desert, he still
continued a Religious correspondence with many of your Sex. The reformation of
that World, which now so fiercely we complain of, may be expected now from such
as those whom St. Hierom then conversed with, and by a soft conveyance of all
things pious from their hands: According to the argument of the Chinese
Philosopher the World consists of Kingdoms, and Kingdoms consist of Families;
And each Family is more in the continual view of its Governess, and more to be
fashioned by her. Not only the Philosopher of China but the other of Greece, he
who gave Laws to the World in Learning, as his Scholar did in War, had the same
wise Notion, that the good management of Kingdoms is to follow this of
Families. Indeed the influence of the Mother is great upon the Mind, as her
share is great in the bodily Constitution, of the Children; and then in this
sense too, If the Root be holy, so may be the Branches. Especially those, in
the Family, of her own Sex, who are so much more within her view and her
management, and whom her experience, in respect of her own Education, and then
her particular knowledge of all things peculiar to her Sex do give her a more
natural capacity to manage with the best success. The saying of a Bishop to a
Courtier was no less suitable, in its Wisdom, to his Character from whom it
came, then useful, in its influence, to him it was directed to, When you choose
a Wife, make your strict enquiries into the qualifications, not of the Father,
but of the Mother, and then you have found those of the Daughter at the same
time and in one discovery. And therefore, as it was the ambition of a Jewish
Woman, to be a Mother, so it should be that of a Christian, to be a good one.

Amongst the several things I have offered to your practice, Fasting I have not
named, much less prescribed, because if that can be useful in any part of your
Age, some may think it not to be so necessary in this part thereof. But surely
there will be a time, when Fasting will be very useful, for the withdrawing our
selves from the World, and fuel from the fire, that meat from our desires,
which does often nourish them more than us, as it often feeds an ulcer more
than a sounder part. Fasting will be useful for the making Spiritual Objects
familiar to us, and for a particular enquiry into our Spiritual state like that
into our weekly expenses, for the remembrance and the repentance of our sins,
and the appointing all the methods of suitable Provision against them, for the
considering not only our Sins, in order to the forsaking them, but our Graces
too, in order to the continuance and improvement of them. When a great Soldier
was to retire from the World, who had seldom retired from his Enemy, he
declared it to be very needful, that there should be some space between the
affairs of life and the day of death: Indeed there should be some between Life
and Life, there should be a Truce with the World, in order to a Peace with God,
there should be a Time of Respite, not only for the sense of Tasting, but for
those of seeing and hearing, and all the Senses; so we may seem to dye, though
not daily, yet one Day at least in the Week, and to better Purposes than
Charles the Fifth, we may thus act Death it self, the chief Parts whereof are
the Silence of the Condition, and want of Sense. And so Retirement is, like
Death, a silent and quiet State, and a remove from sensible Things, and it has
something too of the Happiness which follows Death, in the Religious Enjoyments
of it.

A Method it were of great Advantage to the making you that which you so much
desire to be, and which all others nope to see you, a finished Work of Prudence
and Virtue, if you would choose one eminent for both, known to be so by all who
know her, one of the like Quality and Condition with your self, whom you may
observe, and imitate in both. You may place her Actions before you in the
fairest Light, make her a daily Example to you in her Behavior, that you may
afterward rise to be an Example in yours to others. Indeed the Learned Heathen
has taught us another use of such a Method, not only to place the Actions in
our sight, that we may imitate the Good, but the Person too in our Presence,
that we may avoid all Evil, be overaw'd against it, in a very innocent Magic,
to carry always the Excellent Person with us, to suppose him standing before
us, wherever we are, and reading mora^l Lectures to us. For the latter use of
this Method you have less occasion; for the being Overawed by an imagined
Presence against all Evil, because this always is at so great a distance from
you, and very much out of sight: Your Innocence is such, and your Conversation
so well chosen, that you almost see as little Evil in others, as others can see
in you; there is a continual Presence within your Self, to Overaw, and to
Control, that of pious Thoughts, and a far greater than what the Heathen did
propose, there is that of God. However your Innocence is so great, yet should
you be always on your Guard, to defend and preserve it, as the greatest City
deserves and requires so much more Art and Care to keep and defend it: no
Innocence is too great to be Assaulted, and, without a prudent Care, to be
conquered. Not only Lot's Wise is to be remembered, but Adam's too, the first
that ever was; and were your Innocence as perfect, as in all my Raptures of
Wishing, I could desire, yet would it not be more perfect than Hers, and that,
we know, was no more above a Conquest than above a Temptation. I have all the
vigorous Hope, (and surely my Hope will not deceive me here) that the early
Appearance of your Understanding, which others admire, and which you are happy
in, will give you very much a Capacity of one kind, that of doing good, and
will place you in a Condition, not so much of committing any greater Sin, as of
avoiding it.

You are now Madam, a Flower of the Fairest Kind, in all the blooming Graces,
and lively Perfections of a beautiful Appearance. I would take some Care, and I
would desire some from your self, that there may be one part of you, which may
not be too much like a Flower, and which may not wither. As I would exhort you
to the securing one part, which may not be frail, and which should make the
rest of you lasting to your great Advantage, so I would Exhort you to nothing
more, than to remember that all things upon Earth besides are not lasting, are
very frail: However you can make something not to be so, which has a Relation
to your self, yet you can never make earthly Things otherwise by all your Art:
They will not cease to be such, though you never cease to desire them, and to
love them, they will only Infect you with their own Weakness, and you will be
so much more frail your self, as you more desire them, and love them more, nor
will their just Value be raised by your raising your Affections toward them.
Seeing the Things of the World are such, you may begin to argue what little
Reason there will be to have a value for your self upon things which have very
little in themselves; and then what they have not, they cannot give. So you
will be moved to the not desiring a greater share in this World than you have,
when, if you had a greater, you would only have a more bulky heap of Frailty,
which surely is not a thing desirable. As you will not covet more than you
possess, so you will neither esteem your self, upon that which you enjoy, more
than you ought, nor will you esteem it more than it deserves: And then the
eager Passion we commonly have for things, when they are going from us, will
have no place in your Mind, when you loose them, you will not look upon things
with a fond admiring Eye, which you cannot so much as look on long, but the
fleeting Goods will soon be out of sight, and out of reach. You will pay no
high regard to these Enjoyments, which are every hour passing from you, and
which, as soon as they are gone, you will see, could not claim any such regard,
when to you nothing of them shall remain, nothing but an empty wast, and the
wild and melancholy Prospect of it. You were not more charmed with their Face,
when they were coming toward you, than you shall be frighted with their back
parts, so Deformed and Monstrous, when they are gone away beyond you. Your
Disdain will be a generous Revenge to their Inconstancy; they fly from you, and
at the same time you no less fly from them; you are forsaken by them, and they
abhorred by you. This true Judgment of the World will make you a true Friend
to, and judge of your self, the Knowledge of its unsteady Nature will give you
a very steady Knowledge of Religion, and an hearty Sense thereof: When the
Uncertainty of the World has made an Impression upon your Mind, a Zeal for
Religion will make another, the Contempt of that will advance the Esteem for
this, when that falls so much lower, this will rise so much higher in your
Soul, by a difference of Motion, as the things are different. It may seem very
strange, that my pleading should be so importunate for your Contempt of the
World, when you have so large an Interest therein; as the Advice would seem
absurd, and very disagreeable to him who has the largest stake in the Game, to
play all the time with little Care. But if you should think my Pleading to be
less suitable, yet it is on your side, and then I cannot think any thing absurd
or unseasonable, which favors and promotes your Well being. This my Proposal
can never be so unseasonable, as it will be necessary; because if earthly
Things be treated by you with Fondness and Caresses, you will scarce be happy
in having more than others, you may be most unhappy in loosing more; as Bodies
of greater Bulk are more exposed to Wounds, and the Wounds are more Inflamed,
and Fatal. The Possessing a wealthy Share in the World does not make the
despising of that less needful, but rather is a new Engagement to it; because
otherwise you only have so much more to hurt you. There cannot be a right Use
of the World, unless there be a mean Opinion of it; if there be not a right
use, if you abuse it, that will be sure to abuse you too in a just Revenge, and
will do you Mischief. So well does one of your Sex declare in those her Manly
Writings, which have so large a share in the two great Accomplishments, (Piety
and Wit) where no share can be too large, and she Summons the whole World to
hear the mighty Thing which she declares, when thus she Writes in Defiance to
earthly Things, and for Instruction to Mankind, who are not very apt to bid
Defiance to them.

My Muse pronounce aloud, there is nothing good,
Nothing the World can show,
Nothing it can bestew.
Your having the meanest Thoughts of the World is my last Advice, (however when
I have so great an Opinion of this Advice, it might also have been my first)
that, like other last words, it may be more Imprinted upon your Memory, may go
farther into your Judgment, and pierce deeper into your Affections; because
this will Crown and Finish, and give a lively Influence to all my other
Counsel, without this it cannot be performed, or cannot be effectual. You will
not then so remember your worldly Advantages, as to forget your self, or rather
to remember and think of your self too much; but the good-natured Saying will
have its force upon you, Ecclus 3.18. The greater thou art, the mote humble thy
self, and thou shall find favor before the Lord.

If any part of my Advice seem less easy, be pleased to choose and begin with
that which seems very easy, and that will carry you by gentle Steps to the
other; upon the practice of the easier part, the other will not seem any longer
difficult: As sometimes by a scarce sensible rising we go up to the top of the
Hill, and without great Toil, only by going on, we reach it, when it appears at
a distance very high, and the Ascent very troublesome. You are ready, I know,
to meet Religion, in every way in which it is coming toward you, and you give
it all the joyful Embraces at the Meeting, and you are ready to take all Good
Advice, at the same time you so little want it, and are fit to give it. Every
thing which wears the Badg, or comes in the Name of Religion has more than a
Cup of cold Water, something warm and vigorous, and hearty from you, and surely
you shall not loose your reward. To Proposals of Religion you always give an
easy and liberal Entertainment, and you are not therefore to be oppressed, as
Persons easy in Access, and bountiful in Entertainment, sometimes are by
troublesome and imposing Guests. My Instructions should be useful, but not
severe; like a well modeled Poem, they should have Profit, and Pleasure too,
they should be Healthful, as Exercise and good Diet, not unpleasant as Physic,
especially where little of Disease is to be removed, and a softer Method will
prevent: When the Mind is of so untainted a Constitution, the Physician may be
as much a Courtier as he pleases, there can only be need of something to
prevent, and not to Cure. If any part of my Counsels seem less suitable to your
present Age, that has a Design beyond it, to become a standing Rule for all
your Life; and why should not good things, as well as some ill things, and
Poisons have a lasting force, and work at the distance of many Years? I would
thus lay up for you a Treasure of Instructions, which may hereafter make you
Rich in good Works, and I would in this Sense lay up for you a good Foundation
against the time to come, a Foundation as strong as good, that you may be built
up in your most holy Faith, and may never be liable to any Fall or Ruin. My
Designs cannot be narrow and short, when your Welfare is in view, and in
pursuit; and how charming is the Thought of my having done any thing to advance
it in every part of your Life! So you may be that to me, which an old Christian
Writer calls a Prince of his Time in an Epistle to him, The glorious Ornament
of all my Labors, if I may pretend to Labors, and may deserve such an
Ornament. A Secretary to four Popes Writ a Book of Advice upon Studies and
Learning, Dedicated it to an Illustrious Lady, and he intended it for her
Service. A Grammar was Written for the Use of Queen Mary, when very young, and
Presented to her Mother, Catherine Queen of England: I profess not here to send
you Learned, but Religious Instructions, and not to teach you Words, but
Things, the best, and the greatest Things, and no other Language but of the
better Country, that is, the Heavenly. I present only such Instructions, as
upon the Command of King James the First, Dr. Williams, (afterward Bishop, and
Lord Keeper) writ for the use of the Lady Catherine Manners, Daughter to the
then Earl of Rutland, and Married to the then Marquess of Buckingham. When the
Author sent those Instructions to the Marquess, he declared thus in his Letter
which attended them; Praying is most necessary for the obtaining, Principles
for the Augmenting, Resolution for Vie defending a true Faith and Profession.
The young Marchioness was then not only to be Instructed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, but to be Converted from another, of the Church of Rome.

That every thing now proposed, may so much more prevail for your sake, and for
mine, be pleased to Pray in that prevailing Language of the Church.

Lord of all Power and Might, who art the Author, and Giver of all good Things,
graft in my Heart the Love of thy Name, increase in me true Religion, Nourish
me with all Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep me in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

And now, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise,
think on these things.

May you observe all these Rules, and whatsoever Rules may be added to these,
that you may have an Addition too of Blessings, and a far more exceeding Weight
of Glory, a Weight which shall not be Uneasy, or Oppress; but the heavier it
is, shall be still more easy. May the holy Practice, you began so very early,
end very late, may it never end; but O let it be continued in the Heavenly, in
the endless State, not only continued, but as high as the Heaven is, in
comparison of the Earth, so much more heightened too. May you always be possessed
with a Desire, a steady and refined Desire of Heaven, as a Place not only of
everlasting and unchangable Happiness, but also of everlasting and unchangable
Holiness. May you be happy now in a Religious Practice, and happy hereafter in
the Reward thereof. In the mean time the view of both, of your Practice and
your Reward, makes another happy, the unworthy Writer, and

Madam, Your Lady ships most Unworthy And most humble Servant. J. P.

A Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament, with regard to its being
Commanded by God, and desired by us.
O Most gracious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him the
Father of Mercies too, and the God of all Comfort, let thy Mercies, and thy
Comfort, I most humbly, I most earnestly beseech thee, be always present to me,
and particularly at this time, and at such times as this. Thou have appointed a
Sacrament for the Health and the Strength of my Soul; O make me to rejoice in
that Appointment now, as I am to live, by the right use of it, hereafter. Thou
have given me a Command, O my God, to receive it, and thou have given me the
privilege of receiving it: O let this Command at least be performed by me,
that the Breaches of all thy other Commands may be forgiven to me. O let not
this Privilege be despised, that all the other Privileges and Benefits may
not be forfeited. Thy dying Son has spoken to me, and in Words which were
almost Written in his Blood, and which I should be ready to Seal with mine; do
this in remembrance of me. When he bids me, and when thou repeatest what he
said, with new Engagements, shall not I do this, and every thing? Can I choose
but do it, when it is to be done in remembrance of him, the Thought of whom is
to be most pleasing to me, his Name is as Ointment poured forth, his Mouth is
most sweet, and he altogether lovely? Can any thing be needful to make me
remember him? Can any thing be able to make me forget him, till I can forget my
self? It yet there be no necessity for any thing to preserve the Memory of him,
there is one for the performing what thou Command. If nothing can make me
forget thy Love, and the Son of thy Love, yet I am to show that I do not forget
him, in remembering his Precept. From thy Goodness I have received a Command,
and now from thy Grace a Desire for the observing of it. O grant me all the
Measures, the overflowing Measures of thy Grace for the Executing thy Command,
and my Desire, and thy Grace, (as much need as I have thereof, will be
sufficient for me, I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. Lord,
I desire, help thou my Weakness in desiring, and much more in the performing.
Be thou a Sun and a Shield, a Sun to Cheer and Enlighten, a Shield to save and
defend my Soul. Gird me with Strength, who have none of my own, and let thine
so wound my Spiritual Enemies, that they may not be able to rise, but fall
under my Feet. Let there be no want of Grace from thee, and in me no want of
Will: I am Feeble and Weak, but thou, O Lord, art Strong and Mighty, and thy
strength is made perfect in my Weakness, and will make that perfect too. As thy
Mercy rejoices against Judgment; so does thy Power against Infirmity, and thy
Power, the more I want of it, will rejoice so much more, if my use of thy Gift
be suitable to what thou have given: Thou give to will and to do of thy good
Pleasure; for the partaking of this thy Holy, this thy blessed Sacrament thou
have given me to will, O give me to do of the good Pleasure, which thou have
declared for me, and declared to me in the Merits, and for the fake of thy
beloved Son, and my never enough beloved Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Another Prayer before the receiving of the Sacrament, with a regard to God's
Favor, and our Qualifications in our Approaches to the Sacrament.

O Thou the God of my Mercy, and the God of my Salvation, accept, I pray thee,
thy most unworthy Servant in that Duty in which I should appear most worthy,
and accept my Weakest Service, where the best of my Strength should be
employed. O thou High and lofty One that inhabitest Eternity, whose Name is
Holy, thou dwell in the High and Holy Place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive
the Heart of the Contrite: O make me contrite in Heart, and humble in Spirit,
that thou may dwell with me, that I may dwell with thee in thy House, and at
thy Table. For thy Son's sake, for thy own sake, for thy Mercies sake, contend
thou not for ever, and be not thou always angry, that the Spirit may not fail
before thee, and the Soul which thou have made. Thou have seen my ways, O heal
me; lead me, and restore Comforts to me, and to my Mourners, to all those
Powers within me, which mourn for my Sins against thee: Be thou mine
everlasting Light, and the Days of my Mourning shall be ended. Make me first to
wash my Hands in Innocence, and then admit me to compass thine Altar, O Lord of
Hosts, my King and my God. And how blessed are they who dwell in thy House,
they shall be always praising thee! A Day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand. I confess my Sins, O do thou forgive them: I grieve for my Sins, O
make me to rejoice in the Pardon of them. [Here remember as much as may be, and
confess the particular Sins of your Life] Too long, alas, have I lived, O make
me to live no longer, in a Correspondence with them. Too long have I born the
Burden, and thou the Defiance, of them. Too long have I been at Peace with my
Lusts, and then all the time not at Peace with thee, and with my self: I now
Proclaim War against them, do thou teach my Hands to War, and coyer my Head in
the Day of Battle, give me the Shield of thy Salvation, and thy right Hand
shall hold me up, and thy Gentleness shall make me great. Give thou to me Grace
and Glory, and make me to live a Godly Life, and then no good thing shall thou
withhold from me now in the Sacrament, nor afterward in any other part of
Religion, or any part of my Life. Cloth my Soul with the Garments of
Salvation, cover it with a Robe of Righteousness, as a Bride adorns her self
with her Jewels. Let that Pardon, which this Sacrament is the Seal of, be
extended to all my sinful Imperfections in the receiving of it. The Pardon of
my Sins, and the Acceptance of my self, the great Benefits of thy Sacrament,
and a true Frame of my Soul, that the benefits may be mine, and I may be thine
for ever, vouchsafe, O God, who art rich in Mercy, to grant to me who am poor
in Performance; O grant all to me in the Name, in the Righteousness, in the
Mediation of thy only Son, and my only Redeemer, Thy blessed Son, and my ever
blessed Redeemer, and I ask all again in his holy Words, Our Father, etc.

These Prayers are so much longer, because it is supposed that good Persons set
a part more time for this Occasion, and so they are more at leisure for a
length, and they have then a stronger Devotion for the bearing it; and the
Retirement at such a Season is to take off our Thoughts from the World, and to
this Design Prayer is very useful, and the more we are in that Duty, the more
we are out of the World; the nearer we approach to God in Prayer, the farther
we are from the World in Thought.

Here follows a shorter Prayer to the same Preparatory Purpose.

O Blessed Jesu, who have Suffered, who have Died for me, whose Sufferings and
Death I am now to remember, make me, unworthy as I am, not to Eat and Drink
Unworthily in this solemn Remembrance: That Worthiness which I have not, be
pleased to give me, O give me that which thou have purchased for me, that which
I have so little, which thou have so much of, thou have enough for me, and for
all Mankind besides me; I ask it for my self, and for all, now, and ever. Amen.
Devout Ejaculations at the Holy Table before the receiving of the Sacrament.

THou have invited me, O merciful Lord, to thy Table, and lo I come; Thou will
receive whom thou have invited, O receive me graciously.

Lo, I come, to do thy Will, O my God, I am contented, I delight to do it; and
let thy Law be always within my Heart.

In Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou have had no Pleasure, Sacrifice
and Offering thou would not; but a Body have thou prepared, thy Sons Body to
be Crucified; O let a Soul too be Prepared, my Soul to be Offered.

O most Kind and Compassionate Jesu, who did Exhort the Daughters of
Jerusalem at the time of thy death not to Weep for thee, but to Weep for
themselves, and for their Children; have a favorable Regard to all my Weeping
for my self, and for my Sins, upon this Remembrance of thy Death.

Devout Ejaculations after the receiving of the Sacrament.

I Have received, O my God, and I Praise thee, I Glorify thee, I Adore thee for
the Honor of thy Command, and the Favor of thy Leave to do so.

Thou have given me Bread from Heaven, Thou have given me Wine that makes glad
the Heart of Man, glad with a spiritual Joy which thus begins in this World,
and is not to end in another.

I did hunger and thirst after the Righteousness which is offered in this
Sacrament, and O let me now be filled, let me now be blessed.

Let all the spiritual Virtues of thy Body and Blood, O most holy Jesu, enter
into my Soul, enter deep into it, may they enliven, may they norish, may they
strengthen it to an everlasting Life. Amen.

However this Discourse has nothing to deserve such a Conclusion, yet I ask
leave to give the same to my Discourse, which a Jew did to his, when he had
Written a Catechism, (by him named Good Doctrine) of the Jewish Religion,
According to the Sincerity of my Purpose remember me, O God: The Jew says yet
more, which I cannot pretend to say, with that Confidence which is more
peculiar to Jews in the high Thoughts of their Favor with God. I shall not
blush, nor be ashamed in this World, nor in that to come, but thou will give me
the Portion common to those by whom many have been Exhorted to Piety and
Righteousnese; for they shall shine as Stars, so, so let it please thee.

FINIS.

