Part of the Famous Speech OF WILLIAM PRYNN Esquire December. 48. Touching K. Charles
I.
THe next thing proposed by them for a speedy Peace and Settlement, is the
bringing of the King to speedy Justice for all his Treasons and Bloodshed in
the late Wars, and to Depose and Execute him as the greatest capital Malefactor
in the Kingdom:

This certainly is a very dangerous and unlikely way to Peace and Settlement.
First of all, The smiting of the Shepherd, is the way to scatter, not unite the
Sheep. The slaying of the King or General in the Field, Scatters and Dissolves
the Army, not secures them: To cut off a King'dhead, is the next way to
destroy, not cure a diseased Body: Such kind of State Policy may destroy, or
disturb, but never Settle us in perfect Peace: The Prince his next Heir, the
Queen, the Duke of York, all his Children, and Allies both at Home and Abroad,
will certainly meditate Revenge, and all Kings in Christendom will assist them,
even for their own Interest and Safety, least it should become a President for
themselves. And will this then secure, or be a likely way to Peace or
Settlement.

2. The greatest part of the Members in both Houses, the Lords, Gentlemen, and
all sorts of People throughout the Kingdom, the whole Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland, (who have as great an Interest in the Kings Person, being their Lawful
King, as we have, and are obliged by Allegiance and Covenant to protect his
Person and Crown from violence) will unanimously, as one man oppose and protest
against it, and by force of Arms, endeavor to bring those to Execution who
shall presume to advise, or attempt to depose or destroy the King in any kind,
contrary to their Allegiance and solemn Covenant: Yea, all Protestant Realms,
Churches, States in Foreign parts, will abhor both the fact, and adjudge it
contrary to their Principles and Religion, and that which may irritate Popish
Kings, and Princes to take up Arms to ruin them, lest they should fall into
the like practices. And can this then be a safe or speedy way to Peace and
Settlement, especially when we know not what Government shall succeed upon it,
and can expect nothing but bloody consequences from such a bloody advice.

3dly. I never read of any Peace or Settlement in any Kingdom, where
King-killing was practiced or approved. When the Roman Armies began once to
Kill their Emperors, and cut off their Heads, They were scarce ever free from
Civil-wars. One Army set up one Emperor, another Army another, the Senate a
third, who always Warred till they had cut off one another Heads. Most of
those Emperors had very short reigns, few of them above a year or two, and some
of them scarce two Months, but most of them untimely Deaths. In Sclavonia and
Norway where they had a Law, that he that slew a Tyrant King, should succeed
him in the Throne: They had almost every year a new King, perpetual wars and
discords, and not one of all their Kings for above one hundred years together,
ever came to a natural Death, but was murdered as a Tyrant, and succeeded by a
worse and greater Tyrant, as Saxogramaticus and Nubrigensis testify.

And in the sacred Story it self, it is very observable, That after ten Tribes
revolted from Rehoboam, though by Gods Justice and approbation for Solomon's
sins; they had never any Peace or Settlement, but perpetual Wars with one
Kingdom or another, or between themselves: Their Kings, or most of them were
all Tyrants and Idolators, and by the just Hand of God, for the most part
tumultuously slain and murdered one of and by another, who succeeded them: He
that murdered his Predecessor, being usually slain by his Successor, or his
Predecessors Sons, Servants, or by the People of the Land, in a tumultuous way:
In the 2 Kings 15. We read in that one Chapter, of no less then four of those
Kings slain, one by another: and as for the People under these Kings, they had
never any rest, peace, settlement, or freedom, but lived under the greatest
misery and oppression that ever any Subjects under Heaven did, as the sacred
History records. This King-killing certainly can be then no probable way at all
to Peace, Safety, Settlement, or Freedom, but the Policy to deprive us
eternally of all these, and of God, and Religion to boot; as it did the ten
Tribes heretofore.

4thly. This way to Peace and Settlement, is directly contrary to all the
former Engagements, Oaths, and several Petitions, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestations, and Professions of both Houses of Parliament: To the King,
kingdom, People, wherein we have always protested and held forth unto them
both before and since the Wars. That we will preserve and protect the Kings
Person from danger, support his royal Estate with Honor and Plenty at Home,
with Power and reputation Abroad, and by our Loyal Affections, Actions and
Advice, lay a sure and lasting foundation of the Greatness and Prosperity of
his Majesty, and his royal Posterity in future times. That we are still
resolved to keep our selves within the bounds of Faithfulness and Allegiance to
his sacred Person and Crown. That we will with our Lives, Fortunes, Estates,
and with the last drop of our Blood endeavor to support His Majesty, and his
just Sovereignty and Power over Us; and to prevent all dangers to his Majesty's
Person.

That we took up Arms as well for a Defense of His Majesty to Protect his
Person, as the Kingdom and Parliament; without any intent to hurt or injure His
Majesty's Person or Power: Professing in the presence of Almighty God, That we
would receive him with all Honor, yield Him all due Obedience and Subjection,
and Faithfully endeavor to secure His Person and Estate from all danger, and
to the uttermost of our Power to procure and establish to Him and His People,
all the Blessings of a Glorious and Happy reign; which both Houses several
times professed and remonstrated to the World. TO MURDER and DEPOSE THE KING, was
such a scandal, as any that professed the name of a Christian, could not have
so little Charity as to raise it; especially when they must needs know, the
Protestation taken by every Member of both Houses, whereby they Promise in the
presence of Almighty God, to defend His Majesty's Person; and all their
Addresses and Petitions to Him expressing the contrary: That they never
suffered it to enter into their Thoughts to Depose the King, abhorring the very
Thought of it, much more the Intent. That they never suffered the word DEPOSING
the King, To go out of their Mouths, nor the thing to enter into their
Thoughts. That they rest assured, both God and Man will abominate that
Monstrous and most Injurious Charge laid upon the Representative Body of this
whole Kingdom by the Malignant Party, against the King, as Designing not only
the ruin of his Majesty's Person, but of Monarchy it self: The Authors of
which malicious horrid scandal, they profess to make the Instances of their
exemplary Justi^e, so soon as they shall be discovered. Now for Us after all
these multiplied reiterated Protestations, Promises, Engagements, Declarations,
Remonstrances to all the World, from the beginning of the Differences and Wars
till now, to think or talk of Deposing and Destroying the King, and altering
the Government, as the only safe and speedy way to Peace and Settlement, as the
Army-Remonstrants prescribe; would be such a most detestable breach of public
Faith; such a most Perfidious, Treacherous, Unrighteous wicked Act, as not only
Gods, Angels, and good Men; but the very worst of Turks and Devils would abhor:
And therefore its a Miracle to me, that these precions SAINTS should thus
impudently, before all the World propose to the House, and force you to pursue
it, to stain your Reputation, and make you execrable to God and Men.

5thly. The very Oath of Allegiance, which every one of us has taken, upon our
first admission to be Members, engages us in positive terms, Not to offer any
hurt or violence to His Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government; to bear
Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and Him and
Them to defend to the uttermost of Our power, against all Conspiracies and
Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His or Their Persons, Crown,
or Dignity: And from our hearts to abhor, detest, and abjure as Impious and
Heretical, this Heathnish and Turkish Doctrine: That Princes Excommunicated, or
deprived by the People, (as it seems the King is now for extirpating
Episcopacy, Popery, Mass, and Prelacy out of his Dominions by his present
Concessions, without any possibility or hopes of replanting) may be Deposed or
Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Which Hellish contrivance
and practice, as our whole State and Parliament, in the State of 3 Jac. cap. 1,
4, 5. 35 Eliz. cap. 1. and other Acts resolve, is the only way to unsettle,
ruin and subvert, not to settle and establish the Peace and Government of our
Realm. And both Houses since this Parliament, have by a solemn Protestation,
first, and by a solemn League and Covenant since, with Hands lifted up to the
most high God, engaged both themselves and the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland, by a most sacred and serious Vow and Protestation
(purposely made and prescribed by them, For the Honor and Happiness of the
King and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety and Peace of the
three Kingdoms, as the Title and Preface declare) Sincerely, Really, and
Constantly to endeavor with their Estates and Lives, TO PRESERVE AND DEFEND
THE KINGS MAJESTY'S PERSON AND AUTHORITY, in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom, (which he has now fully and
actually performed by his Concessions in this Treaty) That the World may bear
witness with our Consciences OF OUR LOYALTY; and that WE HAVE NO THOUGHTS OR
INTENTIONS TO DIMINISH HIS MAJESTY'S JUST POWER AND GREATNESS. And shall also
with all Faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as shall be
Incendiaries, or evil Instruments, by DIVIDING THE KING FROM HIS PEOPLE; That
they may be brought to speedy Trial, and receive condign Punishment. And shall
not suffer themselves directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever combination or
terror, to be withdrawn or make defection from this Covenant; but shall all the
days of their Lives really and constantly continue therein against all
Opposition, and promote the same against all lets impediments whatsoever. And
this Covenant we all made in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all
Hearts; WITH A REAL INTENTION TO PERFORM THE SAME, as we shall answer at that
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.

Now how we who are Members of this House, or any who are Subjects of our Three
Kingdoms, or Officers and Soldiers in the Army, who have taken this Oath of
Allegiance, Protestation, League or Covenant, or any of them, (as some of them
have done, all or two of them at least, sundry times over) can, without the
highest Perjury to God, Treachery to the King, Perfidiousness to the Kingdom,
Infamy to the World, Scandal to the Protestant Religion, and Eternal dishonor
to the Parliament and Themselves, Athiestically break through or elude all
those most Sacred aod Religious ties upon our Souls, by a speedy public
Dethroning and Decolling of the King, and Dis-inheriting His Posterity; (as the
Army Remonstants advise) and that in the open view of the World, and that
All-seeing God to whom we have thus Appealed and Sworn, by any Equivocations or
Distinctions, (of which the Armies Remonstrance is full) or Professions of our
damnable Hypocrisy in the breaking of them, transcends my understanding. And
for those who Style themselves SAINTS, and charge this as one of the Highest
Crimes against the King, His frequent breach of Oaths and Promises, to
transcend him and Traitors in this very sin, is such a Monster of Impiety, as I
concelve could never have entered into the hearts of Infidels, or the worst of
Men or Devils. And to act this under a pretext to Preserve and Settle the Peace
of the Kingdom, is such a Solecism, as militates point blank against the very
words and scope both of this Oath, Protestation, League, and Covenant, which
crosses not the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, but more strongly engages
Men to preserve and defend the Kings Person and Autohority, in the Preservation
and Defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom; as the Assembly
of Divines, and both Houses affirm in their Exbortation to take the Covenant,
which prescribes this as the only means of securing and preserving Peace in all
the Three Kingdoms; to preserve the Person and Honor of the King, His Crown
and Dignity, from any such Violence and Invasion as is now suggested by the
Army, which all three of them engage us, and all Three Kingdoms, with our Lives
and Fortunes really and constantly to oppose, against all Lets and Impediments,
etc. and to bring those to condign punishment as Incendiaries and evil
Instruments who suggest it. So as if the Army will proceed in this Diabolical
destructive way, of Treason and Ruin, We, and all Three Kingdoms are solemnly
engaged with our Estates and Lives unanimously to oppose and bring them to
Justice. And is this then the way to public Peace and Settlement, to raise
another new War to murder one another in this new Quarrel, wherein the Army and
their adherents, must be the sole Malignants and Enemies we must Fight with,
etc? No verily, but the highway to the Kingdoms and Armies ruin, whose
Commissions we are obliged to revoke; whose Contributions we must in Conscience
withdraw; and whose Power we must with our own lives resist, unless we will be
Perjured, and guilty of breach of Covenant in the highest degree, if they
persist in these Anti-Covenant Demands.

7. The King having granting us whatever we have, or can demand for the safety
and preservation of our Religion, Laws and Liberties; and both Houses engaged
themselves by Vote in answer to the Kings Propositions, to restore him to a
condition of Freedom, Honor, and Safety, according to the Laws of the Realm,
(which was the Armies own Proposals in his behalf in August 1647.) We can
neither in Honesty, Honor, Justice nor Conscience (were He ten thousand times
worse than the Army would render Him) Depose and bring Him to Execution. It
being against all the rules of Justice, and Honor between two professed
Enemies, who had no relations one to another; much more between King and
Subjects in a Civil War, a thing without President in any Ages. To this the
Army Remonstrance answers, That this would be thought an unreasonable and
unbeseeming demand in a Personal Treaty, between Persons standing both free,
and in equal balance of Power; but not when one Party is wholly subdued,
captivated, imprisoned, and in the others Power. But this certainly is a
difference spun with an Athiestical thread; For to Treat with any King in our
Power, or out of it, on Articles of Peace, upon these terms; That if He consent
to them, We will restore Him to the Throne with Honor, Freedom, Safety; and
when He has yielded us our Demands, then to Depose and cut of His Head; is the
highest breach of Faith, Truth, Honor, and Justice, that can be imagined: and
those who dare justify such Perfidious and Unchristian dealing, deserve rather
the Style of Turks and Athiests, than Pious Saints.

8. There is no president in Scripture, that the General Assembly, or Sanhedrin
of the Jews or Israelites, did ever Judically Imprison, Depose, or Execute any
one of the Kings of Judah or Israel, though many of them were the grossest
Idolaters, and wickedst Princes under Heaven; who shed much innocent blood, and
oppressed the People sundry ways. We know that David himself committed Adultery
with Uriah his Wife, a faithful Servant and Soldier, while he was with his
General Joab in the Field: And then afterward caused him to be Treacherously
slain. Yet neither the Assembly the Elders, nor Joab and the Army under him,
did impeach or crave Justice against him for these sins, though he lived
impenitently in them. And when he numbered the People afterward, for which sin
seventy thousand of his Subjects lost their lives; yet was he not Arraigned nor
Deposed for it: and God who is Sovereignly just, though David was the principal
Malefactor in this case, if not the sole; and thereupon, when he saw the Angel
that smote the People, cried out, Lo, I have sinned and done wickedly; but
these Sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand be against me and my Fathers
House: Yet God spared him and his Household, though the Principals, and punished
the People only with death, for this sin of his. After him Solomon his Son, a
Man Eminent for Wisdom and Piety at first, Apostatized to most gross Idolatry
of all sorts, to please his Idolatrous Wives, and became a great oppressor of
his People, making their burdens very heavy, yet the Subjects or Soldiers did
neither Impeach nor Depose him for it: and though he were the principal Offender,
yet God spared him for David's sake, in not taking the ten Tribes from him for
these sins, during his life; though he rent them from his Son Rehoboam, who was
at most but accessory, for his Fathers sins, not his. True it is, some of the
Idolatrous Kings of Israel, by the just avenging Hand of God, were slain by
private Conspiracies, and popular Tumults, in an Illegal way: but not Deposed
nor Arraigned by their Sanhedrins, or General Congregations; and those who slew
them, were sometimes slain by others who aspired to the Crown, or by the People
of the Land, or by their Children who Succeeded them; and came to untimely
Tragical ends.

9. Tho there be some presidents of Popisb States and Parliaments Deposing
their Popish Kings and Emperors at home, and in Foreign parts, in an
extraordinary way, by power of an armed Party: Yet there is no president of any
one Protestant Kingdom or State, that did ever yet Judically Depose or bring to
Execution, any of their Kings and Princes, though never so bad, whether
Protestants or Papists; and the Protestants in France, though some of their
Kings, when they had invested them in their Thrones, became Apostates to
Popery, and Persecutors of Their People; albeit they resisted them by force of
arms in the Field to preserve their lives; did never once attempt to pull Them
from Their Thrones, or bring Their Persons unto Justice: And I hope our
Protestant Parliament will never make the first president in this kind, nor
stain Their Honor or Religion with the blood of a Protestant King, against so
many Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, Declarations, and Remonstrances made and
published by Them to the contrary.

10. For the presidents of Eeward II. and Richard II. in times of Popery, they
were rather forcible resignations by Power of an Army, then judical
deprivations, neither of them being ever legally arraigned and brought to Trial
in Parliament. And Mortimer who had the chief hand in Deposing King Edward II.
in the Parliament of 1 E. 3. was in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. Impeached,
Condemned, and Executed as a Traitor, and guilty of High Treason, for Murdering
Edw. II. after he was Deposed, at Berkley-Castle, and Sir Simon Bereford,
(together with Thomas Gurney and Will. Ocle) were adjudged Traitors for
assisting him therein; one of them Executed, and great Rewards promised to the
apprehenders of the other two. And as for Richard II. though he was Deposed
after Henry IV. was Crowned by pretense in Parliament: yet this Deposition was
after his resignation only, not before it: and without any Formal trial or
arraignment, or any Capital Judgment of Death against him; for which I find no
president in any Parliament of England, Scotland, France, nor yet in Denmark it
self, though an Elective Kingdom; who, though They justly Deposed Christiern
II. for his most abominable Tyranies and Cruelties; yet they never adjudged or
put him to Death, but only restrained him as a Prisoner. I shall only add this,
That though the Elective Kindoms of Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, Denmark, and
Sweden, have in their Parliaments and Diets Deposed sundry of their Kings for
their Wickednesses and Tyrany; yet they never judically condemned any one of
them to death, though Papists. And for a Protestant Parliament (to please an
army only, acted by Traitors in this particular; to render both Parliament,
army, and our Religion too, for ever execrable throughout the World, and set
all Men's Pens and Hands against them to their ruin, to begin such a bloody
president as this, upon a most false pretext, of settling Peace; contrary to
the express Command of God himself, who Commands Christians, To Pray for Kings,
and all in authority, that they may live a quiet and peaceable life under them
in all Godliness and Honesty, (not to Depose or cut off their Heads) as the
only way to Peace and Settlement; will not only be Scandalous but Monstrous.

FINIS.

