THE Protestants Letter CONCERNING THE REUNION OF THE Two Religions TO THE
ASSEMBLY OF THE Clergy of France, Held at PARIS, May, 1685.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of all Protestants in England, as an
Expedient for reconciling the great Differences in Religion now among them.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

Licensed, October. 2. 1689.

JAMES FRASER.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, AND HIS Honored Friend, JOHN JONES Esquire
SIR,
THE Uniting of Christians is so very desirable a thing, that the bringing it
to pass will deserve the utmost of our Care and Pains; whoever offers any thing
that tends this way, deserves to be heard. The Mischiefs of causeless
Separation from one another, are not easily to be reckoned up: On the other
hand, the Advantages of Uniting upon tolerable Terms are exceeding great. Upon
these Considerations I think the following Papers well worthy to be made
public; and no Man (I hope) will think it unseasonable to publish them at this
time, when there are on foot honest Designs and Endeavors of procuring a
lasting Unity among our selves. This Opportunity which we have of effecting it,
I hope, will not be lost; and I shall much rejoice, if these following Papers
will any way contribute to so blessed an End: Upon that Score it is, that I
cannot but commend them to the Consideration of all that wish well to our
common Christianity; and, considering the Authors, and Occasion of this
following Letter, I cannot think it will be unacceptable to any that are
Protestants.

I need not tell you why I prefix your Name: It Is but just that it should
return to him, from whom the Copy, and the Opportunity of Printing it came. I
trust, you will have no Cause to repent that you consented to this Publication:
It is high time, in our several Places, to do all we can to the putting an End,
as much as may be, to our unhappy Differences.

God of his Mercy inspire us all with the Spirit of Peace and Charity, of
Meekness and Modesty, and mutual Forbearance; and grant that we may mind the
Things that make for Peace, and for the Edifying of one another.

I am, in great Sincerity, SIR, Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant,
Richard Kidder.
October 21. 1689.
Sirs,
THere is a Report runs abroad in the World, that in your approaching Assembly,
under the auspicious Influences of His Most Christian Majesty, you are to use
your Endeavors, about that which that great King does call his great Work;
which is, the Reunion of his Subjects into one and the same Religion.

The King has very great reason to call this his great Work, because that if
he bring it about, it will be the greatest Work that has been effected these
many Ages, and the most glorious Work too, and I may add to that, the most
pious Work also, provided that it be done upon Principles conformable to
Reason, Religion, and Piety. You have perhaps thought, Sirs, that the
Protestants of France were very far from the point, to which they are designed
to be brought: When they have been talked to of a Reunion, the greatest part of
them have looked upon it as a thing impossible, and they have not seemed so
much as to desire it; and probably, it is that Disposition of Spirit, wherein
they were thought to be, which has induced you to so harsh a Course against
them. You were of opinion, that after you had mortified them, by the loss of
their Temples, of their Liberties and Privileges, of their very Children, and,
in many places, of their Estates, they would be the more easily brought to your
Bent: But, Sirs, I dare assure you, that all this was needless, and that they
who have seemed not to desire the Reunion, did lie under that Indisposition
only upon account of the apparent Impossibility which they saw in that Design;
for otherwise, there is not one of us that has not, and does not, with a very
ardent Passion, desire to see an end of a Schism so scandalous, and which does
put so great an obstacle to the accomplishment of those Prophecies which do
promise unto us the Re-calling of the Jews, and the Bringing in of all the
People of the World unto the Christian Faith.

That, Sirs, which made us to believe this Reunion impossible, was, because we
could not persuade our selves, that we were sincerely invited thereunto; but
that Deceit did lie at the bottom of this fair Pretense, and that it was
nothing but a Snare laid to entrap us; for otherwise we believe, that there is
nothing more easy, than to bring such an Enterprise to good success, provided,
Sirs, that you would cloth your selves with that Spirit of Equity, Reason,
Wisdom, and Justice, which ought to be inseparable from Persons of your
Character, called to the Conduct and Government of the Church.

We would very willingly, Sirs, be persuaded of your good Intentions, and do
gladly acknowledge, that the Gallican Church is the purest part of all the
Roman Churches that are at this day in the whole World: The rest of the
Churches which do still depend upon the Sea of Rome, do pertinaciously continue
in their ancient dissoluteness, and in those Disorders wherewith they were
reproached at the beginning of the last Age; but the Gallican Church is at this
day composed of learned, understanding, wise and moderate Bishops, and such who
(for the most part) have a great care of the Government of their Diocesses.
This does incline us to believe, that it is not the Spirit of Persecution which
does excite you, but that (in truth) you do seriously desire the Peace of the
Church, and the Cessation of that grand Schism which has divided the West, for
above these hundred and fifty Years.

You do well believe, that if the Gallican Church had but once reunited her
Children into one and the same Society of Christians, her Example would be of
great force and weight with all the rest of Europe; and that all the Western
Christians would be found to return, in a short time, to a Spirit of Peace and
Concord: And we are of the same Belief, together with you. For which Cause, we
do offer up our Vows, with most sincere and ardent Prayers, that it will please
God to inspire you with reasonable Thoughts, and put into your Hearts just Ways
and Means for the enterprising and accomplishing of this great Work.

It is an Affair which is common to us, as well as you; for we are one of those
Parties that are to be reunited: It is therefore but reasonable that we should
speak, and that we should be heard in this matter; and by consequence, it would
be but just, that we should be permitted to assemble, and to confer together.
Perhaps the Spirit of God would suggest unto us such Thoughts and Means as
would not be displeasing unto you: But, in humble Expectation, until his good
Providence shall bring that Work unto its maturity, and waiting until our whole
Body can make their Remonstrances unto you, permit some particular Persons of
that Body, Sirs, to acquaint you with their Thoughts. Their design is purposely
to make you comprehend, that this Work of Reunion is not so difficult as you
(parhaps) may have persuaded your selves that it was: You may proceed therein
by such ways as will assuredly bring it unto good success, without wounding
your Consciences in the least measure, and without offering any violence unto
ours. For the proof of which, we will lay down such Principles, wherein, Sirs,
we are persuaded that you will consent with us, for they are uncontestable.

1. In the first place, We suppose that you have real Intentions for a true
Reunion (to take that Term in its most exact and strict signification.) All
Treaties which are made in War, between two Parties) are properly of Re-unions.
In none of all those Treaties whatsoever, does any one of the Parties carry
away all that it does demand; for otherwise, it would not be to treat, but to
receive the Law of the Conqueror; that is, to submit unto the Yoke of
Oppression, as being the weakest and vanquished Party. But in every true Union,
there must be a yielding on both sides; both do make high Demands, but each of
them is contented to take much less: It is therefore necessary; Sirs, that you
should explain your selves upon that Particular; and we do believe you to be
too reasonable, not to expect a satisfactory Answer from you. You will
undoubtedly tell us, that you do speak in good Faith, and mean sincerely, when
you speak of a Reunion; and that you conceive there may be a Relaxation made
in some less important Articles, for Peace sake, and to bring back again, into
the Bosom of the Church, so many Persons which (as you believe) are departed
from it. For otherwise, if by the term of Reunion there be nothing meant, but
(simply) a Return unto the Roman Church, though she do never reform her self,
nor concede any thing demanded of her, it is clear that that is but a mere
Abuse of the Terms, and can never be called a Reunion, it is nothing but a
pure and simple Abjuration of that which you call Schism and Heresy. It is not
to be believed, Sirs, that this is that which you intend; for you are more wise
than to attempt such a Work, and not to see that it is absolutely impossible.
It is not (I confess) impossible for a King, so puissant as ours is, to
extirpate out of his Estates that which they call Calvinism: He has already
razed our Temples, scattered our Flocks, chased away the most part of our
Ministers: That Temptation has already prevailed over a great number of
People, unto whom you do the honor to give the name of Converts. If, by your
Advice, His Majesty do continue this harsh Course to his faithful Subjects, who
desire nothing so much as the Glory of their Sovereign; if the King do force
the Reformed, by taking away of their Children, by rigorous Edicts, by
Sentences of Death and Banishment, to change their Religion, the weakest of
them may (perhaps) return into the Communion of Rome, which, yet
notwithstanding, they cannot but detest with all their Hearts; and so you will
make a Company of Hypocrites, and profane Converts of them. The greatest part
of those that are truly pious, will find a Retreat; and whatever care can be
taken to shut the Gates of the Kingdom against them, yet they will make an
Escape through the Windows. After this manner it is, that Calvinism will be
extinguished in France: But this, Sirs, can never be accounted a Reunion, this
is not, in all probability, that which you have in your aim to do; for this
would be to bring the Kingdom to Desolation, to ravish from the King his
Subjects, to add unto the Church false Christians, and unto Jesus Christ false
Members.

Besides all this, Sirs, it is not to be believed, that Men, of such great
Knowledge and Wisdom as you are, can choose but conceive, That it would be very
edifying, to sacrifice something for the Salvation of so many Thousands of
Souls, which live in a State of Separation, and which you (by your Principles)
are obliged to look upon as Souls which do destroy themselves. It is not
likely, that you should be of the cruel number of Those, who say, That the
Church would not put out a Wax-Candle in Favor of the Hugonots: For (in short)
Reason, Piety, and Religion, do require a Tolleration of the Weak.

The Apostle St. Paul was thoroughly persuaded, that the Use of the Legal
Ceremonies was Useless and Unprofitable; nay, that it was dangerous unto
Christianity. He goes so far, as to say, That they who do observe the Law, do
dis-annul the Gospel; and yet nevertheless, he does constantly preach up mutual
Forbearance. He requires, That the Weak should be borne with; That he that eats
of all Things indifferently, should not despise him that makes a Scruple of
eating diverse Things; That Christians should proceed and keep Pace with each
other in those Things wherein they do agree, until God shall reveal unto them
those Things wherein they differ.

The Evidence of Reason is so strong and so clear for this, that it is
impossible not to discern it. The Salvation of Souls, and the Blessing of
Peace, are two great Motives which ought to regulate the Duties of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ: It would be a Cruelty (for which they must give an
account unto God) to suffer Men to be destroyed, whom they might bring back
again unto the Church, by granting them some certain things which would content
them, without doing any prejudice to the Fundamentals of Religion. This then is
our first undisputable Principle; namely, that all those of either side that
will endeavor a Reunion, ought to search out Means whereby to content both
Parties; not to stand upon the Point of Rigor, without any Relaxation; and for
the Benefit of Peace, to yield unto any Thing which does no wrong unto the
Essence of Faith, and of that Worship which we owe unto God.

2. Our second Principle is this, That when once Men are come to that pious
Intention, to yield mutually, for the benefit of Peace, they cannot (honestly)
demand of each other any Relaxation in those things which either of the Parties
does believe to be of the highest importance, and of sovereign necessity for
the Salvation of Souls. I will suppose that they do believe, as necessary unto
Salvation, or as incompatible with Salvation, certain Things, which yet, for
all that, are not of the Foundation, and so deceive themselves; but yet
notwithstanding, the Party which is in that Error, ought not to be demanded to
make any Concessions thereupon: The Reason of it is clear, because it would be
to damn those People from whom such Concessions were extorted. A Man who should
believe (for Example sake) that the Observation of Lent is absolutely
incompatible with Salvation, and yet notwithstanding, out of Complaisance, and
for the Advantages of Peace, should reunite himself unto a Church, with an
unmovable Resolution to observe it, would (undoubtedly) damn himself; he would
commit a Sin against his Conscience, and, in some sort, against the Holy Ghost:
Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; and a Man who, in doing an indifferent
Action, does believe that he commits a mortal Sin, does sin mortally: He acts
(by a Spirit of Revolt) formally against the Ordinances of God, or against that
which he esteems to be the Law of God. None therefore can, nor ought to force
any Party to concede any thing in such Points which they believe to be
necessary; but must first instruct, convince, and work them into a full
Persuasion, that they do needlessly startle at things which are not what they do
believe them to be. This is our second Principle, which seems to us as
indisputable as the former; and to be built upon such solid Reason, that it
will be received by all Persons who are (never so little) disengaged from
Prejudices.

3. Our third Principle is this, That when the Question is of any Article
(whether it be of Faith, or of Practice) which one of the Parties does hold to
be false; and so false, that the Belief, or the Practice of that Article would
essentially concern Religion, and ruin the very Foundations thereof: And the
other Party holds it to be true; but yet so, as that the Practice, or the
Belief thereof is not (according to his Opinion) absolutely necessary unto the
Essence of Religion: In this case (I say) it is clear, that Christian Charity
and Prudence do require, that the Party which holds that Article to be true,
but not necessary, should yield, and bear with the Weakness of him who looks
upon it as false, as intolerable, and as ruinous unto the Fundamentals of
Religion; or as incompatible with Edification. This Truth does seem to me to
carry so great an Evidence in it, that I know not whether it be necessary to
prove it. Is it not clear, by the precedent Principle, that he who gives
himself a Liberty in any Point which is really fundamental, or which he
believes to be so, does damn himself, does act against his Conscience, and
ruin his Salvation? But, on the contrary, That he who takes a Liberty in any
Point which he (indeed) does believe to be true, but does not believe it to be
of an absolute necessity, does do nothing against his Conscience? In the first
place, he does not betray the Truth; for (as we shall see in that which
follows) he is not to be obliged to subscribe the Rejection of that Belief, as
if it were false; or of that Practice, as if it were evil and criminal: He may
keep his own Opinion; he may also declare, that such a Belief is good, though
he tolerate that which is opposite thereunto; and that such a Practice is
innocent, though he have renounced it, for the benefit of Peace. Secondly, He
does not betray his Conscience, nor Religion, in suffering such a Practice to
be abolished, or in leaving every body free to such a Belief; because he is
persuaded that that Belief, or that Practice, are not of the Essence of
Religion, and that a Man may pass-well enough without them, and never (thereby)
run any hazard of his Salvation.

There is nothing that can be more evident than this, That there are most
innocent Practices, yea, such as are authorized by the Testimony of the whole
Church, which might (yet notwithstanding) be very well abandoned, if any great
Interest for the Glory of God, or for the Good of the Church, did depend
thereupon. As for Example: The greatest part of the Christian Churches have (in
Baptism) renounced Immersion, or Dipping, and do content themselves with the
Baptism of Aspersion, or Sprinkling: But now, if the Turks, who were disposed
otherwise to their Conversion, should stumble hereat, and say, that it was of
absolute necessity to plunge in the Water as many as are baptized, that Jesus
Christ did institute it after that manner, that such was the practice of the
Apostles, and that it was the constant usage of the Primitive Church; would not
Christian Prudence be concerned now, to abandon the Baptism of Sprinkling, and
to return again unto that of Dipping? This would not be to impeach the Memory
of our Forefathers; for we should never say, that the Baptism of simple
Sprinkling is a Sacrilege: Neither would this be the Betraying of the Truth;
for we should never subscribe, that the Baptism of Sprinkling is insufficient.
It would only be a Sacrifizing unto a great Interest, a Ceremony which we do
not believe to be important. Now let it be remembered, that there can hardly be
any greater Interest for the Glory of God, and for the Good of the Church, than
the Reunion of those two Parties which do divide the Western Church. If
therefore there were on either Side any Articles of such a Character and
Quality, that the one Side did hold them to be entirely ruinous to Religion,
and that the other did not look upon them (indeed) as merely indifferent, but
yet, nevertheless, as not necessary, with an absolute necessity; it is clear,
that that Party which regarded the Article in question, as not being of
exceeding great importance, ought to yield in favor of the other, who did look
upon it, as being absolutely incompatible with Religion. And this is also
another Principle which ought not (as we conceive) to be disputed.

4. Our fourth Principle is this, That when the Question is about Articles, or
Creeds, whereof both Parties do agree that they are not of the utmost
importance; that if they be true, yet they are not of the Essence of Religion;
and if they be false, though they are believed to be true, yet they do not
destroy saving Faith: In this case, I say, the ruling Party, that which is the
mightiest in Number, in Credit, and Authority, ought to be tolerated by the
Weaker, who must accommodate themselves herein, for the Benefit of Peace, and
to put a Cessation unto the Scandal of Schism. As for Example: If the
Christians of both Communions could agree together, that the Worshipping of
Images, and Praying unto Saints, were not Practices ruinous to Religion, and
were no way prejudicial unto Piety: It is clear, that in those States where
that Religion which invocates Saints does bear the sway, the others ought to
accommodate themselves thereunto; that is to say, that they ought not to
separate themselves from the Communion for that thing alone. On the contrary,
in those States where the Religion which will not admit the Invocation of
Saints does rule, they who are of a contrary Sentiment ought to accommodate
themselves thereunto, and not to separate themselves from the public Worship,
although the Saints were not there worshipped. This is also a Rule of Sovereign
Justice, whose Equity seems unto us to be most manifestly evident; the weaker
Party would do nothing against his Conscience, by adhering unto a Worship
wherein he should see the Practice of Things, which he does not (indeed)
believe to be either necessary or so much as good; but yet such, as he should
not (on the other side) believe to be either contrary, or pernicious unto
Religion; it would only be a most sweet smelling Sacrifice, which he would
offer unto God for the Conservation of Peace: And this we call another of our
uncontestable Principles.

5. Our fifth Principle is this, that in regard of certain Articles of Belief,
or of Practice, which the one side does look upon as important in Religion, and
the other does consider as less important; these last ought to yield in favor
of the former, in not obliging them (formally) to renounce things which they
should believe to be true; they ought, I say, not to oblige them to the
Abjuration, or to the condemning of those Practices as pernicious, or of those
Beliefs as false: I will explain my self by an Example: The Roman Catholics do
believe, that the Opinion of the Real Presence is a thing of importance; the
Reformed (on the contrary) do believe, that it is a great Error; but yet they
do not believe that this Error does ruin the Fundamentals; for which cause
they will tolerate it in the Protestants of the Confession of Ausbourg. If
therefore they should enter into a Treaty of Reunion, with the Christians of
the Roman Communion, it would not be just to oblige them to the Abjuration of
the Real Presence, unless they could find means to persuade them that it was
false: Now this is a thing which no means can be found to do in a Treaty; and
which would also be no way convenient to attempt; for there is no endeavoring
to persuade them that the Real Presence is false, but by a Dispute; but in a
Treaty of Re union all controversal Disputes ought to be avoided, like a most
dangerous Rock. In the Reunion therefore, none ought to be obliged to the
abjuring of Articles, of the falsity of which one of the two Parties cannot be
so quickly persuaded. The Reason of this Rule of Equity is evident; for no Man
ought to be persuaded to do any thing against his Conscience. To abjure an
Error, which a Man does think to be a Truth, is a base and fearful Cowardice;
for which (if it be persevered in) I do not believe, that there is any Place
for Mercy, in so doing he is an Heretic, for he does still retain the Heresy
inwardly; and he is an Hypocrite to boot, for he confesses the Truth with his
Mouth, but does renounce it with his Heart: No Man ought ever to oblige any one
to commit so great a Crime. Moreover, whosoever does yield in this respect,
without obliging the other to abjure, he himself does nothing against his
Conscience; for in suffering another to believe as a Truth, that which he does
look upon as a non-fundamental Error, he does not oblige himself to speak of
that Error as of a Truth, or to make any profession thereof; nay, he does
reserve unto himself a Liberty of resisting that Error, as long as he shall
believe it to be false: Neither does he do any thing against his Conscience, in
not obliging others to the abjuration of such an Opinion; for not believing it
to be destructive of Religion, he does not believe that they who retain it do
run any hazard of their Salvation. We do never sin against our Consciences, in
tolerating that in another, which we judge to be an Error; but when we do (at
the same time) judge that Error to be Fundamental and Mortal, in respect of
Salvation: If then we do tolerate our Neighbor in such Errors, we do suffer
him to destroy himself, without ever opposing his ruin; which is an
unconscionable Proceeding. One of the Communions which does divide the West,
does hold the Real Presence as an important Truth; the other looks on it as a
tolerable Error: It is clear, that whosoever does esteem it to be a tolerable
Error, ought not to oblige the Party, who holds it to be an important Truth,
unto the abjuration of that Opinion; which observation does amount to this, in
one Word, that Men ought to bear with one another, and to unite themselves by
the way of Toleration, in those things that are tolerable; as the Theologues,
Thomists, and Scotists, do bear with one another in most considerable
differences about matter of Grace, without making any separate Communion.

6. Our Sixth Principle is this, That there is an infinite difference between
tolerating an Error, and making profession that we do believe it; the first is
an Action of Christian Wisdom and Prudence; the second is a Cowardice,
infinitely Criminal, and a base Action, to which we ought never to solicit or
tempt any Person.

Truth is a thing so venerable, that respect is also due unto its very shadow,
for so I call those false Opinions, which (by the favor of prejudices) have
established themselves in the Minds of Men, as if they were unquestionable
Truths; and so much respect is owing even to them, that none ought to exact
from any Person the renunciation of them, as long as that Person does account
them to be Truths. When those Errors are capital and fundamental, after we have
endeavored to deliver them who are prepossessed by them; if we cannot effect
that, we must abandon the infected, and renounce all Communion; but we must in
no wise force them to profess the Truths which they do not believe: While
Errors are tolerable, we may use our best Efforts to dispossess Men's Minds of
them; but if we are not able to bring that about, we ought never to force their
Mouth to a Confession of that which would be contradicted by their Hearts: We
must tolerate such Errors, and endeavor to instruct the Persons with the
Spirit of Meekness and of Gentleness.

This Observation is of absolute necessity in this present subject. The
Question is of re-uniting the Protestants to the Roman Church: It must be
conceived that they would be capable of tolerating many false Opinions, the
belief of which they were not able to profess; and it would be unreasonable to
tell them, You do not hold that this Belief, or that that Practice, is mortal,
therefore you ought to subscribe and be conformable thereunto. This is also an
undisputable Principle, and one that needs no proving, that a Man may safely
tolerate diverse things, which he ought not to adopt, nor practice.

7. Our seventh and last Principle is this, That no Treaty ought to be made to
the prejudice of Truth, and most especially of important Truths: Truth must
have her Rights secured, and made good unto her; and it is a Right belonging to
Truth, to produce it self, and to prove it self: And therefore in a Treaty of
Reunion, by which there should be an agreement of Toleration in many Opinions,
upon the Substance and Matter whereof they could not agree, each Party ought to
be left to its liberty, to examine those Truths, about which they were not come
to any particular determination; and also there ought to be a free permission
to examine them publicly, so far as the safety of Peace can allow. There are
some Truths that be not of such grand importance, as that the Peace of the
Church should be troubled to establish them; as (on the contrary) there are
others which are so important, that one ought to have no regard for the
Infirmities of Men, nor for the Prejudices which do possess them: This is also
a Principle which seems to us to be uncontestable. I know not whether we have
been so happy as to bring so clear a Light of Evidence unto these Principles,
as that wherein we our selves do see them; but supposing that these Principles
are certain, clear, and evident, (as we do conceive them to be) we do not judge
that the Reunion should be so very impossible. And this is that, Sirs, which
we desire you will be pleased that we may lay before you in this place, by
applying these general Principles unto the particular Matters of Fact now in
question.

Our first Principle was, That they who will endeavor an happy Reunion, must
search out the Means which are proper to satisfy both the Parties and that
both Sides must sacrifice unto the Blessing of Peace all that can be abandoned,
without doing any Injury to Religion.

We cannot doubt, Sirs, but that you look upon this as a Maxim of most
sovereign Equity. We do (for the present) consent that you should consider us
as Schismatics, who have unjustly separated our selves from the Church,
because the Causes of our Separation have not been sufficient: But (however
that be) you have too much Understanding and Sincerity, not to see, and not to
acknowledge, that if those Causes of Separation have not been sufficient, yet
they have not been altogether null, or frivolous. It was a long time that a
Reformation was demanded to be made, both in the Head, and in the Members. The
whole World did universally complain of the Disorders, and of the Corruptions,
which were crept into all the parts of Religion: Now, do you believe, that all
that Reformation which might then have been justly demanded, has been so fully
made, as that there remains nothing more to be added thereunto? Were all those
Proposals which your Predecessors made, in the Ages last past, unto the Council
of Trent, unjust, or idle? Might they not have been granted to them, without
doing any prejudice to the Church? There were no less than four and thirty
Articles, the greatest part of which were of very grand importance: The
Seventeeth and the Nineteenth tended to re-establish the Vulgar Tongue in the
Divine Service; the Eighteenth made a Demand of the Cup, for the People, in the
Sacrament; the Twentyninth demanded the Retrenchment of that Abuse which was
sliden into the Worshipping of Images, into that of Relics, into the
Pilgrimages, into the Fraternities, etc. Now is there any one among you, Sirs,
who can believe? that all that which was fit for Reformation, was reformed
thereupon? We are persuaded that you are (the major part of you, at least) of
his Opinion, who composed The wholesome Advice of the Virgin to her indiscreet
Votaries: that is to say, that you will confess that there are very many
Abuses, which have insinuated themselves into the popular Devotions. Besides
all this, Do not you own, that among those things which divide the Catholic
and the Protestant, all of them are not of the same importance; some of them
might be foregone, for the benefit of Peace? We do not now mark which they are,
but (in the general) we are persuaded, that you have so great a Love to the
Peace of the Church, and for the Salvation of those People, unto whom you still
do that honor, as to call them your Brethren, that you will freely abandon
something, to facilitate their Return unto the Church, provided that the
Fundamentals of Religion may suffer no Wrong thereby.

The Aim of these Reflections is, to show you, that you are not in such Terms,
as that you cannot give a Relaxation in any thing; for as much as that on the
one side you are sufficiently convinced, that diverse Reformations might be
granted unto us, which would be very convenient for the Church; and on the
other side, your Charity might very well extend it self so far, as to leave
some Practices of small importance, to reunite a divided Church, and to join
it together again, in one and the same Place and Communion. If you are resolved
to release nothing, and that you will make no Reformation, it is in vain that
you invite us to return unto the Roman Church: While you do remain in the same
Terms wherein you were before the Council of Trent, we shall be forced to keep
in the same Terms wherein we are at present; otherwise we should condemn our
former Conduct, and impeach the Memory of our Forefathers; and that is a thing
which we will never do. We ought (at least) to have some pretext, and that we
may be able to say, that the Gallican Church is not the same thing that it was,
when we did separate our selves from it; and therefore, that as we had then
reason to depart from it, so now we have reason to rereturn unto it again.

Now, when we do (thus) demand a Relaxation, we are not so unreasonable, as not
to offer the like: By the Establishment of our Maxim, the Toleration ought to
be mutual on both sides. We are fully persuaded that our Doctrines are true,
and that our Worship is most pure; but we do not believe that all the Truths
which we defend, are of an equal Importance: We could tolerate some Errors,
opposite to some of our Truths, waiting until God should be pleased to
illuminate all of us: We could well enough be assistent at a Worship which (for
the Ceremonies of it) was different enough from our own, provided that there be
nothing therein contrary to that which does make up the essential part of our
Duties, and of those Adorations which we do owe unto God. So then, in regard of
a Reunion in this first Principle, ( viz. that there ought to be a Relaxation
on both sides, for the mutual benefit of Peace) there is nothing that is
impossible.

Our second Principle is, That when Men will endeavor a Reunion of two
Religions, by way of Accommodation, and of mutual Relaxation, neither of the
Parties can (honestly) demand of the other any Relaxation in those things which
his Opposite does believe to be of the highest Importance, and of sovereign
necessity for the Salvation of Souls.

We have (already) proved this Maxim; and though we had not done so, yet it
carries so great an Evidence along with it, that it is proved by it self.
According to this Principle, it would not be honest in you, Sirs, to demand,
that we should give our selves a Liberty; (for Example sake) in the matter of
Adoring the Sacrament of the Altar, of the Invocation of Saints, of the
Adoration of Images, and of many other such like things, which we believe to be
of the highest importance: For let it be supposed (if you will have it so) that
we are in the wrong, that it is but some phanatical Conceit, some
Prepossession, that it is any thing which you shall be pleased to call it; yet,
however, we are under such a Conviction; and it is to be believed, that we
should damn our selves in adoring a thing which, in our Judgment, is nothing
but Bread; in invocating any Creature, with a religious Invocation; or in the
Adoration of Images. If you should oblige us to give our selves a Freedom in
such kind of things, before you had fully convinced us, you would render us
Hypocrites, Profane, Idolaters, and (by consequence) you would make us the
worst Christians in the whole World. If you answer to this, that we ought to
submit our selves to the Judgment of the Church, which has pronounced, that
these Worships are not unlawful, you draw us off from the way of Accommodation,
and of Reunion, to cast us back again into a State of Controversy; for then
we must consider what the Judgment of the Church is, we must examine the Matter
of Fact; to wit, whether the Church (that is to say, the true Church) have
really determined, that the Sacrament ought to be adored, the Saints invoked,
and Images prayed unto: After that, we must examine the Question of Right, and
consider what that Respect and Submission is which we do owe unto the Judgment
of the Church: To lead us this way, would be to make the Reunion (absolutely)
impossible. Besides, we demand nothing but what we are ready to grant: If
therefore there be in your Dogma's, and in your Worships, any thing which you
do believe to be of extreme importance, and without which there can be no
Salvation, we should be unjust to demand of you to give your selves a Liberty
in these things. It lies upon you, Sirs, to mark out unto us those Dogma's, and
those Worships, which you suppose to be of absolute necessity to the Essence of
Christianity, and we will see whether we can accommodate our selves thereunto;
that is to say, whether we can tolerate them, without separating from the
Communion: If we think them intolerable, that (I confess) will render the
Reunion impossible; but I question whether there be many of those things which
(according to your proper Ideas) are of the Essence of Christianity, and which
would be incompatible with the Christian Religion, according to the Idea which
we have of it. Perhaps the Reflections which we shall now make, may give us a
clear Light into this Particular.

In the first place, The Sacrifice of the Mass cannot (as we believe) be that
part of your Religion which you hold to be of the Essence of Christianity, and
of which it would not be honest for us to demand a Relaxation from you; for, to
say nothing of this, that Christians, who should have no Priests to celebrate
that Sacrifice, would not cease (according unto you) to live and die good
Christians for all that, if they were in a place where it was impossible for
them to find Sacrificers. To build nothing upon that, I say, that Monsieur de
Meaux, one of the most illustrious Members of your Body, has reduced this
Controversy to a small matter: It is nothing but a Sacrifice of Commemoration;
it is a Means to apply unto us the Efficacy of the Cross. I can see nothing in
all this, but Ceremonies and Terms, which do distinguish and separate us: As
for Ceremonies, you are too learned (Sirs) in Antiquity, to be ignorant that
they have not been the same in all Times, and (by consequence) that they are
not of the Essence of the Mystery; and that so a Relaxation may very well be
made, in respect of them, without giving any Wound unto Religion. Let us
celebrate the Mysteries with those Ceremonies which were in use about the Times
of St. Justin Martyr, of Tertullian, and of St. Ireneus: Would not that be
sufficient for Religion? Would it be defective with those alone? As for the
Terms, you will have it to be called a Sacrifice, and that we are utterly
against: But is there no way to fix unto the Terms some Idea, and some
Signification, which may satisfy all the World? Monsieur de Meaux has as good
as hit upon it. We are contented that it should be called the Eucharist, a
Sacrifice of Commemoration; provided it be understood, that it is the
application of the Propitiation of the Cross of Jesus Christ: I believe that
all the World will consent to this. There is a third thing, about which
(without doubt Sirs) you will make much less difficulty, and that is the usage
of this Sacrifice. We do assure our selves that you will heartily abolish
private Masses, and Masses without Communicants, which are so constantly and so
certainly contrary unto the usage of Antiquity: Nay, though you should judge
them to be good; yet we do believe that you esteem Masses with Communicants to
be much more conformable unto the primitive institution of that Sacrament; and
so it cannot be that which you do look upon as an essential Point, and upon
which it would not be honest for us to demand a Relaxation of you.

But perhaps the adoration of the Eucharist, is one of those Points wherein you
could not give your selves any liberty, because that that, according unto you
is of the Essence of Christianity; and on the other side, it is an Article
which we are not able to pass: But (Sirs) when you consider unto what the
Controversy is at this day reduced, you will not say so. The Question is not
now, whether the Sacrament ought to be adored; it is true that the Council of
Trent has so ordained. True it is, that the most celebrated Doctors of the
Romish Persuasion do tell us, that the Adoration ought to be referred to the
Species; but that is an Opinion which is not perhaps at this day very current
in the Gallican Church: And you do interpret the Council of Trent in such a
manner, as that it does not oblige you to adore the Species; all the Adoration
is entirely referred unto Jesus Christ. We do not deny but that Jesus Christ
ought to be adored in the Communion of the Eucharist: All the Question
therefore is about equivocal Signs, which may be referred either unto Jesus
Christ alone, or unto the Sacrament in conjunction with Jesus Christ. Now,
might there not be a relaxation given, in the matter of Equivocal Signs,
without obliging People to them, who believe that they should sin mortally in
so doing? Let it be supposed (yet once again) that we are in the Error, in this
Point; But is it not an innocent Error? What prejudice does Religion suffer
thereby? What dishonor can there redound unto Jesus Christ by it, since that
(in conclusion) we do, and we shall adore Jesus Christ? Is God dishonored,
because I do refuse to adore him in a Stone, in which, yet notwithstanding, I
do know that God Is? If you will but give good heed to it, Sirs, you will find,
that (even according to your own Ideas) this also is not any matter, concerning
which you cannot give a Relaxation for the benefit of Peace.

Of many other Points, which some in your Communion would make to pass for
Matters of absolute necessity; we will touch but at one of them; and that is,
adherence unto the Holy See, for so you call that which we call the Sea of
Rome: But we beseech you, Sirs, that you will be pleased to consult your own
Understanding and Judgments thereupon. An Assembly of Faithful Persons,
situated at the other end of the World, who had never heard talk of a Pope, and
who wanted nothing else but this; might they not for all that be very good
Christians still? Consult the Ecclesiastical History; Was that adherence to the Sea of Rome reputed to be always of the same necessity? Had the Churches of
Asia, in the first Ages, the same connection and the same dependence upon the
Roman See, that the Churches of Europe at this day have? When there was no Pope
at all in the Western Church, did it therefore cease to be a Church? That time
has been seen wherein there was not any Pope. During the space of forty years
(for so long did the great Schism of the West continue) there were two Popes to
be seen at one time; and some times no less than three; and all those Popes had
their several intrigues to spin out that Schism, and each of them to maintain
himself in his particular grandeur; which is as much as to say, that there was
not any lawful Pope during all that time; for if they had been both of them
true Popes, the Church must have had two Heads; if one of them had been the
true Pope, and the other a false, then all the Latins which were subject and
obedient to the Antipope, must have been damned, in case that adherence unto
the true Pope be necessary to Salvation: But this is a thing which no Body will
avouch, but hold that each Party of that divided Church were in a way of
Salvation; and yet that could never be, unless that adherence to the Holy See
be not essential unto Christianity. Therefore (to conclude Sirs) seeing that
you have defined, that the Pope is not infallible, from whence should proceed
the necessity of this adherence unto an Head which may lead Men into Error?
Seeing that the Council can depose Popes, why can it not also remove this
Burden? If the States of a Kingdom have the Power to depose a King, they have
also the Power to change the Form of Government; they are Masters of the Laws,
and can change them too. We could add diverse other Considerations, but these do
seem unto us sufficient to make you comprehend, that (according unto your own
Idea's) adherence to the Holy See, cannot be of the Essence of Christianity;
and that therefore you ought not to take it amiss, that we do conjure you to
give a Relaxation in that Point.

You will tell us (undoubtedly, just as we lately told you) that whether it be
Reason, or Pre-occupation, a Fanatical Conceit, or solid Judgment, whatsoever
it be; yet we do believe, that the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Adoration of the
Eucharist, an Adherence to the Holy See, etc. are of the Essence of
Christianity; and therefore (according unto your Principle) you have no right
to solicit us to give our selves any liberty therein. It is not honest, to
require People to renounce things, which are (in their Opinion) of a Sovereign
Necessity: Give us therefore leave, Sirs, to tell you, that you are mistaken;
you say that you do judge this to be of absolute necessity, perhaps you think
that you do believe so, (and undoubtedly People of an ordinary discernment
among you are of that Judgment;) but we are persuaded, that you will plainly
perceive, and evidently see in your own Heart, whenever you shall be pleased to
consult it without Passion, that the Idea of Christianity does not formally
include in it, either the necessity of any other Sacrifice than that of the
Cross, nor of any other Adoration than that of Jesus Christ in the Heavens, nor
of any other adherence but unto the Supreme Head of the Church, which is the
Son of God. There are a thousand things, which we say out of Habit and Custom,
as if we did really believe them; but whenever we come to give heed to it, we
find that those things are no way allied unto the Original Idea's of our
Spirits, and do not at all flow from our Principles.

Our third Principle was this, That when the Question is about a thing, the
Belief or the Practice whereof does seem to be Mortal to one of the two
Parties, and does not seem to be of Absolute Necessity unto the other;
Christian Charity and Prudence do require, that the Party which does not look
upon that Doctrine, or that Worship, as being of Absolute Necessity, should
abondon it for the sake of Peace, and sacrifice it unto the other Party which
has an invincible Horror for it: We do not believe that any wise Person can
contest this Principle; which if you will admit, it will open you a Door to
avoid the most part of those difficulties which put an obstacle to our Reunion.

Let us begin with the Invocation of Saints: You know, Sirs, that that does
take up a great part of your Worship; you do also know, that it is one of the
Stumbling-Stones to the Protestants, and such a Stone, that if it be not taken
away, it does put an unsurmountable Obstacle to the Reunion; for when all is
done, we are persuaded that we ought not, in any fashion in the World, to bring
the Worship of the Creatures into the Divine Service: If possibly we should be
in the wrong, and that you have all the Reason on your sides; yet remember,
Sirs, that some regard may, and ought to be had unto the infirmities of our
weak Brethren; and all that possibly can must be retrenched in favor of them,
that they may not be frightened and scared away: St. Paul does say (with a great
deal of vehemence) If Meat do make my Brother to offend, I will eat no Flesh
while the World stands. We are here absolutely in the case of our third
Principle. On the one side we do believe, that the Worship of the Creatures is
destructive to the fundamentals of the Christian Religion; on the other side
you do believe, that the Worship of the Creatures is not of absolute necessity
in Religion: We do not know any Man among all your Doctors, who says, that the
Invocation of Saints is necessary unto Salvation; according to all the
Christians that there are of your Communion, it is sufficient to invoke God
alone; there is found in that Being infinitely perfect all that is necessary to
satisfy and fill up our Wants: This Principle has so great an Evidence, that
all the World is agreed in it, It is only God from whom we receive those Graces
which do make us happy, and which do dispose us unto a perfect beatitude; it is
enough therefore for us to ask them of him alone. We ought not to pray unto the
Saints (according unto you, Sirs) with any other Spirit or Affection than that
wherewith we desire the Faithful here upon the Earth, to pray unto God for us;
and is that such a great Piece of Business, to leave it, when it proves to be
such a Rock of Offense unto so many Millions of Souls, which (according to your
supposition) do destroy themselves in the Schism. You do agree, that a Man who
does content himself with the succors of his Brethren's Prayers alone, who are
here on Earth, and who should (continually) himself pray unto God, should, yet
nevertheless, be in a very fair way for Heaven, and should not fail of
obtaining that which he did ask for.

We desire you also (Sirs) to consider, that supposing that the Saints do know
our Wants, and do intercede for us; that the Church would lose nothing by it,
though they were not invoked here upon Earth: You are sufficiently persuaded,
that the Charity of those Glorious Souls is no way in the World dependent upon
the Homages which are paid unto them here below; they are jealous only for God;
they do not require of any body to build them Chapels, and to pray unto them:
And if a Cessation were put unto that Invocation, not out of any Contempt of
them, but for fear of exciting the Jealousy of God, they would never be
displeased with the Church for that Cause; they would pray (nevertheless) for
the Church in general, and for the Necessities of every one of the Faithful in
particular. You do also know, that though they should be supposed to be capable
of Resentment for the abandoning of their Oratories, and their Chapels; yet
they would still pray unto God, in the behalf of those who did nothing for
them: So that the Church would lose no Succors by retrenching this Invocation,
and she would gain an infinite of Souls by the Bargain.

This Invocation of Saints is founded upon that which they call their
Intercession: You do agree in that Point, Sirs, that the Intercession of Jesus
Christ is only sufficient for to save us; that although all the Saints should
be silent, provided that our Redeemer did but set his Blood a speaking for us,
that our Affairs would go on never the less prosperously for all that. You do
also grant (Sirs) that he who does rely upon the Intercession of Jesus Christ
alone, does not do amiss: What prejudice therefore could it be to the Church,
to lay aside the Intercession of the Saints? If we should leave it, out of a
Principle of Scruple, and of Fear to offend Jesus Christ, we should not yet
(for all that) lose it, in case that there be any reality in such Intercession;
for (as we have lately represented unto you) you are sufficiently persuaded,
that the Saints, if they know our Wants, do pray for the Conversion of the
Ungodly, who do never (at all) invoke them; as well as for the Perseverance of
the Faithful, who do.

Unto these Considerations we may subjoin another thing, Sirs, which you do
very well know, and which (without making any Mystery of it) you do openly
avouch; namely, that this Invocation of the Saints is very subject unto great
Abuses, and that a great number of them are already crept thereinto: The wisest
Persons of your Body do publicly complain of those Abuses, and do reprove
them; they do approve of The wholesome Advices of the Virgin, unto her
indiscreet Votaries; The Defense of the Bishop of Tournal, for those wholesome
Advices; The Catechism of the three Bishops of Angers, of Rochel, and of Luzon;
wherein there is an entire Lesson concerning the Abuses which ought to be
avoided in the Invocation of Saints, and in the Devotion of the holy Virgin:
That Lesson begins thus; Is there no Abuse to be avoided in the Invocation of
the Saints? And the Catechumenos is made to answer, Yes, there are many of
them, which are but too too common among ill-instructed People. You know, Sirs,
that it is impossible (in this Case) to weed out the Abuse, without extirpating
the Thing which is abused; for the People are not capable (in religious
Service) to discern and separate the Bounds which distinguish the Honor which
is due unto none but God alone, from that which may be rendered unto the
Saints: We dare boldly say, it is impossible but that they should be deceived
herein, by their Ignorance, and by those Inclinations they have unto
Superstition.

Whereupon I beseech you, Sirs, to consider, that the Worshipping of Saints, on
the one hand, being not absolutely necessary to the Perfection of the Christian
Religion; and on the other hand, being subject unto so many Abuses, it would
become your Piety, and your Charity, to retrench a thing, the privation of
which would bring no prejudice to the Church, and the removing whereof would
restore her so many Souls, which (according unto you) are wandered from her
Folds. To conclude, You are (all of you) fully persuaded that the Divine
Service would be never the less pure, though none but God alone should be
invoked; and therefore you are also persuaded, that God, and his Glory, would
suffer no prejudice by such Retrenchment.

The same things we say concerning Images, and the Worship of them: That kind
of Worship will (everlastingly) beget an Horror in the Protestants; they
believe that the Law of God does forbid it; they are persuaded that it is a
pure piece of Paganism, which the Devil has brought into the Church; they
cannot beat it out of their Thoughts, but that this Worship is an invincible
Obstacle unto the Conversion of the Jews and Mahometans. Suppose (if you will)
that all this is but Pre-occupation, yet, however, it is such a Pre-occupation
as they can never recover from: But, on the contrary (Sirs) you are fully
persuaded, in the first place, that Images are not essential unto the Christian
Religion, and that one may pass very well without them. Secondly, That the
Church Apostolical was well enough contented without Images. You will say, that
that was for fear, lest it might prove a Snare unto the ill-instructed Pagans,
whom they desired to withdraw from the Worship of Idols: But (let that be how
it will) it does thereby appear, that one may be a very good Christian, without
prostrating himself before Images. The most Learned, and the most sincere among
you, do also agree, that the Church was without Images for more than three
hundred Years; which does still make it evident, that (even according unto you)
Images are not necessary. Finally, You do agree, that the Abuse of that Worship
is possible, frequent, great, and dangerous: Moreover, it is impossible for the
Simple to form unto themselves distinct Ideas of relative Worship, and of
absolute: You cannot be ignorant, how many thousands of People are mistaken
therein; and that a Peasant does prostrate himself before an Image with more
Devotion, than he does before God himself. Give us leave, yet once again, to
make Application of our Principle here; and to say unto you, For God's sake,
Sirs, do not put an Obstacle to the Reunion of the Church, (which is the
greatest of all the Works which God has now on foot,) for a thing which the
Christian Church can very well be without, and which we believe to be
(absolutely) insupportable. Take away the Occasion of so many Abuses, in taking
away a Worship, the Foundation whereof is, in no wise, of the Essence of
Christianity. A Relaxation ought to be made, for Peace sake, of unnecessary
Dogma's, and Worships, which beget Horror in the Parties you would draw to
them.

This same Principle will show you what you may also do, in regard of the
Retrenchment which is made of the Cup, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: It
seems to us to be essential; we believe that we do lose the whole Sacrament, in
losing one part of it. Now, let it be supposed (yet once again) that there may
be something of a phanatical Conceit in this: But yet, will not your Charity
have some regard to the Infirmity of your weak Brethren, in a thing wherein you
acknowledge that the Glory of God is not interessed, nor Religion concerned? It
is no Sacrilege (according to you) for the People to communicate under both the
Species; you acknowledge they did receive it so for many hundred Years
together: On the other side, according unto us, it is a Sacrilege to
communicate under one Species. It is clear therefore, that you may accord the
Favor we desire of you in that Point, without any Injury done to your Religion.

Divine Service in a Language which the People do not understand, is also one
of those Articles unto which we may apply our third Principle. You do
acknowledge that the Apostolical Church did understand the Language wherein the
Divine Service was performed; you are persuaded that there is neither any Evil
nor Scandal in it, to pray unto God, in the Church, in a Language which the
People do understand: This therefore can be no great business for you to grant;
for, let all your Prayers be turned into French, (when all is done,) your
Religion does abide still in its Integrity; but it is such an unspeakable
Torment unto us, that we cannot communicate at a Worship, in a Language which
we do not understand. There can be nothing therefore more conformable to the
Rules of Charity, and of Christian Prudence, than a Relaxation in this
Particular; the Church would lose nothing at all by the bargain, and the World
would be a great Gainer.

The Liberty of Marriage for the Priests cannot concern the Fundamentals of
Religion, any more than the other Things aforesaid, because it is only a Point
of Discipline. There have been, in the Latin Church, Priests married since the
Tenth Age; the Greek Church has abundance of them that are so now; and you
(Sirs) do not hold, that the Sacraments which are administered by those married
Priests are unlawful; you cannot, therefore, look upon this as a matter of the
highest importance to Religion; and (as for our parts) we cannot possibly
consider it as a thing indifferent, because we look on this Direction of the
Discipline, as a Sourse of ten thousand Disorders; which, we believe, cannot be
any other way remedied, but by taking away that Yoke which imposes a necessity
of an unmarried Life upon so many People, to whom God has not given the
Continency necessary for so holy an Estate.

You know (Sirs) that these are not the only things which you do not believe to
be of sovereign necessity, and which we believe to be very evil: These Articles
which we have touched at, are only Examples, to fortify our Rule, which might
be extended to a great many other things. Might not your Charity and Christian
Wisdom induce you to make a view of all these things, that so you might
retrench a good part of them? You should (undoubtedly) thereby offer a
Sacrifice which would be most acceptable unto him who calls himself the God
of Peace, and who does command that Peace be maintained among the Brethren.

It would not be enough for you to retrench the Abuses, and that which you do
call so, in the Invocation of Saints, in the Worship of Images, in Pilgrimages,
in the Adoration of Relics, in Fraternities, etc. For, in these things, we
cannot distinguish the Use from the Abuse; but do esteem the whole of it to be
Abuse: And though that should be an Error in us, yet it would commend your
Charity, to bear with us in a thing, the Retrenchment whereof would infer no
Wrong unto Christianity.

Neither would it be enough for you to permit us not to invocate the Saints,
not to adore Images, and not to take any part in the Devotions which respect
the Creatures; for we cannot communicate with any Church, where all this should
be practiced: It would be (in our Opinion) all one, as if we did it our selves.
The public Service is for all the whole Company, we could not hinder our
selves (if we would never so fain) from participating therein: It would be our
Worship, as well as yours, if we were reunited; or, if we should (formally)
oppose our selves to it (as we should be obliged so to do) we must then fall
back again, into the Mischief of that Schism, from which you would draw us.

To conclude, Sirs; What we demand here, the like we are willing to grant: If
you have any Articles which you believe to be of a sovereign Necessity, and
which we hold to be almost indifferent, or (at least) tolerable, because they
do not destroy the Fundamentals of Religion, we are ready to tolerate them in
our Brethren, and to reunite our selves, though they do not abandon them: It
does lie upon you (Sirs) to mark out which they are. But, we beseech you, have
the goodness here to remember, that those ought not to he propounded as
(almost) indifferent Dogmas, and (consequently) such as we ought to suffer,
about which, it is notorious, we have declared, that we do look upon them as
(altogether) intolerable.

Our fourth Principle is, That in the Articles wherein it is agreed on both
sides, that they are not essential, there the weakest Side ought to comply with
the Practice of the ruling Party. And here (Sirs) you will find all kind of
Advantage on your side: You are the ruling Party in France; you have, in the
Head of you, that great Prince, for whom we have so much Respect and
Veneration, that, to satisfy him, we will carry our Complaisance as far as
ever it can be carried with a safe Conscience. This Maxim would make you gain
more things, than you could lose by the Precedent; for there would
(undoubtedly) be found a great many of those Articles, both of Dogmas, and of
Worships, which, although we do (indeed) condemn, yet we do not believe them
important enough to oblige us to keep our selves in a State of Separation. We
shall not mark out, which those Articles are which might be abandoned, to you,
because we are not sufficiently authorized thereunto; a full Assembly would be
requisite, to discuss an Affair of such importance: But that which we can
assure you of is this, that this Maxim would save you (almost) all the exterior
part of your Religion; so that you might make a Reformation of the Church,
without fearing the Revolt of those People, who are concerned for nothing but
the outside thereof: But (yet nevertheless Sirs) you ought not to put into the
number of those things, to which we might accommodate our selves out of
Complaisance, those external Ceremonies which go to the rendering of a Religious
Service to the Creature, for we have told you, that is a thing our Consciences
can never endure.

Our Fifth and Sixth Principles do amount unto thus much, That in the things,
which should (by mutual agreement) be retrenched for the edification of the
Church, or tolerated for the benefit of Peace, and for a Reunion, neither
Party should be obliged either to abjure the Errors and the Worships which
should be so retrenched, or to subscribe to the Opinions which should be
tolerated.

This is also, Sirs, an Article, which would be entirely unto our advantage;
for if your Charity and your Complaisance did carry you to retrench (for
Example sake) the Invocation of Saints, the Adoration of Images, and that of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as things which might be laid aside, we should
not press you to condemn as Criminals, the Practices which you should have
renounced; but (waiting until God should illuminate you, to make you know the
true Character of those Worships, and their true Name) we should suffer you to
say, that you had retrenched (out of Complaisance) Worships, which in
themselves were not evil; and by which means you should not be obliged to
condemn your Ancestors, nor to impeach your Church.

But it would be just that we should also enjoy the privilege of this Maxim,
and that in the things which we did tolerate, you should not oblige us to any
abjuration of our Sentiments, nor unto a Confession of yours: If (for Example
sake) we did agree to tolerate the Opinion of the Real Presence, it would not
be just to oblige us to the Abjuration of the Real Absence, or to the
Confession of the Real Presence; for that alone would be an invincible Obstacle
to a Reunion. A Man may well enough tolerate an Error; but he ought never to
betray the Truth. If it should be agreed upon to tolerate the Opinion of
Purgatory, you ought not to oblige us to subscribe to it, nor yet to conceal
our proper Sentiments, and by the same Reason you might not retain all those
Worships, and all those Devotions, which are founded upon that Opinion of
Purgatory; for if you do retain those Worships, they will become our Worships,
and our Devotions, by Virtue of that Union into which we are entered with your
Church. We should confess and establish that Purgatory, which we did in the
mean while renounce with our Hearts, and which we did condemn by our Words;
which would be to put a Christian into a State of Contradiction, and oblige him
to establish and to destroy one and the same thing; a Conduct entirely opposite
unto Christian Sincerity.

Our Seventh and last Principle is, That in an Accommodation of Reunion, Truth
ought to be interessed as little as possibly can be, in such sort, that the
generality and particular Persons ought to be left to their own liberty, to
instruct themselves by the Word of God, and by amicable Conferences upon those
Points, which should be released on both sides; for it would not be convenient
to make a Form of Confession of Faith, which all should be obliged to subscribe
and to hold unto: It was not so that the Apostolical Church did persevere in
their Union, notwithstanding that great diversity of Sentiments, which was
between the converted Jews, and the Pagans which were turned Christians; you
know (Sirs) that that diversity was very great; all the converted Jews were
Zealots for the Law, as St. Luke does expressly tell us in the 21 Chap. of the
Acts; they did believe, that the observation of the Law was necessary unto
those who did embrace the Gospel; St. Paul and all the converted Pagans held,
that such observation of the Law, was pernicious: Now they did not patch up a
Confession of Faith, in general and ambigious Terms, to content both the
Parties; but each of them kept their own Sentiments; and yet for all that they
did continue united. You have (Sirs) in your own Church a great diversity of
Opinions, in Things of exceeding great importance; wherein every Party has a
right to search out the Truth, and to endeavor to make it known unto others,
without any prejudice to the Union: The same course ought to be used in respect
of Opinions, which it shall be thought fit to tolerate in favor of a general
Reunion. There is good reason to believe, that God will bless the endeavors
of those who make search after Truth without Passion, and in the Spirit of
Peace, and that (both Parties being reunited) they would quickly come to an
universal agreement, as well in respect of Doctrines, as of Worship.

These several Principles which we have here established, and applied unto
diverse Articles, might be also applied unto a great many more. There are Points
of Faith, and there are Points of Discpline; there are Controversies purely
speculative, as those of Predestination, Free Will, Grace, Justification, Merit
by Works: It is not this sort of things that can put any Obstacle to a
Reunion, because these do rarely come so far, as the People who are the most
interessed in this Affair, and a Toleration might easily be granted in those
very differences, wherein Men of each Communion, do already bear with one
another. There are other Controversies which respect the Worship; and they will
be easily terminated by applying unto them the precedent Principles. Finally,
there are some Controversies, which relate unto Government and Discipline,
wherein our fourth Principle will give you huge advantages. It is not for us
(Sirs) to take upon us to descend into a more particular retail of those
things, wherein we might give our selves a liberty; but yet I dare assure you,
that there is scarcely any thing which we should not do for Peace, the Glory of
God, and our Consciences (in the first place) being well secured.

We desire you moreover (Sirs) to consider, that the Relaxations, which we
desire of you, do no way interest your Honor, nor your Glory, those false
Maxims of Worldly Glory, ought to have no place or consideration in Religion.
They who make the greatest advances for Peace, do get the greatest Glory. You
have begun those advances by the Pastoral Letter, which your late Assembly did
address unto all our Flocks, we will gladly look upon it as an effect of you
Charity; but that same Charity which carries you to invite us to a Re union,
does also oblige you to open for us the ways unto it: If we were in that Post
which you possess, if we were the ruling Religion, it would be our parts to
clear and to make plain the ways; but in the place wherein you are, it would be
expected from you (Sirs) to do that by virtue of the Authority you have in your
Hands, which we in our weakness should but in vain attempt. Let this be laid
down for an unquestionable Principle, That it is absolutely impossible to have
any Reunion without some Reformation; so that if you do seriously and heartily
desire this Union, you must (Sirs) grant some Reformation; and do not take it
amiss, if we represent unto you, that the Reformation ought to go before the
Propositions of Reunion; I mean, an actual Reformation; for it would be no way
reasonable, that you should oblige us to reunite with you, before you had
reformed, under the bare promise of a future Reformation: For (in the first
place) in expecting that this Reformation should be wrought, we must certainly
continue a long time among you. How long were they forced to demand the Council
of Trent, and the Reformations there made, before they could obtain them? The
Catholic Princes were near forty years in soliciting them, without any
success. The same thing could not fail to happen here; and in a tedious
expectation our Consciences must groan, in a Church where we should be obliged
to participate in a Worship which we believe to be evil. Secondly, What
assurance could we have that Promise should be kept with us? We doubt not but
you are sincere and well intentioned, (Sirs,) but on the other side, we doubt
not, but that when you had resolved to reform the Church, you would find
thousands of People to traverse your Design; and if among all those Obstacles,
any should frustrate this pious Purpose of Reformation, we should find our
selves in an un-reformed Church, with which we should be forced to break a
second time, or to damn our selves in it, abiding therein against our
Consciences.

Forasmuch as that in all Treaties, it is necessarily requisite, that the
Parties should act by way of accord. It would be absolutely necessary (Sirs)
that you should procure his Majesty's full and entire consent, for our free
liberty to confer together; and also that we may take advice of our Brethren
the Protestants of Germany, of England, Switzerland, and the Low Countries; for
whatever respect we have for the Orders of his Majesty yet we cannot make a
Schism with our Brethren, neither can we act any thing herein, without their
advice and consent.

After we should have thus conferred together, it would be necessary that we
should also confer with you; not to enter into Disputes, and to treat of
Controversies, for that is a way which never had, nor ever will have any good
success. In those kind of Controversies, the ruling Party will always have the
Reason on their side; they publish what they please, and yet (when all is done)
every Body believes of it as he shall find cause. The Honor of Victory is more
sought after than the Triumph of Truth. The Conferences ought to run only upon
this, what things may be mutually tolerated, and what cannot.

But (to dispose Men's Spirits unto this Reunion) it would be necessary (Sirs)
that you should procure a Cessation of those Rigors and Severities which are
exercised against us, throughout all the Kingdom, under your direction, and by
your solicitation. Whoever they were that persuaded you, that this was a good
means to make us return, were very ill acquainted with the Heart of Man, and
the workings thereof: It is true, that these ways of rigor may gain you some
base, ignorant, interessed Souls; Souls void of Piety, and without any Love of
the Truth; but it will (endlesly) drive away from you, all that have any Zeal,
or so much as the least spark of Honor in the World. When a People shall see
their Temples pulled down, their Altars demolished, their Children snatched out
of their Arms, their Estates plundered, their Liberties violated, when they
shall see themselves bereaved of Sacraments, their dying Friends without any
Consolation, the Living without Instruction; when they shall see their
Countrymen incited to their ruin, and that they are continually threatened
with Death, Massacre, and Pillage; when they see themselves shut up in a
Kingdom, so that they cannot go any where else to seek their Means of Living,
which is denied them in their own Country, against the Law of Nations, which
does permit Persons to seek Food for their Bodies, and for their Souls,
wheresoever they can find it: All this (I say) is apt to provoke and inflame,
to incense and set Men's Spirits on Fire, to ruin their dispositions unto
Reunion, and to banish all thoughts of Peace.

And therefore it is a Preliminary of absolute necessity to reclaim Men's
Spirits, which are made hagard and exasperated, by the hardships which they
have suffered of late years; to reduce them (I say) by opening the Prisons unto
so many Innocents, who are shut up for no Cause but for Religion; by restoring
unto so many Consciences, which are now in Slavery, the liberty to follow their
own Motions; by permitting so many scattered Flocks to re-assemble themselves,
to pray unto God, and so many banished Ministers to return into the Kingdom,
there to join their Prayers with those of their Brethren, that they may obtain
the Blessing of God upon this great Design of a Reunion. In the Name of God
(Sirs) remember that the Ways of Rigor are not those which the Gospel does
command: The Feet of a persecuting Converter (which comes with thundering
Arrests, with Menaces, and offensive Arms) are not the Feet of the Evangelists,
of which the Holy Ghost says, Oh, how beautiful are the Feet of him that
brings good Tidings of Peace, that publishes Salvation, that says unto
Sion, Thy God reigns! We do earnestly beseech you to have pity upon so many
Thousands of Souls, driven out of the Kingdom, who have saved nothing but their
Consciences, and who are reduced unto very cruel Extremities. We do heartily
beg, that you will suffer your selves to be moved by the Tears of so many
Persons who weep for the Infants which are snatched out of their Bosoms, and
out of their very Bowels, against the Laws of Nature, who do miserably perish
by the harshness of their Countrymen, who are violenced in their Consciences
by the Laws, which do lay a Yoke upon their Souls; who are cruelly tormented
with the Remorse wherewith their own Weakness does upbraid them; who do assist
at your Mysteries, without having any Faith, or Respect for them; who find
themselves reduced to a Necessity, either of losing their Goods and Liberty, or
of betraying their Sentiments.

I will add (Sirs) that you ought not to consider the great disproportion of
Numbers, Strength, Credit, and Authority, which is between you and us: Say not,
that we ought to yield all, because we are the weakest. Consider that it is not
only us, with whom you treat; it is with the whole Body of the Protestants; you
shall act for all Europe; for it is as certain as any thing in the World can
be, that if the Reunion be made in France, by the way of a just Reformation,
all Europe will imitate you, and all the Protestants would follow us: And so
you should acquire the greatest Honor that the Ministers of Jesus Christ can
ever arrive unto; that is, to close up the affrightful Wound of the Church,
which has layen a bleeding for so many Ages.

Ever since the Establishment of Christianity among the Galls, the Gallican
Church has ever been one of the most glorious Parts of the Universal Church.
It is she which has (in all Times) exposed her self, with the greatest Courage
and Success, against Tyranny: She has preserved her self in greater Purity
than any other, in the general Corruption. There is nothing more to be done, to
crown the Glory of your Church, but (only) to make her the Reformatrix of the
universal World: That is a thing which you may do; and it is beyond all doubt,
that your Example would have such Influences in it, as would be extended unto
the uttermost parts of the Earth You would draw those who would not follow you,
and all the World would yield to your Authority.

By this Means, the Kingdom of that great Prince, under whose Orders you act,
would become the most glorious that ever any was, since first there were Kings
upon the Face of the Earth: All the World would bless him, and he would thereby
open himself a Way to the universal Empire: All the People of Europe would make
it their Delight, and take it for an Honor, to be united under the Domination
of him, who should have reunited them into one and the same Religion. You
would have the Honor (Sirs) to live in the Memory of Posterity, as the second
Fathers of the Church, and her great Restaurators: You would have the Pleasure
to restore the Service of God to its primitive Luster, and Apostolical Purity:
You might take for your Model, the Churches unto which the Saints, Ireneus,
Ignatius, Policarp, Cyprian, and all the holy Bishops of the three first Ages
did preach. Reform Christianity upon that Foundation, and you will not only
restore Peace unto the Church, but also open the Gates thereof unto all Infidel
Nations: The Jews and the Mahometans will make no difficulty to adore our God,
when you shall have taken out of their sight those Images, which they call
Idols; that religious Adoration of Saints and Angels, which they do call the
Vice-Deities, and Secondary Gods of the Christians; when you shall permit them
to serve none but one God invisible, and not command them to adore an Object
which they eat: As long as these Stumbling-stones do lie at the Church-door,
the Infidels will never enter into it. Restore the Worship to that degree of
Spirituality, which is essential unto Christianity: Purify the Temple, and the
Spirit of God will fill it, and that Spirit will make your Word, and your
Examples, efficacious for the Conversion of those Countries which are separated
from the Church.

This is that (Sirs) which we should have answered, if we had been authorized
(by the whole Body, whereof we are Members,) by way of Return unto the Pastoral
Letter, which you did us the Honor to write unto us, in your late Assembly. We
do earnestly beseech you (Sirs) that you will awaken the Bowels of your
Compassions toward your Brethren, whom you do suppose to be in a State of
Wandering and Error; but who are (nevertheless) your Brethren, (as great Strays,
and deceived, as you suppose them to be:) Deal therefore with them, as with
Brethren, and not as with Enemies: That your Exhortations may have the more
Efficacy, open unto them the Way of Grace: Draw them with the Cords of
Humanity, that so you may bring them back again, into the Bosom of that Mother,
from whom you pretend they have separated themselves: They will (undoubtedly)
answer your Invitations with Joy, as soon as ever they shall be able to do it,
without resisting the Voice of their Conscience.

FINIS.

