AN EXCELLENT RECEIPT To make a Complete Common-Wealth-Oleo, OR (if you please)
A NEW SENATE Fitted to the English-Man's Palate.
Recipe.
Half a dozen Turks with Turbants on their heads, and Cimitars by their sides,
all well purged of dross and impurities by Moonlight; one hundred Jews
circumcised secundum artem, forty Arabians stuck with spices of all kinds; ten
New England men; fifty Pirates; eight Excisemen, nineteen Geneva-men, three
Jesuits, thirty Quakers, one and fifty Anabaptists, lantch't in fair river
water, threescore Independents; a quarter of a pound of John Lilburn's bones
beaten into fine powder and seared, the better to unite with the rest;
whereunto add an ounce of Oil of Saint-John's-Wort, a drachme of the
scrapings of the Divell's cloven foot; five spoon-fulls of the marrow of old
Oliver's nose; half a Committee man; two Gallons of Aquafortis, seventy Scot's
haslets, together with a Kilderkinfull of Hugh Peter's sighs and tears,
evaporated into water in an Alembiqu' made of an Organ-pipe; you may throw in
(if you see cause) a barrel or two of Gunpowder, (the whitest is best) a
firebrand lighted at both ends, and one grain of Quicksilver, and (to keep all
from blowing up) twenty or thirty Redcoats (according to discretion) and lastly
for the better relishing of the Oleo, a Pispot full of Alderman Atkins's
perfume, you need not trouble your self to go to the Apothecaries for it, the
best is sold by Tom Turd about Pancridg Church fields: to all these add but one
scruple of Eternity to make it last for ever. Put all these materials together
into a great Mortar made of all the Bells in England, Scotland, and Ireland;
beat them well together till they become incorporated into a strong body, then
set them over a gentle fire, till they become just Lukewarm, and no more: take
it off from the fire, let it cool, and keep it for use.

The Virtues.
It Is excellent good to purge the Nation to skin and bones: It agree's very
well with the Commonwealth's men's appetite, but rises in the Cavaliers
stomach; for which cause they, and the Presbyterians had best refrain it: The
Spaniard would like it well if he might have a finger in the dish; the
Frenchman would love it beyond his nicest Kiek shawes. It Is good against
poverty. An excellent Restorative for broken fortunes. It forces men out of
Gaoles to preferments. But you must know that it is also very dangerous for some
constitutions; for it makes some peoples heads fall off from their shoulders,
others dye upon a Gibbet, and sends many an one a pickpack to the Devil: upon
which consideration I have thought fit to set down a necessary preparatory or
course of physic which every man ought to run who intends to be rightly
qualified that he may feed sweetly on it, find it concoct rightly, and turn to
his proper nourishment, the only use it was intended for.

The Method to be used by our Patient.
First you must abstain from reading Divinity books, and hearing sermons three
years, when you have done so, you must go to Rome and take Orders there; when
you return you must shift your clothes to the very skin, and put on any habit
you please but a Papist's, then you must preach one twelve-moneth which being
duly observed, take but the quantity of an Hasle-nut of the following Pill for
a fortnight, together without intermission, and you are right.

Recipe. The Pill:
Of Hypocrisy 5 scruples; self-denying one drachme of Impudence 9 ounces,
Religion. q. s. powder of a seared Conscience 7lb: water of Orphan's tears 1
Rundlet full; Church Lands as much as you can get (for that is a scarce
Commodity, and almost all bought up) 3lb: of the rust of a weathercock, of
Atheism to role up the Pill to make it go down with the less obstruction.
Make all but the last drugg into a mass; take of it (as I said before) the
proportion of an Hasle nut every morning next your heart, for the space of time
above mentioned, and you may partake freely of the Oleo, and yowl find your
self after a little use fit to make an ingredient in such another when that is
spent.

Probatum erit.

