A TRIAL OF A CHRISTIAN.

SHOWING, That it is not the outward name of Christian, that differs from a
heathen, but the inward life and nature.

Also, A Testimony of Truth against the deceit and subtilty of the Serpent:
wherein truth is cleared from many accusations.

With a loving Invitation to all who are hungring after the living bread, and
has not wherewith to satisfy themselves in their own houses; but are seeking
without, and begging from others, and are spending their money for that which
is not bread, inviting them to come into my Fathers house where they shall find
full satisfaction.

With a word of exhortation to all who are called to be saints by way of
remembrance, to stir up their pure minds.

By Alexander Parker.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

TO THE READER.
Friend,
IF thou art so far come into the moderation, as to try all things, and hold
fast that which is of God, stand single in that which is pure, and try not the
truth in a balance of deceit, for that which is of God must be tried by
something of himself; the light of the body is the eye: If thou deny the light,
with what will thou see? the natural cannot discern the spiritual, neither can
the darkness comprehend the light, but the light the darkness. Now if thou will
try that which is good, let the light of Christ in thy conscience judge, for
that I own to be a measure of the true light, which lighteneth every man that
comes into the world; if thou deny this true light, thou deniest the life of
Christ, and art in death and darkness, and cannot receive the things of God; if
thou receive them not, here thou may see what hinders: but otherwise, if
thou confess that Jesus Christ is come a light into the world, a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and if thou believe that in the first nature thou art a
Gentile, and cannot witness the new nature, will thou deny the gift of God,
which is given thee to open the blind eye, to lead thee out of the prison of
corruption, into the new nature. If thou denyest this light, thou denyest the
way, the truth, and the life, and have left thy self without all help of
recovery, so thy damnation is of thy self; You will not come unto me that you
may have life, says he. Now if thou can believe that in the Son is life,
turn to him, that thou may have life; and if thou believe the Scripture,
that the life is the light of men, receive it, and believe in it, that thou
may be a child of light; for this I say, and stand a witness for the Lord,
that if ever thou find him, who is the desire of all Nations, it must be by a
measure of himself made manifest in thee; therefore delay not as thou prizest
thy precious soul, but seek him while the may be found, for in the grave there
is no remembrance of him, to day hear his voice, then harden not thy heart, but
turn at his reproof; that which reproves thee in secret, and makes manifest all
thy evil deeds, that is the light which leads out of sin and evil, this is the
voice which says behind thee, This is the way walk in it; therefore see thou
refuse not him that speaks, but turn at his reproof, that he may pour out his
spirit upon thee: contrariwise, if thou will not stand in his counsel, but hate
his reproof, thou may call, but he will not answer, thou may seek early,
but thou shall not find, thou may strive, but shall not be able to enter;
and being without, art among the dogs, sorcerers, whore-mongers, murderers,
idolaters, and liars, which have their portion in the lake for ever and ever.
It is the Nations of them which are saved, that walk in the light of the Lamb;
these do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life; these
that walk in the light, are they that enter through the gate into the City. Now
if thou say in thy self, that thou have witnessed an entrance already, how
came thou in? art thou one of the saved Nations, that walks in the light of
the new Jerusalem? can thou truly say that Jesus Christ has perfectly
wrought his work in thee, which he came into the world to finish, (that is) to
put an end to sin, and bring in perfect righteousness? If this be wrought in
thee, thou art righteous, as he is righteous, for he that sanctifies, and they
that are sanctified, are all of one; and if thou art one with Christ, thou art
a new creature, created unto good works, which is the fruit whereby thou art
known from the world, for thou art not of the world that witnesses redemption
out of the vain conversation, for the worlds fruits whereby they are known, is
the vain conversation; thou that have an eye to see, thou may see; if these
marks of a Chrisiian be found in thee, I own thee, and am one with thee in the
life of Christ; but if on the contrary, the worlds marks do appear in thee, I
deny thee, and all thy profession and service is an abomination in the sight of
the Lord, for thou professest what thou art not, and so art a hypocrite,
blaspheming the Name of Christ, in saying thou art a Christian, being found one
of the Synagogue of Satan. Therefore friend, whoever thou art, to whom these
papers shall come, be not prejudiced against the truth before thou have heard
it, first read, and then judge, try the matter before thou passest sentence, be
sure it be in the cool of the day, for this know, and I bear testimony to the
truth hereof, that herein is the pure way of God declard, in which the holy men
of God did walk, which the Prophets prophesied of, and the Apostles walked in,
which way is Christ, the light of life, who is come and has given us an
understanding to know him that is true, and his way which is pure, and his life
which is perfect, the end of our faith, and salvation of our souls, and knowing
the Lord, and his way, and his indignation against sin and wickedness, cannot
but deal plainly with all people, judging and condemning only the deceit and
deceivable ways which leads to destruction; if thou say most Sects and
Judgments will plead for their own, I say we are not our own, but another,
who has bought us with his blood, and for him we plead, and for his pure life
contend, held by the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, once delivered to
the Saints, for which we are bold to contend, and valiant to go forth to
battle, by his command, under his banner, to fight against the Beast and all
his Army, Gog and Magog; which battle shall never end till the Lamb has got
the victory, and all his enemies brought under his feet, for now is he risen in
his Saints, and glorified in his servants, and admired in them that believe;
yea, I bear testimony to the truth, and witness the glory of his power revealed
in me, (praises, praises to his name for ever) therefore do deny all the worlds
glory and honor, pleasure and profit, and esteem it great riches to be worthy
to suffer persecution and reproach with his dear people, who are reviled of the
world, and scornfully called Quakers, but known to me by another name, and I to
them by the same, but to the world by

Morgan Watkins.

A TRIAL OF A CHRISTIAN. It is not the outward name of Christian, that differs
from a heathen, but the inward life and nature.
TRy your selves with the touchstone of Truth, all you who bear the name, and
are professed Christians, see and read within with a single eye, whether you be
in Truth what you profess in words, and have the nature and life of Christ
manifest in you, or you have the bare name, and are one in nature and life with
the heathens; the day is dawned which does discover each name, and nature; and
it is not the outward name of a Christian that will avail where the life and
nature of Christ is wanting: Many there be who are called Christians, because
they have been sprinkled with outward water, which has been called baptizing
into the faith, and into the Church; but all are not Christians who are so
called; it is not the outward name, nor the outward sprinkling or dipping that
does make a true Christian: no more then the outward name, and the outward
Circumcision did make a true Jew, as it is written by the Christians; He is not
a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcission which is outward in
the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter: So it is of a Christian, not
the outward washing or sprinkling, but the inward washing with the blood or
life of Jesus, whereby the heart is sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the
body washed with pure water; so as many as are baptized into Christ by the holy
Ghost have put on Christ, and are one in Christ, one heart, one mind, one soul,
and are like unto Christ in name and nature, they bear his Image, and his name
is written in their foreheads, and they are marked and known to be his, and
followers of him, by their meekness and lamb-like harmlesness, by their
gentleness, patience and long suffering, by their soberness and temperance,
moderation and virtuous chaste conversations, by their humility and true love
one toward another: these are tokens and marks of a true Christian, but all
those who have the name of Christians, and profess God and Christ, and
scriptures, and do not live according to what they do profess, but are in
nature like unto the heathens, and so they are marked out and known by their
fruits. All those that live in rage, envy, wrath and malice, these are marks of
a heathen and not of a Christian; and they are of their Father the Devil, and
bears his mark in their foreheads; so every one does bear the image of him that
begat him. There are two births, the one from above, the other from below; that
from above is pure; and that from below is impure; and these are contrary one
to the other, even as light and darkness: all the Children that are begotten of
God, who is pure, and born of the spirit, are hated and persecuted by them who
are begotten by the Devil, and born of the flesh: and so as it was in former
ages, they that were born after the flesh did persecute them that were born of
the spirit: even so it is now in this age, but they that were born of the
spirit did never persecute any; but did bear and suffer even as Christ the
forerunner has lest an example, and all that follow him and will live godly in
him, they must suffer persecution, for it can be no otherwise: for enmity is
put between the two seeds, and there is no agreement nor fellowship betwixt
them: so every child is of the nature of him that begat him. All the Children
of God who are born from above, they bear Gods Image and are like unto their
father, as the Lord is righteous and just, and loves truth and righteousness,
and cannot behold (but hates) iniquity; even so all his children they are pure
and loves truth and righteousness, and cannot have fellowship with the
unfruitful workers of darkness; but it is a burden and a grief to be in company
with the wicked, and presses and grievs their righteous spirits as it did just
Lot who was grieved with the sins of Sodom, hearing and seeing their wickedness
and profaneness, it grieved his righteous spirit day by day: so it is with the
Children of God; what their father loves, they love, and what he hates, they
hate also: But the Children of the wicked one, who are born from below, are
contrary in nature to the Children of the holy one, and bears a contrary Image,
and so contrary fruits, and are of the same nature with their father the wicked
one, which is the devil, who is unclean, and hates the truth, and loves
iniquity: so all his children are naturally inclined to evil, and hates the
truth, and lives in iniquity, and loves darkness rather then the light because
their deeds be evil, and so are under the woe, and condemnation, aliens and
strangers from the living God, and from the covenant of promise: for the wicked
have no right unto the promises of life; but their portion is woe and misery in
the lake of fire. Now thou that reads this read, within thy self, with that of
God in thee which is light, and it will let thee see whose child thou art, and
whose Image thou bears; whether the Image of the holy one, or the Image of the
wicked one: and what thy nature is inclined unto, whether to good or to evil;
and whether thou take delight in the Law of God, and his commandments; or
whether thy delight be in the things of the world which fades away; whosoever
thou art whether Professor, or profane one, thou can not serve two masters,
thou can not be heir of two kingdoms, thou can not have and enjoy the love
of God and the love of the world at one time; for the love and friendship of
the world is enmity against God; therefore says the Apostle, love not the
world, neither the things that be in the world, for if any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him; for the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eye, and the pride of life this is not of God but of the world: and if
thy heart and affections be hankring after the things of the world, whether
gold, or silver, lands or livings, wife or children, goods or cattle, pleasures
or earthly honor, or seeking earthly preferment; if thy love be drawn away to
any of these earthly things, and there takes pleasure and delight, thou art not
a child of God, and a worshipper of him in truth, but thy heart is run a
whoring after other lovers, and other gods; for of whatsoever any one is
overcome, of the same is he brought into bondage, and worships, and falls down
to the same as a God, some their belly is their god, some their gold, some one
thing, some another, whose hearts and affections are drawn away from the pure
living invisible God; and such are not worshippers of God, but follows their
own hearts lusts, and so they are defiled, and the Temple of God polluted, and
such have not peace nor rest unto their souls, but they are at liberty in the
flesh, in their wild untamed natures; and such, though they are professed
Christians, yet are in the wild brutish nature of the world, feeding amongst
the swine upon the husks, and finds no satisfaction: and that is the broad way
that leads to destruction; where there is no Law nor limit to the carnal mind,
nor bridle to the tongue, but all is at liberty; the tongue to speak vain
words, and the thoughts and vain imaginations roving up and down, the eye
running after vanity, the ear open to wickedness, the hands and other members
ready to obey every vain motion of the vain mind; such are not followers of
Christ in the strait and narrow path of life, but are going on without limit
the broad way to destruction: All that follow Christ in the strait way, must
bear his yoke and learn of him; therefore says Christ, Come unto me all you
that labor and are heavy laden, take my yoke upon you and learn of me, I am
meek and lowly in spirit, and you shall find rest for your souls, which is the
chief thing to be sought after; for what will it profit a man, if he gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? Now this I know, that there is no rest unto
the soul until the yoke of Christ be born; for where the yoke is not born, the
lusts are at liberty which war against the soul, and in that condition men and
women are brutish and heathenish, like to the beasts of the field, and are
without God in the world, in the sin and wickedness, where the anguish is upon
the soul, and there is the tossings and the troubles in the world: and there
men and women are wallowing in the mud and mire, like swine feeding upon the
husks, but never finds peace, but are troubled in conscience, for their sin and
rebellion; yet still runs out, and when they have received a wound by the sword
of the Lord, gets it healed again deceitfully; but knows not him who is the
saving health of all Nations, though he be not far off, but stands at the door
and calls to come in, but they not minding his call, lets in the strangers, and
the Inn is taken up with other guests, and Christ must lie in the manger, and
is not received, but shut out of the heart, and so other lovers and other
guests have taken possession, and the house is so full, that it will hold no
more. Read with understanding, godliness is a great mystery, sealed from the
worldly wise ones, as it was formerly, but is revealed to them that fear the
Lord: and so I may say now as the Apostle said formerly, You see your calling,
brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called, but God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the wise, and base things of the world, and things that are despised has God
chosen, and things which are not to bring to naught things that are, that no
flesh should glory in his presence; but every one that glories let him glory
in the Lord: and this is the cause why the wise ones of the world, and the
great professors, and the Rulers of the people, are now found in rage and envy
against the appearance of Christ in his Saints, as it was formerly against
Christ in person; they have not the word of God abiding in them, and so the
enmity is not cut down, for all the profession of God, Christ, and Scriptures
without, does not slay nor cut down the enmity within; and so we in the light
of the Lord, do see this generation to be in the same nature with their
forefathers, though they condemn them for crucifying of the Just one, as that
generation condemned their forefathers for killing of the Prophets, yet
crucified the Son, and persecuted his Ministers; so these now are found in the
same action, persecuting Christ in his Saints; for persecution arises all from
one ground and root, and is cursed, and wherever it appears, it is a mark of
the Beast that makes war against the Lamb; and it is not the mark of a
Christian, for the nature of a Christian is to suffer; for Christ suffered the
contradiction of sinners, and to be a Christian is to be like unto Christ, and
to follow him in the same steps; and so those whom Christ sends forth into the
world he first sanctifies, them by his living Word in their hearts, and so
sends them forth as lambs in the midst of wolves; lambs because of their
harmlessness and meekness, and being sent among wolves, that is, among men in
the nature of wolves, tearing and rending, haling and persecuting, envying and
full of rage, ready to swallow up the innocent ones: and this is made manifest
at this day in England, the Lord is making a separation, and gathering his
lambs from among the devouring wolves, and they shall no more be made a prey
upon, but the Lord will compass them about with the arm of his power, and
salvation shall be for walls and for bull-warks, he will feed them himself as a
good shepherd upon the tops of the mountains of Israel, and they shall dwell in
peace and safety, and eat plenteously and be satisfied, and they shall no more
go among the broken cisterns that will hold no water, but the living springs,
and the fountain of life shall be opened in them; and they shall hunger and
thirst no more, and the Lord will be the teacher and feeder of his people, and
will dwell in them and walk in them, and they shall worship him in his own
Temple not made with men's hands, but his people are his Temple, whom he is now
purifying and cleansing, that it may be a holy habitation for his pure presence
to dwell in: so these are the true Christians, who are in Christ, who are
washed and cleansed in his blood, who are new creatures, old things being done
way, and all things become new, their bodies being made Temples of God, where
holiness and purity dwells; and you who say you are Christians, but are not in
Christ, neither are washed nor cleansed, but have on the old garments, and the
old things are not done away, but the heart is full of the old stuff, as envy,
wrath, malice, pievishness and perverseness, crossness, stubborness, wilfulness,
when things falls cross to your wills, then anger and passion arises, and so
the old man is alive, and the old garments are on: these are the tokens and
marks of a Heathen. Therefore in the fear and name of the Lord I do exhort you
to put off the old garments, which defile you; put off the old man with his
deeds, put away lying and swearing, pride and vain pleasures, drunkenness,
quarrelling, whoredoms, murders, scoffing and jeering, and such like deeds of
darkness, these are the filthy garments which defile you, the old man which is
to be put off, otherwise you cannot enter into the kingdom of God; and these
garments must be put off, before the new garments of righteousness be put on;
there must be a putting off the deeds of darkness, before there be a putting on
the armor of light; for the new garments of righteousness must not be put upon
the old garments of unrighteousness, but first there must be a stripping off
all the old coverings, both of unrighteousness and self-righteousnesse; for
that righteousness is as filthy as the unrighteousness, arising all from one
ground and root, and is both alike, abomination to the Lord; though many things
may be acted and done amongst the formal professors, which in themselves are
good, yet not being acted from a good ground it is evil; The prayers of the
wicked are abomination in the eyes of the Lord, therefore cease to do evil;
that is the first thing to be done: Let every one that names the Name of Jesus
Christ depart from iniquity; for indeed none else ought to name his Name, but
those who depart from iniquity: for all that live in sin and filthiness, do
name the Name of Christ in vain, and are to depart from the presence of the
Lord into the pit of darkness; therefore all and every one who seeks to be
saved, fear God; for the fear of God is very precious, it is a fountain of
life, to depart from the snares of death, and where it is placed in the heart,
it keeps clean the heart, and the old deeds of darkness are put off, and all
the old coverings and cloathings, even to be naked as a child, and then the
clothing of truth is put on, and the pure treasure is put into the pure heart,
and these are Christians, and are blessed, as it is written, Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God; for the pure eye which is the light,
being in the head, which is Christ: God who is pure is seen and felt, a God
near at hand, dwelling in the pure heart, guiding and leading all his children
out of the crooked ways and snares of death, into the pure way of life and
peace, to worship him in spirit and in truth, according as his spirit which
dwells in them does teach them; these are the children of God, who are taught
of God, and serves him in truth and uprightness of heart singly and purely in
the new life of righteousness; these are Christians, who have put off the old
garments, that is, all the deeds of darkness, and have put on the new garments,
the white robes, that is, truth and righteousness, and they are clothed with
equity, having put off the old man, and put on the new man Christ Jesus, and
are one in him, and like unto him in name and in nature, the same love being
shed abroad in their hearts, and the same mind as was in Christ, and the same
spirit, according as it is written; love one another with the same love that I
have loved you withal, and let the same mind be in you, as was in Christ Jesus,
and the same spirit, for he that has not the same spirit is none of his; so
these are Christians who are in Christ, and if any be in Christ he is a new
creature, old things are passed away, and behold all things are become new; new
heart, new mind, new love, new life, new words and new actions, new name and
new nature; these are them who have come through the fire, and have passed
through many tribulations, having denied themselves, and the pomp and glory of
the low world, and have taken up the Cross and followed Christ through the
sufferings and death, whereby they are crucified to the world, and worldly
pride and pleasures, and have learned of Christ meekness and humility, and so
are sent forth into the world, to bear witness against the unrighteousness of
the world, and they are willing to bear and to suffer the reproach of the
world, knowing it is their portion from the world. But all they who are
professed Christians in England and other parts, who have gotten the words of
the true Christians, and are gilded over with glorious words, and makes a fair
show outwardly, as though they were a a people that did delight in the
Commandments of God, yet the new life of a Christian is not brought forth
amongst them, as was in the followers of Christ, but the old life of the
Heathens is in them, old heart, old mind, old love, old life, old words which
are corrupt, old actions, old name and nature, deceitful hearts, full of filth
and abomination, pride, and envy, wrath, malice, lust, and covetousness, double
minded, feigned love, corrupt life, filthy communication, wicked actions, and
so the old bottle poures forth the old wine, and such things as these are acted
and done amongst them which are called Christians, which are an ill smell and
an ill savor; so that the name of a Christian is become abomination among the
heathen, such filthiness and such abominations are acted and done amongst the
Professed Christians, that causes the name of Christ to be blasphemed amongst
the heathens. Consider well all you who say you are Christians, whether indeed
these things be not so; is not the old man alive in you? and are not you doing
and fulfilling the lusts of the Devil? You who say you are Christ's, and lays
claim to him as though he were your inheritance, come and let us reason
together, and try what right you have to this inheritance. You will say the
heathens are without Christ, and have no right to the promise of life, and so
say I; yet he is given a light to the Gentiles; but who are the Heathens? you
put them a far off into other nations, as to the Turks and Pagans who have not
the outward name of Christians. But come near and try your selves, and see if
you be not found the heathens: All who are in Christ are Christians: and all
who are out of Christ are Heathens, of what Nation or country soever they be;
for he is not a Christian which is one outwardly, neither is that the Baptism
which is outward in the flesh with outward water; but he is a Christian which
is baptized into Christ by the spirit and power of Christ, and so is one in
Christ, a new creature, the heart being sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
the body washed with pure water, and the pure life of Christ is brought forth
which witnesses against the unrighteous life of the Heathen, and the pure law
of equity is set up to do to all as they would be done unto, according to the
doctrine of Christ and all who walk according to this light, though they bear
the name of Heathens, yet their heathenism who keep the Law of equity, doing
unto all as they would be done unto) their heathenism) shall condemn those who
profess Christ in words, and are called Christians; but do not act according to
the Law of equity, but cast the Law of God behind their backs, such are shut
out from the promise of life, and have no right unto Christ, who act contrary
to him, such are heathens, of what country or nation, soever they be who live
in sin, and fulfill the desires of the flesh, they cannot please God, for they
who live after the flesh are not subject to the Law of righteousness, but are
heathens, living in rage, and malice, pride and vainglory, lightness and
wantonness, sc^ffing and jearing, reviling and persecuting, lying and swearing,
drunkenness, whoredoms, murders, and such like, these are the marks of the
heathens, and all such are shut out of the kingdom of God, and have no share
with the Christians in the inheritance which is everlasting: for there is no
promise to the wicked, but woe is their portion for ever. So the true Christians
have right to to the inheritance Christ Jesus, but the heathens have no right
unto the promise until they come forth and repent, and be turned from darkness
unto light and from the Power of Satanunto God, they that are Christians are in
Christ, and are Christ's, bought and purchased by his blood, and they that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts: but they that
are heathens, are out of Christ, in the world not bought and redeemed from sin,
but are satisfying, and fulfilling the lusts of the flesh so in the name of God
I do exhort every one that does read this, to try your selves with the Light of
Christ in you, whether you be in the faith or no, or true Christians, and be
not deceived with a vain hope contenting your selves with the bare name, when
the life and nature is wanting: for though you may profess all the Scriptures,
and can talk much of God and Christ without you, yet all this does not make you
true Christians, unless the word of God and the life of Christ be manifest in
you, as it was in them that gave forth the scriptures; for the scriptures do
declare of a generation that were great professors and as zealouss for God and
the Ordinances of God, as you can be for Christ and his ordinances, as you
profess, yet they were blind in understanding, and had not true discerning, but
did oppose Christ Jesus the Son of God: I speak of the Jews and that
generation of scribes and Pharisees who professed a Christ to come, but when he
was come, because he came not in pomp and glory according to their expectation,
but in a low despised manner, they called him a blasphemer and cried out
crucify him; and this was the cause of their blindness, they had not the word
of God abideing in them, and so the vail was over their eyes, and Christ cried
woe unto them, calling them blind guids, whited walls, painted sepulchers and
the like: so I say unto you, all your outside profession, your going to hear
Sermons, and the like; this you may do many years, (as I know you have done)
and be never the better, but grow worse and worse, ever learning, laden with
sin, and led away with diverse lusts, but never able to come to the true
knowledge of God; for none ever knows God in truth and righteousness, but as he
is known by the working of his spirit within, whereby he destroys the works of
the Devil in the heart, and creates a new heart, and a new mind, according to
his own will, and renews his own Image of righteousness and true holiness, and
so man is made Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, and
so his members are servants of righteousness, and the work of God is brought
forth into the world by his servants and children, whereby he is glorified in
them, and wisdom is justified of her children. But all those, of what name
soever they are called, whether Jews, Gentiles or Christians, though they may
profess much outwardly, and be counted godly and religious, yet if their
hearts be not upright to God, and purified by the Word of God abiding in them,
they cannot serve nor worship God in truth; for if iniquity do lodge in the
heart, and be regarded, God will not hear the prayers of such, nor accept of
their sacrifices; for it is not every one that says Lord, Lord, that shall
enter into the Kingdom of God, but such as do the will of God; such shall know
of his doctrine, and such are they that are built upon the rock of ages, and
such do glorify God by their godly and upright lives, and so are Gods
workmanship, and bears Gods Image of love and meekness, patience and long
suffering, and the like. But thou, and all you that are in rage and envy, you
are the devils workmanship, and bears his Image, drunkards, swearers, liars,
scoffers, scorners, light and wanton ones, you are the devils workmanship, and
he begot you, and is your father, and you bear his Image, and not the Image of
God: All you high and lofty ones, you proud Pharisaical professors, you proud
and covetous ones, God never begat you, but the God of the world, the Prince of
the air he rules in you, and carries you up into pride and vain glory, and all
you ungodly ones, under what name soever you be, you are not in the way of God,
but in the way of the wicked one, and your end will be misery; The righteous
God of heaven and earth does not desire the death of any of you, but that you
might turn from your wickedness and live, and for this end he has given his
dear Son a light into the world who does enlighten you whereby many times you
are made sensible of your lost conditions, how that you are aliens and
strangers from the covenant of promise, and you have been many times reproved
in secret for your sins and iniquities, and called and invited to come forth of
your sins: But have you not been rebellious and stiff-necked, and resisted the
council of God and would none of his instructions; But you have chosen your own
ways, and you have delighted in your own abominations, and so not minding the
goodness and long suffering of God which leads to repentance (all that
hearken to his voice) but you after your hardness and impenitent hearts are
treasuring up unto your selves wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of
the righteous judgments of God) who will render unto every one according to
his deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil: To them who by patient
continuance in well doing seek for honor and glory; eternal life. But to them
that are contentious, and does not obey the truth but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil; remember this in your life time all you disobedient ones, take your
portion along with you, and do not flatter your selves with vain hopes to enjoy
the promises of life, which belongs only to them who obey the truth and
follows the Lamb in the strait way of his suffering and death, and are dead
and crucified with him, and so shall live and reign with him in the kingdom of
glory: But all the proud and ungodly who have lived in pleasures in their life
time shall be as the stubble, and the day o^ the Lord shall burn them up, and
leave them neither root nor branch, for the wicked cannot stand in the
judgment, nor the sinners in the congregation of the righteous. Therefore all
and every one who love your own souls, and desires to be saved, turn from your
sins and mind that of God in you, which reproves you for sin secretly though
never so closely acted, that with it you may be led out of sin, and from all
deceit and deceivers; this of God in you will not deceive you, but teach you in
truth the things that belongs unto your peace, and is always present with you;
hearken diligently unto it and your souls shall live, but if you slight this,
the tender profers of the Lords love, and will none of his reproof, but go on
in the vain and ungodly ways of the world, this will be your condemnation, and
shall be an evidence, against you at the bar of righteous judgment at the
great general day of account, when the secrets of all hearts shall be made
manifest, and the books opened, and the judgment set, and the charge is given
and read against the wicked, and the evidence is brought in, Gods faithful and
true witness which cannot lie, which has been privy to all your evil deeds,
even that of God in your own conscience, this shall be brought in against you,
and then woe will be your portion, no excuse will serve your turn, but you shall
stand dumb and speechless, before the righteous judge, and be made to confess
that his judgment is just, and your condemnation just.

Remember these things in your life time and take warning from one who has
known the terrors of the Lord against sin, and so in love unto your souls do
declare unto you, that you may come into repentance; you are left without
excuse; have, have, come away, trim your lamps, prepare and make ready, least
you be shut out of the Kingdom of light and glory, and cast out into utter
darkness among the dogs and swine and unclean beasts, where there shall be
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, where the worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched.

A TESTIMONY OF TRVTH, Against the deceit and subtilty OF THE SERPENT.
JEsus Christ the same to day as yesterday, Heb. 13.8
and his appearance in Power, (in the despised people who in derision by the
scorners are called Quakers) is opposed and cried against by the formal
Professors as error and herefie, Acts 28.22. 2 Timothy 3.5.
and many false accusations are cast upon them as that generation e^^^ did, who
had the form of godliness, but did ever oppose the Power wherever it was made
manifest.

Truth cleared, and some accusations answered. Whereas we are accused by the
people of the world (who know ^ot God nor his pure worship) especially by the
chief Pri^^^ and Parish Masters, 1 Cor. 1.21. Luke 23.2. to the 6.
and the Carnal form lists and self-s^, that we are a people that deny the
Ministers of (...) the Church of Christ, and the commands and ordinances (...)
Christ, and with these and such loud cries they fill the eare^ of people, in
such sort, that many simple and honest hear^, who are breathing and hungring
after Righteousness, Joh. 12.42.43.
and knows not where to find satisfaction and rest to their souls, Joh. 12.42,
43,
are even afraid to own plain and pure truth, and dare not join themselves in
fellowship with the Lords despised ones, for fear of being deceived. But for
the truths sake (which ever was opposed by the formal Professors) and for
their sakes who love the truth and desire to be satisfied, I shall declare the
truth as it is manifested in me and answer their false accusations, that so
they may not rest, nor lie upon the truth, but be turned back into the pit from
whence they proceeded, that so truth which is pure may be kept pure, and all who
love the truth may be encouraged to confess the truth, and not to be afraid of
man, whose breath is in his nostrills, but with patience bear the Cross of
Christ, 2 Timothy 3.12.
knowing this, that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution.

First, Ephesians. 4.
Concerning Ministry, it is an Ordinance of Christ which we dearly own, Gall.
1.1.12.
and honor all those who are sent forth by Christ and do abide in his
Doctrine, such as are made by the will of God, Joh. 15.29.
called and chosen out of the world, and are sanctified by the living word of
truth, and are fitted and prepared of God, Jo. 15.3.
and endued with perfect gifts, and so are sent forth into the world to gather
people out of the world up to God, 1 Pet. 4.10.
and to present them pefect in Christ Jesus according to the Scriptures, Ephesians.
4.10, 11, 12, 13. Col. 1.27, 28.

Such as speak and Minister from the Spirit of the Lord according as they are
moved and directed, 2 Cor. 3.6.
and are never unprovided, but speaks the Word of God in season, and out of
season, 2 Timothy 4.2.
at all times, and in all places as the Spirit gives them utterance, such
Ministers as are thus fitted and prepared, Acts 2.4,
and by the Power of the Lord are sent forth into the world, and do abide in
the Doctrine of Christ, we own and honor. But all such as are made Ministers
(or rather Masters) in and by the will of man, 2 John 9.
brought up at schools: and so sent to Oxford or Cambridge to learn the art of
preaching, Mat. 23.8.10.
and afterward are approved of by man, and sent into the world, but are not
sanctified, but the root of all evil is alive and fresh in them, for they love
money, and strive to get great sums of money by the year; 1 Timothy 6.10.
and instead of enquiring who is worthy, they enquire what will ye give; and
they are not fitted and prepared of God, and endued with perfect gifts, but of
and by man with much labor and pains: and so theirs is of works, and not
free-gift from God, and it is all imperfect; neither do they present any
perfect in Christ Jesus, but denies perfection in this world, 2 Timothy chapter ^
and so denies the true Ministers work and leads silly (men and) women captive,
laden with sin, and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, but never comes
to the true knowledge of God nor perfection: such as speak from the letter and
not from the spirit, and cannot preach but at certain times when they have time
to study, and so by their industry and pains provide themselves, not having
freely received from the Lord: such called Ministers as are thus fitted and
prepared are by the will of man, and are so sent forth in to the world, but are
not sanctified by the pure living Word of God, neither do abide in the pure
Doctrine of Christ, 2 John. 9. 1 John. 2.18 26.
nor bring any to perfection, such we do deny and turn from them, and testify
against them as Antichristian and deceivers of the people, 1 John 3.7, 8.

The Church of Christ we own, Secondly, 1 Timothy 3.^^.
which is the pillar and ground of truth, which is built of living stones,
elect and precious, which is the body, of which Christ Jesus is the head, 1
Pet. 2.5, ^.
and gave himself for it, and purchased with his own blood, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.23.26, 27, 30.
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish: this Church we own, Col. 2.19.
and through the love and tender mercy of our God are made members of it, and
so we receive nourishment from the head to nourish the body, for we are members
of his body, of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.29, 3^.
and of his bones.

But that which the world calls a church which is built of dead stones, we do
deny (which is a steeple house) which carnal people (that know not the Church)
do call the Church, Acts 17.24.25
but do lie and blaspheme, for Christ is not the head or a steeple-house as he
is the head of his Church, neither are those who are earthly, carnal, proud,
covetous, envious, wrathful, malicious, blood-thirsty, murderous, 1 Cor. 6.3,
10.
persecuting drunken, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
lying, profane, light, wanton, ungodly ones that meet in those idolatrous
places which they call Churches they are not members of Christ but limbs and
members of Antichrist, and them and their Church, all their Services we do
deny, Thirdly, Joh. 4.23, 24.
and against them testify.

All the commands and Ordinances of Christ which are durable, pure, spiritual,
and substantial, which tends to a godly and upright life, according as we are
moved and guided by the pure spirit and power of the Lord, we own and practice*
Col. 2.14. Heb. 9.10.
but all those things which are fading, carnal and shadowish, though once they
were commands of God and of Christ, yet not being given to us in Commission, it
is no breach of the commands, in not practicing those outward things to us, Is.
66.1, 2, 3. Romans 2.28, 29.
no more then it was in the Prophets and Apostles, in not practicing the
commands of God which were outward, but testified against them; For, if ye be
dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the
world, are ye subject to Ordinances? Col. 2.20, 21, 22.

Christ Jesus the beloved Son of God, gave forth many precepts and commands,
all which we dearly own in their time and place: but one command that he gave
forth is chiefly to be observed above all others, John 15.12. Joh. 13.34, 35
and that is, to love one another; this is an enduring and a substantial
command, and not to be neglected, for this is a true token and mark whereby the
children of God are known from others; as it is written, Hereby shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another: Joh. 4.7.
this command of love is the old commandment, which was in the beginning, and
it is the new commandment which John the beloved Disciple does so much press
unto, saying, Beloved, let us love one another, for God is love, and every one
that loves is born of God, and knows God; he that loves not, knows not
God, for God is love: Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another, 1 John 4.

Love endures for ever, 1 Cor. 13.
and without love all preaching, praying, reading, singing, and all other the
Ordinances of God, are in vain; this is the chief thing (love) which is grown
cold amongst many of those who cry up the commands and Ordinances of Christ in
words, but iniquity does abound, and their love is grown cold, Mat. 24.12.
and that is the cause of all these divisions and distractions, and wrangling
about Religion, it is want of true love; For where the love of God is shed
abroad in the hearts of his people, it links and joins them together in one
love, and life, Joh. 27.21, 22 Acts 4 32.
and pure way, and one spiritual worship, and all strife, and contention and
wrangling cease, and so they are all of one heart and mind, and one faith
(which we own) which works by love, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
Gal. 5.6.

Another command Christ gave forth, which is not to be neglected by any of his,
and that is this; Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye
likewise unto them; this is an enduring and substantial command, and ought duly
to be observed, for this is the Law and the Prophets, and this command we own,
and teach people to observe, and many others there be of like force and effect,
and ought not to be neglected, as if any on smite thee on the one cheek, Mat.
5. chap.
turn the other; and Christ says, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea,
and your nay, nay, for whatsoever is more is evil. These and all other the
commands of Christ, which tends to purity, and leads to truth (even that which
the Lord loves, 1 Per. 3.4. Psalm. 51.6.
which is truth in the inward parts, to serve the Lord in truth and
righteousness all the days of our lives) we own and practice; Luke 1.74, 75
and I challenge all the world to come forth and mention what they can lay to
our charge.

But as for the outward things which are but shadows and figures, as bread,
wine, and outward water, 1 Pet. 3.21.
which many of the professers in England do so much idolize and cry up (though
the weightier matters be neglected) we are dead with Christ from such weak
elements, Col. 2.21, 22.23. Joh. 5.50, 51.
and cannot be subject to such empty shadows, having tasted of the living
bread, and drunk of the fountain of life, where satisfaction and refreshment we
have found to our hungry thirsting souls. And no new gospel do we preach, Romans
1.16.
but the same which has been declared by the Servants of God, and Ministers of
righteousness. And this was that bread of life which the Saints did feed on,
and the Communion Table where they did eat together in singleness of heart, as
it is declared and testified in the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 10.16.


The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? for we being many are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers
of that one bread. This bread and this cup are not carnal and visible, but
spiritual in invisible: This bread is Christ; for says he, I am the bread of
life, I am the living bread that came down from above, John 6.35. John 6.51.
he that eats of this bread shall live for ever, and he shall never hunger; and
he that drinks of this cup shall never-thirst, but it shall be in him a well of
living water springing up unto eternal life, John 4.14.

Christ Jesus is called by several names in the Scriptures; and they who have
the names but not the substance, are in confusion and devision, and falls out
about the names, and so runs into the outward which are but the shadows, but
knows not the life and substance. 1 Cor. 2.14. John 6.35. John 8.12.
He who is called the bread of life, the same is called the Light of the World,
who does enlighten every one that comes into the World; John 1.9.
and every one loving and walking in the light, so they come to walk in love
and unity, 1 John 1.7.
and are all made partakers of that one light, and so of that one bread which
is the Saints life, 1 Timothy 3.16.
which is spiritual and a mystery, hidden from the world, and from all worldly
wisdom, Psalm. 25.15.
but revealed to them that fear the Lord, and is to them a living Ordinance
ordained of God for the Salvation of their souls.

And as for the outward water, it is but a figure of the living water within,
which washes and cleanses the heart, which the outward water does not. Heb.
10.22. Ephesians. 4.5. Mat. 3.11.
As for the one Baptism I own, which is the Baptism of Christ with the holy
Ghost and with fire, which the water Baptism was but a figure of; and in
denying the outward water Baptism, it is no breach of Christ's Commands; 1 Cor.
1.17.
for I was not sent to Baptize but to preach the Gospel: And all you who take
upon you that power, I demand of you, who gave you commission to go and Baptize
with outward water; if you take your commission from the letter, without a
lively commission from Christ, I deny your ground and your commission; 1 Cor.
3.11.
for it is not the letter of the Law of God that does empower any one to
execute the Law of God, neither does the letter of the Gospel empower any one
to go and preach the Gospel, though they be never so skilful and expert in the
knowledge of the Scripture, without power from on high to commission and
empower them; no more then the letter of the Law of England does empower any
one to be a justice of peace to execute the Law, though many may buy the letter
of the Law, and may be expert and skilful: Yet if the earthly powers do not
give them commission, they cannot act as a justice, nor execute the Law; if
they should take upon them such a thing, the powers of the earth would, call
them into question: Even so all you who have taken upon you that power to
baptize without commission from the Lord, assure your selves you will be called
into question: and in the Name of my Lord and Master, I do charge you to give
an account who it was that gave you commission; and cease speaking against
others, (who keep the commands of God) whom you cannot accuse justly for breach
of the holy and pure substantial commands.

And likewise all other the Ordinances of Christ, as praying and singing,
according as the spirit of God does move to sing with understanding, 1 Cor. 14,
15.
and to pray with understanding; for as the Apostle says, Rom 8.26.27. 1 Cor.
2.10.
we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the spirit helps our
infirmities, and makes intercession for us with sighs and groans that cannot be
uttered; for it is the spirit that makes manifest, and searches out the deep
and hidden things of God; John 4.24.
for as God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit; so there is none
knows him nor worships him in spirit, John. 3.5.
but those who are born of the spirit. And so whatsoever the world, or the
enemies of Truth do say or speak of us; Romans 13.8.
yet we can truly say in the presence of the Lord, that we ow no man any thing
but love, 2 Cor. 6.4. to the 11.
desiring the good of all people, that all might come to the knowledge of the
truth, and for this end do we labor and travel under many heavy burdens
through much reproaches and cruel mockings, Mat. 5.11, 12.
stocks, bonds and imprisonments, every one giving their sensures of us, and so
we pass through many trials, but in all these things we can rejoice, knowing
that it is and has been the portion of the Lords chosen ones to be reviled and
persecuted by the wicked generation; they went through evil report and good
report, as deceivers, and yet true: and so in the Name and Power of the Lord,
do we go abroad as we are led by his spirit, freely declaring unto others in
tenderness of love unto their fouls, what the Lord has done for our souls: and
we do not go about to deceive any, Acts 26.18.
nor to draw any to our opinions; but to turn them from deceit and deceivers,
and to gather them to the Lord, that so the Lord may teach them according as he
has promised, and according as it is written, Isa. 56.13.
all the Children of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord. And though for our
love we be envied and hated, John. 15.20.
yet for Christ our Masters sake we can willingly bear it; for the servant is
not greater then his Masters for says Christ, as they have done unto me, so
will they do unto you: and so it is no new thing, but that which has formerly
been; for the appearance of Christ was ever opposed, especially by the
professing people, who had a form of godliness, but were ignorant of the power,
as the Scriptures do bear testimony with me; For in the time of the Law, under
that administration diverse Statutes and Ordinances were given forth by Moses,
and while those things were practiced and done in the integrity and simplicity
of heart, it was accepted of the Lord: But when they turned from their
integrity and uprightness of heart, though they drew near to God with their
lips and with their mouths, and multipled their offerings and sacrifices; Yet
it was abomination in the eyes of the Lord, and the Lord sent his servants the
Prophets to testify against them, as you may read. Isay. 1. chap. where the
Prophets declares against the wickedness of that generation, saying, a sinful
Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy One of
Israel to anger etc. to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me says the Lord? bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto
me. The new moons and Sahbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with,
it is iniquity; when you make many pruyers, I will not hear; for your hands are
full of blood: Thus the Prophet declares against them, and those things which
they practiced, though they were commands of God; and his exhortation to them
was, cease to do evil, learn to do well, wash ye, make ye clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes says the Lord. And likewise read
Isay. 66.3. Where the Prophet compared the commands of God to abominable things
(saying) He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices the
Lamb as if he cut off a dogs neck, he that offers an oblation as if he
offered swines blood, etc. Here you may see the Prophets testimony, and to what
abominable things he compares the commands: And the Prophets of God in the days
of their prophecy they were hated, and many of them killed by such as had the
form of the Law, but were enemies to the life of the Law: And after the
Prophets days another generation comes and gets the Prophets words, and cries
up the words, but are still in the same nature of their forefathers that
killed the Prophets, as the Scriptures make mention of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and that generation who were zealous for the Law and the outward
commands, and did build the Tombs of the Prophets, Mat. 23.29.30, 31.
and garnished the Sepulchers of the righteous, yet not being led into those
things by the light and spirit of God within, they were found enemies and
persecutors, and crucified him who was the life and substance of those things
which they had the form and shadows of: Mat. 27.20, 22, 25, 26.
And thus the form in those days did oppose the power, and afterward the
Ministers of Christ, who were sent forth in the Name and Power of Christ, they
were hated and persecuted in their days, by those who had the form but not the
power; Acts 8.3, 4. Act. 22.28, 30, 31, etc. 2 These. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.
and so all along to this age the subtle twining Serpent has got the form,
but persecutes the appearance of Christ wherever he is made manifest, as it is
at this day in England and other parts. The clouds of darkness has long been
over all Nations, but now the glorious daylight of the Lord is breaking forth,
and he is appearing in the power of his spirit, in the hearts of his people,
and is bringing to pass his strange work, which makes the Heathen to rage, 2
These. 1.10. Acts 13.4. 2 Cor. 6.8.
and the carnal Professor to swell in their vanity, and cries out of error, and
herefie, and deceivers, and blasphemers, and fills the ears of people with such
a loud noise, that many who have prayed for these days formerly, and have had
some glimmerings of the true light, now when the time is come, and the Lord is
bringing to pass his work, Jer. 31.31, etc. Joh. 7.48.49. Gal. 4.29. Job 21.30.
Isa. 66.15, 16.
and fulfilling his promises, because it is not in their way, and according to
their expectation, they stand up against, and oppose the truth as their
forefathers have done, and so as it was then, even so it is now; they that are
born after the flesh, they persecute them that are born after the spirit; but
woe to all persecuters, and all envious and malicious ones, the sword of the
Lord is drawn forth, and they shall be cut down as fuel for the fire.

Therefore all people every where try your selves, and the ground of your faith
and profession; Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 3.3. John 5.4.
see whether you be in the true faith yea or nay: the true faith does purify
the heart, and gives victory over sin, the world, the flesh and the devil; and
so good fruit is brought forth, to the praise and glory of God. The Lord is
coming to rip open and search all hearts, and a profession and talk of the
Saints words (without the Saints life) will no^ hide nor cover any one of you:
Jer. 17.10, Isa. 30.1.
it is not your fair-saying, and your crying Lord, Lord, that will stand you in
stead in the great and terrible day of the Lord (being found workers of
iniquity) it is not your many years profession, Mat. 7.2.
and hearing and writing of Sermons, and repeating them over and over: the Lord
is coming to look for fruits, Mat. 3.10.
and all fruitless trees must be hewn down and cast into the fire.

You who have long been talking of the new birth, 1 Cor. 3.11. to 17, Romans 8.7,
8. 2 Per, 3.7. to the end.
honestly consider, and see what you can witness of a change, and what is cut
down within you; for as long as the enmity stands within you, all your
profession of the Scriptures and Christ without you, will not save you in the
fiery day of the Lords fierce indignation: for this I testify unto you, that
Regeneration is not a thought, 2 Cor. 5 17.
or a conceiving of a thing, but it is a real work of God wrought within, by
the power of his spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. Acts 15.9.
whereby the heart is purified and cleansed, and the affections and fleshly
desires crucified according to Scripture; Gal. 5.24.
they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
Now try and examine your selves, and see if your many years profession have
wrought this effect; are you crucified to the world, and the world unto you?
Rom 6.2. Gal. 6.14. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
and are you dead unto sin, as those were whom you profess the words of? Be not
deceived with a vain hope; the Lord calls for purity, and without holiness no
man shall see him.

Now consider well, you who profess your selves to be Christians, and do cry up
the commandments and Ordinances of Christ, are you not a sinful people? Isay
1. chap.
are you not laden with iniquity? are you not a seed of evil doers? are you not
corrupted from the top of the head, even to the sole of the foot, as those were
which Isaiah cried against? I have heard many of you confess much in words,
Prove. 28.13.
and cry out of your sins, but I see few of you that does forsake your sins,
but goes on in your customary ways, being dead in sins and trespasses; then to
what purpose is your calling of Assemblies? your preaching and your feigned
long prayers? your days of humiliation, and your Lecture days (as they are
called) it is all abomination to the Lord; Though ye make many prayers, the
Lord will not hear you; your hearts are polluted, and your hands are full of
blood. Therefore fear the Lord, and depart from the evil of your ways; cease
to do evil, and learn to do well, and let every one that names the Name of
Jesus Christ depart from iniquity. Rev. 14.7. 2 Timothy 2 19. Luke 17.20.


Seek no longer the kingdom of God in observations without you, neither spend
your money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55.1. Luke 15.17. Mat. 11.28, 29
but return home to your fathers house, and there you shall find satisfaction;
the candle being lighted, and the house being swept, you will find the lost
groat in your own house.

Hearken to the voice of Christ which cries in your consciences for equity, and
reproves you for the evil of your doings, that is a sure testimony (it is the
light of Christ, Ephesians. 5.13.) and you cannot be deceived in following the light;
Joh. 8.12.
for says Christ, I am the light of the world, and whosoever follows me, shall
not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life. This light is always
present with you, and from this nothing can be hid; Heb. 4.12. Prove. 20.22.
this light does discover the evil thoughts, and the evil intents, that arises
out of the evil heart, and as sin is discovered in any one, wait upon the Lord
for his power, that it may be destroyed; and so the axe comes to be laid to the
root of the tree, and every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Mat. 3.10. 1
These. 5.21.
is hewn down and cast into the fire. And none be hasty in believing false
reports, but try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

And this is that which we labor to bring all unto, even pure truth in the
inward part, that so they may offer up a sacrifice in righteousness, Psalm.
51.6. Deuteronomy. 33.19.
from the pure heart to the pure God, and so have peace with God, and dwell in
safety, sitting under their own Vine, and eating their own bread, being built
upon the Rock, 1 Pet. 2.5. Mat, 7.25.
where the stormy tempests, and the raging persecutors cannot move their
foundation; but stand sure, being built upon the foundations of the Prophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all
the building fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2 20.21.
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord.

And so though we the servants of the Lord be counted deceivers, and the truth
a Sect, 2 Cor. 6.8.
and the way heresy (as formerly it has been) I confess as Paul did, Acts
28.22.
That after the way which they call herefie, so worship I the God of my
fathers, believing all things, Acts 24.14.
not only what is written in the Law and the Praphets, but likewise what is
written in the testimony of Christ and the Apostles: and it is not any breach
of Christ's commands, in denying the shadows and rudiments of the world, no more
then it was in Paul, Col. 22.20, 21 Heb 9.10, 11. Col. 1.27. 2 Cor. 4.11. 1
John 5.10.
in denying the carnal commandments and shadows of the Law, witnessing the
substance, which is Christ within, the hope of glory, which I bear testimony
unto, even the life of Christ manifest in mortal flesh, and seal it with my
spirit, and sign it with my name.

Alexander Parker.

To all who are hungring after the liing bread, and has not wherewith to
satisfy themselves in their own houses, but are seeking without, and begging
from others, and are spending their money for that which is not bread.
A word of love to invite them to come into my fathers house, where they shall
find full satifaction: with a word of exhortation to all who are called to be
Saints, by way of remembrance to stir up their pure minds.
AWake dear friends, the day of the Lord is dawned, and the glorious daylight
is breaking forth, arise out of your deep sleep, and stand up from the dead,
that Christ may give you light, the night is far spent, and the day is at hand,
put off therefore the deeds of darkness, and put on the armor of light; Wisdom
cries and calls unto you to come forth of darkness and all unrighteousness. Oh
give ear, and be obedient and willing to give up all, and to follow the voice
of Wisdom; this pure voice is near unto you, even in your secret Closet,
secretly reproving you for your rebellion and hard-heartedness, and calls unto
you for purity and uprightness: hearken diligently to this still voice; hear
and your souls shall live: You have long been wandering astray, and following
the dead doctrines of men, and have been feeding upon the dry husks, and have
spent your money for that which is not bread, and your labor, but are not
satisfied; and you have rejected the counsel of God, and have rebelled against
him, and would not turn at his reproof, though many times you had secret checks
and reproofs by his light within you, but you have not been obedient, but have
cast his Law behind your backs, and turned from his free grace and love into
wantonness, and vain delights of this present world: Oh return home to your
Fathers house, wander no longer in your dark imaginations, but wait on the Lord
in his fear, and you shall find satisfaction; take his yoke upon you, and learn
of Christ meekness and lowliness of spirit, so shall you find rest unto your
souls.

And all you my dearly beloved ones, to whom the Gospel of peace has been
declared in the demonstration and power of the spirit, who in love and
tenderness have received the word of the Lord, my love is enlarged, and flows
forth freely unto you, and my prayers to my heavenly Father for you is, that
you may all be preserved and kept by his mighty power through faith unto
salvation.

All you whose understandings are opened with the light of the Lord, and whose
minds are turned from the darkness and false ways and worships of the world,
to the living God, him to worship in spirit and in truth. As every one has
received of the Lord, so every one wait and walk worthy of so high a calling
whereunto the Lord has called you; that as you are separated from the world
outwardly (in a measure) so the separation may be made inwardly, that you may
be in truth, what you seem to be in show outwardly, otherwise in vain is all
your profession, and all your meetings together, if you be not guided and led
thereunto by the pure movings of the spirit of the Lord; for except your
righteousness do exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God: Therefore all of you, in the pure fear of the Lord,
try and examine your selves, and search your own hearts, and see what garments
you have on, and how you do appear in the presence of the living God, in whose
presence you now are, and nothing can be hid from the all-seeing eye, nor any
thing cover you but purity, for the woe is to all them that are covered, and not
with the spirit of the Lord; for now all coverings must be ripped open, and the
Lord, the heart-searcher, will search all as with candles, and an outward show
or covering with the Saints words, will not hide nor cover any of you, if the
pure life of Christ be wanting: let none be therefore deceived with a vain
hope, neither do you set up a false rest short of the true rest; for verily I
say unto you, you had need to be watchful, and to walk circumspectly, not as
fools, but as wise men in the Lord, for your adversary the devil, goes about
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, going about by all ways and
means to deceive the hearts of the simple and honest minded ones; his work is
to oppose the work of Christ, and he works in a mystery in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, working them into his Image and liknesse to do his
lusts, and the creature is captivated, and the members thereof, and becomes
servant to the Devil, who rules as a Prince in the heart; and when he cannot
keep people in the common filth of the world, he will get into a form of
godliness, and there keep people feeding upon the empty and dry husks, drawing
near to God with their lips and mouths, when he keeps possession in their
hearts, and draws away their affections after the lusts of the world, and glory
of it, which fades away and comes to an end: And when by his wiles he cannot
hide himself, nor keep people in the empty form, then he will transform himself
as an Angel of light, and whatever the Saints of the most high do speak or
practice, as they are moved by the power and spirit of the Lord dwelling in
them, the subtle Serpent will get into the outward form, likeness, gesture, and
words, or whatsoever is used or practiced outwardly by the Saints and servants
of the Lord: The devil will lead his servants into the likness, and so get the
words (as many do get the words of truth into their unrighteous minds, and so
contend for the truth with that mind that is out of the truth, and so glory in
the words and outward appearance; and the boaster gets up to boast in other
men's lines, and things above their measures, being enemies to the Cross of
Christ, and servants of sin, and in the bondage of corruption) but into the
light and life the devil cannot come nor enter: so in the light which is pure
all wait, for the power and pure life of the Son of God to be manifest in you,
that so from the light and life, fruits abundantly may be brought forth to the
glory of God.

Stand upon your watch, and bring your deeds to the light, that so they may be
proved and tried whether or no they be wrought in God, for he that walks in the
light is kept from stumbling. But all careless and slothful negligent ones, who
run headlong (rashly) without consideration or trial of their deeds, are
captivated and ensnared by the temptation of the devil, and so the light
follows them, and is their condemnation, and so trouble and misery comes upon
the wicked, and it is just, for he is the fool whose eyes be abroad, and whose
tongue is at liberty, and so the rod is prepared for the back of the sool:
Therefore weigh your words in the just balance, and be well advised before you
act any thing, first try the motion, before you go on to action: for in all
words and actions, whatsoever any one does either act or speak, there is some
thing within that moves before the action be acted, or words be spoken, and
whether it be good or evil, it comes from within, out of the heart, and as is
the heart, so will the words and actions be; if the heart be evil, the words
and actions will be evil; and if the heart be good and pure, the words and
actions will be likewise good and pure. Now come all to the touchstone, and to
the ground of all things, that you may know the ground of good things, and the
ground of evil things; for as God is the Author of all good, so the Devil is
the Author of all evil: and as God is a pure Spirit, and works in a mystery in
the hearts of the children of obedience, working them into his Image and
likeness to do his works, which are works of righteousness; so the devil is
an unclean and a dark spirit, and works in a mystery in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, working them into his Image and likeness, to do his
works, which are works of unrighteousness: And as the Author of good, and the
Author of evil are contrary one to the other, and no fellowship betwixt them;
so the workers and servants of each of these, are contrary one to the other,
and no agreement amongst them, but a strong and an irreconcilable enmity; and
so a great and strong battle: and this battle is begun in this Nation (and
other parts) the great and mighty battle between the Prince of light, and the
Prince of darkness, (between the raging Beast, and the meek and harmless Lamb.)
Now there is none can serve those two Masters, neither can any be heirs of
these two kingdoms, but every one becomes his servant to whom he yields himself
servant to obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness,
according as the Scripture declares. All who obey the motion of the Lord in
light and spirit, as he moves in the pure heart, become servants to the Lord,
and so his work is brought forth into the world, which are works of
righteousness, as love, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, meekness,
temperance, brotherly-kindness, humility, soberness, godliness, doing unto all
as they would be done unto, and such like fruits of righteousness, which are a
witness against the unrighteousness of the world; and so are justified by God
in spirit, and created in Christ Jesus unto good works.

But all who yield to and obey the motion of the Devil in the dark as he moves
in the dark heart, by the spirit of darkness, become servants to the Devil, and
so his work is brought forth into the world, and fills the world with darkness
and unrighteousness, as pride and vain glory, covetousness, hatred, malice,
strife and debate, drunkenness, whoredoms, murders, theft, lying and swearing,
vain and profain talking tyranny, cruelty and oppression, persecution and such
like ungodly wicked practices as the Land abounds with, notwithstanding all
their profession of God and Christ, and high notions, and large and fair
pretenses, yet the fruits of wickedness in a high measure are daily growing and
increasing; and all those evils, and all other the abominations that are acted
and done in the world, they all proceed out of the deceitful and wicked heart;
and the Devil he is the father and the Author of it and of all sin, and
whosoever commits sin is of the Devil; and so out of the heart from the cursed
ground it springs and arises; for lust after it has conceived, it brings
forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth death; for the wages of sin
is death. Therefore every one in particular mind the leadings and movings of
the pure spirit of Light, for there is your strength near you; and if ye through
the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, then shall ye live and be made
sensible of the workings of God, destroying the Devils works, and defacing his
image; and renewing in you a pure image like unto himself, and so the pure
Truth ye will really be possessed of, that which the Lord does love and desire,
even Truth in the inward parts, and offer up a sacrifice in righteousness to
the Lord, which is a broken heart and a contrite spirit, which ever was and is
acceptable in the eyes of the pure God; for God is pure and loves
righteousness, and to know him and Jesus Christ whom he has sent is life
eternal. Now to have a literal knowledge of him, and so to speak of him from
the Scripture letter, and not from the spirit and power of God within; this is
not a saving knowledge, but puss up into pride, and soto reject and despise the
cross of Christ; Such a knowledge had they who crucified the Son of God; and
such a knowledge have many in our age, but are persecuting the appearance of
Christ in his Saints. But this I say, none knows the Lord in Truth and
Righteousness but as he is revealed and manifested by his spirit within: for
the spirit searches all things, yea the deep and hidden things of God. So all
turn in your minds, and wait upon the Lord in the Light of his spirit that into
his house you may be led, there to feed upon the living bread, and
soul-satisfying food (upon the hidden Manna) that which the world knows not,
but it is hid from them who be without, feeding amongst the swine upon the
husks and empty shadows: but through love and mercy is revealed unto us, by
the spirit of our God, and freely imparted unto you, to invite you to come in
to our Fathers house, that you may eat with us and be satisfied, and praise the
Lord with us in the Land of the living for ever and ever.

Oh my dearly beloved whom my soul longs and breaths after, whom in the truth,
I dearly love, you are as a lively Epistle written in my heart, and I cannot
forget you; go on in the Name and Power of the Lord, look not back, there is
nothing behind you but death and darkness, for if any one draw back my soul
shall have no pleasure in them; therefore press on toward the mark, for the
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, let not the rage of the
heathen daunt you, knowing that it is our portion from that wicked and untoward
generation to be reproached and reviled: But blessed are ye when men revile
you, and reproach you, and persecute you, and speak all manuer of evil against
you falsely for the Name of Christ, rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is
your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets, and the holy
Apostles which which were before you; for if you were of the world, then would
the world love you; but because Christ Jesus has chosen you out of the world
to be unto him a holy People, therefore do they (of the world who know not God)
hate and revile you; but herein they are discovered and made manifest of what
generation they are of, even of cursed Cains, who slew his brother, and where
envy and rage is, they bear the mark of Cain, and so in this day of the Lord
they are made manifest, for wherever persecution is, it is a mark of the beast,
that makes war against the Lamb, and it is not the mark or token of a
Christian, for the Nature of a Christian is to suffer, and not to persecute;
therefore though ye suffer, and be reproached, yet be not discouraged, but put
on the strength of God, the armor of righteousness whereby ye may all be kept
safe, and the fiery darts of the wicked cannot pierce you.

Dwell in meekness, and love, and pure innocence, these are the Garments of the
Lamb, which the world cannot stain, though they may cast dirt and filth upon
you, by their lies and false slanders, yet your innocence and uprightness shall
stand a witness against them, and so their mouths shall be stopped, and the
witness of God in their own consciences shall testify against them, and answer
for you and for the Lords Truth which you profess, and make them to acknowledge
(though against their wills) that God is in you of a Truth.

I do by the power of the Lord charge you all in the presence of the Lord (who
profess the light) that you walk in the light, that every one may be in life
and substance what you seem and profess your selves to be in words; that no
hypocricy may be amongst you, nor deceit, nor feigned love, nor seeming show of
feigned humility (for that is gross and wicked abomination in the eyes of the
pure God) but that indeed and in truth your love may flow forth one toward
another without dissimulation, for this is a true mark and token that you are
the Lords chosen ones, for hereby shall all men know that you are followers of
the Lord if ye love one another; for love is of God, and all who dwell in love
they dwell in God, for God is love: Oh let this love constrain you to deney
your selves freely and follow him, who by his love invites you to come and eat
and drink freely at his Table: Let not the love of the world, nor any other
earthly enjoyment draw away your hearts and affections from the pure love of
God, into the love of the visible and creaturely enjoyments, and so for a mess
of pottage ( Esau like) sell your birthright for want of a small thing of
self-denial (choosing the pleasures of the World (as many do) rather then to
suffer with the people of God, despising and counting the Cross of Christ
foolishness, and so) lose the Crown of glory. Oh let it not be so with any of
you but take up the Cross willingly, and despise not the day of small things,
but whatsoever the light of Christ does show you to be evil or vain, cast off
and deny that evil and vanity, otherwise you cannot have true peace; for whilst
the wild nature is at liberty, and the unruly affections and lusts, they war
against the soul; therefore says Christ, take my yoke upon you and learn of
me, I am meek and lowly in spirit, and you shall find rest unto your souls. So
the yoke of Christ being laid upon the wild, it tames and brings down, and
leavens the whole, and brings it into the nature of Christ, to meekness, and
gentleness and lowliness of mind, and brokenness and tenderness of spirit, and
so the fountain comes to be opened, and the pure streams flows forth to water
the City of the living God: Therefore hide not the enemies of your peace in
your own bosoms, neither let any prejudice or evil thoughts lodge in your
hearts, if you do, it will eat as a canker, until the pure love be grown cold,
and then comes a cloud of darkness, and hides the glory of the Son of
Righteousness, that it does not shine in its brightness; and the earth will
grow thick and stop the passage, that the streams of love cannot run to water
and refresh the plants of God: therefore be faithful in following the light,
and yielding up to the pure obedience, to what the light makes manifest, though
it be never so small or foolish to worldly wisdom, for that which stumbles at
little things will never obey greater, and whilst you are disobedient to the
light, after convincement of any fin, you not turning from that sin which the
light of Christ makes manifest, and reproves for it, you are still in the same
nature with the world, under the same condemnation, being condemned by the
light in your own consciences.

Therefore every one be faithful according to your measures, and so in love and
joy you will be kept in the unity of the spirit and bond of peace, and grow up
in the vine as lively plants, and increase in grace until we all come into the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man,
even to the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ.

Take heed of reasoning and consulting withflesh and blood, for that betrays
the simplicity, for many have been convinced of the Truth, and tender and
honest desires, and a true love raised in them, by hearing of the sound or
declaration of Truth, but not abiding in that love to wait in the Cross of
Christ; but reasoning with flesh and blood, they have lost their tenderness and
simplicity, and those true desires are choked, and the iniquity got up, and
their love grown cold; and such though they may come to your meetings; Yet are
dead, barren and empty, and possessed with a dull and sluggish drowfie spirit;
when others are feeding and sitting in peace and rest under their own vine,
having oil in their vessels, these careless ones are ready to starve, and are
weary in waiting, when words are not ministered; I say unto all such, repent and
fear the living God, and cause not the holy Name of our God to be blasphemed
amongst the Heathen; return to your first love, and wait in patience until
refreshment come into your souls from the presence of the Lord.

And all you dearly beloved ones, who keep your garments white and clean, you
are as my own life, and dear unto me as the Apple of mine eye, with you I am
present in the spirit of pure love, though in the body I be absent from you;
Dear hearts, let my bowels be refreshed to hear of your faithfulness and growth
in the truth, that the labor and travel of the Messengers of the Lord may not
be in vain, but that we may rejoice in our labors, and see the fruits
springing up to the glory of God, this will be our joy and your comfort.

So all of you in patience wait until the work of the Lord be perfected in you,
turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, but keep in the plain way that
leads to life eternal; meet often together accordingly as you have been
directed, and when you are met together, wait upon God in his pure fear, with
the loins of your minds girt up, that his voice you may hear, and his counsel
receive and stand in, so shall your meetings be for the better and not for the
worse, and your strength renewed, though there be no sound of words spoken to
your outward ears, yet coming once to taste of the sweetness of the love of
God, you will find the union more pure, more dear and more near then pen or
tongue can declare; for if there be a sweetness and a refreshment to hear words
(as I know there is, when they are spoken from the pure life and spirit of the
Lord) then much more is there sweetness and more pure refreshment in the spirit
of the Lord from whence the words do proceed, and all words and writings given
forth from the spirit, are to bring to the spirits worship; this is the sum and
the end of all the shadows and carnal observances, to know God, and to worship
him in Spirit and in truth; according as it is written, for there is no man
knows the things of God but the spirit of God; so without the spirit guiding
and teaching, all words and writings will but little avail, only serve to add
to the condemnation of all those that are hearers, but are not doers of the
Word of God.

Therefore every one retire your selves into your inward habitations, and wait
upon God in the manifestation of his spirit as you have received, and as the
pure spirit of the Lord does move in any of you, so be obedient either to act
or speak: for the Word of the Lord is not limited, but if any one have the Word
of the Lord, let him speak it faithfully; for you may all prophecy one by one,
and if any thing be revealed to another that stands by, let the first hold his
peace: quench not the spirit; for it is my desire that all the Lords people
were Prophets; but let all flesh be silent I charge you by the Lord, and none
to speak before the Lord, for that is but as chaff, and what is the chaff to
the wheat says the Lord? is not my word as a fire, and as a hammer that breaks
the rocks in pieces.

So all dear friends wait that the Word of the Lord you may feel within you,
and taste of it, which is quick and powerful, and cuts down sin, and removes the
earth, and breaks the hard heart, and purifies it, and purges the conscience
from dead works, and so the body is made a holy Temple for the Lord to dwell
in; as it is written, I will dwell in them and walk in them, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people: Wherefore (says he) come forth and be ye
separate, touch no unclean thing and I will receive you, and will be a father
unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and daughters says the Lord God Almighty.
All mind the call of a loving Father, and be obedient to his voice, that you
may be heirs of the promise, and have a right unto the tree of life, and live
and reign with the Lord God and the Lamb, and sing the songs of deliverance
praises and haleluja's for ever and ever.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, and teach you to live soberly
and righteously, and establish you in the truth, that your words and actions
may be gracious and savory, proceeding from the grace of God, that you may have
salt in your selves to savor withal, no more to be tossed to and fro with men's
doctrines, but be built upon the rock of ages, even Jesus Christ the light of
the World, the same to day as yesterday, and shall continue the same forever.

The peace of God which passes understanding keep your hearts and minds up to
God, in love and unity all to grow, that God may delight to do you good, and to
dwell amongst and his pure power to compass you about, (...) keep you upright,
and single-hearted.

This so large an Epistle with my own hand have I wri^ten unto you, because my
love is enlarged toward you.

The Lord, God Almighty breath forth his spirit upon you, and guide you in his
pure wisdom, that with cheerfulness you may run the race set before you. Faint
not (...) the way; but be ye faithful unto death, and you shall have (...)
Crown of life.

Read this with a meek and sober spirit in the fear of the Lord, when in his
name you are met together.

For friends in the Truth in the West parts of England, or else where it may
come.

Written from the movings of the Lord, as I was directed by his spirit, by your
dear brother in the Lord, who is a Labourer in his Vineyard, Known to you by a
nearer name then Alexander Parker

THE END

