A Pair OF TWO MORNINGS MEDITATIONS. The first against Parity. Sect. I.
THough Men by Nature are equal, yet so it is, that being borne to live in
society, and this society not being able to subsist without peace, peace
without union, union without or^^r, order without distinction, distinction
with^^t dependency, or dependency without authority, yet the same Nature which
made men equal (in one respect) has immediately commanded them to be subject
to one head, and to wave their equality, for the avoiding of confusion. GOD
himself in the Creation framed not many men at once, who might the sooner have
stored the Earth: he made but one Man only: yea so, as that he made not Man
and Woman together of Earth: but first drew one Man from the Earth, and
extracted one Woman, from that only one Man: to show, (as St. Chrysostom
divinely notes) how his intention was to establish Derivation, Dependency,
Domination, Principality, yea and Monarchy among men, and to reduce them all
under one Root and Superior, causing them all to proceed from one only, to
the end all might depend upon one. He ever since, has at all times instituted
Temporal Princes and Rulers over his chosen people: first Patriarchs, then
Dukes, after this Judges, and in conclusion Kings. His Providenc^ concluding in
Monarchy, (calling himself by the style and name of King) as the chiefest
highest title, and the most perfect form of Government. As Nature which
proceeds by degrees in her works, first makes Mercury out of the vapors of
the Earth, after, out of Mercury, silver, and out of silver, gold, the crown
and perfection of all Metals: so JESUS CHRIST coming (after) into the World,
(albeit he was Lord and King of Kings, of Heaven and Earth) has (by his word,
as example) confirmed temporal policy and authority, commanding to give unto
Caesar what is due to Caesar: And the Apostle enjoineth us, under pain of
eternal damnation, to yield to our temporal Sovereignes, Obedience, Tribute,
Respect, Honor, and our Prayers, because he defends our lives and goods from
violence: Obedience, since he derives his power from GOD: Respect, in that he
is his Minister: Honor, by reason he bears his Image: Prayers, in reflection
to, and upon, the great need he has of GODS assistance in defending us.
Divine and Evangelicall Law obliges us, to yield him all these duties.
Obedience, in regard of his authority: Tribute, to defray his great charges:
Respect, in regard of his Ministry: Honor, for his dignity: Prayers, for his
necessities.

Ita dicit, ut sencit. A.P.

The Second Against preposterous and irregular COUNSELS. Sect. II.
ALL the true good of Man, both particular and public, depends upon the
safe conduct of good Counsels, good Counsels on true wisdom, and this true
wisdom on GOD. Now since (according to Philosophical maxims) one cannot
deliver an assured judgment of things, but in considering the reference,
relation, and connection they have with primary causes: God, therefore, who is
this first cause, ought to be the primary object, and principal rule of all
our judgments and counsels, if we desire to secure our judgments from
error, and our counsels from temerity. For, whatsoever men have, at any time,
established of good or just in temporal Laws, either imprinted in them by
nature, or deduced by reason, or known by inspiration, or manifested by
revelation, if it stray from this principle, it is unjust, and what is unjust
is violent, and what is violent cannot challenge the name of Law. For this is
the most solid ground of the most eminent commendations we can give to the
truly wise Politician, who, over and above the natural capacity of spirit, and
of humane wisdom acquired by study, and experience of affairs, adds divine
knowledge, which he takes as the principal guide of all his motions, reasons,
maxims, counsels, decrees, and actions. He does not (as the Lesbian builders)
fit his squire or rule to the stone or timber, as they do who seek to
accommodate God to their necessities and affairs, or justice to the times, but
he fitteth and fashioneth the timber and stones to the squire or ruler,
affairs and necessities to God, and the times to Justice. He imitateth good
Pilots, who holding the hand on the helm, lift up their eyes to heaven, to
receive from the Pole and stars the conduct of themselves and ships: for
whilst he manageth the steering of Civil affairs, he has his eyes fixed on
eternal verities, and upon the divine Law, whence he takes his notions, levy,
and directions. And as the High Priest of the old Law, drew the answers and
oracles he delivered to the people, from a precious stone he carried on his
breast, which in a mavelous manner (as some have delivered) represented unto
him Gods pleasure by its color, sometimes red, at another time black; one
while pale, then white, then changeable, according to occurrents: In like
manner, the true wise man, takes his counsels and resolutions from Gods Law,
A Precious Topace (as David terms it) not hung at his breast, but fastened to
his heatt, Oh God, I have hid thy words in mine heart, etc. Psalm. 119.11.127.
There does he find (in eternal reasons) the true rule of things passed in all
seasons, and contemplateth in immovable verities, the constant IDEA of
whatsoever is subject to change and revolution; whence taking his measures, he
(after, or thereafter) guides the inconstant by the constant, causing it to
slide into stability, the temporal by the eternal, the figure of the world
(which passes) by Gods Truth, which is eternally permanent.

Dixi. A. P.

(...)
Exodus 28.17.
Row 1. Sardus 6. 2 Emeraud 4. 3 Ligute. 4 Beril 8. Topaz 9. Saphir 2. Agate.
Onyx. Carbuncle Diamond. Amethyst 12. Jaspar 1.

Revelat. 21.19, 20. Alphabeticall order. Alphabeticall order. Foundation. 1.
Jaspar 4. Amethyst 12. Agate 3 0. 2. Saphir 2. Beril 8. Amethyst 3 12. 3.
Chalcidonie. Chalcidonie 3. Beril 4 8. 4. Emerald 2. Chrysoprasus 10. Carbuncle
1 0. 5. Sardonix. Chrysolite 7. Diamond 2 0. 6. Sardius 1. Emerald 4. Emeraud 2
4. 7. Chrysolite. Jacinct 11. Jaspar 4 1. 8. Beril 4. Jaspar 1. Ligute 3 0. 9.
Topas 1. Saphir 2. Onyx 4 0. 10. Chrysoprasus. Sardius 6. Saphir 3 2. 11.
Jacinct. Sardonix 5. Sardius 1 6. 12. Amethyst 3. Topas 9. Topaz 1 9. Rows
Foundations. Rows. Foundations. Perme A. P. 8.20.44.


