A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL Of the Learned and Ingenious Mrs. Ann Baynard,
Daughter and only Child of Dr. Edward Baynard, Fellow of the College of
Physicians, London. Together with some Remarkable Passages in her Life.
Preached at the Parish Church of Barnes in the County of Surry, June the 16th.
1697.

By John Prude, A. M. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, and Curate of
St. Clements Danes in the County of Middlesex.

Published at the desire of her Friends.

Immodicis brevis est aetas and rara senectus,

Mar. lib. 6. LONDON; Printed for Daniel Brown at the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar. MDCXCVII.

TO THE Most Pious and Virtuous Lady, The Honorable Lady MARY FANE, Eldest
Daughter to the Right Honorable VEER Late Earl of WESTMORLAND: To the Virtuous
and Pious Ladies, The Lady CATHERINE LONGUEVIL; The Lady RACHEL DELVES of
Dodington in Cheshire. Madam Mary Bampfield of Poultimore in Devon. Madam Diana
Montague of Leckham in Wilts. Madam Mary Ewer of Richmond in Surry. Madam
Catharine Broncker of Stoke in Wilts.
Being all Admirers of the Deceased, and equally Admired by her.

THIS FUNERAL DISCOURSE Is with all Submission Dedicated, By Your Ladyships
most Obedient Servant,

JOHN PRUDE.

TO THE READER.
THE honest Attempt of preserving the Memory of that most Pious and Learned
young Gentlewoman Mrs. Ann Baynard, has occasioned the hasty Publication of
this Discourse. She was perhaps one of the greatest Women that any Age has
produced, both for Parts and their Improvement; as her great Skill in the
Languages, and all manner of Learning and Philosophy, has sufficiently made
appear; but that which is most rare, was her great Modesty, under which so much
knowledge was veiled; without the least Tincture of Vanity or Ostentation. For
her Words were very few, and her Countenance always composed; so that
Taciturnity, Wisdom, and Discretion, were Rival Virtues to her other
Accomplishments. The good that such a Woman might have done by her Example is
unspeakable, and her Loss irreparable, for she was known too late, and lost too
early. She-was a true and constant Church Woman, a great Asserter and Defender,
both of the Order and Oeconemy of the Church of England, and pitied the
Breaches and Schisms, which Dissension had made in the pure and spotless
Religion of the most Holy Jesus. She would often say, that Pride and
Self-conceit were the two main Pillars on which that Fabric of Dissension
stood, and therefore Wise and considerate Persons would easily conclude it to
be built upon a weak and sandy Foundation. She mightily pitied the unthinking
part of Mamkind, particularly those of her own Sex, That were any ways mis-lead
into wrong Opinions. And as to Heresy, so also she was a professed Enemy to
Atheism and Profaneness, and held the Sacred Name of God, in such a Reverence
and Admiration; that she always either bowed or stood up, when any occasional
Discourse offered it self that way.

She was a great Admirer of all good and virtuous Persons in General;
particularly the Ladies to whom this Discourse is dedicated, whom she never
named, but with a Respect proportionable to that Value and Esteem, which they
justly deserved, and which she thought their due.

The Lady Mary Fane, accompanied with her Mother, and the best of Mothers, the
most Pious and most Virtuous Countess of Westmorland, (it would seem a
Digression, if I should speak all that I know to this Purpose) often did her
the Favor of their Visits in her Sickness. The good Lady Languevil her next
Neighbor, did not only do the Office of a Friend, but even out-did the
kindnesses of a most near Relation in the Favors she showed her in her
languishing and weak condition. The Lady Delves annually honored her Birthday
for many years together with a noble Present: And the Character she had of the
Virtue and Goodness of that excellent Woman the Lady Bampfield (Mother to Sir
Coplestone Warwick,) made her in love with her very Name.

Madam Montague, Madam Ewer, and Madam Broncker were all related to her, Ladies
of the strictest Virtue and Piety, for whom she had a great Respect and
Kindness. As to her Birth and Family, it is so well known, that I need say no
more of it, than that she was descended from Ralph Baynard Baron of Dunmow in
Essex, who left his Son the Lord Jeffery Baynard in the quiet Possession of
Eighty five fair Lordships, as cited by Mr. Dugdale in his Baronage of England.

Some Books Printed for, and Sold by D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar.
SIX Sermons Preached on several Occasions, by Dr. Haschard Dean of Windsor.
Eight Sermons Preached on several Occasions, by Dr. Mannigham. Mr. Ellesby's
Funeral Sermon of the Danger of a Deathbed Repentance. Dr. Jacomb's Sermom, at
the Funeral of Mr. Martyn. Mr. Bynn's Sermon before the House of Commons, Jan.
30. Four Sermons Preached on several Occasions, by Dr. Felling. Mr. Leighton's
House Sermon, of the Duty and benefit of Frequent Communion. -- His Sermon at
Lincoln Assizes. Mr. Maundrell's Sermon before the Turkey Company. Dr. Horneck's
Four Treatises published since his Death. Dr. Pelling on the Sacrament, 2 Vol.
-- On Charity. -- On Humility. -- On God's Love to Mankind. -- On Prayer.
Ecclesiastes II. 16. For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the
fool for ever, seeing that which now is, in the days to come shall be
forgotten; and how dies the wise man? As the fool.


THE sad occasion of this day, confirms the Position of the Preacher, and gives
us an ample prospect of the vantiy of the best of Mortals: For we see that the
most profound Sagacity, the most refined Virtues and exalted Graces, that
humane Nature is capable of, cannot secure the Body from the Grave, nor the
Worms from their Prey, seeing the wise Man dies even as the Fool.

The scope and drift of the Royal Preacher in this Book, is to evince and
illustrate this one great Truth, viz. That the real Good and Happiness of Man,
is not to be found in this World; and that whatsoever he sets his heart upon
here, is so far from yielding any solid Enjoyment or Satisfaction, that it is
the greatest Allay that can be to it: that it raises his desires only to defeat
them; and invites him with pleasant and specious Expectations, to send him away
with the greater Vexation of Spirit.

And this Truth is here very clearly and pathetically laid open to us, by a
particular disquisition of the Pleasures, Honors, Riches, and Wisdom too of
this World, which are so much the Idols of men's Wishes and Desires.

And indeed who was fitter for such a work than he; not only upon the account
of that depth and capacity he had above other Men, but also from that dear
bought experience, which he had made of all these things.

God had endowed him not only with a vast Comprehensive Soul, but put into his
hands all that his heart could wish for; so that the Conclusion which he draws
from the whole matter, is not the effect of Sullenness in a discontented
Stoic, who might disparage the World because he would have no share in its
Enjoyments; but the cool result of Wisdom in a King, that could command the
Blandishments of this World, after he had given the greatest loose to his
desires in the Enjoyment of them; and who may consequently be the better
believed in what he says concerning them.

Having therefore in the former part of this Chapter found nothing but vanity
in all the delights of the Sons of Men, whether they were large Possessions or
great Retinues; whether they were beautiful Gardens, or pleasant Fountains;
whether the mirth of Feasting and Banqueting, or the melody of the sweetest
Voices and Instruments of Music; he turns himself in the 12th ver. as to his
last refuge, to reflect upon his Wisdom, and to consider it as the only good of
Man; and here he tells us, that he found the intellectual pleasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, to as far exceed the Madness and folly of sensual
Gratifications, as the light of the Sun, which cleares the eyes, and displays
the lovely Scene of Nature to our view, does the darkness of the night, which
shuts up all in solitude and silence, and exposes us to dangers, the wise man's
eyes are in his head; i. e. he is circumspect and cautious, whereby he escapes
the Snares and Troubles which the careless and unwary Man does so easily fall
into. Happy therefore is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that
possesses understanding: Prove. 3.13, 14, 15.
The merchandise thereof is better than the merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof than fine Gold. She is more precious than Rubies, and all the things
that can be desired, are not to be compared unto her.

She is the offspring of Heaven, the excellency of Men and Angels, and the
Salt that seasons every state of life, and makes it savoury.

And yet notwithstanding all this, the share which the best of Men has of it,
is but poor and scanty, and which is allayed with much Ignorance and Error. Its
light is but weak and dim at the best; just enough to discover our Miseries,
but unable of it self to guide us out of them.

In fine, where it is not assissted from above, it has its vanity as well as
all other things here below; it can neither exempt a Man from the Calamities
that surround him, nor secure him from Death and Oblivion. For there is no
remembrance of the Wise, more than of the Fool for ever, seeing that which now
is, in the days to come shall be forgotten; and how dies the Wise Man, as the
Fool.

The words represent to us these two things as Vanities incident to Wisdom.

I. The equal share of Misery and Death that is charged upon the wise Man as
well as the Fool; for there is one event to them both. II. The fruitless
Attempt to retrieve our selves from Death by a surviving Memory; seeing the
wise Man is as soon forgotten as the Fool.
I. Then we say, that notwithstanding the great Prerogative that Wisdom has
above Folly, the one can no more free us from Misery while we live, nor from
the hand of Death at last, than the other.

The wisest Man in the world draws but a precarious Breath here, being lodged
in a Tenement of Clay, a tottering and ruinous House, subject to many
Sicknesses and Infirmities, and every moment threatening a Dissolution. There is
no distinction in his Origin from the Fool, or the Beast that perishes:
Notwithstanding his boast of Wisdom, He is born but as the wild Asses Colt. Job
11.12.
He spends his Childhood in the same ignorance and vanity, and when his
knowledge comes to him, the disadvantage in comparison seems to lie on his
side. For having a larger Prospect and nicer Sense than others, his knowledge
helps him only to discover more things, that will vex him and make him sad.

Hence says our Preacher, That the heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning, and he that increases knowledge increases sorrow, Eccles. 7.4.
and Sorrow dries the bones, wastes the Flesh, and hastens old Age. And as the
natural strength wears away, so does the vigor of the Senses, and as Life
abates, so does Wisdom gradually depait from us. Death spoils our Tabernacles,
we lay our Heads down with the beasts of the Field, and are crumbl'd into the
same common Dust. Let our Wisdom be what it will, whether speculative or
practical, spiritual or temporal, the Wisdom that is from above, or the Wisdom
of this world, it is a most certain and undeniable Truth, that no Man's Parts or
Learning can secure him from the Grave; but there is one and the same Event to
the Righteous and to the Wicked, to the Wise and to the Unwise.

But here we must remember that we do not mistake the Preachers meaning, as if
he made no difference at all between the Wise Man and the Fool: He only
maintains that there was nothing perfect underneath the Sun; that Wisdom it
self, the most excellent of the Gifts of God, had its mixtures and allays, and
was attended with many Inconveniences, that it might not puff us up into Pride
and Self-Admiration. But in all other Respects, Wisdom has been truly justified
by this her Elder Son, who being best acquainted with her, has given her, her
due Praise, and recommended her to Mankind.

And indeed she must be owned to be a Crown of Glory to all that lay hold on
her: And without her direction and guidance, Man is the most forlorn and
despicable Creature in the World, both as to his moral and his political
Capacity.

For as to the former, it is from clouded Und^rstandings, and wrong Conceptions
of things, that Men are so fond of, their Vices; had they but right
apprehensions, their Lusts would not look so alluring.

Who is the proud Man? who is the Drunkard? who is the Glutton? who is the
Covetous? who is the Voluptuous? who is the Profane? who is the Adulterer? But
the Man that lacks Wisdom.

And as to the latter, how can a Man steer himself through the various
Circumstances of his Life, if he has not this Star and Compass to direct him.

What is wealth without knowledge? but a dangerous Temptation, and a sure Evil
to the Owners thereof. What is want without knowledge? but an insupportable
Vexation, that can neither be born nor remedied. What is Power without
knowledge? but a pompous Station, which will either be lost or lessened? What
is Subjection without knowledge, but a brutish drudgery, that will neither be
valued nor pityed. What is Honor without Knowledge, but an empty Title that
will be either envyed or slighted And what is disgrace without Knowledge? but
an insulting Evil, that can neither be warded nor yet weathered. For certain is
it, that by a due improvement of our Minds, we are the better able to carry our
selves through this Valley of Tears, to moderate a prosperous fortune, and to
sustain an adverse one.

Neither would I have the Atheist and Epicure infer from Solomon's saying, The
wise Man dies as the Fool, and both of them as the beast, that there is no
difference of them afterward, and that it will be to all alike hereafter, as
if they had never been; for this is a most certain and evident Proof to the
contrary; the little Discrimination that is made here, does sufficiently make
out that there shall be a greater hereafter. That the Soul of a Wise and Holy
Man, who undergoes the same Trouble and Fatality in this World, that the Fool
and the Sinner does, and sometimes greater, is a convincing Argument, drawn
from the Justice of God, that there is a future State, wherein the grand
difference of Mankind shall be settled and established.

No! Though the one inherits the same Corruption with the other in the Grave, yet
shall he see a more blessed Incorruption; though he sets in Dishonor, yet shall
he rise again in Glory: And therefore our Royal Preacher in another place tells
us, Wisd. 5.1, 2, 4, 5.
That the righteous Man who is truly the wise Man, shall one day stand in great
Boldness before the Face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of
his Labors, that when they see it, they shall be amazed at the strangeness of
his Salvation so far beyond all that they looked for. And again we Fools
accounted his Life madness, and his end to be without Honor; but how is he
numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the Saints. It is no
difficult Matter, I must confess to Persons, who live wholly to the Body, and
do not aim at any useful end of Life, to imagine that they are nothing but
Flesh and Blood; and that when they die their Soul shall dissolve and vanish
into the soft Air:

But to think that those, who have lived above the Body, have governed
themselves by the Dictates of the highest Prudence, have benefited the World by
their rare Endowments, have been adorned with all Divine Graces and Virtues,
and have been the Glory of the Age they lived in; such as this young
Gentlewoman whose remains are now before us; a Person endowed with excellent
Gifts and Graces, to think (I say) that she together with those other Worthys
departed this Life in the Faith and fear of God; to think by their confessing
the same common Dust in their Dissolution, that they were actuated by no higher
Pirnciple; that there were no spiritual Inhabitants in those Houses of Clay,
which being of heavenly extract performed all those noble things, and are now
removed to their native Country to receive the reward of them; is a thought,
which, to any serious thinking Man, must needs be as absurd as it is
uncomfortable.

Methinks it were to be wished that those, which have been such Lights to the
World, besides their immortal State in the other World, might likewise have an
immortal Memory in this; to justify the Power of Wisdom, and to excite our
Emulation. But it has pleased Almighty Wisdom to ordain but one immortality;
that we might be more intent in the pursuit of it, and not vainly expect or
rest in any other. And this brings me to the

II. Vanity incident to Wisdom, which is, though the Memory of the wise be so
desirable a thing to themselves, and beneficial to Posterity, Yet there is no
remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever, seeing that which now
is in the days to come shall be forgotten.

Certain it is that there is a hankering in the minds of all Men, to perpetuate
their Memories, whether it arises from the natural Thirst of the Soul after
immortality, or from a Diffidence of a future State, and consequently an
endeavor to recover what we can from the spoils of Death. And how industrious
has the Wit of Man been to prevent this? Some by costly Unctions and
Embalmings, some by lasting Tombs and Pyramids; some have obtained to be
Registered among the Stars, and others to have the Months of the year to be
called by their Names. What Dangers have Men encountered to get an immortal-Fame
to be incerted in the Annals of the world, or to be celebrated in the strains
of some ingenious Poet? How fond are most Men of surviving in their Offspring,
and what an Unhappiness is it looked upon to have no issue to keep up our name?

Thus do poor Mortals hunt after shadows, and very Spectrums: Thus do they
disquiet themselves in vain, to purchase a little popular breath, which when
they are gone they shall be insensible of, or at least unconcerned for; and in
which Falsehood has often as great a share as Truth, and Vice as Virtue.

For the World is not so curious to hand down what is excellent, as what is
surprising and extraordinary. Thus he that set the Temple of Ephesus on fire is
remembered, whilst he that built it is almost forgotten; and that was a hopeless
as well as mean desire in Cardan, though the greatest Philosopher and Physician
of his time, that the Ages to come might know there was such a Man, not caring
whether they knew any more of him.

But let a man's fame be raised from never so solid a merit, and rivetted in
Brass and Marble; yet Monuments themselves have their destiny; Time eats
through the most lasting Substance, and Oblivion blots out the fairest
Characters.

We cannot hope to live so long in our names as some have done in their
persons; and those who have or shall have the happiest and longest
Commemoration, shall, by the flux of time, have it dwindle into a point, and at
last vanish into nothing.

It being in this respect the same with Time, as it is with Place, that the
greatest distance gives the least appearance; so vain a thing is a restless
inquietude for the diuturnity of our Memories. For who knows whether there are
not more remarkable Persons forgotten, than that stand remembered in the known
account of time; and the best of Men at last must be content, to be as though
they had never been as to this World, and to be found in the Register of God,
not in the Record of Man.

Indeed to have the common voice of Men for the testimony of a worthy Carriage,
in the constant tenor of a Man's life and conversation, is a desirable thing,
and of singular use while we live; our Preacher assuring us, that a good name
is better than precious ointment, Prove. 22.1.
both for the refreshing and cheering our selves, and scattering a delicious
fragrancy to others: i.e. The Reflection upon good Actions is the feast of a
good Conscience; and the Esteem which our Virtue creates in the Minds of
others, excites their Imitation, and brings back with it their Friendship and
Assistance: It comforts us in all the stages of our life, and at the hour of
our departure hence it stands by us; allays the Terror of Death, and tells our
departing Souls, that we shall die desired, and that our Memories shall be
preserved sweet by all that know us.

So that no Ointment is so powerful to preserve the Body from Corruption, as a
good Name and Report is to preserve our Virtue from Oblivion; but this is only
for some time, and is the Prerogative only of one sort of Wisdom; which seeking
those things which are above has the least to do with the Praise and Glory of
this World, and yet notwithstanding gets the greatest, and the most lasting
share of it.

Thus the Psalmist tells us, that the righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance; meaning thereby a very long one. Our Savior gave this
Commendation of Mary Magdalen's anointing him, that what she had done should be
published throughout the Christian World for a memorial of her. And St. Paul,
setting forth the Eulogies of Faith, in the 11th. Chapter to the Hebrews,
amongst the rest delivers, that by it the Elders obtained a good report; and we
have great reason to hope that those Men who have their Praises recorded in
Holy Writ, shall have a name among Men as long as the Sun and Moon endures.

But as I was saying, this is the Privilege only of a few, and is as an
Exception to the general Rule; It Is not the greatness of our Actions, but the
goodness of them, that preserves our Memories the longest.

Let us otherwise do what we can to transmit our name to distant Posterities,
use all our Wit and Art, spend the most costly Perfumes and precious Ointments,
for our embalming, we may justly take up the rebuke which the Disciples of
Christ (though unjustly) gave to the Woman in the Gospel, Quorsum perditio
haec? To what purpose is this waste? Mat. 26.8.
to preserve a name from Stench and Putrefaction.

It Is a sore vanity to be thus anxiously solicitous for the perpetuity of that
which is but a shadow at best, and must take its chance in the World as well as
other things.

It Is a vanity in a wise Man passionately to pursue that which is but of little
worth, though it were eternal, and a greater to do so when it is both
insignificant and transitory too, and yet this is a secret Desire, more or less
in every man of the World.

And thus we see, That wise men also die and perish together, as well as the
ignorant and foolish, and leave the Fruits of their Wisdom to be enjoyed by
others: And though thy think that their houses shall continue for ever, and that
they have called their Lands after their own names, yet there is no remembrance
of the wise more than of the fool for ever.

The Vanity then that is here justly charged upon the coveting Virtue for the
sake of Honor, or the seeking Wisdom to raise an immortal name, is very
obviously unfolded by this Dilemma.

If I get my self a name in the World, I shall be either sensible of it when I
am dead, or insensible. If I am insensible of it, what good can it be to me. If
I am insensible of it, it must be either in a state of Misery, or a state of
Glory. If I have any apprehensions of it in a state of Misery, it will
certainly prove an aggravation to the Worm that never dies, to be under the
heavy Wrath of God, for what the World is then applauding me for. If I am in a
state of Glory, I cannot think the good opinion of Men can be any accession to
the Happiness above: The Praises of poor Mortals must certainly be swallowed up
and disappear amidst the Eulogies and Acclamations of Saints and Angels.

The Consideration then of what has been said should teach us these two plain
Lessons; which are not only the dictates of Reason, and confirmed by the wise
Man's Experience, but commanded by him who is wiser than Solomon.

1st. That we despise the Honor and Glory of this World.

However it was permitted to former Ages, who had but weak and very imperfect
Discoveries of a future state, to seek a reward of Virtue in fame as well as
other temporal goods; yet to us, who have life and immortality brought to light
through the Gospel; the great Command is, deny thy self, and fellow me.

Those who have professed under the Cross of Christ, are to be crucified to the
World, and to have the World crucified unto them; they are to renounce its
Pomps and Vanities, its Flatteries and Applauses; their condition here is not
to be in Greatness and Spendour, but in Humility and Poverty of Spirit: They
are not to seek the Praises of Men, but the Praise and Honor of the All-wise
God.

For to seek the good opinion of others, is inconsistent with the true sense of
our own Unworthiness; and to do good that we may be commended, is to let go the
Substance and pursue the Shadow.

Therefore the Son of God has strictly cautioned us, not to do our works to be
seen of Men; and if our light is to shine before others, it is to enlighten
them, and not to be reflected on our selves in an overweening Complacency.

And how reasonable is this Command to those who are to set their affections on
things above; who are in this World but as Pilgrims and Travelers in an Inn,
who tarry but a night? The Hardships they meet with, the Smallness of the stay,
will not certainly make them very curious what the People will say of them when
they are gone.

2dly. This will teach us to make the best use of our Reason and Understanding;
which is not to get our selves a name, but to answer the End and Excellency of
our Being.

The Faculties and Powers God has endowed us with, are best employed about the
knowledge of our selves; what we are? from whence we derived our Being? what
Duty we owe the Author of it? and how we are to promote his Glory?

This is the Conclusion of the whole matter; That the fear of God is the
highest and truest Wisdom, and that which will certainly lead us into all other.

Let us therefore never think our selves wise, till we are wise unto Salvation;
never think we know any thing, before we know we have a part in Christ.

In our searches after Knowledge, let us have recourse to him who is the God of
Truth; to his Word, which is the Word of Truth; and to his Spirit, which is the
Spirit of Truth; which is the only way to dispel our Darkness here; and to
bring us to the Beatifick Vision hereafter, which is light eternal.

I have not spoke so much upon this Text, as perhaps the subject matter might
well enough bear; because I have another sad Text laid before me, and upon
which it is very requisite that I should speak something: namely, the sad
Dispensation of Divine Providence in cuting off the strength, and shortning the
days of this excellent and rare Example of Wisdom and Mortality, this young
Gentlewoman whose Funerals we now celebrate; and whom, considering her great
Parts and Endowments, it is not meet to bury in silence.

For though we are foretold that the Memory of the wisest and the best of Mortals
is not long lived; yet let us not put the Shroud over them too soon before we
have strewn some few Flowers over their Graves; though like them also, their
remembrance does soon perish, and fade away.

For my own part, as I profess my self no friend to Funeral-pomp and
Panegyricks; (except something extraordinary does appear) so I confess my own
Inability for such an undertaking: Yet it is not good manners to withhold
Praises where they are due; and though Favor be deceitful, and Beauty be vain,
yet the Woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised, says our Royal
Preacher. Prove. 31.30.


But when this is done, much Skill and Rhetoric is required, least like some
sorry Painter, we mar that Face that we pretend to delineate.

But all that can be said for this rough Draught that you meet with here is
only this; that as the Learned and ingenious young Gentlewoman, did never make
a show of any Fondness or Affectation in her outward Dress, when living; so a
plain and ordinary one may the better be excused now she is dead.

No! She had business that lay upon her hands of another Nature; she had many
Books to read, many Doubts and Difficulties to clear up to her understanding,
and much time to lay out in devout and serious Meditation. And should I attempt
to open the Treasury of her Virtues, and acquaint you with the particulars, the
Task would be too tedious, and some might hold it superfluous; especially in
this ill natured and censorious Age, when we cannot endure to hear that
ascribed to others, which is wanting in our selves.

Yet for their sake who knew her not, or not so well as my self, though it was my
great misfortune that I knew her so late, for I should otherwise have learned
much more from her; I should as the wise Man speaks of Wisdom in general, Prove.
5.1.
I should have attended to her Wisdom, and bowed mine Ear unto her
Understanding.

And therefore, I say, for their sake that knew her not, I will single out some
few of those many Virtues she was endowed with, and present them to your Memory
and Practice, and by which, I believe, I shall not grieve or vex your Patience.

But that I may not seem tedious, I will reduce them to these Three,

Her Learning, her Piety, and her Charity.

These are Cardinal Virtues on which all others hang and depend; and I should
be injurious to her Memory, should I conceal her Excellency herein.

And First, what I am to say as to her Learning, perhaps may find but
indifferent Entertainment in this Age, when it is become a Fashion more than
ever for young Women to spend the greatest Portion of their time in
Ornamentals, in preparing modish and accomplished Dresses for the Body; whilst
little or no time is laid aside, to adorn the Soul with decent and useful
knowledge.

But she had found out a better way to employ her time, that according to the
Psalmist she might become like the Kings Daughter all glorious within, Psalm.
45.13.
and whilst some others with Martha are cumber'd about many things, she with
Mary had chosen that better part, Luke 10.41, 42.
which shall not be taken away from her.

The Apostle St. Paul indeed acquaints us with certain Women in his time, 2 Timothy 3.7.
who were always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth. But she was none of those Women, but the rather might truly say with
Holy David, Psalm. 119, 100.
I have more understanding than my Teachers, I understand more than the
Ancients.

The truth of which did most evidently appear to any one that had but the least
Conversation with her.

For, as for Learning, whether it be to understand natural Causes and Events,
to know the Courses of the Sun, Moon and Stars; the qualities of Herbs and
Plants; to be acquainted with the demonstrable Verities of the Mathematics;
the study of Philosophy; the Writings of the Ancients, and that in their own
proper Language, without the help of an Interpreter: These and the like are the
most noble Accomplishments of a human Soul, and accordingly do bring great
delight and satisfaction along with them; and these things she was not only
conversant in, but Mistress of; and that to such a Degree that few, very few of
her Sex did ever arrive at.

She had from her Infancy been trained up in the knowledge of these things, and
had made a great Progress therein; and even in her green years, at the Age of
twenty three, was arrived to the knowledge of a bearded Philosopher.

But that which is most our wonder is; that one so young of an infirm
Constitution, and of the tenderest Sex, not accustomed to the advantages of the
Philosophic Schools, should in the hard and knotty Arguments of Metaphysical
Learning, be a most nervous and subtle Disputant And therefore, let none
Despair or complain of the roughness of the Path, or the acclivity of Virtues
hill; for she was a clear and lively instance, that neither the Crabbedness of
Languages, nor the Abstruseness of Arts and Sciences can be too hard for
Diligence and Application.

It is not long since that she took great Pains to perfect her knowledge in the
Greek Tongue, that she might with greater Pleasure, read that elegant Father
St. Chrysostom, in his own pure and native Style. Her being very well
acquainted with the Greek Testament, in which she was much converstant, was a
great help to improve her Skill in that Language. She was not only satisfied
with reading, but having an Eye to that saying of the Great Poet, Semper ego
Auditor tantum, she set her self to the Composing of many things in the Latin
Tongue, which were rare and useful in their kind, and which I have seen with
abundance of delight and satisfaction. Wherein it does appear that she had a
Beauty in her Style, as well as in her Countenance, and if they shall be made
public, will be the Admiration, as well as the Entertainment of the thinking
pate of Mankind. She had indeed a vast and comprehensive Knowledge, a large and
exalted Mind, a strong and capacious Memory, still coveting more and more
Knowledge; and in this Particular alone she would often say, It was a sin to be
contented with but a little.

But after all this, with what profound Humility, with what Prostration of Mind
would she cry out with St. Paul, Philip. 3.8.
I count all these things but loss, for Excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord.

In which study she was no small Proficient, and has often by her nervous
Arguments, and by the Grace of God which was in her, put to silence some of
those bold Men, who have attempted, (even in these our days, when the light of
the Gospel is so clearly shining among us) to revive that old and baffled
Heresy of Socinus: And she did much lament that such lewd Opinions should gain
any Footing, or the least Entertainment among those that profess the Religion
of the Crucified Jesus.

I have heard her say, That human Learning was worth nothing, unless as a
Handmaid it lead to the knowledge of Christ revealed in the Gospel, as our only
Jesus, our Lord and Savior.

And would Discourse very finely after this manner.

What avails Solomon's Skill in all the works of Nature, if by them we be not
brought to see the God of Nature?

What is it, says she, to be so Skilful in Astronomy, as that by the Motions
of the Heavens, we can foretell things here below, if we never study by our Holy
Practices to come thither?

What is it to be so Skilful in Arithmetic, as that we can divide, and sub
divide to the smallest Fractions; if (as God has revealed unto us in his Holy
Word) We do not so learn to number our days, Psalm. 90.12.
that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom.

What is it (says she) for a Physician to be skilful in foreseeing and
preventing the Diseases of the Body, if (as God has revealed unto him) he
knows not where to find that Balm of Gilead, Jerem. 46.11.
the Wine and Oil of that Samaritan, the Lord Jesus, to pour into the fester'd
Wounds of his own Soul and Conscience.

Such as this was her frequent Discourse, and will well enough lead me to the
second Grace that did shine in her most brightly, and that was her Piety.

And that as it branches it self out into these two known Duties, Public and
Private.

As for the Public, she was a constant frequenter of the Word and Sacrament,
and the Prayers of the Church, which call for our daily attendance: She never
missed, unless hindered by some bodily Infirmity, to which of late she had been
too subject.

Her Private Piety and Devotion was no less, by which she dieted her Soul; and
in her Chamber, with holy David, she communed with her own heart, Psalm. 4.4.
privately examining the State and Condition of her own Soul, that she might
stand in awe, and not sin.

She greedily caught at all opportunities of Retirement, that she might have
the better intercourse with Heaven; as knowing the surest way of overcoming the
World, and living above it, was to sequester her self from in; and the best
Preparatory for Death, was dying daily in holy Solitude and Privacy. By which
she had so disposed her Mind for the time of her Dissolution, that it pleased
God to give her some distant presages of it.

For it is two years since her Meditations leading her in her solitary Walks
into this Churchyard; and resting her self here in the Porch, and no doubt
ruminating on her Mortality, which the place suggested to her, a sudden
Thought, a strong Impulse broke in upon her Mind, that in a short time she
should die, and be buried in this very Churchyard; which was so far from
casting any Horror or Melancholy upon her Spirits, that on the contrary, it
made her in love with the place, and did ever after desire to retire hither,
and did accordingly choose it for her Burial-place.

The third thing, that I mentioned was her Charity, which perhaps you will
think, under her Circumstances, could not be very extraordinary as to the Sums,
yet was it so as to the Cheerfulness and Constancy of her giving; for what ever
her Allowance was, she duly laid aside a certain portion of it to charitable
and pious uses: Neither did her Charity rest here, but raised it self to a
higher degree of Spirituality, and beyond the scene of this World: She had a
great love for the Souls of Men; was heartily afflicted with the Errors,
Follies, and Vices of this present Age, to see that those who called themselves
Christians, should by bad Principles and worse Practice, dishonor their
Profession, and not only hazard their own Salvation, but that of their weak
Brother too, for whom Christ died: And this temper of mind made her not only
importunate in her Intercessions for the good of the World, but gave her
Courage and Discretion above her Years or Sex, to benefit the Souls of those
she conversed with, by friendly Reproof, good Counsel, or some learned or pious
Discourse.

In the exercise of this Christian Love she lived, in this she died; and: here
that I may not be thought to flourish only in this matter, be pleased to
understand, that she desired me on her Deathbed, that I would exhort all young
people to the study of Wisdom and Knowledge, as the means to improve their
Virtues, and bring them to the truest Happiness: And this, I think, I cannot do
better than in the words which were taken from her own Mouth, just upon her
departure, when her Soul was hovering upon her Lips, ready to take the wing for
that other World.

Her words were these, which were faithfully Penned down and delivered into my
hands.

I desire (says she) that all young People may be exhorted to the Practice of
Virtue, and to increase their Knowledge by the study of Philosophy, and mote
especially to read the great Book of Nature, wherein they may see the Wisdom
and Power of the Great Creator, in the Order of the Universe, and in the
Production, and Preservation of things; For Quaelibet herba Deum. This was a
Language which was very familiar to her, and if you would know the English of
it, she would have you to understand thus much by it; that the least Spire of
Grass, as well as the Lillies of the Field do demonstrate the Being of a God.
She proceeds, It will fix in their Minds a Love to so much Perfection, frame a
Divine Idea, and an awful regard of God, which will highten Devotion, and lower
the Spirit of Pride, and give a Habit and Disposition to his Service; it will
make us tremble at Folly and Profaneness, and command Reverence and Prostration
to his Great and Holy Name.

That Women, (says she) are capable of such Improvements, which, will better
their Judgments and Understandings, is past all doubt; would they but set to it
in earnest, and spend but half of that time in study and thinking, which they
do in Visits, Vanity, and Toys. 'Twould introduce a composure of Mind, and lay
a sound Basis, and Groundwork for Wisdom and Knowledge; by which they would be
the better enabled to serve God, and help their Neighbors.

Thus far this rare Young Woman.

And after such Rhetorical Lines as these, such powerful Exhortations, what can
I add, what can I subjoin, but what will fall short, very short of what this
young Disciple has laid before you?

She joins with Moses and the Prophets, in what they have declared unto you;
and if you would have a Preacher from the dead, why may not a dying Preacher
prove as effectual; especially to those of her own Sex, to whom she does most
passionately apply her self. Let her words be as powerful upon you, as if she
did actually rise from the dead, to your Conviction; for otherwise, since she
has given you this Admonition, she may one day rise up in judgment against you.

And here I could weep heartily if it were not to show the Weakness of my
Nature; but I will lament the loss of so excellent a Creature, so rare a
Pattern of so much Virtue, so much Goodness, so much Piety.

And what shall I more say; for the time would fail me to tell of her Meekness
and Patience, Temperance and Chastity, Modesty and Humility; these are moral
Virtues, and in the Practice of which she was very exact, and this brings into
my Mind what I heard from her when we were Discoursing of moral Virtues, some
few weeks before her Departure: Morality (says she) is the Life of Religion;
but our moral Actions unless influenced by our Religion, are of no use; as
judging no doubt, according to the Opinion of St. Austin; that our best Actions
without Faith in Christ were but splendida peccata, like the Apples of Sodom,
of more show than Value.

Much more I might repeat to you, to this Purpose, excellent Sayings that
proceeded out of her Mouth, and worthy to be recorded from Generation to
Generation. The nearer she drew to her End, she manifested to all that came to
see her, the great Contentment that she had in. her approaching Death,
declaring that to her, it did appear no other than the putting off her Clothes;
a Disrobing; that this Mortal part might put on Immortality. By all which it
does appear, that she has set before you a most excellent Example, and that in
an Age exposed to the greatest Temptations.

And therefore we may well turn the words of the Text into a Lamentation, and
say Alas! That there should be no more remembrance of t he Wise than of the
Fool for ever? That what now is in the days to come should be forgotten? And
that the wise Man, and the wise Woman too, should die even as the Fool.

I conclude in the words of the same Author, Prove. 31.29. Many Daughters have
done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

God Almighty give us Grace to labor that we may excel in Wisdom, and Virtue,
and true Piety; and then however our Name, or our Remembrance be lost here on
Earth, yet we shall have a Name written in Heaven, for better than that of Sons
and of Daughters, which God of his infinite Mercy grant. Amen.

FINIS.

