The FIRST PART of a Brief Register, Calendar and Survey of the several Kinds,
Forms of all Parliamentary Writs:

COMPRISING In 3. Sections, all Writs, Forms of Summons to Great Councils,
Parliaments, Convocations in the Tower, from the 5th of King John (1203) till
23 Edw. 4. (1483) to all sorts of Spiritual and Temporal Lords, Greatmen
(Members of,) and the Kings Counsil (Assistants to) THE HOUSE OF LORDS: With
other Rare Writs, and 4. Exact Alphabetical, Chronological Tables: 1. Of all
Abbols, Priors, Masters of Orders, Clergymen, (except Bishops:) 2. Of all
Dukes, Earls, Foreign Kings, Marquesses, Princes of Wales: 3 Of all Lay-
Barons, Lords, Vicounts, Great men: 4. Of all the Kings Counsil (Justices,
Clerks, or other Officers) with the several numbers of each of them, and of
Bishops, summoned to every Council, Parliament, and the Years, Rolls, Dorses in
every Kings reign, wherein their names are recorded.

Illustrated with choice, useful Annotations, Observations concerning these
Writs differences, alterations, entries in the Clause Rolls: the Styles,
Titles, Additions of Patriarcha, Cardinalis, Electus, Confirmatus, Magister,
etc. given in them to Spiritual; of Baro, Miles, Dominus, etc. to Temporal
Lords; with their Baronies, Fealty, Homage, Oaths, right of Session,
Judicature: The Clergies forms of Procurations; Exemption from Taxes by the
Laity: Our Kings Prerogative to call, prorogue, dissolve Parliaments, hold them
by a Custos Regni, or Commissioners, by Patents (here cited;) to create Peers,
Barons by Patent, special (not general) Writs (here registered;) to summon
extraordinary Members, Assistants; Their propriety in Parliaments, dissolved by
their deaths; The Power of their Counsil in, and out of them; The Constitution,
Jurisdiction, Proceedings, Privileges, Ends, Duties of English Parliaments,
Lords, Commons; Their inconsistence with armed guards, seclusion of Members (by
force, oaths, menaces) and with Scottish, or Irish Intruders; Their late
differences from Councils. Parliamentum, when first used in Writs, Acts,
Histories, etc. With other particulars. Publishing more Rarities, rectifying
more Errors in vulgar Writers, touching our Parliaments, than any former
Treatises of this Subject.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire a Bencher of Lincolnes Inn.

Mercurius Trismegistus. In unaquaque art tanta ducimur caecitatis caligine,
ut maxima part eorum quae scimus, sit minima pars eorum quae ignoramus.

LONDON Printed for the Author, and sold by Edward Thomas in Little Britain,
and Henry Brom in Ivy Lane, 1659.

To the Ingenuous Readers, especicially those of the Long Robe, and more Noble
or Generous English Extraction.
THere are 5. grand Defects of very public concernment, highly tending if not
to the dishonor, yet certainly to the great disservice, prejudice of our
Kingdom, Parliaments, great Officers of State, Nobility, Gentry, Nation, and
more especially of the Professors and Profession of the municipall Laws, which
I have for many years last past, not only much admired at, and exceedingly
deplored, but also used my best endeavors to get supplied, so far as there was
any probability to effect it.

The 1. is the irreparable loss of all the Parliament ^olls during the Reigns
of our antient^^t Kings, from William the 1. till 5 E. 2. ^ the first Roll of
that kind now extant) and of many other of those Rolls since, during the Reigns
of Edw. 2. and 3. with the not publishing in Print those Parliamentary Rolls
and Records yet extant by public Order, for the benefit of Posterity, to
prevent their suppression, destruction, Embezelling by fire, war, casualties,
the negligence, or present malice of some Iesuitical Furies, or illit^rate
Animals, instigated thereunto by Hugh Peter's his misintituled Pamphlet, Good
work for a good Magistrate, printed 1651. p. 96. Where after his proposal of a
short new Model for the Law, he subjoyns, This being done, I^ IS VERY
ADVISABLE TO BURN ALL THE OLD RECORDS, YEA EVEN THOSE IN THE TOWER, THE
MONVMENTS OF TYRANNY: Which desperate bedlam advise of his, I have The 2. p^rt
of a short De^urrer to the lews long discontinued Remitter into England, p.
136, etc.
elsewhere at large refuted, as most pernicious to the public, and to all
Corporations and Landed men.

The 2. is the great want of an Exact Collection out of the Clause, Parliament,
and Statu'e Rolls, of all Statutes, Ordinances and Acts of Parliament made
before the use of Printing them immediately after the Parliaments conclusion,
or during their Sessions, came in fashion: all our Statutes at large, and the
Abridgments of them, (even Ferdinando Pultons of Lincolns Inn Esquire. the best
and most refined) having sundry See the Exact Abridgment of the Records in the
Tower, and my Table there, to Title Statutes.
Spurious Impostures printed in them, under the Titles of Acts, Statutes, and
Ordinances of Parliament, which in ver^ty are neither of them, but only
particular Writs or Instuctions of the King to the Justices and other Officers
by advise of his Coun^l out of Parliament: Such are the St^tutes, De
circumspecte agatis, said to be made in 13. E. 1. (resolved to be no Statute,
but made by the Prelates alone. M. 19. E. 3. Fitz. Jur. 28.) The Statutes of
Protections, Champerty, and Conspirators, in 33 E. 1. De conjunctim feoffatis,
in 34 E. 1. Ne rector prosternat arbores in caemiterio, in 35 E. 1. The Statute
for Knights, 1 E. 2. of Gavelet, 10 E. 2. with sundry others, as the very form,
words, and penning of them demonstrate, being transcribed only out of the
Clause or Patents not Parliament or Statute Rolls. Besides these there are some
forged Acts and Statutes printed in these Statute Books not extant in the
Statute Rolls that remain entire: yea, there are sundry misprisions in printed
Statutes, varying both in form and substance from the Statute Rolls wherein
they are recorded, omitting some material words and clauses, adding and
altering others; most of the publishers of our Statutes taking them upon mere
trust, as they found them transcribed by others, but never examining them by
the Statute Rolls and Original Records, as is most apparent by their See the
first part of my short Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued Remitter into
England, p. 36, 37, 49. 53, 54, etc.
mistakes of the very times and dates of some Statutes, by their printing
others of them without any date, as See Pultons Statutes at large, Land. 1618.
p. 115. Rastals calendar of Statutes in the end of his Abridgment; and Tottles
Magna Char^ta, out of which they transcribed them.
made during the reign of King H. 3. Ed. the 1. or 2. BUTUNCERTAIN WHEN, ORIN
WHICH OF THEIR TIMES, and by the manifold variances between their Printed
Books, and the Statute Rolls, of which I have given you a particular account in
my Table to the E^act. Abridgement of the Records in the Tower; the Compiler
whereof was mistaken in this, That the Statute of 2 R. 2. c. 5. touching
tellers of News (or Lies) of Noblemen, or Counselors, is not in the Record,
nor any mention thereof; it being recorded at large in French in the Statute
Roll of the first Parliament that year, wherein it is printed, though not in
the second, as I can attest upon my own view of the Statute Roll it self.
Besides these Impostures, and Variances, there are many useful Acts in the
Parliament and Clause Rolls totally omitted out of all our Printed
Statute-Books, some whereof I have heretofore published in my Irenarches
Redivivus.

The 3. is the Grand deplorable Deficiency of such an Exact Chronological
History of all the Great Councils, Synods, Parliaments of England, with their
several Canons, Acts, Ordinances, Proceedings, as I have formerly mentioned in
the Epistle to my Plea for the Lords, my Preface to an Exact Abridgement of the
Records in the Tower; and in a printed Title three year since, by which I
endeavored to promote it; which would supply all the three precedent Defects.

The 4. is the great lack of diligent faithful Collections and Publications of
all the choicest Records, Proclamations, Writs, Letters, Charters, Patents,
Commissions, etc. in the Tower, or elsewhere, which concern the Liberties and
Properties of the Subject; The just ancient Duties, Customs, Revenues,
Jurisdictions of the Kings and Crown of England in times of War and peace;
the Coin, Merchandise, Manufactures, Trade, Government, Navy, Forts, Militia of
England and Ireland; and the Negotiations, Leagues, Treaties with foreign
States: or at leastwise the want of an Exact Table, Repertory to them, whereby
they might be readily found out, and made u^e of upon all emergent occasions.

The 5. is a Complete Register or Calendar of all Parliamentary Writs extant in
our Records, which those who have formerly written Discourses touching our
English Parliaments, were either totally ignorant of, or not well acquainted
with, or else took no care or pains at all to communicate to others, though the
very foundations of all our Parliaments and their proceedings; The omission or
ignorance whereof has made most of their Treatises of this subject very
imperfect, unsatisfactory, and full of gross misprisions, which pass for
current Truths.

It seemed very strange and monstrous to me, that none of our Kings,
Parliaments, Great Officers of State, Nobles, but especially none of our
reverend Judges, learned Lawye^s, nor any of the M^sters of the Rolls (to whose
beneficial Office, care, diligence, it most prope^ly appertained) in so large a
tract of time since Printing first grew common, have not hitherto put to their
own helping hands, nor encouraged others by Honorary Salaries, to supply these
depl^rable, prejudicial Defects, (especially the 3. first) which so much
concern the public Government, Justice, Honor, welfare, Laws, Interest of the
whole English Nation; when as foreign Kings Parliaments, Statesmen, Lawyers,
Advocates (especially in France, Spain, Germany, Denmark) have been very
diligent and laborious in later ages, in searching out, transcribing,
publishing to posterity all the Antiquities, Records, Councils, Parliaments,
Laws, Edicts, Ordinances, Histories, Transactions of their Predecessors, and
encouraged their learnedest Scholars by great Offices, Honors, Salaries, and
bountiful rewards, to collections and publications of this Nature, to their
eternal honor. VVhereupon I endeavored the last long Parliament by an Epistle
to the Lords to excite them to contribute their best assistance toward the
speedy Publication of all our Parliamentary Rolls and Records, profering my
best endeavors to promote it; but I neither then nor since received the least
encouragement from them or others toward this beneficial public undertaking,
from which soon after I was both discouraged and disabled by near 3. years
close Imprisonment in 3. remote Castles, under armed, strictest guards by Mr.
John Bradshaws and his Whitehall Associates warrant, without any accusation,
hearing, or particular cause either then or since expressed, of purpose to
debarr me from publishing any thing of this Nature, or against their New
Tyrannical usurpations, transcending all in former ages. After my enlargement
from these 3. years expensive, as well as tedious restraints, (superadded to my
former Imprisonments and Losses under the Prelates and Army Officers,) I
endeavored to revive this Heroic work, and to encourage all publike-Spirited
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Lawyers to promote it; both by the publication of many
unknown rare Records, in the second Part of my Demurrer to the Jews long
discontinued Remitter into England; and Discoveries therein of the Usefulness
and excellency of our Records in general, and of those relating to our
Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Properties in particular: Since which, by a
printed Paper, I proposed a way, how, in what manner, and by what time this
useful Design might probably be effected with no loss at all, but certain gain
to those who should contribute only 10 (...) a piece toward it, for a year or
two at most, and should then certainly receive their principal again, together
with Books in the interval amounting to treble the interest; which, though some
of my friends to whom I communicated these papers, highly approved of, seeming
forwards to contribute toward it, yet I found such a general lukewar^nness, or
rather absolute coldness (in others) really to advance it, as caused me totally
to desist from any further prosecution thereof; Whereupon to supply those
defects in some degree as much as in me lay, I did with no little pains and
cost upon my own private account alone, (without the least assistance,
contribution from any others) collect, compile, print and publish to the world,
in the 3. First Parts of my Seasonable Historical Vindication, and
Chronological Collection of the good old Fundamental Liberties, Rights,
Franchises, Laws (...) all English Freemen; an Exquisite Epitome of all the
Parliamentary Councils, Synods, and State-assemblies held within our Realms
upon several Occasions, extant in our Historians, from the Britons first arival
therein, till the Coronation of King William the first Anno 1066. containing
the space of 2390. years. Which though very useful, seasonable, profitable,
containing sundry rarities in them; were looked upon by most men with contempt,
like old Almanacks, Clothes or Fashions quite out of d^te; whence most of them
lie moulding in Warehouses for want of sale. After which in pursuit of these
beginnings; I freely contributed my labors, to the publishing of A^^xact
Abridgment of the Parli^ment Rolls and Records in the Tower of London; from
King Edward the 2. till 1 R. 3. rectifying sundry mistakes, supplying diverse
defects therein, adorning it with a necessary Preface, useful Tables and
Marginal Notes, without which it had been in a manner altogether useless* Since
which, I much enlarged and reprinted upon my own Account alone (for want of
assistance by others) my Plea for the Lords and House of Peers; Wherein I have
communicated to the world out of Records and Histories, more Presidents,
knowledge, touching the Judicature, Jurisdiction and Proceedings of our Great
Councils and Parliaments in former ages, and more fully vindicated the just,
ancient Privilege and Hereditary right of the Lords and Barons of this Realm,
to sit, vote, judge in all our English Parliaments, than any others have done
in former ages, without the least encouragement, aid, or retribution from any
of their Lordships, notwithstanding my manifold sufferings by, from, and under
some of them and their ancesters heretofore both in person and estate, without
the smallest voted recompense.

These last publications, together with my Sovereign Power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms, my Historical Collection of the Great Councils and Parliaments of
England; and new published Argument of the Case of the Lord Magwire, having in
some measure (though not so fully as I desire) supplied the 4. first premised
De^ects, I have endeavored by this present^ Brief Regist^^, (...) and Survey of
the s^veral (...), (the only Basis whereon Parliaments are founded, by which
they are supported, directed, as well as convened) and by my useful
Observations on them, more completely to supply the 5. de^ect, than any of the
former, so far as my present leisure and ability will extend, without supplies
from others; wherein I have with no little pains and diligence, given you a
most exact and faithful Account of all the Writs of Summons to Parliaments,
Great Councils, and most Convocations in England, extant in the Clause Rolls
and Records of the Tower, from the 5. year of King John, till the 23. of Edward
the 4th, that I have hitherto met with upon my best search after them, digested
into several Sections in a Chronological method, with useful Observations on
them; Wherein you have a compendious, yet full and satisfactory Account of all
the several Forms and Varieties of writs of Summons during all this tract of
time issued to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Masters of Religious
Orders, and all Spiritual Lords; to the Prince of Wales, Foreign Kings, Dukes,
Earls, Marquesses, Vicounts, Barons, Temporal Lords and Great men; to the Kings
Counsil, Judges and other Assistants to the House of Lords; the Sheriffs of
Counties, and particular Corporations made Counties, for electing Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses to serve in Parliament, and to the Constable of Dover
Castle, Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Ports themselves for electing Barons of
those Ports; with the particular Rolls, membranaes, dorses, wherein every of
these summons are recorded: Together with a general Account in gross summ^, how
many Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Great men, and Assistants of the
Kings Counsil were summoned to every of these Parliaments and Great Councils,
and 4 most useful, acurate, short Alphabetical and Chronological ^ables,
inserted into my Observations on the 3. first Sections of these Different
writs: 1. Of the Names of all the Abbots, Priors, Masters of Religious Orders,
and other Clergymen (except Bishops) summoned to any Parliament or Great
Council from 49 H. 3. till 23 E. 4. with the years, rolls, dorses in each Kings
reign, wherein you shall find them summoned, and how often any of them were
summoned, and consequently when omitted out of the lists of summons. 2ly. Of
the Names of all the Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, and Princes of Wales. 3ly. Of
all the Temporal Viscounts, Lords, Barons, Peers, and Great men. 4ly. Of all
the Kings Counsil, Judges, Justices, and other Great Officers summoned as
Assistants to the Lords, in every Parliament and Great Council held in England
from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. with the particular Roll, year, dorse in every Kings
reign, wherein you may find their names and summons entered, and when and how
often any of them or their posterity were thus summoned. Which Tables, as they
were very painful and troublesome to me exactly to collect, being enforced to
transcribe most of them three times over, before I could digest them into that
form as here you find them, consisting of very many figures (which I examined
near five times over, to prevent mistakes in any of them) so being thus
completed, will be the most useful and delightful Calendar to all
Antiquaries, Heralds, Law^ers, Noblemen, Gentlemen and others delighting in
Antiquities, or Pedegrees, ever yet communicated to the English Nation;
rectifying all those mistakes in names, and supplying those manifold defects in
my Table of this nature to the Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower.
If any Noblemen. Lawyers, Gentlemen, or others, would find out and know in a
moment, when or how often, or in what Roll and dorse any of their Ancestors,
Family, Name, were summoned to any Parliament or Great Council; or when or how
often any Abbot or Prior (whose lands they or their Clients now enjoy) were
summoned to Parliaments, or of what Order they were, these Tables, compared
with the printed Lists before them, will presently resolve them, better than
all the Tables and Kalendars to the Records in the Tower, which are very
defective, and if they have cause to make use of the Records upon any occasion,
these Tables will punctually direct them both to the Number Roll and Dorse too
wherein they are recorded, without further search: So as I may conclude them to
be greatly beneficial, as well to the Keepers of those Records, as to all those
who shall have future occasion to make use of them in any kind.

For the extraordinary writs of summons and others here published at large, I
dare averr, that most of the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, and Parliament men of
the English Nation* never so much as once saw, or heard of most of them before
this publication; and those few Antiquaries, Lawyers, Gentlemen, who have
gottenauy transcripts and Collections of the writs of summons in the Tower,
shall meet with many memorable rare writs in this Abridgement, which are
totally omitted out of their Folio Volumes, collected to their hands by others;
which I have here supplied by my own industry, and likewise digested into
method: all those large Coll^ctions of writs which I have yet seen, being both
defective, confused, fraught with a tedious repetition of those names of
Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, which I have contracted into four
short Tables in an orderly method. So as I may justly style this Register,
Calendar and Survey, a rich Cabinet, and Compendious Treasury of the chiefest,
and most precious Parliamentary Jewels, Rarities, Records, ever yet presented
to the world in print.

As for my Observations on, and Collections from these writs, I dare affirm
without vainglory, they are for the most part such, as were never yet known nor
communicated to the world; and will be of excellent use, not only for the
searching, but understanding of Records, and of the true constitution,
proceedings, Privileges, Affairs, Ends of the Great Councils and Parliaments of
England, and duties of their respective Members; wherein I have discovered,
refuted many oversights and mistakes in Sir Edward Cook, and other pretended
Antiquaries, who have written of our English Parliaments, and given clearer
evidences of the original, beginning, use of the name Parliament in England; of
the Authority, Power, use of the Kings Counsil, Judges in Parliaments; of the
Kings general writs of Summons to Temporal as well as Spiritual persons who
held not by Barony, not making themselves, nor their Successors, nor
posterities, Lords or Barons, and of sundry other material particulars,
relating to the Freedom, Fullness, Summons, Affairs and Proceedings of our
Parliaments, than any hitherto have done; out of an unfeigned desire of
communicating more knowledge to the present and succeeding Generations, touching
our Parliaments, and their affairs, than former times have been publicly
acquainted with, that thereby I might restore our Parliaments to their
primitive institution, use, splendour, freedom, Honor, that so the^ may be made
medicinal Restoratives, Blessing not Grievances, or Diseases to our (...)
Church and State, or (...)
Physicians of no value. We read of (...)
a woman in the Gospel, which had a^ issue of blood for 12 years, and had
suff^ed many things of many Physicians, and spent all that she had upon them,
even all her living, and yet was nothing better, but rather worse, and could
not be heated by any of them. This woman is a true Emble^ of England, ly^^g for
so many years, or more, si^k of a bloody issue under the hands of several
Physicians, under the Name and Disguise of Parliaments of several Forms and
Modells, who (with their armed supporters) have put her to infinite expenses,
sufferings, and exhausted all she has; and yet they have neither healed nor
amended her in any kind, but left her in a ^arr worse condition then they
found her, ^er. 30. 13.
for want of healing skill, or medicines; applying nothing but new corrosives and
causticks of steel, instead of astringents and incar^natives to her bleeding
wounds: yea those very Physicians are now so full of man^fold infirmities,
distempers, if not gross corruptions, that we may surely say unto them this
Proverb, Lu. 4. 23.
PHYSICIAN HEAL THY SELF, before we can possibly expect any public healing
from them either in Church or State. If these few leaves, through Gods blessing
on them, shall become Rev. 22. 2.
like to the leaves of the tree of life, for the healing of these Physicians,
and our Nations, (one prime end of their publication) I shall bless God for it,
and deem my cost and labor well bestowed; however this shall be my comfort;
Propertius p. 134.
In magnis et voluisse sat est: Pliny Praefatio in com. 1. Not. Hist.
Etiam non assecutis voluisse abunde pulchrum atque magnisicum est, in such a
case as this.

One chief means to make our future Parliaments beneficial, medicinal and
restorative to our Nation, is, to restore them to their ancient freedom, and
secure them and their Members from all future force and violence; which may be
easily effected, 1. 7 E. 1. Rastal, Armor 1.
By removing all armed Forces, and Soldiers a good distance from the places
where they shall be kept, and prohibiting them under severest penalties, not to
approach near unto them during their Sessions. 2ly. Cook 4. Instit. p. 14.
By defending the wearing of any offensive arms or weapons in or near the
Cities where the Parliaments convene. 3ly. By inhibiting all tumultuous popular
addresses to them, under color of Petitions or otherwise, and ordering, that
no Petitions or Addresses shall be tendered unto them from any County, City,
Corporation, or Fraternity upon any occasion by above 12. grave selected
persons at most, under pain of being questioned and proceeded against as
tumultuous. 4ly. By declaring and enacting all Persons whatsoever to be actual
Traitors, and Enemies to the Nation, (as they are by 4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 1.
21R. 2. c. 12. 31H. 6. c. 1. 3 ^ac. c. 1, 2. Exact Collection, p. 200. etc. A
Collection, P. 201, 202.
Law) and to be effectually proceeded against as such; who shall offer any
force, violence, assault to the Parliament, or any Member or Members thereof
during their attending therein, or in going to or returning from the same, or
violently interrupt their proceeding^. And that all who shall hereafter be
peccant in this kind, and 21 R. 2. c. ^.
their heirs males shall be for ever hereafter disabled to sit in Parliament,
or bear any Office whatsoever, Civil or military, or to purchase or re-ceive
any Lands, Chattels, Gift, Legacy or bequest whatsoever, or to enjoy the
privileges of an English Freeman.

My chief design in this and other late publications, has been to inform the
English Nation of the true Original constitution, uses, ends, Rights,
Privileges, Judicarure, and Proceedings of the Great Councils and Parliaments
held within our Island, from its original plantation by the Britons, till the
Normans ruling in it, which I have already published in a Brief In my Summary
Collections, etc. and Breviate,
Chr^nological manner, and from thence to the end of King Edward the 4th his
reign, which I have likewi^e in a good measure accomplished in my late enlarged
Plea for the Lords and House of Peers; wherein I have given the Readers a large
account of most of the Great Councils held under King Henry the 1. and 2.
proving, there were no Knights, Citizens or Burgesses summoned to them in their
reigns, as they have been of later times; which may be further evidenced by
these Historical Passages and Great Councils which I there omitted.

In the year of Christ 1109. in a Eadmerus Hist. Novor. l. 3. p. 67, 68.
Great Council of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, ET PRINCIPVM totius Regni,
there was this Canon made amongst others; Vt nullus Archidiaconus Presbyter,
Diaconus, Canonicus uxorem ducat, vel ductam retineat, etc. Vt Presbyter
quamdiu illicitam conversationem mulieris habuerit, non sit legalis, nec missam
celebret, nec si celebraverit, ejus miss a audiatur: After Anselms banishment
very many Priests reteining or resuming their wives contrary to these Decrees,
Eadmerus l. 4. p. 83, 84, 85.
King Henry the 1. thereupon caused his Ministers to indict, and prosecute many
Priests for this contempt, only to extort moneys from them: but their fines not
amounting to so great a sum as the King expected, there was a general Sentence
given against all the Priests, as well innocent as nocent, and a fine set upon
every Parish Church, which the Priest thereof was to redeem; which some Priests
having no money, and others refusing to pay, because it was an unjust
innovation, they were thereupon contumeliously seized upon by force, imprisoned
and tortured; and when near 200 of them in their Surplisses and Priests habits
came all together to the Kings place in London barefoot, imploring him with one
voice to take pity on them, Ille ad preces ^orum nulla miseratione permotus
est, vel saltem quavis eos, sicut homin^s omnis religionis expertes, responsi
honestate dignatus, suis obtutibus festine abegi praecepit: whereupon they
repaired to the Queen, who only wept in pity toward them, but could not
relieve them. Anselm upon the other Bishops Letter to him, writ an Epistle to
the King touching this proceeding of his, as an innovation, Quod hactenus
inauditum et inusitatum est in Ecclesia Dei de ullo Rege, et de aliquo
Principe. No^ enim pertinet secundum legem Dei hujusmodi culpam vindicare ^isi
ad singulos Episcopos per suas parochias, ^ut si and ipsi Episcopi in hoc
negligentes fuerint, ad Archiepiscopum and Primatem, etc. Adding, Dico enim
vobis quod valde timere debetis, quod pecunia taliter accepta, ut taceam
quantum noceat animae, non tamen cum expendetur, adjuvabit terrena negoti^,
quantum postea perturbabit. To which the King returned this answer.

Eadmeru^ ^. 4. p. 86.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, Anselmo Archiepiscopo Cantuariae salutem. In
die Sancti Gregorii apud Tunebrigge, mihi fuerunt delatae literae repostae sub
tuo sigillo. Et per ^a mihi mandasti talia unde multum miror, quia quod feci
credo me per te fecisse. Et in die Ascensionis Domini HABEBO OMNES BARONS MEOS
(without Knights, Citizens or Burgesses) MECUM CONGREGATOS, and PER CONSILIUM
EORUM ita convenienter tibi respondebo quod cum tecum loquar non credo te me
inde blasphematurum. Et quicquid fiat alias, scito quod tui, quicquid ipsi
fecerint, per omnes terras tuas in pace permanserint.

Hoveden, Annal. pars p^sterior, p. 56^, 567.
Anno Gratiae ^172. King Henry the 2d. Venit OXENFORD, and IN GENERALI CONCILIO
ibidem celebrato CONSTITUIT Iohannem filium suum REGEM IN HYBERNIA, concessione
and confirmatione Alexandri summi pontificis. Et in eodem Concilio venerunt ad
Regem Resus filius Griphini regulus de Su^hwales, and David fil^s O^ain regulus
de Northwales; qui sororem ejusdem regis Angliae in uxorem duxerat, and
Cadwelanus regulus de Delnain, and Owanus de Keuillian, and G^iffinus de
Brunfeld, and Madacus ^ilius Gervetrog: and alii multi de nobilioribus
Gualliae, et omnes devenerunt homines regis Angliae patris, and fidelitatem ei
contra omnes homines, and pacem sibi and regno suo servandam juraverunt. In
eodem autem Concilio dedit dominu^ Rex Angliae praedicto Reso filio Grifsini
terram de Meronith: and David filio Owain terram de Ellesmare. Deditque dominus
^ex Hugoni de Lasci (ut supradictum est) in Hybernia totam Midam cum
pertinentiis suis pro servitio 100. militum, tenendam de ipso et Iohanne filio
suo, and chartam suam ei inde fecit. Deditque ibidem Roberto filio Stephani and
Miloni de Cogham regnum de Co^ch, pro servitio 60. militum, tenendum de ipso et
Iohanne filio suo, excepta civitate de Corch, cum uno cantredo, quae dominus
rex sibi et haeredibus suis retinuit. Deditque ibidem Hereberto filio
Hereberti, et Willielmo fratri Comitis Reginaldi, and Iollano de la Primerai
nepoti eorum regnum de Limeric, pro servitio 60. militum, tenendum de ipso et
Iohanne filio suo: excepta civitate de Limeric, cum uno cantredo, quae dominus
sibi et haeredibus suis retinuit. Trad^dit autem dominus rex Willielmo filio
Aldelini dapifero suo civitatem Wesesordiae in custodia, cum omn^bus
pertinentiis suis; and statuit haec subscripta in posterum pertinenda ad
servicium Wesefordiae: Harkelou cum pertinentiis suis, Glascarric cum
pertinentiis suis; and terram Gilberti de Boisrohard, Ferneg Winal cum
pertinentiis suis, Fernes cum pertinentiis suis: and totam terram de Hervei
inter Weseforde and aquam de Water^orde. Servitium Raimundi de Druna. Servitium
de Frodrevelan. Servitium Vimo^thi de Leighlerin. Tenementum etiam Machtaloe
cum pertinentiis suis. Et Leis terram Gaufridi de Costentin cum pertinentiis
suis: and totam terram Orueldi. Tradidit etiam ibidem dominus rex Roberto le
Poer marescallo suo in custodia civitatem Water^ordiae: cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis: et statuit haec subscripta in posterum pertinenda ad
servitium Waterfordiae: totam terram quae est inter Waterforde and aquam quae
est ultra Lismors, and totam terram de Oiseric cum pertinentiis suis. Tradidit
etiam ibidem dominus rex Hugoni de Laci civitatem Diveliniae cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis in custodia: and sta^it haec subscripta in posterum
pertinenda ad Servitium Diveliniae; totam terram de Offelana cum pertinentiis
suis, and Kildaran cum pertinentiis suis, and totam terram de Offalaia, cum
pertinentiis suis, and Wikechelon cum pertinentiis suis, and servitium de Mida,
and servitium quatuor militum, quod Robe^tus Poer debet de castello suo de
Dunaver. Postquam autem dominus rex apud Oxeneford in praedicto modo terras
Hyberniae, et earum servitia divisisset, secit omnes quibus earun^emcustodias
commis^rat homines suos and Iohannis silii sui devenire: et jurare e^s
ligantias et fidelitates de terris Hyberniae. Et ie^de m Concilio dedit dominus
rex Richardo Priori de Kiteby abbatiam de Witebi. Et Benedicto Priori Ecclesiae
sanctae Trinitatis Cantuariae, abbatiam de Burgo, and Richardus Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopus benedixit cum in abbatem. Eodem anno praedictus Vivianus
Presbyter Cardinalis and Apostolicae sedis legatus, peracta legatione sua in
Hyb^rnia, rediit in Angliam, and per conductum domini r^gis rediit in Scotiam,
and celebrato Concilio apu^ castellum puellarum, susspendit a pontificali
officio Christianum Episcopum Candidae casae, quia ad Concilium suum venire
noluit; sed Episc. suspensionem illam non tenuit, septus munimine Rogeri
Eboracensis Archiepise. cujus suffraganeus ipse erat. Deinde venit dominus Rex
usque Merleberge: ubi Rex dedit Philippo de Brensa totum regnum de Limeric pro
servitio sexaginta mili^um, tenendum de ipso and de Iohanne filio suo. Nam
Herebertus and Willielmus fratres Reginaldi Comi^is Cornubiae, and Ioslanus de
la Pumerai nepos eorum, regnum illud habere noluerunt, eo quod nondum
perquisitum erat: nam occiso a regalibus rege Monodero, qui Rex erat de
Limeric, and homo regis Angliae inde suerat, quidam de progeny illius, vir
potens et fortis, regnum de Limeric invasit, cepit, et potenter rexit, nullam
subjectionem faciens Regi Angliae, nec suis obedire voluit propter
infidelitatem eorum, and mala quae faciebant populo Hyberniae sine merito. Rex
vero Corcensis and alii multi divites Hyberniae insurrexerunt in Regem Angliae,
and suos: and erant novissima eorum pejora prioribus, and se mutuo
interfecerunt.

By which president it is evident; that King Henry by the advice of his Great
Council of Prelates and Nobles of and in England, disposed both of the
Kingdoms, Crowns and Lands in Ireland to his Son, and other subjects of
England. The same King R^d^lph. de Diceto, Ymagines Histor. col. 613.
Henry the 2. Anno Dom. 1182. aetatis annum inchoans quadragesimum nonum, dum
mentis et corporis incolumitate vigeret, dum regnum suum undique tranquillae
pacis commoditatibus frueretur, apud Waltham Episcopi Winton, REGNI CONVOCAVIT
MAJORES. Itaque pr^^sentibus illis et approbantibus quandam pecuniae partem in
causas pias procurans, Qua^raginta siquidem duo mili^a marcorum argenti,
quingentas marcas auri distribuit, etc. After this Hov^ Anna. (...) P 6^8, 629.
Pope Lucius An. 1185. sending a Letter to King Henry the 2d. to take the Cross
upon him and succor the holy Land, by the P^triarch and Master of the Hospital
of Jerusalem, who presented it to him, together with the toy. al banner, and
Keys of the Lords Scpulcher, and of the Tower of David, and City of Jerusalem,
on the behalf of the King and Princes of the Land, importuning his answer to
their requests: Domi^us Rex statuit eis terminum suae responsionis primam
Dominicam Quadragesimae apud Londonias. Ad quam Dominicam, Dominus Rex and
Patriarcha et Episcopi, et Abbates, et COMITES et BARONS ANGLIAE (but no
Knights, Citizens or Burgesses thereof, and Willielm. REX SCOTIAE, and David
frater ejus, CUM COMITIBUS ET BARONIBUS TERRAE SUAE (...) Londoniis: et habito
inde cum deliberatione consslio, PLACUIT VNIVERSIS, quod Dominus Rex consuleret
inde Dominum suum Philippum Regem Franciae: et sic soluto CONCILIO, Dominus Rex
dedit universis hominibus suis, tam Clericis quam Lacis, licentiam capiendi
crucem. Unde factum est quod Baldwinus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, et
Ranulphus Iusticiarius Angliae, and Walterus Rothomagensis Archiepiscopus, et
Hugo Dunelmensis Episcopus, et alii quamplures Episcopi transmarini et
cismarini: et fere omnes Comites et Barons et Milites Angliae, and Normanniae,
and Aquitaniae, and Britanniae, and Andegaviae, and Cenomanniae and Turoniae
Crucem ceperunt. Deinde Dominus Rex venit usque Windleshoures et ibi in
Dominica ubi cantatur, Laetare Jerusal^m, fecit Johannem silium suum militem,
and statim misit eum in Hyberniam, and INDE EVM REGEM CONSTITVIT.

To pretermit the Parliamentary Councils under King^ Richard the 1. of which I
have given you some account in my Plea ^or the Lords, p. 234. to 242. I shall
proceed to those in the beginning of King John's reign.

In the 1. year of King John Anno Dom. 1199. there was a Great Council of the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords and Barons summoned to his Coronation, thus
related by Flores H^st. pa^s 2. Anno 1199. p.
Matthew Westminster, though there be no writs of Summons thereunto extant on
record; Dux Normanniae Johannes in vigilia Ascensionis Domini London venit, ibi
CONGREGATIS ANGLIAE NOBILIBVS, ab H^b^rto Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo coronatus
est, die^ Ascensionis Domini; which Annalium pars posterior Ann. 119. p. 793.
Roger de Hov^den thus relates, Congregatis igitnr apud Lundonias in advent^
praedicti ducis Huberto Cantuariensi, Johanne Dublinensi, et de Raguse
Archiepiscopus, Willielmo Lundoniensi, Gilberto Roffensi, Johanne Norwicensi,
Hugone Lincolnensi, Eustachio Eliensi, Godfrido Wintoniensi, Henrico Exoniensi,
Sefrido Cicestrensi, Gau^rido Coventrensi, Savarico Bathoniensi, Hereberto
Salesburiensi, Philippo Dunelmensi, Rogero de sancto Andrea in Scotia, Henrico
de Landas Episcopis, Roberto de Leicestre, Richardo de Clare, Willielmo de
Tutesburie, Hamelino de Warenne, Willielmo de Salisbirie, Willielmo de
Striguil, Walranno de Warewic, Rogero Bigot, Willielmo de Arundel, Ranulfo de
Cestre Comitibus, and Baronibus multis: Hubertus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus
coronoavit, et consecravit in regem Angliae prefatum Johannem ducem Normanniae,
in Ecclesia sancti Petri Apostoli Westminstriae, sexto Calen^. Iunii, feria 5.
die Ascensionis Domini; Philippo Dunelmensi Episcopo appellante, ne coronatio
illa fieret in absentia Gaufridi Eboracensis Archiepiscopi, totius Angliae
Primatis. H^st. A^g p. 1^9. 1^0.
Matthew Paris thus records the manner of his Coronation more fully.
CONGREGATIS ita que in adventu ejus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus et
Baronibus atque aliis omnibus, qui ejus coronationi interesse debuerant,
Archiepiscopus staus in medio omnium, dixit; Audite universi. Noverit discretio
vestra, quod nullus praevia ratione alii succedere habet regnum, nisi ab
universitate Regni unanimiter, invocata Spiritus gratia electus, and secundum
morum suorum eminentiam praeelectus, ad exemplum et similitudinem Saul primi
Regis inuncti, quem praeposuit Dominus populo suo, non Regis filium, nec de
Regali stirpe procreatum. Similiter post eum David Sem ei filium: hunc quia
strenuum et aptum dignitati regiae, illum quia sanctum et humilem, ut sic qui
cunctos in regno supereminet strenuitate, omnibus praesit et potestate et
regimine. Verum si quis ex stirpe Regis defuncti aliis praepolleret, pronius et
promptius in electionem ejus est consentiendum. Haec idcirco diximus pro
inclyto Comite Iohanne, qui praesens est, frater illustrissimi Regis nostri
Richardi jam defuncti, qui haerede caruit ab eo egrediente, qui providus et
strenuus and manifest nobilis, qnem nos, invocata Spiritus sanctigratia,
ratione tam meritorum quam sanguinis Regii unanimiter elegimus universi. Erat
autem Archiepiscopus vir prosundi pectoris, et in regno singularis columna
stabilicatis et sapientiae incomparabilis. Nec ausi erant alii super his adhuc
ambigere; scientes quod sine causa hoc non sic diffiniverat. Verum Comes
Johannes et omnes hoc acceptaban^, ipsumque Comitem in Regem eligentes et
assumentes, exclamant dicentes: Vivat rex. Interrogatus autem postea
Archiepiscopus Hubertus, quare haec dixisset? respondit se praesaga mente
conjecturare, et quibusdam oraculis edoctum and certificatum fuisse, quod ipse
Johannes Regnum and Coronam Angliae foret aliquando corrupturus, and in magnam
confusionem precipitaturus. Et ne haberet liberas habenas hoc faciendi, ipsum
electione non successione haereditaria, eligi debere affirmabat. Archiepiscopus
autem imponens capiti ejus coronam, unxit eum in regem ap^d Westmor a^t^rium,
sc. in Ecclesia principis Apostolorum, Dominicae ascensionis die, sexto
kalendas Junii, Philippo Dunelmensi Episcopo appellante, sed non obtinen^e, ne
coronatio illa fieret in absentia G. Archiepiscopi Eboracensis. In hac
coronatione Rex Johannes triplici involutus est sacramento: Quod videlicet
sanctam Ecclesiam et ejus ordinatos diligeret, et eam ab incursione
malignantium indemnem conservaret: et quod perversis legibus destructis, bonas
substitueret, et rectam justitiam in regno Angliae exerceret. Deinde adjuratus
est ab eodem Archiepisc opo ex part Dei, et districte prohibitus, ne honorem
hunc accipere praesumeret, nisi in mente habeat opere, quod juraverat,
adimplere. Ad hoc ille respondens, promisit se per auxilium Dei, bona fide, ea
quae juraverat, servaturum. In crastino autem, homagiis et fidelitatibus
acceptis, beatum Albanum Protomartyrem Angliae, orationis gratia, devotus
petivit. Et sic brevissimam in Anglia moram faciens, ea quae statuenda erant in
regno, cum consilio Magnatum rite peregit.

In the 2. year of (d) King John, Anno 1200. Hub^rt Archbishop of Canterbury
and Chancellor of England, Generale celebravit Concilium Londini apud Westmona
sterium, contra prohibitionem Gawfridi silii Petri, Comitis Essex, tunc
temporis summi Iusticiarij Angl^ae; In which many Laws and Canons were made
touching Ecclesiastical persons and businesses, recorded at large in Annal.
pars post^rior P. 806. to 810.
Roger de Hoveden. And in the same year the same Page ^803.
Author writes, the long su^e between William de Stutevil, and William de
Moubray, touching the Barony of Moubray, was compremised and ended by an
agreement made between them CONSILIO REGNI, and VOLVNTATE REGIS. In which
Council of the Realm, it is most probable, Statuta quaedam Johannis Regis,
concerning the prises of Wine, registered by Ibid. p. 795, 796.
Hoveden, were made. Sed hoc PRIMUM Regis STATUTUM vix inchoatum, statim est
adnihilatum, quiae Mercatores hanc Assisam sustinere non poterunt, and data est
eis licentia vendendi sextertium de vino albo pro octo denariis, and vini rubri
pro sex denariis, and sic repleta est terra potu, and potatoribus. The Writs of
Summons for these two General Councils of the Church and Realm this year, are
not found extant on record.

The Patent Roll in the 5 of Pat. 5. Johan Regis m. 1. n. 3. Seldens Title of
Honor p. 707.
King John, makes mention of an Assise of Beer and Wine, made per Commune
Consilium Baronum nostrorum, held the year before at Winchester.

Rex, etc. sciatis, Nos Communi Cons^lio Baronum nostrorum constituisse, Quod
albus panis factus in Civitate nostra Winton. fit ponderis 3 c Sol. etc. Et
unusquisque Pistor sigillum suum pani suo apponat, etc. Et volumus et firmiter
praecipimus, quod haec constitutio firmiter teneatur. Facta est autem haec
constitutio ad Pascham proximam post obitum Alienorae Reginae matris nostrae,
anno regni nostri quinto, Test G. fill. Petri Com. Essex. apud Freitemnel 15
die Aprilis.

This Ordinance for the Assise of Bread, with the Proclamation and proceedings
thereupon, is more at large recorded in Matthew Paris Hist. Angl. Anno 1262,
Editione Tyguri 1589. p. 200. where you may peruse it at leisure.

In the 5th. year of his reign (as ^ist. Ang. p. 204.
Met. Paris relates) Rex Johannes in COMITES and BARONS occasiones
praetendens, quod ipsuminter hosts reliquerant in partibus transmarinis, unde
Castella, and terras suas pro eorum defectu amiserat, caepit ab eis septimam
partem omnium mobilium suorum (by grant, as I conceive in a Parliamentary
Council) nec etiam ab hac rapina in Ecclesiis conuentualibns manus coercuit
violentas. Yet I find no Writ of Summons to this Council in the Rolls of this
year.

In the 6 year of his reign, Mat. Paris, p. 201. Man. Westminster. p. 83.
An. 1204. In crastino circumcisionis venerunt ad Colloquium apud Oxoniam Rex
and MAGNATES Angliae, ubi concessa sunt Regi auxilia militaria de quolibet
scuto, scilcet duae marcae and dimidia. Nec etiam Episcopi and Abbates, sive
Ecclesiasticae personae, sine promiss one recesserunt.

In the 8 year of his Regality, as Mat. Paris p. 204. M^t. Westminster. p. 83.
King John celebrated the day of our Saviors Na^ivity at Oxford; So it appears
he likewise held a Parliamentary Council there, which granted him an aid toward
the recovery of his lands in France, and defense of the Realm of England, by
these two Records that year.

Claus. 8. Johan. Regis dors. 2. Rex Justice. auxilii assidendi and Vic. Berks
salutem: Sciatis quod Abbas de Abbendon finivit nobiscum pro sexties cent. mar.
pro habenda quietantia de dominicis feodis and hominibus omnibus tenentibus
suis in Balliva vestra de anxilio Nobis proviso PER CONCILIUM NOSTRUM OXON: et
ideo vobis mandamus quod ipse inde quietus sit. Et si quid inde per Nos
inc^oatum suerit, penitus relax. Tu autem Vic. videas quod securus sis quod
habeamus unam medietatem finis illius ad proximum clausum Pasche: Et aliam
medi^tatem ad ptoximum festum Sancti Iohannis Baptistae. Alioquin capietur de
firma tua. Et Justitiariis mandatum est and libere tenentibus suis in ballivia
tua quod faciant ei praedictum auxilium. Et si quid inde cepisti, id ei sine
dilatione reddi fac. T.

Pat. 8. Johan. Rs. m. 1. Rex Archidiacon^, Officiali and toti Clero
Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. Salutem. Notum satis, quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Abbates, Priores, and Magnates regni nostri auxilium Nobis fecerunt ad
defensionem regni nostri and recuperationem terrarum nostrarum. Verum quia de
vobis confidimns, quod Nos and ^onorem nostrum diligitis, and defensionem regni
nostri, and recuperationem terrarum nostrarum affectatis, vos rogamus
attentius, quatenus tale axilium Nobis exemplo accepto ex part vestra
faciatis, ut inde vobis gratias dare debeamus: Et quod alii Rectores
Ecclesiarum intuitu vestri ad auxilium Nobis faciendum exempio vestro facilius
inuitentur: ^t quantitat^m auxilii quod nobis quilibet ipsorum sac^re voluer
it, quilibet vestrum seperatim faciat. Ita quod per ipsos in octabis Sanctae
circumcisionis inde possimus testificari. Test me ipso apud Ebor. 26. die Maii.

This same year the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Archdeacons, and Clergy of
England by command from Pope Innocent, without the Kings Writ or consent, were
called to, and resolved to hold a Council at Saint Albans, to pay Romescot in
an unusual manner, and many other unaccustomed exactions, to the great
prejudice of the Kingdom, and oppression of the people; whereupon the King upon
the general complaint of the universality of the Earls, Barons, Knights, and
other Subjects against those exactions and this Council, issued forth this
memorable Writ and Prohibirion, in preservation of the rights of the Crown,
Kingdom, People, against this Papal usurpation and innovation.

Pat. 8. Johan. Rs. m. 1. Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Archidiaconis, and omni clero apud Sanctum Albanum AD CONCILIVM convocato
salutem. Conquerente universitate Comitum Baronum, Militum, and
aliorum-fidelium nostrorum, audivimus, quod non solum in lai^orum grave
praejudicium, sed etiam in totius Regni nostri intolerabile dispendium, super
Romescotto praeter consuetudinem soluendo, and aliis pluribus inconsuetis
exac^ionibus, Autoritate summi Pontisicis CONCILIUM inire, and CONCILIUM
celebrare decrevistis. Nos vero licet ob honorem sidie nostrae and debitum
reverentiae quod sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae impendere tenemur, voluntatem sancti
Patris vestri Domini Papae Innocentiae obtemperare cupimus, tamen omittere non
possumus quin quaerelis fidelium and subditorum nostrorum clamantium de jactura
sua and timentium, prout necesse est, sibi subveniamus, and ^mergentib^scausis
quae indempnitati pacis and unitati regni nostri obviare possunt, quanta decet
celeritate and diligentia occurramus. Vobis igitur praecise mandamus and
express prohibemus, ne super praedictis vel aliquibus aliis CONCILIUM ALIQUOD
anthoritate aliqua in fide qua nobis tenemini teneatis, vel contra regni nostri
consuetudinem aliquod novum statuatis, et sicut Nos and honorem nostrum, and
communem regni tranquillitatem diligitis a celebratione hujusmodi CONCILII and
a praedictis taxationibus ad praesens supersedeatis, quousque cum universitate
nostra super hoc COLLOQUIUM habuerimus. Scientes per certo, quod expediet
honori sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae and domino Papae and Nobis and Vobis quod
istud ad praesens negotium differatur, donec generalem habuimus conferrentiam
commodius and honestius explicari. Et quod vobis hoc mandamus pro honor, and
commodo sacrosanctae Ecclesiae, and vestri and regni nostri id fecimus: Quia
talia audivimus quod hoc ita fieri necessario expedit, sicut vobis dicemus cum
vobiscum locuti fuerimus. Test me ipso apud Ebor. 26. die Maii.

Now because all Elections of Knights of Shiers, are and ought to be made in
the next 7. H. 4. c. 15. 8. H. 4. Rot. Pa^l. 83. 139.
County Court after the Writs for Elections come to the Sheriffs hands; I shall
add this memorable exposition of the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 35. made by
the King and greater part of the Bishops, Earls, and Barons of the Realm
without the Commons, touching the holding of Hundred Courts, Wapentakes, and
Court Leets, omitted by Sir Edward Cook in his Commentary thereon, which it
better explains than his Annotations upon it.

Claus. 18. H. 3. m. 10. Rex Vic. Linc. salutem. Quia audivimus quod tu and
Ballivi tui, and Ballivi aliorum qui Hundredum habent in Comitatu tuo, non
intelligitis qualiter Hundreda and Wapentake teneri debeant in Com. tuo,
postquam concessimus omnibus de Regno nostro Libertates in cartis nostris quas
indo fecimus, dum f^imus infra aetatem. Nos eandem Ca^^am nuper legi fecimus in
praesentia Dom. CANIUAR. ARCHIEP. and MAJORIS and SANIORIS PARTIS OMNIUM
EPISCOPORUM, COMITUM ET BARONUM TO TIUS REGNI NOSTRI, UT CORAM EIS ET PER EOS
EXPONERETUR haec clausula contenta in Mag Carta c. 35.
Carta nostra de Libertatibus, viz. Quod nullus Vicecomes vel Ballivus faciat
Turnum suum per Hundredum, nisi ^is in anno, and non nisi loco debito and
consueto; viz. semel post Pascham, and iterum post festum sancti Michaelis. Ita
scilicet quod qui libet habeat ^ibertates suas quas habuit and habere consuevit
tempore H. Regis avi nostri, vel quas postea perquisivit. Unde a multis ibi
dictum suit, quod t^^pore H. Regis avi nostri tam Hundreda et Wapentac, quam
curi^^ Magnatum Angliae solebant teneri de Quindena in Quindenam; Et licet
multum placeret communi utilitati totius regni and indempnitati pauperum
providere, quia tamen illi duo Turnii plene non sufficient ad pacem regni
nostri conservandam, and ad excessus tam divitibus quam pauperibus illatis
corrigendos quae ad Hundredum pertinent, De COMMVNI CONSILIO praedict. Dom.
CANTUAR. and OMNIUM praedict. EPISCOPORUM COMITUM, ET BARONUM, ET ALIORUM, ITA
PROVISUM EST. Quod inter praedictos duos Turnos teneantur Hundredum and
Wapentakia, and etiam curiae Magnatum de Tribus septimanis in Tres septimanas,
ubi prius teneri solent de Quindena in Quindenam. Ita tamen, quod ad illa
Hundred a and VVapentakia and Curias non fiat generalis summonitio, si^ut ad
Turnos praedictos; set ad hujusmodi illa VVapentakia and Curias convenient
conquerentes and adversarii sui, and illi qui sectas debent, per quos teneantur
placita and fiant judicia, nisi ita sit quod ad Hundreda illa and VVapentakia
fieri debeat Inquisitio de placitis Coronae, sicut de morte hominis, Thesauro
invento, and hujusmodi: ad quae inquirenda conveniant cum praedictis sectariis
quatuor villatae proximae; scilicet omnes de illis villis qui necessarii
fuerint ad Inquisitiones illas faciendas. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod
praedicta Hundreda VVapentakia and Curias tam Nostras quam aliorum teneri
facias de cetero secundum quod praedictum e^t de tribus sepeimanis in tres
septimanas, exceptis praedictis duobus Turnit, qui de caetero teneantur
secundum quod prius teneri solebant. T. R. apud Westminster. 11. Octobris.

I shall only add this one Record more, proving, that matters concerning
Truces, were resolved by King H. 3. the Spiritual and Temporal Lords in
Parliamentary Councils, without any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses.

Claus. 19. H. 3. m. 20. Rex Roberto de Langeton, Archidiacono Cant. and Abbati
de sancta Radegunda, salute^, Super sollicitudine and diligentia laudabili
simul and laboribus sumptuosis quas circa negotium nostrum expediendum quod
vobis injunximus apposuistis, urrique vestrum copiosas referrimus gratiarum
actiones, vobis quidem magister S. praecipuas and speciales, utpote ei cujus
fidelitatem and prudentiam plurimum commendamus. Sciatis autem quod CONGREGATIS
apud VVestmon. in octabis sancti Hillarii vener: patribus G. Cantuar
Archiepiscopo, EPISCOPIS, COMITIBUS, ET ALIIS FIDELIBUS NOSTRIS. (to wit, the
Barons and Great men, not Commons, as the subsequent clause attests.) Post
diligentem tractatum habitum CUM IPSIS DE NEGOTIO TREVGARVM inter Nos and Regem
Franciae and aliis agendis nostris, visum fuit iisdem fidelibus nostris, quod
nullo modo sine verecundia and opprobrio nostris Insulam de Olerone (...)
potuimus Comiti Marchiae pro co^sensu suo adhibendo ad treugas inter nos
ineundas, nec in co consilium Nobis praestare vel consentire voluerint. Sic
enim praeter verecundiam quam inde consequeremus ab omnibus quibus factum
nostrum innotesceret teneremur et pro remissis, et minus valentibus haberemur,
et etiam pessimum and perniciosum exemplum aliis qui in casu consimili ad
similia petenda per hoc moverentur. Vnde si per d^centas libras annuas Treugis
durantibus ad consensum Treugarum possit^idem Comes induci pro Insula praedicta
sicut alias locutum suit, been placeret tam Nobis quam praedictis MAGNATIBVS
NOSTRIS; et ad hoc laborare velitis, quia priori conditioni consentire non
esset honestum, vel expediens, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 27. Januarii.

I shall trouble you with no more Presidents or Records of this nature, by way
of Preface to this first part of my Register, Calendar and Survey of
Parliamentary Writs: In which I have presented you only with the several Writs
of Summons directed to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, and Kings Counsil
(their ordinary Assistants) intermixed with some other Writs, and several forms
of Procurations, in my Observations on them; which relate wholly, or
principally to the House of Lords, Convocations, and Clergy, amounting to a
just vendible Volume. The several forms, varieties of Writs issued to Sheriffs
of Counties, Wardens, or Officers of the Cinque Ports, Dukes of Lancaster,
their Lieutenants, or Chancellors, and Sheriffs of particular Cities, Towns,
Boroughs ^made Counties within ^emselves) for electing Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Barons of the Ports (peculiar to the House of Commons) with all
sorts of Writs for proroguing, continuing, adjourning Parliaments, or
superseding them after summons to them upon extraordinary occasions, (relating
equally to both Houses of Parliament, and their Members) together with some
special Writs of Summons to the Kings, Prelates, Nobles, Barons, Great
Officers, and others of the Realms, Lands of Scotland and Ireland, to appear
in, at, or before the Parliaments, Great Councils, Kings, or Privy Counsil in
England, concerning the affairs, or defense of Scotland and Ireland only: as
likewise to particular Merchants, Masters of Ships, Forresters, Lawyers,
learned men of both Universities, and other Persons upon special occasions, to
attend the Parliament, King, Counsil; with my particular Observations on them,
(which I at first intended to have published in this Piece) I shall (if God
send health, life, opportunity, and encouragement by a grateful acceptance of
these First Fruits) with all convenient speed, communicate to the World in A
Second Part. After which, I shall in two or more distinct Volumes, present unto
public view several other kinds of Writs, relating to the Parliaments, Great
Councils, Convocations and Clergy of England, to all sorts of proceedings in
them, Criminal, or Civil; the assessing, levying of the expenses of Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament: of Dismes, Quidismes, Aids, Subsidies,
Customs, Imposts, granted by them; with the disposing, releasing of them; the
defense of the Realm by Land or Sea in times of danger; the proclaming,
observing of the Great Charters, Laws, and Liberties of England; and of Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament newly enacted; with sundry other Rarities, which
all former Writers of our English Parliaments have either totally omitted, or
but briefly touched, and that very slightly; though of excellent use, and most
necessary to be insisted on, for the information of their Readers, and benefit
of Posterity.

Not to detain you with any longer Preface, I shall now leave you to the
perusal of this First Part, distinct from those Parts I intend shall follow it;
if embraced with that respect, affection, and desire as it may justly expect
and hope for from the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, Antiquaries and Heralds of the
English nation. But if slighted, vilified, neglected, like old Almanacks or
fashions grown quite out of use and request (though mere Novelties in their
discovery and communication to the world, hitherto unacquainted with them) I
shall then resolve to cast no more such precious ancient Mat. 7. 6.
Pearls and Rarities before swine; who will neglect and trample them under their
feet; but reserve them for my own private Cabinet, use, ornament, benefit,
delight, and such learned Friends to whom I shall hereafter bequeath them, who
will estimate them according to their true intrinsecal worth, and prefer them
before the most orient Pearls and Diamonds, which are only for show, when as
these are of greatest public use, and will be so esteemed in future
generations, how much soever slighted by the Athenians of this age, who like
the old ones, Acts 17. 20, 21. spend their ti^e in nothing else but to tell or
hear some new thing; preferring new Gloworms, Ignes fatui, and Prodigious
Comets, shining only in the night, before the Sun, Moon, and fixed Planets,
which ten thousand times outshine, transcend them both in splendour, magnitude,
use, excellency, and public benefit. It is Ad herenicum: p. 21.
Cicero his observation of old, Solis exortus, cursus, occasus nemo admiratur
propterea quod quotidie ^iunt; at ^cclypses solis mirantur, quia raro accidunt.
Nulla nisi rara aut admirabili re commovetur animus. Which Natural. quaest. l.
7. p. 933.
Seneca thus seconds, Ita co^positi sumus, ut nos quotidiana, etiam si
admiratione digna sunt, transeant: contra, minimarum quoque rerum, si insolitae
prodierunt, spectaculum dulce fiat. Hic quoque caetus astrorum, quibus immensi
corporis pulchritudo distringuitur, populum non convocat, sed cum aliquid ex
more mutatum est, omnium vultus in coelo est. Nemo observat lunam nisi
laborantem. Tunc urbes clamant, tunc pro se superstitione vana trepidant.
Quanta illa majora sunt, quod Sol totidem gradus quotidie habet and annum suo
circuitu claudit; quod a solstitio diem inclinat, and noctibus spacium dat,
quod sydera abscondit, quod terras cum tanto major sit illis, non urit, sed
calorem suum intentionibus and remissionibus temperando fovet; quod lunam
nunquam implet, nisi adversam sibi, nec obscurat; haec tamen non annotamus
quamdiu ordo servatur. Si quid turbatum est, aut praeter consuetudinem emicuit,
spectamus, interrogamus, ostendimus. Idem in comae: is fit, etc. Adeo natural
est, nova, magis qua^ magna mirari: which. is in truth both the sin and folly of
our present fantastic childish age, affecting, studying, delighting, admiring
nothing but Novelties, as well in Theology, all kinds of Arts, Sciences,
public Government, and Parliaments themselves, as ^^ell as Fashions or
Apparel, though never so prodigious, Heterodox, ridiculous or destructive. But
however vertiginous Scepticks, and fantastic Gallants having more hair than
brains, are wholly enamored, infatuated with New-Nothings, yet all judicious
Christians, Lawyers, Statesmen, (with holy and prudent King Psalm. 77. 5.
David (a man after Gods own heart) will consider the days of old, the years
of ancient times: And according to Gods own precept, Jer. 6. 16.
stand in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way,
and walk therein, that they may find ease for their souls: Concluding with holy
Job* Job 12. 12.
with the ancient is wisdom and understanding: And with our Saviors own
resolution, wherewith I shall close up this Epistle, Luke 5. 39.
No man having drunk old wine, straitway desires new; for he says, THE OLD IS
BETTER. Which is the experimental resolution of.

Your unfeined Friend and Servant, as well in relation to private as public
good, WILL. PRYNNE.
From my Study in Lincolns Inn, Ian. 26. 1658/1659.
A Brief Register, Calendar, and Survey of the several kinds of all
Parliamentary Writs; with useful Observations on them.
THat all Great Councils of State, Parliaments, Synods, Convocations held in
England, under the British, Saxon, Danish, Norman, English Kings successively
reigning therein, were summoned by their Royal Writs, precepts, and held by
their Authority alone, is a Truth irrefragable, which I have Antiquity
triumphing over Novelty, p. 8. to 109. The 2, and 3. Part of a Seasonable,
Historical and Legal Vindication, etc. my Plea for the Lords, and House of
Peers. A Breviate of the ancient Great Councils and Parliaments of England.
elsewhere abundantly evidenced by Histories and Records, though all the Writs
whereby they were summoned till the reign of King John, be no where extant,
being consumed by the all-devouring jaws of time. The Writs of Summons to
Parliaments and Great Councils of State, being the Corner-stones whereon they
are founded, and best discovering the causes, ends for which they were
summoned; instead of that Folio Register of them at large which I once intended
to have published, I shall present you only with a Brief Register and Calendar
of some of the antientest and rarest of them, full of excellent variety and
delight; and such Observations on and from them, as may best instruct the
Readers, rectify the mistakes of some pretended Antiquartes who have written of
our English Parliaments, writs of summons to them, and supply their defects,
especially concerning the several forms and various kinds of Parliamentary
writs, which they have rather touched than handled, being all very maimed and
incomplete in this particular.

To avoid Confusion, I shall Marshall these Writs into several Squadrons,
according to the quality of the persons to whom they were directed, and that in
a Chronological Series, digesting them into distinct Sections, beginning with
those issued out to our Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual
Lords or Barons of the Realm.

SECTION I.
Concerning Writs of Summons to Parliaments, Great Councils, Convocations,
issued out to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclestastical
Barons of the Realm, who were Peers and Members of our Parliaments.
King John, running in this Form of words.

Claus. An. 6. Johann. Rs. m. 3^ dorso. Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Book 2.
chapter 5.. 20. p. 708.
Mandamus vobis Rogantes quatenus omni occasion and dilatione postposita,
sicut nos and honorem nostrum diligitis, sitis ad nos apud London die Dominica
proxima ante Ascensionem Domini, nobiscum tractatur^ de magnis and arduis
negotiis nostris and Communi regni utilitate. Quin super his quae a Rege
Franciae per nuncios nostros and suos nobi^ mandatae sunt, unde per Dei gratiam
bonum speramus provenire, vestrum expedit habere consilium et alioru^ Magnatum
terrrae nostrae quos ad diem illum and locum fe^imus convocari. Vos ^tiam ex
part nostra and vestra Abb^tes and Priores Conventuales totius Diocaesis
citari faciatis ut Concilio prae^icto intersint, sicut diligunt nos and
communem regni utilitatem. T. etc.

The 2. writ of this kind extant on Record, is that H. 3.

Claus. An. 26 H. 3. m. 13. dorso; Seldens titles of Honor, p. 717.
Henricus, etc. ven^rabili in Christo patri Wal^ero Eboracensi Archiepiscopo
salutem. Mandamus vobis quatenus sicut nos and honorem nostrum pariter and
vestrum diligi it is, and in fide qua nobis temmini, omnibus aliis negotiis
omissis, sitis ad no^ apud London a die sancti Hillarii in XV dies, ad
tractandum nobiscum, una cum cae^eris magnatibus nostris quos similiter fecimus
convocar^, de arduis negotiis nostris statum nostrum and totius Regni nostri
specialiter tangentibus and hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. me ipso, apud
Windlesoram XIV die Decembris.

There are some writs directed to the Archbishops, and Bishops in 38 H. 3.
which seem much like a writ of Summons of the Clergy to a Convocation, which I
shall here insert.

Claus. An. 38 H. 3. m. 7. dorso. Rex, R. Cantuar. Archiep^scopo, totius
Angliae Primati, salutem. Cum Rex Castellae nullo jure sed potentiae sua
confisus, terram nostram Wasconiae cum multitudine Christianorum et Saracenorum
in aestate prox. futura hostiliter sit ingressurus, prout alias vobis
significavimus, quam quidem terram in tanto periculo constitutam contra tam
potentem Principem sine communi Regni nostri Angliae auxilio defendere non
valemus; dolentes si regnum praedictum, quod inter caeteros mundi Principatus
probitate gentium florere sole^, propter virium impotentiam aut segnitiem
propriam suis viribus destitutum succum^eret. Paternita^em vestram omni qua
possumus affectione rogamus, quatenus Nos et jura nostra taliter inde^ensa non
deserentes, cum omni celeritate convocetis coram vobi* Capitulum vestrum
Cathedrale, Archidiaconos, viros religiosos et Clerum vobis subjectum.
Inducentes eos modis omnibus quibus poteritis, quod Nobis in tanta necessitate
liber ^^^ter subveniant et gratiose ad praedictae terrae nostrae defensionem,
quod in ipsorum honorem verte^ur sempiternum: cum ex contrario, hujus negotii
eventu non tantum nobis, sed singulis regni nostri, personarum et rerum dampnum
manifest immineat periculosum. Proviso, quod aliqui viri discreti ex part
praedictorum certificent CONSILIUM NOSTRUM apud Westminster. in quindena Pasch: prox.
futur. de modo et quantitate subsidii memorati. Salvis nobis promissionibus
tunc solvendis ibidem a viris religiosis vestrae Diocaesis nobis factis in
quindena sancti Hilarii prox. praeteriti. Et quia ordinariam Jurisdictionem
exerceatis vacant sede in Episcopatu Lincoln, vos requirimus affectuose,
quatenus Officialibus vestris ejusdem Episcopatus scia^is attente, quod
tempestive convocent coram eis Capitulum Cathedralis Lincoln. Archidiaconos,
viros religiosos and Clerum ejusdem Episcopatus ad certos diem and locum.
Inducentes eos modis omnibus quod in hac necessitate nostra consimilem Nobis
faciant subventionem, et quod certificent CONSILIUM NOSTRUM apud Westminster. in
praedicta Quindena Pasch. per viros discretos ejusdem Episcopatus de modo and
quantitate praedicti subsidii. Salvis nobis promissionibus a viris religiosis
praedicti Episcopatus nobis factis in quindena sancti Hillaerii prox.
praeteriti sicut praedictum est. In cujus, etc. T. A. Regina nostra, and R.
Com. Cornub. fratre nostro, apud Windlesor 11 die Febr.

Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo Eborum, and singulis Episcopis totius
Angliae, and Officialibus Bathon. and Wellen, Episcopi, nulla facta mentione de
Episcopatu Linc.

This writ is no summons either to a Parliament, Council, or Convocation of the
Clergy, as it may seem to some men, but a special writ directed to the
Archbishops and Bishops in their several Diocese, to summon their Chapters,
Archdeacons, Clergy, and the religious persons in their respective Diocese
before them, and to excite them to a free, voluntary, and liberal contribution
to supply and ^elieve the Kings necessities, for the defense of Gas^^ig^,
against the intended invasion of the King of Castle, as the whole frame
thereof demonstrates, and their several certificates of the manner and quantity
of their aids, and the sums they would contribute in this necessity, required
to be certified from every Bishopric and Dioce^s to the Kings Council at
Westminster by certain discreet men; with distinct promises by religious
persons mentioned therein, do manifest beyond contradiction; Every Bishop, with
the Clergy, and religious in every distinct Diocese, being to meet and act
apart herein by themselves, and not summoned to meet all together to advise and
resolve concerning this aid requested from them: Therefore though a writ fit to
be inserted into this Register, yet I shall not enumerate it amongst the writs
of summons to a Parliament, Council, or Convocation.

The 3. Writ is that of 49 H. 3.

Claus. 49 H. 3. dors. 11. in Scedula: Seldom Ti^. of Honor, p. 717. My plea
for the Lords, p. 259.
Henricus De^gratia Rex Angli^e, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
venera^ili in Christo pa^ri R. E. piscopo Dunelmensi, salutem. Cum post gravia
turbationum discrimina dudum habita in regno nostro, Carissimus filius Edwardus
primogenitus noster, pro pace in Regno nostro ass^curanda and firmanda obses
traditus extitisset, and jam sedata (Benedictus Deus) turbatione praedicta,
super deliberatione ejusdem salubriter providenda and plena securitate and
tranquillitate pacis ad honorem Dei and utilitatem totius Regni nostri
firmanda, and totaliter complenda^ ac super quibusdam aliis Regni nostri
negotiis quae sine Consilio vestro et aliorum Praelatorum et Magnatum nostrorum
nolumus expediri, cum eisdem tractatum habere nos oporteat. Vobis mandamus
Rogantes in fide and dilectione quibus nobis tenemini, quod omni occasion
postposita et negotiis aliis praetermissis, sitis ad nos Londoniis in octabis
sancti Hillarii proximo futuris, nobiscum et cum praedictis Praelatis and
Magnatibus nostris, quos ibidem vocari fecimus, super praemissis tractaturiet
Consilium impensuri; Et hoc sicut nos and honorem norum and vestrum, Neonon et
Commu^em Regni nostri tranquillitatem diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Test
Rege apud Wigorn. 14. die Novembris.

The like writs (as appears by the Roll) were directed to the Archbishop of
York, and 11 more Bishops; to 101 Abbots and Priors, to the Master of the
Knights of the Temple in England, and to the Deans of York, Exon, Wells, Sarum
and Lincoln.

The 4. writ is that of 23 E. 1. m. 9. Dorso. De Parliamento tenendo.
Edwardus, etc. Venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cant^ar.
Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati salutem. Quia super quibusdam ar duis
nego^ils Nos and regnum nostrum, ac vos caeterosque Praelatos de eodem Regno
tangentibus, quae sine vestra et eorum praesentia nolumus expediri PARLIAMENTUM
nostrum tenere, et vobiscum super hiis colloquium habere volumus et tractatum.
Vobis mandamus, quod in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini fi^miter
injungentes, qu^^enus sitis ad Nos apud Westminster. primo die mensis Augusti prox.
futur. vel saltem infra tertium diem subsequentem ad ultimum, Nobiscum super
dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo
omittatis. Test meipso apud Album Monasterium XXIIII. die Julii. Per Breve de
Privato Sigillo.

The like writs then issued to the Archbishop of York and 18. other Bishops; to
the Master of the Order of Semplingham, the Master of the Knights of the
Temple, the Prior of the Hospital of St. John's Jerusalem in England, and to 53.
Abbots and Priors, whose names are recorded in the Rolls, over tedious to
transcribe at large.

The same year 23. E. 1. there was another Parliament summoned by this
memorable writ, the 5. I find upon Record.

Claus. 24 E. 1. m. 7. dors. DeParliamento tenendo.
Rex venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati, salutem. Sicut lex justissima provida circumspectione sacrorum
principum stabilita horratur, Ut quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbetur; sic
and (...) evi^enter: ut communibus periculis per remedia provisa communiter
obvietur; Sane satis nostis et ^am est, ut credimus, per universa mundi clim^ta
divulgatum, qualiter Rex Franciae, de terra nostra ^asconiae, Nos fraudulenter
and cautelose decepit, eam Nobis nequiter de^inendo. Nunc vero praedictis
fraud et nequitia non contentus, ad expugnationem regni nostr^, class maxima
et bellatorum copiosa multitudi^e congregatis, cum quibus regnum nostrum and
regni ejusdem incolas hostiliter jam invasi^, linguam Anglicam, si concep^ae
iniquitatis proposito detest abili potest as correspondeat, quod Deus ave^^at
omnino de terra delere proponit. Quia igitur Pravisa.
Provisa jacula minus laedunt, and res vestra sicut caeterorum ejusdem regni
communiter agitur in h^c part, Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus
nobis ^enemini firmiter injungentes, quod die Dominica prox. post festum sancti
Martini in hieme prox. futura, apud Westminster. PERSONALITER INTERSITIS.
Praemunientes Priorem and Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, Archidiaconos totumque
Clerum vestri Diocaesis, facientes quod iidem Prior and Archidiac. IN PROPRIIS
PERSONIS SUIS, and dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos
Procuratores idoneos, plenam et sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo et
Clero habentes, una vobiscum intersint modis omnibus tunc ibidem; ad tract and,
ordinand. and faciend. nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis and Proceribus and
aliis incolis regni nostri, qualiter sit hujusmodi periculis et excogitatis
maliti^s obviandum. Test Rege apud Wengeham 30 die Septembris.

The like Writs were then issued to the Arch Bishop of York, and 13 other
Bishops there named, only with this diversity, Praemunientes Decanos et
Capitula Ecclesiarum, Archidiaconos totumque Clerum suorum Dioc. facientesque
quod iidem Decani and Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, and dict a
Caepitula per unum, idemque Cl^rus per duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam and
sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitu^is and Clero habentes, etc. as before.
And with this peculiar different cla^se in the writ directed W. Bathon and
Wellen. Episcopo. Praemunientes Priorem Bathon. and Capitulum (...) and Decanum
and Capitulum Wellen. Ecclesiarum suarum, necnon Archidiaconos and Clerum, etc.
And in the writ issued Coventr. and Lichf. Episcopo, Praemunientes Priorem and
Capit. Coventr. and Decanum and Capitulum Lichf. necnon, etc. ut supra, Test
ut supra.

The like Writs were then sent to 66 Abbots and Priors there named ^omitting
the whole clause of Praemunientes, etc.) and to the Masters of the Knights of
the Temple, and of the order of Semplingham, and to the Prior of the Hospital
of St. John Jerusalem in England.

The 6 writ is that of Claus. 24. E. 1. m. 7. Dorso.

Rex etc. R. etc. Cant. Arch. etc. See Walsingham, Hist. Angl. An. 1297, 1298,
p. 34, 35, 36. Clerus ob constitutionem Bonifacii hoc anno edi^am quae prohibet
sub poena ex communicationis ne talliae vel exactiones a Clero per seculares
Principes quocunque modo exigantur, vel eis solvantur de rebus Ecclesiae, Rege
pro werra sua petenti subsidium denegavit. Rex autem ut de meliori responso
deliberarent negotium in aliud Parliamentum ^enendum Londo^iis in crastino
sancti Hillarii distuli^. Parliamentum coactum est Londoniis post ^estum sancti
Hillarii, in quo clero persistente in denegatione subsidii, Rex ipsum a sua
protectione exclusit. Pro qua tamen redimendo, multi per se, multi vero per
mediatores, regi bonorum suorum dederunt postea quintam partem. Rex
Archiepiscopum rigidiorem comperiens, terras ejus omnes seisivit, and de bonis
ejusdem debita in Rotulis Scaccarii inventa praecepit cum celeritate levari.
Nam idem Archiepiscopus de consensu Cleri procuraverat a Papa inhibitionem, ne
quis Clericorum ^egem respiceret be bonis Ecclesiae.
Vestra paternitas plane novit, qualiter vos and alii Praelati, and Clerus
regni nostri apud Westminster. ultimo congregati, in concessione pecuniae reddituum,
and benesiciorum vestrorum ecclesiasticorum pro defensione regni ejusdem usque
ad festum sancti Michaelis prox. futur. nobis facta, and sub spe ub^rioris
subsidii in futuro a vobis and aliis praestandi admissa, bonum et sufficiens
nobis pro futuro tempore subsidium ob candem causam, nisi interim inter Regem
Franciae and nos Pacem reformari vel Treugas iniri contingeret, dare
promisistis unanimiter, liberaliter and libenter; cui quidem reformationi pacis
vel initioni Treugarum dictus Rex Franciae hactenus non consensit. Quocirca
vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus nobis te nemini firmiter
injungentes, quod in crastino animarum prox. futur. apud sanctum Edmundum
personaliter intersitis. Praemnnientes, etc. (as before) tunc ibidem, ad
ordinandum de quantitate and modo subsidi memorati. Test Rege apud Berewic.
super Twede 26 die Augusti.

The like writs issued. Custodi Archiepiscopatus Eborum, sede vacant; Electo
Menevensi, vel ejus vices gerenti ipso agente in partibus transmarinis: et
Electo Landavensi; and to 17. Bishops more: It being usual then, and in
succeeding times, to issue out writs to Bishops elect, and so to Abbots and
Priors elect, before their consecrations or installments; and to Bishops
Vicars, or Vicegerents, in case of their absence in foreign parts.

The like writs were then directed to 68 Abbots, but not to one Prior, except
of the Hospital of Jerusalem, and to the Masters of the Knights of the Temple,
and Order of Semplingham: differing only in the Praemunientes, etc. and this
close of the writs, Ad tractand. ordinand. and faciend. Nobiscum and cum
caeteris Prelatis et Proce^ibus, et aliis Incolis regni nostri, qualiter sit
hujusmodi periculis et excogitatis malitiis obviand. Test ut supra.

The 7. writ is this of Claus. An. 25. E. 1. m. 6. dorso.

Rex venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia R. Cantuar. Archiepisc. etc.
salutem. De Parliamento tenendo.
Quia super quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis Nos et vos, ac totum
regnum nostrum tangentibus, volumus, quod Edwardus filius nofler Karissimus,
tenens locum nostrum in Anglia, vobiscum colloquium habeat et tractatum. Vobis
mandamus in fide et di^ectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod
in instante crastino Sancti Michaelis London: ad eundem filium nostrum modis
omnibus personaliter intersitis, cum eodem et caeteris de Consilio nostro qui
ibidem aderint, super dictis negotiis tractaturi vestrumque consilium
impensuri. Et hoc sicut honorem et commodum nostrum diligitis nullatenus omit
tatis. Test Edwardo fill. Regis apud Sanctum Paulum London 9. die Septembris.

The like writs were directed to 6. other Bishops, 17. Abbots, 4. Priors, the
Prior of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, and Mr. of the Templers.

The 8. writ is thus recorded in Claus. 27 Ed. 1. m. De Parliamento tenendo.


Rex venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Arch. etc. s^lutem.
Quia super negotiis nostris ultramarinis vobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis,
ac Proceribus regni nostri, habere volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vobis
mandamus, etc. quod prima Dominica Quadragesimae ad Nos London. modis omnibus
personaliter intersitis; Nobiscum ibidem, super dictis negotiis, etc. as in the
next precedent writ. Test Rege apud Pontem de Tail 6. die Febr.

The like writs were sent to the Archbishop of York Angliae Prima^i; to 17
other Bishops, 34 Abbots, and 5 Priors, and all others omitted, or not entered
on the Roll.

Anno 27 E. 1. m. 16. Dorso.

Rex, venerabili in Christo Patri R. etc. Cantuar. Arch. etc. De Parliamento
tenendo.
Propter quaedam specialia et ardua negotia nos, and statum regni nostri
tangentia quae noviter emerserun^, and quae sine praesentia vestra nolumus
expedire; Vos affectuose requirimus et rogamus quatenus sitis ad nos apud
Westminster. in quindena Pa^chae prox. nunc ventur. omnibus praetermissis, ad
tractandum nobiscum super eisdem negotiis, ac etiam vestrum consilium
impendend. prout Dominus inspirabit. Et hoc sicut de vobis confidimus et
honorem nostrum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Westminster. 10 die
Aprilis.

The like writs are issued to 16 Bishops and 26 Abbots, without any Priors or
other Ecclesiastical persons.



Rex venerabili, etc. R. Cantuar. Arch. etc. De Parliamento tenendo.
Propter quaedam ardua negotia Nos et vos de regno nostro, ejusque statum
urgent. tangentia; Vos rogamus specialius scimus possumus, ^vobis nihilominus
injungendo mandamus, quatenus in prox. festo Sancti Lucae Evangelistae apud
Novum Templum London personaliter intersitis: ad habendum un^ cum aliis
fidelibus nostris qui intererunt, deliberationem et consilium super praedictis
negotiis vobis tunc ibidem ex part vestra (nostra rather) before exponend. Et
hoc amore nostri nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Ledes 21 die Septembris.

The like writs then issued to 4 more Bishops, 4 Earls, and 5 Lords only, and
no more, without any other Bishops, Abbots, Priors, or Temporal Lords mentioned
in the Roll. Whence I conceive it rather a summons to a private Consultation,
than a Common Council or Parliament, the frame of the whole writ importing as
much, and that following it at the heels.

The 11. is a writ of Summons to a Parliament, recorded Membrana.

Claus. 2^ E. 1(...). dorso.
Rex ven. in Christo Patri R. etc. Cantuar. Arch. etc. Quia ad salvationem
Coron^ nostrae Regiae, et commune^ utilitatem populi regni nostri secunda
Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. London. PARLIAMENTUM tenere, and vobiscum,
et cum c^teris Praelatis necnon Magnatibus and Proceribus ejusdem regni super
negotiis nos et idem regnum nostrum contingentibus, speciale colloquium habere
volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod ad dictos diem et locum person aliter
intersitis Nobiscum, and cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus
praedictis, super dictis negotiis tracta^uri, vestrumque consil^um impensuri.
Praemunientes, etc. as before, p. 7, 8.) Ad faciendum et consentiendum hiis
quae tunc de Communi Consilio Deo fav^nte ordi^ar^ c^ntigerit, vel etiam pro
utilitate dicti regni providere; Et hoc sicut honorem nostrum regnique
praedicti commodum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Berewicum
super Twedam, 29 die Decembris.

Writs of like form are directed to 17. Bishops more, and likewise Custodibus
Episcopatus Lincoln. sede vacant: et Capitulo Ecclesiae beati Petri Eborum,
Custodibus spir^tuallum ejusdem Diocaes. sede vacants: with this special clause
superadded; Quod ad praedictos diem et locum sufficientem Procuratorem plenam a
vobis potestatem habentem mittatis ad tractand. Nobiscum, et cum praedictis
Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus super negotiis antedictis, et praebendum
nomine vestro consilium et assensum hiis quae ibidem t^nc contigerit ordinari.
Praemunientes Archidiac. in Ecclesia vestra, to^umque Clerum Eborac^nsis
Diocaes. facientesque etc. as in p. 7, 8, etc. The like writs then issued to 73
Abbots; but to no Prior, except of St. John's Jerusalem in England, and
Fratribus et Mag^stro Militiae Templi in Anglia, et M^gistro de Semplingham.

The 12. is the writ in Claus. 28 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.

Rex, venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, etc.
De veniendo ad Parliamentum.
Cum nuper pro Communi utilitate populi regni nostri con^esserimus, quod Carta
de Foresta in singulis suis articulis firmiter observaretur, assignando quosd^m
de fidelibus nostris in singulis Comitatibus ejusdem regni in quibus Forestae
nostrae existunt, ad perambulationem in eisdem Forestis faciendam. Ita quod per
ambulationem illam distinct et aperte factam ad Nes antequa^ aliqua executio
vel aliquid aliud inde fieret reportarent, et quod jur amentum nostrum, jus
Coronae Angliae, rations and calumpniae aliorum omnium salva forent. Nos licet
dilects et fideles nostri nunc primo ad Nos detulerunt quod fecerint in
negotiis memoratis, quia tamen Praelaci, Comites and caeteri Magnates dicti
regni in quorum praesentia nostras, and aliorum proponi et audiri volumus
rations, et de quorum Consilio in eodem negotio, prout alias diximus,
intendimus operari: maxim cum ip^^ ad observandum et manutenendum ^ura Regis
et Coronae nostrae praedictae, una Nobiscum ^uramenti vinculo sint astricti, ^
Regni.
a^ la^^^, nost^um tunc ten p^^^is non fuerunt; ac pro eo scilicet quod illi
qui suas rations qua^enus illud negotium illos ^ang it proponere habeant, inde
praemun^^i non erant, eidem negotio sine ipsorum Consilio-^inem imponere non
potuimus BONO MODO. Et quia negotium illud quantum possumus cup^mus maturare,
ita quod per Nos non foret quin absque ulterioris dilationis incommodo effectum
debitum sorti^ri (posset.) Volentes cum Praelatis, Comitibus, Baronibus ac
Magnatibus supradictis ac aliis ^e Communitate dicti Regni super hoc, et
quibu^dam aliis negotiis, Nos et Statum regni praedicti tangentibus, habere
colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod sitis ad Nos ad PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRUM apud
Lincoln. in Octabis sancti Hillarii prox. futur. Nobiscum ibidem, una cum
cae^eris Praelatis et Proceribus praedictis super praemissis tractaturi,
vestrumque consilium im^ensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos, and commodum regni nostri
praedicti diligitis, nullatenus omittatis, Test Rege apud le Rose. 26 die
Septembris.

The like writs were sent to the Archbishop of York, Angliae Primati, and to 17
Bishops more: to 80 Abbots; but no Prior except Prior Hospitalis Sancti
Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia; Magistro Ordinis de Semplingham, Magistro Milit.
Templi in Anglia.

The 13. and 14. writs are of this form registered in Clauso

Rex, etc. R. etc. Can^uar. Archiepisc. etc. De Parliamento tenendo.
Quia super quibu^dam arduis negotiis Nos and vos totumque regnum nostrum
specialiter tangentibus quae sine vobis et caeteris Praelatis ac Proceribus
dicti regni nostri nolumus expediri, vobiscum et cum eisdem Praelatis ac
Procetibus habere volumus Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. quod in
Octabis Nativ. Sancti Iohannis Bapti^tae prox. futur. ad ultimum apud Westminster.
modis omnibus personaliter intersit is Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis ac
Proceribus supradictis, super dict^s nego^iis tractaturi, etc. T. Rege apud
Thurrock Gray 2. die Iunii.

Rex, etc. R. Archiepise, Cantuar. etc. De Iteratione Parliamenti.
Licet vos non lateat, Parliamento nostro, habito London hiis diebus extitit
ordinatum, ut ad providendum consulcius and salubrius ordinandum super negotiis
de quibus tract atum fuit in eodem Parliamento et aliis, super quibus pro
commodo et securitate r^gni ^ostrs et ^^colarum ejusdem tractandum, vide^itur
Parliamentum iteratum in prox. festo sancti Michaelis London habeatur; ex
habundanti tamen vobis in fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini firmiter
injungendo mandamus, quod e^dem futuro Parliamento aliis quibuscunque negotiis
praetermissis personaliter intersitis. T. Rege apud Westminster. 24 die Julii.

Consimiles literae dirigun^ur subscriptis, viz. I. Karliol. Episcopo, etc.
(with (...) more names of Bishops (...) Abbots, (...) temporal Lords) is
written under both these writs.

Claus. An. 33 E. 1. m. 8. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. eadem gratia Episcopo Wigorniae salutem. Licet hactenus vobis
mandavimus quod esse^is ad No^ apud Westminster. ad Parliamentum nostrum quod in
Octabis nativitatis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere volumus Deo
dante. Vobis nihilominus iterato mandamus in fide, etc. quod die dictarum
Octab. vel in crastino earundem ad vltimum aliis omnibus praetermissis
intersitis. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Rothing 27 die Augusti.
Per Breve de privato sigillo.

Consimiles literae dirigun^ur subscriptis, mutatis mutandis. W: Coventr. and
Lichf. Episcopo, Abbati W^ stm: Abbati de Waverle: and to 2. Earls, and 9. more
there named.

E. 1. and the new government, espousals, and coronation of King Edw. 2. is
this.

Claus. An. 1 E. 2. m. 19. dorso. De veniendo ad Parliamentu^ Regis.
Edwardus Deigratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae, Ven. in
Christo patri W. eadem gratia Eborum Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati, salutem.
Quia super quibusdam Negotiis nos in ista recenti susceptione regiminis regni
nostri, tam videlicet super humatione corporis celebris memoriae Domini Edwardi
quondam Regis Angliae genitoris nostri, cujus animae propitietur D^us, quam
super solempnitate nostrorum Sponsalium, et Coronationis nostrae auctore Deo
celebr and. aliisque arduis negotiis statum ejusdem regni contingentibus,
vobiscum et cum cae^eris Praelatis and Magnatibus de eodem regno habere volumus
Colloquium speciale et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. quod in Quindena sancti
Michaelis prox. futur. etc. apud Northampton personaliter intersitis Nobiscum
and cum aliis^ Praelatis and Magnatibus, etc. Praemunientes Decanum et
Archidiaconos, etc. (as in former writs) ad faciend. and consentiend, etc. T.
meipso aqud Comenok, 26 die Augusti, Anno regni nostri primo.

Eodem modo scribitur to 18 Bishops there named (...) Abbots with other
Ecclesiastical Barons.

The 17. writ is this: Claus. Anno 1 E. 2. m. 11. dorso.

Rex venerabili in Christo Patri W. Archiepiscopo Eborum Angliae Primati,
salutem: Summoni^io Parliamenti.
Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis No^ et statum regni nostri tangentibus,
etc cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, et aliis fidelibus nostris de eodem
regno Colloquium et tractatum habere, et PARLIAMENTUM tenere proponimus Domino
concedente. Vobis mandamus, etc. quod prima Dominica Quadrag simae prox. futur.
apud Westminster. etc. intersitis, Nobiscum ibidem et cum caeteris Praelatis et
Magnatibus, etc. (as before) T. Rege apud Douorr. 19 die Januar.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. A. Patriarch. Jerusalem, et Episcopo
Dunelm: and (...) Bishops more: the rest (...) Abbots (...) in the Roll.

The 18. writ is in Claus. Anno 1 E. 2. m. ^. ^. dorso.

Rex ven. etc. W. eadem gratia Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. Quia super diversis
negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri tangentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. die Dominica in Quindena Paschae, prox. futur. tenere proponimus D^o
concedente. Vobis mandamus, etc. ibidem Nobiscum et cum Praelatis and caeteris
Magnatibus et Proceribus de regno praedicto, etc. T. Rege apud West. 10 die
Martii.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to^^ Bishops, with (...) Abbots, (...) named
particularly in this Roll.

The 19. writ, is in Claus. Anno 2 E. 2. m. 20. Cedula.

Rex, ven. etc. R. eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepiscopo etc. Summonit^^
Parliamen^i^
Quia diversa negotia Nos et statum regni nostri tangentia super quibus
vobiscum et cum cae^eris Praelatis et Magnatibus ejusdem regni in PARLIAMENTO
NOSTRO quod nuper post Coronationem nostram summoneri fecimus, tractare
incepimus, propter aliquod impedimentum interveniens quod, benedicto Altissimo,
modo cessat, adhuc remanent pertractanda; per quod PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRVM apud
Westminster. a die Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. in tres Septimanas tenere
disposuimus Domino concedente. Vobis mandamus, etc. (without a Praemunientes,
etc.) et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum atque vestrum, commodumque dicti
regni diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Langele 16 die Augusti.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. W. Archiepiscopo Eborum, Angliae
Primati, A. Patriarch. Jerusalem, et Episcopo Dunelm. etc. without more names
of Bishops or Abbots in the Roll.

Claus. Anno 2 E. 2. m. 14. Cedula.

Rex, etc. A. eadem gratia Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. De veniendo ad tractandum
cum Rege.
Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et statum, etc. vobiscum et cum aliis
Praelatis, Proceribus, et Magnatibus ejusdem regni habere volumus tractatum.
Vobis mandamus, etc. quod suis ad Nos apud Westminster. secunda Dominica
Quadragesimae, etc. Nobiscum et cum caeteris etc. super praemissis Colloquium
habituri, etc. T. Rege apud Langeleye S die Ianuarii.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. W. Archiep. Eborum. Angliae Primati,
A. Patriarchae Ierus. et Episcopo Dunelm. R. Electo Dublin. Episcopo, etc.
without more names of Bishops or Abbots.

Summonitio Parliamenti.
directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the same form as the last, with
an addition only of Praemunientes Priorem, etc. (not in the former) a die
Paschae prox. futur. in unum mensem apud Westminster. etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 4. die
Martii.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis mutatis mutandis quoad Decanos et Capitula,
et Priores et Capitula, viz. W. Arch. Ebor. A. Patriarch. Jerus. et Ep. Dunelm.
J. Karlio^, etc. without more names.

The 22. is Claus. 2. ^. 2. m. ^0, dorso.

Rex, etc. R. etc. Cantuar. Archiep^sc. etc. De summonitione Parliamenti*
Quia Treuga sive sufferentia quam ad requi sitionem magnifici Principis Domini
Philippi Regis Francorum illustris Patris nostri carissimi, Scot is inimicis,
et ^^bellibus nostris usque ad certum tempus concessimus duratur. per ipsos
Scotos qui nunc pejora quam ante captionem suffer (...) praedictae commiserant,
committere non verentes, contra Nos ^t fideles nostros in illis par^bus
existentes, f^audulenter and hostiliter insurgunt, castra, villas, terras, et
ten^menta tam nostra quam fidelium nostro^um ibidem nequi^er occupando^ necnon
depraedationes, incendia et homicidia multiplicilen perpetr a^do, ^ullaetenus
observatur, quod vos et alios de reg^o nostro cred mus non latere; Nos dictorum
Scotorum proterviam et nequitiam hujusmodi cum Dei ^uxilio dep^imere cupientes,
et super hoc vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis et Proceribus regni nostri
volentes habere Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, quod die Dominica
prox. post festum Sa^cti Jacobi Apostoli prox. futur. sitis ad Nos apud
Staunford, Nobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et vestrum ac
comodum regni (...) de^igitis nullatenus omitta^is. T. Rege apud Westminster. 11 die
Junii.

The 23. writ is enrolled in Claus. Anno 3 E. 2. m. 17.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum. etc. Quant^^ au ^aciae quantaeque
temeritatis sun^ hiis diebus opera Roberti de Brus, Inimici et Rebellis, et
Proditoris nostri, suorumque Complicum et Fautorum, Nobis et dicto regno nostro
dampnosa, quotiens hujusmodi Inimici nostri perturbaverint idem regnum, quot
e^iam malorum et machinationum genera Treugis ipsis ad requisi^ionem magni^ici
Principis Domini Philippi Regis Francorum ^illustr. Ka^issimi Patris nostri
concessis pendentibus, proditionibus soli^o sicut aslueta non relinquere
volentes erga No^, praefatumque regnum minime perpetrare verebantur, Castra,
villas, ^erras et tenementa tam nostra quam fidelium nostrorum ausu ^emerario
invadendo et aliqua obsidendo, et (proh dolor!) pejora acc^mulantes prioribus,
quibusdam fidelibus nostris nequiter interfectis, depraedationes, rapinas, et
alia enormia multipliciter commiserunt, vos et alios de dicto Regno nostro
credimus non latere. Volentes igitur super hiis, ac aliis arduis negotiis Nos
et statum regni nostr^ tangentibus vobiscum, et cum caeteri^ Praelatis,
Proceribus, et Magnatibus ejusdem regni habere Colloquium et tractaium. Vobis
mandamus, etc. sitis personaliter ad Nos apud Eborum, die Dominica prox. post
festum Purificationis beatae Mariae prox. futur. Nobiscum et cum caeteris
Praelatis, Proceribus et Magn^tious, etc. (without any Praemunientes, etc.) T.
Rege apud Eborum 26. die Octobris.

In the Eodem modo mandatum est, etc. 3. Bishops only are named with an etc.

Dorso.

Rex, etc. De. summonitione Parliamenti.
R. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia propter plura et ardua negotia Nos et
statum regni^^ostri tangentia die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Lauren^ii
prox. futur. ordinavimus, Deo propiti^ Lon^^n, Parliamentum tenere, et vobiscum
et cum (...) Praelatis et Proceribus, etc. habere Colloquium et tractatum.
Vobis mandamus, etc. Praemunientes Priorem et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, etc.
T. Rege apud Berewic. super Twe^am, 16 die Junii. Per Breve de privato sigillo.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis mutatis mutandis quoad Decanos et Capitula,
et Priores et Capitula, viz. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primati, I. Karliol.
Episcopo, etc. without more names.

Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 17. Dorso.

Rex, etc. R. Archiep. Cantur. etc. Quia i^ ultimo PARLIAMENTO nostro apud
Westminster. habito propter solempnitatem festi Nativitatis Dom^ni supervenientis
diversa et ardua negotia Nos et statum regni nostri, aliarumque terrarum
nostrarum multiplicite^ ^^^gen^ia, non potuimus, sicut spor abamus expedire:
(...) ALIUD PARLIAMENTVM apud Westminster. (...) Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur
(...), (...) vobiseum et cum caete^is Praelatis ac Proc^ribus dicti regni super
pr^^^ssis (...) Domino finaliter portract andis haber^ proponi^us Colloquium et
tractatum. Vobis ^ (...), etc. Nobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, ac cum
Proceribus praedictis, aliisque fidelibus nostris, super memor^tis nego^^^
tractat^^^ etc. Praemunien^es Prio^^m et Capi^. etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 19 die
Decembri^

Consimiles literae diriguntur Vi^ari^ generali Aro^iopiscopi Eborum, ipso
Archiepiscopo in^^motis age^te, etc. without more names of Bishops or Abbots.

The 26. Writ is entered Claus. An. 5. E. 2. m. 11. 13. dors.

Rex, etc. R. etc. Archiepisco to Cantuar. etc. De summonitione Parliamenti.
Quia propter pl^ra et ardu^ Nego^ia, No^ etc. die Do^inica prox. post festum
beatae Mariae Magdalenae prox. futur. ordinavimus Deo propitio apud Lincol^.
Pa^li^mentum ^enere, et vobiscum, cum caeteris Praelatis ^t Proceribus de dicto
regno, etc. Praemu^ientes Priorem and Capit. T. Rege apud Eborum.

Eodem modo scribi^ur* subscriptis mutat. mu^andis quoad Decanos et Capit. etc.
viz. Arch. Eborum Angliae Primati. Carliol Epise. without more names.

The 27. Writ is recorded, Claus. An. 6. E. 2. m. 31. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. R. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Q^ia tertia Dominica Quadragessimae
prox. futur, ordinavimus Deo propitio apud Westminster. Parliamentum te^ere et
^obiscum, ac cum caeteris prael^tis et pro^eribus regni nostri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Windesor 8 die Ianuarii.

Eodem modo s^ribitur, etc. Arch. Eborum. Angl. Primati, R. London, Episcopo,
etc. without more names.

The 28. is this memorable special writ of Summons to London.

Claus. An. 6. E. 2. m. 2. dorso. Rex vener. in Christo Patri R. ead^m gratia
Land. Episcopo, s^lutem. Datum est nobis intelligi quod Scoti, inimici et
rebels nostri terram nostram Scotiae occupantes, C^stra, villas, et alia loca
usurparunt et devastarunt, et his similibus non contenti Regnum nostrum Angliae
in diversis partibus sunt ingressi, homicidia, depiaedationes, incendia, et
alia dam^na innumera perpetrantes, Ecclessiae sacrae aut locis aliis Deo
dedicatis non parcentes in hac part; ^Et quia praemissa non solum in nostri
dampnum* verum etiam in destructionem Ecclesiae, et locorum praedictorum et
animarum grave periculum, (ad quorum salvationem vos una nobiscum oportunas
vires decet extendere) dinoscuntur gravius redundare, per quod injunximus
venerabilibus Patribus W. Wygorn. Episcopo, Custodi magni Sigilli nostri, et I.
Bathon. and Wellen. Episcopo, et dilecto et fideli Nepo^i nostro Gilberto de
Clare Comiti Glouc. et Hereford. quaedam vobis et quibusdam aliis Praelatis de
dicto regno nostro super praemissis; sitis in propria persona vestra, vel per
sufficientem Procuratorem a vobis plenam potestatem habentem London. die Jovis
prox. post festum Sanctae Trinitatis prox. futur. ad tractandum una cum praefat
is Episcopis, et Comite, et aliis quae ibidem ex hac causa sunt vocati super
negotiis antedictis, et ad consentiendum hiis quae tune in eisdem contigerit
ordinari. Et hoc sicut Dei et Ecclesiae suae, ac nostri ac vestri honorem
diligitis, et dampna hujusmodi in dicto regno desideraveritis, evitari. T. Rege
apud Do^or. 23 die Maii.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. Episcopo Winton, Episc. Excestr.
Episc. Norwyc. Episc. Eliens. Ep. Sarum: Custodi Spiritualitatis Arch. Cant.
quod sint personiliter: Episc. Roff. Episc. Lincoln. Per se, vel per Procurat.
Episc. Meneven. personaliter.

An. 6 E. 2. m. 3. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. Licet ad requisi^ionem Sanctissimi
in Christo Patris Domini Clementis divina providentia Summi Pontificis, n^cnon
Domini Regis Franciae nostri Kar^ssimi patris, jam sumus ad parts transmarinas
profecturi, pro arduis negotiis statum Ducatus nostri praedicti diver simode
contingentibus, quae sine nostra praesentia, ut per quosdam Magnates et Amicos
nostros, et Ministros nostros partium illarum intelleximus feliciter expedire
non poterint reformandis. Quia tamen a partibus illis in brevi Deo propitio in
Angliam redire proponimus, et PARLIAMENTUM NOSTRUM in Quindena Nativitatis S.
Johannis Baptistae prox. futur. apud Westminster. tenere, et vobiscum, et cum
caeteris Praelatis et Proceribus regni nostri, super diversis negotiis Nos et
statum dicti regni nostri, ac expeditionem guerrae nostrae Scotiae specialiter
tangentibus habere Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. Praemunientes,
etc. T. Rege apud Douorr. 23. die Maii.

Eodem modo scribitur, viz. Custodi Archiepiscopatus Can^uar. sede vacant, R.
London. I. Lincoln. etc. without more names.

The 30. writ in Claus. Anno 7. E. 2. m. 27. dorso,

Rex, etc. W. eadem gratia Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. Cum diversa et ardua
negotia Nos, et statum regni nostri tangentia, super quibus in Parliamento quod
apud Westminster. in Quindena Nativitatis St. Johannis Baptistae prox: praeterita
fecimus summoneri, proposueramus Vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus
et Proceribus regni nostri habuisse Colloquium et Tractatum, ob aliquas certas
rations ad^huc remaneant indiscussa; per quod ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. die Dominica prox: post festum S. Mathaei Apostoli prox. futur.
tenere; et vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, etc. Vobis mandamus, etc.
Praemunientes etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 26. die Iulii.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, Custod. Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede
vacant, Custodi Episcopatus London. sede vacant, J. Episcopo Lincoln. S.
Episc. Sarum, etc. without more names par^icularized.

The 31. writ is this of Claus. Anno 7 E. 2. m. 16. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum, etc. De summonitione Parliamenti.
Quia super diversis negotiis Nos, etc. tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. die Dominica in Quindena Pasch. prox. futur. ten^re proponimus Domino
conc^dente. Vobis mandamus, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 6. die
Decembris.

Eodem modo mandatum subscriptis, viz. Custod. Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus
Cantuar. sede vacant, mutatis mutandis, London. Episcopo, I. Lincoln.
Episcopo, etc.

Claus. Anno 8 E. 2. m. 45. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. eadem gratia Archi^pisc. Cantuar. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, et maxim
Terrae nostrae Scotiae specialiter tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud
Eborum die Lunae in crastino Nativitatis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur*
tenere, et vobisc^m, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti
regni habere proponimus Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Eborum. 29 die Julii. Per Breve de privato
sigillo.

Eodem modo mandatum est Subscriptis, mutatis mutandis, viz. W. Arch. Eborum,
Angliae Primati, J. Lincoln. Episcopo, etc.

The same writ verbatim, issued this year to the some Archbishop; Claus. 8 E.
2. m. 29. dorso. Rex, etc. prescribing Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster: in
Octabi^ S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. habere proponimus
Colloquium et tractatum, etc. T. Rege apud Spalding 24 die Octobris: There
being 3. Bishops only named in the Eodem modo mandatum est.

Ann. 9. E. 2. m. 22. dorso. Rex, etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
the same in terminis with the two last* but in the place and time of the
Parliament, viz. Parliamentum nostrum apud Lincoln, in Quindona Sancti Hillarii
prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. meipso apud
Empington, 16 die Octobris. The Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Lincol with
an, etc. are only mentioned in the Eodem modo mandatum est.

Anno 12 E. 2. m. 29. in Cedula pendente.

Rex etc. W. etc. ^ant. Arch. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum a die Sancti Michaelis prox.
futur* in tres Septimanas tenere, et vobiscum, etc. T. Rege apud Notingham 25.
Augusti: Per Regem et Consilium. There are but 4. Bishops specified with an
etc. in the Eodem modo.

The 35. is Claus. An. 12 E. 2. m. 11. dorso, De summonitione Parliamenti.
to W. York, the same verbatim with the last, but in Parliamentum nostrum apud
Ebo^um a die Paschae in unum mensem tenere: T. Rege apud Eborum 28 die Martii,
Per ipsum Regem. Five Bishops with an etc. are mentioned in the eodem modo.

The 36. in Claus. 13 E. 2. m. 13. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.
agrees with Statum Regni nostri, et Ducatus nostri praedicti specialiter
tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum in Octabis Hillarii prox. futur.
tenere, etc. T. Rege apud Eborum, 6 die Novembr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.
In the eodem modo 5. Bishops are mentioned with an, etc.

The 37. is Claus. 13. E. 2. m. 29. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. De summonitione Parliamenti.
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae in octabis S. Mich. prox. futur.
teneri, etc. without Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 5. die Augusti.
Per ipsum Regem. In the eodem modo, 5 Bishops are nominated with, etc.

The 38. writ I meet with is in Claus. 14 E. 2. m. 5. dorso.

Rex, W. etc. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. De summonitione Parliamenti.
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. a die Nativitatis S. Iohannis Baptistae,
prox. futur. in tres Septimanas tenere, etc. with a Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege
apud Westminster. 25 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem. In the eodem modo 5. Bishops with an
etc. are specified.

The 39. writ in Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 16. dorso, W. Archiep. De summonitione
Parliamenti.
Cantuar. agrees verbatim with the last before; but in Parliamentum nostrum
apud Ebotum, a die Paschae prox. futur, in tres Septimanas tenere, etc. T.
meipso apud D^rby, 14. die Martii. Per ipsum Regem. There are only 5. Bishops
with etc. in the eodem modo.

E. 2. m. 26. dorso, has this recital.

Rex, etc. W. and^. Archiep. Eborum, etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Cum jam regressi sumus de partibus Scotiae, et in partibus Novi Castri super
Tynam, ad refraenand. Scotorum inimicorum et rebellium nostrorum obstinatia et
malitia, si forsan parts regni nostri hostiliter ingredi attentaverint isto
tempore, hic malui cum manis potenti moram facere, et in instanti seisona
aestivali ad easdem paries Scotiae ad ipsorum inimicorum nostrorum proterviam
cum Dei adjutorio finaliter conterend. proficisci proponimus; et super hiis et
aliis arduis negot^is Nos et statum regni nostri et dictam terram Scotiae
tangentibus, vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti
regni nostri apud Rippon, die Dominica prox. post festum S. Martini prox.
futur. ordinavimus habere colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, without any
Praemunien^es, etc. T. Rege apud Nov^m Castrum super Tynam, 1^. die Septembris.
Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur W. Arch. Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati: and 3. more
there named with etc.

The 41. wri, is this in Claus. 18. E. 2. m. 21. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. De tracta^u cum Magnat. apud
Winton. habend.
Quia ad parts Ducatus nistri Aquitaniae, de quo Rex Franciae malitiose nos
exhaeredi^are proponit, in succursum ejusdem Duca^us nostri passag^u^ nostrum
ordinavimus, Domino disponente, Vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus
and Proceribus regni nostri super passagio nostro praedicto et aliis arduis
negotiis, Nos, et statum regni nostri, et Ducatus praedicti tangentibus habere
volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. sitis ad nos apud Winton:
secunda Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. Nobiscum, etc. Test Rege apud
Notingham 30. die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem. In the eodem modo, 5. Bishops
only are particularized with an etc. to the last of them.

Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 5. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. crastino Nativitatis S. Iohannis
Baptistae prox. futur. tenere, etc. Test Rege apud Winton. 6 die Maii. Per
ipsum Regem.

The Eodem modo, etc. mentions the Archbishop of York, and 5. other Bishops,
with etc. to the last.

The 43. writ is entered, Claus. Anno 19 E. 2. m. 27.

Rex, etc. W. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Pro Rege de tractatu habendo.
apud Westminster. in Octabis Sti. Martini prox. futur. Parliamentum nostrum tenere,
ac vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, etc. Vobis mandamus, etc. Praemunientes,
etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 10 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est, etc. VV. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primati, and 3 more
Bishops with an etc. instead of the others names.

The 44. writ is recorded in Claus. Anno 1 E. 3. part being very memorable.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Qualiter Scoti nostri et regni
nostri inimici pacis tractatum cum nostris solempnibus Nunciis, quos nuper ea
de causa ad parts Marchiae Sc^tiae destinavimus mire contemptibiliter
recusarunt, et ruptis proditionaliter Treugarum vinculis tempore Dom. Edw.
nuper Regis Angliae Patris nostri inter populos Angliae and Scotiae initis et
juramento firmatis, congregato magno exercitu regnum nostrum hostiliter plures
sunt ingressi, homicidia, depraedationes, incendia, et alia mala injuria
perpe^^ndo, qualiter et ad refraenand. ipsorum audaciam ad parts Marchiae
Scotiae praedictae, congregato magno exerci^u declinavimus, ut ipsos inimicos
potenter et viriliter prosequamur, vobis incognitum non existir. Et quia dicti
Inimici dum per Nos et exercitum nostrum in parco de Stanhope, quatenus fieri
poterint circumdati fuissent, noctanter et latenter ut devicti de parco
praedicto evaserunt, et ad parts suas sunt regressi, nonnullis eorum per
quosdam de exercitu nostro insecutis et interfectis, et ut Nobis relatum est,
iterato se congtegare, et regnum nostrum ingredi proponunt ad mala quae
poterunt perpetranda, propter quod tam super defensione et custodia regni
nostri contra aggressus dictorum inimicorum, quam super aliis arduis negotiis
Nos et Statum regni nostri tangentibus, vobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus, et Proceribus regni nostri apud Lincoln. in crassino Exaltationis
sanctae Crucis prox. futur. colloquium ordinavimus habere et tractatum. Vobis
mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini, etc. quod omnibus aliis
praetermissis dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis ibidem, Nobiscum si
interesse possumus, seu interveniente impedimento depurandis a Nobis, super
defensione et custodia ac aliis negotiis supradictis tractaturi, vestrumque
consilium impensuri. Et praemuniatis Priorem et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae
Cantuar. Archidiac. totumque Clerum vestrae Dioc: quod iidem Prior et
Archidiac. in propriis personis suis, dictumque Capitulum per unum, idemque
Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam et sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis
Capitulo et Clero habentes dictis die ac loco inte^sint ad faciend. et
consentiend. hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi Consilio divina savente clementia
ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedicts; et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T.
Rege apud Stanhope, 7. die Augusti, Anno regni nostri primo. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Eborum Angliae Prima^i, et Episcopis
subscriptis, viz. H. Lincoln Episcopo, I. Karliol Episcopo, L. Dunolm.
Episcopo, L. London Episcopo, etc.

The 45. writ, in Claus. Anno 1 Ed. 3. part 2. m. 16. dorso, runs thus.

Rex, Summonitio Parliamenti.
etc. Archiepis. Cantuar. etc. Cum super reformatione Pacis inter Nos et
nostros subditos, ex una part, et Robertum de Brus ac Magnates et alios de
Scotia ex part altera, certis Nunciis ex utraque part missis, nuper apud
Novum Castrum super Tynam habitus fuisset tractatus, certi Articuli sunt
expositi reformationem praedictam contingentes; Super quibus et aliis Coronam
nostram tangentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum. die Dominica prox. post
festum Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere, ac vobiscum
et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus regni nostri Colloquium et
Deliberationem habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. Praemunientes,
etc. ( as before.) T. Rege apud Coventr. 10 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis mutatis mutandis, viz. Custod.
Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacant, etc.

The 46. writ (very observable) I meet with in Claus. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. Cum in Parliamento nostro nuper
apud Eborum convocato magna and ardua negotia Nos et itatum regni nostri
tangentia proposita fuissent, quae propter absentiam quorundam Praelatorum et
aliorum Magnatum et Procerum regni nostri, tunc non poterunt terminari: Super
quibus et aliis diversis negotiis de assensu omnium Praelatorum Magnatum et
Procerum in eodem Parliamento nostro tunc existentium apud Northamton a die
Paschae prox futur. intres Septimanas Parliamentum tenere, et vobiscum ac
OMNIBVS aliis Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni Colloquium habere
ordinavimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. vestrumque consilium impensuri.
Scientes pro certo quod aliquem Procuratorem pro vobis, seu pro aliquo Praelato
vel Magnate ad praesens propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum, admittere
non intendimus quoquo modo; Et Praemuniatis Decanum et Capit. etc. ( as in
former writs) Et quia ante haec tempora negotia in hujusmodi Parliamentis
tractanda impedita fuerunt ex eo quod See my Plea for the Lords, p. 278, 279,
280. Cooks 4 Institut. p. 14.
nonnulli Magnates cum multitudine tumultuosa hominum armatorum ad Parliamenta
illa accesserunt, et populus partium ubi Parliamenta illa tenta fuerunt damp
nificatus existit et gravatus; volumus et firmiter praecipimus, quod omnes et
singuli de regno nostro cujuscunque status seu conditionis fuerint qui ad
dictum Parliamentum venire voluerint, modo debito et absque aliqua multitudine,
sub forisfactura omnium quae Nobis forisfacere poterint, accedant. Ita quod per
ipsorum adventum indebitum negotia nostra non retardentur, seu patria in hac
part oneretur indebite quovis modo. T. Rege apud Eborum quinto die Martii.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis mutatis mutandis, viz. Custod.
Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacant. Th. Episcopo Hereford.
I. Episcopo Exon. etc.

The 47. writ is this in Claus. Anno 2 E. 3. m. 23. dorso.

Rex, Summonitio Consilii.
etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum, etc. Cum post Parliamentum nostrum apud
Northampton nuper tentum, quaedam magna et ardua negotia Nos et Statum regni
nostri ac jura nostra intime contingentia emerserint, super quibus vobiscum, ac
cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri etc. apud
Eborum die Dominica proxima post festum Sancti Iacobi Apostoli prox. futur.
consilium et deliberationem habere ordinavimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus,
etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Wigorn. 15 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem

Eodem modo mandatum est, etc. Custod. Spirit. Archiepiscopatus Cant. sede
vacant. Thomae Episcopo Hereford, etc.

Claus. An. 2. E. 3. m. 15 Dorso.

Rex, Summonitio Consilii.
etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum; Cum nuper post Parliamentum nostrum quod
apud Northampton ultro tenuimus, quaedam ardua et magna negotia emersissent,
quae statum nostrum, et statum regni nostri intime contingere dinoscuntur,
super quibus apud Eborum postmodum tractatum habuimus, sed propter absentiam
quorundam Praelatorum, Magnatum et Procerum non potuerunt tunc dicta negotia
non sine gravi nostri dispendio discuti et terminari; Propter quod or dinavimus
Parliamentum nostrum apud Novam Sarum die Dominica proxima post Quindenam
Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatibus,
Magnatibus et Proceribus super dictis Negotiis et aliis quae noviter emerserurt
Colloquium habere et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus
Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quod omni Excusatione postposita sitis
personaliter apud Novam Sarum dicto die Nobiscum and cum caeteris Praelacis,
Magnatibus et Proceribus praedict. super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque
consilium impensuri: Et hoc sicut nos et honor^ nostrum, and tranquillitatem
regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis; Ne quod absit ob vestri absentram
contingat dicta negotia ulterius protelari; unde nobis et toto regno nostro
irreparabile dispendium possit de facile generari. Scientes pro certo quod
aliquem Procuratorem pro vobis, seu pro aliquo Praelato vel Magnate ad
praesens, propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum excepta causa necessaria,
admitti non intendimus quoquo modo. Et praemuniatis Decanum et Capitulum, etc.
T. R. apud Clipston, 28 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est S. Arch. Cantuar. etc. sub data 19 die Septembris Rege
apud Risinge existente. Thoma Episcopo Hereford; I. Episcopo Exon. etc.

The 49. Writ is extant in Claus. An. 3 E. 3. m. 19 dorso.

Rex, De Tractatu (...) habendo.
etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Cum super maximis and arduis negotiis nos,
et statum regni nostri, ac Mariae Magdalenae prox futur. apud Windesor
Colloquium habere ordinavimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. ( without
Praemunientes, etc.) T. Rege apud Cantuar. 12 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo subscriptum est mutatis mutandis, viz. W. Eborum Archiep. Angl.
Primati, Thomae Epis^. Heref. etc.

The 50 is in Claus. Anno 4. E. 3. m. 41, dorso.

Rex, etc. R. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quta p^o magnis et arduis negotiis nos, etc. multipliciter contingentibus
Parliamentum nostrum apud Winton. die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti
Gregorii Papae. prox. futur. tenere, etc. Vobis mandamus, etc. Praemunientes
Priorem et Capitulum, etc. Et hoc sicut nos, et honorem nostrum, et vestrum, ac
salvationem regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Eltham.
25 die Januar.

Eodem modo, etc. As last before this.

Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 32 dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Arch. Cantnar. etc. De Tractatu apud Oseney habendo.
Quia super magnis et urgentibus negotiis noviter emersis, Nos et regnum
nostrum intime contingentibus vobiscum, etc. die Lunae prox. post festum
t^anslationis Sancti Thomae Martyris prox. futur. apud Abbathiam de Oseney
colloquium habere ordinavimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. without
Praemunientes, etc. Et hoc sicut nos and konorem nostrum et v^strum diligitis,
etc. T. Rege apud. Wodstoke 5 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo, etc. 3 Bishops only named; the last A. Episcopo Wigorn, etc.

The 52 is the Writ of Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 23. dorso.

De Tractatu apud Nottingham habendo.
Cantuar. Archiepiscopo. Cum propter quaedam ardua negotia, Nos, et statum
regni nostri, et aliarum terrarum ^ostrarum intime contingentia quae noviter
emerserunt vobiscum, etc. die lunae prox. ante festum sancti Lucae Evangelistae
prox. futur. apud Nottingham ordinavimus habere colloquium et tractatum. Vobis,
etc. without Praemunientes, etc. Et hoc sicnt nos et honorem nostrum ac
vestrum, et utilitatem et quietem ejusdem regni ac terrarum praedictarum
diligitis nullatenus omittatis: Scituri quod si quod absit, prop^er absentiam
vestram dicta negotia contigerit retardari, ad vos prout convenit, graviter
capiemus. T. Rege. apud Nottingham 6 die September. Per ipsum Regem.

The Eodem modo is to 3 Bishops, the same with the last.

The 53 is this memorable writ in Claus. Anno 4 E. 3. 13 dorso.

Rex etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Qualiter negotia nos et statum regni nostri contingentia postquam suscipimus
gubernacula regni nostri huc^^ que in nostri dampnum et dedec^s, See the cause
of this writ and Parliament in my Plea for the Lords. p. 277. 278, etc.
ac depauperationem populi nostri deducta erant, vestram credimus prudentiam
non latere: Propter quod, non volentes hoc urgente conscientia ulterius
sustinere, et desiderantes toto cord statum et regimen regni nostri, secundum
juris et rationis exigentiam, ad honorem Dei, et tranquillitatem et pacem
sanctae Ecclesiae, ac totius populi ejusdem regni reformari; ordinavimus de
consi^io et assensn Praelatorum and Magnatum nobis assistentium Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. die lunae prox. post festum sanctae Katerinae virginis
prox. futur. et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus
dicti regni habere super praemissi cum deliberatione plenaria consilium et
tractatum. Vobis in fide et dilectione, etc. mandamus, quatenus omni
excusatione voluntaria cessante dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis,
nobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et tranquillitatem regni
nostri praedicti diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Scientes quod diem
sommonitionis dicti Parliamenti ob intensum desiderium quod habemus ut negotia
s^atum ipsius regni nostri contingentia feliciter disponantur, de assensu
Praelatorum et Magnatum praedictorum abbreviavimus ista vice: Nota.
Et nolumus quod abbreviatio hujusmodi cedat alicui in praejudicium vel
trahatur in consequentiam in futur. Et praemuniari faciatis Priorem et
Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, etc. T. Rege apud Leicest. 23 die October. Per ipsum
regem et consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo et Episcopis subscriptis, viz. 3 named,
the last, I. Exon. Episcopo, etc.

The 54 is the Writ entered in Claus. 5 E. 3. m. 25.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. Summonitio Parliament^.
Quia propter quaedam magna et ardua negotia Nos et Ducatum nostrum Aquitaniae,
ac alias terras nostras in pattibus transmarinis, (pro quibus ad easdem parts
nuper solempnes nuncios nostros destinavimus) contingentia, quae in ultimo
Parliamento nostro ob aliquas certas causas terminari non potuerunt,
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae in Crastino Quindenae Pa^chae prox.
^utur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. (in the ordinary form without Praemunientes,
etc.) Et hoc sicut honorem nostrum, et tranquillitatem et quietem dicti regni
diligitis, etc. T. Rege apud Wyndesore 18. die Feb. Per ipsum Regem.

An. 5 E. 3. m. 7. dorso.

Rex, etc. S. Archiepis^. Cantuar. etc. Cum pro magnis et arduis negotiis Nos
et statum ac regimen regni nostri specialiter contingentibus, de consilio
Praelaiorum et Magnatum Nobis assistentium ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. in crastino Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum ac
cum caeteris, etc. with Praemunientes Priorem, etc. Nota.
Et quia ante haec tempora communia regni nostrinegotia propter aliqnorum
Praelatorum et Magnatum absentiam, qui ad Convocationes at Parliamenta
hujusmodi non ad di^s Statutos, set diu postmodum venerunt, frequenter
retardata fuerunt, ad commune dampnum populi regni nostri. Volumus, et vobis
injungimus et mandamus, quod dicto crastino omni modo sitis ad Nos ad locum
praedictum; Et praemuniatis praefatos Priorem, Archidiaconos, parcatis populi
nostri laboribus et expensis. T. Rege apud Lincoln. 12 die Iulii. Per ipsum
Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est, etc. W. Archiepiscopo Eborum: and to 19. Bishops
more, Abbati S. Augustini Cantuar. and 26 Abbots, and 3. Priors more, with this
Addition in the writs to the Abbots, Priors and Nobles: Quia intentionis
nostrae, etc. ut supra.

5 E. 3. part 2. m. 7. dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. De summonitione colloquii and tractatus
haband.
Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis Nos ac statum regni nostri et aliarum
terrarum nostrorum quae post ultimum Parliamentum nostrum evenerunt intime
contingentibus et aliis, ordinavimus vobiscum, etc. Octabis S. M^chaelis prox.
futur. apud Westminster. habere Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis, etc. without
Praemunientes, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et tranquilitatem
dicti regni ac terraram nostrarum praedictarum diligitis, etc. T. Rege apud
Gildeford. 20. die Novembr. Per i^sum Regem.

Consimili^ Brevia diriguntur. W. Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. and to 19. more
Bishops, Priori S. Johan. Ierus. in Anglia, Ab^ati Wes^m: and 16 Abbots more.

The 57. is the writ in Claus. Anno 6 E. 3. m. 36. dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Cum magnificus Princeps Philippus Rex
Franciae, Consanguineus noster, et complu^es alii Reges et Principes Catholici,
zelo devotionis accensi, ad recuperandam haereditatem Dominicam de manibus
Inimicorum Crucis Christi, ad terram Sanctam jam ordinaverint iter suum, et Nos
instanter requifierin^, ut una cum ipsis ad dictas parts excausa prae icta
ve^imus prosicisci: Nos iter praedictum assumentes multum cordi, ordinavimus
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Gregori^ Papae
prox: futur. tenere, et vobiscum ac cum caereris Praelatis, Magnatibus et
Proceribus regni nostri super dicto itinere, et aliisn gotiis Nos, et statum
dicti regni nostri, et aliarum terrarum nostrarum specialiter tangentibus
habere Coll^quium et Tractatum. Vobis igitur, etc. et hoc sicut Nos et honorem
nostrum ac tranquillitatem et quietam regni nostri di^igitis nullatenus
omittatis. Sciences pro certo, quod nisi evidens et manifesta necessitas id
expos^at, non intendimus Procuratores seu Excusatores pro vobis admittere ea
vice propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum. Et praemuniatis, etc. T. Rege
apud Westminster. 27 die Ianuar.

Eodem modo mandatum est, etc. W. Archiepis^. Eborum: and 19. Bishops: Abbati
S. Augustine. etc. 27. Abbots, and 3. Priors more.

After whose names is inserted in the Roll.

Istis Ab^atibus et Prioribus subscriptis non solebat scri^i in al^^s
Parliamentis, viz. Abbati de Teukesbury, Abbati de Bardeneye, Abbati de
Barlinges, Abbati de Bello, Abbati de Pershore, Abbati de Hayles, Abbati de
Sancta Ositha, Abbati de Langedon, Abbati de Tavestoke, Abbati de Stratford,
Abbati de Burton super Trentam, Abbati de Ford^, Abbati de Wardon. Abbati de
Whalley, Abbati de Fontibus, Abbati de Fornays, Abbati de Ryevall, Abbati
Sancti Augustini Bristoll, Abbati de Cestr. Abbati de Boghland, Abbati de
Them, Abbati de Lesnes, Abbati de Gerveux, Magistro Ordinis de Sempyngham,
Priori de Sempyngham, Priori de Bridelington, Priori Ecclesiae Christi de
Twynham, Priori de Gisburn.

Yet I find most of these summoned to ^ormer Parliaments, under H. 3. and Ed.
1, 2. but afterward omitted in most summons to Parliaments, but some of them
inserted into summons to Councils.

After this in the same Roll there issued out a second writ (the 58. in number)
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, agreeing verbatim with the ^ormer to
impensuri, and then subjoyning this unusual clause of praemunition to the
Clergy the second time. Et licet injunximus singulis Episcopis praedictis, quod
quilibet eorum praemuniri faciat Priores et Decanos et Capitula ecclesiarum
suarum Cathedralium, necnon Archidiaconos et Clerum suarum Dioc. quod ^idem
Priores, Decani et Archidiac. propriis personis suis, et quodlibet Capituloru^
dictorum per urum, Clerumque cujus^ibet Diocaes. per duos Procuratores idoneos
suss^cientem potest atem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero habentes, dictis die et
loco inter sint; ad faciendum et consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi
consilio divina favente clementia et super premissis contigerit ordinari.
Nolentes tamen dicta negotia nostra pro defectu praemunitionum praedict arum si
for san minus recte factae fuerint aliqualiter retardari; V^bis mandamus
rogantes* quatenus praemunire faciatis Priores, Decanos et Capitula Ecclesiarum
Cathedralium, ac etiam Arcaidiaconos et totum Clerum vestrae Provinciae, quod
iidem Priores D^cani et Archidiaconi in propriis personis suis, et quodlibet
Capitulorum p^aedictorum per unum, Clerumque cujuslibet Diocaes. per duos
P^ocuratores sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo et Clero habentes, sint
in dicto die apud dictum locum ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de
communi consilio regni nostri ordinari contigerit sicut praedictum est. Et hoc
nulla^enus omittatis. Test Rege apud Westminster. 28 die Ianuarii.

Consimiles literae diriguntur W. Arch. Eborum. Angliae Primati, test ut supra.

The 59. writ is that of Claus. An 6 E. 3. m. 19. dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia Hyberniae specialiter contingentib^s, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster, in crastino Nativitatis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere,
etc. without Praemunientes, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, necnon
tranquiliitatem regni et terrae nostrorum praedictorum diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis. Test Rege apud Wodestock 20 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Archiep. Eborum. and 19. Bishops more; Abbati S.
Augustini Cantuar. and 27 Abbots more, and Priori S. Iohannis Jerusalem in
Anglia, Priori de Spalding, Priori de Jews.

The 60. writ is extant in Claus. 6 E. 3. m. 9. dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Cum post Parliamentum nostrum quod
apud Westminster. ultimo tenuimus, quaedam magna et ardua Negotia versus parts
Boreales quae statum regni nostri et Coronae nosirae regiae intime contingunt
emerserunt, super quibus celere et festinum remedium cum deliberatione provida
apponere Nos oportet, propter quod de Consisio Praelatorum et Magnatum Nobis
assistentium Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum: die Veneris prox. ante festum S.
Nicolai prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. without Praemunientes, etc. Et
hoe sicut Nos et honorem nostrum ac salvationem Coronae nostrae regiae, et
tranquillitatem partium dicti regni nostri diligitis, nullatenus omittatis.
Scientes quod propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum, ceslame impedimento
legi^imo praelentia vestra carere non pos^umus ista vice. Test Rege apud
Eborum 20 die Octobris, Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo Eborum. to 19. Bishops, 29. Abbots, and
3. Priors last before named.

Claus. Anno 7 E. 3. pars 2 m. 3. dorso.

Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Priori Ec^lesiae Christi Cantuar. Summonitio
Parliamenti.
Custodi spiritualitatis A^chiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede va^ante, etc. Quia pro
diversis et arduis negotiis Nos, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum die
Lunae prox. ante fes^um sancti Petri in Cat^edra prox. futur. teneri, etc. (as
in other summons) Test Rege apud Walyng^ord 4 die Januarii Per Breve de
privato sigillo.

Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopo Eborum. 19 Bishops, 27 Abbots, and 3
Priors forenemed. After which there i^ued out other writs to the said Guardian
of the Spiritualties of Canterbury, and the Archbishop of York, dated the same
day and place, verbatim agreeing with the former, with this addi^ional Clause
in the close thereof. Et licet singulis Episcopis praedictis injunxerimus quod
quilibet eo^um praemunire faciat, Prio^es, Decanos, etc. as in the 58 writ
before cited. T. ut supra.

Claus. 8 E. 3. m. 18. do^so.

Rex, etc. I. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia, etc. nos et statum regni nostri, et alia^um terra um nostrarum
specialiter contingentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die lun^e prox.
post festum exaltationis sanctae Crucis prox ^utur. tenere, etc. Praemunientes,
etc. Test Rege apud Redinges 24 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum. to 18. Bishops, 27 Abbots* and 3. Priots
more.

Then follows in the same Roll another special writ to the two Archbishops,
agreeing with the former, except in this addition. Et licet singulis Episcopis
praedictis inj^nxerimus, etc. as in the 58. and 61. Test ut supra. Per ipsum
Regem.

The 63. writ is recorded in Claus. 9 E. 3. mem. 28.

Rex, etc. I. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum in crastino Ascentionis Domini
prox. futur. tenere, etc. Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud Notingham 3. die
Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est, Arch. Eborum. 18 other Bishops, 28. Abbots, 3.
Priors. Then follows another writ of the same Form and date to both the
Archbishops, with an Et licet, etc. as before, ^. 53.

The 64. is in Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 8. dorso.

Rex, etc. J. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die
Lunae prox. post diem Dominicam in medio Quadragesimae prox. futur. etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Berewic. super Twedam 22. die Ianuarii. Per
ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est, Archiep. Eborum 19. other Bishops, and 3. Priors.
After which there issued writs to both the Archbishops of the same date, with
Et licet. etc. superadded as before, n. 58. Peripsum Regem.

The 65. writ is entered, Claus. Anno 10 E. 3. m. 5. do^so.

Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum* die Lunae in festo Sancti Hillarii
prox. futur. tenere, etc. Test Rege apud Botheuil 29. die Novembris. Per ipsum
Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est, Archiepisc. Eborum. 18 other Bishops. Custodi Spn
^^ualitatis Episcopatus Norwic. sede vacant, Abbots 28. Priors 3.

These writs are seconded with 2. other writs of the same date and form to both
the Archbishops, with the addition of the Clause: Et licet singulis Episcopis
praedictis injunxerimus quod quilibet eorum praemunire faciat Priores, etc. ut
supra, n. 58.

The 66. writ is registered Claus. 11 E. 3. pars 1. m. 15. dorso.

Rex, etc. J. etc. Arch. Cant. De venicndo ad Consilium apud Staun^.
Quia super diversis et urgentissimis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, et
aliarum terrarum nostrarum, etc. apud Staunf. die Veneris in crastino
Ascentionis Domini prox. futur. habere ordinavimus colloquium et tractatum,
etc. Vobis mandamus, etc. quod dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis
Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis, super
dictis negotiis tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et
honorem nostrum et salvationem et tranquillitatem regni et terrarum nostrarum
praedictarum diligitis modis omnibus faciatis, ne per vestri absentiam
expeditio negotiorum nostrorum it a urgentium retardaretur, sen aliquo modo
quod absit, differatur. Test Rege apud Westminster. 24 die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem.

Edoem modo mandatum est Archiepisc. Eborum, et Episcopis, ac Comitibus et
Magnatibus et aliis subscriptis DE CONSILIO REGIS existentibus mutatis
mutandis: there being only the names of 8. Bishops subscribed, without any
Abbots or Priors, and 10 Earls, 23 Lords and Barons, 5. Justices, and 3. others
of the Kings Council: but no writs at all for electing Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses: So as this was no Summons to a Parliament, but rather to a Privy
Council or Consultation.

The 67. writ is extant in Claus. 11. E. 3. pars 1. m. 8. dorso.

Rex, etc. I. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. De veniendo ad Consilium.
Quia super quibusdam arduis et urgentissimis negotiis quae per solempnes
Nuncios nostros quos ad parts transmarinas transmissimus Nobis jam sunt
before intimata, et quae Nos, et statum regni nostri Coronaeque jura
specialiter et intimis contingent, vobiscum et cum aliis Praelatis, Magnatibus
et Proceribus ipsius regni nostri Westminster. die Lunae prox post festum Sanctae
Margaretae Virginis prox. futur. Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum; Vobis
in fide et dilectione, etc. mandamus quod cessante excusatione quacunque dictis
die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super dictis negotris tractaturi vestrumque
consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et tranquillitatem et
salvationem regni Coronaeque nostrorum diligitis, nullatenus omucatis. Scientes
quod propter arduitatem et magnitudinem negotiorum praedictorum absentiam
vestram ad diem illum nequimus nec volumus aliqualiter excusare. Test Rege
apud Staunford 21 die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopis, Abbatibus et Prioribus subscriptis, v^z. 15
Bishops, 25 Abbots, 4 Priors (the last of Sempyngham often omitted before) 10.
Earls, 38 Nobles and great men.

The 68. is this Notable writ in Claus. 11 E. 3. part

Rex, etc. I. and. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. De Consilio summonito.
Cum de assensu Praelatorum, Magnatum and Procerum regni nostri ac aliorum de
Consilio nostro, ad parts transmarinas una cum non^ullis Magnatibus et
Proceribus, et aliis Pidelibus nostris, ex c^rtis et legitimis causis infra
breve, Domino duce, ordinavimus Nos transfretare, et prae caeteris insideat
Nobis cordi, quod pax nostra in regno nostro in nostra absen^ia inviolabiliter
observetur, et idem regnum nostrum ab hostium incursibus tueatur. Nos autem
passagium nostrum praedictum ad dictas parts super custodia dicti regni nostri
et conservatione pacis nostrae in codem regno dum sic absentes fuer^mus, ct
aliis arduis et urgentissimis negotiis, tam Nos et Statum ejusdem regni
altarumque terrarum nostrarum, quam eundem transitum nostrum spcialiter
contingentibus, vobiscum et cum cae^eris Praelatis et Magnatibus ipsius regni
apud Westminster. die Veneris prox. ante festum Sancti Mich^elis prox. futur: habore
volumus Colloquium et tractatum. Et ideo vobis in fide et dilectione quibus
nobis tenemini, sirmiter injungendo mandamus, quod pensatis tanta nostrorum et
dict^ regni negotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus, absque exc^satione
qu ^cunque dictis die et loco personaliter inter sitis, N^biscum et cum
caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super dictis negotiis
tracta^uri, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut honorem nostrum ac
salvationem et tranquillitat^m dicti regni nostri et Ecclesiae sanctae
diligitis modis omnibus faciatis. Ne, quod absit, per vestri absentiam
expeditio negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum retardetur seu quomodolibet
differetur. Et praemunientes Priorem, etc. Test Roge apud Westminster. 18 die
Augusti. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est W. Arch. Eborum; to 15. Bishops more; Custod.
Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Cicestr. sede vacant: 29. Abbots and 3. Priors.

Paul's.

Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Cum de assensu Praelatorum, etc.
usque imparturi (ut supra, et tunc sic.) Et quia negotia praedicta salvationem
et quictem regni nostri et Ecclesiae sanctae, ^c universorum ac singulorum
ipsius regni specialiter contingunt; Vobis mandamus, rogantes, quod Episcopos,
Praelatos and Clerum vestrae Provinciae apud Ecclesiam Sancti Pauli London, in
crastino S. Michaelis prox. futur. convocari fac. Ita quod tam dicti Episcopi
quam Decani, et Priores Ecclesiarum Cat^edralium, and Archidi aconi et Abbates
exempti et non exempti quos expedire videritis personaliter, et quodlibet
Capitulorum praedictarum Ecclesiarum Cathedralium per unum, et (lerici
cu^uslibet Dioc. per duos Procuratores sufficientem potestatem habentes, apud
dictam Ecclesiam Sancti Pauli in praedicto crastino Sancti Michaelis intersint.
ad tractandum et consulendum super praemissis una vobiscum et aliis per Nos
tunc mittendis, et ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem pro communi
defensione et utilitate divina favente clementia contigerit ordinari. Test ut
supra. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimile Breve dirigitur W. Archiepiscopo Eborum Angliae Primati, quod
convocare fac. Praelatos, etc. de Provincia sua apud E^orum die Iovis prox.
post Octabis S. Michaelis prox. futur. Test u^ supra.

Claus. Anno 11 E. 3. pars 2. m 11. dorso.

Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiep Cantuar. etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Quia tam super urgentissimis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, ac aliarum
terrarum nostrraum, ac jura nostra et Coronae nostrae tangen^ibus, quam etiam
super expeditione quorundam altorum arduorum negotiorum, quae venerabiles
Patres Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinales, ad Nos jam in Angliam, per Domi^um
Summum Pontificem transmissi, Nobis ex part ejusdem Summi Pontificis et dictae
sedis specialiter nunciarunt, PARLIAMENTUM nostrum apud Westminster. in crastino
Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox, futur. tenere, ac ibidem vobiscum
et cum caeteris Praelatis, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et
tranquillitatem et quietem dictorum regni et terrarum diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis. Praemunientes Priorem, etc. Scientes insuper, quod tam prop^er
dictorum negotiorum arduitatem, quam pro co quod nonnulla alia nostri et regni
nostri negotia in diversis Parliamentis nostris ante haec tempora tentis, Nota.
propter absentiam Praelatorum et Magnatum ejusdem regni qui eisdem
Parliamentis, una cum aliis ipsius regni Proceribus personaliter juxta mandata
nostra eis inde directis interfuisse debuerant FUERUNT NON ABSQUE NOSTRI and
REGNI NOSTRI INCOMMODO SAEPIUS RETARDATA, Procuratores, seu excusationem
aliquam pro vobis ligitimo cessante impedimento, admittere nolumus ista vice.
Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Eborum. 16. Bishops more, and H. Episcopo
Lincoln. vel ejus Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo in remotis agente: 28.
Abbots, and 4. Priors.

The 71. is this observable writ of Claus. 12 E. 3. pars

Rex, etc. Archiepisc. Eborum, etc. De Consilio summonitio.
Cum super defensione et salvatione regni nostri ac jurium Coronae nostrae de
assensu Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum et Communitatis regni nostri sumus jam
cum exercitu nostro ad parts transmarinas, annuente Domino, personaliter
prosecturi: et dilectum et fidelem nostrum Edwardum Ducem Cornubiae er Comitem
Cestriae, filium nostrum primogenitum Custodem dicti regni nostri, et locum
nostrum tenentem in eodem regno constituerimus, dum sic Nos absentare
contigerit, vel alias nostrae placuerit voluntari: ac intimius insidat cordi
nostro, quod Pax nostra in ipso regno tam in nostra absentia quam in praesentia
illaesa firmius conservetur, et idem regnum et populus noster ibidem ab hostium
incursibus tueantur. Per quod de assensu Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod
super praemissis et aliis arduis et urgentibus negotiis nos et Statum regni
nostri multipliciter conting^ntibus QUODDAM MAGNUM CONSILIUM apud North^mpton,
in crastino S. Iacobi Apostoli prox. futur. teneatur; Vobis in fide et
dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod attentis
praemissorum arduitate et imminentibus periculis, quacurque excusatione
cessante dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, cum praefato Custode et
caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri, quos ibidem ea de
causa convocari fecimus, super negotiis praedictis tractaturi, vestrumque
consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et
tranquillitatem dicti regni nostri et Ecclesiae sanctae, diligitis, modis
omnibus faciatis; ne quod absir, per vestram absentiam expeditio negotiorum
nostrorum praedictorum retardetur, seu quomodolibet differatur. Praemunientes
Decanum et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, etc. Test Rege apud Walton. 15 die
Iunii, Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est etc. to 15 Bishops more, H. Episcopo Lincoln. vel ejus
Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo in remotis agenti, R. Electo London, confirmato.

Then follows the like writ to J. Archbishop of Canterbury, as issued to York:
with this different clause after; Excusatione cessante; viz. vel Vicariis
vestris generalibus, vobis in partibus transmarinis agentibus, dictis die et
loco personaliter intersitis, etc. Et vos, vel dictus vicarius vester
generalis, praemuniatis, etc. (ut supra, mutatis mutandis) Test ut supra.

Consimile Breve dirititur R. Episcopo Dunolm, and to 28. Abbots, and 4. Priors.

Claus. 14 E. 3. part 2. m. 28. dorso.

Rex, etc. I. Summonitio Parliamenti.
etc. Archiepi^c. Cantuar. etc. vel ejus Vicario generali ipso Archiepiscopo in
remotis agenti, Salutem. Quia de avisamento Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod
super arduis et urgentibus negotiis, tam Nos et expeditionem guerrae nostrae,
ac jura nostra et Coronae nostrae in partibus transmarinis, quam statum et
defensionem, regni nostri, et aliarum terrarum nostrarum contingentibus
Parliamentum apud Westminster. ad Quindena S. Michaelis prox. futur. teneatur: et
ibidem vobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, etc. Vobis, etc. mandamus, quod
consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus, cessante
quacunque excusatione dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum, seu
cum Custode regni nostri, si tunc contigerit Nos abesse, ac caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus, etc. consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos and honorem nostrum, ac
salvationem regni, terrarum et jurium nostrorum praedictorum, ac Ecclesiae
sanctae, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum nostrorum diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis. Ne quod absit, per vestram absentiam (quam cessante impedimento
legitimo excusare aliqualiter nolumus ista vice) expeditio dictorum negotiorum
nostrorum retardetur, seu quomodolibes differatur. Praemunientes, etc. Test
Custode praedicto apud Windesore, 25. die Aug. Per ipsum Regem ac dictum
Custodem et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum, etc. and 16. Bishops more, R. Dunolm.
Episcopo, vel ejus Vicario generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente: and so H.
Lincoln Episcopo, T. Hereford Episcopo, vel ejus Vicario generali, etc.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to* 25 Abbots and 4. Priors.

After which follow writs to the Archbishop of York, and to the Archbishop of
Canterbury or his Vicar General in his absence of the like form: with an, Et
licet singulis Episcopis regni nostri, etc. Nolentes tamen dicta negotia nostra
pro defectu praemunitionum praedictarum si minus recte factae fuerint,
retardari, etc. ( as n. 58.) Test Custode apud Wyndesor. 26. die Augusti. Per
ipsum Regem et dictum Custodem and Consilium.

Claus. An. 13 E. 3. pars 2. m. 1. dorso.

Rex, Summonitio Parliamenti.
etc. I. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Cum quaedam ardua et urgentia Negotia,
quae Nos et honorem nostrum, statumque regni nostri contingebant in Pariiamento
nostro apud Westminster. Quindena S. Michaelis prox. ptaeterito summonito, Praelatis,
Proceribus et Communitate dicti regni ibidem existentibus exposita extitissent;
super quibus eadem Communitas tempus ad delibe^andum petiit, supplicans aliud
Parliamentum statim infra breve, ut tunc deliberatione hujusmodi habita valeret
expositis maturius responderi. Per quod de avisamento Praelatorum et Procerum
praedictorum, necnon ad dictae Communitatis hujusmodi supplicationem,
ordinavimus, quod super hiis et aliis urgentissimis negotiis, tam Nos et
expeditionem guerrae nostrae in partibus transmarinis, quam defensionem ejusdem
regni, jurium et terrarum nostrarum contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. in Octabis S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneatur; Et ibidem vobiscum, etc.
Vobis, etc. mandamus, quod dictorum negotiorum arduitate, periculisque et
necessitate imminentibus ponderatis, excusatione quacunque cessante, dictis die
et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, seu cum Custode regni nostri, si tunc
con^igerit nos abesse, ac caeteris Praelatis, etc. (as in the last writ before)
Praemunientes, etc. ad consen^ien^um etc. Test Custode praedicto apud Langele,
16 die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem, et dictum Custod^m et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum, and to 18 Bishops more, 29 Abbots, and
4. Priors. After which follows two other writs dated 20 die Novembris, to both
the Archbishops in the same form; with the clause of Et licet singulis
Episcopis, etc. as before, n. 58. Per ipsum Regem, et dictum Custodem et
Consilium.

De Parliamento sum^^onito.
Anno 14 E. 3. pars 1. m. 33. dorso.

Rex, venerabili in Christo patri, I. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar,
totius Angliae Primati, Salutem. Quia super diversis arduissimis et
urgentissimis Negoti^s, Nos et statum ac etiam defensionem regni Angliae, quam
expeditionem guerrae nostrae, ac jura Coronae nostrae, terrasque et Dominica
nostra in partibus transmarinis multipliciter contingentibus Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. di^ Merc^rii prox. post diem Dominicam in medio
Quadragesimae prox. futur. tenere, et ibidem vobiscum, ac cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus et Procetibus dicti regni Colloquium habere volumus et
tractatum. Vobis in fide, etc. mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum Negotiorum
arduitate et periculis necessitate que imminentibus, cessan^e quacunque
excusa^ione, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum, et cum
caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super dictis Negotiis
tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impens^ri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum
ac salvationem ejusdem regni nostri Angliae caeteratumque terrarum ac jurium
nostrorum praedictorum ac negotiorum expeditionem diligitis nullatenus
omi^tatis. Et praemun^entes Priorem, etc. Non mirantes ex hoc quod stilum
nostrum consuetum mut vimus ET REGEM FRANCIAE NOS FACIAMUS nominari jam ( in
the beginning of this writ at large to the Archbishop, though omitted for
brevity in the Clause Roll, beginning only with Rex, instead of See the St^tute
of 14 E. 3 Stat. 1. Prol. Stat. 2^ c. 1. and Sta^. 4. Cooks 1 Inst. f. 7. b.
Edwardus Dei gra^a Rex Ang^iae et FRANCIAE, etc.) diversae subsunt causae per
quas hoc facere necessary nos oportet, et quas vobis et aliis Praelatis et
Magnatibus necnon Communitatibus ejusdem regni nostri Angliae ad dictum
Parliam. before exponemus. Scientes insuper quod nolumus, nec intentionis
nostrae exis^it, quod ex assumptione nominis et honoris eorundem dicto regno ac
terrae Angliae, aut statui seu juribus eorundem prae judicietur, aut
aliqualiter derogetur, set quod eidem regno uberius subveniatur et rele vetur
maturius, illud idem, et p^o securitate in hac parre ad dictum Parliamentum si
opus fuerit, ordinabimus, quod juxta consilium vestrum et aliorum Praelatorum,
Magnatum caeterorumque ibidem convocatorum viderimus oportunum. Test Rege apud
Harwich. 21 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modomandatum est Arch. Eborum, and to 17. Bishops more. T. Episcopo
Hereford, vel ejus Vicar. generali, ipso Episcopo in remotis agente, W. Electo
London c^nfirmato, 29 Abbots, and 4. Priors.

After which there are two writs of the self-same date and form directed to
both the Archbishops; with this usual additional clause. Et licet singulis
Episcopis, etc. as before, n. 58.

De Parliamento summonito.
Anno 14 E. 3. pars 1. m. 23. dorso.

Rex, etc. I. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Cum pro defensione et salvatione
regni nostri Angliae, ac recuperatione jurium nostrorum et Coronae nostrae
sumus cum Magnatibus et aliis ejusdem regni ad parts transmarinas, annuente
Domino personaliter profecturi; et per-dilectum et fidelem nostrum Edwardum
Ducem Cornubiae, et Comitem Cestriae filium nostrum primogenitu^ CUSTODEM dicti
regn^ nostri Angliae, et locu^ nostru^ tenente^ in eodem regno constituerimus
dum Nos sie absentari contigerit, vel alias nostrae placuerit voluntati; ac
intimius insideat cordi nostro quod pax nos^ra in ipso regno tam in absentia
qua^ in praese^tia ill^safirma observetur, ^dem regnu^ et p puli^s noster
ibidem ab hostiu^ incursu tueantur; per quod de assensu Consilii nostri
ordinavimus, quod super praemissis ^t aliis arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos
et Statum dicti regni nostri Angliae, et expeditionem diversorum
urgentissimorum negotiorum nostrorum multipliciter contingentibus, quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. ad diem Mercurii prox. post festum
Translationis S. Thomae Martyris prox. futur. teneatur. Vobis in side, etc.
personaliter intersitis, cum praefato Custode ac caeteris Praelatis, etc. quos
ibidem ea de causa convocari mandavimus, super dictis negotiis tractaturi
vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac
salvationem et tranquillitatem regni nostri Angliae et Ecclesiae sanctae
diligitis modis omnibus faciatis; Ne quod absit, per vestri absentiam expeditio
negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum retardetur, seu quomodolibet differatur. Et
praemuniatis, etc. Test R^ge apud Westminster. 30 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est, A. Episcopo Winton, and 18. Bishops more, 29 Abbots,
and 4. Priors.

The 76. writ is recorded in Claus. 15 E. 3. pars 1. m. De Parliamento
summontio.


Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis
tam Nos, statum et defensionem regni nostri Angliae, quam expeditionem guerrae
nostrae, ac jura Coronae nostrae, et terras et Dominica nostra in partibus
transmarinis multipliciter contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in
die Lunae prox. post Quindena Paschae prox. futur. ^enere, et ibidem, etc. (a^
in the 73. precedent writ.) Test Rege apud Wodestoke. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est to 18. Bishops, 29 Abbots, and 4. Priors.

The 77. writ is in Claus. An^o. 16 E. 3. pars 1. m. De Consilio Summonito.


Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia super quibusdam arduis
negotiis Nos et statum dicti regni Angliae ac aliarum terrarum nostrarum, ac
etiam recuperationem jurium nostrorum specialiter contingentibus, Vobiscum et
cum caeteris Praelatis ac Magnatibus dicti regni nostri apud Westminster. die Lunae
in cr^stino Claus. Paschae prox. futur. colloquium habere volumus et tractatum.
Vobis, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et defensionem
dicti regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test Rege apud Westminster. 25
die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est to 7. Bishops, but no Abbots, Priors, Sherifs, or
Warden of the Cinqueports, and so no summons to a Parliament, but a Council, as
the Margin styles it.

The 77. writ is entered in Claus. 16 Edw. 3. pars 2. m. 22. dorso; with one
unusual clause.

Rex, De Consilio summonito.
etc. J. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia pro defensione et salvatione regni
nostri Angliae, ac expeditione guerrae nostrae Franciae, passagium nostrum ad
parts transmarinas duximus ordinandum. Nos de bono regimine dicti regni, ac
conservatione Pacis nostrae, ac discretione provida negotiorum nostrorum, ac
aliorum publicam utilitatem concernen. dum sic absentes fu^rimus merito
solliciti, quoddam CONSILIUM ET TRACTATUM tenendum vobiscum, et cum aliis
Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Communitatibus dicti regni nostri super hiis apud
Westminster. die Mercurii prox. post festum S. Edwardi Confessor^s prox. futur. per
Edw. Ducem Cornubiae, et Comitem Cestriae, filium nostrum carissimum, quem
Custodem dicti regni constituimus, Nobis sic agentibus in remotis, ordinavimus.
Et ideovobis, etc. dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis cum praefaro
Custode, nomine nostro, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Communitatibus
antedictis, super praemissis ^ractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri.
Praemunientes, etc. et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, et salvationem et
defensionem dicti regni diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Scituri quod
gratitudinem et ingratitudinem quas Nobis in absentia nostra jam ostendi
contigerit plus ponderabimus, quam si fuerant dum praesentes essemus, et ea
curabimus juxta merita seu demerita compensare. Test Rege apud Gastry 12. die
Sept. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimili^ Brevia diriguntur, mutatis mutandis sub eadem data, unto 17.
Bishops, 20. Abbots, and 2. Priors.

E. 3. part 2. m. De veniendo ad Consilium.
13. Dorso.

Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia jam super expeditione guerrae
nostrae sub spe saelicis eventus agimus in remotis, et super quibusdam tam
personam quam statum et bonum regimen regni nostri Angliae sum concernentibus
vestrum habere vellemus auxilium et consilium providum et festi^um; intime vo^
rogantes mandamus, quod die Sabbato in crastino S. Luciae prox: futur. fitis
personaliter apud Westminster. ibidem cum Edward^ filio nostro carissimo Duce
Cornubiae, CUSTODE Angliae, ac aliis de Consilio nostro, super his tractaturi
vestrumque consilium et auxilium, prout requiret dictorum negotiorum qualitas,
impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et expeditionem nostram
diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test praefato Custode apud Kenyngton 20. die
Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to 5. more Bishops, 5. Earls, 17. Lords and Great
men; without any Abbots, Priors, writs to Sherifs, Assistants, or Warden of the
Cinque Ports. It being only a Council, not a Parliament.

The 80. writ very observable in the recital, is registered Claus. Anno 17 E. 3.
part 1. m. 25. dorso. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia ob reveren^am Domini Summi
Pontificis et sedis Apostolicae, et instantiam venerabilium Patrum Dominorum
Penestrini et Tusculani Episcoporum, sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae Cardinales,
et dictorum Summi Pontificis atque Sedis Nunciorum, propter haec ad Nos
specialiter transmissorum, quaedam Trenga, sub spe pacis honorabilis inter Nos
et adversari^s nostros Franciae jam est inita, et ad tractandum de dieta Pace
iuxta conditionem super hoc habitam, solempnes Nuntios citra festum Nativitatis
S. Johannis Baptistae habemus ad Romanam Curiam destinari, propter haec et
alias causas varias et arduas commodum publicum nostri et nostrorum fidelium
concernentes, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post
Quindenam Pasch. prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibu^ et Proceribus regni nostri Angliae Colloquium habere volumus et
Tractatum. Vobis in fide, etc. mandamus, quod considerata dictorum negotiorum
arduita^e, quatenus excusatione cessante dictis die et loco personaliter inter
sitis Nobiscum, etc. Et praemuniatis, etc. Test Custode praedicto apud Byfleet
29 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to 19. Bishops, 26. Abbots, and 2. Priors.

Anno 18 E. 3. pars 1. m. 14. dorso.

Rex, etc. I. etc. Archiep. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibu^dam arduis et urgentibus negotiis honorem Dei, et
decus et defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ac necessarium et salubre Regimen
populiet regni nostri. Angliae sum concernentibus, ordinavimus Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post Octab. S. Trinitatis prox. futur.
tenere, ac vobiscum ibidem, ac cum caeteris, etc. firmiter injungimus et
mandamus quatenus excusatione quacunque postposita, ard^itate negotiorum
praedictorum considerata, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum,
si praesentes fuerimus ibidem, seu cum deputandis a Nobis si abesse Nos
contigerit, et cum caeteris Praelatis, etc. Et praemuniatis, etc. Test Rege
apud Westminster. 30 die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem et Cons^^ium.

Eodem m^do mandatum est, Archiepisc. Eborum. I. Electo Hereford confirmato,
and 18 Bishops, 26 Ab^ots, and 2. Priors more.

An. 20 E. 3. par. 2. m. 22. dorso.

Rex, etc. J. etc. Archiep. Summonitio Parliamenti.
Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento Consilii nostri ordinavimus, quod super
variis et arduis negotiis, tam Nos et expedit^^nem guerrae nostrae, ac jura
nostra et Coronae nostrae in partibus transmarinis, quam Statum et defensionem
regni nostri Angliae contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
die Lunae prox. post festum Nativitatis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur.
teneatur, et ibidem vobiscum, etc. Tractatus et Colloquium habeantur. Vobis in
fide, etc. cessante quacunque e^^usatione dictis die et loco personaliter
Nobiscum, seu cum Custode regni nostri, si tunc contigerit Nos abesse, ac
caeteris Praela^is, etc. consilium impensuri. Et hoc ^cut honorem nostrum et
salvationem regni, terrarum et jurium nostrorum ac Ecclefiae ^anctae,
expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum nostrorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis;
Ne quod absi^, per vestri absentiam (quam cessan^e impedimento legitimo nullo
modo excusatam habere volumus) expeditio negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum
retardetur, seu aliqualiter differatur. Praemunien^e^, etc. Test Custode
praedicto apud Westminster. 30 die Iulii Per ipsum Regem et dictum Custodem et
Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to 16. Bishops, Custodi Spiritualitis Episcopatus
Assaven, 23. Abbots, and 2. Priors.

The 83. (in the same Clause of Roll and Membr.) is this York and others,
varying from all the rest in some observable clauses concerning making Proxies
in their absence.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum etc. Cum de avisamento, etc. ut supra,
to habentur; then, Per quod mandaverimus diversis Praelatis, Comitibus,
Baronibus, et aliis Proce^ibus regni nostri, quod consideratis dictorum
negotiorum arduitate et periculis imminentibus, cessante excusatione quacunque,
dictis die ^t loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, etc. (ut supra, to
impensuri. Then comes in this special clause) Et quia modernis temporibus super
salvatione et defensione Marchiae Scotiae estis multipliciter occupati: Vobis
in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus; quod
dictis negotiis et periculis per vos debite ponderatis, aliquem idoneum
Procuratorem, in quo been confiditis, de voluntate et intention vestris
before informatum, in loco vestri, cum sufficienti potestate ad dictos diem et
locum mittatis, ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc per dictos Praelatos. Comites,
et alios Proceres ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Et hoc sicut
de vobis confidimus, et Nos et honorem nostrum et vestrum, ac recuperationem
^urium nostrorum praedictorum, salvationemque et defensionem dicti regni nostri
Angliae diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. Gilberto de Umfravill
Comiti de Anegos, Thomae de Lucy, Hen. de Percy, Rad. de Nevill, Johan. de
Harrington, Pet. de Malo-lacu, le quint, Joh. de Fauconberge, Thomae Wake de
Lydell, Joh. de Moubray, Hen. Fitz Hugh, Rad. de Bulmere, Thomae Episcopo
Dunolm. vel ejus Vicar. generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente. J. Episcopo
Carliol. Abbati beatae Mariae Eborum, Abbati de Selbye.

Claus. Anno 21 E. 3. pars 1. m. 28. dors. De veniendo ad Consilium.


Rex, etc. R. eadem gratia Episcopo Cicestr. Salutem. Propter quaedam ardua
negotia Nos statum et defensionem regni nostri Angliae, ac expeditionem
guerrarum nostrarum sum contingentia: Vobis in fide, etc. mandamus quod
omnibus aliis praetermissis, sitis apud Westminster. tertio die Martii prox. futur.
ibidem cum Praelatis, et caeteris Magnatibus, ac aliis de Confilio nostro super
negotiis an^edictis tracta^uri, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut
Nos et honorem nostrum, ac celerem expeditionem Guerrarum nostrarum
praedictarum diligitis nullo modo omittatis. T. Custode praedicto apud
Redinges, 18. die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis, mutatis mutandis, sub eadem data,
viz. to 5. Bishops (one of them inserted among the temporal Barons) 8. Earls,
8. Barons, 20 Abbots, and 5. Priors: without any writs to Sheriffs, Assistants,
or Warden of the Cinque Ports. It being a Summons to a Council, not Parliament,
which the next writ demonstrates.

Claus. Anno 21 E. 3. part 2. m. 9. dorso, having a most observable clause
toward the end of it, which would be very acceptable now (as no doubt it was
then) to the overlong uncessantly taxed, and almost exhausted people.

Rex, etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
I. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis negotiis tam Nos
et Statum Regni nostri Angliae, quam communem utilitatem populi ejusdem regni
nostri contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in crastino S. Hillarii
prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac
communem utilitatem populi praedicti dilig^is, ^ull^tenus om^ttatis.
Praemuntentes etc. Et scire vos volu^mus, Quod dictum Parliamentum non ad
Auxilia seu Tallagia a populo dicti regni nostri petenda, vel alia onera eidem
populo imponenda, Nota.
set duntaxat pro justicia ipsi populo nostro super damnis et gravaminibus sibi
illatis facienda (a very welcome clause in this exacting, oppres^ing,
unrighteous age of manifold grievances and Injuries of all kinds fit to be thus
redressed in a particular Parliament summoned for that end) Et pro tractatibus^
super dictis negotiis, ut praemittitur habend. fecimus summoneri. Test Rege
apud Westminster. 13. die November. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch^episc. Eborum, etc. and 19 Bishop^, 24 Abbots,
and 2. Priors.

The 86. is this memorable writ of Summons I meet Claus. Anno 22 E. 3. part 1.
m. 32. dorso.

Rex, etc. Summonitio Parliamenti.
I. and. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Cum juxta formam Treugarum inter Nos et
adversarium nostrum Fr^nciae apud Calesiam initarum, concordatum fuisset, quod
nonnulli solempnes Nuncii durantibus dictis Treugis, tam ex part nostra, quam
dicti adversarii nostri ad sedem Apostolicam ad tractandum ibidem de finali
Pace inter Nos et dictum adversarium nostrum mitterentur; Et licet super hoc
certos competentes Nun^ios ad sentiendam voluntatem Dom. Summi Pontificis super
quibusdam praeparationis, tam dictum t^acta^um pacis, quam^missionem hujusmodi
majorum solempnium Nunciorum concernentibus, ac aliis de causis motvis plurimum
ad dictam sedem circiter festum S. Andreae Apostoli prox. praeteritum duxerimus
transmittend^s, tunc sperantes certam responsionem ab ipsis Nu ciis in ultimo
Parliamento nostro apud Westminster. tento veresimiliter habuisse, de quibus quidem
Nunci^s, seu eorum exped^tione hactenus non recepimus quicquam certum: Propter
quod missionem majorum* Nunciorum nostrorum solempnium adhuc posuimus in
suspenso; Et quia Deo dante, de dictis Nunciis et eorum expeditione in proximo
habere credimus certa nova, super quibus, ac etiam et super eo quod contra
formam dictarum Treugarum ex part ipsius adversarii nostri juratarum, quaedam
notabiliter ponderanda, et in favorem nostri, et nostrorum fidelium
ec^allegatorum adimplenda, per partis adversae maliciam, minime sunt impleta,
necnon super eo quod dictus noster adversarius contra bonam fidem, desperata
pace pro part sua promissa, maximam multitudinem hominum ad arma, ac aliorum,
ac navium et galiarum, potentius quam hactonus auditum fuerat, procurat, ad
dictum regnum nostrum Angliae hostiliter invadendum, ac Nos et Dominium nostrum
pro viribus subvertendum, prout ut haec per manifesta indicia satis liqueant,
expedit, ut cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus ejusdem regni, absque moris
dispendio salubre consilium habeamus, per quod ex causis praedictis, et pro
aliis gentem et terram Scotiae, necnon pro quibusdam variis negotiis multum
arduis tam Nos quam Statum totius regni nostri praedicti specialiter
contingentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. ad diem Lunae prox. futur.
tenere, vobiscumque ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus
praedictis colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Et ideo vobis in fide et
dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quatenus
cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis,
Nobiscum, ac cum caetenis Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti regni
super negotiis praedictis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri.
Praemunientes Priorem et Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae Christi Cantuariae, ac
Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum vestrae Dioc. quod ^idem Prior et Archidiaconi
in propriis personis suis, ac dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per
duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam et sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo
et Clero babentes praedictis die et loco personaliter inter sint, ad
consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communt Consilio ipsius regni nostri,
divina favente clementia contigerit ordinari. Test Rege apud Westminster. 14. die
Februarii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. Arch. Eborum, and 19.
Bishops 24 Abbots, and 2. Priors more.

The 87 writ is this of Claus. Anno 22. E. 3. part 2. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. R. eadem gratia Episcopo London. Salutem. Quia pro magnis et arduis
negotiis inter quosdam fideles nostros ex part nostra, et quosdam Magnates et
alios ex part adversariorum nostr. Franciae, quosdamque ex part Comitis et
Gentis Flandriae. jam noviter apud Cales. tractatis, necnon pro diversis aliis
urgentibus Negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri Angliae sum contingentibus,
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Hillaru^ prox.
futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. colloquium habere volumus et tractatum Vobis
in fide, etc. dictis die et loco in propria persona vestra absque Procuratore
faciendo intersitis Nobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac
expeditionem negotiorum nostrorum, necnon utilitatem et commodum regni nostri
Angliae diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Praemuni^ntes, etc. Scituri pro certo,
quod attenta dictorum negotiorum arduitate Procuratores aliquos pro vobis, seu
ex part vestra ad diem praedictum admittere, seu absentiam vestram excusatam
habere nolumus ullo modo. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die November. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. J. de Ostord
Decano Lincoln. Electo Cantuar. confirmato, W. Episcopo Winton, and 16.
Bishops, 28. Abbots, and 3. Priors more.

Besides there issued a writ to W. eadem gratia Episcopo Wigorn. in the same
form to omittatis: and then thus: Quacunque concessione vobis pro immunitate
vestra de non ventendo ad Parliamenta nostra prius concessa non obstante.
Praemunientes, etc. Test ut supra.

After which follows another writ; Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiep. Eborum: in like
form till tractatum; with this different clause from the other writs; Vobis in
fide, etc. mandamus, quod aliquem idoneum et sufficientem Procuratorem pro
vobis in quo confiditis ad dictos diem et locum, ^o quod vos propter corporis
vestri debilitatem laborare non po^^ritis, quo praetextu personalem praesentiam
vestram is it avice excusatam habere volumus, mittati, Nobiscum, ac cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti, etc. ut supra. Praemuntentes, etc.
Test ut supra.

Claus. An. 24 E. 3 par. 2. m. 3. dorso. Summonitio Pa^liamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Arch^ep. Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos, et sta^um et bonum regimen regni nostri, et aliarum
terrarum et Dominiorum nostrorum contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere,
etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum et commune commodum dicti regni nostri
Angliae diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud
Westminster. 25 die November. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est, sub eadem data. Arch. Eborum. and 18. Bishops, 25.
Abbots, and 2. Priors more.

Claus. Anno 25 E. 3. part 1. m. 5. dorso. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Ca^tuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri, et necessariam defensionem
ejusdem regni contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster* die Veneris in
crastino S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere, and hoc ( as before, writ 88.)
Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 15. die Novembr. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Eborum. and 18. other Bishops, 24. Abbots, and
2. Priors: This special note is entered in the Roll and Lists of the Abbors
^^mes then summoned after Abbati de Croyland. Abbas Leicestr, cancellatur, quia
habet Cartam Regis quod non compellatur venire ad Parliamentum; Not^.
His Patent of Exemption is entered in Rot. Pat. 26 E. 3. part 2. m. 22. Pri^ted
in Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, Book 2. chapter 5. p. 734, 735, and in my Plea for
the Lords, p. 155, 156.

The 90. is this con^iderable writ. with some unusual Claus. An. 26 E. 3. m.
14. dorso. De summonitione Consilii.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Arch. Cantuar. etc. Quia pro magniset urgentibus negotiis,
et novis subitis ad Nos perlatis Nos et statum ac jura regni nostri Angliae
sum concernentibus, super quibus festinum et providum oportet exhiberi
remedium, uobiscum ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proce^ibus, et
aliis fidelibus nostris dicti regni apud Westminster. in crastino Assumptionis bea^ae
Mariae virginis prox. futur. coll^quium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis,
etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et defensionem et
commodum dicti regni nostri diligitis, et subversionem ejus vi^are volueri^is,
nullo mo^o omittatis. Nos de die receptionis praesentium et per quem vobis
dilatae fuerint certificantes tunc ibidem. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Iul^.
Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim^lia Brevia diriguntur to 1^. Bishops, Priori H^spitalis Jerusalem in
Anglia, Abbati Westminster. There being no more Priors or Abbots named in the Roll,
but these 3. summoned by special writs.

But the writs to the Bishops of Exon, Bath and Wells, Coventry and Litchfield,
St David's, Rochester, Bangor, Assaven. Landaff and Carliol. have this clause in
them, in which they vary from the former: Dictis die et loco per vos vel per
Procur atorem vestrum ido^eum intersitis Nobiscum, etc.

The 91. are these 3. special writs of Summons to appear

(g) Rex d lecto sibi in Christo fratri Ranulpho Monacho Abbatiae Cestriae,
Salutem. Claus. 26 E. ^. m. 14. dorso.
Quibusdam certis de causis vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod sitis
personaliter coram Nobis et Consilio nostro apud ^estm. die Martis, prox. post
festum Assumptionis beat^e Mariae virginis prox. futur. una cum omnibus
Canonicis vestris, et quae sunt in C^stodia vestra, ad loquendum et ^ractandum
cum dicto Consilio super aliquibus quae tunc vobis expetuntur ex part nostra.
Et sub periculo quod incumbit nullatenus omittatis. Te^te Rege apud Westminster. 8
die Augusti.

Et mandatum est Abbati Abbatiae praedictae, quod praefa^um Ranulphum ad diem
et locum praedictos habeat ex causa praedicta. Test ut supra.

Rex dilecto sibi in Chris^o Priori Provinciali Ordinis Fratrum Praedicatorum
in Anglia, salutem. Quibusdam certis de causis vobis mandamus firmiter
injungentes, quod sitis personal^ter coram Nobis et Consilio nostro apud
Westmon. die Martis prox. post festum Assumptionis beatae Mariae virginis prox:
futur. ad loquend^m et tractandum, etc. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est Priori Provinciali Ordinis beatae Mariae de Monte
Carmeli in Anglia, de essendo coram dicto Consilio, die Iovis prox. post
Assumptionem beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. sub eadem data.

These I conceive were all summoned rather as private informers, than Members
of this Council; being to appear Coram Nobis et Consilio nostro: not to be
Members thereof.

Claus. Anno 27 E. 3. m. 12. dorso.

Rex, Summonitio Consilii.
etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Can^uar. etc. Quia pro magnis et urgentibus nego^iis
Nos et sta^um regni Angliae sum concernentibus, vobiscum etc. et aliis
fidelibus dicti regni apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Matthaei
Apostoli prox. futur. Colloquium habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis, etc. Et
hoc sic^t Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et de^ensionem ac commodum
dicti regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Nos de die receptionis
praesentium et per quem vobis delatae fuerint certificantes tunc ibidem. Tes^e
Rege apud Westminster. 15. die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. E^orum. et 19. Bishops, 25 Abbots, and 2. Priors.

The 93. is this writ in Claus. 28 E. 3. m. 26. dorso.

Rex, Summonitio P^rliamenti.
etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia pro magnis et urgentibus
negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri Angliae, ac salvationem et defensionem
ejusdem regni sum concernentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lun^e
prox. post festum S. Marci Evangelistae prox. futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 15. die Martii. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur I. Arch. Eborum: to 19. other Bishops, 24 Abbots,
2. Priors.

The 94. writ is thus entered, Claus. 29. E. 3. m. 8. dorso.

Rex, Summonitio Parliamenti.
etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos et Statum regni Angliae, ac necessariam defensio^em
ejusdem regni concernentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Jovis in
cr^stino S. Martini prox. futur, te^ere, et vobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et
honorem nostrum, et commune commodum et salvationem et defensionem dicti regni
nostri Angliae diligitis, etc. Pr^munientes, etc. Test Rege apud Portsmo^th
20. die Septembris. Per ipsum gem.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, I. Arch. Eborum. 18. Bishops, whereof one is
Electo Elien. confirmato; 25 Abbots, 2 Priors: One of the 25 Abbots was Abbati
de Leicestr. over against which is written in the Margin. Cancellatur Abbas
Leicestriae quia habet Cartam Regis, Nota.
quod non compellatur venire ad Parliamentum.

After which in the same Roll follows this 95. writ to Canterbury and another
to York to summon a Convocation of the Clergy. De Clero convo^ando.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. ( just in the same form and words as
before, to ves^rumque Consilium impensuri. Then follows this clause.) Et quia
expedit quod negotia praedicta quae salvationem et defensionem dicti regni
nostri sic contingunt, salubriter et efficaciter cum bona et matura
deliberatione deducantur; Vobis m^^damus rogantes quatenus omnes Episcopos et
Abbates, necnon Decanos et Priores tam Ecclesiarum Cathedralium quam
Collegiatarum, exemptos et non exemptos, Archidiaconos et totum Clerum vestrae
Provinc^ae apud Ecclesiam S. Pauli London. die Lunae prox. post dictum festum
S. Martini convocari faciatis. Ita quod dicti Episcopi, Decani, et Priores
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, et Abbates exempti et non exempti, et Archidi^coni
personaliter, et quodlibet Capitulorum dictorum Ecclesiarum Cathedralium per
unum, et Clerus cujuslibet Diocper duos Procuratores sufficientem potestatem
haben^es apud dictam Ecclesiam S. Pauli dicto die Lunae intersint; ad tractand.
et cons^lend. super praemissis una vobiscum et aliis per Nos illuc mittendis;
et ad consentiendum hiis qu^ tunc ibidem super dictis negotiis divina fave^te
clementia contigeri^ ordinari: Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac
salvationem et defensionem dicti regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis.
Test Rege apud Westminster. 25 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimiles literae diriguntur I. Archiepiscopo Ebor^m, Primati Angliae, de
Clero suae Provinciae die Lunae in Crastino S. Nicholai prox. futur. apud
Ecclesiam bea^i Petri Eborum, ex causa praedicta convo^ando. Test ut supra.

Claus. Anno 31 E. 3. m. 21. dorso. very considerable. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex* etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri Angliae, et necessariam
desensionem ejusdem regni et ECCLELIAE ANGLICANAE contingentibus, ordinavimus
Parliam^ntum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post Sep^imanam Paschae prox.
futur. tenere, et vobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicu^ Nos et ho^orem nostrum, ac
commune commodum, et salvationem ^t defensionem regni ac ECCLESIAE praedictorum
diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Praemunientes, etc. Et quia propter arduitatem
praedictorum negotiorum et celeriorem expeditionem eorundem volumus primo die
Parliamenti personaliter interesse; Nolumu^ nec intendimus vos, aut aliquem
alium ad dictum Parliamentum summonitum, quin eodem primo die personaliter
intersitis habere ullo modo excusato^, nec excusationem a vobis admittere
aliqualem. Test Rege apud Westminster. 15 die Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium:

Consimilia brevia diriguntur subscriptis, mutatis mutandis, sub eadem data,
viz. I. Arch. Eborum, 18 Bishops, 24 Abbots, and 1. Prior.

After which follows this 97. memorable writ in the dorso, Claus. 31 E. 3.
dors. 21. De Convocatione Cleri.
to summon a Convocation of the Clergy.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Cantuar. etc. (verbatim* a before, to vestrumque consilium
impensuri. Then follows this clause;) Et quia praedicta negotia perquam ardua
sine maxima deliberatione tam Praelatorum et Cleri, quam Magnatum et
Communitatis ejusdem regni nullo modo expediri poterunt, ad quorum expeditionem
Auxilium et Consilium tam a vobis et Clero, quam a dictis Magnatibus et
Communitate habere necessario Nos oportet; Vobis rogamus mandantes, quatenus
omnes Episcopos et Abbates, necnon Decanos et Priores, tam Ecclesiarum
Cathedralium quam Collegiatarum exemptos et non exemptos, Archidiaconos et
totum Clerum vestrae Provinciae apud Ecclesiam S. Pauli Land. in crastino S.
Georgii prox. sequent. Convocari faciatis. Ita quod dicti Episcop^, etc. (as
before writ 95.) apud dictam Ecclesiam S. Pauli in crastino S. Georgii, cum
continuatione et prorogatione dierum tunc sequentium quatenus dicta nego^ia id
requirun^, intersint, ad tractand. et consulend* super praemis is una Nobiscum,
et aliis per Nos illuc mittendis: Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum, ac
salva^ionem et defensionem dicti regni nostri, ac ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE
diligitis, nullatenus omitta^is. Test Rege apud Westminster. 22 die Februarii. Per
i* sum Regem.

The 98. writ is thus enrolled, Claus. Ann^ 31. Ed. 3. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archie^. Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quib^sdam arduis et
urgentibus negot^is Nos et Statum regni nostri Angliae, et necessariam
defensionem ejusdem Regni et ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE concernentibus, ordinavimus
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum Purificationis
beatae Mariae virginis prox. futur. tenere. Et vobisc^m, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos
et honorem nostrum, ac commune commodum et salvationem et defensionem REGNI ET
ECCLESIAE praedictae diligitis, nullatenus omit^atis. Praemunie^tes, etc. Et
quia propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum ac celeriorem expeditionem
eorunde^ volumus primo die Parliamenti interesse, nolumus, nec intendimus vos
aut aliquem alium ad dictum Parliamentum summonitum, quin eodem primo die
personaliter intersitis habere ullo modo excusa^os, nec excusationem a vobis
admittere aliqualem. Test Rege apud Westminster. 15 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem
et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis, mutatis mutandis, sub eadem data,
viz. I. Arch. Eborum, etc. 18 Bishops, 24 Abbots, and 1. Prior.

Claus. Anno 32 E. 3. m. 14. dorso. De Consilio summonito.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiep. Cant. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus
negoti^s Nos et Statum Regni nostri Angliae, et jura Coronae nostrae Angliae
sum concernentibus, vobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, etc. die Dominica
prox. post festum S. Margaretae virginis prox. futur. apud Westminster. Colloquium
habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et
honore^ nostrum, ac salva^ionem dicti regni nostri Angliae, ac juriu^ Coronae
ejusdem regni diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die
Iunii. Per ipsum Regem et* Con^silium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data; viz. to 6 Bishops, 6
Abbots, 2. Priors, and Decano wellensi; and none else of the Clergy; nor any
writs to Assistants, Sheri^s, or the Warden of the Cinqueports for electing
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Barons of the Cinqueports: Therefore only a
Council, not a Parliament; as was this next ensuing: summoned by this 100 writ,
Claus. Anno 33 E. 3. m. 10. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Consil^i in absentia Regis.
etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Ca^t. etc. Cum pro expeditione guerrae nostrae
Franciae, ac sa^vatione et de^ensione regni nostri Angliae, sumus ad parts
transmarinas in prox. Deo duce, personaliter profecturi: et Thomam ^ilium
nostrum carissimum Custodem dicti regni nostri Angliae, et locum nostri
tenentem in eodem regno, dum Nos sic absentari contigerit, vel alias nostrae
placuerit voluntati consti^uimus, ac intimum in^ideat cordi nostro, quod Pax
noster in eodem regno inviolabiliter conserve^ur, et idem regnum ab hostium
incursibus defendatur; per quod ordinavimus, quod super praemissis et al^is
arduis negotiis Nos et statum dicti regni nostri concernentibus quoddam
Consilium Praelatorum et aliorum Magnatum et Procerum eju^dem regni apud Westminster.
die Dominica prox. ante festum S. Martini in prox. futur. teneatur. Vobis in
fide, etc. vestrumque con^ilium impensuri; Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum,
ac salvationem et defensionem dicti regni nostri, ac tranquillita^em pacis
ejusdem diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Test Rege apud Sandwicum, 10 die
Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur to 6. Bishops, 2. Priors, and 4. Abbots, more; 6.
Earls, and 19 Lords or great men, without any writs to Assistants, Sherifs, or
Warden of the Cinque Ports.

The 101. is this writ in Claus. Anno 34 E. 3. m. 35. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos ac salvationem et desensionem regni nostri* Angliae
sum coutingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Veneris in cras^ino
Ascentionis Domini prox. futur. tenere volumus, et ibide^ vobiscum* etc.
Mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate et periculis
imminentibus cessante excusatione quacunque dictis die et loco personaliter
intersitis Nobiscum, seu cum Custode dicti regni nostri si tune contigerit Nos
abesse; ac caeteris Praelatis, etc. Ne quod absit, per vestri absentiam, quam
cess^nte impedimento legitimo et evidente, nullo modo excusatam habere volumus,
expeditio negotiorum nostrorum praedictorum retar etur, seu aliqualiter
differatur. Praemunientes, etc. Test Custode praedicto apud Wes^m. 3 die
Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est sub eadem data, I. Arch. Eborum, etc. 17 Bishops.
Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Covent. and Li^hf. vacant et in m^n^ Regis
ex^sten^e, 22 Abbots, and the Prior of St. John's Hospital Jerusalem.

Anno 34 E. 3. m. 4. dorso.

Rex, Summonitio Parliamenti.
etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos et statum, et bonum regimen regni nostri Angliae
concernentibus, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Dominica prox.
ante festum Conversionis S. Pauli prox. futur. teneri, et vobiscum, etc. Et hoc
sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac bonum regimen, ac commune commodum ejusdem
regni diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Praemuniences, etc. Et quia propter
arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum, ac ce^eriorem expeditionem eoruudem volumus
primo die Parliamenti personali^er interesse, nolumus, etc. ( as before writ
98.) Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur I. Archiepiscopo Eborum, to 17. Bishops more, 24
Abbots, and the Prior of St John's Jerusalem.

Claus. Anno 36 E. 3. m. 16. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiep. C^ntuar. etc. Quia super quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis Nos et Statum regni nostri Angliae concernentibus,
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in Quindena S. Michaelis prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, et vobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum et
expeditionem negotiorum diligitis nulla^enus omittatis. Praemunientes, etc.
Scientes insu^e^, quod propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum Procuratores,
seu excusationem aliquam legitimo cessante impedimento pro vobis admittere
nolumus ista vice. Test Rege apud Windesor 14 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur sub eadem data, I. Archiep. Eborum: to 17. other
Bishops: Custodi Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Lincoln. and likewise Episcopa^us
Cicestriae sede vacant, 22 Abbots, and 3. Priors.

The 104. writ is extant, Claus. Anno 37 E. 3. m. 22. Summoniti^ Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia super quibusdam arduis,
etc. (as next before) Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in octabis S. Michaelis
prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, etc. Praemunientes, etc. Scientes insuper,
etc. (as next before.) Test Rege apud Westminster. 1. die Iunii. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia di^iguntur I. Archiep. Eborum, to 18 other Bishops, 23
Abbots, and 3 Priors.

The 105. writ is entered in Claus. An. 38 E. 3. m. 3. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. I. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia super quibusdam, etc. ac jure
Coronae nostrae concernentibus, Parliame^tum nostrum apud Westminster. in Octabis S.
Hillarii prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, etc. Praemunientes, etc. Scientes
insuper, etc. (as in 103. before.) Test Rege apud Westminster. 4 die Decembris. Per
ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Iohanni Archiepiscopo Eborum. 15 Bishops more;
Vicario generali Episcopo Cicestr. ipso Episcopo in remotis agente. Custodi
Spiritualitatis, Episcopatus Roffensis sede va^ante, de praemuniend. ut supra.
23 Abbots, and 3. Priors.

The 106. writ (having one special clause differing from Summonitio Parliamenti.
the former) is registered, Claus. Anno 39 E. 3. m. 2. dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia, etc. ac jura Coronae
nostrae concernentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae in crastino
Inventionis Sanctae Crucis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, etc.
Praemuni-entes, etc. Scientes insuper, etc. Et quia expeditio negotiorum
praedictorum multum insidet cordi nobis, vos attente rogamus quatenus die
Dominica prox. ante dic^um diem Lunae apud London esse velitis. Ita quod eodem
die Lunae mane apud Westminster. vos cum aliis Praelatis et Magnatibus illuc tunc
venturi esse valeatis; quia eodem die Parliamentum praedictum inchoare, et
ibi^em personaliter e^^e volumus omni modo. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die
Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum. 18 Bishops, 23 Abbots
and 3. Priors.

Claus. 42 E. 3. m. 22. dorso. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. primo die Maii prox^ futur. tenere ordinavimus, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
Scientes insuper quod propter arduitatem, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 24 die
Februarii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. Iohanni Archiep. Eborum, 19 Bishops, 23
Abbots, and 2 Priors.

Claus. An 43 E. 3. m. 24. dorso. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. in Octabis S. Trinitatis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Scientes insuper, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 6 die
Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. Iohanni Archiepiscopo Eborum, ^7 Bishops, 23 Abbots,
and 2 Priors.

The 109. writ shows it self in Claus. Anno 44 E. 3. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia super etc. Nos et Statum ac
defensionem regni nostri Angliae, ac jura Coronae nostrae concernentibus,
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae in prima Septimana Quadragesimae,
viz. in festo S. Matthaei Apostoli prox. fu^ur. tenere ordinavimus, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Scie^tes insuper quod propter ardui^atem, etc. Test Rege
apud Westminster. 8. die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. J. Arch. Eborum: 18 Bishops, Custodi Spiritualitatis
Episcopatus Bangor, side vacant, 24 Abbots, and 2 Priors.

The 110. writ, is visible in Claus. Anno 46 E. 3. m. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. Archiepiscopo Cantu^r. Quia de avisamento Consilii nostri
ordinavimus, quod super arduis et urgentibus negotiis tam Nos et-expeditionem
guerrae nostrae ac juria nostra, et Coronae nostrae in partibus transmarinis,
quam statum et defensionem regni nostri Angliae et ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE,
contingenti^us, quoddam Parliamentum apud Westminster. in Quindena S. Michaelis prox.
futur. teneatur: et ibidem vobiscum, etc. Colloquium et tractatus habeantur.
Vobis, etc. mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate, et
periculis imminentibus cessante quacunque excusatione dict is die et loco
personaliter intersit is Nobiscum, seu cum Ricardo filio carissimi Primogeniti
nostri Edwardi, Principis Aquitaniae et Walliae, CUSTODE regni nostri Angliae,
et locum nostri tenente in eodem regno si tunc contigerit Nos abesse, ac
caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus, etc. Et hoc s^cut Nos et honorem
nostrum, ac salvationem regni terrarum et jurium nostrorum praedictorum ac
ECCLESIAE SANCTAE, expeditionemque di^^orum negotiorum diligitis nullo modo
omittatis. Ne quod absit, per vestri absentiam (quam cessante impedimento
legi^imo nullo modo excusatam habere volumus) expeditio negotiorum nostrorum
praedictorum retardetur, seu aliqualiter differatur, Praemunie^tes, etc. Test
Custode praedicto apud Walyngford 1. die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem, ac dictum
Custodem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia di^iguntur, etc. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17 Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, particularly named in the Roll.

The like writ issued to Thomas Bishop of Durham; but with this different
clause next after Consilium vestrum impensuri, viz. Et quia m^dernis temporibus
super salvationi et defensione Marehiae Scotiae istis mandato nostro
multiplieiter occupati. Vobis in fide, etc. mandamus, quod dictis negotiis et
periculis perv os debite ponderatis, si videritis quod ad Parliamentum
praedictum commode pervenire non poteritis, tunc aliquem idoneum Procuratorem
in quo been confiditis, de voluntate et intention vestris before informatum
loco vestro cum sufficient potestate ad dictos diem et locum mittatis, ad
consentiendum hiis quae tunc per dictos Praelatos, Comites, et alios Proceres
ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Et hoc sicut de vobis
confidimus, et Nos et honorem nostrum et vestrum, recuperationem jurium
nostrorum praedictorum, salvationemque et defensionem dicti regni nostri
Angliae diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Praemunientes, etc. Test ut supra. Per
ipsum Regem, ac dictum Custodem ec Consilium.

Consimile Breve dirigitur Thomae Episcopo Karliol.

Claus. Anno 47 E. 3. m. 13. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisameato Consilii
nostri pro quibusdam arduis, etc. ( as in the 110. writ before) quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in crastino S. Edwardi Regis prox. futur.
tenere ordinavimus, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos, etc. Ne quod absit, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. ( as in the said 110 writ) Test Rege apud Westminster. 4 die
Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. I. Archiepiscopo Eborum: 18. Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, named in the Roll.

The 112. writ is thus registered, Claus. Anno 49 E. 3. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento Consilii
nostri, pro quibusdam, etc. Nos et Statum et defensionem regni nostri Angliae,
et ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE contingentibus, quoddaem Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. duodecimo die Februarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, et ibidem
vobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem regni
praedicti et ECCLESIAE SANCTAE, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis
nullatenus omitiatis. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud
Langele 28 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. A. Archiep. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 23
Abbatibus, and 2 Proceribus.

The 113. writ is preserved in Claus. An. 50 E. 3. part De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cintuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. (just
as in 112. before) quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in Quindena S.
Hilarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, et ibidem vobiscum, etc. Et hoc sicut,
etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. (as next before.) Test Rege apud
Westminster. primo die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. Alex. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17 Episcopis,
21 Abbatibus, Priori S. Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia, Priori de Coventr.

The 114. is this memorable writ in Claus. 1. R. 2. m. De Clero convocando.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Cum inimici nostri inter se
allegati et undique hostiliter congregati regnum nostrum Angliae in pluribus
locis per terram et per mare saepius invaserunt, mala quamplurima et
intolerabilia nobis et ligeis nostris perpetrando, et non solum de hoc
contenti, dictum regnum nostrum, ac Ecclesiam sanctam Nosque ac populum nostrum
Angliae de die in diem separant totis viribus subvertere et destruere, nisi
^orum malitiae adjuvante Deo fortius resistatur: unde in salvationem Status
Ecclesiae sanctae et regni ac populi pr^dictorum necessariam defensionem
sumptus ac census et expensas inaestimabiles, et aliquo tempore praeterito
magis solito graviores effundere Nos oportet. Verum quia de copia the sauri vel
bonorum in primordiis nostri regiminis nec mirum penitus alieni ad ipsorum
onerum et sumptuum supportationem absque juvamine fidelium nostrorum non
sufficimus sicut scitis. Vobis in fide et d^lectione quibus nobis tenemini
rogando mandamus* quatenus consideratis tam arduitate negotiorum praedictorum,
quam grandibus periculis quae Ecclesiae et regno praedicto oculata fide,
imminere conspicitis, attentis, et debite consider atis, Suffraganeos vestros,
Decanos et Priores Cathedralium Ecclesiarum, Abbates, Priores et alios
electivos, exemptos et non exemptos, necnon Archidiaconos, Capitula, Conventus,
et Collegia, totumque Clerum cujuslibet Dioc. dictae vestrae Provinciae ad
comparend. coram vobis in Ecclesia S. Pauli London. vel alibi prout expedire
videritis ad breviorem diem quam poteritis more solito convocari fac. et eis
dictis negotiis et periculis ibidem before expositis et declaratis, ipsos ad
Subsidium in hoc casu competens et necessarium in supportationem dictorum
onerum et sumptorum Nobis concedendi eo specialius et cum efficatia qua magis
sciveritis vel poteritis tanta necessitate causante inducatis, et parts
vestras ad hoc effectualiter apponatis; Nos in Cancellaria nostra de quantitate
Subsidii illius certificantes. Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum ac
salvationem et defensiontm Ecclesiae et regni praedictorum diligitis nullatenus
omittatis. Test meipso apud Westminster. 29 die Septembris.

Consimile breve dirigitur A. Arch. Eborum, Angliae Primati, de Clero
convocando in Ecclesia beati Petri Ebor.

De veniendo ad Parliamentum Regis.
is this of Claus. Anno 1 R. 2. dorso 37. running in the ordinary form except
in one particular clause.

Rex, ven. etc. S. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia cum regni et populi nostri
divina permissione suscepto regimine, de avisamento Consilii nostri pro
quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos et jura Coronae nostrae, ac Statum,
salvationem et defensionem regni et populi praedicti ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae
contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud West. in quindena S.
Michaclis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus; et ibidem vobiscum, etc. Ne quod
absit, etc. Praemunientes etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 4 die Augusti. Per ipsum
Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data v^z. Alexandro
Archiep. Eborum electo, etc. 19 Bishops and 23 Abbots, with the Priors of St
John's Jerusalem, and Coventre.

The 116. writ is thus entered in the ordinary usual Claus. Anno 2 R. 2. m. 3.
dorso.

Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. Statum et
defensionem regni nostri Angl. et Eccles. Anglicanae contingent. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in Quindena Paschae prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus etc. Ne quod absit per vestri absentiam (quam nisi tanta
infirmitate tunc detenti sueritis quod aliqualiter illuc laborare non poteritis
nullo modo excusatam habere volumus ista vice) expeditio. etc. Praemunientes,
etc. T. R. apud Westmon. 17 die Febr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. are issued Alex. Archiep. Eborum, and to 19. Bishops,
24. Abbots, and 2. Priors.

Claus. 3 R. 2. m. 27 dorso. De Clero convocando.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Qualiter inimici nostri Franciae, et
alii sibi cohaerentes inter se colligati et undique hostiliter congregati
regnum nostrum Angl. perter^a et per mare saepius invaserunt, mala quamplurima
et intollerabilia Nobis et legiis nostris inferendo, et non solum de hoc
contenti dictum regnum nostrum et Ecclesiam sanctam, Nosque et totam linguam
Anglicanam subvertere et destruere de die in diem totis viribus se conantur
nisi eorum malitiae adjuvante Deo fortius resistatur, vos non credimus
ignorare; unde in salvationem, etc. (as Claus. 1 R. 2. m. 31. before, to
omittatis.) Test Rege apud Westminster. 2. die Decembris.

Consimiles literae dirigunt ur Alex. Archiep. Eborum, Angliae Primati ad
convocandum Clerum in Ecclesiae beati Petri Eborum. Test ut supra.

Claus. 3 R. 2. m. 32. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento etc. Quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Hilarii prox.
futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, as last before; Praemunientes,
etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Octobris.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Alex. Arch. Eborum: 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus,
2 Prioribus.

Claus. 4 R. 2. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. S. etc. Archiepiscopo Cant. etc. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Northampton die Lunae prox. post festum Omnium Sanctorum prox.
futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. nullatenus omittatis. Ne quod absit pro vestri
absentiam (quam nisi tanta infirmitate detenti fueritis quod aliqualiter illuc
laborare non poteritis nullo modo excusatam habere volumus ista vice) expeditio
dictorum negotiorum nostrorum retardatur aut aliqualiter differatur.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 26 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. A. Arch.
Eborum, etc. 19 Bishops, 25 Abbots, 2 Priors.

Claus. 5 R. 2. m. 12. dorso. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Cant. etc. Satis est vobis, sicut et caeteris
Praelatis, Proceribus, aliisque Dominis Subditis nostris regni nostri
manifestum, qualiter in ultimo Parliamento nostro vos Domini, Magnates et
Communitates regni nostri Angliae quoddam subsidium de lanis cariis et pellibus
laniatis Nobis gratanter concesserunt ad certum tempus futur. percipiend. ad
effectum quod de denariis de Subsidio praedicto provenientibus aliqua
ordinatio, sive aliquod viagium pro defensione terrae nostrae, et gravamine
inimicis nostris publicis inferend. et celeriori acceleratione finis guerrae
magis expediens fieri ac parari possit, et effectualiter provideri. Ac nos
super executione effectus praedicti assistentibus Nobis quibusdam Magnatibus,
Dominis et peritis de Consilio nostro, efficacissime recolentes eorum nunc
propositum, ad parts exteras ex causis praemissis, volente Deo, cum
sufficienti Comitiva personaliter transfretare; Nos advertentes hujusmodi
propotum nostrum absque Chevantia competenti ad optatum finem commode deduci
non posse, et ut in absentia nonostra pro expedienti et necessario regimine
regni nostri debite provideatur, necnon qualiter dicta Chevantia quietus et
citius fieri, ac creditoribus nostris in hac part melior and firmior securitas
solutionum dari poterit et vallari, volentes prospicere prout decet,
disposuimus de avisamento Consilii nostri praedicti in crastino Sancti Iohannis
ante portam latinam prox. futur. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
tenere, et vobiscum, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. (as next before.) Praemunientes,
etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 24 die Martii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. A. Arch. Eborum, etc. 19 other Bishops
mutatis mutandis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

The 121 writ I find in Claus. 5 R. 2. m. 40. dorso. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacant. Quia de
avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post
Festum exaltationis sancta Crucis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc Ne quod
absit, etc. (as before in the two last writs) Praemunicutes, etc. T. Rege apud
Villam de S. Alban. 16 die Julii. Per ^ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. A. Arch. Eborum, etc. 18 Episcopis, Custodi
Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Dunolm. sede va^ante, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de
Coventre.

Claus. 6 R. 2, part 1. m. 4. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, W. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia referente fama publica ad nostrum pervenit
certitudinaliter intellectum, quod Carolus, adversarius noster Franciae
principalis, subjugata sibi maxima part Flandriae, quae de amicitia nostra
existebat, ad obsidend. jam Villam nostram Cales, et alia mala, dampna et
gravamina Nobis et regno nostro Angliae undique inferend. et fieri procurand.
totis viribus se festinat, omnique dilig^ntia machinatur. Nos maliciae dicti
adversarii nostri resistere, et h^jusmodi ob^idionem, si quae ibidem, quod
absit, fieret in event^, favente Domino removere, necnon circa recuperationem
juris nostri quod ad Coronam et regnum Franciae notori^ obtinemus, ac circa
defensionem dicti regni no^^ri et Ecclesiae Anglicanae meliorem laborare e^
intendere, relevamenque et succursum amicis et fidelibus nostris circumquaque
fa^ere et praebere cupientes, ^e consilio et assensu quamplurimoru^
Praelatorum, Procerum, Magnatum, Dominorum, Militum, Burgensium e^ Merca^orum
dicti regni nostri, ad Consilium nostrum ex hac causa evocatorum, sumus in
proposito in propria per^ona nostra ad parts transmarinas cum comitativa
Procerum, Magnatum et Nobilium plurimorum manu forti, volente Domino
proficisci. Et ut hujusmodi propositum nostrum felicem sortiatur effectum, ac
Nobis in remotis agentibus pro expedien^i et necessario regimine dicti regni
nostri debite provideatur; et interim tam inimicis nostris Ispann. quam aliis
quibuscunque, si regnum nostrum praedictum hosti^iter invadere praesum, serint,
fortiter et viriliter ut Oportet, et prout maxim insidet cordi nostro
resistatur; disposuimus de consilio et assensu praedictis die Lunae in tertia
Septimana Quadragesimae prox. futur. quod dam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, Dominis, et
COMMUNITATE dicti regni nostri super praemissis et aliis urgen^ibus causis,
statum, regnum et honorem nostra concernentibus Colloquium habere et tractatum:
Vobis igitur in fide et dilectione, etc. quod considerata dictorum negotiorum
arduitate, cessante quacunque excusatione dictis die et loco personaliter
intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Proceribus, et Prioribus praedictis
super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut
Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem Regni et Ecclesiae praedictorum
diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Ne quod absit, etc. (as before.)
Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 7. die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. A. Arch. Eborum. etc. 18 Bishops, Custodi
Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Landaven. sede vacant, 24. Abbatibus, 2. Prioribus.

The 123. is this usual writ, I meet with in Claus. 6 Rex, etc. W. Archiep. De
summonitione Parliamenti.
Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
die lunae in Octabis Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Ne
quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Wodestock 9. die Augusti. Per
ipsum Regem.

Cons. Brevia diriguntur A. Arch. Eb^rum. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit.
Episcopatus Assaven. sede vacant, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 124. writ is recorded in Claus. 7 R. 2. m. 10. De summonitione Parliamenti,


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliament* nostrum apud Novam Sarum die Veneris prox. post festum S. Marci
Evangelistae prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 3 die Marcii* Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. A. Arch. Eborum, etc. 19 Episcopis, 24. Abbatibus, 2.
Prioribus

The 125. is this uncommon writ of Claus. An. 7 R. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. Archiepi^c. Cant. etc. Quia de assensu et deliberatione Consilii
nostri pro certo Tractatu super pace inter Nos, et regnum, terras, Dominia ac
^ubditos nostros ex una part, et magnificum Principem Robertum consanguineum
nostrum Scot^ae, et ejus terras, Dominia, et Subditos ex alia, favente Domino
facienda, mediante Consilio et assens^ vestris, ac aliorum Praelatorum,
Procerum, Magnatum ac Communitatis regni nostri Angliae ineundo, ac pro aliis
arduis et urgentibus negotiis, Nos, Statum et defensionem Regni nostri
praedicti Ecclesiaeque Anglicanae multipliciter contingentibus, disposuimus die
Lunae prox. ante festum Omnium Sanctorum prox. futur. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. tenere, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R.
apud Westminster. 20. die Aug. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur A. Archiep. Eborum. etc. 18. Episcopis, H.
Episcopo Norwicen. vel ejus Vicario generali ipso in remotis agente, 24
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

Claus. 7 R. 2. m. 33. which is observable. De Clero convocando.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Qualit^r inimici nostri Franciae, et
alii sibi adherentes in se obligati et undique hostiliter congregati Regnum
nostrum Angliae per terram et mare saepius invaserunt, mala quam plu^ima et
intolerabilia nobis et ligeis nostris inferendo, et non solum de hoc contenti
dictum Regnum nostrum et Ecclesiam sanct^^m, Nosque et totam linguam Anglicanam
subvertere et destruere de die in di^^m totis viribus se conantur, nisi little
maliciae adjuvante Deo fortius resistatur, vos non credimus ignorare. Unde in
salvationem Status dictae Ecclesiae, ac regni ac populi nostrorum necessariam
defensionem sumptus ac census, et expensas inestimabiles effundere nos oportet.
Verum quia ad horum onerum et sumptuum supportationem absque juvamine fidelium
nostrorum non sufficimus sicut scitis, vobis in fide et dilect ione quibus
nobis tenemini rogando mandamus, quatenus tam arduitate negotiorum
praedictorum, quam grandibus periculis quae Ecclesiae et regno praedictis
^culata fide imminere conspicitis, attentis et debite consider atis;
Suffraganeos vestros Decanos, et Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium* Abbates,
Pri^res, et alios Electivos, exemptos et non exemptos, necnon Archidiaconos,
Capitula, Conventus and Collegia totumque Clerum cujuslibet Diocaesis vestrae
Provinciae ad comparend. coram Vobis in Ecclesia S. Pauli London, vel alibi
prout vobis expedire videritis, in crastino S. Martini prox. futur. more solito
convocari fac. et eis dictis negotiis et periculis ibidem before expositis, et
declaratis, ipsos ad Subsidium in hoc casu competens et necessarium, in
supportationem dictorum onerum et sumptuum Nobis concedend. co^specialius et
cum efficacia qua m^gis sciveritis vel poteritis tanta necessitate causante
inducatis, et parts vestras ad hoc effectualiter apponatis; Nos in Cancellaria
nostra de quantitate Subsidii illius, ac de terminis solutionis ejusdem
certificantes. Et hoc sicut Nos and honorem nostrum; et salvationem et
defensionem Ecclesiae et regni praedictorum diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T.
R. apud Westminster. 8. die Octobris.

Consimile Breve dirigitur Venerabili in Christo patri A. Arch. Eborum, Angliae
Primat^. T. ut supra.

The 127. is this common writ in Claus. 8 R. 2. m. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in crastino S. Martini prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 28.
die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim. Brevia diriguntur, etc. A. Archiep. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 128. writ is in Claus. 9 R. 2, m. 45. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. die Venetis prox. post festum Sancti Lucae Evangelistae,
prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
T. R. apud Westminster. 3. die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim. Brevia, etc. A. Archiep. Eborum, 17 Episcopis Custod. Spiritualitatis
Episcopat. Cicestr. et Coventr. sede vacant, 24. Abbatibus, 2, Prioribus.

Claus. 10. R. 2. m. 42. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiep. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. primo die Octobris, prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud
Oseneye 8. die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. A. Archiepiscopo Eborum. 16 Episcopis, Custod.
Episcopatus Landaven. et Bathon. et Wellen. sede vacant, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

Claus. 11 R. 2. m. 24. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis
prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
T. Rege apud Windesore, 17 die Decembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Consim. Brevia, A. Archiep. Eborum. 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de
Coventr.

Claus. Anno 12 R. 2. m. 42. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Cant. Quia de avisame no Consilii, etc.
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Cantebrigg. in crastin. Nativitatis bea^e
Mariae. prox. futur. teneri ordinavimu^, etc. Ne quod absit, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Oxon. 28 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. Custodi Spiritualitatis Aroh. Eborum, sede vacant, 18
Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

Claus. 13 R. 2. part 1. m. 6. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum aapud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum S. Hillarii prox.
futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R.
apud Redyng 6. die Novembr.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. Th. Archiepisc. Eborum, 18 Episcopis. Custodi
Spiritualitatis Episcopatus Cicestr. et Roffen. sede vacant. 24 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 133. is Claus. 14 R. 2. m. 42. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nos^rum apud Westminster. in crastino S. Martini prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus,
etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 die
Septembr^s. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia Th. Arch. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 134. writ is in Claus. 15 R. 2. m. 37. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar, etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in crastino Animarum prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunien^es, etc. Test R. apud Westminster.
7 die Septembr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. Th. Arch. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 24 Abba^ibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 135. is the writ in Claus. Anno 16 R. 2. m. 23. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiep. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nos^rum, apud Wynton in Octabis S. Hillarii prox. futur. tenere
ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absi^, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Eborum 23
die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim. Brevia, etc. Th. Archiepisc. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 136. De summonitione Parliamenti.
is that in Claus. An. 16 R. 2. m. 32. dorso.

Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Qui de avisamento, etc. quodd^m
Parliamentum no^trum apud Eborum. in crastino translationis S. Edwardi Regis
tenere ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud
Wyndesore 23 die Iulli. Per ipsum Regem et Confilium.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. Th. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus,
2 Prioribus.

Claus. Anno 17 R. 2. m. 30. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar, etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in quindena S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 13
die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim. Brevia, Th. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 18 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, Priori
de Coventre.

Claus. An. 18 R. 2. m. 23. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. W. etc. Archie^isc. Cant. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in quindena S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Edmundo Duce
Eborum Custod. Angliae apud West* 20 die Novembris. Per ipsum Regem et
Consilium.

Consim. Brevia Th. Archiep. Eborum, 16 Episcopis; Custodi Spirit. Episcopatus
Assaven. 25 Abbatibus, 2. Prioribus.

Claus. 20 R. 2. m. 15. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex Custodi Spiritualit^^is Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacant salutem.
Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster in festo S.
Vincentii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Ne quod absit, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 30. die Novembr. Per ipsum Regem.

Consim. Brev^a diriguntur. etc. Thomae Arch. Eborum, etc. 19 Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 140. writ is in Claus. 21 R. 2. m. 27. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Thomae Arch. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post festum Exaltationis sanctae Crucis,
prox. futur. teneri ordinavimu^, etc. Ne quod absit, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
T. R. apud Westminster. 18 die Iulii. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim. Brevia diriguntur A. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus,
2 Prioribus there named.

The 141. is Claus. 23. R. 2. m. 3. dorso. De summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. Th. etc. Arch. Cant. etc. Quia, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. in crastino S. Michaelis, proz. futur. etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege
apud C^stre. 19 die Aug. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia Arch. Eborum. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 142. writ is enrolled in Claus. Anno 1 H. 4. m. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex* etc. Thomae, etc. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, etc. Quia de avisamento, etc.
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in festo Sanctae Fidei Virginis prox.
futur. teneri, etc. (in the usual form.) T. R. apud Westminster. 30 die Decembris.
Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur R. Archiep. Eborum. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus, inserted among the Abbots names.

The 143. writ is that of Claus. 3. H. 4. dors. 17.

Rex, De summonitioni Parliamenti.
etc. Th. etc. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. ante ^estum Purificationis beatae Mariae
prox. futur. teneri, etc, Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 2 die
Decembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia Archiep. Ebor. 19 Episcopis, 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 144. De summonitione Parliamenti.
is in Claus. 5* H. 4. m. 28. dorso.

Rex, etc. T. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Coventre. 3 die Decembris prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T.
Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Octobris.

Consimilia Brevia Archiepiscopo Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

Te 145. is entered in Claus. 7 H. 4. m. 39. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. T. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Covent^. 15 die Febr. prox. fu^ur. ten^ri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T.
Rege apud Westminster. 21 die Decembris.

Consimilia Brevia Custodi Spiritual. Archiepiscopa^us Eborum: et Episcopatus
Roffen. sede vacant, 10 Episcopls, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 146. writ is in Claus. 8 H. 4. m. 2. dorso:

Rex, De summonitione Parliamentum.
etc. Th. Arc^iepis^. Cantuar. etc. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Gloucestr. 20 die Octobris prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
T. Rege apud Westminster. 26 die Augusti. Per breve de privato Sigillo.

Consimilia Brevia Custodi Spiritual. Archiepis. Ebor. Custodi Spirit. Episc.
Norwi^. Custodi Spirit. Episc. Meneven. sede vacant, 14 Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 147. writ is that of Claus. 11 H. 4. m. 32. dorso. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. Th. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Bristoll in Quindena S. Hillarii prox' futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes,
etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 26 die Octobr.

Consimilia Brevia H. Archiepiscopo Ebor: 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus 2
Prioribus.

The 148. writ is in Claus. 12 H. 4. m. 2. dorso.

Rex, De summoninitione Parliamenti.
etc. Th. Archiepis. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster: in crastino Animarum prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T.
Rege apud Westminster: 21 die Septembris.

Consimilia Brevia H. Arch. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 149. writ is that of Claus. 14 H. 4. dorso 22.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Th. Arch. Cant. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in
crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunieutes,
etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. ^. die Decembr. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia, H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 150 writ is in Claus. 1 H. 5. m. 9. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Thomae Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Leicestr. 29 die Ianuarii prox. futur. teneri
ordinavimus, etc. Praemunientes, etc, T. Rege apud Westminster. 1. die Decem^ris.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur H. Arch. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 26 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 151 writ is extant in Claus. 1 H. 5. m. 37. dorso. De summonitione
Parliamen ^


Rex, etc. Thomae, etc. Archiep. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. a die Paschae prox. futur. in tres Septimanas
teneri ordina^imus, etc^. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud VVe^tm. 22 die Martii.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur, etc. H. Arch. Eborum. 18 Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 152. is registered Claus. 2 H. 5. m. 16 dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. etc. Arch. Cantuar. Quia etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. die Lunae prox. post Octab. S. Martini prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 27 die Septembr.

Consimilia brevia H. Archiep. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spiritual.
Episcopatus Covent. et Litchf. 25 Abb^^bus, 2 Prioribus.

The 153. is in Claus. 3 H. 5. m. 15 dorso.

Rex etc. De summonitione Parliamenti.
H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die
Lunae prox. post festum S. Lucae Evangeli^^^^ prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemuni^ntes, etc. Te^^e Iohanne Duce Beaf. Custod. Angliae apud Westminster. 12 die
Augusti.

Consim. Brevia dirig^ntur H. Arch. Ebor. 15 Episcopis, N. Episcopo Ba^hon. et
Wellen. ^ive ejus Vicario generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente. The like R.
Episcopo Norwicen. and R. Episcopo Sarum, vel ejus Vicar. generali, etc.
Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Cicestr. 25 Abbatibu^, 2 Prioribu^.

The 154. is that of Claus. 4 H. 5. m. 16 dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 19 die
Octobr. prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Praemunien^es, etc. T. Rege apud
Sandwicum 3. die September.

Consimilia Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 13 Episcopis, 5 Episcopis London, Bath
and Wells, Norwich, Sarum, Coventre and Lichf. sive ejus Vicario generali ipso
Episcopo in remotis agente. Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Cicestr. sede
vacant; 23 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 155. writ is in Claus. 5 H. 5. m. 11. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
18 die Novembris prox. futur. teneri. Praemunientes, etc. Test Iohanne Duce
Bedford. Custode Angllae apud Westminster. 5. die Octobr.

Consimilia Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 11. Episcopis, 5 Episcopis, si^^ eorum
Vi^a^io genesis (as before.) Custodi Spiritual. Episcopatus Cicestr. et. Sarum. 24
Abbatibus, Priori de Cov^ntre.

The 156. is Claus. 7 H. 5. m. 9. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
H. Archiepiscopo Cant. Qui^, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 16
die October. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. Test Iohanne Duce
Bedf. Custode Angl. apud Westminster. 24 die Augusti.

Consim. Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 16 Episcopis, Custod. Spirit. Episcopatus
Wigorn, et Roffen: I. Episc. Coventr. et Lichf. sive ejus Vicario generali,
ipso Episco^o in remotis agente, 24 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

The 157. is in Claus. 8 H. 5. m. 2. dorso.

Rex etc. De summonitione Parliamenti.
H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 2.
^^e May prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunien^es, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 26
die Febr.

Cons. Brevia H. Arch. Ebor. 17 Episcopis. Custodi Spirituali. Episcopatus
Cicestr. sede vacant. T. Episc. Hereford, vel ejus Vicario general^ ipso
Epi^copo in remotis agente, 23 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

The 158. is enrolled, Claus. 9 H. 5. nu. 13. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. Quia quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
1. die Decembris, prox. futur. etc. Proemnnientes, etc. Test Iohanni Duce
Bedf. Custode Angliae apud Westminster. 20 die Octobris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia H. Archiep. Ebor. 14 Episcopis, Custodi Spiritual.
Episcopatus London. and Roffen. sede vacant, Episcopo Heref. et Cicestr. vel
ejus Vicario generali ipso Episcopo in remotis agente, 25 Abbatibus, Priori de
Coventre.

The 159. writ in ordinary form, is registered in Claus. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. H. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. ante Festum S. Marti^^. prox.
futur. teneri ordinavimus, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Wyndesore 29
die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur H. Arch. Eborum. 19 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus,
Priori de Coventre.

The 160. is recorded in Claus. 2 H. 6. m. 18. dorso. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. H. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. 23. die October. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Premunientes, etc. T. Rege apud
Westminster. 1 die Septembris. Per breve de Privato Sigill^.

Consim. Brevia H. Archiepisc. Ebor. 15 Episcopis, 3 Episcopis, vel eorum
Vicario genera^i, etc. Custod. Spiritual. Episc. Bangor. sede vacant, 24
Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

Claus. 3 H. 6. m. 9. dorso. which has some variation from the former. De
summonitione Parliamenti.


Rex, etc. H. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. salutem. Quia nos jam dum in annis
degimus teneris an pax et justitia ubilibet inter Ligeos nostros regni nostri
Angliae, sine quarum observatione regnum aliquod prospicere (non pote^^) debi^e
conserventur et exhibeantur necne, per avisamentum Consilii nostri decrevimus
experiri; quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud West monast. ultimo die Aprilis
prox, futur. teneri or inavimus, ac ibidem vobi^cum, ac^cum caeteris Prala^is,
Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri super prae^issi, et quibusdam alijs
arduis et urgentibus n^go^iis, No^, statum, et defensionem dicti regni nostri
ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus, Colloquiu^^^ bear et tractatum. Vobis
in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini sirmiter injungendo mandamus, q^od
consi^e ra^is dictorum negotiorum arduitare et periculis immin^ntibus, ce ^a^re
quacunque ^xcula ion^, dictis die et loco persona^iter intersit is Nobiscu^^,
acc^m cae^eris Praelatis Magnatibu^ et Proceri^us praedictis, super dictis
negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impe^s^ri. Et hoc sicut No^ et
honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et defensionem regni e^ Ecclesiae praedictorum,
expeditionemq^e^ dictorum negotiorum diligi is nu^^atenus omit^a is.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 24 die Febr.

Consim. Brevia Custod. Spirit^ual. Archiepisc. Ebor. and so Episcopatus
Bathon. et W^llen. L^ncoln. et B^ngor. sede (...), 15. Episcopis. T. Episc.
Cicestr. vel ejus Vicar. genesis etc. 25 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

Claus. 4 H. 6. dorso. 15.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archie^. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Leicestr. 18 die Februar. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes,
etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 4 die Ianuarii.

Consim. Brevia Custod Spirit: Archiepisc, Ebor. Episcopatus Lincoln, Elien.
Bangor. Norwic. ^ede vacant, 15 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

The 163. is this of Claus. 5 H. 6. m. 4. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster.
in Quindena S. Michaelis prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege
apud Westminster. 15 die Iulii. Per Consilium.

Consimilia brevia I. Arch. Ebor. 16 Episcopis, 2 Custodibus Spirit. sede
vacant H. Episc. Wynton, vel ^jus Vicar. genesis etc. 25. Abbatibus, Priori de
Coventre.

The 164. is in Claus. 7 H. 6. m. 2. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in
Quindena S. Mich. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud
Westminster. 12 die Julii. Per Breve de Privato sigillo.

Consim. Brevia I. Archiepisc. Ebor. 17 Episcopis, 1 Custodi Spirit. 2 Episc.
vel eorum Vicar. Generali, etc. 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 165. writ is that of Claus. 9 H. 6. dorso 18.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. die Veneris prox. ante festum S. Hillarii prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Test Humfrido Duce Gloucestr. Custodi Angliae apud Westminster.
27 die Novembr. Per breve de privato sigillo.

Consim. Brevia I. Archiepisc. Ebor. 17 Episcopis, Episcopo Winton. vel ejus
Vic. genesis etc. Custodi Episc. Cicestr. sede vacant, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 166. is in Claus. 10 H. 6. m. 10. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Arch. Cant. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 12 die
Maii prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster: 25 die
Feb. Per Breve de Privato sigillo.

Consimilia Brevia, etc. I. Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17 Episcopis, 2 Episc. vel
ejus Vic. Genesis etc. 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

H. 6. m. 10. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiep. Cant. etc. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westminster. 8 die Iulii. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T R. apud
Westminster. 24. die Maii. Per breve de privato sigillo.

Consim. Brevia, I. Archiep. Eborum, 13 Episcopis, 5 Episc. vel ejus Vic. genesis
etc. Custodi. Spirit. Episc. Assaven. sede vacant, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 168. is that in Claus. 13 H. 6. m. 2. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiepiscopo Cantuar, etc. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. die 10. Octobris, prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T.
R. apud Westminster. 5 die Iulii.

Consim. Brevia I. Archiep. Eborum, vel ejus Vicar. genesis etc. and so to 4.
Bishops more, 15 Episcopis, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

Claus. 15 H. 6. dorso 18.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. Licet ^uper de avisamento et assens^ Consilii
nostri pro quibusdam arduis, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Cant. 21.
die Ianuarii, prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, Quibusdam tam encertis de
causis, nos intime con^ernentibus Parliamentum praedict. etc. Praemunientes,
etc. T. Rege apud West, 10 die December. Per breve de privato Sigillo.

Consim. Brevia 17 Episcopis, 2 Custod, Spirit. sede vacant, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 170. is in Claus. 18 H. 6. mem. 33. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
H. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in
crastino S. Martini, prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud
Guildeford, 26 die September. Per ipsum Regem.

Consim. Brevia I. Archiep. Ebor. vel ejus Vic. genesis etc. H. Episcopo Winton,
C^rdinali Angliae vulgariter nuncupato, vel ejus Vic. genesis ipso Episcopo in
remotis agente. Administratori Episcopatus Elien. vel ejus Vicar. gener. ipso
Adminini^ra^. in remotis agente, 15 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 171. is extant in Claus. 20 H. 6. m. 27. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. H. Archiepisc. Cant. etc. Quia pro quibusdam a^^uis, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum in die Conversionis S. Paul^, prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud M^nerium sum de Sheue, 3 die Decembris. Per
ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiep. Ebor. Angliae Primati; H. Cardinali
Angliae, et Episcopo Wynton. 17 Episcopis, Administratori Episcopatus Elien.
vel ejus Vicar. gener. ipso Administrat: in remotis agente, 25 Abbatibus,
Priori de Coventre.

The 172 is that of Claus. 23 H. 6. m. 21. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. I. Archiep. Cantuar. etc. Quia pro quibusdam, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. 24 die Febr. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
T. Rege apud Westminster. 13 die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem.

Consim: Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiep. Eborum. Angliae Prima^^; H. Cardinali
Angliae, et Episcopo Wynton. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 173. is in Claus. 25 H. 6. m. 24. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. I. Archiep. Cant. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Villam nostram Cantebrigg. in die Sanctae Scholasticae, viz. 10 die Febr.
prox. futur' teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 14 die
Decembris. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consim. Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiep Eborum: etc. H. Cardinali Angliae, et
Episcopo Wynton, 17 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit. Episcop. Meneven. 25 Abbatibus,
2 Prioribus.

The 174. is in Claus. 27 H. 6. m. 24. (26) dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. I. Arch. Cant. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. 12. die Febr. prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. R.
apud Westminster. 2 die Ianuarii.

Consim. Brevia I. Cardinali et Archiepiscopo Eborum, etc. 18 Episcopis, 25
Abbatibus, Priori de Coventre.

The 175. is that of Claus. 20. H. 6. m. 26 dorso.

Rex, De summonitioni Parliamenti.
etc. I. Arch. Cant. etc. Quia pro quibusdam, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. 6 die November. prox. futur. etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud
Shene, 23 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia I. Cardinali et Arch. Eborum. etc. 18 Episcopis, Custodi
Spirit. London. sede vacant, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 176. writ is in Claus. 29 H. 6. m. 41. dorso.

Rex. De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. I. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Qui^ de avis^mento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. in festo Sancti Leonardi prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Wes^m. 5 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem

Consimilia Brevia I. Cardinali er Archiep. Eborum etc. 18 Episcopis, Custodi
Spirit. Episc. Sarum, ^ede vacant, 24 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 177. is entered Claus. 31 H. 6. m. 36. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. I. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Redynge 6 die Martii prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunien^es, etc.
T. Rege apud Wes^m. 10 die Ianuarii. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevi^ W. Archiep. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, Custodi Spirit. Episcopo
Covent. et Litchf. 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 178. is in Claus. 33 H. 6. dorso. 36.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Th. Archiepisc. Cant Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. 9. die Iulii prox. futur. teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc.
T. Rege apud Westminster. 26 die Maii. Per breve de Privaro Sigillo.

Cons. Brevia W. Arch. Ebor. 19 Episcopis. 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 179. is extant in Claus. 38 H. 6. m. 30. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Th. Archiepisc. Cant. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum apud Coventre. 20 die Novembris prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster 19. die Octobris. Per ipsum
Regem.

Consimilia Brevia etc. W. Archiep. Ebor. 20 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 180. is this summons to a Convocation, Claus. 38 De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex venerab. in Christo Patri Tho. eadem gratia Archiep. Angliae Primati,
salutem. Quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negociis Nos, Statum et defensionem
regni nostri Angliae, et utilitatem Ecclesiae Anglicanae intime concernentibus;
Vobis in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini rogantes mandamus, quatinus
praemissis debito intuitu attentis et ponderatis, universos et singulos
Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos, et Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium,
Abbates, et Prio^es Electivos, exemptos et non exemptos, necnon Archidiaconos,
Capitula, Conventus and Collegia totumque Clerum cujuslibet Diocaesis ejusd.
Provinciae, ad comparand. coram Vobis in Ecclesia S. Pauli London, vel alibi
prout melius expedire videritis cum omni celeritate accommoda more debito
convocari faciatis, ad tract and* consentiend. et percludend. super praemissis
et aliis, quae sibi clarius exponentur tunc ibidem ex part nostra. Et hoc
sicut Nos, et statum Regni nostri praedicti, ac honorem and utilitatem
Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 die
Feb.

Rex, Ven. in Christo Patri W. eadem gratia Archi^p. Eborum. Angliae Primati,
etc. ut supra: usque ibi coram vobis: et tunc sic: in Ecclesia beati Petri
Ebor. vel alibi prout melius expedire videritis. T. ut supra.

The 181. writ is remaining in Claus. 49 H. 6. m. 6. De summonitione
Parliamenti.


Rex, Th. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Quia de avisamento, et assensu Consilii nostri
etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 26 die Novembr. prox. futur.
teneri, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 15 die Octobris. Per ipsum
Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia G. Arch. Eborum. 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibu^, 2 Prioribus.

The 182 writ I shall remember, is that in Claus. 1 E. 4. m. 35 dorso. De
veniendo ad Parliamentum.


Rex, etc. Th. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia de avisamento, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 6. die Iulii prox. futur. teneri, etc. (in
usual form.) Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 23 die Maii.

Consim. Brevia diriguntur W. Archiepisc. Ebor. etc. and to 19 Bishops, 25
Abbots, 2 Priors there mentioned by name.

The 183 is that in Claus. 2 E. 4. m. 3. dorso.

Rex. De veniendo ad Parliamentum.
etc. Th. Archiep. Cantuar. Quia de avisamento et assensu Consilii nostri, etc.
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 29 die Aprilis prox. futur. teneri,
etc. Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 28 die Febr. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia W. Archiepisc. Ebor. 17 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 184. writ is in Claus. 6 E. 4. m. 1. dorso.

Rex, De veniendo ad Parliamentum.
etc. Th. Archiep. Cantua^. Quia pro quibusdam arduis, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 3. die Iunii. prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 28 die Febr, Per breve de Privato
Sigillo.

Consimilia Brevia Archiepisc. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 185. is Claus. 12 E. 4. m. 2. dorso.

Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. Archiepiscopo Cant. Quia de avisamento et assers, etc. quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 6 die October. prox. futur. teneri, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 9 die Augusti. Per breve de privato
Sigillo.

Consim. Br^via 17 Episcopis, Vicario genesis Archiepiscopatus Ebor, in remotis
agente, Custod. Spirit. Episcopat. Norwicen. and Assaven. 24 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

The 186. is that of Claus. Anno 22, and 23 Edw. 4. m. 11. dorso.

Rex, etc. Th. Archiep. Cant. Quia de avisamento et Pro Parliamento.
etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. 10 die Ianuarii prox. futur.
teneri ordinavimus, etc. Praemunientes, etc. T R. apud Westminster. 15 die November.

Consim. Brevia, I. Archiep. Eborum, 19 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

The 187. is in Claus. 22, and 23 E. 4. m. 11. dorso, for De Convocatione.


Rex Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Th. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cant.
totius Angliae Primati, consangu^neo nostro carissimo, s^lutem. Quibusdam
arduis and urgentibus Negotii^, Nos, securitatem et defensionem Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, ^c pac^m, ^r anquillitatem, bonum publicu^, et defensionem R^gni
nostri, and Subdi^orum nostrorum e^usdem concernentibus, Vobis in fide et
dilectione quibus Nobis ten^mini rogando mandamus, quatenus praemissis d^bit^o
intuito attentis and ponder^atis^ univers^s, etc. (ut supra, number. 180.) coram
Vobis in Ecclesi^ Sanct^ Pa^li London, vel alibi prout vobis expelire viderit^s
cumom^^ c^lerita^e accommoda modo debito co^vocari faciatis, ac tractand*
consentiend. and conclud^nd. super praemiss^ et aliis quae by clarius
exponentu^ tunc ibidem ex part nostra. Et hoc sicut Nos, et Statum ^eg^i
nost^i, et honorem et utilita^em Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis nullatenus
omittatis. T. Rege apud Westminster. 3 d^e Februarii. Per ips^m Regem.

This is the last writ in the Clause (...) in the Tower of this Nature, which
extend only to the end of King Edward the ^^h. his reign.

The writs of Summons ^o Parliaments, and Convocations under R. 3. H. 7. 8. Ed.
6. Q. Mary Q. Eliz. K. James, and King Charles, are not in the Tower, but
reserved in the Ro^^s and Chancery, where those who please may peruse them,
they running for the most part in the selfsame ordinary form, without any
notable variety.

I shall close up this Section with the last writ of this Nature under our late
King Charles.

Carolus Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and H^berniae Rex, See My
Antiquity triumphing over Novelty, p. 25.
Fidei defensor, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo patri ac fideli Consilario
Nostro Gulielmo, eadem gratia Cantuar. Archiepisc. totius Angliae Primati and
Metropolitan^, salutem. Quib^^am arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos, securitatem
and defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ac pacem and tranquillitatem, bonum
publicum and defensionem regni Nostri and subditorum Nostrorum ejusdem
concernentibus; Vobis in fide and dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini rogando
mandamus, quatenus praemissis debito intuitu attentis et ponderatis, universos
and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos Ecclesiarum Cathedralium,
necnon Archidiaconos, Capitula et Collegia, totumque Clerum cujuslibet
Diocaesios ejusdem Provinciae, ad comparandum coram Vobis in Ecclesia Catholica
Cathedrali.
Sancti Pauli London, decimo quarto die Aprilis proxim, futur. vel alibi, prout
melius expedire videritis, cum omni celeritate accommoda modo de^ito convocari
facias, ad tractandum, consentiendum, and concludendum super premissis, and
aliis quae tibi clarius exponentur tunc ibide^ ex part Nostra: Et hoc sicut
Nos, et Statum regni Nostri, ac honorem et utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae
diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test meipso apud Westmonast. vicesimo die
Februarii, Anno regni nostri quintodecimo.

Before I proceed to my Observations on the precedent writs, I shall crave
leave to inform and satisfy the ingenuous Readers in 2. particulars, to
prevent their causeless censures.

1. That the usual writs in some Clause Rolls to the Spiritual Lords were for
Brevitie sake purposely omitted, and in the Consimiles literae, and eodem modo,
etc. after the transcripts of the writs of Summons here inserted (especially
those of King Edward the 2.) the paticular Numbers of the Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, and Spiritual Lords then summoned to those Parliaments mentioned in the
Eodem modo etc. were casually left out (though entered by their names in the
Clause Rols) by reason of an, etc. and vacant spaces in the written Copy for
their numbers; through have forgotten to be filled up, before they were printed
off; which caused some Errors and Omissions of the true number of Bishops,
Abbots and Priors in the Eodem modo, etc. from p. 14. to 32. which I think
necessary here to rectify and supply, rather than in an Errata at the end of
this Breviate; and that in this brief manner.

Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 12. dorso. Consim: literae diriguntur I: Karliol: Episc. 14
Bishops more, and 44 Abbatibus.

Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 9. dorso. Consim: literae, etc. Iohanni Karliol. Episcopo,
to 14 other Bishops, 44 Abbots; Magistro Militiae Templi in Angl. Magistro
Ordine de Semplingham, Priori Hosp: Sancti Iohannis ^ Jerusalem. in Anglia.

In both these Rolls there is a writ, Thomae Arch. Eborum: with this special
clause after impensuri; Vos saltem Procuratorem idoneum cum sufficienti
potestate ad dictos diem et locum, et vestro nomine designatis. Et hoc
nullatenus omittatis.

Anno 32 E. 1. m. 2. dorso. Rex, etc. Archiepiscopo Cant. etc. Quia pro
quibusdam negotiis, etc. (as in that of this Roll in the next Section to the
Lords) Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Brustwike 12 die Novembr.

Eodem modo, etc. 18 Episcopis, besides Electo London. vel ejus Vices ger^nti
ipso agente in partibus transmarinis, Decano et Capit: beati Petri Ebor.
Custodibus Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Eborum sede vacant, 74 Abbatibus,
Magistro Mil. Templi and S^mplingham, Priori Hosp: S. Johan: Ierus.

Claus. 34 E. 1. m. 2. dors. Rex, etc. W. etc. Arch. Ebor. Quia super
ordinatione et stabilimento terrae nostrae Scotia, etc. (as in the next Section
to the Prince) Praemunientes, etc. Test ut ib^.

Eodem modo scribitur, (mucatis mutandis) 18 Episcopis, 28 Abbatibus.

Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 19. Eodem modo scribitur. 18 Episcopis, 55 Abbatibus,
Priori Hosp. S, Johan. Jerus: Magistro Mil: Templi.

Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 11. Eodem modo mandatum est 15 Episcopis, 12 Abbatibus, 3
Prioribus; And dors. 8. 12 Episcopis, 14 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus.

Claus. 2 E. 2. dors. 11. Eodem modo scribitur Archiepisc. Ebor. 16 Episcopis,
Custodi Spirit. Episc. Bathon: et Wellen: sede vacant, 51 Abbatibus, 1 Priori.

Claus. 3 E. 2. dors. 17. Eodem modo mandatum est, W: Archiepisc. Ebor. A.
Patriarch: Ierus: et Episcopo Dunelm: 15 Episcopis, L. Bathon: et Wellen:
electo et confirmato, electo et confirmato Bangoren: without Abbots or Priors
in the Roll.

Claus. 4 E. 2. dors. 2. Eodem modo scribitur (mutatis mutandis) quoad Decanos
et Capit: et Priores et Capit: Archiepiscopo Ebor: 16 Episcopis, 52 Abbatibus,
1 Priori.

Claus. 5 E. 2. dors. 17. Consim: literae diriguntur 11 Episcopis, 3 Vic. Genesis
Episc. in remotis agente, 29 Abbatibus.

Claus. 7 E. 2. dors. 27. Eodem modo mandatum est, Custod: Archiep: Cantuar. et
London: sede vacant, 16 Episcopis, 45 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Magistr. Ord. d^
Sempringham; And dors. 15. Custod: Arch: Cant: 16 Episcopis, 41 Abbatibus, 3
Prioribus, Mag. Ordinis de Sempr.

Claus. 8 E. 2. dors. 29. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Ebor. 18 Episcopis, A.
Assaven: electo confirmato, 46 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, Magist: Ord. de Sempr.

Claus. 9 E. 2. dors. 22. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Ebor: 19 Episc. 46
Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus.

Claus. 11 E. 2. m. 14 dors. Rex, De summonitione Parliamenti.
etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cantuar. etc. Quia super diversis et arduis negotiis
Nos, etc. Parliamentum nostrum apud Lincoln: tenere, et vobiscum, etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Novembr.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch: Ebor^ 17 Episcopis, D. Dublin: Archiepiscopo, 45
Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag. Ord. de. Sempr. And dors. 8. W. Arch: Ebor: 17
Episcopis, D. Dublin: Archiepiscopo, 45 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, and Mag: Ord:
de Semp.

Claus. 12 E. 2. dors. 29. Eodem modo mandatum est W. Arch: Ebor: ^8 Episcopis,
D. Dublin. Arch. 42 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag: Ord: de Sempr. And dors. 11.
W. Arch: Ebor. 17 Episcopis, 51 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag: Ord: de Sempr.

Claus. 13 E. 2. dors. 13. Eodem modo mandatum Arch. Ebor: 16 Episcopis, 28
Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus, Mag^ Ord. de Sempr.

Claus. 14 E. 2. dorse^ 23. De summonitione Parliamenti.
Rex. etc. W. etc. Archiepisc. Cant: etc. Quia super diversis, etc.
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster: die Lunae in Octab. S. Michaelis, prox. futur.
teneri, etc. without any Praemunientes, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 5 die Augusti.
Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mand: W. Arch. Ebor: 18 Episcopis, I. Winton: electo confirmato, 28
Abbatibus, Mag: Ord. de Sempr. 3 Prioribus; And dorso 5. Archiepiscopo Ebor. 19
Episcopis, 51 Abbatibus, 2 Prioribus, Mag: Ord: de Sempr.

Claus. 16 E. 2. dors. 26. Eodem modo scribitur, W. Archiepisc. Cant: etc. 19
Episcopis, 28 Abbatibus, 4 Prioribus.

Claus. 17 E. 2. dors. 27. Rex, etc. W. etc. Cantuar: Archiepisc. etc. Quia
super diversis, etc. apud Westminster. a die Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis
prox. futur. i^ tres Septimanas Parliamentum nostrum tenere, et Vobiscum etc.
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Kenilworth, 26 die December. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur^ Archiepiscopo Eborum, 17 (...) Abbatibus, 4 Prioribus.

There are 3. other writs to both the Archbishops reciting the first writ* unto
ordinari contigeri^ super negotiis antedictis; and then subjoyning: (...)
Decanos et Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, et Archidiac. totius Provinciae
vestrae in propriis personis s^is, Capitula etiam singula dictarum Ecclesiarum
Cathe dralium (...) ad dictos diem et. locum venire faci^^^s, ad tractand. et
consentiend. hiis qu^ in praemissis tunc ibidem contigerit ordineri. Et hoc
nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege ut supra.

Claus. 18 E. 2. dors. 5. Eodem. modo scribitur Archiep. Ebor. 15 Episcopis, 28
Abbatibus, 4 Prioribus, Magistro Gilberto Midleton^ Archidiac. Nonthampton,
Officiali Curiae Cant. Magist. Roberto de. S. Albano, Decano de^ Arcubus London.

Claus. 19 F. 2. dors. 27. Eodem modo mandatum est W. Arch. Ebir. 17 Episcopis:
27 Abbatibus^ 3 Prioribus, Nota.
with this addition to one of them, Prior de Bridlington Nihil tenet de Rege.

Claus. 20 E. 2. dors. 4. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiepiscopis Cant. et Ebor.
16 Episcopis, and 19 Abbatibus only, and no Prior.

Claus. 1 E. 3. pars 2. dorso 16. Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Ebor. 16
Episcopis, Custodi Episc. Exon^ ((...) mutindis^) Norwic. and Heref. Episc. vel
ejus Vicar. genesis ipso Episc. in remotis agente, 19 Abbatibus only: After which
follow two Writs to both the Archbishops reciting, the former, with an Et licet
singulis Episcopis, etc. Nolentes tamen n^gotia nostra, etc. like that
forecited, p. 34, 35.

(...) mandatum est Custod^ Spirit. Archiep. Ebor. Episcopat. Heref. et Exon.
sede vacant, reciting the first writ with an Et licet singulis Episcopis
praedictis, etc. Nolentes tamen, etc. Test ut supra.

Claus. 2. E. 3. m. 31. dorso. Eodem modo mandat. est Custodi Archiep. Cantu^r.
et Episcopatus Bangor. sede vacant, 18 Episcopis, 17 Abbatibus only, and no
Prior.

Claus. 2 E. 3. dorso. 15. Eodem modo mandatum est Custodi Spirit.
Archiepiscopatus Cant. 19 Episcopis, 1^ Abbatibus, Priori Ho^p. S. Johan.
Jerus. in Anglia: After which ensue 2 writs to the Archbishop of York, et
Custod. Spirit. Archiepisc. Cant. rehear^ing the first; with an Et licet
singulis Episcopis, etc. Nolentes tamen, etc., Test ut supra.

Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 41. Eodem modo mandatum est, Archiep. Ebor. 19 Episcopis,
27 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus. After that ensues a writ to both the Archbishops,
relating the first with an Et licet singulis Episcopis, etc. Nolentes tamen,
etc. Test apud Odiham, 1 die Febraarii.

Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 19. Eodem modo mandatum est Archiep. Ebor. 19 Episcopis,
27 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus.

Claus. 6 E, 3. dorso. 4. Eodem modo mandat. est 17 Episcopis, 25 Abbatibus, 2
Prioribus.

Claus. 9 E. 3. dorso 8. There is a second writ to both the Archbishops,
reci^ing the first with an Et licet singulis, etc. Nolentes tamen, etc. T. Rege
apud Nottingham 3 die Aprilis. Per ipsum Regem. And Dorso 2. De summonitione
Parliamenti.
there is au Ordinary writ of Summons Archiepisc. Cant. to a Parliament apud
Westminster. prox. post diem Dominicam in medio Quadragesimae prox. futur. with a
Praemunientes, etc. T. Rege apud Berewic. super Twedam, 22 die Ian: Per ipsum
Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est Arch. Ebor. 19 Episcopis, 27 Abbatibus, 3 Prioribus:
And 2 writs to the Archbishops only with an Et licet, etc. Nolentes tamen, etc.
T. ut supra. Per ipsum Regem.

These are the only Omissions, in the writs to the Bishops, Abbots, Priors and
Spiritual Lords, and mistakes in the numbers of them in the Eodem modo,
Consimiles literae, and Consimilia Brevia, omitted casually in the premises.

The 2. thing I shall acquaint the Readers with, are the reasons inducing me to
recite so many writs to the Archbishops and Prelates, running all in the
self-same form; which may seem to many a mere Tautology and super^^uity, which
might have been better expunged, than inserted into this Breviat, though in
truth not so. For I recited them all in this manner upon these considerations.
1. To inform the Readers in what Clause Rolls in the Tower all the writs of
Summons are extant, and in what Membranaes and dorses they may readily find
them upon all occasions; A very useful, and hitherto unpublished, yea
generally unknown part of Antiquity and learning. 2ly. To inform the Readers of
the exact numbers of these writs of Summons, their several dates, and the
particular places, days of all Parliaments and great Councils meetings extant
on Record, from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. and the numbers of the Spiritual Lords and
Prelates of all sorts summoned to them, not hitherto published by any. 3ly.
Because the beginnings and recitals of all or most writs in these Rolls to the
Temporal Lords, Sherifs, Council of the King, and Warden of the ^inqueports,
cited by me in the ensuing Sections, referr for the most part to the writs to
the Archbishops and Bishops, (usually entered at large in every Roll) and to
their respective dates, with an, etc. ut supra, Test ut supra, and the like,
and must be compared with them by the Readers to make them complete. 4ly.
Because the styles of some Bishops who were Patriarchs, Cardinals, Bishops
elect, or elected and confirmed; and the writs to such; yea, to the Gardians of
Bishops Spiritualties during the vacancy of their Bishoprics, and to their
Vicar Generals during their absence in foreign parts; and to the Administrators
of Bishoprics, are for the most part recorded only in the Eodem modo,
Consimiles literae, or Consimilia brevia, subjoyned to those usual writs here
abbreviated; therefore it was absolutely necessary to repeat them, to evidence
and clear up those hitherto unknown, uncommon particulars and rarities. All
which reasons duly pondered, will, I hope, absolve me from the guilt of any
Tautologies, or super fluous recitals in the premised Writs, and adjuncts
annexed to them.

Useful Annotations and Observations upon the precedent Writs to the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Ecclesiastical Barons, and Clergy.
FRom the precedent Writs of Summons issued to the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors. Ecclesiastical Barons, and Clergy, wherewith I have presented
you in a Chronological Series according to their Antiquities, I shall here, for
the information of such Lawyers, Gentlemen, and other Readers unversed in
Records of this nature, recommend these ensuing particular Observations to
them, before I proceed to the Writs of Summons to the Temporal Lords; reserving
my General Annotations and Observations concerning Parliamentary writs for the
Close of the first Part of this Brief Register, Calendar and Survey; when they
have taken a full view of all the several kinds and varieties of Parliamentary
writs of Summons, whereon they must be grounded.

1. That as the Spiritual Lords and Barons, are mentioned in all See Spelmann^
Concilia, Ingulphi Historia, The Prologues to the printed Statutes of H. 3. Ed.
1, 2, 3, 4. R. 2. H. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Great Councils, Parliaments, Prologues, and Acts of Parliament before the
Temporal Lords and Barons: So generally for the most part, the writs of Summons
directed to them are first entered, recorded in the Dorse of the Clause Rolls,
before the writs to the Temporal Lords, though now and then the writs to the
Prince of Wales, and some other Temporal Peers, are first enrolled, but yet
very rarely.

2. That when there was an Archbishop of Canterbury in being, the first writ of
Summons to, or Prorogation of Parliaments entered in the Rolls, is generally
that which issued unto him, as Primate of all England; if within the Realm, or
to his (...) absence out of it; But when there was no Archbishop of Canterbury
living; the first writ (...) in the Ro^^s issued to the Archbishop of (...)* as
Primate of England: yet Here, p. 28, 29 36.
now and then the first writ of Summons entered, is directed to the Archbishop
of York, when both are living; and the writ to the Guardian of the Spiritualties
of Canterbury (...) of that See is some^imes first entered before the writ to
the Archbishop of York: Yea, if the Archbishop of York was a Cardinal* and
Canterbury none ye (...) of Summons, as appears by Cl^^s 25 H. 6. m. 16. and 24
dorso, and 29 H. 6. m. (...) ^orso, and other Rolls.

3. That when both Sees of Canterbury and York were void, the first writ entered
was directed to the Here, p. 55.
Bishop of London (as in 22 E. 3. where the Archbishop of Canterbury was
elected and confirmed, but not installed, and York quite void) and sometimes to
some other Bishop, without any certain method therein observed.

4. That in Claus. Here, p. 3.
6 Iohannis (the first writ of Summons extant) there is only one single writ of
Summons without the Bishops name to whom it was issued, and in Claus. 26 H. 3.
only one single writ of Summons to the Archbishop of York, without mention of
any writs to other Bishops, which yet no doubt had writs of Summons as well as
he, though not entered, as some clauses in the bodies of both these writs do
intimate.

5. That in the Summons of 49 H. Here, p. 5, 6.
3. the first, and only writ registered is directed to the Bishop of Durham, and
18 Abbots and Priors are listed in the Eodem modo mandatum est, before the
Archbishop of York and other Bishops.

6. That the writs directed to the Archbishops of Canterbury always styled
them* Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Cantuariae Archiepiscopo, totius
Angliae Primati: That the writs issued to the Archbishops of York ever use this
style; Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Eborum, Archiepiscopo, Angliae
Primati, leaving out totius: And the writs sent to all other Bishops run thus,
Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Episcopo, etc. (But i^ any Archbishop
or Bishop were made a Cardinal, then the style was, Cardinali et Archiepiscopo
Eborum, et Cardinali et Episcopo Wynton: as in Claus. 25 H. 6. m. 16, 24 dorso.
29 H. 6. m. 21. dorso, and other Clause Rolls of Hen. 6. when York and
Winchester were both Cardinals; and Winchester is still placed whiles a
Cardinal next after York. The writs to Abbots, Priors, Gardians of
Spiritualties of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons, usually run in this
form, Dilecto sibi in Christo Abbati Sancti Augustini, etc, or Priori de Jews,
etc. which I have here omitted in their writs for the most part, with an, etc.
to avoid frequent Repetitions, and p^olixity.

7. That in the Eodem modo, and Calendar of the Bishops names to whom writs
were directed, the Archbishop of York is for the most part first named, yet
sometimes he and his Suffragans are listed after all the Bishops of the Province
of Canterbury, sometimes before them, sometimes intermixed with them. In the
entering of the Bishops names, there is no certain order or method observed; for
sometimes the Bishop of Durham is first named, other times the Bishop of
London, elewhere the Bishop of Winchester: sometimes the Bishop of Rochester,
otherwhiles Chichester: Now and then all the Welsh Bishops are named together
after all the rest of the Province of Canterbury, yet in some Rolls they are
named promiscuously, and intermixed with the English Prelates, as the writs
came first to the Registers hands, and not according to the Antiquity of their
Sees or consecrations, for ought I can discern by comparing their entries; Only
it is observable, that Anthony See Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 520, 521.
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 720.
Beak Bishop of Durham (a very wealthy Prelat) procuring himself to be made
Patriarch of Jerusalem by the Pope, was summoned by the Title of A. Patriarch.
Jerusalem. et Episc. Dunolm. in the Summons of 1, 2, 13 of Edward 2. Here, p.
15, 16. and entered next after the Archbishop of York in the Rolls.

8. That the Bishops for the most part are named in the Rolls, and entered by
themselves before the Abbots and Priors, yet now and then (but very rarely)
they are intermixed with the Abbots and Priors, as in 49 H. 3. dors. 11.

9. That all the Archbishops and Bishops were usually summoned to all our
Parliaments, but not to Councils of State, and that in person, if in England,
or alive. But when any Here, p. 11, 19, 20, 21, 22, 27, 28, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43.
46, 51, 64, 65. etc. 95, 96, 97.
Archbishop or Bishop was absent in foreign parts, the King usually sent writs
of Summons to their Vicars Generals: and when their Bishoprics were void by
their deaths, or translations to another Bishopric, to the Guardians of their
Spiritualties, to supply their places.

10. That when any Archbishop, Bishop, or Abbot, was elected only, Here, p. 9.
16. 42, 46, 50, 55* 59, 71. 96, 97.
before his confirmation or installment; the writ of Summons issued to him by
the name of I. Electo Cantuanae, electo Hereford, etc. If elected and
confirmed, but not installed; then Electo Cantuariae, or Hereford* confirmato:
By which it is evident, that Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots only elected, or
elected or confirmed, might be and were usually summoned to (...) likewise in
their absence beyond the Seas; Yea, in 2 E. 2. dors. 14. There is a writ issued
R. Electo Dublin Episcopo, in the Eodem modo, registered amongst the Bishops of
England, next after the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Bishop of Durham:

12. That the chief reason why sometimes there are more Bishops summoned to one
Parliament than another, is only the vacation of their Sees by their deaths or
translations: what the number of them was summoned to each Parliament, I have
mentioned in the gross where I find them entered in the Roll at large, to
avoid the repetition of their names, which those who please may peruse in the
rolls themselves.

1^ That the first writs to the Archbishops of Canterbury, York, or any other
Bishop in the Clause Rolls, be they writs either of Summons to a Parliament,
Council, or Convocation, or of Adjournment, or Prorogation, are usually entered
at large: which I have abbreviated with an, etc. where the form and clauses are
the same with those I transcribe at large. And the writs which follow the first
issued to the rest of the Bishops, are but briefly entered for the most part,
with an Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, or Consimiles Literae, or
Consimilia Br^via diriguntur subscriptis, viz. etc. unless it be where there
are different Clauses in some of the writs varying from those to the first
Bishops; which Clauses (recited at large) I have here printed, when they
occur in the Rolls.

13. That the writs of Summons to Parliaments directed to the Archbishops and
Bishops are of various forms, differing very often one from the other, not only
in their recitals of the particular causes of summoning them; but in sundry
special and unusual clauses, as I have touched in the recital of them, and
shall more largely insist on in my General Obs^rvations in the close of this
Part of my Register. That the writs of Summons to Councils and Convocations,
issued to the Archbishops and Bishops are usually different one from another,
not only in form and special^ Clauses, but likewise from the writs of Summons
to Parliaments, unless where the word Concilium is used for a Parliament: There
being no Praemuni^ntes, etc. in any writs of Summons to Councils of State, but
only to Parliaments, and that not always, but a^ the Kings pleasure: and no
general Summons of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors holding by
Barony to all Councils of State; but only of such and so many of them as the
King and his Counsil thought meet, when as they were usually all summoned to
Parliaments.

14. That the writs of Summons to Convocations of the Clergy, were directed
only to the two Archbishops or their Vicars Generals, to summon all the
Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Clergy of their respective Provinces to them, not
always on a certain day or place as in writs for Parliaments and Great
Councils, but at such time (or place) as they deemed most convenient, without
any particular writs at all issued to any other Bishops, Abbots, Priors, or
Clergy men, as in Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils: where though they
had all particular writs of Summons, yet the King often times issued special
writs to the two Archbishops, to summon all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors and
Clergy, within the several Diocesses of their Provinces to appear at the
Parliaments, Councils, and Convocations, to prevent all negligence, defects, or
faylers in their Summon^, and excuses for not appearing, whereby the affairs of
the King and kigdom might be prejudiced.

15. That ^he number of Abbots and Priors summoned to our Parliaments, was
sometimes more, sometimes less, as I have briefly touched, relating their number
in the gross for brevity sake; where I find them particularly mentioned in the
Rolls. The names of those Abbots and Priorr who were ordinarily or
extraordinarily summoned to Parliaments and Parliamentary Councils, with the
reasons of this incertainty in their numbers by subsequent exemptions, because
they held no Lands by Barony or Knights service from the King, but only in
Frankalmoigne, or by act of special grace, or through vacancy by death, or
otherwise; those who please may read at large in Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor,
Book 2. chapter 5. Sect. 22, 23, 25. p. 732. to 735. and more particularly in the
ensuing Alphabetical Table of their names and Summons.

I shall here only present the Readers with 3. Kalendars of their names out of
the Clause Rolls, as I find them there recorded.

The 1. List is that in the Clause Roll of 49 H. 3. m. 11* dorso in Cedula.
where the writ at large being directed to R. etc. Episcopo Dunolm, etc. (as it
is here transcribed, p. 5, 6.) immediately after the writ, this Catalogue of
the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Deans names summoned to it follows, in this
form.

Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopo Karliol.
Abbati Sanctae Mariae Eborum. Priori Dunolm. Priori Sanctae Trinitatis Eborum.
Abbati de Seleby. Abbati de Furness: Abbati de Fontibus. Abbati de Royvall.
Abbati de Melsa*
Archiepiscopo Eborum. Priori de Parco. Abbati de Rup^. Abbati de Bella Lauda.
Priori de Bridlington. Priori S. Oswaldi. Abbati de Rufford. Priori de Blida.
Priori de Thurgarton. Priori Karliol: Abbati de Wyteby. Priori de Giseborne.
Decano Eborum.
Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis.
Episcopo London. Episcopo Wynton. Episcopo Exon. Episcopo Wygorn. Episcopo
Lincoln. Decano Exon. Decano de Well. Episcopo Elien. Episcopo Sarum. Episcopo
Coventr. et Litchf. Episcopo Cic^str. Elect^ Bath. et Wellen. Decano S^rum.
Decano Lincoln.
In forma praedict a scribitur Abbatibus, Prioribus subscriptis sub hac data.
Test Rege apud Wodest. XXIIII. die Decembr.
Abbati Sancti Edmundi. Abbati de Wautham. Abbati de Sancto Albano.
Abbati de Glaston. Abbati de Rading. Abbati de Cirencestr. Priori de Merton.
Abbati de Oseney. Priori Sanctae Fresewid: Oxon. Abbati de Missenden. Abbati de
Waverle. Priori Elien. Priori Norwicen. Abbati Cestr. Abbati Salop. Abbati de
Hulmo. Abbati de Bardene. Priori de Lenton. Abbati de Bello. Priori Ordinis de
Sempli^gham. Priori de Watton. Electo de Evesham. Abbati Westminster.
Priori Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis Jerusalem in Anglia. Magistro Militis Templi
in Anglia. Abbati de Ramesey. Abbati de Burgo. Abbati de Thorn. Abbati de
Crouland. Abbati Colecestr. Priori de Dunstaple. Abbati de Bello loco. Abbati
de Parco Lude. Abbati de Stanlegh. Abbati de Lilleshull. Abbati de Buttlesden.
Priori de Betuve^r. Priori de Lews. Abbati de Clervaus. Priori de Stodley.
Abbati S. Augustine. Cantuar. Abbati de Cercesey. Priori Sanctae Trinitatis
Cantuar. Abbati de Hida Winton. Abbati de Middleton. Abbati de Cerne. Abbati de
Abbotisbury. Abbati de Tavistocks. Priori de Huntingdon. Abbati de Sulebey.
Abbati S. Augustini Bristol. Abbati de Malmesbery. Abbati de Milchene. Abbati
de Abingdon. Abbati S. Petri Gloucestr. Abbati de Persour. Abbati de
Winchecombe. Priori de Coventr. Abbati de O elveston. Abbati de Teukesbury.
Priori de Swinesheued. Priori de S. Neoto. Abbati de Wardon. Abbati Sancti
Iacobi Northampt. Abbati de Leicestr. Abbati de Kirkested. Priori de Eton.
Priori de Cruceroys. Abbati de Kirkestall. Abbati de Tame. Abbati de
Bermundesy. Priori de Barnewell. Abbati de Meryvall.
Priori Sancti Swithin Winton. Abbati de Lesenes. Priori de Ledes. Priori de
Lauda. Priori de Spalding. Priori Sancti Barthol. London. Priori de Kenelworth.
Priori de Nuttell. Abbati de V^lle Dei. Abbati de Croxton.
Here you see 36 Priors, in^ermixed promiscuously with 65 Abbots, (one of them
only Abbot Elect, but not installed) the Bishops and Deans in^erposed between
them, most of which Priors, and some of which Abbots, were never after summoned
to any other Parliaments, nor yet these Deans in this manner.

The 2. is that of Clause 23 E. 1. m. 4. dorso, and 24 E. 1. m. 7. dorso: where
the Abbots and Priors summoned to those 2. Parliaments are thus registered and
distinguished by their several Orders in both these rolls alike, and in no
Summons else besides these: though they are again all summoned and entered
almost in this Order in Clau^e 28 E. 1. dors. 17. and 3. and some Rolls in E. 2.

Abbati de S. Edmundo. Exempti.
Abbati de Waltham.
Abbati de Alnewik. Premonstracen.
Abbati de Egleston. Abbati de Sta. Agatha. Abbati de Barlinge. Abbati de
Tupholme. Abbati de Byley. Abbati de la Dale. Abbati de Newhus. Abbati de
Cokirsand. Abbati de Croxton. Abbati de Kirkested. Abbati de S. Radegunda.
Abbati de Heppe.
Abbati de Fur^eyes. Cisterc.
Abbati de Sallaye. Abbati de Holmecoltram. Abbati de Novo Monasterio. Abbati
de Iornall (or) Iereval. Abbati de Fontibus. Abbati de Bella Lauda. Abbati de
Melsa. Abbati de Kirkestede. Abbati de Rupe. Abbati de Rughford. Abbati de
Valle Dei. Abbati de Gerndon. Abbati de Stanley in Ardern. Abbati de Pippewell.
Abbati de Comb. Abbati de S. Albano. Abbati de Evesham.
Abbati de Tichefeld. Abbati de Suleye. Abbati de Lavendox. Abbati de Torre.
Abbati de Wellebecks. Abbati de Hales. Abbati de Bello capite. Magistro
Militiae Templi in Anglia. Priori Hospitalis Ioh. Ierus. in Anglia. Magistro
Ordinis de Semplingham.
Abbati de Glauca in 24. E. 1. m. 7.
Blanca Lauda. Abbati de Basingwerk. Abbati de Cumbermere. Abbati de
Crokesden^. Abbati de Valle Regali. Abbati de Deulacresse. Abbati de Mira
Valle. Abbati de Stanlawe. Abbati de Byldewas. Abbati de Stanle in Wiltes.
Abbati de Swynesheued. Abbati de Wardon. Abbati de Boxle. Abbati de Stratford.
Abbati de Tyletye. Abbati de Binedon. Abbati de Quarrera. Abbati de Leteley.
Abbati de Dunkeswell. Abbati de Bell^ loc^ Regis. Abbati de Strata florida.
Abbati de Flaxele. Abbati de T^nt^rn^. Abbati de King^swode. Abbati de Waverle.
Abbati de Revesbye. Abbati de Parco Lude.
16. That in the writs of Summons to Abbots and Priors, the writs are very
seldom recited at large to any of them, unless in 27 E. 1. d. 9. and toward
the latter end of the reign of King Edward the 3. where some writs to the first
Abbot named in the lists of Summons, are entered at large; the rest only recited
with an, etc. or not mentioned at all, but only thus, Eodem modo mandatum est,
etc. or Consimiles Literae, or Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Abbatibus et
Prioribus subscriptis; entered in the Roll, with a Catalogue of their names
subscribed under it.

17. In ancient times the first writ that is entered, for the most part issued
to the Abbot of S. Augustines in Canterbury, (in which Rolls there is no
certain order observed in the Abbots and Priors names and summons.) sometimes
the Abbot of S. Albans, now and then the Abbot of Glastonbury; sometimes some
other Abbots are first named in the List of Summons, and one name frequently
praeponed, and then postponed after another, as the Register was pleased to
enter them in the Rolls: But from 1 H. 4. to the end of King Ed. 4. the first
writ entered is, Abbati de Burgo Sancti Petri. As for the Priors, they are for
the most part registered after the Abbots; now and then but rarely, before the
Abbots, and frequently intermixed with them: sometimes one Prior is placed
before another in some Summons, which was named last in other Lists: few Lists
agreeing in the order of their names, unless that of 23 E. 1. d. 4. and 24 E.
1. d. 7. which exactly accord in all things, from which that of 28 E. 1. d. 3.
and 17. does somewhat vary in the order, though not in the number of their names.

18. That the absence of the Archbishops, Bishops or other Great men from, and
no^ coming to Parliaments an^ Great Council^ when summoned, did many times
hinder the proce^dings in them, and caus^ them to be prorogued or adjourned, to
the public prejudice* yet upon particular nec^ssary occ^sions for the
kingdoms defense and ^afety, their personal presence was dispensed wi^h, and
their Summons superseded; wi^nesse this memorable writ to the Bishop of Durham,
Claus. 6 E. 2. m. 12. dorso.

Rex, Venerabili in Christo Patri R. eadem gratia Dunolm. Ep^s^opo salut^m.
Li^^t nuper Vobis mandaver^mus quod omn^bus aliis praetermissis essetis ad Nos
tertia Dominica Quadragesimae prox* fu^ur, apud Westminster, ibidens Nobiscum ^t cum
Praelatis ^t Proceribus Regni nostri super diversis negotiis Nos et Statum
ejusd^m Regni nostri tangentibus tractaturi, vest umque consilium impensur^*
Pre securitate tamen Custodiae et maj^r^ tuitione part^um vestrarum contr^
Scotos inimicos ^t Rebe^les nostros, vobis man* damu^, quod a partibus
praedictis vos nu^^atenus ^^anf^ratis, sed Procuratorem vestrum sufflo^^nter
instructum addictos diem et locum mittatis, ad consent and, hi^s qu^ tun^
ib^dem per Nos ^t dictos Pr^latos, ^t Proc^re^ ^^n^^geris ordinari. Test Rege
apud Westminster, 20 di^ Feb.

Eodem modo mandatum est Episcopo Karliol. T. ut supra.

And this other observable writ of Supersedeas to the Bishops of Durham, and
Karliol, with other Lords and Great men summoned to Parli^m^nt, thus recorded,
in Claus. 12 R. 2. m. 42. dorso.

(...) De non venlendo ad Parliamentum.
(...) (...) Vobis mandamus* quod prop^^r r^siste^tiam inimicorum nostrorum
pr^dictorum meliori et fortiori mod^ quo poteritis, in propriis partibus
vestris, aut alibi ubi in hac part melius^ videritis expedire, expectetis,
mandato nostro non obstante. Ita quod semper dil^ctis et fidelibus Henr. de
Percy Comiti Northum: and Johanni ae Nevil de Raby quos ad supervidend: et
gubernand: Marchias Scotiae assignavimus, obedientes, intendentes sitis et
auxiliantes quot^^ns et q^ando per ipsos, seu ^orum alterum fueritis
rationabiliter praemuniti. Test Rege apud Northampton 20 die Augusti. Per
ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eadem data, viz. Th. Episcopo
Karliol, Rogero de Clifford, Johanni de Roos de Hamlake, Rado* Baroni de
Graystock, Philippo Darcy, Henr. Fitz Hugh; Willielmo de Dacre.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Henr. de Percy Comiti Northumb. Iohanni de Nevill
de Raby, excepto ultimo Clauso. Ita semper.

Of which see more in my Observations on the next Section, and here p. 51, 52.

19. That some writs to particular Bishops, varied in certain special clauses
now and then from those issued to other Bishops at the self same time, upon
special occasions, and in the Sea p. 7, 8. 51, 52.
form of the Praemunientes, etc.

20. That as there are some single writs of Summons to Bishops, or Archbishops
entered in the Clause Rolls now and then, without any to the Temporal Lords or
Barons registered together with them; So there are some writs of Summons to and
prorogations of Parliaments iss^ed to Temporal Lords in some Rolls, without any
to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors or Ecclesiastical Lords entered with
them, though no doubt they had the like writs of Summons and Prorogations,
although not registered, as the bodies of the writs do manifest.

21. That the writs issued to the Archbishops, Bishops Abbots, Priors and
Clergy, run usually in this form* Vobis mandamus quod in fide et dilectione
quibus nobis tenemini, etc. not in fide et homagio. But the writs to the Earls,
Barons and Temporal Lords: though they sometimes retain the self same words in
fide et diloctione, yet for the most part they run thus; quod in fide and
homagio, or ligeantia, quibus nobis t^n^mini, etc. or in homagio, ^id^ et
dilectione: or in homag^o et lige^ntia; homagio, or ligeantia being put in the
place of dilection^, or added to fide et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini.

22. That the writs to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Priors, for the
most part, observe this style; Vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus
et Proceribus, etc. in all clauses of the writ; The writs to the Earls, and
Temporal Lords, Vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis et caeteris Magnatibus et
Proceribus, or caeteris Magnatibus, or Proceribus, only: cae^eris being ev^r
placed before Praelatis, in the writs to the Bishops, Abbots, but after
Praelatis, and before Magnatibus or Proc^ribus, in all writs to the Tem^oral
Lords, because of different Orders* the Prelates no^ being Magnates or Proc^r^s
by birth, or in their own right, but only the Temporal Lords; and they being
not Praelati, or Eccl^s^astical Peers by order or function, but only the
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical* Barons.

23. That the number of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Ecclesiastical
persons summoned by writs to our Parliaments, was for the most part equal to,
and many times far exceeding the number of the Temporal Lords, and Barons; as
you may easily discern by computing and comparing their numbers in this, with
those of the Temporal Lord in the ensuing Section. In the Parliamvnt of 49 H.
3. the number of the Prelates, Abbots, and Spiritual persons summoned by writ,
was 120. the number of Temporal Lords, but 23. Anno 23 E. 1. d. 9. the number
of the Spiritual Lords summoned was 77; of the Temporal Lords but 63. And dors.
3, 4. the Spiritual Lords summoned to another Parliament that year, amounts to
90. the Temporal Lords only to 50. In 24 E. 1. d. 7. the Spiritual Lords
summoned, were in all 91. the Temporal but 43. yet in other Parliaments the
Temporal Lords exceeded the Spiritual, as in 27 E. 1. d. 18. the Spiritual
Lords were 58. the Temporal 90. but in the next Parliament 28 E. 1. m. 3. the
Spiritual Lords summoned were 102. the Temporal only 89. Their differences in
number in other Parliaments I shall for brevity sake omit, only in most summons
under King H. 4, 5, and 6. during these Kings absence and wars in France, (when
most of the Earls and Temporal Lords were in actual service in the wars) the
Spiritual Lords were near double to the Temporal.

24. That the first writ wherein I find any mention of, and provision for the
Defense of the Church of England, is in 6 E. 2. here, p. 20. the next is in 11
E. 3. p. 39, and 40. 12 E. 3. p. 42. and 14 E. 3. p. 46. After which in the
writs of 18 E. 3. p. 50. 31 E 3. p. 60, 61, 62. 46 E. 3. p. 67. 49 E. 3. p. 69.
1 R. 2. p. 69, 70, 72. and in most succeding them, Defensionem Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, Salvationem et defensionem Ecclesiae Sanctae; Et ^oc sicut
salvationem et defensionem Ecclesiae Sanctae diligitis, were usually inserted
into the writs of Summons, as well to Parliaments as Convocations, and in writs
to the Temporal Lords and Sherifs, as they were in writs to the Clergy, it
being one principal end of summoning Parliaments and Convocations.

25. That sometimes the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors were Here, p. 20,
27, 29, 33, 35, 36, 41, 55, 56, 62, 64, 65, 71, 72, etc.
authorized by the writs themselves to make Proctors, or Proxies to supply
their places; other times prohibited to make any Proctors or Proxies at all,
but peremptorily enjoined to appear in person, without any excuse, or Proctor
to supply their absence. But the Deans, Chapters, Archdeacons, Priors and
Clergy of every Diocese by a special clause of Praemunientes, etc. in the writs
to the Archbishops and Bishops, and by second writs to the Archbishops, were
summoned the Deans, Pri^rs and Archdeacons by themselves, their Chapters by
one, and the Clergy of each Diocese, Quod per duos Procuratores idon^os p^enam
et sufficiente^ potestate^ ab ipsis Capitulis et Clero habentes, dictis die et
loco intersint, ad fac^end. and consentiend. hiis, quae tun^ ibidem de Com:
Consilio regni nostri, divina favent^ clementia co^tig^rit ordinari. Amongst
others, the Bishop of Here p. 7, 8.
Bath and Wells was particularly enjoined Praemunientes Priorem et Capitulum
Bathon. et Decanum et Capitulum Wellen* Ecclesiarum suarum, etc. quod idem
Prior et D^canus in propriis personis suis, and dicta Capitula per unum
Procuratorem idoneum, etc. una nobiscum inter sint, ad* etc. Hereupon the Prior
of Bath when sick appeared not in person, but by a Proctor, and the Chapter of
Bath by one or more Pr^ctors, specially chosen and authorized by their Letters
of Procuration under their Seals; Which Letters of Procuration, I find entered
in the ancient Parchment Leiger Book of the Priory of Bath in sundry forms in
the reign of King Edward the 1. which I shall here insert, for their rarity;
and because they will inform us, what ^ull and sufficient power other Priors,
Deanes, Chapters, and the Clergy of each Diocese, (as also the Spiri^^al Lords
when absent, and authorized to make Proxies,) gave to their Procurators; and in
what forms other Letters of Procuration were made in former times, of which I
find only one printed in Ti^les of Honor, p. 731, 73^.
Mr. Seldom.

The first of these Procurations runs in this manner, being directed to the
King himself:

Serenissimo Domino suo, Domino Edwardo, Dei gratia, illustri Regi Angliae,
Domino Hiberniae, et Duci Aquitan^ae, sui devoti Thomas Prior, et Capi^:
Bathoniensis Ecclesiae, salutem, et debitam cum orationibus assiduis
reverentiam et fidelitatem. Ad tractandum* ordinandum et faciendum una Vobiscum
et caerer^s Praelatis et Proceribus, et aliis Regni incolis, in praesenti
Convocatione Generali ap^d Westminster. die Dominica proxima post festum S. Martini,
pro diversis Regni negotiis convenientibus, dilectum in Christo Con^ratrem, et
Conprofessum nostrum Fra^rem W. de Hampt^n, ^ostrum facimus, ordinamus, et
constituimu^ PROCURATOREM per praesentes, plenam et liberam po^estatem eidem in
hac part conceden^es. In cujus rei testimonium sigillum, Capituli nostri
praesentibus est appensum. Datum in Capitulo nostro Bathon: die Mercurii prox.
ante festum S. Martini. Anno great. 1295. (A^. 23 Ed. 1.)

There is another Letter of Procuration to this W. d^ Hampton, made by the Sub
Prior and Chapter of Bath the same year in the same words with the former,
except in this variation and addition; Et aliis Regni incolis in hac instanti
Convocatione generali apud Westminster. die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Andreae
Apoli, etc. PROCURATOREM LEGITIMUM per praesentes: Dan^es eidem, etc. (as
before) omnia nostro nomin^ facienda quae Nos faceremus si in Convocatione
memora^a praesentes esse possemus. In c^j^s, etc. ut supra. Datum in Capit.
nostro Bathon: die Sanctae Celiciae Virginis and Martyris. Anno gr. 1295.

Anno 24 E. 1. I find this form of Procuration by the Sub-Prior and Chapter of
Bath directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Reverendae Sanctitatis Patri in Christo, Domino C. Dei patientia Cantuar:
Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primati, sui filii humiles et devoti Frater
Philippus Subprior. et Capitulum Bathoni^nsis Ecclesiae Cathedralis devotos
obedientiae et reverentiae Spiritus cum salute. Ad tractandum una cum caeteris
Religiosis in Convocatione vestra praesenti London. convenientibus die Dominica
qua cantatur Laetare Jerusalem, cum continuatione diei, si^opus fuerit seu
di^rum, et ad faciendum omnia quae Nos ipse faceremus si praesentes ibidem esse
possemus, dilecto Confratri nos^ro, et Conmonacho Will: de Hampshire
PROCURATORI NOSTRO ^plenariam per praesentes contedimus faculta^em: Ratum
habentes stabile et fi^mum quicquid per eundem nomine nostro in Convocatione
praedicta actum fuerit sen concessum. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillo Capituli
nostri fignari fecimus hanc Indenturam. Datum in Capi^ulo nostro Bathon: die
Sancti Cuthberti. Anno Dom. 1296.

In the 27. year of King Edward 1. there is this Procuration made in another
form.

Sancto Patri ac Domino, Domino C. Dei gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. totius
Angliae Primati, Frater Thomas, Prior Ecclesiae Bathon. salutem, subjectionem,
honorem et reverentiam debitam tanto Patri. Sanctae Congregationi Patrum
Reverendorum Dominorum Episcoporum, Abbatum, Priorum, caeterorumque Praelatorum
ac Cleri Provinciae Cantuar. in vestra praesentia reverenda post instantem
commemorationem Animarum London faciendae, ob debilitatem nimiam nostri
corporis, non valen^es personaliter interesse; vestrae Paternitati supplicamus
attente, quatinus tunc ibidem hanc no^^ram excusationem habere dignemini
benignius excusatam. Ad tractandum vero providendum e^ ordinendum super
utilitatibus Ecclesiae promovendis, et aliis articulis de quibus in vestrae
Paternitatis mandato plenior ^it men^io, ac consent^endum hiis quae oportuna et
expedientia videbuntur, dilectum nobis in Christo fratrem Hugonem Godmer
nostrum Commonachum, NOSTRUM PROCURATOREM facimus et constituimus loco nostri,
ad faciendum omnia ac singula quae Nos faceremus, seu facere deberemus si
personali^er praesentes essem^s. Ratum habituri et gratum, quicquid idem
Procurator noster cum unanimi Sanctorum Patrum et Cleri praedictorum assensu in
praemissis duxerit faciendum. Valeat vestra S^ncta Paternicas reverenda in
Christo per tempora longiora. Datum Bathon. 4 to. Kal. Novembr. Anno Dom: 1299.

There is another Procuration of the self-same date made by the Sub-Prior and
Chapter of Bath, directed to the said Archbishop with the self-same Preface, to
tanto Patri: and then Vestrae Sanctae Paternitati notum fa^^mus per praesentes,
quod Nos ad tractandum, providendum, ordinandum super ut^litatibus Ecclesiae
promovendis, e^ aliis ^rtioulis de quibus in vestrae Paternitatis mandato
plenior fit ment^o, et ad consentiendum hiis quae oportuna et expedientia
videbuntur; dilectum nobis in Christo Fra^rem Rober^um de Clapcote nostrum
Commonachum nostrum Procuratorem facimus et constituimus loco nostri, ad
faciendum omnia (...) singula quae verus et legitimus Procurator fac^r^ d^bet
et consuevit. Ratum habi^uri et gra^um, quicquid idem Proourator, etc. (as in
the next before.) Datum in Capitulo nostro Bathon: 4 Kal. Novembr. Anno Dom.
1299.

The same year on the first Lords day in Lent, I meet with another Procuration
of this Prior in a different form from the precedent.

Universis sanctae Matris Ecclesiae ^iliis ^rater Thomas Prior E^clesiae
Bathon: salutem in Domino sempiternam. Quia IN PARLIAMENTO DOMINI REGIS HABENDO
LONDON secunda die Dominica Quad^agesimae OB NIMIAM CORPORIS NOSTRI DEBILITATEM
ADESSE PERSONALITER NON VALEMUS, dilectum Nobis in Chri^^o Fra^rem Willielmum
de Hampton, nostrum Commonacum, NOSTRUM PROCURATOREM FACIMUS ET CONSTITUIMUS,
ad faciendum pro Nobis ibidem quaecunque facere deberemus, secundum tenorem
mandati Regis si in propria nostra persona tunc praesentes essemus, et
consentiend^m sicut justum fuerit et canonicum hiis quae de Communi Consilio
pro utilitate Domini Regis et Regni, favente Domino tunc ordinand. con^igerit,
vel ^tiam provideri. Ratum habituri et gratum quicquid idem Frater Willielmus
NOSTER PROCURATOR cum unanimi Praelatorum Ecclesiasticorum, Procerum ac
Magnatum, et Cleri assensu in praemissis sic duxerit faciendum. Datum B^thon:
die Dominica prima Quadragesimae. Anno Dom. 1299.

There is the like Procuration of the some date made to him by the Prior and
Chapter of Bath in all their names, and in the same words.

About the same year, the Sub Prior and Chapter of Bath made this form of
Procutation, entered in their Le^ger Book.

Pa^eat universis per praesentes, quod Nos Prior et Capitulum Ecclesiae Bathon.
dilectos nobis in Christo William de Syw^nham Clericum, et I^hannem de Merston
PROCVRATORES NOSTROS VEROS ET LEGITIMOS, conjunctim et divisim, et quemlibet
eorum in solidum, ita quod non sit melior conditio occupantis, ad infra scripta
fecimus, ordinavimus et constituimus per praesentes. Dantes eisdem et eorum
alteri nomine nostro potestatem IN PARLIAMENTO DOMINI NOSTRI REGIS apud W^stm.
in crastino S. Hillarii prox futur. per Dei gratiam celebrando, cum
continuatione et prorogatione dierum sequentium, usque ad ^^nalem dicti
Parliamenti expeditionem, comparendi cum caeteris Religiosis, et aliis de Clero
Regni Angliae Proceribus et Magnatibus dicti regni, caulas et negoci^ quas vel
quae habuerint in Parliamento tractandi, proponendi, necnon super tractandis et
proponendis ibidem Statum dicti Domini Regis, e^ regni sui, ac etiam STATUM
ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE concernentib^s: nostrumque deliberatum consensum et
cons^^iium hiis quae mediante Domino ibidem contigerit utiliter ordinari una
cum aliis impendendi. Ulteriusque faciendi in praemissis et ea concernentibus
quod juris fueri^ et rationis. Promittentes Nos ratum, firmum et gratum sub
Ypotheca re^um quos et ligare pos^umus, habituri, quicquid dicti PROCURATORES
NOSTRI VEL EORUM ALTER in praemissi^ et ea contingentibus duxerint, vel duxerit
faciend. In cujus rei ^estimonium ^igillum nostrum commune praesentibus est
appensum. Dat. in Domo nostro Capitulari Bathon.

26. That it appears by the Here, p. 3, 4, 78. 34, 35. 40. 54, 62, 70, 72, 73.
Clauses and contents of sundry Praemised Writs, as likewise by the Sea an
Exact Abridgment, p. 18. 189.
Protestations of the Clergy, and their Distinct Aids, and Subsidies from the
Temporalty granted in Parliaments to our Kings by d^^^erent Acts of Parliamen^,
ex^ant in our Printed Rastalls Abridgment Taxes and Tenths.
Statute Books, as well as Parliament, and Stat^te Rolls; that the King and
Temporal Lords and Commons in Parliament could not legally impose any Aids,
Subsidies or Taxes whatsoever on the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Deans, Chap^ers, Archdeacons, and inferior Clergy o^ England, without their
own special Grants and Consents in their Co^vocations; it being contrary to the
Great Charters of Henry the 1. King John, and Henry the 3. Chap. 1. yea to the
Freedom, Rights, Liberties of the Church confirmed by them, and to all other
Acts confirming Magna Charta, and to a particular Act, Rot. Parl. anno 8 H. 4.
^. 36. exempting them from making Contributions with the Laity. Therefore they
cannot do it now, upon the self same grounds, they having as full, as large an
interest in their Rights, freedoms, Libe^ties, and those Grand Char^ers,
Statutes confirming them, as any of the Laity have in theirs: Yet when they
obstinately refused to grant* King Edward the first a necessary Aid for the
defense of the Realm in two successive Parliaments one after the other, against
their allegiance and duty, Walsi^gham, Hist. Angl. p. 34, 35, 36. See before,
p. 8. See my Plea for the Lords, p. 262, 263.
only because Pope Boniface by his Constitution had prohibited under pain of
excommunication, Ne Talliae vel Exactiones a Clero per seculares Principes
quocunque modo exigentur, vel eis solvantur de rebus Ecclesiae: the King
thereupon did put them out of his protection: to redeem which, many of the
Clergy by themselves, and many of them by Mediators gave the King the fifth
part of their goods, notwithstanding the Popes Inhibition; which is thus
related by Matthew Westminster, Anno 1296. p. 407, 408.

Die Sancti Hillarii, celebravit Archiepiscopus Concilium suum cum Coepiscopis
suis Suffraganeis Londini in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli. Quibus tractantibus per
dies octo super postulatione regia, non invenerunt iter rectum, nec modum
exclusivae sententiae, si aliqui vel quae^ito color, vel aliquo titulo
quippiam contulissent, etiam si plurimi clerici, aulici, curiale^que
accessi^^ent, qui postulatis consilium dederan^ and favorem. Quae omnia Regi
per Episcopos, aliosve nuncios, funt relata. Qui statim mutatus in crudelem,
perversa regali aequalitate in tyrannidem, licentiatis suis famulis, obviantium
cle^icorum religiosorumque virorum, quasi modo hostili, equitaturas ^ibi
arripere meliores, prohibitis insuper placitatoribu^, in lege sua peritis,
coram Baronibus de Scaccario, seu ante quemvis ^lium Justiciarium secularem,
pro personis Ecclesiasticis allegare, Ecclesiasticos ministros censuit sua pace
in^ignos. Mandavit etiam singulis ordinatis, sponte offerre sibi suorum
proventuum quintam partem, a^t invite cedere omnibus bonis suis. Huic mandato
primitus obtemperaverunt quidam ^onsorati, in curia regali praelati, in cura
vero animarum Pilati manifesti, ut inducerent pari modo animos caeterorum. Quo
facto, seisita sunt protinus per manus Vicecomitum omnia bona clericorum
mobilia and immobilia, super laicum feodum inventa, a^qu^ fisco regio titulata,
cum superabundanti molestia suis ablatis libertatibus, q^as praedecessores
reges, Christianitatis conservatores, Ecclesiis contulerant, authors bonorum.
Et quod nequius est ferendum, appreciabantur ipsorum facultates, emptoribus
quantocius expo^endae, nec securi audebant clerici equitare, nisi in majori
conventu propter militum in cl^ricos violentiam, a rege licentia data. Sed and
omni^ bona Archiepiscopi, mobilia and immobi^ia, capta sunt in manu regis. Ipse
quidem sustinuit patiente^. Ig^^ur Clero si^ut supradictum est passo in
corpore, pas^us est and Rex in animo. Hinc dolor et metus omnium Praelatorum.
Hi^^mque in perplexitate maxima constituti sunt, ut si quicquam concederent,
sententiam excommunicationis incurrerent ipso facto, et si non darent, non
effugerent immisericordes manus ipsorum praedonum. His madefacti
adversitatibus, pro se ipsis anxii, pro grege sibi commisso inco^solabiliter
moestificati, tanquam non habente alimoniam, ingruente fame, necessario seculum
reperere quaesierunt, protectionem regis facultatibus suis, ratioci^io magno,
redemptis.

Yet notwithstanding all the Clergy procured special Absolutions from this
Po^e, from that Excommunication they conceived they had incurred by this their
Aid granted to the King against his Constitution, though done only through
force, and such fear as might happen even to a constant man, as I observe by
certain Instruments of Absolution, remembered by none of our Historians, but
registered in the Leiger Book of the Priory of Bath; out of which I have
transcribed them, as not unworthy public knowledge.

Venerabili in Christo Patri, Dei gratia Archiep^s^opo Cantuar. vel ejus
Vicario in Spiritualibus, Frater Gentilis, miseratione divine, Ecclesiae Sancti
Martini in Montibus Presbyter Cardinalis, salutem, et synceram in Domino
caritatem. Ex part Joh^nnis de Godmer perpetui Vicarii Ecclesiae de Ched^ern.
Bathon. and Wellen. Diocaes. Nobis oblata pet^tio continebat, Quod ipse olim
per vim and metum qui cadere posset in constantem, invitus Ministris se^
Collectoribu^ illustris Regis Angliae, contra novae Constitutionts tenorem
Sanctissimi Patris Domini Bonefacii, divina providentia Papae (...), Tallias
sive Collec tas per solvit; per quod sententiam Excommunicationis incurrit, in
tales generaliter promulgataem, et sic ligatius, non tamen in contemptum
Clavium, in suis Ordinibus ministravit, et alias se ingressit divinis. Super
quibus, supplicari fe^it humiliter si^i de absolutionis beneficio et
dispensationis gratia per sedem Apostolicam salubriter provideri. Nos igitur,
auctoritate Domini Papae, cujus Penitentiariae curam gerimus, circumspectioni
vestrae committimus, quatenus si ita est, ipsum Vicarium a dictae
excommunicationis Sententia ^uxtae formam Ecclesiae absolvatis. Proviso
attente, quod idem Vicarius super hoc mandatis Domini Papae, et Romanae
Ecclesiae semper parebit, et faciet illam poenitentiam quam sibi duxerit
injungend^m, eoque ad tempus prout expedire vider^^is a suorum Or^^num
executione suspenso. Demum Suffragan^ibus ei meri^is alioque Canonico non
obstante super irregularitate dicto modo contracta cum eo misericorditer
auctoritate dispensetis predicta. Datum Agnan: 6to Idus Augusti. Ponti^icatus
Domini Papae Bonefacii 8. Anno sexto.

Sancto Patri in Christo et Domino reverendo R. Dei gratia Cantuar.
Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati, sui filii humiles et devoti Thomas Prior
et Conventus Bathon. salutem, et devotus obedientiae et reverentiae Spiritus
cum omni honor debito tanto Patri. Ad petend. et recipiend. a vestrae
clementia sanctitatis beneficium absolutionis, super excommunicationis
sententia quam incurrisse veremur, ex eo quod contra Constitutionem sanctissimi
Patris et Domini Bonifacii divina providentia Papae octavi editam, contra omnes
qui Collectas et exactiones sibi a Ministris, Nunciis seu Collectoribus
illustris Regis Angliae persolveru^t nolentes vel inviti, Protectionem Domini
Regis super hoc impetrantes et recipientes; dilectum Nobis in Christo fratrem
Hugonem Godmer, praecentorem Ecclesiae nostrae Bathoniae Conmonacum nostrum,
nostrum in hiis constit^imus Procuratorem. Dantes eidem liberam et plenam
potestatem ^estra in hac part recipiendi mandata quae secundum Deum ad salutem
animarum nostrarum juxta tenorem, formam, vim et effectum mandati Apostolici
super hoc vobis directi, nobis duxeritis injungenda, una cum potestate jurandi
in animas nostras secundum quod postulaverit ordo Juris. In cujus rei
testimonium Sigillo nostro communi signari fecimus hanc scripturam. Datum
Capitulo nostro Bathon: 5 Idus November. Anno dom. 1300.

Universis praesentes literas inspecturis pateat evidenter, Quod nos Thomas
Prior Bathon. et ejusdem lo^i Conventus Ordinis S. Benedicti, Bathoniensis et
Wellensis Diocaes. bona side promittimus et sub ypotheca omnium bonorum
Monasterii nostri cavemus, quod nos semper Romanae Ecclesiae et Domini Papae
mandatis par^bimus, super excommunicationis et interdicti sententiis quas
incurrimus, pro eo quod dudum contra Constitutionis tenorem Sanctissimi^ Patris
nostri Domini Bonifa^^ti Papae octavi, Nunciis, seu Ministris Domini Regis
Angliae Subsidium de bonis nostris Ecclesias^icis contribuimus propter vim et
metum qui cadere poterit in constantes. In cujus rei testimonium, etc. Datum in
Capitulo nostro Bathon. 5 Idus Novembr. Anno Dom. 1300.

Universis praesentes Literas inspecturis Robertus permissi^ne divina Cantuar.
Archiepiscopus totius Angliae Primas, aeternam in Domino salutem. Literas
Venerabilis Patris Domini Matthaei Dei gratia Portuensis, et Sanctae Rufinae
Episcopi sanctissimi Patris Domini Bonifacii Papae 8vi. Paenitentiarii
recepimus, tenorem qui sequitur continentes. Venerabili in Christo Pat^i Dei
gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. vel ejus Vicario in Spiritualibus, Fr^ter
Matthaeus miseratione divina Portuensis, ac Sanctae Rufinae Episcopus, salutem,
et sempiternam in Domino caritatem. Ex part Prioris et Conventus Monasterii
Bathoniensis Ordinis Sancti Benedicti fuit propositum coram Nobis, quod ipsi
olim viet me^u qui cadere po^erit in constantem, Ministris, Nunciis, ^eu
Collectoribus illustris Regis Angliae contra Constitutionem et tenorem
Sanctissimi Patris et Domini, Domini Bonifacii divina Providentia Papae octavi
noviter ^ditae contra Tallias, Collectas et Exactiones sibi impositas
persolverunt, propter quod Excommunicationis incurrunt sententiam ex ipsius
Constitutionis tenore in omnes et singulos contra facientes generaliter^
promulgatam: Et sic ligati in suis, non tamen in contemptum Clavium,
ministraverunt Ordinibus, et aliis divinis se ingesserint Officiis sicut prius;
Verum cum parati sint Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae in omnibus obedire mandatis,
supplic^ri fecerunt humiliter eis per sedem Apostolicam salubriter provideri.
Nos igitu^ ipsorum supplicationibus quantum cum Deo po^^umus favorabi^iter
annuent^s, auctoritate et mandato Domini Papae cujus Paenitentiariae curam
gerimus, providentiae vestrae praesentium tenore committimus, quatinus ^i est
ita, ipsos et eorum quemlibet a reatu exces^us hujusmodi et excommunicatione
quam propter hac incurrerunt absolvatis juxta formam Ecclesiae consuetam;
Interdictum ab ipso Monasterio amovendo, et injunc^a eorum cuilibet pro culpae
modo paeni^entia salutari, et alia quae talibus debent et consueverunt injungi;
quodque ^tabunt mandatis Ecclesiae, et facient illam poenitentiam quam seeds
Apostolica eis duxerit injungendam* Super i^regularitate ex praemissis
contracta dispensetis auctorita^e et mandato praedictis, alio non obstante
canonico, misericorditer eisdem prout secundum Deum animarum ipsorum salu^i
^ideri^is expedire. Datum Lateran. 3. Nona^ Martii. Pontificatus Domini Papae
Bonifacii octavi Anno sexto. Nos igitur dictos Priorem et Conventum Monasterii
Bathon. et eorum quemlibet in per^or a Fratris Hugonis Godomer, Procuratoris
ipsius Ecclesiae Bathon. Commonachi et Procuratoris sui, a majoris
Excommunicationis sententia memorata, praestita nobis primitus ab eisdem idonea
cautione quod stabunt Mandatis Ecclesiae, e^facient illam poenitentiam quam
seeds Apostolica eis dixe^it injungendam, auctoritate nobis in ha^ part,
commissa, juxta formam nobis in hac part commissa juxta formam Ecclesiae
absolvimus, et eis injunximus poenitentiam salutarem. Interdictum de ipso suo
Monasterio amovendo. Et super irregularitate quam ea occasion sic liga^i in
suis Ordinibus ministrando, et alias se divinis Officiis inmiscendo
contraxerant, cum eisdem et eorum quolibet misericorditer auctoritate
dispensamus praelibata, prout secundum Deum animarum ipsorum saluti vidimus
expedire. In testimonium vero praemissorum Sigillum nostrum praesentibus est
appensum. Datum apud Lyminge 17 Kal. December. Anno Dom. 1300. Consecrationis
nostrae septimo.

There is another absolution from this excommunication granted almost in the
like form and words by the Archbishop of Cant. to Iordanus Vicar of W^ston, who
made a Procuration to another Clerk to request and receive it in his behalf;
quia gravi corporis agritudine perpetua detentus ad v^stram venerabil^m
praesentiam accedere non valens. By which it is evident, that every Clergyman
and religious person whatsoever from the highest to the lowest, who through
force or fear contribu^ed any aid to the King, against this Antimonarchical
Constitution of Pope Boniface the 8. was excommunicated, interdicted for it,
and forced to Peti^ion the Pope and his Penitentiaries, to be absolved from the
same; and that only upon their Oaths and caution given to yield obedience
always to the Popes and Church of Romes manda^es for the future, and to
undergo such penance as the Pope should please to i^flict upon them for what
was past; yet thi^ is styled, a dealing mercifully with them. After which Oath
and absolution, An. 1300, when as the Temporal Lords and Commons granted the
King the 15. part of their goods for the Confirmation of the Great Char^er and
their Liberties; Mar. Westminster. Anno 1300. 1301. p. 416*
Robertus Archiepiscopus Cantuar. pro Clero nihil voluit concedere, neque de
temporalitate annexa Ecclasiae, sine licentiasummi Pontificis special; yet the
Pope the next year usurped and received from him and them the Tenth of all
their Ecclesiastical goods for 3. years, against their wills and the Kings too.
Such vassals then were the English Clergy to the Popes; as of late years they
have been in another kind to all arbitrary Commi^tees, New Tax-masters and
Governors, who not only tax them at their pleasures without their consents, but
eject, suspend, silence the^ from preaching, administering the Sacraments, or
instructing children as Schoolmasters, in Public or Private, without any legal
cause, trial, or proceedings, against all the Great Charters and S^atutes for
maintenance of their Liberties and Freeholds in their Benefices, they being
mere tenants at will both of their Ministry and Livings, the only means to make
them Gal. 1. 10. 1 The^. 2. 4. 2 Cor. 2. 27. Ezech. 13. 10, 11, 12.
time-servers, Men-pleasers, Cor^upters of the Gospel* and Daubers with
untempered mortar, instead of sincere Ministers of the Gospel, and real
Servants of Jesus Christ; Therefore fit to be timely redressed for the future;
as this Papal Constitu^ion was timely opposed by King Edward the first, as is
evident by Pat. 25 E. 1. pars 1. m. 9. 11. pars 2. m. 5. 6* and Claus. 30 E. 1.
m. 13. which I shall hereafter reci^e at large in their due place. And this
Passage of Mat. Westminster* An. 1297. p. 408. Anno Gratiae 1297. congregatis
Archipraesule Cantuar. and quibusdam aliis coepiscopis suffraganeis suis apud
s^nctum Paulum Londint. 26 die Martii, iterum pro^stat^ ecclesiae consulturis,
insurgentes protiniss duo causidici, and duo de ordine Praedicatorum fratres,
regalem and temporalem favorem aucupantes, conati sunt argumentis probare
clerum ipsi regi, in tempore belli, non obstante prohibitione apostolica, de
suis facultatibus posse licit^ subvenire. Insuper prohibitio sub poena
incar^erationis, ne quis contra ipsum regem et eos, qui jam pridem suam
protectionem quaesierant, excommunicationis sententiam promulgar^t,
provocatione facta pro se ad Romanam curiam and pro ipsis. Recesserunt igitur
omnes oneratis suis conscientiis per Archi^piscopum sic dicentem, salvet suam
animam unusquisque.

A most rare, useful Alphabetical Table of all the Abbots, Ma^ters, and Priors
of Religious Orders, to whom any particular Writs of Summons to our Parliaments
or Great Councils issued from Anno 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. extant in the Clause
Rolls and Lists of Summons in the Tower of London, with the several years of
each Kings reign wherein they were summoned: If they (or others) were twice or
oftener summoned in any year before R. 2. then the several dorses of the Clause
Rolls that year, are expressed after the year d. for dorse, and the number of
it next ensuing it in a parenthesis, if but once, the figure for that year is
only mentioned; the dorse of the Clause Roll for that year, you may readily
find in the writs thereof mentioned in the precedent Section; and where were 2.
Writs of Summons in one year under R. 2. H. 4, 5, and 6. there the Abbots and
Priors were all twic^ summoned, in the Rolls and dorses, mentioned in the Writs
of Summons here cited.
(A)
ABbotesbury, 49 H. 3. Abingdon, 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, 28, 30. (d. 9. 12.) E. 1.
5, 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14* (d. 5.
23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2 (d. 15. 31.) 4 (d. 19. 41.) 5.
(d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9. (d. 2. 28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d.
8. 11. 40.) 12. 13. (d. 1. 28.) 14. (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21. (d. 9,
28.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 24, 25, 27, 28, 29. (d. 7, 8.) 31. (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.
35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11,
12, 14 H* 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15,
18, 20, 23, 25 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22, and ^3 E. 4.
Agatha 23, 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Albans 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25,
27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 5, 6, 7, (d. 15, 27.) 8, 9,
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19* 20 E. 2.
1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19.
36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 28.) 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20,
21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.)
32, 33, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 38, 39, 42, 43. 44* 46, (d. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50
E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23
R. 2. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18. 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2,
6, 12. 22, and 23 E. 4 Alnewick^ 23, 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34, E. 1. 1, (d.
19.) E. 2. Augustines Bristoll 49 H. 3. 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1.
10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17 E.
3. Augustines Canterbury 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 28, (d.
3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.)
9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E.
2. 1 (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4, 9 19.
36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28)
14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32,
33, 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44. 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4.
6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23
R. 2. 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11,
13, 15, 18. 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E.
4.
(B)
BArd^n^y, or Bardnay 49 H. 3. 23. d. (9.) 25, 27, (d. 17, 18) 30 (d. 9. 12.) E
1. 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18. 12, 13. (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23.
33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d.
2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47. 49. (d.
4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21,
23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, H. 5. 1,
2, 3, 4, 7, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2,
6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Barlinge 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30*
(d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d.
8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E 2. Basingwerk^ 23, (d. 4.) 24,
28, (d. 3. 17.) 3^. 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Bella Lauda 23, (d. 4.)
24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32. 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, ^ E. 2. B^llo,
Bello loco, Bello loco Regis, and Bello Campo Regis, 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24,
27, (d. 17. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 3. 16. 19.) 2, (d. 31.) 4, 5,
6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 16, 17, 18, 19* 20 E.
2. 4. (d. 19. 41.) 6, (d* 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9* (d. 18.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11,
(d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 22, (d. 7.) 23, 24 E.
3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2,
3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9,
10, 11, 13, 15. 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38. 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12. 22 and 23 E. 4.
Bello Capite, 23. (d. 4.) 24. E. 1. S^^cti Benedicti de Hulmo 43 H. 3. 23, 27.
(d. 17, 18.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8,
9, 10. (d. 8. 13.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14. (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 2.
(d. 15.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7, 8, 9. (d. 2.
28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13. (d. 1. 18.) 14. (d. 23. 33.)
15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31. (d.
2. 21.) 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39. 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47. 49. (d.
4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 16, 17, 18,
20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9
H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5* 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33,
38, 39 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22, and 23, E. 4. Bildewas 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3.
17.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Blanca, or Glauca Lauda 23. (d. 4.) 24 E. 1.
Bocland 12. (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Boxle 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) E.
1. Burgo, and Burgo Sancti Petri 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d.
9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2. 4, 6, 7. (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d.
8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14. (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3.
16.) 2. (d. 15. 31.) 4. (d. 19, 41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6. (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8,
9, (d. 8. 18.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11, 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14. (d.
23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21. (d. 9. 28.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27,
28, 29 (d. 7, 8.) 31. (d. 2. 21.) 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36. 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9,
11.) 47, 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3* 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28,
29. 31, 33, 38. 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22, and 23 E. 4. Burton Super Trent 23,
27. (d. 3. 18.) 30. (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 8, 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11. 29.) 14
(d. 5.) E. 2. Butlesden 49 H. 3. Byly 23 (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 7.) 32. 34 E.
1. Bynedon 23. (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
(C)
CErcesey, or Certeseye 49 H. 3. 23. 27 E. 1. 22. (d. 7.) 23 E. 3. Cerne 49 H.
3. Cestriae (S. Werburge) 49 H. 3. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. C^rencester 49 H.
3. 23. 27. (d. 17, 18.) 30. (d. 3. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7,
(d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17,
18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2. (d. 15. 31) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5* (d. 7. 25.)
6, (d. 4. 9. 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11, 40.)
12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 28, 29.) 22,
(d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.)
36, 39, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 18,
20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9* H. 5.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49
H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22, and 23 E. 4. Clerva^x 49 H. 3. Cokersand, Crokersand 23,
24, 28 (d. 3. 17.) 32 E 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Colecester 49 H. 3. 23,
27, (d. 17, 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7. (d. 27.) 8, 9, 12, (d. 11.
29.) 13, 14, (d. 5, 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6.
(d. 4. 9. 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12,
13, (d. 1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17* 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.) 23, 24, 25, 27,
28, 29, (d. 7, 8,) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 36, 37, 38. 39, 42, 43, 44* 46, (d. 9. 11.)
47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 15,
16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29,
31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6, 1, 2, 6, 12. 22 and 23 E. 4. Comb, or Cumbe 23. (d. 4.)
24* 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (9, 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15.
27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Crokesden 23 (d.
9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. Croyland, or Crowland 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 9.)
25, 27, 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17. 18, 19, E, 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.)
5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d, 4. 9, 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11.
(d. 8. 9. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.), 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21,
(d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.)
34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38. 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1,
2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7,
9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6,
12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Croxton 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 25, 28* (d. 3. 17.) 30. (9.
12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 1^*) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.)
12, (d. ^ ^ 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Cumbermere 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.)
32 E. 1.
(D)
DE la Dale 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d.
19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Deu^acresse 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
Dunkeswell 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
(E)
EDmunds d^ Bury 49 H. 3. 23* (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17. 18) 32, 34 E.
1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13,
14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1. (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d.
19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1.
5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23, 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18,
20, 21. (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29. (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2.
21.) 34. (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d, 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4.
6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23
R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12.
22 and 23 E. 4. Egleston 23* (d. 4.) 24, 28 E. 1. Evesham 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.
9.) 24, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.)
2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5.
23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5,
(d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8. 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d.
8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.
28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 32, 34, (d.
4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8,
11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13,
15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E.
4. Eynesham 27, (d. 17, 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 4^, 44
E. 3. 1 R. 2.
(F)
FEversham 23, 27 E. 1. 6. 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.)
14, (d. 5.) 17, 18 E. 2. 21. (d. 28.) E. 3. Fl^x^le, or Flaxley 23. (d. 4.) 24.
28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Fontibus 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8* 9, 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16 E. 2. Forneyes, or Furneys 49 H.
3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 4. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1 (d. 19.) 2,
4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14 (d. 5.) E.
2.
(G)
GErndon, Grendon, Gerwedon 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d.
19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12* (d. 11. 29.) 14 (d. 5.)
E. 2. Glaston 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.)
32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3.
16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6 (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8,
9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d.
23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22* (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27,
28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 24.) 34, (d. 4, 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44,
46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3* 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25,
27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Glo^cester Sancti
Petri 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32,
34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.)
12, (d. 11. 29) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E, 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2,
(d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9, 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d.
2. 18,) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, 23. 33.) 15,
16, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.)
31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47,
49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13.
24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p.
^. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7,
9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6,
12, 22 and 23 E. 4.
(H)
HAles, or Hayles (2. distinct Abbots usually summoned together) 23 (d. 4. 9.)
24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9,
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Heppe 23 E. 1. (d. 4.) Hid^
juxt^ Winton 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 3. 17. 18,) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8.
11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13,
14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4. (d.
19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1.
5.) 11* (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18,
20, 21, (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.
21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37,, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.) 47, 50 E. 3.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 (d. 13. 24.) 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 20, 21 R. 2. 1, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14, H.
4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11. 13, 15 18, 20, 23*
25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Holmencoltram
23, (d. 4) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4 E. 2. Hulme, See
Benedict.
(I)
James (See Northampton.) Ierevall, Iornal, I^rval, Gereval, Gervaux, 23 (d.
4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7,
(d. 27.) E. 2.
(K)
KI geswode 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Kirk^sted 49 H. 3. 23, (d.
4. 9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8,
9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2* K^rkestall 49 H. 3.
(L)
LAvedon, Lanedon 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Lesenes 49 H. 3. 23
E. 1. Leicester 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) E. 1. 12. (d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 5.
23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3 16.) 2, (d. 15. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5,
(d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d.
8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28. 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.
28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24. (25. cancellatur) 27, (summoned again) and 29, d.
7. E. 3. cancellatur. Lilleshull 49 H. 3. Litely, Letely, 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28.
(d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
(M)
MAlmeshury 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E.
1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.)
16, 17, 18, 19, 20* E, 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 11. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d.
7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18,) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. 8.
1^. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.)
22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.
35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, (d. 28. ^. ^. d. 4.) 8, 11, 12, 14 H.
4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9* 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20,
23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23. E. 4. Mary
Eborum 49 H. 3. 23, 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4,
5, 6* 7, (d. 15, 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 23.)
16. 17, 18, 19, 20. E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 11. 31.) 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d.
7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8* 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11.
40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21. (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7.
32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44,
46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. Melsa 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28,
(d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15.
27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Meryval, Mira
Valle 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28* (d. 3. 17.) 30. (9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d.
19.) 2,* 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d.
5.) E. 2. Middleton 49 H. 3. 12, (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. 22, (d. 7.) 23 E.
3. (...) 49 H. 3. Mucheln^ye 22, (d. 7.) 23 E. 3.
(N)
NEwhus 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1* 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7,
(d. 15. 27.) E. 2. N^^som 23 E. ^. (d. 4.) Northampton, James 49 H. 3. 12, (d.
11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Novo Monasterio 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d.
9, 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. Nuttel 49 H. 3. Nywenham 2, 5, 6 E. 2.
(O)
OSelveston 49 H. 3. Os^ney 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1.
12. (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6,
(d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18.) 1^, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 14,
(d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21, (d. 28.) 23, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47 E. 3. Osytha 23,
32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2.
(P)
PArco Lude 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Sancti Petri
Bristoll 32, 34, E. 1. 1, (d* 19.) E. 2. 32 E. 3. Pershor^, Persour, Pershor 49
H. 3. 23. 27. (d. 17, 18.) E. 1. 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d.
5.) E. 2. Pippewell 23, (d. 4*) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2,
4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) E. 2.
(Q)
QU^rrera, Quarrere 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1.
(R)
RAdegunde 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34, E. 1. 1,
(d. 19.) 2, 4, E. 2. R^^ing, Reding, Reding^s 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 17, 18.)
28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8,
9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12 (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2.
1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15, 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 6,* (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9,
(d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8, 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23.
33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 2^, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28,
29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38. 39, 42, 43, 44, 46. (d. 9. 11.)
47, 49, (d. 4, 6,) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d.
13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28.
p. 2. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6,
12, 22 and 23 E. 4. R^m^s^y Ramsey 49 H. 3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 17. 18.) 28, 30,
(d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11* 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9,
12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14,) (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.)
2, (d. 15. 31) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10,
(d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 15. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18,
20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 32.) 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.)
34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.)
50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21 R. 2, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 (...). 4. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 (...). 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25,
27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. and 6, 12, 22, and 23 E. Revesbye 23, (d. 4.)
24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. 14 (d. 5.) E. 2. Ryevall, Ryaval, Rival 49 H. 3.
4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5.
23.) E. 2. Rufford, Rughford 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17) 32, 34 E.
1. 1, (d. 19.) 2. 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) E. 2. Rupe 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 4.) 24, 48,
(d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 3. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4. 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2.
Rouc^ster. 12 E. 2. (d. 11.)
(S)
SAllay 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 34, E. 1. 1, (d. 19.)
2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Salop 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17, 18.) 32 E. 1. 5, 12
(d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18 E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6,
(d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8, 11. 40.) 12, 13,
(d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 2^.
24, 25, 27, 29, (d. 7, 8,) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 38. 39, 42, 43, 44,
46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11,
(d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, (d.
28. p. 2. d. 4.) 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2,
6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Selebey, Selby, Suleby 49 H. 3. 23, 24, 30, (d. 9. 12.)
32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. ^4.) 12, (d.
11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15.
31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10,
(d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11.) 12, 13* (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21,
(d. 9.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37,
38, 39, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d.
10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1,
2, 3, 5, (d. 28. and 1. d. 4.) 7, 8, 10, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H.
5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38,
49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Sherburne 23, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. 8, 9,
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2. Stanley in Arderne
23, 24, (d. 1. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. Stanlawe 23, (d. 4.) 28, (d. ^. 17.) 32 E.
1. Stonely, Stanley, Stanlegh in Wilts 23 (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
5, 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Strata florida 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.)
30, (d. 9. 12.) ^2 E. 1. Stratford at Bogh 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19. 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Swynesheued 23, (d.
4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1.
(T)
TAme 49 H. 3 Tavistoke 49 H. 3. 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 22, (d. 7.) 23 E. 3.
Teukesbury 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17. 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Thorney 49 H.
3. 23, 25, 27, (d. 3. 18.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) E. 1. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8,
9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 4, (d. 5. 2^.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4,
(d. 19. 4^. 5, (d. 7. ^5.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 11, (d.
8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 20, 1, (d. 9. 28.)
22, (d. 32.) 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. ^. 8.) ^1, (d. 2. ^1.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36,
7, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 ^. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23,
25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Thornton
super Humber 23, (d. 4.) 27 E. 1. 5, 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13,
14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 E. 2. 2, (d. 3. 16.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d.
7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8.
11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15. 23 E. 3. Tiche^ielde 23, (d.
4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Tint^rne 23 (d. 4.) 24,
28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Torre 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1,
(d. 19.) 2, 4, 6 E. 2. Tupholme 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1,
(d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Tyletye 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E.
1.
(V)
VAlle D^i 49 H. 3. 23) (d. 4.) 24. 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E.
1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.)
14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Valle R^gali 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, E. 1.
(W.)
^Altham and Wautham Sanctae Crucis 49 H. 3. 23 (d. 4. 9.) 24, 25, 27, (d. 17,
18.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8. 9,
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 2,
(d. 15.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2.
34.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.)
15, 16 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28 29, (d.
7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33. 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9.
11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15. 16,
17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 28,
29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Warden, Wardon de Boxle
49 H. 3, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32 E. 1. Waverly, Waverle 49 H. 3. 23. 25, 27, (d. 3.
17,) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Wellebeck 23, (d. 4.) 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9. 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Westminster Sancti Petri 49 H. 3. 23,
25, 27, (d. 3. 17, 18) 28, 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 5, 6, 7,
(d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17,
18, 19, 20 E, 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15, 31.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.)
6, (d. 4. 9, 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 8. 18,) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (d. (d. 8. 11.
40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, 17, 18, 21, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22,
(d. 7. 32.) 23, 24; 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, 34, (d. 4.
35.) 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 5,
7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10,
11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22
and 23 E. 4. Whiteby, Wyteby 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. 12. (d. 11.) 14,
(d. 5.) E. 2. Winchecombe 49 H. 3. 23, 27, (d. 17. 18) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d.
9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15, 27.) 8, 9, 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19, E. 2. 4. (d. 19. 41.)
5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11,
(d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17, 20, 21, (d. 9.)
22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.
35.) 46, (d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14* 15. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23. R 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23,
25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38. 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4.
The total number of the Abbots summoned at several times, (taking Hales and
Hayles as distinct,) is ^22.

An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Priors and Masters of Religious Orders
summoned to the Parliaments and Great Councils of England.
BArtholmew London 49 H. 3. Bath 23 E. 1. Bermundesey 49 H. 3. Bernewell, 49 H.
3. Blida 49 H. 3. Bridlington 49 H. 3. 1. (d. 11.) 12, (d. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) 16,
17, 18, 19 E. 2. Bouver, or Beuver 49 H. 3. Christ-Church Canterbury 23, 25,
27, (d. 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11.) E. 2. 21, (d. 28.) 22, (d. 7,) 32, 33 E. 3.
Coventre 49 H. 3. 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, (d. 9.
11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28,
29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 12, 22 and 23 E. 4. Cruceroyes 49 H. 3.
Dunolme 49 H. 3. 29 E. 1. Dunstaple 49 H. 3. Ely 49 H. 3. 23, 25 E. 1. 21 E. 3.
d. 28. Eton 49 H. 3. Finnesh^ued 49 H. 3. Friswid Oxon 49 H. 3. Giseburn 49 H.
3. 23, 27 (d. 18.) E. 1. Huntingdon 49 H. 3. John Jerusalem in Anglia 49 H. 3.
23, 25, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, 4, 6, 7, (d. 15.
27.) 8, 9, 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 16, 17, 18, 19
E. 2. 2, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9,
(d. 2. 18.) 10, d. (1, 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23.
33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28; 29,
(d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, 33, 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 42, 43, 44. 46,
(d. 9. 11.) 47, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50 E. 3. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2,
3, 4 H. 5. 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 18, 23, 25, 28, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2,
6, 12. 22 and 23 E. 4. Karliol 49 H. 3. Kinleworth 49 H. 3. Lauda 49 H. 3.
Ledes 49 H. 3. Lenton 49. H. 3. Lews, or Jews 49 H. 3. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2.
4. 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5.
23.) 16, 17, 18, 19 E. 2. 4. (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.)
7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14,
(d. 23, 33.) 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, (d. 9. 28.) 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25,
27, 36, 37, 38 E. 3. Merton 49 H. 3. 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. N^ots 49 H.
3. N^rwich 49 H. 3. 23, 25 E. 1. Oswald 49 H. 3. Parco 49 H. 3. Roffen. 21 E.
3. d. 28. Magist^^ Ordinis de S^mpingham, Semplingham, and Sempringham,
sometimes written Prior 49 H. 3. 24, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 6, 7.
(d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2.
10. (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15 E.
3. Stodley 49 H. 3. Spalding 49 H. 3. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, (d. 15. 27.) 8, 9, 11, (d.
8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 16, 17, 18, 19, E. 2. 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5,
(d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19, 36.) 7, 8, 9, (d. 2. 18.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (d. 8.
11. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15 E. 3. Swithe^^ Winton 49 H. 3.
23, 25 E. 1. 21 E. 3. Magister Militiae Templi in Anglia 49 H. 3. 23, 24, 27,
28, (d. 3. 17.) 30. (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1 (d. 19.) E. 2. This Order of the
Templars was dissolved under King Edward the 2. and their Lands ^scheated,
settled on the Hospitallers by the Statute of 17 E. 2. So that the Mr. of the
Templars was never after summoned. Thurgarton 49 H. 3. Trinity Cant. 49 H. 3.
Trinity Ebor. 49 H. 3. Watton 49 H. 3. Wigorne 23 E. 1.
The total of the Priors and Masters of Orders 41.

Deans and other particular Clergymen summoned.
Decan. Ebor. Decan. Sarum, Decan. Lincoln, Decan. Exon, Decan. de Well: 49 H.
3. Magistro Gilberto Middleton Archid. Northampton^ Offic. Cur. Cantuar.
Magistr. Roberto de Sanct. Albano Decano de Arcubus London: 18 E. 2. dors, 5.
Decano Wellen. 32 E. 3. dors. 14.
By this Alphabetical exact Table it is apparent,
1. That the total Number of the Abbots at any times summoned to Parliaments
and Great Councils of State by special Writs and Memorials entered in the Clause
Rolls, was 122. And the total sum of Priors and Masters of Religious Orders
thus summoned, 41. in all 163. besides the 5 Deans, and the Official of the
Court of Canterbury and Dean of the Arches.

2. That of all this numerous multitude of Abbots, Priors, and Masters of
Religious Orders thus summoned at several times upon particular reasons and
occasions, there were only 25 Abbots constantly summoned toward the latter end
of King Edward the 3. his reign, and the beg^^ning of Richard the 2d. to the
end of King Edward the 4th, and the dissolution of Monasteries; to wit, the
Abbots of Abingdon, St. Albans, St. Augustines Canterbury, Bardeny, de Bello,
de Burgo Sancti Petri, Cirencester, Colecester, Croyland, St. Edmonds Bury,
Evesham, Glaston, Gloucester, Hida, Hulmo, Malmesbury, St. Mary's of York,
Rading, Ramesy, Salop, Seleby, Thorney, Waltham, Westminster and Winchecombe;
And two Priors only, namely of Coventre, and of the Hospital of S. John of
Jerusalem in England.

3. That 13. of these 122. Abbots, and 27. of these Priors, were summoned only
but once; 4. of these Abbots and 1. of these Priors but twice; 3. of these
Abbots and 3. Priors only thrice; 6. Abbots and 2. Priors but 4. times; 17.
Abbots but 5. times, others 6. 7. 8. 9. or 10. times summoned, and no more,
then totally omitted out of the Summons ever after.

4ly, That some Abbots and Priors summoned to very many Parliaments, and Great
Councils, were yet afterward omitted out of the Summons, and never called by
writ unto them afterward. For instance, the Abbots of St. Augustines Bristoll
were summoned to 16. of Barlinges to 25. of Cumbe to 21. the Abbots of Croxton
to 22. D^ ^ontibus to 25. Of ^urneyes to 23. Of Hales to 21. Of Melsa to 23. Of
Mira Valle to 21. Of Osency to 39. Of Thornton to 43. the Master and Prior of
the Order of Semplingham to 29. the Prior of Lews or Jews to 61. and the Prior
of Spalding to 41 Parliaments and Great Councils under Henry the 3. Edward 1.
2. or 3. and yet they were never summoned to any Parliaments after King Edward
the 3. The Prior of St. James Northampton summoned once under Henry the 3d.
being Summoned Ann. 12 E. 2. was (upon his Petition prosecuted by his Proctor)
discharged from any future summons, and lest out of the Rolls after 14 E. 2.
because Non tenet de Rege per Baroniam, nec (...) Capite; sed tantum in puram
et perpetuam eleemosynam, nec praedecessores sui unquam in Cancellaria i^
rotulati fuerunt, nisi ad stimulationem aliquorum malignorum* possent alias,
p^r casum irrotulari^, et per consequens citari* as you may read at large in
Titles of Honor. p. 731. to 735.
Mr. Sclden. The Prior of Bridlington was summoned 9. times under Henry the 3.
and Edward 2. and then in 14 Ed: 2. there was this entry made in the Roll,
Nihil tenet de Rege, and no future Summons issued to him afterward: The Abbot
of Leicester was summoned to no less than 50 Parliaments and Great Councils
under Henry 3. and Ed. 1, 2, 3. before 25 E. 3. yet after all these Summons
there is this entry made upon his 51 summons, Ann. 25 E. 3. (Here, p. 6.) Abbas
Leicestr, cancellatur, quia habet Cartam Regis quod non compellatur venira ad
Parliamentum: The Grounds of which discharge are thus expressed in the Charter
of his exemption from future summons granted upon his Petition in Parliament.

Pat. 26 E. 3. pars 1. m, (...), Seldens^ Titles of Honor, p. 734. 735.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Supplicavit nobis dilectus nobis in Christo
Abbas de Lecestria, ut, cum Abbatia sua praedicta per Robertum Fitz Robert de
M^kan, dudum Comitem Leycestriae, fundata fuisset in puram and perpetuam
elemosinam, and advocatio ^ive patronatus ejusdem ad manus Domini H. quondam
Regis Angliae proavi nostri, per forisfactum Simonis d^ Mont^ ^orti tune
Comitis Leycestriae and pa^^oni ejusdem devenerir, idemque Abbas aliqua terras
seu tenementa de nobis per Baroniam seu alio modo non teneat, per quod ad
Parliamenta sen Consilia nostra venire teneatur, nec aliquis Praedecessorum
suorum ante quadragesimum nonum annum dicti proavi nostri, post ^orisfacturam
praedicti Simonis (quo anno omnes Abbates et Priores Regni nostri Angliae, ad
Parliamentum ejusdem proavi nostri tune tentum, voluntary summoniti fuerunt)
summonitus extiterit, velimus ipsum Abbarem de hujusmodi adventu ad
Parliamentum factae exonerari; Et quia visis cartis and confirmationibus de
^erris and tenementis eidem Abbatiae datis et concessis in Cancellariae nostrae
irrot ulatis compertum est, quod dicta Abbatia per praedictum Robert Fitz
Robert de Mekan, tunc Comitem Leycestriae, fundata erat in puram et perpetuam
Elemosinam, et non invenitur in rotulis praedictis, quod prae dictus Abbas
aliqua ^erras seu tenementa de nobis tenet per Baroniam seu aliquo alio
servitio, nec quod Praedecessores sui Abbates loci praedicti ad aliqua
Parliamenta progenitorum nostrorum ante praedictum quadragesimum nonum annum
dicti proavi nostri aut postmodum continu^, sed vicibus interpola^is, summoniti
fuerint; Nolentes ipsum Abbatem indebire sic vexari, concessimus pro nobis et
haeredibus nostris, quod idem Abbas et successores sui de veniendo ad
Parliamenta et Consilia nostra vel haeredum nostrorum de caetero quieti sint
and exonerati imperpetuum. Ita semper quod dictus Abbas and succe^^ores sui in
Procuratores ad hujusmodi Parliamenta and Consilia per Clerum mittendos
consentiant and ut moris est expensis contribuant eorundem. In cujus, etc.
Test Rege apud West monasterium XV. die Februar. Per petitionem de Parliamento.

After which Patent and entry this Abbot being summoned again in the lists of
27. and 29 E. 3. upon complaint thereof, there was this Memorandum made in the
Clause Roll of 29 E. 3. Cancella^ur Abbas Leycestriae, quia hab^^ Cartam Regis,
quod Non Compellatur v^nir^ ad Parliam^ntum.

The Abbot of Tavistock was summoned to 5 Parliaments and Parliamentary
Councils under H. 3. Ed. 1. and Ed. 3. the last whereof was in 23 E. 3. but
never after; yet King Henry the 8. in the 5. year of his reign, created Richard
Banham Abbot of Tavistocke and his successors, to be one of the Spiritual and
Religious Lords of the Parliament, of himself his heirs and successors; yet
withal pardoned their absence at any time from Parliament, by reason of their
great distance from it, paying only the fine of 5. marks for every time they
should be personally absent into the Kings Exchequer, as this Patent manifests.

Henricus, etc. Par. 5 H. 8. pars 2. m. 22. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 750,
751,
Sciatis quod certis considerationibu^ nos specialite^ moventibus, and o^
specialem devotionem quam ad Beatam Virginem Mariam matrem Christi, sanctumque
Rumonum, in quorum Honor Abbatia de Tavistocke, quae de fundatione nobilium
progenitorum nostroum quondam Regum Angliae and nostro patronatu dedicata
existir; gerimus et habemus, hinc est, quod de gratia nostra speciali ac ex
certa scientia and mero motu nostris, volumus candem Abbatiam sive Monasterium
nostrum gaudere honor, priuilegio, ac liberratibus spiritualium Dominorum
Parliamenti nostri Haeredum and successorum nostrorum. Ideo concessimus and per
praesentes concedimus, pro nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris quantum
in nobis est, dilecto nobis in Christo Richardo Banha^ Abbati de Tavistocke
praedicto and successoribus suis, ut eorum quilibet qui pro tempore ibidem
fuerit Abbas, sit et erit unus de spiritualibus and Religiosis Dominis
Parliamenti nostri Haeredum and successorum nostrorum, gaudendo honor,
privilegio ac libertatibus ejusdem; Et insuper, de uberiori gratia nostra,
a^^^ctando utilitatem dicti nostri Monasterii, considerando ejus distantiam,
Ita quod si contingat aliquem Abbatem qui pro tempore fuerit fore vel esse
absentem propter praedicti Monasterii utilitatem in non veniendo ad
Parliamentum praedictum Haeredum vel successorum nostrum, quam quidem absentiam
eidem Abbati perdonamus per praesentes; Ita tamen quod tune solve^ pro
hujusmodi ab^entia cujuslibet Parliamenti integri in nostro Scaccario, suum per
Attornatum quinque Marcas nobis, haeredibus sive succe^^oribus nostris, totiens
quotiens, ho^ infuturum contigerit. In cujus, etc. Test, etc. Vicesimo ter^io
die Ianuarii, etc.

Sir Edward Cook in his 4. Institutes, p. 45. affirms this Patent to be void
in Law; but upon such a poor reason, as will made all Temporal Lords, Barons,
Earls, and Dukes Patents likewise void, if they hold not by Barony; and I
conceive it to be good in Law, upon consideration of the premises, that our
Kings did at their pleasure, without any special Patents of Creation, summon
what Abbots and Priors they thought meet to their Parliaments, and omitted,
discharged them at their pleasures, as the premises plentifully manifest beyond
contradiction.

5. It is most demonstratively and experimentally evident by this Table: That
the Kings bare writs of summons of Abbots, Priors, Masters of Religious Orders,
Deans, and other Clergymen not holding by Barony, and their sitting in
Parliaments and Great Councils, and debating, consulting, advising with the
King and the rest of the Abbots, Priors, Bishops, Earls, Lords and Barons of
the Realm in Parliament according to the tenor of the writs of Summons (issued
to them all in the self-same form) did neither really or actually ennoble
either them, nor their successors (for then by 4 Instir. p. 1.
Sir Edward Cooks own doctrine) they ought, ex debito justitiae, to have been
summoned constantly during life, and their Successors after them, when they had
been called by writ, actually sat in one, two, much more if in three or four
Parliaments; when most of them who were summoned sat only in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, or 8. Parliaments and no more; and neither they nor their Successors were
ever after summoned; yea some of them after above 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60.
summons to, and Sessions in Parliaments under several Kings, have been
afterward discharged, or left out of the writs of Summons, as no Barons nor
Peers of the Realm, because they held not by Barony of the King: Therefore
their writs of Summons and Session did only make them but momentany and quasi
temporary Peers, or Spiritual Lords pro hac vice only, when and whiles they
were summoned to, and sat in any particular Parliament or great Co^ncil
amongst the rest of the Prelates and Lords, not after they were dissolved, when
both their tempora^ie. Pe^^^ge and Lordships (if their writ^ and Session^ made
them Lords or Peer^ pro tempore,) expired with the Parliaments: And by the
self-same ground, reason, the Kings summons of any Knights, Esquires, or other
Laymen to Parliament by a general wri^^, who held not by Barony, without any
special Clause creating them Barons by writs or Parents, and their actual
sitting in Parliament, can neither ennoble themselves, nor make them Lords,
Barons, or Peers of the Realm for life, much less their heirs males in fee, or
for perpet^ity after their deceases, but only make them quasi Peers, or Great
men, or rather Assistants to, and joint Co^nsellors with the Lords in
Parliament pro tempore, so long as the Parliaments to which they are summoned
and in which they sit continue, but no longer; as I have In my Plea for the
Lords, Epist. to the Reader, and p. 147. to 161.
elsewher^ proved, and shall further demonstratively evidence in the next
Section, against Sir Edward Cooks and others mistakes therein.

8. That our Kings by their Prerogative and royal Authority alone did upon all
extraordinary occasions summon what Abbots, Priors, Religious and
Ecclesiastical persons they thought meet, in the self same manner, and by the
self same forms of writs, as they summoned the Bishops, Abbots, Peers and other
Lords who were actual Peers and Barons of the Realm, in greater or smaller
numbers as they and their Council thought mee^est; who sat, consulted, advised
in Parliament, together with the King and the rest of the Lords: which royal
Prerogative and Jurisdiction was never questioned, oppugned, complained or
voted against in any ancient Parliaments to my knowledge; which being our Kings
Parliaments, yea the Grand Councils both of the King and kingdom, (as the writs
of Summons and all Prologues and Acts of Parliament style them) they might
thereupon lawfully summon to them what persons they deemed most fit and able to
advise, assist them, and to promote, dispatch their public affairs, for their
own and the kingdoms benefit, safety, defense, and common welfare; though no
actual Peers, Lords, or Barons of the Realm by Patent, or Tenure; as will more
fully appear by the two next Sections.

7. This Table does undeniably convince the forecited Memorandum (p. 34.)
entered in Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 36. Istis Abbatibus et Prioribus subscriptis, non
solebat scribi in aliis Parliamentis; viz. Abbati de Teukesbury, with 26 Abbots
and Priors there named to be full of gross mistakes: For I find the Abbot of
St. Augustines Bristol summoned no less than 5. times before, and 11. times
after 6 E. 3. and the Abbot of Bardenay no less than 33. times sommoned before,
and 80. times after it, being one of the Abbots constantly summoned till the 23
E. 4. and dissolution of Monasteries: the Abbot of Barlinges 25. times before
it: the Abbot de Bello 30. times before, and 70. after it, being one of the 25
Abbots constantly summoned as a Baron: the Abbot of Burton upon Trent 12 times:
the Prior of Bridlington 8. times, the Prior of Chester 4. times, the Abbot de
Fontibus 26. the Abbot of Furneyes 23. times: the Abbot of Gerveux (Gervall, or
Iorvall) 13. times: the Prior of Gis^urn thrice: the Abbot of Hayles 21 times:
the Abbot of L^^^^nes twice: the Abbot of St. Ositha 12. time^, the Abbot of
Per^hore 11. times the Abbot of Ryevall 14. times: the Master and Prior of the
Order of Sempingham 29. times, the Abbot of Stratford 12. times, all of them
before 6 E. 3. the Abbot of Tavistock. thrice before, and twice after i^: the
Abbot of Tham^ once, the Abbot of Teukesbury 5. times, and the Abbot of Wardon
4. times before it: Only to the Abbots of Boghland, Langedon and W^alley
therein mentioned I find no writs of Summons in any Rolls, unless Boghland, be
meant of Bocland (as I conceive it is) who was twice summoned; and Langedon for
Lavedon who was 5. times; and Whalley for Wave ley, who was 9. times summoned
by writ before this Memorandum; entered by some ignorant Clerk, who had not well
examined the former Clause rol^s and lists of Summons.

8. That the Bishops, Abbots and Priors summoned constantly and of right to our
Parliaments and Great Councils by writ, were thus summoned to them, not as they
were Bishops, Abbots, or Priors, but in respect of their Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, Cooks 4 Instit. c. 1.
Baronies, which they held of, by, from and under our Kings; as is evident by
the Recognition made in the Great Parliamentary Council at Ch^on. Gervas^ii,
col. 1133. Mat. Part, p. 96, 97.
Clarindon, Ann. 1164. B^bl. Patrum, tom. 12. pars 2. p. 942, 944.
by Petrus Blesensis his Treatise De Institutione Episcop^: dedicated to King
Henry the 2d; by the Judgment given against Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury in a Council at Northam^ton Anno 1165. (11 H. 2.) recorded by
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 705, 706.
William Fitz-Stephens; Mat. Paris, p. 246, 247.
by the Great Charter of King John, Anno 1215. (15 Iohanis) by that Hist. Ang.
p. 354, 355.
of Matthew Paris Anno 1231. Septimo Calendas Februarii, convenerunt ad
Colloquium apud Westmonasterium Rex, cum Praelatis et aliis Magnatibus, ubi
exegit idem Rex Scutagium, de quolibet Scuto tres marcas* ab omnibus qui
Baron^as tenebant tam Laicis quam Praelatis: ^ui Richardus Can^uariensis
Archiepi^copus, et quidam Episcopi cum eo, aud^cter resistentes, dixerunt. Quod
non tenentur viri Ecclesiastici judicio subjici Laicorum, cum absque (...)
concessum ^uit, Scutagium in finibus ^ransm^^inis. Tandem ^et^ post mustas inde
disceptationes, negotium quan^^m ad Praelatos reclamantes pertinebat usque 15.
dies post Pascha dilationem ac^^pit; Edi^. Tiguri, 1589. p. 970, 971.
And by this notible passage of the Continuer of Matthew Paris Anno 1267. (51
H. 3.) Rex citati f^cit Comites et Barons, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos et
Abbates, omnesque communiter militare servitium sibi debenter, ut apud Sanctum
Edmundum, equis et a^mis sufficienter instructi convenirent, ad impe^endum ^os,
qui contra pacem Regiam occupaverunt Ins^l^m Eljensem, etc. Abaduna^is qui ad
Parliamentum citati suerant, praeter rebels, primo principaliter Rex et
Legarus subscriptos Articulos exigebant; Ut omnes Praelati and rectores
Ecclesiarum decimas sibi concederent, de tribus annis sequentibus, and de anno
pr^ximo prae^e^ito* quantum dabunt Baronibus ad custodiendum mare contra
alienigena^. Responsio. Ad hoc responderunt, quod bellum inceptum fuerat per
iniquam cupiditatem, and durat in praesens, and necessarium esset, hujusmodi
petitiones pessimas praeterire, and de pace regni tractare, Nota.
et Parliamentum suum ad utilitatem Ecclesiae et regni convertere, non ad
denatiorum extorsionem: praecipue quum terra in tantum destructa sit per
bellum, quod nunquam, vel saltem sero poterit respirate. Secundu^. Item petitum
est, ut Ecclesiae taxarentur per manus Laicorum, justa et alta taxatione, ad
valorem omnium bonorum spectantium ad easdem. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur,
quod non est ratio, sed omnino contra justiciam, Nota.
ut Laici de decimis colligendis se intromittant, nec in hoc unquam
consentirent communiter, sed tantum ut taxa^io antiqua staret. Tertius. Item,
ut Episcopi and Abbates, etc. decimam suam darent DE BARONIIS SUIS plenarie, et
de Laico feudo recta and alta taxatione. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod
depraedationibus sunt depauperati, et sequuti sunt Regem in expeditione, and
tanta pecuniarum effusione, quod omnino pauperes sunt effecti, e^ etiam ^errae
eorum incultae ^ac^bant propter bellum. Quartus. Item petirum est, ut Clerus
communiter daret domino Regi, ad relevandum sta^um suum, triginta millia
marcarum, propter ante dictas decimas, quas quidem Legate us vendicabat ad opus
Romanae curiae, propter debita Siciliae, Apuliae, et Calabriae contracta, in
nomine domini Edmundi filii Regis modo praesentis. Responsio. Ad hoc
respondebatur, quod ^ihil darent, quia omnes hujusmodi taxationes and
extorsiones per Regem factae prius, nunquam in Regis utilitatem vel regni sunt
conversae. Quiutus. Item petitum est, ut omnes Clerici TENENTES BARONIAS, vel
Laicum feudum, personaliter armati procederent contra regios adversarios, vel
tantum servirium in expeditione Regis invenirent, quantum pertineret ad tantam
terram, vel tenementum. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod non debent
pugnare cum gladio materiali, sed spiti^uali, scilicet cum lachrymis and
orationibus humilibus and devotis. Nota.
Et quod propter beneficia sua tenentur pacem manu tenere, non bellum. Et quod
BARONIAE EORUM ab eleemosynis puris stabiliuntur: unde servitium militare non
debent, nisi certum, nec novum incipient. Sextus. Item petitum est, ut Clerus
communiter a^quietaret novem millia marcarum, quas Episcopus Roffensis
Laurentius, Episcopus Bathoniensis Willielmus, and Abbas Westmonasterii
Richardus, mutuo receperunt a mercatoribus domini Papae in curia Romana, quando
fuerunt ibidem, pro Regiis negotiis ex^ediendis. Responsio. Ad hoc
respondebatur, quod nunquam consentiebant mutuationi tanti debiti, nec unquam
inde scieb^nt, unde in nullo tenentur illud adquietare. Septimus. Item petitum
est ex part Papae, ut fi^ret praedicatio in omni festinatione de cruce per
totum regnum, ad expugnand^m populum, quem curia providere, vel ad crucem
perpet^am redimendum. Responsio. Ad hoc respondebatur, quod populus t^rrae per
bellum in magna part perimitur, and si modo cruce signarentur, pauci vel nulli
ad defensionem patriae remanerent. Unde manifestum est, quod Legatus vellet
naturalem terrae progeniem exulare, ut alienigenae liberius conquirere possint
terram. Octavus. Item dicebatur, quod Praelati tenebantur ad omnes petitiones,
vellent nollent, propter juramentum de Coventre, ubi juraverunt quod domino
Regi auxiliarentur modis omnibus, quibus possent. Responsio. Ad hoc
responderunt, quod quando juramentum fecerunt, non intelligebant de alio
auxilio quam Spirituali, consilioque salubri.

By which demands and answers (not unsuitable nor unseasonable for the
consideration of our present times) it is apparent; that the Clergy ought not
to be taxed by the Laity for their Ecclesiastical Baronies and Temporal Lands
in Parliament, but only by themselves, much less then for their Spiritualties
and Benefices; and that their BARONIES held of the King, obliged them to sit
and serve in Parliaments, yet did not bind them to serve the King in person in
his wars; nor to foment any wars between him and his Subjects, but rather to
advise him to maintain peace not wars. By Matthew Westminsters Flores Histor.
pars 2. p. 409.
relation, That the Archbishop of Canterbury who the year before had all his
Temporalties and goods seized into the Kings hands for refusing to grant a
Subsidy to the King, for fear of Pope Boniface the 8. his Constitution to the
contrary; together with the rest of the Clergy being put out of the Kings
protection upon this occasion, was this year restored to the Kings grace and
favor, atque REDDITA SIBI BARONIA SUA. And by this Protestation of the Bishops,
Abbots, Priors and Clergy in the Sea An Exact Abridgment, p. 322.
Parliament of 11 Rich. the 2. Rotul. Parliamenti part 1. nu. 2. Artic. 34. De
Iure et consuetudine Regni Angliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro
tempore fueri^, n^^non caeteros Suffraganeos, Comfraires and Compatres ABBATES
ET PRIORES, ALIOSQVE PRAELATOS QVOSCUNQVE PER BARONIAM DE DOMINO REGE TENENTES,
PERTINET IN PARLIAMENTIS REGIIS QUIBUS CUNQUE UT PARES REGNI PRAEDICTI
PERSONALITER INTERESS^. ibidemque de Regni Negotiis ac aliis tractari (...) cum
caeteris decti Regni Paribus, et aliis I (...) INTERESSENDI (...), consulere et
tractare, ordinare, statuere et diffinire, ac caetera facere quae Parliamenti
tempore ibide^^ invenient facienda. Of which, those who please may find many
other Testimonies, in my Plea for the Lords, p. 151. to 158. 221. to 290. and
in Mr: Seldens Titles of Honor, Part. 2. Chapter 5. Section 17. to 26.

27, It is observable, that when any Archbishop died, after the writ of Summons
to Parliament issued to him with a Praemunientes, etc. and before the return
and execution thereof; the King thereupon issued a new Writ of Summons to the
Guardian of the Spiritualties of the Archbishopric, with a Praemunientes to
summon the Dean, Chapter, Archdeacon and Clergy of the Province, with a
particular writ to the Dean and Chapter of his Church to appear at the said
Parliament; as is evident by these two memorable writs in Claus. 9 E. 2. m. 20.
dorso.

Rex Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Eborum. sede vacant, salutem.
Quia nup^r tempore quo Parliamentum nostrum usque Lincoln. in Quindena S^^ncti
Hillarii prox. futur. summoneri mandavimus bonae memoriae W. pro tunc Archie
piscopo loci praedicti jam de ^uncto, quod in propria persona sua dicto
Parliamento nostro interesser, ac quod praemuniri faciet Decanum et Capitulum
Ecclesiae suae be^ti Petri Ebor. totumque Clerum suae Dioc: quod dicti Decanus
et Archidiaconi in propriis pers^nis suis, dictumque Capitulum per unnm, et
dictus Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos dicto Parliamento similiter
interestent, ad tractandum ibidem Nobl^cum super negotiis Nos et Statum Regni
nostri ^^ng^^tibus pro quibus dictum Parliamentum mandavimus Convocari. Nos
nolentes per mortem praefati Archiepiscopi dicta mandata nostra differri, set
ea potius per vos executioni debito demandari, Vobis mandamus, quod Vos in
propria persona vestra dictis die et loco intersitis. Praemunientes praedictos
Decanum et Capitulum, Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum praedictum, quod iidem
Decanus et Archididiaconi in propriis personis suis, dictumque Capitulum per
unum, ac dictus Clerus per duos Procuratores dicto Parliamento nostro in
Quindena praedicta intersint. Ad tractandum ibidem Nobiscum super Negotiis
praedictis in forma supradicta, et ad consentiendum hiis quae ^unc ibidem de
Communi Consilio contigerit ordinari. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud
Clipston 17 die Januarii, Per ipsum Regem.

Rex dilectis sibi in Christo Decano et Capitulo Ecclesiae beati Petri Ebor:
salutem. Quia nuper, etc. (ut supra;) Et quod praemuniri faciet vos,
Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum suae Diocaes. quod praefati Decanus et
Archidiaconi in propriis personis vestris, dictumque Capitulum per ^^um, et
praedictus Clerus per duos Procuratores dicto Parliamento nostro similiter
interessetis, ad tractandum ibidem, etc. Nos nolentes, etc. Vobis mandamus,
quod vos praefatus Decanus in propria persona vestra dicto Parliamento in
Quindena praedicta intersitis, Et vos dictum Capitulum per unum Procuratorem
sufficientem sitis similiter, ad tr^ctandum ibidem, etc. Test ut supra. Per
ipsum Regem.

28 That no private Prelates and Clergy men could grant a Subsidy to bind the
rest of the Clergy for the necessary defense of the Church, King, kingdom,
against invading Enemies, without the general Consent of the Archbishops, and
all the Clergy summoned in Convocation within their respective Provinces; as is
most apparent by this memorable writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
like to the Guardian of the Spiritualties of the Archbishopric of York, De
Convocatione Clerifacta pro Subsi^io Regri p^o gue^^a fac.
wherewith I shall close up this Section, and my Observations on it.

Claus. 9 E. 2. m. 17. Rex venerabil^ in Christo Patri. W. eadem gratia
Archiepiscopo Cantuar. etc. salutem. Pro firmo credimus et tenemus, quod ad ea
quae regni nostri salva ionem et ^opul^ Nobis commissi tranquillitatem et
quietem respi^iunt cum Dei adjutorio feliciter promovenda mauus velitis
extendere liberalit^r adjuvantes. Quidam itaque Praelati et alii de Clero
Provinciae vestre convoca^i, quos ad interessendum Parliamento nostro apud
Lincoln. f^^imus summoneri, ibidem, ex part nostra super Subsidio nobis pro
guerra nostra Scotiae fa^^^nda requisiti ad urgentem necessitatem in hac part,
and inevitabile periculum quod tam Ecclesiae Anglicanae quam Nobis et toti
poputo nostro ex Scotorum inimicorum et rebellium nostrorum, (qui pluries
R^gnum nostrum hostiliter sunt ingressi, depraedationes, ino^ndia, homicidia at
alla dampna quamplunima intul^runt perpetrando) obstinat a malitia pot^rit
imminere, nisi ^orum nequitiae citius et poten^^cus cum Dei adjutorio
resistatur, suae considerationis intuitum dirigentes ad Subsidium Nobis ex
causa praedict^s faciendum, quatenus vo^is absentibus cui subsu^, ^t in
quorundam aliorum tam Praelatorum, quam Religiosorum et caeterorum de Clero
dictae Provinciae absentia potuerunt, unanimiter consenserunt: Ita tamen quod
tam ipsi quam alii de Clero vestrae Provinciae qui in dicto Parliamento
pra^entes non fuerunt coram vobis ad tractandum et consentiendum vestra
auctoritate interveniente de certo Subsidio Nobis, ut praemittitur, faciendo,
in loco debito convocentur. Vestram ig^^ur Paternitatem reverendam, de qua
fiduciam gerimus pl^ni^rem requirimus et rogamus, quatinus omnes Pralatos, tam
Religiosos quam alios, caterosque de Clero Provinciae vestrae supradictae, quod
sint coram Vobis apud Lond^n die M^rcurii prox. post Quindenam Pasch. prox.
futur. ad ultimum, ad tractand. in vestra praesentia, et una vobiscum
consentiend. super Subsidio memorato, convocari faciatis. (...) Subsidio nomine
nostro audiendam, it nobis post modu^ reportandam. Test Rege apud Lincoln. 17
die Febr.

Eodem modo mandatum est Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiepiscopatus Eborum. sede
vacant mutatis competenter mutandis, excepto quod Clerum Eborae. Provinciae
venir^ (...) (...) ipso apud Eborum a di^ Paschae in un^m mensem* etc. Test ut
supra.

What ever else concerns the Prelates, Abbots, Priors, Convocation and Cl^ry;
is reserved for its proper plac^ in subsequent Sections.

SECTION II.
Of the several writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils, directed to
the Temporal Lords; as The King of Castle, the Prince of Wales, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Barons, and other Great men of the Lords
House; whereof there are several forms and varieties; with Observations on them.
SOme pretended Antiquaries, not well versed in our Records, in their late
printed Discourses of The Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p. 22. 24.
88. 89. meeting with a Transcript of ancient writs issued to Earls, Barons and
Great men holding lands of the King by Knight service, to repair to him at a
certain time and place, cum equis et armis, for his defense against Enemies or
Rebels in times of wars, insurrection, or danger, have injudiciously conceived
these writs, to be Writs of Summons to Parliaments, or confounded them
promiscuously with them; affirming; That they find these writs recorded AMONG
THE PARLIAMENT ROLLS of 14. (or 15.) E. 3. and therefore thought good to
remember them. When as there are ^o such writs extant in any Parliament Rolls
in the Tower; nor any Writs of Summons to Parliaments or Great Councils, entered
in our Parliament Rolls (as they ignorantly publish) but only in the Dorse of
the Clause Rolls, quite different and distinct from the Rolls of our
Parliaments, as the meanest Novice in Records can ascertain them.

Upon the like mistake some have conceited these ensuing writs of Claus. 45 and
47 H. 3. to be writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great Councils, when as the
writs themselves declare the contrary, that they were only Summons, to assist
the King against Enemies and Rebels, with horses and arms, and all their
power; not to counsel, advise, or grant any aids of money to him in Parliament.

Claus. 45 H. 3. m. 3. dorso.
Rex Willielmo de Bello Campo de Aumel, salutem. Mandamus Vobis in fide et
homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis
praetermissis ad Nos sitis London in craftino Apostolorum Simonis et Iudae
absque dilatione ulteriori, CUM EQUIS ET ARMIS, ET CUM POSSE VESTRO, tam de
servitio vestro Nobis d^bito, quam de subventione amicorum vestrorum, pro
quibusdam urgentibus ^^egotiis personam nostram specialiter et Statum Coronae
nostrae tangentibus. Et hoc sicut de vestra fid^litate et dilectione
confidentiam gerimus speciale^ ^ullatenus omittatis. Quia SUBVENTIONEM qu^m
Nobis et Coronae nostrae praeter servicium Nobis debitum ad praesens feceritis,
in consequentiam trahi nolumus, nec vobis per hoc ullo tempore derogari.
Taliter vos habeatis in hac part quod dicto die absque defalta ad Nos sitis,
ita quod vobis exinde in perpetuo teneamus ad grates. Test Rege apud Turrim
London 18 die Octobris.

Eodem modo mandatum est Phil: Basset, and 107. Barons and great men holding by
knights service, there registered by name. After which this writ ensues in the
same Dorse.

Rex Abbati de Burgo Sancti Petri, salutem. Mandamus vobis in fide et
dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis
praetermissis mittaris Nobis Servitium vestrum quod Nobis debetis; ita quod
sitis ad Nos in crastino Sancti Martini absque defalto, pro quibusdam
urgentibus negotiis personam nostram specialiter et statum regni nostri
tangentibus. Et hoc sub debito fidelitatis qua Nobis ^enemini nullatenus
omittatis. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to 36 Abbots more, whose names are there listed in
the Roll: Then follows this entry.

Isti subscripti vocati sunt ad crastinum Apostolorum Simonis and Iudae CUM
EQUIS ET ARMIS; Thomas de Chauro: with 16. more there named after him.

Mandatnm est Vicecomiti Essex, quod summoneri faciat omnes illos de Honoribus
de Redleg et Castro Baynard, et de Hundredo de Rochford, quod veniant ad Regem
ad ^undem diem cum servicio suo Regi debito.

The like writs issued to diverse others in this and other Membrana^s of this
Roll of 45 H. 3. to aid the King against the Barons then in rebellion against
him, and reduce them to their obedience, as is evident by this writ to the Earl
of Flanders, though not particularly expressed in the precedent writs.

Claus. 45. H. 3. m. 8. dorso.
Rex Comiti Flandriae, salutem. Quiae Magnates nostri NOBIS ALIQUANDIU REBELS
EXTITERINI, propter quod, nisi citius resipiscant, aliud consilium Nos opponere
oportebit, dilectionem vestram requirimus et rogamus, quatinus taliter vobis
providere velitis, quod ad Nos centum Milites et tot servientes ad arma been
munitos Nobis mi^tere possitis: Taliter vos habentes in hac part, quod
specialiter vobis teneamur ad gratias. Test Rege apud Windesor. 22 die Augusti.

In 47 H. 3. there issued these ensuing writs to sundry Noblemen and others to
aid the King against the Welshmen then in rebellion against him, to suppress
their Rebellion, and reduce them to obedience.

Claus. 47 H. 3. m. 7. dorso.
Rex, Rogeto de Bigot, Comiti Nor^^: and Mariscallo Angliae, salutem. Mandamus
vobis sub debito fidelitatis et homagii quibus Nobis tenemini^ et sicut ea quae
de n^bis t^n^tis, diligitis, quod in festo beati Petri ad Vincula prox. futur.
sitis apud Wigorn. CUM EQVIS and ARMIS, et cum servitio vestro Nobis debito:
parati exinde Nobiscum proficisci in expeditionem nostram contra Lewellinum
filium Griffini et accomplices suos REBELS NOSTROS, et ita decenter in hac
necessitate nostra ibidem v^niatis, ut dictorum NOSTRORUM REBELLIVM versutia
adeo potenter reprimatur, quod Nobis et Vobis cedat ad honorem, et exinde vobis
ad grates teneamur speciales. Test Rege apud Westminster. 25. die Maii.

Eodem modo mandaium est to 133. Nobles and others, whose names are there
recorded.

The Sea claus. 24 H. 1. d. 2. cl. 25 E. 1. d. 3. 7, 8, 14. Schedula. cl. 28 E.
1. d. 11. 15. claus. 29 E. 3. d. 11, 12, 13, 16. claus. 8 R. 2. d. 3.
like writs of Summons against the Scots, Welsh, French and other Enemies and
Rebels, frequently occur in the Clause Rolls of King John, Henry 3. and
Edward 1, 2, 3. Rich. 2. and other Kings: which have no Analogy with writs of
Summons to Parliaments or Great Councils, wherewith some Ignorant Antiquaries
would conjoyn them as Homogeneal; which I thought ^it to premise, to avoid all
mistakes of this kind.

It is evident by this Clause in the writs i^^ued to the Bishops, Claus. An. 6.
Iohannis Regis m. 3. dorso. (^orecited, p. 2, 3.) vestrum expedit habere
consilium et ALIORUM MAGNATUM terrae nostrae QUOS AD DIEM ILLVM ET LOCUM
FECIMVS CONVOCARI: that King John issued forth writs of Summons to the Temporal
as well as Spiritual Lords, to summon them to the Parliamentary Council then
held at London, though neither the form of the writs by which they were then
summoned, nor any list of their names be entered in that or any other Roll now
extant. And by this Clause in the writ of Summons to the Archbishop of York
Claus. 26 H. 3. m. 13. dorso: ad tractandum Nobiscum una cum CAETERIS
MAGNATIBUS NOSTRIS QUOS SIMILITER FECIMUS CONVOCARI; it is most apparent, that
the Temporal Lords and great men were likewise called to the Parliamentary
Great Council then assembled at London by writ, though there be no entry of
those writs, nor catalogue of their names in that or any other Rolls to be
found, but only the single writ to one Archbishop.

All the antientest writs of Summons of our Temporal Lords to Great Councils
being utterly lost through negligence, or perished through the rust or
consumption of time, the very first writ of Summons to them, and Calendar of
their names now remaining, is that of 49 H. 3. dors. 11. Cedula already recited
at large, p. 5, 6. one and the self-same form of writ verbatim, being then
directed both to the Temporal and Spiritual Lords, though they usually differed
in after times in some special clauses. After the Eodem modo mandatum est; and
Catalogue of the Bishops, ^bbots, Priors, Deans, and Ecclesiastical persons
names then summoned to that Parliamentary Council by the self-same writs, there
followed this list of the Temporal Lords and Barons.

Item in forma praedicta mandatum est COMITIBUS et aliis subscriptis: dat: de
Wodestok. Comiti Leicestr. Comiti Gloucestr. Com. Norff: and Mariscallo
Angliae, Comiti Oxon. Comiti D^rby, Radulpho Cameys, Rogero de Sancto Iohanne,
Hugoni le Despencer Justic. Angliae, Iohanni Filio Iohannis, Willo. de
Munchensey, Nicho. de Segrave, Iohi, de Vescy, Rado: Basset de Drayton, Henr.
de Hasting. Galfrido de Lucy, Roberto de Ros. Iohanni de Eyvil, Ade de
Novo-Mercato, Waltero de Colevyll, Willielmo Maryun, Rogero Bertram, Rado.
Basset de Sapcote, Gilberto de Gaunt.

This Parliamentary Council was summoned soon after the great bloody battle at
Evesham (wherein the Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster. Walsingham, Holinshed, Daniel,
Speed, Polychronicon, Grafton Ann. 1265. My Plea for the Lo^ds, p. 258, 259,
260.
Barons who opposed K. Henry were totally routed, Simon de Montford their
General, and many others of of them slain in the field, and the rest scattered)
to settle the peace and tranquillity of the Realm as the writ informs us; the
most of the Barons and Great men upon on this occasion being omitted out of the
Summons, though many more Abbots, Priors, and Clergymen were summoned to it,
than to any other succeeding Parliament whatsoever, to supply the places of the
Barons then in actual rebellion, and give the greater reputation to this
Assembly, as I appreh^nd.

The 2. writ of summons to the Earls and Temporal Claus. 23 E. 1. m. 9. dorso.
which I shall transcribe at large: though entered with an etc. in the Roll, with
reference to the Bishops writs, ut supra.

Rex, dilecto et fideli suo Edmundo fratri suo Com. Lanc. salutem. Quia super
quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et Regnum nostrum, ac Vos caeterosque Procetes et
Magnates de eodem regno, quae sine vestra et ^orum praesentia nolumus expediri,
Parliamentum nostrum tenere, et vobiscum super hiis colloquium habere volumus
et tractatum; Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quod sitis ad Nos apud Westminster. primo die mensis Augusti prox,
futuro, vel saltem infra tercium diem subsequentem ad ultimum, nobiscum super
dictis negotiis tractaturi, et vestrum consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo
omittatis. Test me ipso apud Album Monasterium 24 die Iulii. Per Breve de
Privato Sigillo.

Eodem modo mandatum est singillatim per Brevia Clausa Comitibus and Baronibus
subscriptis, viz. 12 Earls, and 53 Barons, and Great men of the Temporalty;
whose names, because tedious to repeat after every writ, I shall present you
with in a short Table in the Observations, for brevity sake.

The 3. writ is that recorded in Clause Anno 23 E. 1. Summonitio Parliamenti.


Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Edmundo Comiti Cornub. salutem. Quia
super remediis contra pericula quae toto Regno nostro hiis diebus imminent
providendis, Vobiscum et cum caeteris Regni nostri Proceribus habere volumus
Colloquium et Tractatum: Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod die Dominica prox. post festum Sancti
Martini in hieme prox. futur. apud Westminster: personaliter intersitis, ad tract^nd.
ordinand. et faciend. Nobiscum et cum Praelatis, et caeteris Proceribus, et
aliis Incolis Regni nostri, qualiter sit hujusmodi periculis obviand: Test
rege apud Cantuar. primo die Octobris.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 8 Earls and 41 Barons and
others Great men of the Laity: This writ differs in the Prologue and date from
that to the Archbishop, Bishops, Abbots and Priors, Claus. 23 E. 1. dors. 4.
summoned to the same Parliament, ( H^re, p. 6, 7.) as you may discern by
comparing them.

The 4. writ is recorded in Clause 24 E. 1. m. 7. dorso.

Edmundo Comiti Cornub. salutem: Quia super remediis contra pericula, etc. (as
before writ 3.) Vobis, etc. injungentes, quod in crastino Animarum prox. ^utur.
apud S. Edmundum personaliter intersitis, ad tractand. ordinand. et faciend.
Nobiscum, et cum aliis Regni nostri Magnatibus etc. qualiter sit hujusmodi
periculis obviand. et s^atui ejusdem Regni tutius et utilius consulend. Test
Rege apud Berewic. super Twede 26 die Augusti.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 5. Earls and 37 Barons and
Great men.

The 5. writ is thus registered, Claus. 25 E. 1. m. 25. dorso.

Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salutem. De Parliamento tenendo apud Sar^m.
Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et Vos ac Regnum nostrum
contingentibus vobiscum, una cum quibusdam aliis Proceribus et Magnatibus
ejusdem Regni habere volumus Colloquium et tractatum; Vobis mandamus in
homagio, fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod
modis omnibus sitis^ad Nos apud Sarum, die Dominica in festo Sancti Matthaei
Apostoli prox. sutur. ad ultimum; Nobiscum super dictis Negotiis Colloquium et
Tractatum specialiter habituri, vestrumque consilium impensuri; Et hoc sicut
Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem Regni nostri, et incolarum ejusdem
diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. Test Rege apud Wetings 26 die Januarii.

Consimile mandatum habent siuguli Comites, Barons, et MILITES subscripti,
viz. 5 Earls, 65 Barons, 13 Knights. The word Milites being written over
against the Judges, and those of the Kings Council in the Margin of the Roll.

The 6. writ I find extant in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 18. dorso.

Rex, etc. Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salutem, Quia super negotiis nostris
ultramarinis, etc. (ut supra, p. 9. 10. in the writ to the Archbishop.) Vobis
mandamus in fide et hom^gio quibus Nobis tenemini, etc. ut supra: Test ut
supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 10 Comitibus; After which follows,
the beginning of a writ, Henrico Percy, etc. and then Consimiles literae
diriguntur BARONIBUS subscriptis, being 79 more in particular.

The 7. writ is entered in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 16. dorso.

Rex, etc. Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salurem. Propter quaedam specialia et ardua
negotia Nos et statum regni nostri tangent ia, etc. (as in the writ to the
Archbishop, p. 10.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini
firmitet injungentes, quatinus sitis ad Nos apud Westminster. in quindena Paschae
prox. nunc ventur. omnibus praetermissis ^d tractand. etc. Test ut supra.

Cons^miles literae diriguntur, viz. 10. Comitibus, et Baronibus et Militibus
subscriptis, viz. Iohanni de Hastings, and 45. more.

The 8. is in Claus. 27 E. 1. m. 9. dorso; (the same verbatim with that to the
Archbishop, p. 10, 11.) directed only to 3 Earls and 5 Barons entered on the
Roll.

dors^.

Rex, etc. dilecto Consangnineo et fratri suo Edmundo Comiti Cornub: salutem.
Quia ad salvationem Coronae nos^rae et communem ^tilitatem populi Regni nostri
Sancta die Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. L^ndon. Parliamentum ^enere, et
vobiscum ac cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus ejusdem Regni super negotiis
No^, et idem Regnum contingentibus speciale Colioquium habere volumus et
tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quod ad praedictos diem et locum personaliter intersi^is Nobiscum,
ac cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis
tracta^uri, et vestrum consilium impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum
diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test Rege apud Barwicum super Twede 29 die
Decembris.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis; viz. 10 Comitibus, 99 other Barons
and Great men: entered on the Roll before the writs to the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, and their lists of names.

dorso.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo, Iohanni de Warrena Comiti Surr: salutem. Cum nuper
pro communi utilitate, etc. (as in the writ to the Archbishop, p. 12, 13.)
Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini, etc. Test ut supra.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur Comitibus, Baronibus et Mil^ibus subscriptis,
viz. 8 Earls, and 80 others.

dorso.

Rex, Edwardo Princip^ Walliae et Comiti Cestriae filio suo carissimo, salutem.
Licet vos non lateat qualiter in Parliamento nostro habito London: his diebus
extitit ordinatum; ut ad providendum consultius et salubrius ordinand. etc. (as
in the writ to the Archbishop, p. 13.) Ex abundanti tamen vobis in fide et
homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod eidem futuro
Parliamento aliis quibuscunque negotiis omissis personaliter intersitis. Test
ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 9* Comitibus, and 88 Lords and
Great men.

The 12. is that in Claus. 30 E. 1. m. 12. dorso.

Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae, etc. (ut supra) Quia super quibusdam ardnis
negotiis nos et vos totumque Regnum nostrum specialiter tangentibus, quae fine
vobis et Praelatis ac caeteris Magnatibus dicti Regni nostri nolumus expediri,
vobiscum et cum Praelatis et Magnatibus habere volumus colloquium et tractatum.
Vobis in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini mandamus firmiter injungentes,
quod in Octabis Nativitatis S. Johannis Baptistae prox. futur. ad ultimum apud
Westminster. modis omnibus personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum et cum Praelatis a^
Magnatibus supradictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium
impensuri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Test Rege apud Thurrock Gray 2. die
Iunii.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 9* Comitibus, and 82 other
Lords and Great men.

The 13 is registered in this form; Claus. Ann. 32 E.

Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae et Comiti Cestriae, filio suo Karissimo, salutem.
Quia pro quibusdam negotiis quae Regnum nostrum Angliae specialiter tangent,
necnon stabilimentum terrae nostrae Scotiae, et etiam pro aliis diversis
negotiis quae disponere proponimus Deo dante, die Martis in quindena
Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. apud Westminster. Parliamentum
tenere, et vobiscum ac cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus ejusdem Regni
super negotiis illis speciale colloquium haber^ volumus et tractatum. Vobis
mandamus, quod ad praedictos diem et locum personaliter intersitis Nobiscum et
cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super dictis negotiis
tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullatenus omutatis. Test
Rege apud Brustwyk 12 die Novembr.

The like writ issued, Dilecto and fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Comiti Lincoln.
etc. ut supra, with Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini:
etc. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem, dictique Regni nostri commodum diligitis
(omitted in the writ to the Prince) nullatenus omittatis. Test ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 7 Comitibus more, and 92
Barons and Great men.

De veniendo ad Parliamentum.


Rex dilecto and fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Comiti Lincoln. salutem. Licet nuper
vobis mandaverimus quod essetis apud Westminster. ad Parliamentum nost^um quod
ordinavimus tenend. in Octabis Nativitatis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur.
Nobiscum et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super negotiis Nos et statum Regni
nostri specialiter tangentibus tractaturi. Nihilominus exhabundanti vobis
iterato mandavimus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quod omni excusatione postposita apud Westminster. in dictis Octabis
modis omnibus personaliter intersitis tractaturi Nobiscum et c^m caeteris de
Consilio nostro de negotiis antedictis; Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege
apud Boxle 30 die Iulii.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. W. Episcopo Winton. Humfredo de
Bohun. Com. Here Is. and Essex, Gilberto de Roubiry, Magistro Regin, de Brandon,
Hugoni le Despencer, Johanni de Hastings, Johanni de Botetourte, Abbati Westminster.
Willielmo Martyn, Abbati de Waverle, Magistro Pho. Martyn, Fratri Hugoni de
Manicestr. Rogero Brabazon, Radulpho de Hengham.

Dors. 8. in the same Roll the like writs issued to the same persons, and to
the Bishops of Wigorn. Coventre and Lichf: with this variation: Licet hactenus
vobis mandavimus quod essetis ad Nos apud Westminster. ad Parliamentum nostrum quod
in Octab. Nativita^. beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere volumus Deo
dante. Vobis nih^lominus iterato mandamus in fide et dilectione quis Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod die dictarum Octab. vel in crastino
eorundem ad ultimum aliis omnibus praetermissis intersit^s. Et hoc nullatenus
omittatis. T. Rege apud Rothinge 27. die Augusti. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.

After which follows this single writ, varying somewhat from these two
preceding.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Henrico de Percy salutem. Quia Parliamentum nostrum
apud Westminster. in Octabis Nativitais beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere
proponimus Deo dante. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus, etc. quod die
dicta^um Octab. vel in crastino earundem ibidem ad ultimum aliis praetermissis
omnibus intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Magnatibus Regni nostri ibidem
tunc ventur. s^per negotiis Nos et statum ejusdem Regni specialiter
tangentibus, tractaturi: Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege ut supra.

The 15. is endorsed on Claus. Anno 34 E. 1. m. 2.

Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae, etc. (as before in 13.) Quia super ordinatione
et stabilimento terrae nostrae Scotiae, necnon et aliis negotiis Nos et statum
Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus apud Karliol. in Octabis S. Hillarii prox,
futur. Parliamentum tene^e, et vobiscum ac cum cae^eris Magnatibus de eodem
Regno habere volumus Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus quod omnibus aliis
praetermissis ad praedictos diem et locum dicto Parliamento personaliter
intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum caeteris Magnatibus de dicto Regno, super
ordinatione et stabilimento, et negotiis praedictis tractaturi vestrumque
Consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Lauretof 3. die
November. Anno Regni s^i 34.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Henr. de Lacy Comiti Lincoln. ^a^utem. Quia, etc. ut
supra; Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis ^enemini, etc. ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 10 Comitibus: 86 Lords and
Great men, besides Assistants of the Kings Counsil.

De Parliamento tenendo.


Rex dilecto et fideli suo, Thomae Comiti Lancastr. Cum nuper vobis
mandaverimus, quod in Octabis Sancti Hillar^i prox. praeterit. essetis apud
Parliamentum, Nobiscum super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos et Statum Regni
nostri tangentibus, pro quibus venerabilis Pat^r Dom. Petrus Sabinen. Episc.
Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalis, ad Nos ex part Domini Summi Ponti^icis
est venturus, ut quem ante Octab. praedict. ad Nos venisse credebamus,
colloquium habitur. Et idem Cardinalis non erit ad Nos apud Karliol. ante diem
Dominicam prox. post mediam Quadragesimae, viz. primam Dominicam in Passione
Domini quae jam instat. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod dictis die et loco modis omnibus
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum super praemissis habitur. Colloquium et
Tractatum, vestrumque Consilium impensur. et hoc sub forisfactura omnium quae
nobis forisfacere poteritis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Lavercost. 22
die Febr.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 2 Comitibus, and 24 Barons.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Hen. de Lacy Com. Lincoln. salutem. Quia super
quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos in ista recenti susceptione regiminis Regni
nostri, etc. (as here to the Archbishop, p. 14.) Vobiscum et cum caeteris
Magnatibus de eodem regno, etc. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus, etc.
Nobiscum et cum aliis Magnatibus ejusdem Regni ibidem super dictis negotiis
tractaturi, vestrumque consilium et auxilium impen^ur. Et hoc sicut Nos et
honorem nostrum ac commodum dicti Regni diligitis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege
ut supra. ( p. 15.)

Eodem modo scribitur subcriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 69 others.

The 18. is in Clause 1 E. 2. m. 11. dorso.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Iohanni de Warrena Com. Surr. salutem. Quia super
diversis arduis negotiis Nos et statum regni nostri tangentibus, vobiscum et
cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus, et aliis fidelibus nostris de eodem Regno
Colloquium et tracta^um habere et Parliamentum tenere proponimus, Domino
concedente. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus etc. quod prima Dominica
quadragesimae prox. futur. apud Westminster. omnibus aliis prae^ermissis personaliter
intersitis, Nobiscum ibidem et cum caeteris Praelatis ac Magnatibus de regno
praedicto super praefatis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. Et
hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra ( p. 15.)

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 10 Comitibus, and 46 other Great men.

The 19 is Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 8. Rex dilecto et fideli Henr. de Lacy Com.
Lincoln. salutem; Quia super diversis, etc. (as p. 15.) Vobis mandamus in fide
et homagio, etc. Test ut supra, p. 15.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, and 46 others.

The 20. is in Clause 2 E. 2. m. 20. cedula. Rex dilecto Gilberto de Clare Com.
Glouc. and Heref. salutem. Quia etc. ut supra p. 15, 16. Vobis mandamus in fide
et homagio, etc. Nobiscum et cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus de regno
praedicto, etc. (as p. 15. 16.)

Eodem modo mandatum est, viz. 7. Comitibus, and 57 more.

The 21. is in Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 14. Cedula. Rex dilecto Gilberto de Clare Com.
Glouc. et Hertf. Quia, etc. vobiscum et cum aliis Proceribus et Magnatibus*
etc. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, etc. as p. 16.

Eodem modo mandatum est, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 41 other Lords and Great men.



Rex dilecto Nepoti et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare Com. Glouc. et Hertf. Quia,
etc. vobiscum et cum aliis Proceribus et Magnatibus ejusdem Regni, etc. Vobis
in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, etc. as
p. 16.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus; and 81 Great men more.



Rex dilecto Nepoti et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare, etc. Vobis mandamus in
fide et homagio, etc. sitis ad Nos apud Stamford, nobiscum et cum Praelatis et
Proceribus praedictis super praemissis tractatum et colloquium habituri, etc.
Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, accommodum regni nostri diligitis
nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra. p. 17.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 70 other Great men.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare, Com. Glouc. et Hertf. salutem;
Quantae audaciae, etc. (as p. 17, 18.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc.
T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. xi. Comitibus, and 84 other Lords
and Great me^.



Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Com. Lancast. salutem. Qui^
propter plura, etc. (as p. 18.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut
supra. Per breve de Privato sigillo.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 5. Comitibus and 54 others.



Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Lancastr. salutem. Quia
in ultimo Parliamento, etc. as p. 18, 19. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio,
etc. quod praedicto die Veneris sitis ap^d Westminster. in propria persona vestra,
Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Praelatis, Proceribus et fidelibus nostris
supradictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri:
et hoc sicut de vobis con^idimus nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Comitibus et Baronibus subscriptis, viz. 7.
Comitibus, and 60 other Grandees.

The 27. is the writ in Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 11. (or 13.)

Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Lancastr. salutem. Quia
propter plura et ardua negoti^ Nos et Statum regni nostri tangentia die
Dominica prox. post ses^um beatae Mariae Magdalenae prox. futur. ordinavimus
Deo propitio apud Lincoln. Parliamentum tenere, et vobiscum, ac cum caeteris
Praelatis et Proctribus de dicto Regno nostro super dictis negotiis habere
Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. ibidem,
nobiscum et cum Praelatis et Proceribus supradictis super dictis negotiis
tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege
apud Ebor.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 42 others: and 16 more,
over against whose names is written in the margin Cleri^is Consilii; and 16
others styled Iusticiar' in the margin.

The 28. is that of Claus. 6 E. 2. m. 31. dorso. Rex Thomae de Brotherton
Comiti Norff. salutem: Quia tertia Dominica, etc. (as p. 19.) Vobis mandamus in
fide et homagio, etc. quod omnibus aliis praetermissis sitis ad Nos in proptia
persona vestra ad diem et locum praedictos, Nobiscum, etc. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, and 88. other Lords and
Great men.

The 29. is the writ in Clause 6 E. 2. m. 3. dorso.

Rex dilecto sibi Thomae de Brotherton Comiti Norff. salutem. Licet ad
requisitionem, etc. (as p. 20, 21.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T.
ut supra.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus and 88 others.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae de Brotherton Comiti Norff. salutem. Cum
diversa, etc. (as p. 21,) Vobiscum et cum Praelatis, et caeteris Mag^atibus,
etc. Vobis man damus in fide et homagio, etc. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, and 99 other Lords and
Great men.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae de Brotherton, etc. (as p. 21, 22.) Vobis
mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, and 88 others.



Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Com. Lancastr. salu^em. Quia
super, etc. as p. 22. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 93 others, besides
8 Judges and Assistants intermixed with them.



Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Lancastr. salutem. Quia,
etc. Vobis mandam^s in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut supra, p. 22. and 23.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 85 more, besides
Officers, Judges, Assistants, joined together with them without distinction.



Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae Com. Lanc. etc. T. ut supra. p.
22.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 7 Comitibus, 83. Greatmen, and 34.
others, with a lines distance only between their names, summoned ^ormerly as
the Kings Counsil, and as assistants.

The 35. is Claus. 11 E. 2. d. 14.

Rex, etc. Th. Com. Lancastr. etc. (as here, p. 97,)

Eodem modo scribitur 17, Comitibus, and 118 others, with those of the Kings
Counsil intermixed with the Lords and Barons.

The 36. is Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 29. in cedula pendente.

Rex dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Thomae, Com. Lanc. etc. (as in 33.)
Test ut supra p. 23.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 79 Great men, and 24 more
with a lines space* between them usually summoned as Assistants, and the Kings
Counsil.

The 37. is Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 11. dorso.

Rex dilecto consanguineo. etc. Thomae Com. Lancast. (as 33.) T. ut supra. p.
23.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 79 Great men, and 25 more
with a lines distance, formerly summoned as the Kings Counsil.

The 38. is in Claus. 13 E. 2. m. 13. dorso.

Rex dilecto Consanguineo* etc. Thomae, Com. Lanc. etc. (as 33.) T. ut supra,
p. 23.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis* viz. 8 Comi^^bus, 72 more, and 25 of the
Counsil, with a lines space from the former.

The 39. is in Claus. 14 E. 2. m 23. dorso.

Rex Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio nostro carissimo, salutem. Quia super
diversis et ard^is nego^iis, etc. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus
Nobis tenemini, etc. T. ut supra, p. 23.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus, 74 others, and 32 more of
the Kings Counsil, with a lines distance from the former.

The 40. is Claus. 14 E. 2. m. 5. dorso.

Rex dilecto Consanguineo e^ fideli suo Thomae Com. Lancastr. salutem. Vobis
mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut supra, p. 23. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 88 others, besides
Assistants of the Counsil.



Rex Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio suo carissimo, salutem. Quia super diversis,
etc. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut supra, p. 23. Per ipsum
Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, and 72 others besides
the Counsil.



Rex Edwardo Comiti Cestriae, etc. (just as in 40.) T. ut supra, p. 24. Per
ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 9 Comitibus* and 52 other Lords and
Great men.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio suo carissimo,
salutem. Summonitio Magnatum de T^actatu cum eisdem habend.
Quia super diversis arduis negotiis Nos et statum Regni, ac terrarum nostrorum
Subditorum et populorum eorundem specialiter tangentibus, vobiscum ac cum
caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti Regni apud Sarum, a die Sancti
Michaelis prox. futur. in tres Septimanas colloquium habere volumus et
tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco person liter
intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris Magnatibus et Proceribus praedictis super
praemissis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. Et hoc sicut Nos et
honorem nostrum, et Regni et terrarum praedictarum diligitis nullatenus
omittatis. T. Rege apud Porcestr^ 13 die Septembris. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. 8 Comitibus, 48 others. The 2.
Archbishops, and 2 Bishops more, with etc. follow them, and 2 only de consilio.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Norff. et Mariscal^o Angliae fra^ri
suo carissimo, salutem. De Tractatu cum Magnat. apud Winton. habend.
Quia ad parts Ducatus nostri Aquitaniae, de quo Rex Franciae malitiose nos
exhaereditare proponit, in succurs^ ejusdem Ducatus nostri passagium nostrum
ordinavimus Domino disponente, et vobiscum ac cum Praelatis, et caeteris
Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri super passagio nostro praedicto, et aliis
arduis negotiis Nos et sta^um Regni nostri et Ducatus praedicti tangentibus,
habere volumus colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes,
quod omnibus aliis praetermissis sitis ad nos apud Winton. secunda Dominica
Quadragesimae prox. futur. Nobiscum et cum Praelatis, et caeteris Magnatibus et
Proceribus regni nostri super praemissis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium
impensuri. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem ac commodum dicti regni nostri diligitis
nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Notingh. 30 die Decembr. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz. Edwardo Comiti Cestriae filio Regis^, 7
Earls more, and 50. others: After which follows a short recital of this writ to
the Archbishop of York, and Eodem ^odo to Canterbury, and the other Bishops.

Claus. 18 E. 2. m. 5. dorso. Summonitio Parliamen^^.


Rex dilecto and fideli suo Edwardi Comiti Cestriae fili^ suo catissimo,
salutem. Quia pro quibusdam arduis negotiis nos et statum regni nostri, ac
Ducatum nostrum praedictum (Aquitaniae) speci^liter con^ingentibus,
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in cra^ino Nat^vi^atis Sancti Iohannis
Baptistae prox. futur* tenere, et Vobiscum ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et
Proceribus dicti regni super negotiis praedictis colloquium habere volumus et
tracta^um. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
in^ungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis ad dictos diem et locum in
Parliamento praedicto personaliter inters^^is; Nobiscum ac cum Praelatis,
Magna^ibus et Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis trac^ar^^i
vestrumque consilium impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud
Winton. 6 die Maii. Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandat^m est subscriptis, viz. 4 Comiti^us, 39 others: after which
follows a brief recital of the writ to the Archbishops, Bishops, etc.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Norff. et Marescallo Angl. fratri suo
catissimo salutem. Q^ia super etc. T. ut supra, p. 25.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 3 Comitibus, and 39 Great men more.



Rex, etc. Th. Com: Norff. et Marescallo Angl. etc. Licet nuper, etc.

Eodem modo mandatum est Magnatibus subscriptis, viz. 6 Comitibus, and 46
others*



Rex dilecto et fideli suo, Thomae Comiti Norff: Marescallo Angl. salutem.
Qualiter Scoti, etc. (as p. 25.) Vobis mandamus in ^ide et homagio, etc. dictis
die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, si interesse possumus, seu
interveniente impedimento deputandis a No^is super de^ensione ac custodia, ac
aliis negotiis supradi^^is tractatur. vesirumque cons^^ium impensur. Et hoc
nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra, p. 26.

Eodem modo mandatum est Edmundo Comiti Kan^. Avunculo Regis, and 5. Comitibus
besides, 47 other Lords and Great men.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Com. Norff. etc. Cum super reformatione
pacis, etc. (as p. 26, 27.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 4 Comitibus, and 49 more.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Com. Norff. et Marescallo Angliae Avunculo
suo carissimo falutem. Cum Parliamentum nostrum nuper apud Eborum, etc. (as p.
27.) Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. quod omni excusatione postposita
dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus etc. Scientes pro certo quod aliquem Procuratorem pro Vobis, seu pro
aliquo Praelato vel Magnati ad praesens propter arduitatem negotiorum
praedictorum, admi^tere non intendimus quoquo modo. Et quia ante haec tempora
negotia in hujusmodi Parliamentis tractanda impedita fuerunt, Nota.
eo quod nonnulli Magnates cum multitudine tumulcuosa hominum armatorum ad
Parliamenta illa accesserunt, et populus partium ubi Parliamenta illa tenta
fuerunt dampnificatus existit et gra^atus; per quod per Nos et Consilium
nostrum concordatum existit, quod omnes et singuli de regno nostro cujuscunque
status seu conditionis fuerint, qui ad dictum Parliamen^u^ venire voluerint,
modo debi^o, et absque aliqua multitudine, sub ^orisfactura omnium quae Nobis
foris^acere poterint, accedant. Ita quod per ipsorum adventum indebitum negotia
nostra non retardentur, seu patria in aliqua part oneretur ind^bite quovis
modo. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes sub forisfactura praedicta, quod ad
Parliamentum praedictum cum decenti comitiva de hominibus bonae discretionis et
consilii, ET NON CUM HOMINIBUS AD ARMA ACCEDATIS, in forma praedicta. Et hoc
nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra. p. 28.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 6 Comitibus, and 49 other Lords and
Great men.

In the Clause Rolls following (throughout the Edward the 3.) the writs
directed to the Temporal Lords are the same (mutatis mutandis) with those
issued to the Archbishops and Bishops forecited Sect. 1. wherefore I shall
present you with this Breviate of them, entered after the writs to the Bishops.
The 1. writ til the later end of 11 E. 3. is thus directed Claus. 2 E. 3. dors.
23. Rex, etc. dilecto et fideli suo Thomae Comiti Norff: et Marescallo Angliae,
etc. Vobis mandamus in fide et homagio, etc. Eodem modo mandatum est to 6 Earls
more, and 50 others, Claus. 2 E. 2. m. 15. dors. to 6 Earls more, and 48
others: Claus. 3 E. 3. m. 19. dorso, 8 Earls more, and 59 others, Barons,
Lords, Judges and Assistants mixed together, (whereof the Dean of Lincoln, the
Archdeacons of Richmond and Northampton are three) Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 41. dorso,
10 Earls more, and 50 others, Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 32. 8 Earls more, and 53.
others, whereof 5. are Judges and Assistants, Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 23. 8 Earls
more, and 45 others, Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 13. dors. 8 Earls more, and 47 others,
Claus. 5 E. 3. dors. 25. 9 Earls more, and 48 others, Claus. 5 E. 3. m. 7.
dorso 9 Earls more, and 47 others, Cl. 5 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 7. 9 Earls more,
and 46 others (whereof some were Judges) Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 36. d. 11 Earls more,
and 66 others, Cl. 6 E. 3. m. 19. dors. 10 Earls more, and 66 others, Cl. 6 E.
3. m. 9. dors. 10 Earls more, and 65 others, Cl. 7 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 3. 12
Earls more, and 62 others, Cl. 8 E. 3. m. 18. dors. 11 Earls more, and 60
others, Cl. 9 E. 3. dors. 28. 10 Earls more, and 60 others, Cl. 9 E. 3. dors.
8. 10 Earls more, and 61 other^, Cl. 10 E. 3. dors. 5. 9 Earls more, and 47
others, Cl. 11 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 15. 8 Earls more, and 23 others: And dors.
8. 10 Earls more, and 39 others: where the writ Iohanni de Sutton de
Holdernesse (vac. quia non fuit summonitus.)

Dilecto ^t fideli suo Henr. Comiti Lanc. etc. being the same (mutatis
mutandis) with those to the Bishops forecited, Claus. 11 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 4.
Eodem modo, etc. to 12 Earls more, and 33 others: And dors. 11. 8 Earls more,
and 37 others: Claus. 12 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 32. 11 Earls more, (a vacat being
entered against Humfrido de Bohun^ Comiti Hereford.) and 45 others, Cl. 13 E. 3.
pars 2. dors. 28. 9 Earls more, and 44 others, Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 1.
10 Earls more, and 45 others, Claus. 14 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 33. 12 Earls more,
and 44 others. Dors. 23. 7 Earls more, and 44 others, Cl. 15 E. 3 pars 1. d.
37. 7 Earls more, and 45 others.

the Temporal Lords entered in the roll issued, Dilecto and fideli suo Laurentio
de Hastings Com. Pembroch. etc. Eodem modo, etc. to 9 Earls more, and 94
others, Claus. 16 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 22. (and so following) the first writ to
the Nobility issued Henr. Com. Lancastr. 2 Earls more, and 20 others. Dors. 13.
4 Earls more, and 17. others. Claus. 17 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 25. 11 Earls more,
and 40 others. Cl. 18 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 14. 13 Earls more, and 40 others,
Claus. 20 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 22. ( Iohanni de Warenna Com. Surr.) 4 Earls
more, and 12. others. Dors. 28. to him and 7 Earls more, and 9 others. Dors. 9.
Henr. Com. Lancastr. 10 Earls more, and 30 others, Cl. 22 E. 3. pars 1. dors.
32. 10 Earls more, and 30 others, Claus. 22 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 7. 9 Earls
more, and 56 others, Claus. 24 E. 3. pars 2. d. ^. Henr. Comiti Lancastr.
Edwardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornubiae, et Comiti Cestriae, 10 Earls more,
and 50 others, whereof the 16 last are Assistants, and 4 of them styled the
Kings Sergeants. The writ Claus. 25. pars 1. dors. 5. is Rex dilecto et fideli
suo Edwardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornubiae and Comiti Cestriae, etc. Vobis in
fide et ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini, etc. Eodem modo, etc Henrico Duci
Lancastr. 11 Earls, 52 others, Claus. 26. E. 3. dors. 14. Edwardo Principi
Walliae, etc. Henrico Duci Lanc. 11 Earls, 24 others, Cl. 27. E. 3. d. 32. to
them, 11 Earls more, and 43 other Great men, Cl. 28 E. 3. dors. 26, Edwardo
Principi Walliae, etc. Henrico Duci Lancast. 11 Earls. 48 others, Claus. 29 E.
3. dors. 8. Henrico Duci Lancast. 7 Earls, and 41 others, Claus. 31 E. 3. dors.
21. Dilecto Consanguineo et fideli suo Humfrido de Bohun. Com: Hereford. Vobis
mandamus in fide et ligeantia, etc. 6 Earls more, and 38 others, Claus. 31 E.
3. dors. 2. Edwardo Principi Walliae filio suo carissimo, etc. in fide et
ligeantia, etc, Consimilia Brevia Henrico Duci Lancastr. 11 Comitibus, and 50
others Claus. 32 E. 3. dors. 14. Dilecto and fideli suo, Thomae de Bello Campo
Comiti War. in fide et homagio, 6 Earls more, and 101 others. Cl. 33 (...). d.
7. Ricardo Comiti Arundel, 3 Earls more, and 19 others; Claus. 34 E. 3. d. 35.
Humfrido de Bohun Com. Hertf. et Essex, 3 Earls more, and 20 others. Dors. 4.
Edwardo Principi Walliae, ^ilio suo carissimo, in fide et ligeantia: Henrico
Duci Lancast^. 11 Earls more ( Leonel Com. U^ton, the Kings Son, not an Irish
Lord, being one of them) and 48 others, Claus. 36 E. 3. dors. 16. Carissimo
filio suo Johan. Com: Lancastr. in fide et homagio, etc. 8 Earls more, and 29
others, Claus. 37 E. 3. d. 22. Carissimo Filio suo Johanni etc. as next before,
9 Earls more, and 40 others; Claus. 38 E. 3. dors. 3. Ca^issimo filio suo
Johanni, etc. 5 Earls more, and 41 others, Claus. 39 E. 3. d. 2. Carissimo
filio suo Johanni, etc. 10 Earls more, and 41 others. In Claus. 42 E. 3. d. 22.
the first writ to the Temporal Lords issued Carissimo Primogenito filio suo
Edwardo Principi Aquitaniae and Walliae: Vobis in fide et homagio, etc*
Consimilia Be^via Johanni Duci Lancastriae, 10 Comitibus, and 41 others, Claus.
43 E. 3. dors. 24. Carissimo filio suo Johanni Duci Lancast. in fide et
homagio, etc. 10 Comitibus, and 35 others, Claus. 44 E. 3. dors. ^. Carissimo
Primogenito nostro Edwardo Principi Aquitaniae et Walliae, in fide et
ligeantia, 11 Comitibus, and 49 others, Claus. 46 E. 3. dors. 11. Dilecto et
fideli suo Ricardo Com: Arundel in fide et ligeantia, 1 Earl more, and 18
others, But in the writs of Prorogation and Resummons, dors. 9, 10. writs
issued to Edward Prince of Wales, Iohanni Regi Castellae et Legionis, Duci
Lancastr. 7 Earls more, and 18 others besides those in the first summons,
Claus. 47 E. 3. dors. 13. Ricardo Com. A^undell in fide at ligeantia, 5 Earls
more, and 33 others, Claus. 49 E. 3. dors. 6. Carissimo filio suo Iohanni Regi
Castellae and Legionis, Duci Lancastr: in fide and ligeantia, 9 Earls, and 38
others, after which follows a writ to the Prince of Wales, Claus. 50 E. 3. pars
2. dors. 6. Carissimo filio suo (styled his Son, though in truth his Grandchild
only, not Son) Ricardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornub. et Comiti Cestriae in
fide et ligeantia. Consimilia Brevia, Johannni Regi Castellae and Legionis,
Duci Lancastr. 10 Comitibus, and 35 others: whereof Michaeli de la Pole,
(Admirallo Fl^te Navium versus parts B^riales) is one.

All the Writs of Summons to Parliament issued to the Temporal Lords under King
Richard the 2. have the selfsame Epitome. In Claus. ^ R. 2. dors. 37. the first
writs to the Temporal Lords issued Carissimo Avuncul^ suo Iohanni Regi
Castellae et Legionis, Duci Lancastriae, etc* Consimiles Literae to 12 Earls,
47 Lords, Barons and Great men, Cl. 2 R. 2. dors. 3. 29. The first writs issued
to him, and Consim. Literae to 14 Earls, 48 Lords, Barons, and Great men, Cl. 3
R. 2. d. 32. the first writ was directed to him, Consim. lit: to 13 Earls, 47
Lords and Great men, Cl. 4 R. 2. d. 32. the first writ is to him, Cons. Lit. to
(...) Earls, 44 Lords and Great men, Cl. 5 R. 2. d. 32. 40. the first writs
issued to him, Cons. Lit. to 10 Earls, 47 Lords and Great men, Cl. 6 R. 2. d.
37. the first writ issued to him, Cons. Lit. to 9 Earls, and 45 Lords and Great
men, Cl. 7 R. 2. d. 37. the first writ is directed to him, Cons. Lit. to 11
Earls, 48 Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 R. 2. d. 10. the first writ is to him,
Cons. Lit. to 11 Earls, and 48 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 8 R. 2. d. 35. is to
him, Cons. Lit. to 11 Earls, and 50 Lords and Great men, Cl. 9 R. 2. d. 45. is
to him, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 11 Earls, and 46 Lords and Great men, Cl. 10 R.
2. d. 42. the first writ issued Carissimo Avunculo suo Edwardo Duci Ebor* etc.
Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke, 1 Marquess, 9 Earls, 44 Lords and Great men, Cl. 11 R. 2.
d. 24. the first writ is to this Duke, Consim. Lit. to 2 Dukes 8 Earls, 47
Lords and Great men, Cl. (...) R. 2. d. 13. to him, Cons. Lit. to ^ Duke, 8
Earls, 34 Lords and Great men, Cl. 12 R. 2. d. 42. to him, Cons. Lit. to 1
Duke, 9 Earls, 42 Lords and Great men, Cl. 13 R. 2. d. 5. the first writ entered
is Iohanni Duce Lancastr. Cons. Lit. to a Dukes, 9 Earls, 46 Lords and
Grandees, Claus. 14 R. 2. d. 42. the first writ is to the same Duke, Cons. Lit.
to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 4^ Lords and Great men; Cl. 15 R. 2. d. 37. the first
writ entered is, Iohanni Duci Aquitaniae et Lancastriae, etc. Cons. Lit. to 2
Dukes, 10 Earls, 41 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 16 R. 2. d. 23. the writ is to him,
Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 42 Lords and Great men, Cl. 17 R. 2. d. 30. to
him, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 11 Earls, 40 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 18 R. 2 d. 23.
the first writ entered is Hen. Com. Darbi^, Cons. Lit. to 6 Earls, 29 Lords and
Great men, Cl. 20 R. 2. pars 1. dors. 15. the first writ issued Carissimo
Avunculo suo Iohanni Duci Aquitaniae and Lancastriae, Cons. Lit. to 2 Dukes, 11
Earls, 38 Lords and Great men, Cl. 21 R. 2. part 1. d. 27. the writ entered is
to him, Con^im. Lit. to 3 Dukes, 1 Marquess, 6 Earls, 33 Lords and Great men,
Cl. 23 R. 2. dors. 3. the writ entered issued Henrico Duci Lancast. etc. Cons.
Lit. to 4 Dukes, one Marquess, 10 Earls, 34 Lords and Great men.

Henry the 4th. are entered next after those to the Spiritual Lords, having the
same recitals and dates, with them forecited in the 1. Section: Of which take
this ensuing short account. Cl. ^. H. 4. dorso 37. the writ entered issued,
Henrico Duci Lancastriae, Cons. Lit. to 4 Dukes, 1 Marquess, 10 Earls, 34 Lords
and Nobles, Cl. 1 H. 4. d. and Claus. 2 H. 4. part 1. d. 3. the first writ
entered is, Carissimo filio suo Henric^ Principi Walliae, et Duci Cornubiae,
etc. 1 Duke, 10 Earls, 35 Lords and Great men Cl. 3 H. 4 d. 17. the like writ
to the Prince of Wales, 1 Duke, 8 Earls, 32 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 5 H. 4.
part 1. d. 28. and part 2. d. 4. the first writ issued to the same Pr^nce,
Cons. Lit. to 1. Duke, 7 Earls, 3^ Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 H. 4. d. 30. t^
the Prince, 1 Duke, 7 Earls, 33 Lords, Barons and Great men, Cl. 8 H. 4. d. 2.
the like writ to the Prince, 1 Duke, 8 Earls, 33 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 9. and
11 H. 4. d. 32. the writ entered issued to the Prince of Wales, Cons. Lit. to 1
Duke 8 Ea^ls, 32 Lords and Great men, Cl. 13. H. 4. d. 2. the writ is to the
Prince of Wal^s. 1 Duke, 6 Earls, 32 Lords and Great Persons, Cl. 14 H. 4.
dors. 22. the writ issued to Henry Prince of Wales, 5 Earls, 35 Lords and Great
men.

The writs of Summ^ns under King Henry the 5th to Carissimo fratri Regis Thomae
Duci Clarentiae, Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke, 9 Earls, 29 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 1 H.
5. d. 37. the writ entered issued, Edward^ Courteney Com. Devon. 6 Earls, 32
Lords and Nobles, Cl. 2 H. 5. d. 16. the writ recorded at large is directed,
Thomae Duci Clarentiae and Com. Albemarliae, Cons. Lit. to 3 Dukes, 11 Earls,
28 Lords and Great men, Cl. 3 H 5. d. 15. the first writ entered issued Radulpho
Com. Westmerland, 1 Earl, 17 Lords and Great men, Cl. 4 H. 5. d. 16. the writ
recorded is directed Carissimo fratri suo Thomae Duci Clarentiae, etc. Cons.
Lit. to 2 Dukes, 10 Earls, 24 Lords and Great men, Cl. 5 H. 5. d. 11. the writ
registered is directed Carissimo Avunculo suo Thomae Duci Exon. Cons. Lit. to 3.
Earls, 14 Lords and Great men, 7 H. 5. d. 9. the writ recorded is Carissimo
Avunoulo suo Henrico Percy Com. Northumb. Cons. Lit. to 2 Earls, 13 Lords and
Great men, Cl. 8. H. 5. d. 2. the writ entered issued Carissimo fratri suo
Johanni Duci Bedford, etc. Cons. Lit. to 1 Duke 6 Earls, 20 Lords and Great
men, Cl. 9 H. 5. d. 13. the writ registered issued, Carissimo Consanguine^ suo
Henrico de Percy Com. Northumb* 2 Earls, and but 13 Lords and Great men.

All the writs to the temporal Lords during the reign Henry the 6. are the same
in the Prefaces and dates with those to the Bishops and Spiritual Lords, and
entered after them, being thus directed Cl. 1 H. 6. dors. 22. Carissimo Avunoulo
suo Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, Cons. lit. to 1 Duke, 5 Earls, 16 Lords and
Great men, Cl. 2 H. 6. d. 18. Humfrido Duci Gloucestr. 1 1 Duke, 5 Earls, 15
Lords and Grandees, Cl. 3 H 6. d. 9. Carissimo Avuncul^ suo Thomae Duci Exon. 1
Duke, 6 Earls, 22 Lord and Grandees, Cl. 4 H. 6. d. 15. Carissimo Avunculo suo
Joha^ni Duci Bedfordiae to 3 Dukes more, 2 Elarls, 23 Lords and Great men, Cl.
5 H. 6. d. 4. Carissimo A^^nculo su^ Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 1 Duke more, 4
Earls, 22 Lords and Great men, Cl. 7 H. 6. d. 2 Humfrido Duci Gloucestr. 1 Duke
besides, 7 Earls, 26 Lords and Grandees, Cl. 9 H. 6. 18. Humfrido Duci
Gloucestr. 5 Earls, 21 Lords and Great men, Cl. 10 H. 6. d. 10. Humfrido Duci
Gloucestriae, 1 Duke, 6 Earls, 25 Lords and Grandees, Cl, 11 H. 6. d. 10.
Johanni Duci Bedfordiae, 2 Dukes more, 6 Earls, 26 Lords and Great men, Cl. 13
H. 6. d. 2. Caris, Avunculo suo Johanni Duci Bedfordiae, 2 other Dukes, 8
Earls, 26 Lords and Great men, Cl. 15 H. 6. d. 18. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae,
1 Duke more, 7 Earls, 27 Lords and Great men, Cl. 18 H. 6. d. 33. Humfrido Duci
Gloucestriae, 2 other Dukes, 6 Earls, 26 Lords and Great men, Cl. 20 H. 6. d.
27. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 2 Dukes more, 11 Earls, 28 Lords and Great men,
Cl. 23 H. 6. d. 2 Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, 4 Dukes besides, 2 Marquesses, 7
Earls, 1 Vicount, 30 Lords and Noblemen, Cl. 25 H. 6. d. 24. and 26. Humfrido
Duci Gloucestriae, 4 other Dukes, 2 Marquesses, 7 Earls, ^ Vicount, 32 Lords
and Great men, Cl. 27 H. 6. d. 24. Ricardo Duci Ebor. 3 other Dukes, 6 Earls, 1
Vicount, 39 Lords and Great men, Cl. 28 H. 6. d. 26. Willielmo Duci Suffolciae,
3 Dukes more, 7 Earls, 1 Vicount, 35 Lords and Great men; Cl. 29 H. 6. dors.
41. Ricardo Duci Eborum, 4 Dukes more, 9 Earls, 1 Vicount, 40 Lords and Great
men, Cl. 31 H. 6. d. 36. Edwardo Duci Eborum, 4 Dukes besides, 12 Earls, 3
Vicounts, 36 Lords and Great men, Cl. 33 H. 6. d. 36. Ricardo Duci Eborum, 3
Dukes more, 11 Earls, 2 Vicounts, 35 Lord and Great men, Cl. 38 H. 6. d. 30.
Henrico Duci Exoniae, 2 other Dukes, 9 Earls, 2 Vicounts, 35 Lords and Great
men, Cl. 49 H. 6. d. 6. Carissimo consanguineo suo Georgio Duci Claren^iae, 3
Dukes more, 7 Earls, 1 Marquess, 23 Lords and Great men.

The writs of Summons to Parliament issued by King Edward the 4th to the
Temporal Lords, agree in Prologues, forms, and dates, (except in the
Praemunientes, etc.^ with those to the Archbishops and Spiri^ual Lords in the
1. Section, and are thus directed, Cl. 1 E. 4. d. 35. Johanni Duci Norfolciae 4
Earl, 1 Vicount, 31 Lords and Great men Cl. 2 E. 4. d. 3. Dil^cto and fideli
suo Ricardo Comi^i* W^rwici, 4 Ear^, 37 Lords and Great men, C. 6. E. 4. d. 1.
Car^ssimo Fratri suo Geo^gio Duci Claren^iae, 2 Dukes more, 10 Earls, 1
Marquess, 36 Lords and Great men, Cl. 9 E. 4. d. 3. Carissimo, fratri suo
Georgio Duci Clarentiae, 9 other Dukes 8 Earls, 23 Lords and Great men, Cl. 11
E. 4. d. 41 Car^ssimo fratri suo Georgio Duci Clarentiae, 3 Dukes more, 8
Earls, 25 Lords and Great men, Cl. 22 and 23 E. 4. d. 10. Carissimo suo filio
Primogenito ^dwardo Principi Walliae, 4 D^kes more, 1 Marque^e, 7 Earls, 32
Lords.

Having presented you with this Breviate of all the general writs of Summons
to Parliaments and Great Councils issued to the Temporal Lords from 49 H. 3. to
23 E. 4. I shall now give you a view of some extraordinary special writs to
some Temporal Lords and others, reducible to, and proper for this Section.

I shall begin within this Memorable writ to Roger de De interessendo
Parliamento.


Rex dilecto et fideli suo Rogero de Mortuo-Mare de Wygmore, salutem; Cum vos
tempore quo Parliamentum nostrum usque Lincoln: in Quind^na Sancti Hillarie
prox^ futur: summoneri fecimus in partibus Hiberniae fuissetis, per quod Nos
vobis non (...) simus ad interessendum dicto Parliamento; ac vos a dictis
par^ibus Hiberniae usque regnum nostrum jam, ut accepimus, accessistis; ideo
vobis mandamus in fide et homagio quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes,
quod si ad dictas parts Hibe^niae citra* dictum Parliamentum non essetis
regressuri, tunc eidem Parliamento nostro dictis die et loco modis omnibus
personaliter intersiti^, super negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri rang^ntibus,
pro quibus Parliamentum nostrum mandavimus convo^ari, Nobiscum et cum
Magnatibus et Proceribus regni nostri tractaturi, vestrumque consilium
impensuri. Et hoc nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Clipston 17 die Januarii.

This Roger de Mortymer (a Baron of this Realm, as is evident by former Summons
to him) being absent in Ireland when the writs of Summons to this Parliament
first issued, was thereupon left out of the original writs and Lists of
Summons; but the King being informed that he was returned into England,
thereupon sent this special writ of Summons to him bearing date the 17 of
January, (full 3. months after the first writs of Summons dated the 16 of
October before) entered in another dorse apart from the other writs: His absence
in Ireland, yea and return thither, about the public affairs after this writ
issued, before this Parliament sat, in the Kings and his Counsils opinions,
being a sufficient ground to excuse his absence from Parliament, and to send no
writ of Summons to him into Ireland. And if English Peers absence or residence
in Ireland, be a just, legal ground to exempt them from summons to a Parliament
held in England, much more then must Irish Peers and Lords, who are no Lords or
Barons at all in England, be totally exempted from all writs of Summons to the
Parliaments of England, both in respect of their remoteness from England, of
the great charge and danger in crossing the Seas to repair to them, and because
they are obliged neither by their tenures, nor Patents, to resort to any
English Parliaments, but only to the Parliaments held in Ireland, where only
they are Peers and Lords of Parliament, and because they cannot attend in two
places at once, if a Parliament should be summoned in England and Ireland on or
near the selfsame time: Of which more hereafter in its proper place.

The next writ of this kind I shall communicate to you, is this I meet with
Claus. Ann. 35 E. 3. m. 36. dorso. De Consili^ summonitio.


Rex dilecto et fideli suo Humfrido d^ Bohun Comiti Northampton: salutem. Q^ia
terra nostra Hiberniae per molestationes a diu Hibernicorum inimicorum
nostrorum (et) incursus propter impotentiam fideliu^ nostroru^ habitantium in
eodem regno, et pro eo quod Magnates et alii de regno nostro Angliae terras in
ea habentes, commodum dictarum terrarum suarum ab eadem terra capiunt, et
defensionem aliquam non faciunt, jam tantae vasticatis et destructionis
miseriae subjicicur, quod nisi Deus averta^, et celerius succurratur eidem ad
totalem perditionem in prox. deducetur; per quod pro salvatione ejusdem
ordinavimus, quod Leonellus Comes Vlton. filius noster carissimus, cum ingenti
exercitu ad terram praedictam cum omni festinatione transmitta^ur, et quod
omnes Magnates et alii de dicto regno nostro, terras in dicta terra Hiborniae
habentes, qu^nto potentius poterunt, in Comitiva dicti filii nostri
proficiscentur, vel si debiles in corpore existant (...) alios sufficientes
ibidem mittant pro repulsion ^^^^^orum inimicorum, et salvatione et defensione
terrarum suarum et succursu terrae supradictae; Et pro dicto negotio
accelerando, volumus vobiscum, et cum aliis de eodem regno terras in dicta
terra habentibus Colloquium habere et tractatum. Vobis in fide et ligeantia
quibus Nobis renemini firmiter injungentes mandamus, quod omnibus aliis
intermissis, sitis personaliter apud West^. in Quindena Pasch. prox. futur*
adloquendum Nobiscum et Consilio nostro super dictis Negotiis, e^ illud
concernentibus, et ad faciend. et consentiend. super hoc quod ibidem contigerit
ordinari. Et interim vos et homines vestros, quanto potencius et decentius
poteritis ad arma paretis. Ita quod in vestri defectum progressus dicti filii
nostri et exercitus sui non retardetur, nec dicta terra amissionis periculo non
subjaceat (...) causa. Et hoc sicut Nos et honorem nostrum, ac salvationem et
desensionem terrae praedictae diligitis nu^^a^enus omit^atis. Et habea^ is ibi
hoc breve. Test Rege ap^d Wes^m, 15 die Martii. Per ipsum R^gem et Co^sili^m.

Consimilia Brevia dirig^^^^ subscriptis de effe^do coram Rege et Consilio suo
ad dies subscriptos, viz, Rado. Com. Staff. Thomae Com. Oxen. David. de
Strabolgi Com. Athol. Edw. le Despenser, 31 more. Abbati de Forneux, 3 Abbots
and 5 Priors, Magistr. Thomae de Nevill, and 10 others, (whereof two were
Prehends in Ireland: Ad^^res Septimanas Paschae: All of them having lands in
Ireland. The writs to the Abbots, Priors Prebends, and some others, had this
special clause added to them, not in the writs issued to the Earls and others
of the Laity. Sitis personaliter apud Westminster. ^n tribus Septimanis Pasche prox.
futur. vel si personaliter tunc ibidem interesse non commode possitis, tunc
aliquem vel aliquos de quibus confiditis, ad diem et locum praedictos mittatis,
ad loquend. Nobiscum et Consilio nostro (ut supra.) Et interim homines vestros,
etc. (ut supra usque nullatenus omittatis, (tunc) Nos in Cancellariams nostram
de nominibus illorum qu^^ usque Westminster. ex causa praedict a duxeritis destinand.
(...) diem praedictum distinct et apertc certiores. Et habeat^s ibi tunc hoc
Breve. Test ut supra.

Rex dilecto sibi Mariae Comitissae Norff. ^alutem. Quia, etc. ut supra usque
ibi, accelerando: et tunc sic) Volumus cum Magnatibus et aliis de eodem Regno
terras in dicta terra Hiberniae habentibus, Colloquium habere et Tractatum.
Vobis in ^ide et ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus,
quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, aliquem vel aliquos de quibus confiditis apud
Westminster. mittatis. It a quod si^t ibi in Tribus Septimanis Pasche prox. futur. ad
loquend. Nobiscum et Consilio nostro super dictis Negotiis, et illud
concernentibus, et ad faciend, et consentiend. nomine vestro su^er hoc quod
ibidem contigerit ordinari. Et interim homines vestros, etc. (ut supra usque)
nullatenus omittati^. (Et tunc sic) Nos in Cancellari^m nostram de hominibus
illor^m quos ^^que Westminster. ex causa praedicta d^xeritis (...) reddentes ad diem
praedict^m (...) et aperte cer^iores. Et habeatis ibi tunc (...) Breve^ (...)
supra.

Consimilia Bre^^^ dirig^n^ur subscripris sub eadem data de essendo coram Rege
et (...) ad dies subscriptos, viz. Alianorae Comi^issae Dormond, Annae le
De^penser, ad Quindenam Paschae, Philippae Comitis^ae de la March, Agnets
Comitissae P^mbroc, Mariae de Sancto Paulo Comitissae Pembroc, Matildae
Comitissae Oxon. Katherinae Comitissae A^hol, Iohannae Fitz Wauter, Margeriae
de Ro^s. Ad tres Septimanas Pasche.

The next writ is Claus. 36 E. 3. m. 42. dorso. very De veniendo ad Consilium,
ad tractand. de statu terrae Hiberniae.


Rex dilecto et fideli suo Thom^ de Furnyvall falutem. Cum nuper in succursum
terrae nostrae Hiberniae quae pro magna part per potentiam Hibernicorum
Inimicorum nostrorum quibus Fideles nostri in partibus illis resistere non
poterant, occupara et de^^ructa suit, ad resistend. malitiae eorundem
Inimicorum nostrorum, et ad ipsos expugnand. et debelland. Leonellum Comitem
Ulton. filium nostrum carissimum cum non modico armatorum n^mero destinavimus,
qui ibidem a diu super salvatione terrae praedictae ad sumptus excessivos in
^isdem partibus^ moratus est, et quamplures hominum suorum ex variis eventibus
decesserunt, sic quia idem filius noster et fideles nostri cum ipso commorantes
per potentiam dictorum Inimicorum nostrorum indies invalescente in maximo
periculo sunt constituti. Et licet vobis sicut aliis fidelibus nostris de Regno
nostro Angliae terras in dicta terra Hib^rniae habentibus, per diverta Brevia
mandaverimus, quod vos cum hominibus ad arma armatis et ^agittariis quanto
potentius possecis parere^^^, et cum dicto filio nostro et aliis fidelibus
nostris ad terram praedictam pro defen^ione ejusdem et terrarum vestrarum
ibidem transiretis: Vos tamen ad terram illam accedere, vel homines aliquos
ibidem mitte^e non (...), in no^^ contemptum, ^t dict^ h^ii no^tri et aliorum
fidelium nostrorum in Comitiva sua existentium, (...) terrae praedictae
amissionis periculum manisestum, unde plurimum conturbamur, nec immerico, ac
movemur, Vobis igitur in fide ^t ligean^ia quibus nobi^ ^^n^mini, et sub
forisfactione omnium quae Nobis forisfacere poteritis, mandamus firmiter
injungentes; quod attentis periculis praedictis, omnibus dilationibus et
excusationibus cessantibus, Vos et homines vestros quanto potentius, juxta
flatus vestri decentiam poteritis paretis, et arraietis ad transfretand. ad
dictum filium nostrum ad dictas parts Hiberniae, cum eodem filio nostro, ac
aliis fidelibus nostris ibidem existentibus super salvatione et defensione
terrae praedi^tae et terrarum vestrarum propriarum in parribus illis moraturi.
^ta quo ^ sitis in dictis partibus Hiberniae in Quindena Pasche prox. fu^ur. ad
ultimum, prompti et parati ad terram praedictam, una cum aliis fidelibus
nostris contra dictos Inimicos nostros defendend, et ipsos Inimicos nostros cum
Dei adjutorio expugnand, et debelland. et malitiam little propulsand. Et vos
ipsi sitis coram Nobis et Consilio nostro apud Westminster. die Veneris in secunda
Septimana Quadragesimae prox. futur. ad loquend. et tractand. super progressu
vestro ad dictas parts Hib^rniae, et ad ^aciend. quod vobis tune injungetur ex
part nostra. Et hoc sub forisfactur^ praedicta nullatenus omittatis. Test
Rege apud Westminster. 10 die Febr. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis, de essendo coram Rege et Consilio
suo ad diem praedictum sub eadem data, Thomae Comi^i Oxon. and 41 Earls,
Barons, Gentlemen, Abbots, Priors, and Clergymen more, who had lands in Ir^l.
After whose names this writ follows.

Rex dilecto sibi Mar^a* Comitissae Norff. salutem, Cum in succursum, etc.
(just as in the writ before) usque ex^nsationibus cessantibus; homines ad arma
armatos et sagittarios ^e^e munitos quanto potentius juxta status vestri
decentiam poteritis, paretis et arraiatos ad trans^^^ and. etc. (ut supra
usque) expul^and. Et aliquos vel aliquem de quibus, vel de quo specialiter
confiditis, mittatis apud Westminster. Ita quod sint ibidem die Veneris in secunda
Septimana Quadragesimae prox. futur. ad loquend. et tractand. super progressu
hominum vestrorum praedictorum ad dictas parts Hibern^ae, et ad faciend. quod
tunc ibidem per Nos et Con^^lium nostrum con^igerit ordinari. Test Rege apud
Westminster. 10 die Februarii.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis de essendo coram Rege et Consilio suo
ad diem praedictum sub eadem data, viz. Alianorae Comi^issae Dormond, Philippae
Comitissae Marchlae, Agneti Comitissae Pembroc. Mariae de Sancto Paulo
Comitissae Pembroc. Matildae Comitissae Oxon. Katherinae Comitissae Athol,
Annae le Dispenser, Iohannae Fitz-Wauter, Margaretae de Roos.

The next I shall transcribe, is this special writ of summons to the Prince of
Wales, entered at large in Claus. 49 E. 3. m. 6. dorso. after the writs to the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Temporal Lords and Sheriffs to elect
Knights and Burgesses, but before the writ to the Warden of the Cinque ports.

Rex carissimo Primogenito suo Edwardo Principi Walliae, salutem. Cum super
arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos, et statum et defensionem Regni nostri, ac
Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. duodecimo
die Februarii prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus; per quod per diversa Brevia
nostra mandavimus singulis Prael* it is, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti regni
nostri quod ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum summoneri fecimus, quod ad dictum
locum Westminster. 12 die Febr. intersint super negotiis praedictis tractaturi
suumque consilium impensuri. Et quia nolumus quod tam ardua negotia dicti regni
absque avisamento et consilio ves^ro tract entur, et d^rigantur; Vobis mandamus
quod apud dictum locum Westminster, ad dictum duodecimum diem Februar. in propria
persona vestra, ^ntersits Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magna^ibus, ^t (...)
praedic^s super dictis nego^i, (...) vestrumque consilium impensuri. Test ut
supra.

De veniendo ad Parliamentum.


Rex carissimo Avunculo suo Iohanni Duci Aquitaniae et Lancastriae, salutem.
Quia de assensu Prae^atorum, Procerum et Magnatum regni nostri Angliae in
Parliamento nostro apud Westminster di^ Lunae prox. post festum Exaltationis Sanctae
Crucis prox. praeterito summoneri fecimus existentium, pro quibusdam arduis et
urgentibus negotiis et materiis in eodem Parliamento adhuc pendentibus, quae
adhuc commode terminari non (...) ac aliis causis sa^is evidentibus, dictum
Parliamentum usque Quindenam Sancti Hillarii prox, futur* apud Salop, in stat^
quo nunc fuit duximus prorogand. et contin^and. Vobis in fide et ligeantia
quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod apud Salop in Qnindena
praedicta cum familia et (...) sta^^^ vestro congruis, et non cum multi^^dine
gen^ium, nec alio modo quam tempore Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Avi
nostri et nostro, an^iquitus et communi er fieri consuevi^, personaliter
intersi^is, Nobiscum et (...) Praelatis, Proceribus, et Magnatibus dicti regni
no (...) super causis, negotiis, et materiis antedictis finali^er tractaturi,
vestrumque Consilium impensuri, abinde ab^que licentia nos^ra speciali minime
recessuri. T. R. apud Westminster. 5. die Novembris.

Consimi^^^ Brevia sub eadem data, issued to 5. Dukes more, one Marquess, 6
Earls, and 33 Lords, Barons, and Great men.

William de Dacre.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Willielmo de Dacre salutem. Cum nuper de avisam nto
Consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis Nos, statum et
defensionem Reg^a nostra A^gli^^ et Eccle^^^ Anglicanae concernentib^s quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud West^. in crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae pro^.
futur. (...) ordinavimus. Et ^licet per breve nostrum vobis in fide et
ligeantia q^ibus Nobis tene mini firmiter injungendo mandave^mu^, quod cessan^^
ex^usa^ione qua^unque dictis die et loco personaliter inter^^^^ Nobiscum, ac
cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proce^bus Regni nostri praedicti super negotiis
praedictis tractaturi, vestrumque consili^m impens^^i. Vos tamen mandato nostro
praedicto minime parents, ad Parliamentum praedictum dictis die et loco, (...)
huca que ven^e non curas^^^* in nost^a contemptum manife^^um. Et quia
Parliamentum praedictum usq^e in d^em Lunae in (...) Quin (...) Paschae prox.
futur. duximus contin^and. Vobis in fide et ligean^ia vestris praedictis
injungimus et mandamus, quod excusatione quacunque cessan^e ad locum praedictum
in Quinde^a praedict^ perlonal^ter intersi^is Nobiscum, et cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus* et Proceribus dicti Regni nostri super negotiis praedictis
tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri, ABINDE ABSQUE LICENTIA NOSTRA
SPECIALI MINIME RECESSURI. ET HOC SUB GRAVI PAENA, PER [NOS] ET DOMINOS IBIDEM
TUNC PRAESENTES LIMITAND NULLATENUS OMITTATIS. Test nt supra.

Per ipsum Regem et Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub ^adem data viz. Iohi. de Well
Chr. Iohi. Gray de Codonore, Willo. Botreaux Chr. Iohi le War, Chr. Iohi. de
Monteacuto Chr. Phil^^po le Dispenser Chr.

By which writ it is apparent, 1. That if any Lord neglect or refuse to appear
upon the first writ of Summons issued to him, that the King may resummon him by
a second writ, as here he did these Lords. 2ly, That the not appearing in
Parliament upon the first writ of Summons, through negligence, wilfulness, or
without lawful excuse made for it, is a manifest contempt to the King; That no
Peers summoned to Parliaments ought to depart whiles the Parliament con^inues,
without the Kings special license; 4ly, That the not appearing of any Peer when
summoned, or his departure from Parliament, without the Kings special license,
is to be punished with such a heavy and deserved penalty as the other Lords
sitting in Parliament shall limit and inflict, not the King himself without the
Lords.

Useful Annotations and Observations upon the precedent Writs to the Prince of
Wales, King of Castle and Leon, Dukes, and other Temporal Lords and Barons, and
the lists of their names recorded after them.
1. I Observe, and must inform the Readers, that in some few Clause Rolls,
there are writs of Summons entered only to Earls, and other secular Lords,
without any writs to Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Spiritual Lords, who no
doubt had like writs then is^ued to them, though not registered in the Rolls, as
the Lords writs attest.

2. That in the Rolls where in they both are registered, the writs to the
Temporal Lords are now and then entered, before those to the Archbishops,
Bishops and Spiritual Lords; but most usually they follow them.

3. That they are commonly entered both together on the self-same dorse* or
membrana, and their reci^als, cla^ses for the most part the same in terminis;
except in the Praemun^entes, etc. which is peculiar to the Archbishops and
Bishops writs; or in the clauses, or Homagio et ligeantia quibu, Nobi^
tenemini; which is peculiar to the Temporal Lords; and never used in the writs
to the Bishops, Abbots, and E^clesiastical Lords; but in fide and (...) quibus
Nobis t^n^mini, only; which is often times inserted into the writs to the
Temporal Lords, and others of the Laity, not peculiar only to the Clergy; as in
homagio and lig^antia are to the Tempor^lly. The reason whereof I conceive to
be gro^nded on that of Littleton in his Chapter of Homage, Sect. 86. If an
Abbot or Prior, or other man of Religion (which extends to all Archbishops,
Bishops, De^n, Parsons, Prebends and other Ecclesiastical bodies Politic)
shall do homage to his Lord, he shall not say, IEO DEVEIGNE VOSTR and HOME
(whence Homage has its name and derivation, as all Temporal Lords and Laymen
ought to do, when they do their homage to the King or other Lords) because he
has professed himself, PUR ESTRE TANT SOLEMENT LE HOME DE DE^U; But he shall
(...) say, I do Homage unto you, and to you I shall be true and faithful, and
faith to you bear for the Tenements which I hold of you; In which respect,
Glanvil lib. 9. c. 1, 2. Bracton ^. 78. F. Britton cap. 68. and (...). 3^ cap.
16. resolve. S^^endum ^st quod (...) liber (...) ^asculus quam famina, Clericus
et Laicus, major and minor, dum tamen electi in Episcopos; POST CONSE^R ATIONEM
HOMAGIUM NON FACIUNT, quicquid ^ecerunt any, sed TANTUM FIDELITATEM. Conventus
a^t^m HOMAGIUM nec faciet de Iure, sicu^ NE^ ABBAS, NEC PRIOR, ^o quod tenent
nomine alieno, scilicet nomine Ecclesiarum: as Sir Ed. Cook likewise observes
in his 1. Institutes, f. 65. b. So that they doing no homage properly so styled
to the King, after their consecrations, nor using the words (I become your man,
if we credit L^ttleton) in making their homage as the Temporal Lords do.
Thereupon (I conjecture) the writs of Summons command the Temporal Lords and
Laity to appear, etc. in fide ^t homagio, et in ^ide et ligeantia quibus Nobis
tenemini; but the Prelates, Spiritual Lords, and other Clergy, only in fide et
dilectione, they being bound to swear fealty and Allegiance to our Kings for
the Freehold Lands and Tempora^ties they held of him ^^xcept only those that
hold in Frankalm^igne, as 29 E. 3. f. 38. a. Littleton Sect. 91, 92, 93. Sir
Edw. Cook in hi^ 1. Insti^utes on these Sections, and other Law Books resolve.
For this I shall produce one memorable Record; a^^uring us, that all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbo^s, Priors and Clergy both in England and Ireland,
did, and of right ought to swear fealty to the King, as well as the Temporal
Lords and Commons, and prescribing Commissioners in Ireland to receive it from
them; Pa^. 1 E. 1. m. 20.
Venerabiii in Christo Patri e^dem gratia Midden. Episcopo, et dilectis et
fidelibus suis Mauricio filio Mauricii Justiciario suo Hiberniae, et Mgistro
Iohanni de S^mford Escheatori suo Hiberniae salutem. Cum defuncto jam celebris
memoriae Domino Henrico Rege patre nostro (cujus animae propicietur Al^issimus)
ad Nos regni Angliae gubernaculum, et ^errae Hiberniae Dominium pertineant, ob
quod PRAELATI, Comites et Proceres, et Communitas Regni nostri Nobis, tanquam
Domino suo ligio et Regi, FIDELITATIS JURAMENTUM, et omnia alia quae Nobis
ratione Coronae et Dignitatis Regiae ab ipsis fieri et praestari Nobis in
absentia nostra poterun, plenarie et sine omissione aliqua prompto et libenti
animo PRAESTITERINT; AC, ARCHIEPISCOPI, EPISCOPI, ABBATES, PRIORES, Comites,
Barons, Mi^ites, libere tenentes, ac tota Communitas terrae nostrae HIBERNIAE,
NOBIS tanquam REGI ET DOMINO SUO ^IGIO, CONSIMILE SACRAMENTUM FIDELITATIS
PRAESTARE TENEANTUR; Dedimus ^obis potestatem recipiendi nomine nostro
FIDELITATEM IPSORUM. I^a tamen quod si vos; omn^s interesse ne quiveritis, tunc
duo vel^^us vestrum qui prae ens^u rit nihilominus plena^i^m hab at potestatem
recipiendi nomine nostro FIDELITATEM IPSORUM in forma praedicta. Et id o vobi
mandamus quod FIDELITATEM PRAEDICTAM nomine nostro recipiatis, prout, melius
videbi^is expedire. In cujus etc. (...) Westminster. 7 die Sept. A^n. 1 E^ 1. Hence I
find this IURAMENTVM EPISCOPORVM; in T^ttles Magna Charta, printed London
1556. f. 164. b. being nothing else but the form of the O^th of Fealty, which
the Bishops took to our Kings before they received their Temporalties out of
their hands, being the same in substance, which the King of Walsingh^m Hist.
A^gl. p 32. Hen. de Knyghton de Event. A^gl. (...) c. 3. col. 2482.
S^ots an^ his Tempora^ Lords, and English Barons and Laymen, usually made to
King Edward the 1. and his Successors con^inued (...) these later times. Ieo
serra so^all et loyal, et ^oy et lo^altie por^^ray AV ROY and A SES H^IRES,
ROYS DE ANGLITERRE, de vie et de, members, et de terrene honor contre tout^
gentz qui p^yent vivre et mounir. Et loya^ment monstray, et loyalment ferray
les services qui appendent a la temporaltie de Levesque de M. la quelle ^eo
claimor de tenir de vous^, et la^quelle vo^us me rendes. Si moy aid Dieu et
ses Saints. This Oath of Fe^lty, as 7 Rep. f. 6, 7 Calv^is, case, 4 I^^stit. f
60. b. Lambardi Archaion, f. 135, 13^.
Sir Edward Cook and others affirm, was first invented, and generally
prescribed to all persons above 12 years of age, by our famous British King
Arthur; who by virtue thereof, ex pulit SARACENOS et Inimices ^egno. But this
certainly is a mere fable, and gross mistake; (which I admire Mr. Lambard. and
Sir Edward Cook observed not;) for the Saxacens never invaded England in any
age, neither were they expelled the Realm by King Arthur; but the Saxons, who
had then and formerly possessed themselves of a great part of Britain, were
vanquished and expelled by him in the years of grace 518, 520, 522, as Matt.
Westminster, Hist. l. 9, 10.
Geoffry Manmouth, Tho. Walsingham, and Grafton, Holinshed, and others in his
Life.
other of our Historians relate; yet not by virtue of this Oath, (which no
Historian mention^) but of his arms and (...); this Oath (as I conc^ive) being
rath ^r^invented by our Saxon Kings, than King Arthur; and first prescribed by
this Law of King Edmund son of Adelstan (made at Chron. Johannis Bromton, col
859.
Culinton by advice of his Bishops and wise men, about the year 944. Lex 1.) Ut
omnes jurent in nomine Domini etc. FIDELII ATEM Edmundo Reg., SICVT HOMO DEBET
ESSE FIDELIS DOMINO SUO; sine omni controversia et seditione in manifesto et
occulto, etc. Et quod ANTEQVAM IURAMENTUM HOC DABITUR, ut nemo concelet hoc in
fratre vel proximo suo plus quam in extraneo. This Oath thus instituted, was
Lambardi Archaion. Spelm. Gloss. Tit. Fidelitas.
backed by the Laws of Edw. the Confessor, and of Will, the Conq. (Lex 78, 79.)
published by Iohannis Seldom ad Eadmerum, and Notae and Spicilegium, p. 191.
Mr. Seldom: in whose reign all Bishops before their Consecrations did Homage
to the K. as well as Fealty for their Temporalties; Which though Archbishop
Anselm opposed, yet at last it was Eadmerus Hist. Novor. l. 4. p. 91. 92. Mat.
Paris, p. 60. Mat. Westminster. p. 25, 26. Hoveden, p. 471. My Plea for the Lords, p.
171, 173.
agreed between King Henry the first and him, by assent of the Bishops, Abbots,
Lords and Great men in a Parliamentary Council held in August Anno ^107. Vt
nullus ad Praelattonem electus PRO HOMAGIO QUOD REGI FACERET consecratione
suscepti honoris priva^etur. Which Law and usage continued under King Henry the
second, as is evident by this passage of Glanvil, l. 9. c. 1. who writ and was
chief Justice under him. Electi vero in Episcopos ante consecrationem HOMAGIA
SVA FACERE SOLENT. What solemn public Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity
Bishops and other Clergymen, as well as the Temporal Lords and Commons, have
heretofore and of late years made to our Kings and their heirs, you may read at
leisure in the Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 427, 657, 663,
25 H. 8. c. 20. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 7. 10. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2, 3. 5 Eliz.
c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 3. 5. 7. Jac. c. 6. I shall only present you with one more thus
recorded in the Clause Roll of 11 E. 4. m. 1. dorso.

Memorand, quod tertio die Iulii Anno regni Regis Edwardi Quarti undecimo apud
Westminster. in Camera Parliamenti, Venerabilis Pater Thomas Cardinalis
Archiepiscopius Cantuar, ac alii Domini Spirituales et Temporales, ac etiam
quidam Milites quorum nomina subscribuntur, fecerunt Recognitionem,
Iuramentumque praestiterunt Edwardo primogenito dicti Domini nostri Regis
Edwardi Quarti, illustri Principi Walliae, Duci Cornub, and Comiti Cestriae in
forma sequenti, and ad corroborationem praemiss^rum singuli little manibus
propries scripserunt sua Nomina.

I Thomas Cardinal Archbishop of Canterbury knowledge, take and repute you
Edward Prince of Wallys, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, first begotten
so^ of our Sovereign Lord Edward the fourth, King of England, and of France,
and Lord of Ireland, to be very and undoubted heir to our said Sovereign Lord
as to the Crowns of England and France; and Lordship of Ir^land; and promi^^e
and swear, that in case hereafter it happen you by Gods disposition to overlive
our said Sovereign Lord, I shall then bear, and in all things truly and
faithfully behave me toward you and your ^heirs, as a true and (...) Subject
ought to behave (...) to his Sovereign Lord and right wy^ King of England, etc.
So help me God and holy domes, and the Evangelists.

T. (...) G. (...) T. London Episc. He^r. Dun^lm. W. Episc. Winton.
G. Cl^rence. R. Gloucester. Norff. H. Buckyngham. I. ^uff. Arundell. H. Essex.
E. Kent. Riveri^rs. I. Wiltshire. W. (...), Prior Hosp^t. S Iohannis. E.
Arundall Mautravers. A. Gray. I. Fenis. R. E^^sc. Sarum. W. (...) T. (...) R.
Bathonien. E. Carliol.
R. Beauchamp. Sir Rob^rt Fenys. Bourgchier. T. Bourchier. W. Par. I. Dudley.
I. Audley. Dac^e. Edw^^do Bergaveny. I. S^trange. I. Scrop. W. Ferrers.
Berners. Hasting^. Mou^tjoy. Dynham. Howard. Duras. I. Pilk^ngton. W. Bea^don.
W. Courtenay. T. Mullineux. Raulf Ashto^.
The first who brought Homage into England for ought I can find, was William
the Conqueror, and his Normans^, who equally imposed it, on all Bishops, Abbo^s
and Clergymensas well as on the Laity, in the self-same words and form for
ought appears. How Bishops and Abbots came to be exempred from doing homage for
their Temporalties to our Kings after their consecra^^ons I have already
touched and shall here further declare for the informa^ion of those of my own
profession:

Abbot Historiae, P. 896.
Ingulph^s records, (...) mulcis armis retroactis (even from King E^h^l^eds
reig^) ^ulla electio Praelatorum erat mere i^era ^^canonica, ^ed omnes
divnita^es tam Episcoporum quam Abbatum per Annulum et Baculnm Regis curia pro
sna complacentia conferebat; his (...) King William the Conquerot, who first
b^ought the Sea the Customs of Normandy, Chapter of Homage, and Britton chapter 68.
de Homages, p. 171. b.
word and service of HOMAGE out of Normandy into England, and at his Coronation
at London Ann. 1067. HOMAGIIS a Magnatibus (as well of the Clergy as Laity)
acceptis, cum FIDELITATIS JURAMENTO, obsidibusque acceptis, in regno
confirmatus, omnibus qui ad regnum aspiraverant factus est terrori, as Matthew
Paris, p. 4. and Matthew Westminster p. 1. relate. Mat Par^s p. 4. 10. Mat.
Westminster. p. 78.
Ann. 1072. He received homage from the King of Scots. And Anno 1079 He entered
Wales with a numerous Army, subdued it, et a Regnlis (...) ditionis HOMAGIA and
FIDELITATES ACCEP^T. Anno 1083. Cepit HOMAGIA Ordinum totius Angliae, et
JURAMENTUM FIDELITATIS, cujus^unque essent ^endi ^el senementi^; And apud
Londonias HOMINIUM SIBI FACERE, et contra omnes homines FIDELITATEM JURARE
OMNEM ANGLIAE INCOLAM IMPERANS (therefore Bishops, Abbots and Clocks, as well
as Laymen) totam terram descripsit, etc. as Historia, p. 908.
Ingulphus informs us flourishing in that age. The Pope being much offended
that Kings should thus confer Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other Ecclesiastical
dignities Per Annulum et Baculum, and that Bishops, and Abbots should thus do
Homage and Fe^lty to them, and become their men, as well as L^ick^, (as being a
grand impediment to their Supreme Authority over Emperors, Kings and Princes of
the earth, strenuo^sly attempted by Pope Hil^ lebrand;) thereupon Pope Urban
the 2d. An^s. 1095. in a Mat. Paris p. 20.
Council held at Claremount ordained, Ut Episcopi, vel Abbates, vel aliquis de
Clero aliquam Ecclesiasticam dignitatem de manu Principum, vel quorumliber
Laicorum, non recipiant. And this not prevailing, in another Council held by
this Hoveden; Annal, pars 1. p. 467. Mat. Parker, Antiqu. Eccl. Brit. p. 103.
107. Malmsb. de Gestis Pontif. p. 224.
Pope at Rome, Anno 1099. Urbanus Papa excommunicavit omnes Laicos investituras
Eccle^arum dantes, et omnes easdem investituras de manib^s Laicorum
accipientes, necnon omnes in officium sic dati honoris consecrantes.
Excommunicavit etiam eos, qui pro Ecclesiasticis Honoribus LAICORUM HOMINES
FIUNT id est, HOMAGIUM INEUNT as learned Glossarium, p. 357.
Sir Hen. Spelman truly expounds it.) Dicens minus execrabile videri, ut manus
quae in tantam eminentiam excre^erant, ut quod nulli Angelorum concessum^est,
ut Deum cuncta creantem suo signaculo CREANT (mark the blasphemy and
contradiction) et eundem ipsum pro salute totius mundi Dei Patris obtutibus
offerant, in hanc ignaviam vel stul^itiam detrudantur; ut ancillae fiant eorum
manuum quae diebus et noctibus obscenis contactibus inquinantur, sive rapinis
et injustae sanguinis effusione addictae maculantur. Et ab omnibus est
clamatum, fiat, fiat, et in his consummatum est conci^ium. Hereupon Eadmerus
Hist. Novor, 1. 2, 3, 4 Mar. Parker, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 105, 106. 107,
etc. Malm^b de Gestis Po^tif. l. 1. p. 215. etc. 224, 225. Godwin in the life
of Anselm.
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, a Burgundian by birth, and great Creature of
the Popes, peremptorily refused to consecrate any Bishops, who received their
Investi^ures per annulum baculum from the King, or to have any communion with
those who were thus invested and consecrated by the Archbishop of York in his
absence; denying to do any homage or fealty to King Henry the 1. after his
revocation by him from his exile under Will. Rufus, without the Popes license;
affirming, Volente DEO NVLLIVS MORTALIS HOMOFIAM, nec per Sacramen^u^ alicui
FIDEM PROMITTAM. Hereupon Rex, Regnique Proceres, Episcopi, et cujuscunque
generis aulici praeter Regni consuetudinem ab Anselmo facti^atum indigne
ferentes asserebant sese nunquam tam iniquo Papae decreto assensos vel
assensuros, et potius tam Anselmum regno exterminaturos et ab Ecclesia Romana
penitus disces^uros, quam hanc Papae sententiam A IURE REGIO, REGNIQUE
CONSUETUDINE PRORSUS ALIENAM, ratam haberent. After many public meetings and
debates between the King, Prelates, Nobles and Anselm about this business, it
was agreed, that Anselm, and William Werelast the Kings Ambassador, should go
to Rome to Pope Paschal the 2. and debate this business before him; where the
said William appearing, and vehemently urging before the Pope in the Kings
behalf; Dedecus ei, et videri et esse, si Antecessorum suorum jura perderet,
quos ipse et animi magni^udine, et opum affluentia long praerivit, etc. Adding
in the close; Quod Dominus meus nec pro amissione Regni patietur sibi
Ecclesiarum investituras auferri. To which the insolent Pope presently replied
with a stern countenance. Nec ego pro capitis sui redemptione eum investituras
permittam impune habere; Whereupon they decreed the cause for Anselm against
the King; and in a Synod at Lateran, ratified the former Decree of Pope Urban
in the Council at Rome; which this Pope by his consolatory Epistle to Eadmeri
Hist. Nov. l. 3. p. 63, 64.
) Anselm informed him of, encouraging him openly and boldly to appear and speak
in this cause for the Churches divine Liberty. Anselm hereupon wrote thus to
King Henry (inviting him to return into England, and to do him that service as
his predecessors had done to his Ancestors) Eadmer. l. 3. p. 76.
Ut autem sim vobiscum ita ut Antecessor meus erat cum patre vestro, facere non
possum, quia NEC VOBIS HOMAGIVMFACERE, nec accipientibus de manu vestra
Investituras Ecclesiarum propter praedictam (Papae) Prohibitionem me audiente
factam, audeo communicare. But though Spelmanni Glossarium, p. 357.
Ludovicus Crassus K. of France was so pusillanimous, as by his Charter, dated
An. 1137. to exempt his Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy from doing any Homage
or Fealty to him for their temporalties before, or after their Consecrations,
granting them, Quod canonicam omnino gauderent libertatem ABSQVE HOMAGII,
IURAMENTI, seu fidei primum datae, obligatione; Yet K. Hen. the first, though
he were contented at last to part with his investitures to Bishoprics and
Abbeys, yet he would upon no terms exempt any Bishops or Abbots from the homage
due unto him for their temporalties, after their elections, and before their
Consecrations, not from the Oath of Fealty; they always doing homage to him
and his Successors, at least wise before their consecrations, though seldom
after them, and that in the self-same form as Laymen did, (without omitting
this Clause, I become your man) as appears by Glanvil, l. 9. c. 1. Bracton, l.
2. c. 35. Fleta, l. 3. c. 16. Britton, chapter 66 of Homages; and 17 E. 2. Of the
manner of doing Homage and Fealty; prescribing only one and the self-same form
of homage as well to the Clergy as Laity, as well as the same Oath of Fealty,
which they equally performed, though Littleton (and he alone) makes a
difference between their forms of Homage. Hence in the Parliament at Salisbury,
Anno Dom. 1116. Comites and Barons CUM CLERO TOTIUS REGNI in praesentia Regis
Henrici 1. sibi et Willielmo filio suo HOMAGIUM FECERUNT and FIDELITATEM
IURAVERUNT, as the Col. 1005.
Chronicle of Bromton, and Slm. Dun^lm. Hist. col. 237. Mat. Paris p. 63. Mat.
Westminster. p. 28. Eadmerus, l. 5. p. 131. Hoveden, p. 473. Holi^ shed, Speed, and
others in Henry the 1.
other of our Historians record. I shall illustrate this discourse touching
Homage and Fealty, with these memorable clauses in the Charter of King Stephen,
touching the agreement made between him and Henry Duke of Normandy, etc. in a
Chronicon Johannis Bromton, col. 1038, 1039. See Hoveden, Mat. Paris, Mat.
Westminster. Holinshed, Stow, Speed, and others. Anno 1153.
Parliamentary Assembly of the Bishops and others of the Realm at Wallingford.
Anno Gratiae 1153. wherein King Stephen declaring him the right hereditary heir
to the Crown of England after his death; and he reciprocally agreeing, that
Stephen should enjoy the Crown and Kingdom quietly, without interruption by him
during his life; thereupon, Dux propter hunc honorem et donationem et
confirmationem sib^ a me factam, HOMAGIUM michi, et Sacramento securitatem
fecit, scilicet, quod fidelis michi erit, et vitam et honorem meum pro suo
pos^e custodier, per conventiones inter Nos praelocutas, Ego etiam secu^itatem
Sacramento Duci feci, quod vitam et honorem ei pro posse meo custodiam, et
sicut fi^ium and haeredem meum in omnibus in quibus potero eum manu^enebo, et
custodiam contra omnes quos po^ero. Willielms autem filius meus HOMAGIUM et
securitatem Duci fecit, etc. Comites and Barons Ducis qui homines mei nunquam
fuerunt, pro honor quem Domino suo f^ci, Homagium et Sacramentum michi
fecerunt, salvis conventionibus inter me et Ducem factis. Coeteri vero qui ante
Homagium michi fecerant, fideli^atem michi fecerunt sicut Domino. Et si Dux a
praemissis rece^erit, omnino a servicio ipsius cessarent, quousque errara
corrigeret, etc. Comites etiam et Barons mei LIGIUM HOMAGIUM DUCI FECERUNT,
salva mea fidelitate quamdiu vixero, et regnum tenuero. Simili lege, quod si
^go a praedictis recederem, omnino a servicio meo cestarent quousque errata
corrigerem. Cives etiam Civi^atum et homines Castrorum quae in Dominio meo
habeo ex praecepto meo homagium et securitatem Duci fecerunt, salva fidelitate
mea quamdiu vixero et regnum tenuero. Archiepiscopi, Episcopi atque Abbates de
regno Angliae ex praecepto meo FIDELITATEM SACRAMENTO DUCI FECERUNT. Illi
quoque qui in regno Angliae Episcopi deinceps fi^nt vel Abbates, IDEM FACIENT.

In the Recognition of the ancient Customs of the Mat. Paris, Hist. p. 96, 97.
See Simeon Dunelmens^s, Hoveden, Holinshed, and others, Anno. 1164.
Realm of England used in the reign of King Henry the 1. and his Ancestors,
quae observari debebant in regno and ab omnibus teneri; drawn up and agreed
upon Febr. 8. Anno Dom. 1164. in the famous Parliamentary Council of Clarindon,
in the presence of the King, and of all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons and Great men of the Realm; who all juraverunt and
firmiter in verbo veritatis promiserunt viva voce, tenendas et observandas
Domino Regi et HAEREDIBUS SVIS, bona fide et absque malo ingenio in perpetuum;
I find these Articles pertinent to my purpose, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, et
universae personae regni, qui de Rege tenent in capite, habeant possessiones
suas de Rege sicut Baroniam, et inde respondeant Justiciariis et Ministris
Regiis, et fequentur et faciant OMNES CONSUETUDINES REGIAS; et sicut caeteri
Barons debent interesse judiciis Curiae regis cum Baronibus quousque
pervenitur ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem. Cum vacaverit
Archieplscopatus, Episcopatus vel Abbatia, vel Prioratus in dominio Regi^, esse
debet in manu ipsius, et inde percipiet omnes reditus et exitus, sicut
Dominicos reditus suos. Et cum ventum fuerit ad consulendum Ecclesiam, debet
Dominus Rex mandare po^iores personas Ecclesiae, et in Capella ipsius Regis
debet fieri electio, assensu ipsius Regis et Concilio personarum regni, quas ad
haec faciendum advocaverit, et IBIDEM FACIET ELECTUS HOMAGIVM and FIDELITATEM
REGI, SICVT LIGIO DO MINO SVO., de vita sua et de membris, et de honor
terreno, salvo ordine suo, priusquam consecretur. Indeed Angelus de Clavasio in
his Summa Angelica Tit. Homagium, and other Canonists hold it to be Symonie and
unlawful, prore' spirituali, puia Beneficio Ecclesiastico HOMAGIUM EXIGERE:
But our Laws resolve it an ancient Legal duty and Service: Of which see more
in Spelmanni Glossarium, Tit. Fidelitas and Homagium, in William Somners
Glossarium, Tit. Homagium, and in Bracton, Britton and Fleta.

4. That this clause in the writs to the Temporal Lords in fide and homagio,
implies they were all (or most) Barons by tenure. And whereas 4 Instit. p. 5.
Sir Ed. Cook, and 5 Glossarium, p. 80.
Sir Henry Spelman assert, That of ancient time, the temporal Lords were
commanded by the Kings writ thus to appear, In fide et homagio quibus Nobis
tenemini, and in the reign of Edward 3. in fide et ligeantia, and sometimes in
fide et homagio, but at this day constantly, in fide et ligeantia; because at
this day there are no feudal Baronies, in respect whereof Homage is to be done;
which in 21 E. 3. was the true cause of this alteration: If this observation of
theirs, That in fide et homagio, feodales proprie respiciat Barons, denoting
only such Barons who were Barons by tenure, or Barony, for which they did their
Homage and swore Fealty and Allegiance to the King: then this is a most
convincing argument, that all the Lords and Barons summoned before 11 E. 3.
were Barons only by tenure, not by writ alone, because they were all regularly
summoned to appear in fide et homagio, not in fide et ligeantia: 2ly. It is a
clear mistake, that this alteration of homagio into ligeantia, was made in 21
E* 3. for it was not till 25 E. 3. pars 1. dors. 5. in fide et homagio, being
used both in the writs of 21, 22, 23, and 24 E. 3. 3ly. The reason of this
alteration could not be this they rend^r, because all or most of the Lords and
Barons then summoned, did not hold of the King by Barony; but were Barons only
by writ, not tenure; First, because all the writs to the Prince of Wales, ^and
Earls then summoned (who held of the King by Homage and Barony) issued in this
form in fide et ligeantia to them, as well as to the inferior Lords and
Barons. 2ly, Because the self-same Prince, Earls, Lords summoned in this form
in 25 E. 3. in the very next years of 26 E. 3. d. 14. and 27 E. 3. d. 12. were
twice summoned again, i^ fide, homagio et ligeantia quibus Nobis tenemini, and
28 E. 3. d. 26. in fide et homagio; after in 29 E. 3. d. 8. 7. 31 E. 3. d. 21.
and 1. they are summoned in fide et ligeantia; but yet in 32 E. 3. d. 14. 36 E.
3. d. 16. 37 E. 3. d. 22. 38 E. 3. d. 3. 39 E. 3. d. 2. 42 E. 3. d. 22. 43 E.
3. d. 24. 46 E. 3. d. 9. all the writs to the Prince, Earls, Lords and Barons,
run again in fide et homagio only: and some between and after them in fide et
ligeantia only, though issued to the self-same persons, or their heirs:
Therefore ligeantia, in these and subsequent writs, is put only as a Synonima,
signifying only Homagium; as the coupling them together in two writs, in fide,
homagio et ligeantia, and the placing of Homagio thus interchangeably for
ligeantia, and ligeancia for homagio, evidence beyond contradiction: The
rather, because there is the highest promise and bond of Allegiance expressed
in the very words, and form of homage done to the King (as the words, Littl..
85.
I become your man from this day forwards of life and member, and of earthly
worship, and unto you shall be true and faithful, and bear you faith, and this
clause, saving the faith that I owe unto our Sovereign Lord the King, when done
to a common person) import: and Glanvil l. 9. c. 1. Bracton l. 2. c. 35. Fleta
l. 3. c. 16. Sir Edward Cook in his 1 Institutes on Littletons Chapter of
Homage, Sir Hen. Spelman, and Somner in their Glossaries Tit. Homagium and
Fidelitas, at large demonstrate; Therefore homage may be properly styled
ligeantia, and be put in lien of homagio, as doubtless it is in all those writs
that use it. 3ly. I find See An Exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower,
p. 332, 370, 545, 576, 625, 626.
sundry Homages for Dutchies, Earldoms and Baronies, done to our Kings by the
Duke of Aquitain, the Duke of Hereford, Henry Percy, the Duke of Norfolk, and
other Peers, who were then and afterward summoned in fide et ligeantia, not
homagio; and I doubt Sir Edward Cook and those of his opinion, can hardly name
any Dukes, Earls, Vicounts, Lords or Barons, summoned to Parliament under Henry
the 3. R. 2. H. 4, 5, 9. or E. 4. who was not a Lord by Tenure or Barony, as
well as by Patent, or a special writ of creation, the very names of their
Baronies as 4 Instit. p. 5.
Sir Edward Cook, and Titles of Honor, p. 720.
Mr. Seldom inform us, being usually expressed in all later writs of Summon^:
Therefore this their conjecture of altering the writs from homagio to
ligeantia, because they held not by homage, must needs be erroneous, and
groundless in my judgemen^, and the assertions of such who hold, that the Kings
bare general writs of summons, issued to those who held not by Barony, did
create them and their issues Barons, if they sat in Parliament without any
special creation by some Clauses in the writs, or by Pa^ent, grounded on this
mistake, must vanish into smoke; else that Clause of creation in the writ to
Sir Henry Bromfleet, Cl. 27 H. 6. d. 24. would have been both superfluous and
ridiculous.

5ly. That this clause, in fide et homagio; or, in fide and ligeantia quibus
Nobis tenemini, is sometimes omitted out of the writs of Summons to the Prince
of Wales, and other times inserted into them.

6ly. That the Prince of Wales in the writs of Summons and adjournment, is
sometimes styled Princeps Walliae only; sometimes, Princeps Aquitaniae et
Walliae; other times, Princeps Walliae, Dux Cornubiae, et Comes C^striae; when
all these titles were conferred on him by the King.

7ly* That in the writs issued to Dukes, Earls, and Temporal Lords of the Kings
Progeny, royal blood and alliance, they are usually styled; Carissimo filio
nostro; Fratri Regis; Fratri nostro; Avunculo Regis; Avunculo nostro; Nepoti
nostro; Consanguineo nostro, etc. and the other Earls and Temporal Lords,
Dilecto et fideli nostro, only; and that those of the blood royal are for the
most part, though not always, first entered in the Rolls of summons.

81y. That when a Duke or Earl of England was made a real or titular King of
any foreign Realm, his Royal title was always mentioned in the writ: Thus John
Duke of Lancaster King of Castle and Leon, in all writs of summons to him
after his foreign Kingship., was styled, Car^ssimo filio suo Iohanni Regi
Castellae et L^gionis Duci Lancastriae, in the summons of 46. 49, 50 ^. (...)
And Carissimo Avunculo suo Iohanni Regi Castell^ and Legionis, Duci
Lancastriae: in all the writs issued to him under King Rich^rd the 2d. So if
any Earl or Baron of England, was created a Duke or Earl in Scotland, France,
or Ireland, his foreign Titles were inserted into the writs, as the Title of
Cardinal, or Patriarch of Jerusalem was inserted into the English Bishops writs
created Cardin^ls and Patriarchs beyond the Seas. Thus Gilb^rt de Vinf. an l an
English Baron being made Earl of Anegos, and David de Strabolgi, Earl of Athol
in Scotland, Leonell the Kings son Earl of Vlster in Ireland; the black Prince
made Prince of Aquitain as well as of Wales, and John Duke of Lancaster, Duke
of Aquitan, under Richard the 2d. the were thereupon styled See p. 2^ 12, 213.
Comiti Anegos, Comiti Athol, Comiti Vlton, Principi Aquitani^ and Walliae,
Duci Aquitaniae and Lancastriae, in the writs directed to them: and if these
their foreign Titles were omitted in any Writs against them at the Common Law,
the writs would abate, because they were English Peers, and had these Titles
inserted into their writs of Summons to Parliament, where they sat in their
Princes, Dukes and Earls Robes, amongst the rest of the Dukes and Earls. But if
any foreign Duke, Earl, Lord, or Baron of France, Ireland, Spain or Germany, who
was no English Baron, Lord or Peer of Parliament, was sued in the Kings Court
by writ, he might be styled only a Knight or Esquire, and needed not to be sued
by the Title of Duke, Earl, Lord or Baron; because he was no Duke, Earl, Lord
or See my Argument of the case of the Lord Magwire.
Baron at all in England; but only in his own Country, and should be tried upon
an Indictment of Treason, Murder or Felony, only by an ordinary Jury, and not
by English Peers. By which differences the Books of 39 E. 3. 3^. Brooks Nosme
de dignity, ^9. 59. and Parl. 4. 11 E. 3. Fi^zh. Brief. 473. 8 R. 2. Fitzh.
Process. 224. 20 E. 4. 6. Brooks Nosme de Dignity. 49. Dyer, ^60. b. Cook 7*
rep. Calvin's case, f. 15, 16. 9. rep. ^^nchers case, f. 117. 3. Instit. p. 20.
and 4. Instit. p. 47. are fully reconciled.

9. That if any Earl, Baron or Lord was Marshal, Constable, Steward, Admiral,
Chancellor, Treasurer, or other great Officer of England, or Warden of the
Cinque ports; his Title of Office was commonly inserted into the writs of
Summons. As, Rogero, or Thomae Comiti Naff. and Marescallo Angliae, Avunculo
suo carissimo, Thomae de Wodestoke Consta^ulario Augliae, Willo de Cl^nton
comiti Ha^i^gdon, Constabulario Castri Dover. et Custodi quinque Portuum
suorum, etc. What precedence these Officers had of other Earls, Lords and
Barons, in Parliament, you may read in the Statute of 31 H. 8. c. 10. and Mr.
S^ldens Titles of Honor. p. 901, etc.

10. That in the lists of the Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Barons names there is no
certain order observed according to their Antiquity or Precedence, but in some
Rolls one is first entered, in other Rolls others listed before them, and they
again postponed in succeeding lists: Yet generally for the most part, though
not always, the Prince of Wales is first entered before the rest; the Dukes
before the Earls; the Earls and Vicounts before the Lords and Barons; and they
before the Judges or Kings Counsil; and the Earl who was Marshal of England,
before the other Earls; the Clerks entering their names promiscuously for the
most part as the Writs came to their hands. Some times the first Writs entered
at large issued to one Earl, Lord, Duke, Baron, other times the Writs go to
others, without observing the Laws of Heraldry, though in the reing of Edward
the 3d. and afterward, their names are more methodically entered then before
that time; often times in the selfsame order, or with some small variations and
transpositions. So as the Precedence of the Earls or Barons, and their places
of sitting in the Parliament House cannot be certainly collected from, or
defined by the entry of their Writs of Summons or li^ting in the Eodem modo
mandatum est, or Consimiles lit^rae; but by custom, and the Statute of 31 H. 8.
cap. 10.

11ly. That in some Clause Rolls there is one Writ to the Archbishop, or some
other Bishop first entered at large, and another Writ at large, to some one Earl
or temporal Lord; with an Eodem modo, or Consimiles literae, only entered to the
rest there listed: but most usually, there is only but one Writ entered at large
to one of the Archbishops, or some other Bishops; and then a short recital of
some part of that Writ to one temporal Lord, with an etc. Test ut supra, and
the like, for brevity sake: and an Eodem modo, and Consimiles literae; or some
short entries of some special clauses of the Writ, to all the other temporal
Lords.

12ly. That in the Eodem modo, and Consimiles Literae; first the Bishops,
Abbots, Priors and spiritual Lords, then the Dukes, Earls, Temporal Lords,
Barons, Justices, Kings Counsils names, are entered successively one after
another, after the first Writ, which is singly entered in sundry Rolls, without
any Writ or part of Writ interposed between their names; as if they had all the
selfsame Writs in terminis issued to them. But in most Rolls, there is either a
distinct Writ, or part of Writ; or an Eodem modo mandatum est etc. mutatis
mutandis; interposed between the names of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and
Earls and Lay Lords; and likewise between the Temporal Lords, and the Kings
Counsil and Justices summoned to Parliaments: with the usual clauses wherein the
writs differ one from another inserted into them; which different clauses no
doubt were in most of the Writs issued to them in those Rolls where they are
all entered promiscuously together in the Eodem modo, and Consimiles Literae;
without any Writ or part of a Writ, or m^tatis mutandis interposed between
the^, omitted only for brevity sake by the Clerks; who engrossed the Rolls.

13ly. That the English Barons, who were tit^lary Earls in Scotland under the
Kings Jurisdiction and Allegance were always summoned and li^^ed among^^ the
Earls of England in the Rolls of Summons, not amongst the English Lords and
Barons who were no Earls: witness Gilbert, and Robert de Vmfranil, Earls of
Anegos in Scotland, and David de Stabolgi, Earl of Athol, always summoned to
the Parliaments by the Titles of these their Scottish Earld^ms, and li^ted
amongst the En^lish Earls, not Barons, in the Clause Rolls. Gilbert de Vmfranil
being summoned by Writ as Earl of An^gos, to no less than 12. Robert de
Vmfranil to 63. Gilbert (...) Vmfran^l his Son, to 50. English Parliaments, and
David de Sirabolgi to 21. Parliaments and great Councils, as Earl of Athol (as
the ensuing Table will inform you) amongst the other Earls of England: but no
other Earls of Scotland besides these two. The reason whereof was only this,
because they were English Barons, and held lands by Barony in England, though
the Titles of their Earldoms were not English^ but Scottish, yet they were under
the Kings Subjection Allegiance; and their Residence when thus summoned, was
upon their Baronies in England. That Gilbert de Vmfranil, was an English Baron
and Lord of Parliament, before he became Earl of Anegos, is clear by the Clause
Rolls of 23 E. 1. d. 4. 9. and 24 E. 1. d. 7. See Cooks 4. Insti^. p. 47.
wherein he was summoned to 3. Parliaments amongst the English Lords and
Barons; but then being Earl of Anegos by descent from his Mother, he, was in
Cl. 25 E. 1. d. 25. and sundry Parliaments after, always summoned by the name
of Earl of Anegos, and listed amongst the Earls of England, as the ensuing
Table demonstrates. So Rob. de Umfranil, summoned to Parliament amongst the
English Barons, Claus. 2. E. 2. d. 20. was in Claus. 2. E. 2. d. 11. and all
succeeding Parliaments under Edward the 2. and 3. summoned to Parliament as
Earl of Anegos among the Earls of England, with whom he is still entered in the
Rolls. The like may be said of David de Stra^olgi, who though originally a
Scottish Earl, was yet afterward made an English Lord by the King, and held
L^nds in England by Barony, and upon that account summoned to sundry
Parliaments and great Councils by ^^e Title of Earl of Athol, and registered
amongst the English Earls in the Clause Ro^ls. Which I thought meet to touch,
both to rectify and clear that do^b^e mistake in the Antiquity of the
Parliaments of England (newly printed) p. 46. That Peers of Scotland were wont
to come and be summoned to the Parliament. And that the Peers of Scotland came
to the Parliament for Justice: which the Author endeavors to prove by 39 F. 3.
35. in a writ of R^v^shment de Guard, against Gilbert Vmfravi^; who demanded
judgm^nt of the writ, because he was Earl of Anguish, and not so named in the
writ, etc. When as he was not summoned to our Parliament as a Peer of Sco^land,
but only as an English Baron dignified with the Title of a Scotlsh Earldome;
and came not to our English Parliament for Justice; but was summoned to it by
Spe^^^l writs, as a Peer and Member thereof; as the Clause Ro^ls resolve, and
the very year Book likewise. Of which more hereafter in its proper place.

14ly. That no Foreign Prelates, Earls, Nobles, Barons of Ireland, Scotland or
France were formerly summoned to the Parliaments of England, as pro^er Members
thereof or Lords of Parliament, to make Laws or impose Taxes, or give Judgment,
or Counsel in any matters relating to England, but only our English Prelates,
Earls, Lords and Barons; as is most apparent by these special clauses in the
writs of Summons. Ibidem Vobiscum, ac cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, and
Proceribus DICTIREGNI ANGLIAE (never Scotiae Franciae, or Hiberniae in any
writs whatsoever) colloquium habere volumus and tractatum. And Dictis die et
loco persona^^ter intersitis Nobiscum, and cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus
et Proceribus, PRAEDICTIS (or DICTI REGNI NOSTRI^^) super dic^^s negot^^s
tracta^^ri, ve^^rumque consilium impensu^i. And ad consentiendum hi^s quae ^unc
ibidem de Communi consilio DICTI (or EJUSDEM) REGNI NOSTRI, CONTIGERIT
ORDINARI: And by this usual clause in the Patents of creation of all our
English Earls, Lords, and Barons of Parliament; Seldens Titles of Honor. p,
663. 665. 747* 748* 763. 751. 757. My Plea for the Lords, p. 40.
Volentes and concedentes pro Nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris, quod
praefatus, A. Comes B. or C. Baro, or Dominus, D. et haeredes sui masculi, et
eorum quilibet habeat, teneat and possideat sedem and locum in PARLIAMENTIS
nostris, haeredum and luccessorum nostrorum infra REGNUM NOSTRUM ANGLIAE inter
ALIOS COMITES, and BARONS EJUSDEM REGNI, ut COMES, or BARO: compared with the
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 840. 841, 848. 849, My Argument of the case of the
Lord Magwire, p. 42.
Patents of creation of Irish and Scottish Earls, Lords Barons, and Boroughs,
which constitute them only Earls, Lords, Barons or Boroughs; in terra and
Dominio nostro Hiberniae, or Scotiae; or infra Regnum nostrum Scotiae, or
Hiberuiae; and Vnum Comitem, Dominum vel Baronem omnium and singulorum
Parliamentorum and Magnorum Conciliorum nostrorum, etc. in terra (or Regno)
nostro HIBERNIAE, or SCOTIAE, ^enendorum; and grant them only, sedem et locum,
in Parliamentis nostris HIBERNIAE, or SCOTIAE, inter alios Comites, Dominos and
Barons ejusdem Regni; As the Kings Patents to Sir Hen. Hoberts Reports p. 14.
15.^
Buroughs in Irel. gave them plena^ potestate^ and authoritate^ eligendi,
mittendi and retornendi duos discretos and idoneos viros, ad inserviendum and
attendendum in quolib^t Parliamento in dicto regno nostro Hiberniae (not
Angliae) in posterum tenend. But no Place or Voice at all to their Peers or
Burgesses in the Parliaments of England, amongst the Earls, Lords or Barons of
England; who have no seat, Place, or Voice at all in the Parliaments of
Scotland or Ireland, as they are English Peers (though subordinat Kingdoms to
England.) Which I shall farther clear in some ensuing Sections.

15ly. That there is a great diversity between writs of Summons to Parliaments,
or General Parliamentary Councils; and to particular Councils upon emergent
occasions which are not properly Parliaments; all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Lords, Barons, together with the Judges and Kings Counsil, Citizens,
Burgesses of Parliament, and Barons of the Ci^que ports, being usually summoned
to the one; but some few Spiritual and Temporal Lords only, without any Judges,
Assistants, Knights, Citizens Burgesses or Barons of the Cinque Ports, or some
few of them only, and diverse who were no usual Lords, Barons of Parliament (as
in 32 E. 3. d. 14. and other Rolls) summoned to the other, as the Clause Rolls
a^test. Which difference some ignorant Antiquaries not observing, have
confounded them both together as one and the same, and mistaken some writs of
Summons only to a Council, or to a conference with the King and his Privy
Counsil upon extraordinary dangers and occasions, for writs of Summons to a
Parliament. Such amongst other forecited writs, are these of Here, p. 187, to
192.
35 E. 3. dors. 36. and 36. E. 3. d. 42. Where all those Earls, Lords, Abbots,
Peers, Great men, Gentlemen, Counte^^es, Ladies and Dowagers who had Lands in
Ireland (and none else but they alone) were summoned, the Temporal Lords and
great men, to appear in proper Person, the Clergymen, Countesses, Ladies and
Dowagers, to send one or more Proxies or Deputies in whom they specially
confided, to the King and his Counsil at Westminster (not to the Parliament)
there to confer and treat with them concerning the relief of Ireland, and their
passage to, or sending men of Arms speedily into Ireland, to resist, suppress
the Irish Rebels, who much infested, wasted, and endangered it; as the whole
frame and contents of the writs themselves, and the marginal Notes in the
Rolls, De Consillo Summonito: De Veniendo ad Consilium, etc. resolve beyond all
contradiction. Which Joseph Holland and others not considering, in their
Antiquity of the Parliaments of England, p. 23. 88. have published these two
gross mistakes together, viz. That in the time of Edward the th^^^, ther^ was
a writ then in use; De admittendo ^ide dignas ad colloquium, etc. It is
recorded amongst the Summons of Parliament, 35 E. 3. that there is a writ, De
admittendo fide dignos ad Colloquium. And amongst the Earls and Barons there is
returned. M^ry Countess de Norff: Alianoxa Countess de Ormond* Philippa
Countess de March, Agnes Countess de Pembroke, and Katherine Countess of
Athol. When as these Countesses were not recorded nor returned amongst the
Earls and Barons in any Summons to Parliament, nor were they required to send
or come to any Parliament or Parliamentary Council; nor is th^re any writ, in
this or any other Roll; De admittendo fide dignas, or dignos ad Colloquium; as
they confidently affirm. But they were only summoned by writ to send men of
Arms into Ireland with other Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, who had Lands and
Possessions there, as these Countesses all had, for to defend and recover the
same from the Irish Enemies; and commanded; See here p. ^88, 189, 190, 191.
Aliquos vel aliquem de quibus, vel de quo specialiter confiditis MITTATIS apud
Westminster. etc. Which MITTATIS these Pseudo-Antiquaries, have metamorphosed into a
writ, DE ADMITTENDO fide dignas ad Colloquium. By which gross perversion they
have evidenced themselves and their Treatises, not to be fide digni, in these
and other particulars rela^ing to our Parliaments, wherewith they have deceived
both themselves and others, who adore these their Oversights for Oracles.

16ly. That when any of the Earls, Lords or Nobles were employed in the Wars in
France, Scotland, Ireland, or any other service for the King in foreign parts,
they were omitted out of the lists of Summons to Parliaments, and Parliamentary
Councils; and if any writs in such cases issued to them they were usually
revoked and cancelled, and entries thereof made upon the Clause Rolls: This is
evident by Claus. 11 E. 3. 25. dors. 11. where I find these 2. Presidents in
the lists of the Lords and Barons names. Thomae Wake de Lydett, VACAT QUIA IN
OBSEQUIO REGIS. Henry de Gray, VACAT, QUIA IN OBSEQUIO REGIS. After which, at
the end of all the writs of Summons to the Sheriffs, Warden of the Cinqueports,
and Kings Counsel, follows this entry of writs to some Earls, Lords and
Gentlemen, besides those first mentioned after the Spiritual Lords then
summoned.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Willo. de Bohun, Com. Northamton, salutem; Quia tam
super urgentissimis, etc. ut supra in brevi directo Hent. Com. L^ncastr. usque
in finem.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. Thomae Com. Norff^er Mariscallo
Angliae, Avunculo Regis, Willielmo de Monteacuto Comit^ Sarum, Rico. Comiti
Arundell, Hugoni de Aud^le Comiti Gloucestr. Roberto de Ufford Comiti Suff.
Gilberto de Umfravill, Comiti de Anegos, Ranulpho de Dacre, Bartho, de
Burghersh, Johanni de Segrave, Egidio de Badlesmere, Rado. de Nevill, Johanni
de Tybtofte, Rico. Talebot, Henr. de Percey, Rado de Stafford, Thomae de
Berkele, Antonio de Lucy.

Et Memorand. quod Brevia istis Magnatibus immediate praescriptis directa, de
essendo ad PARLIAMENTUM praedictum, remissa fuerunt Cancellar; ET PRO EO QVOD
QVIDAM EX EIS IN PARTIBUS SCOTIAE, QUIDAM EX EIS IN PARTIBUS TRANSMARINIS IN
OBSEQUIO REGIS EXISTVNT, ADNU^LAND.

So Claus. An. 12 E. 2. pars. 2. dors. 32. There is this entry made in the
lists of Summons. Humfrido de Bohun Comiti Hereford, VACAT QUIA IN OBSEQUIO
REGIS. And Cl. 2. R. 2. d. 29. Iohi de Nevill de Raby (in partibus Aquitan.)

If any Baron or Lords name were in the list of Summons, and he not actually
summoned; there was then a Vacat entered in the Roll; as in Claus. 11. E. 3. p.
1. dors. 8. Iohi de Sutton de Holdernesse (VACAT QUIA NON FUIT SUMMONITUS) And
if he died before the Parliament, then his death was entered upon the Roll, as
Claus, 9. E. 3. d. 28. Iohi de Clynton, MORTUUS EST.

17ly. That when any Temporal Lords or Prelates had writs of Summons to
Parliament issued to them in times of war and danger, whilst they were
employed in the Wars against the Scots in the North, or parts of Scotland; if
they could not desert the Wars and attend personally in Parliament without
danger and prejudice to the Public, they had then writs of countermand sent
them, not to recede from the parts where they were in Service, notwithstanding
their Summons to Parliament. For which I find this memorable president in
Claus. 30 E. 1. d. 7. De non recedendo a partibus Scotiae,

Rex dilecto and sideli suo Iohanni Segrave salutem. Licet ^uper vobis
mandavimus quod omnibus aliis praetermissis ad Parliamentum quod apud London in
prox. festo Sancti Michaelis duximus Stat^end. PERSONALITER INTERSITIS, NOLUMUS
TAMEN quod praetextu mandati praedicti and partibus Scotiae,, seu Marchiae
ejus, in quibus estis in obsequio nostro constituti ALIQUALITER RECEDATIS. T.
Rege apud Losele XI die Septembris.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Alexandro Balliolo, Edmundo de Hastinges, Willo
de L^^u, Seniori, Waltero de Huntercumbe.

Eodem modo mandatum est Roberto de Clifford, quod, a partibus in quibus nunc
est NULLATENUS RECEDATIS.

To which I shall subjoyn this later* President of Cl. 6. E. 2. d. 12. Rex
dilecto and fideli suo Waltero de Fauconberg, salutem. Licet nuper vobis
mandaverimus, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis essetis ad Nos tertia Dominica
Quadragesimae prox. futur. apud Westminster. ibidem Nobi^scum and cum Magnatibus and
Procerib^s regni nostri super diversis negotiis, Nos et statum ejusdem Regni
tangen^ib^s tractaturi ve^trumque consilium impensuri, pro securiori tamen
custodia et majori tuitione partium vestrarum contra Scotos inimicos et
Rebels nostros, vobis mandamus, quod a partibus praedictis sine mandato
nostro vos nullatenus transferatis. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Febr.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. Ranulpho de Nevill, Willo de
Vavasour, Willo de Ros de Hamlake, Marmiduco de Twenge, Nicho. de Meivill, Ade
de Everingham, Thomae de Multon de Egremond, Thomae de Multon de Gillesland,
Ingelramo de Gynes.

As for the Bishops in such cases, they were by other special writs authorized
to make Proctors to supply their places; though summoned by the original writs
to appear personally in Parliament, and not by Proxies; as in Claus. 20 E. 3.
pars 2. d. 22. and Claus. 46 E. 6. d. 11. forecited p. 51. 52. 58.

18ly. That if the King either Summoned or prorogued a Parliament to a certain
day and place by his writs, commanding the Earls, Lords and other great men
personally to appear in Parliament at that day and place; and then by reason of
other emergent occasions could not meet them, or hold the Parliament at the
time and place prefixed, he then usually discharged them all from their
attendance by a subsequent wrir; Of which we have this pregnant example, Claus.
5. E. 2. d. 17.

Rex dilecto consanguineo and fideli suo Thomae Comiti Lancast. salutem. Licet
nuper Vobiscum volentes ac cum Praelatis caeterisque Magnatibus Regni nostri
supra Negotiis Nos and statum, dicti Regni tangentibus habere Colloquium and
Tractatum, ordinassemus Parliamentum nostrum tenere apud Westminster. prima Dominica
Quadragesimae prox, fu^ur, Vobisque mandassemus, quod dictis die and loco
PERSONALITER INTERESSETIS, ad tractand. Nobiscum, and cum Praelatis and
Magnatibus praedictis super negotiis antedictis, Quia tamen PROPTER ALIQUAS
CAUSAS ad locum praedictum dicto die ACCEDERE NON VALEMUS, Vobis significamus,
QUOD AD DICTOS DIEM ET LOCUM PRAEMISSA OCCASION VOS ACCEDERE NON OPORTET.
Test Rege apud Eborum, 20. die January.

Consimiles Literae dirigunter subscriptis: viz. to 6. Earls more, and the rest
of the Lords summoned with them to appear personally at this Parliament.

19ly. That sometimes the Temporal Lords as well as Prelates, were more
strictly and peremptorily required, and adjured with greater earnestness to
appear Personally in Parliaments and Parliamentary Councils, then they were at
other seasons, without admitting any excuses or making any Proxies; because
through their absence and want of their personal presence when summoned, the
Parliaments were often adjourned to some other time, the business of the King
and Kingdoms retarded, delayed to the public praejudice, and the Parliaments
sometimes dissolved without concluding any thing, the Lords and Commons there
assembled refusing to do or grant any thing, when any of the chief Lords and
Prelates were absent,

20. That no Spiritual or Temporal Lords could absent themselves from
Parliaments when duly summoned thereunto without a reason^ble and just excuse,
nor make any Proxies or Proctors to supply their places, but when specially
authorized and licensed to do it in or by the writs of Summons, or other
special writs, much le^^e than could they be forcibly secluded the House when
summoned by writ; as some of late times have most violently been by those who
were raised to defend both their persons and the privileges of Parliament.

21. That armed Guards, Forces, and Troops of Soldiers in or near the Places
where Parliaments are assembled and kept, are altogether inconsistent with the
Customs, Usage, Freedom and Privileges of Parliament; prejudicial obstructions
to their proceedings, and a great oppression to the people; Upon which account
not only the Earls, Lords and Barons, are sometimes in the writs of Summons
specially prohibited under grievous forf^itures and penalties to repair to the
Parliament, See here, p. 27, 28* 177.
With men of Arms, and multitudes of people; and to come only cum dicenti
comitiva de hominibus bonae discretionis et consilii, et NON CUM HOMINIBUS AD
ARMA, sub forisfactura omnium quae Nobis forisfacere poteritis. Claus. 2 E. 3.
m. 31. dorso; But our Kings likewise by special writs and Proclamations at the
very first meeting of their Parliaments usually prohibited all sorts of men,
under pain of forfei^ing all they might forfeit, not to wear any privy Coat of
plate, or go Armed, or carry any Warlike weapons within any City or Suburbs
thereof where their Parliaments sa^e, during all the time of their Session,
that so the Parliaments and Member^s might not be thereby disturbed,
interrupted, over awed or terrified; as those who please may read at large in
the Statute of 7 E. 1. Rastals Abridgment, Armor 1. 1 E. 2. c. 3. 6 E. 3. rot.
Parl. n. 3. Parl. 2. n. 2. Parl. 3. at York. n. 3. 415. ^. 3 E. 3. Parl. 1. n.
2. Parl. 2. n. 2. 14 E. 3. n. 2. 15 E. 3. n. 2. 17 E. 3. n. 3. 18 E. 3 n. 2.
20. E. 3. n. 1. 2 ^ E. 3. n. 1. 25 E. 3. Parl. 1. n. 58. Parl. 2. n. 4. and
Cook 4. Instit. p. 14. Such a Proclamation as this issued before the Parliament
held at New Sarum, An. 2. E. 3. as is evident by the Articles of improachm^nt
against Roger Mortymer Earl of March, in the Parliament of 4E. 3. Rot. Parl. n.
1, 2. and 28 E. 3. n. 9, 10^ Who amongst oath. Articles was impeached condemned
and executed as a Traitor, for coming Henry de Knyghton de Eventibus Angl^ae,
l. 3. c. 16. col. 2557, etc. My Plea for the Lords, p. 278, 279, 28^.
armed to the Parliamen^ at Salsbury, against the Kings Proclamation; with
diverse of his confederates, whereby sundry of the Nobles were so terrified,
that they came not to the Parliament, and the Bishops there assembled had the
doors of the house wherein they sat in Counsel broke open upon them by armed
men, and were there threatened to lose both life and members if they should be
so hardy to say or do any thing against his will and ordinances; whereby he
procured himself to be made Earl of March; caused the King to give him many
Lands and Tenements, to the disinherison of his Crown; and excited him to ride
armed against the Earl of Lancaster and other Peers of the Realm to Winchester,
as they were coming toward the King to the said Parliament at Salisbury;
whereupon they were enforced to re^ire to their own Countries to eschew the
perils that might happen; which much greived them that they could not speak
with their king, not counsel him as they ought. After which the Parliament of 5
R. 2. as appears by n. 1. was interrupted and adjourned because the Duke of
Lancaster, and Earl of Northumberland being at variance, resorted to i^ with
multitudes of men armed in warlike manner, of which great complaint was made;
and the Parliament deferred till the King, his Counsil and other Lords had
examined and reconciled the differences between them, and removed their forces.
Fit presidents for future times to imitate, after so many outrages and forcible
assaults upon the Parliament and their Members by Soldiers and others of late
times, beyond all presedents in former ages, to the total dissolution both of
our Parliaments and their privileges, unless carefully regained, reestablished
by strictest Laws, exemplary Punishments, and severest prohibitions of all
armed forces in or near unto the places where future Parliaments shall
assemble; who by the just judgment of God upon the former Parliament, (which
against the Custom, Freedom and Privilege of Parliaments making use of armed
mercenary Guards and Soldiers for their defense, has been unexpectedly
affronted, assaulted, forced, dissipated, yea destroyed by them, and made their
basest Slaves and Captives) may learn to avoid all such extravagances and
oversights in succeeding ages.

22. It is observable and most evident by comparing the births of our Princes
of Walsingh^m Graf^on, Speed, Holinshed, Daniel Baker, How Martin.
Wales and Earls of Chester recorded in our Histories, wi^h the dates of their
first w^its of Summons to Parliam^nt^; that Edward of Carnarvan, the first
Prince of Wales was first summoned by writ to Parliament when he was but 19.
years old; that Edward the eldest Son of King Edward the second, as Earl of
Cheste^r, was first summoned by writ to Parliament when he was scarce 9. years
of age; that Edward the black Prince of Wales, was summoned when he was not 20.
and Richard his Son Prince of Wales called by writ to Parliament when he was
not full 9. years old: The Kings eldest and youngest ^ons being usually
summoned to Parliaments during their Minorities, (though others are See my
Minors no senators.
seldom summoned till their full age) even as King Henry the 6. rode
triumphantly to, Speed Chronicle, p. ^828. 829.
and sat in State in Parliament in his Queen-mothers lap, before he was full
12. months old.

23. I observe, that in Claus. 27 E. 1. d. 6. 16. Adomarus de Valencia, was
summoned and listed among the Earls, without the Title of Earl annexed to his
name, being then, as I conceive, Earl of P^mbroc, and so styled in succeeding
Summons: And in Claus. 50 E. 3. pars. 2. d.( See the Table of Earls, ensuing,
) 6. Thomas de Wodestoke Constabularius Angliae, and Henry de Percy Marescallus
Angliae, are listed amongst the Earls without any Title of Earls; yet in the
next writ of Summons, Claus. 1. R. 2. d. 31. 37. Thomas de Wodestoke, is styled
Com* de Buck: et Constab. Angliae: and Henry de Percy, Com. Northumb. in the
list of the Earls; and therefore I apprehend they were Earls in 50 E. 3. (as
our Histories and Heralds report them) though not so styled ^n-the Roll of
Summons.

24. That the names of the Kings Counsil, Justices, and other Officers,
^ummoned to Parliaments only as Assistants, are sometimes inserted into the
Eodem modo mandatum est; and Confimiles literae next after the the Lords and
Barons name without any space, line or distinction between them, sometimes with
a lines distance, or small space only from them; sometimes they are
distinguished from the Lords and Barons by the words Milites, or Cl^ricis
Consilii, and I^st^^iar* added in the Margin and a small space between them, as
in Claus. 5 E. 2. d. 17. Cl. 2 E. 1. and sometimes they are in^exmixed with the
Lords and Barons names, and listed amongst them, as in Claus. 8 E. 2. d. 35.
Roger de Brabazon and 7 others of them are^ named amongs^^th Lords and Barons,
and so in Claus. 3 E. 3. d. 19. Claus. ^ E. 3. p. 2. d. 7.

In the Clause Roll of 25 E. 1. d. 25. the word Milites is inserted in the
Margin over against the Names of the Judges and Kings Counsil, in the Eodem
modo, and in Claus. 5 E. 2. d. 17. Clericis consilii, and Iusticiar. is written
in the Margin, to distinguish them from the Lords, and Barons, (but in no Rolls
besides) without the word Barons superadded to the Barons and Greatmen in the
catalogue of their names.

24. That although the word BARO and BARONS in the Clause Rolls of King John,
Henry the 3d^ Edward 1. 2. and Histories, See My plea for the Lords, p. 60. to
303. 506. 507. Magna Charta Preface, c. 2. 14. 31. 37. Cha^^a Forestae, c. 4.
11. 26. 3^ H. 3. c. 10. 3 E. 1. P^ologue.
Great Charters and Statutes in their reigns be frequently used, applied to all
the Temporal Lords of Parliament, yet in all the Clause Rolls and Writs of
Summons I have seen, no particular persons amongst them are summoned by the
Title of Barons, but only the Barons of Greystok, Graystoke, or Craystoke, and
the Barons of Stafford: In the Clause Rolls of Ed. 1, and 3, so of Rich. 2. H.
4. 5. and 6. writs are frequently issued Iohanni BARONI de Greystoke, Willo.
BARONI de Greystoke, Rado. BARONI de Greystoke, as they are s^iled in the Eodem
modo; yet in other writs, lists, rolls in the Eodem modo, the direction to
these very Barons, is many times Iohanni de Craystoke, or Greystoke, Willo. and
Rado. de Greystoke, without the addition of BARONI annexed to them; which Title
is totally omitted in all the Ro^^s of Edw. the 4th. as the ensuing
Alphabetical and Chronological Table, with my Table to the Exact Abridgement of
the Records in the Tower, will more particularly inform you. So in the Rolls of
King E. 1. and 3. (mentioned in the following Table) the directions in sundry
writs in the ^od^m modo are, Edmundo, and Rado. BARONI de Stafford; and in
other writs to the one of them, he is styled only Rado. de Stafford, BARONI
being omitted in his Title, BARO, being given ^o none (for ought I can find) in
any lists of summons, but to these 2. Barons of Greystoke and Stafford alone.

25. That in my best observation ^ the Title or Addition of MILES or CHIVALER,
was not given to any Temporal Lords or Barons in any writs or lists of Summons
to Parliament before Claus. 49 E. 3. dorse 4. 6. and 50 E. 3. pars 2. d. 6.
wherein summons issued Willielmo le Morle Chivaler, Willielmo de Aldeburgh
Chivaler, Iohanni de Well. Chivaler, Hugoni de Dacre Chivaler; after which it
grew more common under King Rich. the 2. Henry 4. and 5. when many of the
Temporal Lords and Ba^ons had this addition given them sooner or later; those
who wanted it in one, two, three, four or more writs of Summons at first,
before they were Knighted, receiving it in subsequent writs after they were
Knighted. After the beginning of King Henry the 6. and during the reign of Edw.
the 4th. there was scarce any Temporal Lord in the lists of summons but was
styled See Cokes 4 Instit. p. 5.
Chivaler, or Miles, being all genetally Knighted for their greater honor. Of
all the Temporal Lords, I find only one namely Tho. de la Ware, constantly
styled MAGISTER Tho. de la Ware in all writs of summons to him from 23 R. 2.
^05 H. 6. as the en^uing Table will inform you; the true and only reason
whereof I apprehend to be this, that before the temporal Dignity of a Lord or
Baron descended to him, See Co ^ 4 Instit. p. 5.
he had been a Clergyman in sacred Orders; this Title Magister being always
prefixed before the Names of all of the Kings Council who were Clergymen, in
their summons to Parliament as Assista^ts to the Lords House, as the writs and
Table in the next Section will inform you^ not to distinguish him from the
Lords who were Knights, as some mistake, because none of the other Lords who
were not Knights, had this Title Magister given to them, but he alone: Now
whereas in the summons of 1 E. 4. John de Audley, is Cook, ib.
styled Armiger, I conceive it mistaken by the Clerks for Chlr. he being ever
^^iled Chivaler, not Armiger, in the summons of 49 H. 6. d. 6. 2 E. 4. d. 3. 6
E. 4. d. 1. and all other summons else; and not one Baron or Lord Armiger, but
he alone, though unknighted; Armiger being a petty inferior Title, not suitable
to his Lordship or P^erage.

26. That the Prince of Wales, Dukes, Earls and Marquesses, are regularly
styled by their Christian names, and Titles or Places of their Dignities, and
very rarely (yet now and then) by their Seldens titles of Honor, p. 722. Cook 4
Instit. p. p.
Sirnames; but the ^emporal Lords and Barons till the end of King Rich. the 2.
his reign, in the writs of summons directed to them, are for the most part
styled by their Christian names and Surnames, or by their Baronies supplying
Surnames^ and sometimes both by their Surnames and Baronies. That the Ti^le
DOMINUS, was not usually given to any of them, except two, before the reign of
King Henry the 6. The first in my observation to whom this ^itle was given in
any writ of summons, was John de Moubray, who in Claus. 16 E. 3. par. 2. d. 13.
and so in other succeeding writs (though not in all) is styled John de Moubray
DOMINUS Insulae de Axholm: none else having this Title till after the reign of
Rich. the 2. The next so styled is in Claus. 11 H. 4. d. 32. where a writ
issued Iohanni Talbot DOMINO de Fur^vall; which though omitted in some summons
after, is again used in the summons to him Cl. 4 H. 5. d. 16. and Cl. 8H. 5. d.
2. Afte^ which I find none so styled till Cl. 23 H. 6. d. 21. where Robert
Hungerford Chivaler, is styled DOMINUS de Mollins; as he is in Cl. 25 H. 6. d.
24. which gives the title of DOMINUS de Poynings to H^nry Peircy. In Cl. 27 H.
6. d. 24. this title DOMINUS is given to Hungerford, Percy, and 4 more; in Cl.
28 H. 6. d. 26. it is added to 8. In Cl. 29 H. 6. d. 41. to 16. after which it
grew more common to them and most others who were summoned; as the ensuing
Table will more particularly inform you. But though the temporal Lords in the
writs of summons issued to them, were seldom styled Lords or Barons before 23
H. 6. yet it is observable, that when any of them are particularly mentioned in
the Sea Exact Abridgement, p. 18. to 25. 121, to 124.
Parliament Rolls, Acts of Parliament, Commissions or Patents, they are usually
styled BARONS or LORDS, as in the Pro^^gue of Magna Charta 9 H. 3. etc. 2. 14.
37. Charta de Foresta, c. 11. 20 H. 3. c. 9. 51 H. 3. 1. 10. Dictum de
Kenelworth 51 H. 3. 3 E. 1. the Prologue, and c. 23. 13 E. 1. c. 42. 18 E. 1.
The Statute of Quo Warrauto, 25 E. 1. c. 6. 34 E. 1. c. 5. The Prologues to the
S^atutes of E. 3. 14 E. 3. c. 5. and the Commission thereupon, Pa^. 18 E. 3. p.
2. m. 39. 36 E. 3. c. 6. 20 R. 2. c. 3. and other Acts. How fearful Christians
were to give this T^tle of DOMINUS to the Greatest Emperors, and how unwilling
Augustus, and the greatest Christian Emperors were to receive or make use of
i^, unless with the diminution of DOMNUS and DOMPNUS, not Dominus, you may read
in Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary, p. 225, 226. it being a Title Psal^ 110. 1.
Acts 2. 36, Romans 14. 8. 9. 1 Cor. 8 5 6
peculiar to God and Christ: and DEI NO MEN, as Apologia ^. 34.
Ter^ulli^^^ ^liles it; whereas now it is usurped by, and given to every
upstart of the most ignoble extraction, to bring Nobility it self, and the
House of Lords into contempt.

27. That it is the inseparable incommunicable Prerogative, and Supreme Royal
Jurisdiction of the Kings of England (underivable to, and inusurpable by any
other person or persons) by their special Patents, Writs of Creation, Charters
and Solemn Invchi^ures, to make and create Princes of Wales, Dukes, Earls,
Marquesses, Vicounts, Lords, Barons and Peers of the R^alm, and to give them
and their posterities a place, seat, voice in the Parliament and Great Councils
of England, the Supreamest Judicature and highest Court of all others, wherein
they See my Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers.
sit as Judges, and all others Judges in the Courts of Westminster, sit only as
their Assistants, not as Associates or their fellow Judges. This is evident,
not only by all writs of summons issued to the Lords, but likewise by the
express Resolution of all the Nobles and Parliaments of 50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n.
41. 51 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 9. 36 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 94. 40 E. 3. rot. Parl. n.
13. 9 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 14, 15, 16, 17. 11 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 44. An Exact
Abridgement, p. 123, 124, 145, 103, 310, 325, 326, 332, 363, 370, 391, 392,
405, 550, 576, 578, 659, 702, 703.
13 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 21, 22, 23, 20 R. 2. rot. Par. n. 30, 31, 32. 21 R. 2.
rot. Parl. n. 33. 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 76, 78, 82. 9 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 25. 4
H. 5. rot. Parl. n. 13. 3 H. 6. (the case of John Earl Marshal,) rot. Parl. n.
11, 12, 13. 11 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 31. to 36. 33 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 42, 43,
50. 1, 2 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 12, 13, 14. 14 E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 24, 25. 17 E.
4. rot. Parl. n. 16. by all Patents, presidents of creating any Princes, Dukes,
Earls, Marquesses, Vicounts, Lords, Peers and Barons of Parliament, collected
by Mr. John Seldom in his Titles of Honor, Book 2. Chap. 5, 6, 7. Mr. William
Martyn, Cam^den, Mills his Catalogue of Honor, B^ook his Catalogue of Nobility;
Augustine Vincent his Discovery of Errors therein, James York his Union of
Honor, with others who have written of our English Peers, and Nobility, and
Sir Henry Sp^lmas his Glossary, Title Baro, p. 81, 82, 83. and Comes, p. 177,
178. Hence is it, that King Henry the 1. King John, Henry the 3. and Edw. 1. in
their Mag. Char^a, c. 2. Rich. Hagustadiensis Historia, col. 310, 311. Mat.
Paris, p. 55, 56, 256, 257.
Great Charters, and other wri^ing* usually style them, ^OMITES and BARONS
NOSTRI, and MEI; Si quis BARONUM MEORUM v^l COMITVM, or DE BARONIBUS MEIS, or
NOSTRIS; and Glanvil, l. 8. c. 11. l. 9. c. 1. Huntindon Historiarum, l. 5. The
Leiger Book of Ramsay, sect. 171. Pope N^cholas in his Epistle to King Ed. the
Confessor, with our Lawbooks and Henry de Knighton, de Eventib. Ang. l. 2. c.
4. col. 2354^ ^ H^veden Annal. pars po^^erior Mr. Seldom ad Eadmerum Notae, p.
171. 199.
Historians usually style them, BARONS REGIS and REGII, and BARONS VESTRI,
BARONS SVI, speaking of the King; Rex de IURE BARONIBUS SUIS; And hence we
read Ann. 3. H. 3. Fitzh. Prescription 50. this Custem pleaded in Bar of a
Nuper obiit; Quod si aliquis BARO DOMINI REGIS tenens de Rege ob^isset, et non
haberet haeredem nisi filias, et primogenita filiae maritatae sunt in vita^
patris, Dominus Re^ daret postnatam filiam quae remaneret in haered^tate Pa^ris
alicui Militum suorum, cum tota haereditat^ Patris sui de qua obiisset
seseitus, i^ a quod aliae filiae nihil rec^p^rent versus postnatam filiam in
v^ta sua: et omnes Reges habuerunt hanc dignitatem a Conquestu. Yea this is
such an incommunicable Prerog^^ve incident to our Kings alone, that neither the
Emperor himself, nor Pope could ever create an English Earl, Baron or Lord of
Parliament, nor give him any precedence before other Lords in England; of which
we have a late memorable president, in (m) Thomas Arundel of Wardour, M.
Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 413, 417, 418, 419. Mr Cambden^ Elizabetha, An.
1596. p. 126, 127, 128. William Martins History, p. 809, 810.
who being created by the Charter of the Emperor Rodolph the 2. COMES SACRI
IMPERII, una cum universa prole atque posteritate legitima mascula et faeminea
in infinitum; both for his eminent service in the wars against the Turks and
the Nobleness of his. Family; yet it was with this special saving in his Paten,
Serenissimae tamen Principis et Dominae Elizabethae Reginae Angliae, etc.
IURIBUS AC SVPERIORIT ATIBUS SEMPER ILLAESIS ET SALVIS; yet the Queen with the
English Barons, would not acknowledge him for an Earl nor Baron in England upon
any terms; the Queen resolving; That she would by no means permit any of her
sheep, or subjects, to wear the badge, or follow the whistle of any foreign
Shepherd or Prince, but only her own. In the d^bate of which case, it was
alleged by the English Peers Camdeni Elizabetha, p. ^. 127, 128.
So^ius Principis esse (and NON ALTE^RIUS CUIUSCUNQUE) suis Subditis dignitates
destribuere, juxta illud Valeriani Imperatoris; Ea sit tantum dignitas, quae
nobis jubentibus sustinetur. Ejusmodi titulos honorarios nec a Subditis
accipiendos, nec a Principe admittendos. Principis enim Majestati et Subditorum
obsequio multum detrahi, si honores ab exteris accipere permittantur; tacitum
enim sidei pactum inter honorantem et honoratum intercedere videri. Hujusmodi
titulos illecebras esse occultas ad animos subditorum a suis principibus
abstrahendos, etc. That Reginald Mohun (created Earl of Somerset by the Pope in
the reign of Henry the 3.) was never acknowledged to be an Earl by the King and
Lords; nor Robert Curson created a Baron of the sacred Empire by Maximilian the
Emperor, acknowledged to be a Baron in England by King Henry the 8. or his
Nobles, till he created him a Baron himself by his Charter, without giving him
a voice in Parliament, (as King James created this Thomas Arundel such a Baron
by Patent) ut unbrat^lem Baronis et Comitis Sacri Imperii titulum mature
obrueret Some say the Queen committed Arundel for receiving this dignity from
the Emperor; Page 8^0
but William Mar^yn assures us, that Sir Nicholas Clifford and Sir Anth:
Shirley, (whom the French King for their Service in the wars, received into the
Order of S. Michael,) were laid in prison at their coming home, charged to
resign their robes, and see that their names were blotted out of the French
Commentaries. It is the general received opinion of all Cassanaeus Catalog Glor
^aemundi, pars 1. Con^id^ 4. pars 5. Confid. 15, 18, 61, 123, 168. pars 7.
Consid. 1. pars 8, Consid: ^4. Bonus de Curteli, de Nobilitate, pars 3. n. 200,
201. Baldus in Consilio 129. Lucas de Penna, in l. Nemini de Consulibus, l. 12.
Andraeas de Isernia, in D. tit. Quae sunt Regalia, Calvini Lexicon Juridicum,
tit: Baro, Comes, Regalia.
Lawyers: Civil, Canon, Common^ Heralds, and others who have written of
Nobility, that none but Emperors, or Kings, can create Dukes, Earls,
Marquesses, Lords, Barons and Peers, and that only within their own Dominions:
A Rege enimeman^^ it origo D^g^ita^um Temporalium; A Rege et Principe prost^u^t
^t derivantur tanquam a font, om^ es Magistratus et Dignitates, q^ia in eo
sunt omnes dignitatum thesauri recond^i. Ad Regem solum spect at creare Comites
and Barons; Princeps solus magnas Dignitates confer at. Non dic^ur vera
Nobilitas, vel Baro ex inf^udation^, nisi ^ Principe; as they all unanimously
resolve. Hence Ad cap. Innotuit Extrav: tit. De Electione.
Baldus, and De Singula^i Certamine, cap. 32. Seldens titles of Honor, p. 416.
Alciat define a Baron to be one, who has merum, justumqu^ imperium in aliquo
Castro, Oppidione CONCESSIONE PRINCIPIS. In B^h^mia, Moravia, ^ilesia, Lusatia,
and other Provinces i^corporated to it; Summam p^test^em obtinet Rex, et non
solum NOBILES, (...) ET BARONS CREAT, quemadmodum in Silesia ad quatuor
primarios BARONATUS n^mo admittitur nisi vel ab IMPERATORE VEL REGE BOHEMIAE
BARO CREATUS ^VERIT, writes Nolden: de Statu^. Nobil. c. 2.. 86.
Nolden: and Hist. l. 6. Seldens titles of Honor, p. 469, 470.
Dubravius informs as, that one Honora, primum inter BARONS autoritate.
Caesaris Hen^ici (H. the 1.) ad^um PROCERUM gradum proveb batur, quae nunc
BARONS a quercu in Bohemia, appellantur. Ad Rubric^ de Baronibus et co^^u^
Officio, sect. 22 and 32, et ad Pragm. 5. number. 63.
Franciscus Capiblancus resolves; BARONUM nomine Comites ali^sque Titularios
compraehendi nos dicimus; Nam istud verbum BARO, est scala et caput DIGNITAIV
MREGALIUM: And thence he inferrs, Dignitas Super Rub^ic, de Ba^o^^bus, et eorum
Officiis, Sect: 12, 13, 14, 34.
BARONALIS cum sit Dignitas et caput dignitatum, sp. cifice est tribuenda A
PRINCIPE, cujus est eas conf^^re, cum ab eo fluant et refluant. In France, such
Feiffs as are at the Kings pleasure, and by his license erected into Baronies,
are the only Territories that give the Title of a BARON: and the Lord thereof
is styled A BARON per le Conge du Prince, as Seld. p. 47^, 473, 5^7, 539, 540,
541.
Mr. Seldom proves out of Simon Marion P^oydey 9^ who adds, That when A BARONY
came to the King of France by escheat or otherwise, the Kings gi^t of the
BARONY by Charter, made the Patentee A BARON, without other Rules of Creation:
After which he proves by the A Thoma Ca^merio Edi^^ l. 8. tit: 2.
Code of King Henry the 4. that the Titles and Honors of a Duke, Marquess,
Earls and BARONY, and their prerogat^ve, A SOLO REGE TRI^^I POSSVNT. And in
Selden^ Titles of Honor, part 2. c. 4.
Spain all their great Dignity and Titles of Nobility are not only originally
derived from the King; but most of them upon every death, are received Sal. de
Mendoza, l. 3. c, 8. 13. Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l: 8. c. 2. Seldom. p. 575.
again FROM THE KING, though not by any Charter of new Creation, yet by the
Kings acknowledgement of them, by adding the titular Name to the heir, who by
his own name only, without the addition of his Title, signifies to the King the
death of his Ancestor. Therefore doubtless, none but our Kings and Queens alone
can create Earls, Lords, or Baron^ of Parliament in England, there being no one
presid^nt in An^iquity, nor in any Em^ire or Kingdom in the world (that I
remember) to the contrary; and this I conceive to be most clearly resolved in
and by the Statu^es ^f 27 H. c. 24 and 31 H. 8. c. 10.

28. That one of the first B^rons created by Patent, whose Patent is yet
ex^ant, wa^ John de Beauchamp Stew^rd of the Household to King R^chard the 2.
whose Patent runs in this form.

Richardus, etc. Sciatis quod pro bonis et gratuitis servitiis quae dilectus et
fidelis M^les noster Johannes de Beauchamp de HOLT, Parents 11 R: 2 part 1. n:
12. Seldens titles of Honor, p. 747. Spelmanni^in Glo^^^^ium, p. 80, 81.
Senescallus hospitii nostri nobis impendit, ac loco per ipsum tempore
Coronationis nostrae hucusque impensis, et quem pro Nobis tenere poterit in
fururum IN NOSTRIS CONSILIIS and PARLIAMENTIS, necnon pro Nobili et fideli
genere unde d^scendi^, et pro suis magnisicis sensu et circumspectione, ipsum
Iohannem INUNUM PARIUM A^ BARONVM REGNI NOSTRI ANGLIAE PRAEFECIMUS. Volentes
quod IDEM JOHANNES and HAEREDES MASCULI DE CORPORE SUO EXEUNTES, STATVM BARONIS
SVSTINEANT and DOMINI DE BEAUCHAMP, and BARONS DE KIDERMINSTER NUNCUPENTUR. In
cujus etc. datum 10 Octobris.

I find this John Beauchamp only once mentioned in the List of Summons in
Claus. 11 R. 2. dors 24. dated 27 die Decembris, within 3. months of his
creation; where he is styled only Iohanni Beauchamp de Kiderminster, but
neither Dominus de Beauchamp, nor BARO de Kiderminster: After which in the
summons of 27 H. 6. till 12 E. 4. one of his posterity was summoned by the
style of John Beauchamp Miles, DOMINUS DE BEAUCHAMP, without the Title of BARO
de Kiderminster, expressed in any of the Rolls. For the various significations
of the word Baro, and the several kinds or degrees of Barons, you may at
leisure consult Bartholomeus Cassanaeus, his Catalogus Gloriae mundi, pars 8.
Consid. 15. Calvini Lexicon Juridicum, tit. Baro; Sir Henry Spelmans
Glossarium, De Baronibus Diatribe; William Somners Glossarium, tit. Baro and
Baronia, and Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part. 2. chapter 5. sect. 51, 52, chapter 2.
sect. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. chapter 1. sect. 21, 22. chapter 4. sect. 6, 7. chapter 5. sect. 5.
chapter 6. sect. 2. chapter 7. sect. 2. and the several Authors there quoted.

29. That I find no president of any person created a Baron by special writ,
but only one; whereby Henry Bromfleet Knight and the heir males of his body
were created Barons of Vescy, by this writ entered after the Names of the
Temporal Lords in the summons of Claus. 27 H. 6. m. 26. dorso.

See the Exact Abridgment of the meant of the Records in the Tower, p. p. 637.
Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 541. and My Plea for the Lords, p. 153.
Rex dilecto et fidelissimo Henrico Broms^eet Mili^i, salutem. Cum, etc. (ut
supra, usque ibi) Tractatum: (et tum sic) Vobis in fide et ligeantia quibus
Nobis tenemini, etc. ut supra.) nullatenus omittatis. Volumus enim VOS and
HAEREDES VESTROS MASCULOS de corpore vestro legitime exeuntes BARONS DE VESCEY
EXISTERE. T. ^ege apud Westminster. vicesimo quarto die Januarii; of a different date
from that in the other summons, This special writ and clause of creation had
been merely void and nugatory, had the general writ alone ennobled him and his
Posterity, and them Lords and Barons of Parliament.

Yet notwi^hstanding this special writ creating him BARON of Vescy; it is
observable, that in all the subsequent writs of summons of 28, 29, 31, 33, 38
H. 6. nd 1, 3, 7 E 4. he is always styled DOMINUS, but never BARO de VESCY; in
any one List or Roll. I find in the Cl. Rolls of 49 H. 3. 23 E. 1. and 6. 7. 8
E. 2. John de Vescy first, and after him William de Vescy summoned amongst
other temporal Lords. By which it is evident, that there were Lords and Barons
of Vescy (though not so styled in the Rolls) under these 3. Kings who were
summoned to Parliaments; But after the summons of 8 E. 2. there is no mention
of them in any Rolls (the Barony escheating for want of issue male, or by
attainder, as is probable) till Sir Henry Bromfleet and his issu^ males were
created Barons thereof, by the premised writ. A sufficient evidence, that no
general writ of summons created any Gentlemen who were summoned to Parliaments,
Barons, unless they held Lands by Barony and were Barons by Tenure; there being
no Clause or words in the general ordinary writs of Summons, creating any
persons summoned, Earls, Lords or Barons, or giving them these Titles, unless
they were Earls, Lords and Barons by Patent or Tenure before their Summons; the
writs fli^ing them only such as they were when issued to them, and conferring
no new Dignity or Title on them; as I have (1) elsewhere proved at large.

30. That the most ordinary writs of Summons both to the Spiritual and Temporal
Lords, My Plea for the Lords Epistle to the Reader, and p. 127 to 162.
Sherifs, and others use only the words Magnates, or Proceres, Magna ibus and
Proceribus jointly, or one of them alone without the other, to express the
Temporal Lords and Nobles, without the word Barons, or Baronibus, which very
rarely occur^ in any writs, except only in the w^its to the Sherifs, C^aus. 24
E. 3. d. 7. and the writs of Cl. 28 E. 1. d. 3. Claus. 5 E. 3. d. 25. and 12 E.
3. pars 2. d. 32. wherein the word BARONS is mentioned in some of them, and
this Clause Cum Comitibus, BARONIBUS, and caeteris Proceribus, or Magnatibus
Regni nostri, used in others of them, upon extraordinary occasions; bu^ in no
writs besides to my best remembrance; which run usually; Cum Praelatis et
caeteris Proceribus, or Magnatibus, or Proceribus et Magnatibus dicti regni
tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri; without the word BARONIBUS. Which
being not so much as once mentioned in these ordinary (but only in 2. or 3.
extraordinary) writs, it is most evident to all, that the issuing of such writs
to any Knights, Esquires, or Gentlemen, to summon them to Parliaments, can
neither create nor constitute them Barons by writ; because they neither style
them (nor any of the Lords and Nobles, (but those two forementioned) ^arons,
nor use the word BARO at all; but only Proceres, or Magnates.

31. It is evident by all these writs, That the ancient temporal Earls, Lords,
Barons, are most essential necessary constitutive Members of our English
Parliaments and Great Councils, to which they always were, and ought of right
to be summoned; and that no Parliament may or ought to be summoned or held
without them, since both the writs to themselves, as likewise to the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Sherifs of Counties, and Particular
Cities and Corporations which are Counties within themselves, the Wardens of
the Cinque Ports, Justices and other Assistants, in the bodies and essential
parts of them, at least once, twice, or more frequently thus recite; Quia, etc.
ordinayimus quoddam Parliamentum apud We^^m. etc. CUM PROCERIBUS, or
MAGNATIBUS, or MAGNATIBUS ET PROCERIBUS dicti regni nostri tenere, etc.
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris, or cum PROCERIBUS,
MAGNATIBUS, or MAGNATIBUS and PROCERIBUS, praedictis super dictis nego^iis
tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri: Which I having more largely
evidenced in my Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers, shall here no further
insist on.

32. That sometimes the King summoned some particular Bishops and Lords to
treat with him about public businesses by writ, much like to a summons to
Parliament, without summoning other Lords, for which take this president in
lieu of more.

Cl. 6 E. 2. d. 5. Rex venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Bathon. et
Wellen. Episcopo salutem. Quia pro diversis arduis negotiis Nos et terram
Vasconiae tangentibus in brevie ad parts Franciae, concedente Domino, sumus
profecturi, ac vobiscum super aliquibus quae Nos tangunt ante passagium nostru^
ad parts praedictas habere volumus Colloquium et tractatum. Vobis mandamus in
fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus
aliis praetermissis sitis ad Nos apud Cant. die Jovis prox. ante festum
Ascensionis Domini prox. futur. super praemissis Nobiscum tractaturi. Et hoc
sicut Nos et honorem nostrum diligitis et indignationem nostram vitare
volueritis nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Westminster. 3. die Maii. Consim. Breve
dirigitur Dom. H. Wynton Episcopo. The like Episcopo Norwich, Waltero de Thorp,
Gilberto de Middleton. T. ut supra, to come to the King apud Dover, another
day.

33 It is most apparent by these respective Clauses twice recited in all
ancient and modern writs of summons to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, and 4
or 5 times in the writs of Prorogation and Resummons to them (hereafter cited
Section 7.) Vobiscum and cum caeteris Praelatis (or) cum Praelatis et caeteris
Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni habere volumus (or proponimus) Colloquium
and Tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc. quod personaliter ad dictos diem and locum
intersitis, Nobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti
regni super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri: which
make not the least mention of their sitting, treating, or consulting with the
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Commons of the Realm, or of theirs with the
Lords. And by the like Clauses in the writs of Summons to the Kings Counsil,
and in the writs issued to Sheriffs for electing Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses: The first part whereof recites, Quia nos de avisamento et assensu
Consilii nostr^, etc. quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud W. etc. t^neri
ordinavimus, et ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti regni
nostri Colloquiu^ ^abere et Tractatu^ (without mentioning any Conference or
Treaty at all of the Commons jointly with the Prelates, Lords and Great men in
the Parliament) who by the writ are to be elected, re^urned, summoned, empowered
only; Ad faciendum et consentiendum hiis, quae tunc ibidem de Communi Consilio
regni nostri, or Praelatorum, Magnatum and Procerum dicti regni nostri (divina
favente Clementia, contigerit ordinari. That the Lords and Commons nev^r sat
and consulted together as one entire House in the Parliaments of England, since
their first Summons to our Parliaments, but that the^ always sat and
consulted asunder one from the other: Therefore Sir Edw. Cook his over-confident
Assertion (without any real ground of Authority or reason) in his 4.
Institutes, p. 4. Certain it is, that at the first both Houses ^ate together;
as it appears by Modus tenendi Parliamentum (which directly avers the
contrary, Sect. 15, 16* 17, 27.) and by 5 E. 3. n. 3. other places of the same
Roll, and in 6 E. 3. in diverse places it appears, that the Lords and Commons
sat together; (when as both those Parliament Rolls and others un^er Ed. 3.
expressly evidence the contrary, as I have In my Preface to an Exact Abridgement
of the Records of the Tower.
elsewhere fully evidenced) must be exploded as Apochryphal, and enumerated
amongst his other mistakes.

34 That the Temporal Lords could not impose any Tax, Aid or Subsidy upon the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual Lords or Clergy without or
against their particular grants or assents in Convocation, no more than the
Spiritual Lords and Clergy could impose any Aids or Taxes upon the Temporal
Lords and Commons; as I have formerly evidenced (p. 113. to 120. 148, 149, 153,
154, 155.) For further evidence whereof I shall hereunto subjoyn this ensuing
memorable writ, casuall^ omitted out of the first Section, page 31. where it
should have been placed.

Clau^. 4 ^d. 3. m. 3. dorso. Pro Reg^ de Auxilio habendo d^Clero pro
resistentia terrae Franciae,
Rex venerabili in Christo Pa^ri S. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuar. totius
Angliae Primati, salutem. A vestra memoria non excidit, ut speramus, qualiter
nuper apud El^ham in praesentia vestra et aliorum Praelatorum et Procerum de
regno nostro, quos tunc ibidem pro magnis et arduis nego ^iis nostris fecimus
congregari, exposita ^uerunt inter alia, negotia contingentia Nos et Regem
Franciae; et post diligentem tractatum inde habitum, tam vobis quam ipsis
videbatur, quod pro pace habenda cum ipso Rege, esset omnibus modis et viis
quibus po^sumus exhaered^tionis periculo (obviare) insistend. Et si for^an ide^
Rex vias Pacis rationabiles recusar^t, et ad exhaeredationem nostram quoad
Ducatum praedictum, et alias terras quas habemus subDominio suo, ni^eretur,
quod ad defensionem nostram contra ipsu^ cu^ Dei adjutorio vires nostras
opponere deberemu^. E^ ad hoc, tam vos, quam c^^^eri Praela^i (...) Magnates,
tunc ibidem existen. praebuistis consilium, ^et promisistis opem et auxilium
opponere oportunium. Et su^er hoc concordatum existi^, quod Par^iamentum
nostrum apud Wynton, ad diem Dominicam prox. ante festum Sancti Gregor^i Papae
prox. prae eri^um summoneri f^cerimus. Verum, quia in eodem P^rliamento
expositis negotiis supradictis, habitaque delibera^ione super modo et forma
defensionis contra potentiam ipsius Regis, si forsan dictas terras nostras
invadere voluerit, apponendo petitoque sigillatim a q^^liber Prael^to et
Magnate, CUIVSMODI SUBSIDIUM NOBIS IN EODEM EVEN^U FACERE VOLEBAT, ac Comitibus
et BARONIBUS voluntatem in ea part Nobis benevole exponen^ibus, dicti Praelati
responderu^^, quod prop^er absentiam vestram eorum responsum tunc facere
nequiverunt, sed IN CONVOCATIONE ea de causa facienda taliter facere volebant,
quod inde contentari deberemus. Nos igitur ad pericula et dampna quae non solum
nobis, sed etiam vobis, et toto regno nostro evenire poterunt, si praefatus Rex
Nobis guerram movere voluerit, ut est dictum, nisi de bona et forti resisten^ia
provida^u^, ^^bitae considerationis in^uitum di^igentes, attenden^es quoque
quod ad hoc non solum ex Ligeantiae debi^o, sed etiam pro tantis et tam
ine^^imabi ibus evitandis periculis, Vos et caeteri Praelati ^atu^q^e Clerus
regni nostri manus apponere tenemini adju^rices; Vobis mandamus rogantes,
qua^inus ad diem Lunae prox. post sestum Sanctorum Tiburt^^ and Valeriani prox
futur: convenire fac. omnes Praelatos, tam Religiosos, quam alios, totumqu^
C^erum vestrum Cantuar. Provinciae coram Vobis, eisque dicta negotia et
pe^icula imminentia seriosius exponere studeatis. Inducentes eos modis et viis
quibus expedire vide^i^is, quod tantae necessitatis articulo TALE NOBIS
SUBSIDIVM FACIANT, pro tantis periculis evitandis, quod per vestrum et ipsorum
subventionem, jura et honorem nostri et totius regni nostri conservare,
ipsosque et totum populum nostrum ab hostium inc^rsibus ^ueri, et protegere
valeamus domino nobis assistente. Mittemus autem ad vos ad ^iem et locum
praedictos quosdam de fidelibus nostris, ad praemi sa prosequenda and ^ieri
curanda prout eis tunc ex part nostra injungetur. Test Rege apud Winton, 18
die Marcii. Anno Regni nostri quarto.

35. That the Lords in P^rliament were the usual See my Plea for the Lo^ds.
Here, p. 12, 13.
Judges not only in all Cr^minal, and Civil Causes and writs of Error, but
likewise in all cases of Precedence, and Controversies conc^rning Peers and
Peerage, as is evident not only by the memor^ble pr^sidents of 3 H. 6. rot
Parl. n. 10. to 14. 27 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 19. 14 E. 4. rot. Part. n. 25. in
Controversies of this Nature there recorded; but by these two presidents of
la^er times remembered by Mr. Cambde^.

In the Cambdeni Elizabetha, p. 144, 145.
Parliament of 39 Eliz. Anno 1597. Thomas Baron de la Ware pe^i^ioned the Queen
to be restored to his anci^nt place and ^eat in Parliamen^, whose case was
this. His father, William, by judgment of Parli^ment in the reign of Edward
the 6. for endeavoring to poison his Uncle the Lord de la Ware, to gain his
inheritance and honor; was disabled to enjoy any inheritance or honor that
might descend to him by his Unkles death: Afterward in Queen Mary's reign he
was condemned of High Treason; and not long after entirely restored, as if he
had not been condemned. Being disabled by his first Sentence to inherit his
Unkles honor, upon his death, he was by Queen Elizab^ths special Favor and
Letters Patents, created Baron de la Ware de novo, and sat only as a younger
Baron then newly created, during his life; After his death, his son
petitioning, to enjoy the place of his Ancestors in Parliament, the Queen
referred the business to the Lords in Parliament; who finding the judgment
against William his Father, to be only personal, and not to bind his children,
and that the judgment given against him under Queen Mary, was no obstacle,
both because he could not lose that Dignity and Honor by it, which then he had
not (his Uncle being then alive) and because he was soon after entirely
restored; and for that the an^ient Dignity and Barony was not extinct by his
new Creation, but only suspended during his life, being not vested in him at
the time of his late Creation; the Lords thereupon, locum ^i avitum
ADJUDICAVERUNT inter Barons Willoughbeium de Eresby, and Berkleium, in quo
rite locatur. In the same Parliament, it was resolved by the Lords in the case
of Thomas Howard Baron of Walden, Knight of the G^rter; who being sick and
unable to come to the House himself, Baron Scroop, as his Proxy, was brought
into the Lords House in his Parliamentary Robes between two Barons, the chief
King of Arms going before him; where presenting his Patent and Creation, when
the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal had read it, he was placed below all the rest
of the Barons, though he were the younger son of a Duke, whose sons by an Order
of Parliament made in the 6. year of King Henry the 8. ought to take place of
all Viscounts, and other Barons, which the Lords then resolved, to be intended
out of P^rliament, but they ought to sit in the Parliament house only according
to the time of their being created Barons; as Mr. Cambden relates out of the
Lords I^urnal.

36. That the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Great men of the Realm, See here, p:
12.^ See my plea for the Lords.
are the Proper Judges of all Causes and Controversies there deba^ed between
the King and his people, and are all bound by Oath, as well as the King, to
observe, defend and maintain the rights of the Realm and Crown of England; and
that more especially by their Oath of Fealty and Homage, whereby they were tied
to the King, and charged to appear when summoned in the writs of summons, as
you may read more at large P. 194 to 208.
before, in Spelmans Glossarium, Tit. Fidelitas, Homagium, and ligeantia, and
in P. 218, 219, 220.
Mat. Paris, who records, A^. 1209. that K. John caepit HOMAGIA de omnibus
hominibus libere tenentibus et etiam duodecim annorum pueris, quos omnes post
FIDELIT ATEM FACTAM in osculum pacis recepit ac dem^sit. Et Wallenses (quod
anteactis temporibus fu^ra^ inauditum) venientes ad Regem HOMAGIA fecerunt
ibidem, licet tam divitibus, quam pauperibus esset o^erosum. Then passing into
Ireland with a great Army, there came to Dublin to meet him, plus quam viginti
Reguli illius regionis, qui omnes timore maximo perter^ iti HOMAGIUM ILLI ET
FIDELITATEM FECERUNT, as the Sea Hoveden, p. 533, 534, 540, 541, 545, 546.
highest Obligation of their future Loyalty, fidelity and subjection to him.
Upon which Account, Homage is frequently styled HOMAGIUM LIGEUM, LIGEANTIA and
LIGAN^IA, by Bracton, l. 2. c. 35. f. 79. Glanvil, l. 7. c. 10. Guliclmus
Neubrigensis, Hist. l. 2. c. 37. Chron. Here, p. 204
Iohannis Bromton, col. 1005. Fleta, l. 3. c. 16. Britton, ch, 68. De Homages,
Custumar. Vetus Normanniae, c. 43. Cooks 7 Rep. Calvin's case, f. 7. 1. Instit.
f. 65. a. Horns Myrrour des Justices, chapter 35, 36, 37, 38. Spelmans Glossarium,
Homagium and Ligeantia; because i^ most strictly unites and binds the King and
his Subjects together, hunc, ad protection^m and justum Regimen; illos, ad
reverentiam, tributa et d^bitam Subjectionem, ^t obed^^ntiam, as they resolve;
whereupon the Lords are enjoined in their writs of summons person^lly to appear
in Parliaments and Great Councils, in fide and homagio QUIBUS NOBIS TENEMINI,
as I formerly observed.

37. That the n^mbers of Earls, Barons, Temporal Lords and Great men summo^ed
to our Parliaments and Great Councils, andentred after the Eodem modo, and
Consimiles literae in the Rolls and Li^ts of Summons are often times very various
and different; there being many more of them summoned to some Parliaments and
Great Council^ than to others, as you may easily discern by comparing their
Numbers, which I have here presented you with in the gross after every writ;
the Prince of Wales himself, the Duke of Lancaster, and other Dukes, and Earls,
as well as inferior Lords, Barons and Great men, being left out of some Lists
of Summons, one, two, or three Parliaments and Great Councils together, or
more; and then inserted again into others; the true reasons whereof I apprehend
to be these ensuing.

1. Their absence in foreign parts or els^where in the wars, or upon other
special services of the King; in which cases no wr^ts of Summons issued to
them; and if their names were entered in the Lists of the summons, they were
usually cancelled or rased out of them; witness the Here p. 217, 218.
forecited entrys, in the Lists o^ Claus. 11 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 11. And Claus.
12 E. 3. pars 3. dors. 32.

2ly. Their abode Here p. 185, 186.
beyond the Seas upon their own particular occasions, Both which causes
frequently happened during the wars with France, Scotland, and Ireland; and
whiles our Kings and Nobles had any Lands and Possessions in France, Aquitain,
Normandy, Anjow, Picardy, and other parts beyond the Seas. Many of the Earls,
Lords, Barons, Great men, and our Kings themselves being often times by reason of
Wars, Treaties, Embassies, and defense of their Inheritances, absent in foreign
parts, when Parliaments were summoned and held in England by the Custos Regni,
or Commissioners; at which times I generally find there were fewer Earls,
Barons and Noblemen summoned to our Parliaments and Great Councils, than in
times of Peace, or when our Kings were personally present in England, most of
the Earls and Temporal Lords attending on them in person in their w^rrs and
voyages into foreign parts, as on Ed. 3 H. 4 5, and 6.

3ly. The Civil wars happening now and then between the King, Lords and Barons:
upon which occasion some of the Temporal Lords whiles in open hostility and
rebellion against the King, were now and then (as I conjecture) left out of the
Lists of Summons, because they could not be conveniently summoned, or would not
appear upon any summons if sent them.

4ly. The attainders, or Outlawries of some Earls, Lords and Barons of High
Treason for their wars, Insurrections, Rebellions, or other Treasons against
the King; which disabled themselves and their Posterities to be summoned to
Parliaments, till pardoned* or restored by the King to their honors, blood,
Lordships, Baronies and L^nds.

5ly. The Alie^ation of some Baronies by te^ure, by sales, gifts, marriages,
escheats, or otherwise from one person, name, family to another, whereby the
former Barons only by Tenure, were no more summoned after such Alienations, but
the new Tenants who purchased or possessed them.

6ly. The deceases of some Earls, Lords and Barons without heirs males of their
Bodies, or the Infancy or nonage of their heirs males at the time of their
death^, who usually had no writs of summons till their Cook 4. Instir. p. 1.
full age; though the Prince of Wales, and Kings own sons were sometimes
summoned to Parliaments during their Minority, as will appear by comparing the
dates of their wri^s with the time of their births mentioned in our Historians,
but few Nobles else were summoned during their Minority, for ought appears, See
My Minors no Senators.
Minors being unfi^ to be Senators, Counse^lors, Judges in the Supremest
Council* Judica^ure of the Realm, as I have In my plea for the Lords.
elsewhere proved.

7ly. Our Kings Liberty and Prerogative; who though obliged by the an^ient Laws
and customs of the Realm, the Con^^i^utions of Clarindon, the Great Charter of
King John, ( See my Plea for the Lord, p. 21, 22 35. (...), p. 217.
Ad habendum COMMUNE CONSILIUM REGNI a^ Auxiliis assidendis et de Scutagiis
assidendis, (...) faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, COMITES and
MAIORES BARONS REGNI SINGILLATIM PER LITER AS NOSTRAS, etc.) and ex debito
Iustitiae (as 4 lust^^. p. 1.
Sir Edward Cook informs us,) to summon EVERY ONE OF THE TEMPORAL LORDS BY
DESCENT OR CREATION being of full age, by writs to our Parliaments when held;
yet they have likewise a Freedom and Prerogative to create New Earls, Lords,
Barons by special Writs or Patents, or to Summon what particular Gentlemen and
others of Parts and Abilities they please to their Parliaments and Great
Councils, to counsel and advise them, as the exigency of their affairs shall
require, and they and their Counsel shall think necessary, pro hac vice tantum,
or so often as they deem necessary, without creating them Earls, Lords, or Barons
for life or inheritance, by their general writs of Summons, as I have See my
Plea for the Lords Epistle to the Reader, and p. 147. to 161
elsewhere evidenced.

38. That the Eodem mod^ mandatum est, etc. And Consimiles literae diriguntur
subscriptis, in the Clause Rolls, are for the most part general, without
defining the Degrees and Qualities of the persons underwritten, except Dukes
and Earls (specified by their Titles) but few else besides them. And sometimes
special: As Eodem modo mandatum est Comitibus et Baronibus subscriptis, Here p.
163, 164, 171, etc.
Consimile mandatum habent singuli Comites, BARONS, and MILITES subscripti.
Consimiles Literae diriguntur Comi^^bus, BARONIBUS and MILITIBUS SUBSRIPTIS. So
as it is a difficult matter certainly to define by the large list of names,
which of them were real Lords and Barons of Parliament, and which not, except
those only who were usually summoned and listed in the Rolls amongst the Lords
and Barons, and their posterity after them; or such who are expressly styled
either Barons or Lords in the writs or lists of names, of which I shall give
you one instance. In the summons of Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 25. dorso. in the Eod^^
modo mandatum est Comitibus et Baronibus subscriptis, there is this List of
names, with a particular distinction made of their Degrees in the Margin;
declaring all in that Catalogue, to be Earls and Barons; and in no Roll else
upon my best observation.

Guidoni de Bello Campo Comiti War. Adamaro de Valen^. Comiti Pembr. H^mfrido
de Bohun. Comiti Heref. and Essex. Comitibus.
Iohanni de Warenna Comiti surr. Edmundo Comiti Arundel. Roberto de Veer Comiti
Oxon.
Hugoni de Veer Hugoni le Dispenser Iohanni de Hastings. Ioh. de Gifford de
Brimesfeld Willo Martyn Iohanni de Ferrar. Willo. de Mareschall. Roberto de
Clifford. Iohanni de Somery. Roberto Fill. Pagan^. Iohanni Botetourte. Roberto
fill. Walteri. Pagano Tybetot. Bartho. de Badles^ere. Iohanni de Segrave: Pho.
de Ky^e. Edmundo Deincourt. Iohanni de Gray. Rico. de Gray. Iohanni la Ware.
Willo. de Echingham. Thomae de Furnivall. ^aronibus.
Iohanni de Clavering. Peero Corbet. Rado. Basset de Draiton. Iohanni Dengaine
(Engayne) Fulconi Lestrange. Willo. le Latymer. Fulconi fill. Warrini. Roberto
de Ufford. Boronibu^.
Iohanni de Bello Campo de Somerset. Hugoni de Courtenay. Rado. de Gorges.
Henr. de Lancastr. Mauricio de Berkele. Thomae Bardolfe Roberto de Monte alt^.
Iohanni de Moh^^.
An exact Alphabetical and Chronological Table of all Dukes, Earls, Marquesses,
Princes of Wales, and foreign Kings summoned to the Great Councils and
Parliaments of England, from 49 H. 3. to 23 E. 4. with the numbers of the
Parliaments, years, and dorses of the clause Rolls of each King (when there
were two or more Parliaments in one year) to which they were summoned, or
resummoned by Writs of Prorogation; p. in the parenthe^is signifying the part,
d. the dorse, and the next figures, the membranaes of the dorse or dorses
wherein they are recorded. The other dorses you may find in the forecited Writs.
A
ALbemariae, Thomas Duke of Albemarl, or Aumarle (Uncle to K. R. d 2.) summoned
to Parl. 9 R. 2. Edward Duke thereof, 21, 23, R. 2. and 1 H. 4. Thomas Duke of
Clarence, Earl of Albemarle, so styled in his summons, 1, 2, 3, 4 H. 5. A^^gos,
Angos, Danego^, or Anguish, Gilbert de Vmfravil, Earl thereof summoned to Parl.
An. 25 (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16, 18.) 28 (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 33, ^4, ^5, Ed.
1. 1 (d. 11. 19.) Ed. 2. Robert de (...) Earl thereof summoned, 2, 3. 12, (d.
11. 29.) 1^, 14, (d. 5. 2.) 15, 16, 17, 18. (d. 5. 21, 23. 34*) ^. 2. Gilb^^t
de Umfr^vil 6, (d. 4, 9, 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9. (d 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 12, 13,
(d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23, 33.) 15. 16, (d. 13, 39) 17, 18* 20, 21, 22, (d. ^, 7.
(...).) 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, (d. 7, 8.) ^1, (d. 2. 21.) 32, 33, 34, (d.
4. 35.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, (d. 4, 6.) 50 E. 3. 1, (d. 37.)
2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 13, 29.) 3. (d. 32) R. 2. All these, 3 Umfravils, though
the Title of their Earldom was Scottish, were all originally English Barons of
Prodhow and Kime in Lancashire, and summoned to Parliament as Barons, though
listed amongst the Earls, by reason of their Scottish Dignity; as you may read
at large in Augustine Vinc^n^s Discovery of Errors in Mr. Brook his Catalogue of
Nob^lity, p. 10, 11, 12. Mr. Cambden, Scotland, p. 45. and here p. 21 2. which
will rectify the mistake in Brooks Abridgement, Title Parliament, 84. The last
of them dying without Heirs males in 4 R. 2. they ceased to be summoned.
Aquitain, John Duke there^f, and of Lancaster, sum^moned by that Title, Cl. 15,
16, 17, 20, 21 R. 2. See Lancaster. Arundel, Rich. Fitz* Alan. Earl thereof
summoned 23, (d. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16, 18,) 28, (d. 3, 17.) E. 1. Edmund
Earl of Arundel summoned, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8, 9, 11, 19.) 2, (d. 11, 14, 20,) 3,
(d. 16, 17.) 4, 5, (d. 11, 17, 25.) 6, (d, 3^.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 19. 35.)
9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8, 14.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5, 29.) 15,
(d. 16.) 16, (d. 20.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5, 15, 21, 34,.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2.
Richard 5 E, 3. (d. 7, 25. pars 2. (d. 7.) 6, (d. 4, 9, 19, 36.) 7, (d. 3.) 8,
(d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 12,
(d. 32.) 13, (d. 3. 28.) 14, (d. 33.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 18, (d.
14.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22. (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (d.
23.) 24, (d. 3.) 25, (d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28. (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7,
8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. (d. 4. 35,) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.)
38, (d. (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9,
10, 11.) 47 (d. 15.) 50, (d. 6.) Ed. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.)
4, (d. 12.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10, 37.) 8, 9, 10, 11, (d. 13, 24.)
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 R. 2. ^homas, 1, 2, 3, 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d.
4. ^ 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3 H. 5. John 4 H. 5. Richard 1, 2. 3 H. 6.
William summoned, 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49 H. 6. 7, 9, 12, 22,
and 23 E. 4. Athol. A. Writ, Iohanni Comiti Athol. Custodi^terrae Regis Scotiae
ultra mare, to summon others in Scotland, 33 (d. ^0.) E 1. David de Strabolgi
Earl of Athol, summoned to Parliaments, 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.)
18, (d. 15, 21, 34.) 20 (d. 2.) E. 2. 4, (d. 13, 38, 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25.
p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9, 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 14.) E. 3. David 35,
(d. 36) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) Ed. 3. These David's de Strabol^^,
were Barons of Mitford in England, though the Title of their Earldom was
Scottish, and summoned thus to Parliaments in respect of this English Barony,
though listed amongst the Earls, as you may read in Mr. Brook his Catalogue of
Nobility, and Augustine Vincent his Discovery of the Errors therein, p. 36, 37,
38. to whom I refer you, both for their pedigre and death, without heirs males.
B
BEdford, Ingeram de Cou^y Earl thereof summoned to Parl. 43 E. 3. d, 24. John
Duke of Bedford summoned, 2, 3, 4, 5, H. 5. 4, 11, 13 H. 6. Boughan (in
Scotland) Henry de Bellomon^e, (Beaumont) Earl thereof summoned, 7, (p. 2. d.
3.) 8, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8, 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12,
(p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14 (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. See Vincent, p. 5.
Buckingham, Thomas de Wodestoke Earl thereof, and Constable of England
summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 12.) 5, (d. 40.) 6,
(d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35) R. 2. Humfrey Duke thereof summoned, 23,
25, 27, 28, 29. 31, 33, 38 H. 6. Henry Duke thereof summoned, 22 and 23 (d.
10.) E. 4.
C
CAmbridge (Cantabrigiae) Edmund (Son to King Edward 3.) Earl thereof summoned,
37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49,
(d. 4, 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6,) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 7,
(d. 10, 37.) 8, (d. 35.) R. 2. Richard Earl thereof summoned, 2 (d. 16,) H. 5.
Cantiae. See Kent. Cestriae (Chester) Edward Prince of Wales, (eldest Son of K.
^. 1.) Earl of Chester, and so styled in the Writs of Summons, 30 (d. 8. 13.)
E. 1. ( Edward eldest Son of K. E. 2. Prince of W^les, Earl thereof summoned,
14 (d. 23.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5, 15, 21, 24.) E.
2. Edward Son of Edward 3. Prince of Wales, 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27,
(d. 12.) 28 (d. 6.) E. 3. Richard Prince of Wales, 50 (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. See
Prince of Wales. Clarence, Thomas Duke thereof summoned, 1. (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d.
16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 26. H. 5.) George Duke thereof summouned, 49 H. 6. (d.
6.) 7, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Cornwall, Edmun^ ^arl thereof
summoned, 23, (d. 3, 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 17, (d. 9. 16, 18.) 28, (d.
17.) ^. 1. P^ter de Gaveston, Earl thereof summoned, 1, (d. 8. 11.) 3, (d. 16,
17.) E. 2. John de Eltham ^ the Kings Brother) Earl thereof summoned, 4 (d. 1^,
32, 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4, 9, 19, 36.) 7* (p. 2. d.
3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8, 18.) E. 3. Edward Prince of Wales, Duke of Co^nwall
summoned, 24, (p. 2. d. 33.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28 (d.
16.) E. 3. Richard Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwall summoned, 50 (p. 2. d.
6.) (...). See Prince of Wales.
D
DErby, the Earl thereof summoned, 49 (d. 11.) d. 3. Henry de Lancaster, Earl
thereof summoned, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15, p. 2. d. 11, 40.) 14, (p. 2. d. 33.) 16,
(p. 1. d. 30.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18 (p. 1. d. 14.) E. 3. Henry de Lancaster,
Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d. 45,) 10, (d. 42.) 11. (d. 13, 24.) 12, (d. 42.)
13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15. (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17 (d. ^0.) 18, (d. 23.) 20,
(p. 1. d. 15.) ^1, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. Devon. Hugh de Countenay Earl thereof
summoned, 9 (d. 8, 28.) 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11, 40)
12, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33.) 15, p. 1. d 37.) 17, (p. 1. d.
25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2, d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22,
(p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1.
d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d, 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.)
32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 4, 35.) 36, (d. 16) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.)
4^. (d. 23.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9* 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d.
4. 6.) 50 (p. 2. d. 6.) ^. 3. Edward de Courteney, Earl of Devon. summoned, 2,
(d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4* (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 37, 40.) 8,
(d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14,
(d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 31.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1.
d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3* (d. 17.) 5* (d. 28.)
7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. ^.) 14 (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9.) 2,
(d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7 (d. 9.) H. 5. Hugh Courten^y
Earl thereof summoned, 8, (d. 2.) 9 (d. 13.) H. 5. Thomas Earl thereof
summoned, 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27,
(d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31* (d. 36.) 33 (d. 30.) H. 6. Henry Earl
thereof summoned, 38* (d. 30.) H. 6. Dorset, John Beauford, created Marquess
Dorset, summoned by this Ti^le, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1 (d. 37.)
H. 4. Thomas Beauford Earl thereof summoned, 2 (d. 16.) 4, (d. 1, 6.) H. 5.
Edward Earl thereof summoned, 20, (d. 17.) made Marq^ess Dorset, and thus
summoned, 22 (d. 21.) H. 6. Thomas Marquess Dorset summoned, 22, and 23 (d.
10.) E. 4. Dublin, John de Vere Marquess thereof summoned, 10. (d. 42.) R. 2.
E
EBor. See York. Essex, Humfry and John Bohun, successively Earls of Hereford
and Essex summoned. See Hereford, Henry Earl of Essex summoned, 49 (d. 6.) H.
6. 2, (d. 3.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Ewe in Normandy,
Henry Bourgchier, Earl thereof summoned, 13 (d. 2.) H. 6. See Brook and Vincent
p. 149. etc. in E. We. Exeter, John Holland Duke thereof summoned, 21, (p. 1.
d. 17.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2 (d. ^.) H. 4. Thomas Duke of Exeter
summoned, 5, (d. 11.) H. 5, 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) H.
6. Henry Duke thereof summoned, 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d* 16.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d.
39.) H. 6.
G
GLoucester, Gilb, de Clare, Comes Gloucestr. and Hert^ord, summoned, 23 (d.
9.) E. 1. Radulphus de Monte Hermerii, Comes Gloucestriae, summoned, 27, (d.
16, 18.) 28, (d. 3, 17.) 30, (d. 8, 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34 (d. 2.) E.
1. Gilbert de Clare Com. Gloucestr. and Heref. summoned, 1. (d. 8, 11.) 2, (d.
11. 14, 26.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, (d 11.) 5, (d. 11, 17, 25.) 6, (d. 3, 31.) 7,
(d. 16 27.) E. 2. Hugo de Audele, Audeley, Comes Gloucest^iae, summoned, 11,
(p. 1. d. 8, 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d, 32.) 13, (d. 2. d. 28.) 14, (p. 1.
d. 2^, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p, 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1.
d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3. Thomas Dux Gloucestriae, the Kings Uncle,
summoned, 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13, 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.)
15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2. Thomas de Le
Spencer, Com^s Gloucestr. summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1 (d.
37.) H. 4. Humfrey Dux Gloucestriae, summoned, 2, (d. 11.) 3, (d. 15) 4 (d.
16.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.)
9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 14, (d. 2.) 15, d. 18.) 16, (d. 33.) 18,
(d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25 (d. 24.) H. 6. Richard Dux Gloucestriae,
summoned, 9, (d. 3.) 12. (d. 41.) 22, and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4.
H
HEreford, Humfry de Bohun. Earl of Hereford, and Essex su^moned, 23, (d. 3,
9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 6.) (...) (d. 3, 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33,
(d. ^* 21.) 34^ d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8, 11, 1^.) 2, (d. (...), 14, 20.) 3, (d.
16, 17.) 4, (d. 3.) 5, (d. 11^ 17, 25.) 6, (d. 3, ^1.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d.
^9, 35.) 9 (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8, 12, 19.) 1^, (d. 11, ^9.) 13, (d. 17.) 14 (d. 5,
29.) E. 2. John de Boh^n. Earl o^ Hereford and Essex, summoned, 20, (d. 4) E.
2, 1^ (p. 2. d. 11, 16.) 2, (d. 15, 23, 31.) 4, (d. 13, 32, 41.) 5, (p. 1. d.
7, 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4, 9, 19, ^6.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 28.) 9, (d.
8. 28.) E. 3. Humfry de Bohun. Earl of Hereford and Essex, and of Hereford and
Northampton, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8, 15. p. 2. d. 11, 40.) 12, (p. 2.
d. 32.) 16, (p. 2, d. 22.) 20, (p. 2.) 22. 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22,
(p. 2. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1.
d. 6.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.)
34, (d. 4. 35.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E.
3. Hertford, Earls thereof. See Gloucester. Huntingdon, William de ^lyn^on,
Earl thereof summoned, 11. (p. 2. d. 11, 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 14, (p. 1. d.
23, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.)
18, (p. 1. d. 14,) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1.
d 32. p. 2. d. 3, 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.)
26, (d. 14.) 27. (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Guiscard de Angle, Or D'angle Earl
thereof summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13, 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. John de
Holland. Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d.
37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 25.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. John
de Holland, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d. 2.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 20, (d.
27.) H. 6. William, Earl thereof summoned, 22, and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4.
I
IReland, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland summoned, 11; (d. 24.) R. 2.
K
KArliol Andrew de Harcla, Earl thereof; summoned 16, (d. 11. 26.) E. 2.
Kendal, John Duke of Bedford, Earl thereof summoned, 2, (d. 16) H. 5. Kent,
(Cantiae.) Edmond (the Kings Brother,) Earl thereof summoned, 15, (d. 16.) 16,
(d. 36.) 17, (d. 27.) 20. (d. 4) E. 2. (The Kings Uncle) 1. (p 2. ^ 11. 1^.) 2.
(d. 15. 23. 31.) 4. (d. 41. E. 3. John Earl thereof summoned* 22. (p. 2. d. 3.)
25. (p. 1. d. 5.) 26. (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas Earl thereof summoned. 34. (d. 4.)
E. 3. Thomas de Holland Earl thereof (Brother to the King) summoned, 4. (d.
32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6. (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d.
42.) 11, (d. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d.
23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. ^9.) 20* (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) ( R. 2.
Edward, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. Edward Earl of Kent
summoned, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41) 22, and 23, (d.
10.) E. 4. King of Castil, Leon and Arragon (John Duke of Lancaster:) See
Lancaster. King of Scots, Edward de Balliolo, King thereof summoned, 22, (p. 2.
d. 3.) (p. 1. d. 19. E 3.
L
LAncaster, Edmund Earl thereof (the Kings Brother) summoned, 23, (d. 9.) E: 1.
Thomas, Earl thereof summoned: 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8, 9.)
33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 2.) Ed. ^. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14.
20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4. (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 30.) 7, (d. 16. 27.)
8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 12.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14,
(d. 5. 29.) Ed. 2. Henry de Lancastria, Earl thereof summoned, 18, (d. 5. 21.
34.) 22, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d.
13. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2.
d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p.
2. d. 32^) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 17.) 16,
(p. 1. 33. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21. (p. 1.
d. 28. p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24,
(p. 2. d. 3.) Ed. 3. Henry created Duke of Lancaster summoned, 25, (p. 1. d.
15.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d.
4.) E: 3. John, Earl thereof summoned, 36, (d. 16.) E. 3. made Duke of
Lancaster, and so summoned) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39* (d. 2.) 42* (d. 22.)
43, (d. 24.) King of Castle, Legion, and Duke of Lancaster, summoned by all
these Titles.) 46, (d. 9. 10.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p: 2. d. 6.) E. 3. (the
Kings Uncle) 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3* (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6,
(d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 35.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d: 42.) R. 2.
John, Duke of Aquitain and Lancaster summoned, 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17,
(d: 30.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Henry, Duke thereof
summoned, 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) H: 4. Leicester; the Earl thereof
summoned, 43, (d. 11.) H. 3. Lincoln; Henry de Lacy, Earl thereof summoned, 23,
(d. 9.) 27, (d: 9. 6. 18.) 28, (d: 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d.
10.) 34, (d. 2.) Ed: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.)
Ed. 2.
M
MArch: Roger de Mortuomari (Mortimer) Earl thereof summoned, 4, (d: 32. 41.)
E: 3, Roger de Mortuomari (summoned, 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) E* 3.
Edmund de Mortuomari, Earl thereof summoned, 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d: 9.) 47, (d:
13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E: 3. 1, (d: 27.) 2, (d: 29.) 3, (d. 32.)
R: 2. Edward, Earl of March, summoned, 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4,
(d: 16.) 8, (d: 2.) H. 5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) H: 6: Marshal, Marescallus,
John, Earl Marshal summoned, 1, (d: 9.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16) H.
5. Thomas, Earl Marshal, 1, (d. 22) 2, (d. 18.) H. 6. John, Earl Marshal, 3,
(d: 9.) H: 6. See Norfolk and Nortingham Mountacute, John Marquess thereof, 49,
(d. 6.) H. 6.
N
NOrfolk: Com. Norf. and Marescal. Angliae summoned, 49 (d: 11.) H. 3. Roger de
Big^d, Comes Norfolk, and Marescallus Angliae, summoned, 23, (d. 1. 9.) 24, (d.
7.) 25, (d: 6. 25.) 27, (d: 9. 16. 28.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d:
2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. Thomas de Brotherton Com. Norfolk, and
Marescallus Angliae, summoned, 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.)
9, (d. 22.) 11, (d: 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 29*) 15,
(d: 16) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d: 5. 15. 21. 34.) 19, (d: 27.) 20, (d:
4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4^ (d: 13. 32. 41.) 5^ (p:
1. d: 7. 25. p: 2. d: 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8. (d. 18.) 9,
(d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) E: 3.
Thomas Duke of Norfolk summoned, 21, (p. 1. d: 27.) R. 2. John Duke of Norfolk
summoned, 4, (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: 7.) 10, (d: 10.) H: 6, John (his Son)
Duke of Norf. summoned, 15, (d: 8.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21) 25,
(d: 24.) 27, (d: 21.) 28, (d. 26.) 29. (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38,
(d. 30.) 49, d. 6.) H: 6. 1, (d: 35.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d: 41.) E: 4.
Northampton, William de Bohum Earl thereof summoned, 11, (p. 1. d. 15. p. 2. d.
40.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d.
14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d.
7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Humphrey de Bohun, Earl thereof summoned, 37, (d.
22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3, See Hereford, John Newel Earl thereof
summoned, 6, (d. 1.) E. 4. Northumberland, Henry de Percy, Earl thereof
summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2* (d. 13. 29) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6^ (d.
37.) 7, (d: 12. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12.
(d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 1^, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 43.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d. 30) 18, (d:
23.) 20, (p: 1* d: 15*) 21, (p: 1^ d. 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R: 2. 1, (d. 37) 2, (p:
1. d: 3) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 4.) H. 4. Henry Percy (Earl
thereof) summoned, 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d: 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H:
5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) 3, (d: 9) 9* (d: 18.) 10, (d. 10,) 11, (d: 10.) 13,
(d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27,
(d. 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30) H. 6. John, Earl
thereof summoned, 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d: 3.) E: 4. Henry, Earl thereof summoned, 12,
(d: 41.) 22. and 23, (d. 10.) E: 4. Nottingham, John de Mowbray, Earl thereof
summoned, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 33.) 5, (d: 40.) 6,
(d: 37.) R. 2. Thomas de Mowbray, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d:
35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) Marescallus Angliae, 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d:
42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p. 1.
d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d: 17.)
O
OXford; Oxon, the Earl thereof summoned, 49, (d: 11.) H. 3. Robert de Veer,
Earl thereof summoned; 23, (d: 3. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.)
28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E: 1. 1,
(d: 8. 11. 19) 2, (d: 11, 20) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 5.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6,
(d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 12. 14.) 12,
(d: 11, 29.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 5. 15. 21. 34.) 19, (d: 27.)
20, (d: (...).) E: 2. 1, (p: 2. d: 11. 16.) 3, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 4, (13. 32.
41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 25.) E. 3. John de Veer, Earl thereof summoned, 5, (p. 1. d:
7. p. 2. d: 7.) 6, (d: 4. 13. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8.
28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d: 8, 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.)
13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 33.) 17, (p: 1. d: 21.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.
21, (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 32. p: 2. d: 3. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d:
23.) 24, (p: 2. d: 5.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 26, (d, 14) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.)
31, (d: 2.) 32, (d: 14.) 33, (d: 10.) E: 3. Thomas de Veer, Earl thereof
summoned, 35, (d. 36.) 36, (d. 16. 42.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 39.) 39, (d: 2.)
43, (d: 24) 44, (d: 1.) Ed. 3. Robert de Veer, Earl thereof summoned, 7, (d:
10. 37) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) Marquess of Dublin, 10, (d: 42.) Duke of
Ireland, 11, (d: 24.) R. 2. Albric, or Albert Earl of Oxon summoned, 17, (d:
30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R: 2. 1^
(d: 37.) H. 4. Richard, Earl thereof summoned, 9, 11, (d: 32.) 12* (d: 2.) H:
4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d: 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16. H. ^. John de Veer, Earl
thereof summoned, 7, (d: 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 10, (d: 10,) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.)
15, (d: 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d. 24.)
28. (d: 26.) 29 (d: 4.) 31, (d: 36,) 33, (d: 36.) 38, (d: 30.) 49, (d: 6.) H:
6. 1, (d. 35.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) E. 4.
P
PEmbroc, William de Valencia, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3. 9.) E: 1.
Adamarus de Valencia, Earl thereof summoned, 27, (d: 8. 16.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8.
11.) 2, (d: 4. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16,
27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d.
13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) E: 2. Laurence
Hastings, Earl thereof summoned, 13, (p. 2. d. 1.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15,
(p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 21, (p. 1. d: 28.) p. 2.
d. 9. 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) E. 3. John de Hastings, Earl thereof summoned, 54, (d.
1.) H. 5. Humphrey Du. of Glocest^r Earl thereof summoned, 2, H. 5. d. 16.
Jasper (...) thereof summoned, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6.
R
RIchmond. John de Britannia, Earl thereof summoned, 34, (d. 2.) E: 1. 1, (d:
19.) 2, (d. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8,
(d 29. 35.) 3, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 12. 14,) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14,
(d: 5. 29.) E. 2. 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4.
9.) 19. 36.) 7. (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 13.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. John, Earl of
Lanc. and Richmond summoned, 34, (d. 9) 36, (d. 16.) E. 3. John Duke of
Britain, Earl thereof summoned, 2. (d. 13. 29.) R. 2. Edmond, Earl thereof
summoned, 31. (d. 36.) H. 6. Rivers, Richard, Earl thereof summoned, 6, (d. 1.)
E: 4. Autony Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23. (d. 10.) E. 4.
Rotland, Edward, Earl thereof summoned, 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.)
17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 2. d. 27) R. 2. 1, (d. 37) 2, (p. 1. d.
3.) H. 4.
S
SArum, Salisbury, William de Monteacute (Monteacute) Earl thereof summoned,
11, (p. 2. d. 40.) 24, (p 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.)
28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38,
(d. 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d. 3.) 44, (d. 9.) 47, (d:
13.) 49, (d: 6.) 50, p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.)
4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 47.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 3^5.) 9, (d. 45.)
10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d.
37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17. (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2. John de
Monteacut^, Earl thereof summoned, 21, (p. 1. d: 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d.
37. ^.) H. 4. ^homas Earl thereof summoned, 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, ((...).) 3, (d.
^.) 4, (d. 16.) H. 5. 5, (d. 4.) H. 6. Richard Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d.
18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d.
24) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36) 33, (d. 30.) Com.
Warwic. and Sa^^m. 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Salop.
Shrewsbury, John, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 21) 25, (d. 24.) 31, (d. 36.)
33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Somerset, John
Beauford, Earl thereof summoned, 2, (p. 1. d. 27.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (d. 28. p. 2.
d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32) H. 4. Edward Duke of Somerset, 29,
(d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Stafford, Ralph, Earl thereof summoned, 27, (d.
12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d, 2. 21.) 32, (d 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 35,
(d. 36.) 36* (d: 16) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d.
24.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Hugh, Earl thereof summoned, 46, (d. 9.) 49, (d. 4. 6.)
50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5,
(d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. Thomas, Earl
thereof summoned, 15, (d. 37.) R. 2. Edward, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3.)
R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) H. 4. Humphrey, Earl thereof
summoned, 3, (d. 9) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 8.) 18, (d. 33.)
20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Suffolk, Robert d^ Ufford, Earl thereof summoned, 13, (p. 1.
d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 16, (p. 1^ d. 33.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d.
14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7) 23, (p. 1. d, 13.) 24,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 6.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d.
2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 36.) 37* (d: 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.)
42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. William de Ufford Earl thereof summoned, 44,
(d. 1:) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d: 46.) 50, (p. 1. d: 6.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d. 13.
29.) 3* (d. 32.) R. 2. Michael de la Pool, Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d: 45.)
10, (d. 42.) 23, (d. 3.) R: 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p:
1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) H. 4. 1,
(d: 9. 37.) 2, (d: 16.) H. 5. William de la Pool, Earl thereof summoned, 9, (d:
18,) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d: 16.) 13, (d: 2.) 20, (d: 27.) Made and summoned as
Marquess of Suffolk, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) summoned, as Duke of Suffolk,
27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) H. 6. John, Duke thereof summoned, 49, (d: 6.) H. 6.
6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Surrey, John de
Warrenna, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d: 9.) 27, (d: 9. 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17)
30, (d: 8. 13.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d:
16. 17.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16, 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9,
(d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 12. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15,
(d: 16.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 15. 21. 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d: 11.
16.) 2, (d: 11. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d: 13. 32. 42.) 5, (d: 7. 25.) 6, (d: 4. 9.
19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1.
d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15,
(p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p.
1, d. 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 28.) E. 3. Thomas Holland, Duke of
Surry, summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23. (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) H. 4.
V
UL^on, Li^^^l (the Kings Son) Earl thereof summoned, 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. sent
into Ireland with an Army, 35, E. 3. d. 33. 36. E. 3. d. 42.
W
WAles. Edward (eldest Son of Ed. 2.) Prince of Wales, etc. summoned, 30, (d,
8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33* (d. 10. 31.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Edward (eldest Son of
Ed. 3.) Prince of Wales, etc.) summoned, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.)
26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) 42, (d. 22.) 44.
(d. 1.) 46, (d. 9. 10.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Richard, `Prince of Wales (styled
the Kings Son, though his Grandchild only) summoned, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3.
Henry Prince of Wales, etc. summoned 1 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3. (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1.
d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 9, 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4.
Edward (eldest Son of E. 4.) Prince of Wales summoned, 22, and 23. (d. 10.) E.
4. Warenne, John, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Warwick;
William de Bello-campo (Beauchamp, Earl thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3. 9.) 24,
(d. 7.) 25, (d. 25. E. 1. Guido de Bello Campo, Earl thereof summoned, 27, (d.
16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2) 33, (d. 21.) 35, (d. 13.)
E. 1. 1, (d. 11. 19) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1*) 5, (d. 11.
17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, (d. 35. E. 2. Thomas de Bello-campo,
Earl thereof summoned, 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6,
(d. 9. 19. 24 36. 7, (p. 2. d. 32.) 1^, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 33.)
16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 3. 7.) 23, (p.
1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (p. 1. d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.)
28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 42, (d. 22. 34,
(d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 4.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1. (d.
37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10.
37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 46.) 10. (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d.
5.) 14, (d. 42. 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1 d.
15.) 23* (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) H. 4. Richard, Earl thereof
summoned* 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p* 2. d. 4.) 6, 7, (d. 30.) 9, (d. ^.) 11, (d. 32.)
12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9, 37) 2, (d. 16.) 4, (d, 16.) 8, (d. 2.)
H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18,) 3, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 10, (d. 10.) 11,
(d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 49,
(d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 31.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Westmerland,
Ralf de Nevil, Earl thereof summoned, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1,
(d. 37.) 2, p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1, 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 6, 7, (d. 30.)
8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 5. 37.) 2, (d.
16.) 3^ (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H.
5. 1. (d. 22) 2, (d. 26.) 3, (d. 9) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18,) 10, (10.) 11, (d.
10.) 12, (d. 1.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.)
25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d, 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.)
38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12,
(d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 16.) E. 4. Wigorne, Worcester, Thomas de Percy, Earl
thereof summoned, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2.) 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.)
Richard, Earl thereof summoned, 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. John, Earl thereof summoned,
28, (d. 26.) 29. (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) H. 6. 2, (d. 3.) E. 4.
Edward Tibetot, Earl thereof summoned, 6, (d. 4.) E. 4. Wilts, Wiltshire,
Wiltes, James, Earl thereof summoned, 28. (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.)
33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. John, Earl thereof summoned, 12, (d. 41.) E. 4.
Winton, Winchester, Hugh le Dispencer, Earl thereof summoned, 16, (d. 26.) 17,
(d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 15. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2.
Y
YOrk, Edmond, Duke thereof summoned, 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.)
12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15* (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 3. 30.)
20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1.
d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4.
Edward, Duke thereof summoned, 9, (d. ^.) 11, (d. 26.) 12, (d. 3.) H. 4. 1, (d.
9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) H. 5. Richard Duke thereof summoned, 11, (d. 10) 13, (d.
2.) 18, (d. 3.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 29, (d.
41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36) H. 6.
An Exact Alphabetical and Chronological Table of all the Temporal Lords,
Ba^ons, Viscounts and Great Men summoned to Parliaments and Great Councils in
England, from 49. H. 3. till 23. E. 4. with the years, dorses of the Clause
Rolls in each Kings Reign, and Numbers of the Parliaments to which they were
summoned; p. in the Parenthesis, signifying the part of the Clause Roll of the
year next before it, d. the dorse, and the figures following it the membrances
and dorses wherein they are registered.
A
Gllbert de Acton summond, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. William de Acton, 33, (d.
10.) E. 3. John ab Adam, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 6. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d.
8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33. (d. 21.) 34, (d, 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14.
20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) E. 2. Elias de Albiniac^, 23, (d. 3. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25,
(d. 25.) E. 1. Richard de Aldeburgh, summoned, 6, (d. 4.) E. 3. William de
Aldeburge, Aldeburgh, 44, (d. 12.) Chival^r, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.)
E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d.
(d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 24.)
Ald^thleg^, Ald^thleg, ^ See Andeley. Almaric de Sancto Amando (St. Amand)
summoned, 28, (d. 3. 7.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.)
35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11, 13. 20.) 3, (d. 5. 16.) 4, (d. 1.) E: 2. John de
Sancto Amando, summoned, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d.
22,) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.)
16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Almari^ de
Sancto Amando, 44, (d. 12.) 46, (d. 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49 (d. 4. 6.) 50,
(p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d.
37.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d.
23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p.
1. d.) 3, (d. 17.) H. 4. Aabert de Arcedekne (Archedeacon) Erc^dekn^,
Lercedekne, summoned, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 18, (d. 34.) E. 2.
Thomas de Arcedekne, etc. summoned, 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18,
(d. 34) E. 2. John Arcedekne, Lercedekne, summoned, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3.
Philip de Arcy, summoned, 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. See
Darcy. R^gniald de Argentine, summoned, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. John de Arundel,
summoned, 1, (d. 37,) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. John de Arundel, de
Arundel Chiva^er* summoned, 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Thomas Arundel de Mountravers,
Chival^r* summond, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Nicholas de Astele, or Asteley,
summoned, 30* (d. 8.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) E. 2. Thomas de Astele,
summoned, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Gilbert de
Aton, summoned, 18, (d. 21.) E. 2. William de Aton, 45, (d. 3.) E. 3. Nicholas
de Aldithlegh, Aldethly, A^dels, A^dely, Daudele (thus variously written)*
summoned, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9,
(d. 22.) Junior, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Hugh de A^dely Daudeley, senior,
summoned, 11, (d. 12.) 14, (d. 5.) 22, (d. 4.) E. 2. Hugh de A^dele, (Daudely)
Junior, and without addition) 11, (d. 8. 12. (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d,
5. 29.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d. 11.
23. 33. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19 36.) 7, (p. 2. d.
3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. James de A^dele, Daudeley, summoned, 4,
(d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 9.) 9, (d. 8. 28.)
10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.)
14, (p: 2. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1: d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.)
18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 24, (p: 1. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) 26, (d: 14.) 27, (d:
12.) (de Helegh) 33, (d: 10.) 34, (d: 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d.
3.) 39, (d: 2.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d: 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.)
2, (d: 13. 29) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 44.) 7, (d: 37,) 8,
(d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 24.) R: 2. Nicholas de Audeley (de
Helegh) 11, (d: 13.) R: 2. Richard de Audeley de Helegh, 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d:
5.) 4, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) R. 2. James de A^deley 8, (d: 2.) H. 5.) 1, (d:
22.) 2, (d. 18.) Chivaler, 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d: 15.) 5. (d: 4.) 7. (d: 2.) 9, (d.
18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d: 10) 12, 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d* 33.) 20. (d:
37.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d:
36) 33, (d: 36.) H. 6. John de Audeley Chivaler, 49, (d: 6.) H: 6. Armiger, 1,
(d: 35.) Chivaler, 2, (d: 3.) 6* (d: 1.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23. (d: 10.) E.
4.
B
THomas Baco^n, summoned, 6, (d: 4.) E. 3. Bartholomew de Badlesmore, summoned,
3, (d: 17.) 5* (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 27.) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9,
(d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 12. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) E. 2.
Giles de Badlesmore, summoned, 9* (d: 8.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. p: 2.
d: 40.) E. 3. Alexander de Balliolo, summoned, 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.)
32, (d* 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34* (d: 2.) E. 1. Roger de Bane^t, Bane^t, summoned,
6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 10, (d: 11. 29.) 11,
(d: 8. 14.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. 6, (d: 49. 19. 36.)
7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 28.) E. 3. Hugh Bardolfe, 27, (d: 16. 18.)
28, (d: 3.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) E. 1. Thomas Bardolfe, 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d:
11. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d.
16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 32.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d:
13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 19, (d. 29.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2,
(d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13. 32. 41.) John Bardolfe, 9, (d. 8. 28.)
10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d: 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13,
(p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 17, (p 1. d. 25.)
18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24,
(p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d.
7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 31.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4*) E. 3. John Bardolfe de
Wyrnegen, 33, (d. 10.) 34 (d. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) E. 3. William de
Bardolfe, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 3. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3,
(d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d:
45.) R. 2. Thomas Bardolfe de Wyni^sgy, 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.)
17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 17.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d.
37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) H. 4. Mr. John
Barnet, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Ralph Basset de Sapcote, 49, (d. 11). H. 3. Richard
Basset de Wilden, Wileden, 25, (d. 25.) 27. (d. 18.) E. 1. Ralph Basset de
Drayton (sometimes styled Senior, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.)
30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33. (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d.
8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.)
6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 26. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) ^, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12,
(d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27)
20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 6. 11.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, d. 19.) 4, (d.
13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 49. 19. 36.) 7, p. 2.
d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8* 28) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d.
11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, ( p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15,
(p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. P. 2. d. 13. 22.) E. 3. Ralph Basset de
Drayton, 31, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 37, (d. 32.) 38* (d. 3.) 39, (d.
2.) 42* (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44* (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d.
13. 29) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9. (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) R. 2.
Sinon Basset, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Ralph Basset de Sapco^e, 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d.
9.) E. 3. Robert Baynard, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. 3, (d. 19.) E. 3.
Nicholas de Beche, 16. (p. 1. d. 36.) 49, (d. 6.) E. 3. John de Be^e, 23, (d.
4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. John de Beke-campo, (Beauchamp) usually styled de
Somerset, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16* 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d 8. 13.) 32, (d.
2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 26.) 3, (d.
16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d.
24. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5.
29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16. (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.)
20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 6. 11.) 2* (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32.
41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8,
(d. 12.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8.) 15. (p. 2. d. 11. 40.)
12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14. (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d.
37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d, 25.) 21, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27,
(d. 12.) 28, (d. 25.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, (d. 10*) 34, (d. 4.) E.
3. Giles de Bello-campo, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. John de Bello-campo de Warwick, 24,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 21.) E. 3. Roger de Bello-campo,
37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 49,
(d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R.
2. John Beauchamp de Kiderminster 11, (d. 24.) R. 2. William Beauchamp de
Burgavenny, 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p.
1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1.
d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d.) 11, (d. 32.) H. 4. William
Beauchamp DOMINUS de Sto. Amando, 27, (d. 24.) Miles 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.)
33, (d. 36) H. 6. John Beauchamp Miles, Dominus de Beauchamp, 27, (d. 24.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 36.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6.
1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 4.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. Richard
Beauchamp de Beauchamp Miles, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Henry de Bello-monte
(Beaumont) sum. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4* (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d.
3. 31.) 7, (d. 18. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12* (d. 11.
29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18,
(d. 5. 21. 34.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2. (d. 15. 23. 31.) 5,
(p. 1. d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) E. 3. John de Bellomonte, 16, (p. 1. d.
39.) E. 3. Henry de Bellomonte, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d.
2.) E. 3. John de Bellomonte, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 46.) 10, (d.
42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16,
(d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) R. 2. Henry de Bellomonte, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 8.) 11, (d.
32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 37.) John Beamont, Miles 10, (d.
10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 14, 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) Vicont de Beamond,
20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41)
31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Robert de Benhall, 33, (d. 10.)
34, (d. 3^.) E. 3. William de Berisford, 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Thomas de Berkelegh,
Berkele, Berkeley, Berkely (thus variously written) 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.)
25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33,
(d. 10. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 26.)
3, (d. 16. 17.) 4 (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8 (d.
29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5.
29.) E. 2. Thomas de Berkele, Berkeley, 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 9. 23. 32. p. 2. d.
7.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2.
d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14 (p. 1. d. 23. 43.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p.
1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20* (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2.
d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25,
(p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2.)
34, (d. 4. 35.) E. 3. Maurice de Berkeley, 2, (d. 1. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4,
(d. 19.) 5, (d. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d. 32.)
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Maurice de
Berkele, Berkeley, 16, (p. 1. d. 36.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39,
(d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.)
R. 2. Thomas de Berkeley, Barkeley. 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d.
37.) 8, (d. 35.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) Chivaler:) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d.
5.) 14, (d 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1.
d. 15.) de Berkeley, 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1.
d. 3.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12,
(d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 33.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) H.
5. James de Berkele, Berkel^y, 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 3, (d:
9.) 4* (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: ^.) 9* (d: 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13,
(d. 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27,
(d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29* (d. 41.) 31, (d. 38.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6.
1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Richard Berkeley, 3, (d. 9.) H. 6. William de
Berkeley, Chivaler, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 6, (d. 1.) 12, (d. 14.) Vicou^^ Berkeley,
22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. John de Berners, Chivaler. 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 7* (d.
3.) 8, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) ^. 4. Roger Bertram, 49. (d. 11.) H. 3. Thomas le
Blo^^te, Blount, 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 23. 31.) E. 3. William le Blount,
Blunt, 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8,
(d. 18.) 9, (d. 8, 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 11. 2. d. 40.) E. 3.
Walter Blunt de Mountjoy, Chivaler, 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4.
John Blount de Mountjoy, 22, and 23, Chivaler (d. 10.) E. 4. Henry de Bodrigan,
3, (d. 17.) E. 2. John de Boh^n, 33, (d. 10.) de Mid^urst, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d.
3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 2. William Boneville, Bonevile, DOMINUS de Bonevile and de
Chaton Miles, 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 3.)
H. 6. William de B^tera^^x, Botreaux, 43, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47,
(d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 1. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3,
(d. 32.) Chir. 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d.
24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R. 2. John de (...), 8,
(d. 35.) R. 2. William de Botreaux^ 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d.
16.) 3, (d.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1,
(d. 22.) 2, (d. 1^.) Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) ^,
(d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 1^.) 18, (d. 33.) 20,
(d* 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28. (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31,
(d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) E. 4. John Bo^^tourte,
Butet^urte, (...), 33, (d. 3. 8.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d.
16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) ^, (d. 3. 3^.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d.
29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 2^) 13, (d. 13.) 14. (d. 5.
29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17* (d. 27.) 18, (d. 34.) 20, (d. 4) E. 2. John
(...), 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) de Byley^, 32, (d. 14.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) 46,
(d. 9, 10. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2,
(d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8,
(d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. William de Botiler, Botiller, Butiller, Butiler, 23,
(d. 4. ^.) 24, (d. 7.) de W^rington, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. De (...),
1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d.
^3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d.
11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14* (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.)
18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. William Botiller de (...), 42, (d. 22.)
43, (d. 24.) E. 3. Rad^lph de Botiler, Chivaler, 20, (d. 27.) de Sutley, de
sudely, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 28.) 29, (d. 41.) 31,
(d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6,
(d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. John B^urgohier, Bourgh^hier, 4, (d. 32.)
5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.)
11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 3.) 14, (d. 42.) 15* (d. 37.) 16, (d.
23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 21, (p. 1.
d* 3.) R. 2. 1* (d: 37.) H: 4. (...). 2.) 15* (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) de
Bourghchier Chivaler, 23, (d. 31.) Vicount Burghehier, (yet still lifted
toward the end of the Barons, for the most part) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Henry
Bourghchier de Crumwel Chivaler, 49, (d. 8.) H. 6. William Bourghchier, Miles
Dominus Fitzwarren, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d.
36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4.
Fulco Bourghchier, de Fitzwarren Chivaler, 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. John Bourghchier
de B^ruers Chivaler, 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2,
(d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. See Berners. Humfrey
Bourghchier de Cromwell Chivaler, 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Thomas de Bradeston, 16, (p.
1. d. 39.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.)
25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 29.) 34, (d. 35.) E.
3. Gerard Braybrook, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. William de Brewosa, Brenosa, Brewes,
25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 9. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 12.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 31.) 34, (d.
2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11* 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 21.) 3, (d. 10.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7,
(d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13,
(d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) E. 2. Thomas de Brewosa, de
Brewes, 16, (p. 1. d, 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.)
26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Guido de Brian,
Bryan, 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d.
26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38,
(d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42. (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46. (d. 3.) 47, (d.
13.) 49, (d. 4. 5.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d.
32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d.
45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12* (d. 42.) R. 2. Henry Bron^fleet, Miles,
BARO de Vesey, Vess^y, 27, (d. 24.) Dominus de Vesey, Vessey, 28, (d. 26) 29,
(d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6,
(d. 1.) E. 4. Edward Brook de Cobham, Chivaler, 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27,
(d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6.
1, (d. 35.) 2. (d. 3.) E. 4. John Brook de Cobham, Chivaler, 12, (d. 41.) 22,
and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Maurice de Brun, Brunne, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.)
8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14,
(d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. R^bert de Brus, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25,
(d. 25.) E. 1. John Bucton, 49, (d. 4.) E. 3. Ralph de Bulmer, Bulmere, 16, (p.
2. d. 39.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 21, (p. 2. (d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.)
23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. William de Burgh, 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 31.) E. 3.
Robert de Burghershe, 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Bartholomew de
Burghershe, 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19.
36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d.
8. 15. p. 2. d. 40.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p. 1. d: 32. p:
2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) Senior, 24, (p. 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 26,
(d. 16.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 31, (d: 2.) 34, (d: 4.) 36, (d: 16. 42.) 37,
(d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) E. 3. Robert Burghersh, 16, (p:
1. d: 39.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.) E. 3. Edmund Burnel, 5, (d.
17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Nicholas Burnel, 24,
(p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) 28, (d. 28.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 36,
(d. 10.) 37, (d. 32.) 38, (d. 22.) 39, (d. 2.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d.
13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 9.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d.
32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) R. 2. Hugh Burnel, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8,
(d. 35.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d 42.) 15*
(d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17* (d. 31.) 18, (^. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1.
d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d.
28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.)
H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5* (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.)
H. 5. William de Burton, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
C
THomas de Cailly, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Ralph Cam^ys,
Camoyes de Camoyes, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Ralph de Cameyes, Canoyes, 7, (d. 16.
27.) 8. (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11. (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d 11. 29.) 13* (d. 13.)
14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) 19, (d.
27,) 20, (d. 4) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31) 3. (d. 19.) 4,
(d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7*
(p. 2. d. 3) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 18.) E. 3. John de Camoyes, 33. (d. 10.) E. 3.
Thomas Camoyes, Chivaler, 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11,
(d. 13 24.) 1^, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 3.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17,
(^. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1, d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (p. 1. d. 3.)
R. ^. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7,
(d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 37.) 2,
(d. 16.) 3* (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. (...)
23, (d. 4. 9:) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d: 3.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.)
34, (d. 3.) E. 1. William de Camvil, 2, (d: 11.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. William de
Cantilupo, 28, (d: 3.) 30, (d* 8. 13.) 32, (d. 21.) 3^, (d: 23.) 34, (d: 2.)
35, (d. 13.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 2.) E: 2. Nicholas de Canti lupo,
9, (d. 8.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 42.) 12, (p. 2. d: 3^) 13, (p: 2.
d. 1.) 14, (p: 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d. 39.) 17, (p: 1.
d. 25.) 18, (p: 2. d. 14.) 20* (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d. 9.) 22, (p: 1. d:
32. p: 2. d: 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 24, (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 28, (d.
26.) E. 3. Robert de Causton, 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) E. 3. Hugh de
Chasteldon, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Peter de Channet, Champne^, 28, (d. 3. 17,)
(...) 1. John Chaundos, 11* (p. 1. d. 15.) E. 3. (...) Chaundos de Chaundos,
11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d: 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 3.) 14, (p. 1.
d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1^ d. 39. ^2. d. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.)
18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1.
d. 23.) 24, (p. 1. d. ^.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d.
7. 8.) E. 3. Thomas de Chaworth, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. John de
Charleton, (Charleton) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (p. 22.) 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17,
(d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19. (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11.
16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7.
25: p. ^. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d: 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 28.)
10, (d: 15.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15.) Senior, 13* (p. 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d:
23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d:
14.) 20, (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23,
(d: 23.) 24, (p. 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. (...).) 29,
(d: 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 34, (d: 4.) E. 3. John de Charleton de Powi^, 36, (d:
16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d: 22.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d. 9.)
47, (d: 13.) E. 3. John de Charleton de Powys, 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8,
(d. 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 3.) 14,
(d. 42) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d. 15.)
21, (p: 1. d: 27.) 23, (p: 1. (d. 3.) R: 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p: 2. d. 3.) H: 4.
Edward Charleton de Powys, 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d: 4.) 7, (d:
30.) 8, (d. 7.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d: 2^.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2,
(d. 6.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d: 9.) 8, (d: 2.) H. 5. Richard
de Clare, 3 (d: 17.) E. 2. John de Clavering, Claverings, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d: 8. 13.) 32* (d. 2.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 3, (d: 16. 17.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.)
6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29, 35.) 9, (d: 2^.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12,
(d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d. 5.
21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23.
31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3.
Robert de Clifford, de Clyfford, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.)
33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d.
16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) E 2. Roger de Clifford,
13, (d: 12.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Robert de Clifford, 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d.
23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d: 7. 25. p: 2. d. 7.) 6, (d 9. 19.
36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9* (d. 8. 18.) 16, (p. 1. d: 39.) 18, (p. 1.
d: 14.) 31, (d: 2.) E: 3. Roger de Clifford, 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 37, (d:
22.) 38, (d: 2.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d: 22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d: 9.)
47, (d: 13.) 49, (d 4. 6.) 50, (p. 1. d: 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.)
3, (d: 32.) 4. (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. ^5) 9,
(d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) R. 2. Thomas Clifford, 13,
(d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R. 2 John Clifford, 12, (d 2.) 14, (d: 22.)
H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. John
de Clifford, Chivaler, 20, (d* 27.) H. 6. Thomas de Clifford Chivaler, 23, (d.
21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36.) H. 6.
William de Clifford Dominus de Clifford, 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. John de Clifton,
Clyften, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d.
32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.)
11, (d: 24.) 12, (d: 42.) R. 2. Constantine de Clifton, 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d:
30.) 18, (d: 23.) R. 2. John de Clinton, 27, (d: 18.) E. 1. William de Clinton,
Clynton, 4, (d: 23.) 5, (d: 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d: 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d.
3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) E. 3. John de Clynton, 6, (d. 4.
9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d. 18.) E. 3. John de Clynton, 31, (d: 2.) 32,
(d: 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d.
13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d.
32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) (9, d:
45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15,
(d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1.
d. 27.) R. 2. William de Clinton, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d.
3.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d.
32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 16.) 8,
(d: 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H: 5. 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.)
Chivaler, 9, (d. 18,) H. 6. John DOMINUS de Clinton, 29, (d: 41.) 33, (d: 36.)
H. 6. Chivaler, 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Henry de Cobeham, Cobbeham,
Cobham, 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.)
17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4:) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d.
11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.)
6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 1^, (p. 1. d.
^7.) E. 3. Stephen de Cobbeham, 10, (d. 4.) E. 2. ^. (p: ^. d. 1^.) 2, (d. 15.
23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. ^3. 23.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) ^,
(p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. ^^ginald de Cobbeham, Cobham, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 11, (p. 2.
d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25,
(p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. ^6.) 3^, (d. 2.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.)
44, (d. ^*) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. John de Cobbeham, 6, (d. 4.) 16, (p. 2. d. 13.
22.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 14.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7.
8.) 31, (d. 2. 21. 29.) E. 3. John de Cobbeham de Kent, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d.
24) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 11.) 47, (d. 6.) 49, (d. 4. 8.) E. 3. ^, (d. 37.) 2,
(d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8,
(d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 4^.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14,
(d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.)
21, (p. 1. d. 27.) Chivaler, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 8,
(d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. ^0.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. See Old^
astle. John Coggeshall, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John Cokdyn, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
Walter de Colvyll, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Robert de Colevil, Colvil, Colvile, 16,
(p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d.
3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32,
(d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39,
(d. 2.) E. 3. Philip de Columbariis, 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 14.)
12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d.
27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 11. 16.)
2, (d. 15. 23. 37.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d.
4. 9. 19. 36.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11.
40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33.) E. 3.
Peter Corbet, de Corbet, 23, (d. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 28.) 28, (d. 3.
17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 31.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11.
19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.
29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 7. 29.) 16, (d. 16.) E. 3. Robert Corbet, 32, (d.
14.) E. 3. John Cornwall, Chivaler, 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18,
(d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Hugh de Courtenay, 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.)
30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 22.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.)
2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d.
16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d.
13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.)
19, (d. 27.): 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3,
(d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7) 6, (d. 4. 9.
19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 28.) E. 3.) Hugh de Courtenay Junior, 11, (p.
1. d. 8. 15.) E. 3. Hugh de Courtenay le Fitz. 44, (d. 4.) E. 3. Craystocke,
See Graystocke. William de Cressey, 15, (d. 25.) E. 1. John de Cretings, 6, (d.
4. 9. 19. 36.) E. 3. John de Crombewel, Crumbewel, Crumwel, 1, (d. 8) 2, (d.
11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 15.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d.
26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.)
2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13. 23, 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p.
2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 13. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 7.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d. 18.) E. 3.
Ralph de Crumbewel, Chivaler, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d.
37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10.
37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d:
5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p. 1.
d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d: 27) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d: 3.) 3, (d.
17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d: 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d:
2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d: 16.) H. 5.
Ralph Crombewel, Chivaler, 1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5,
(d. 4.) 7, (d: 2.) 9, (d. 18) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d:
18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 23.) 28, (d:
26.) 29, (d: 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d: 36.) H. 6. Humfrey, Dominus Crombewel,
2, (d: 3.) 6, (d: 1.) E. 4. Nicholas de Cryoll, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Simon de
Cudington, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
D
RAnulph, Ralph de Dacre, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.)
18, (d. 21. 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d.
19.) 4, (d: 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p: 1. d. 7. 25. p: 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7
(p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 12, (p: 2. d. 32.) E.
3. William de Dacre, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d.
26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d: 4.) E. 3. Ralph de Dacre 34, (d:
16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.)
46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Hugh de Dacre, Chivaler, 50, (p: 2. d. 6) E. 3.
1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7,
(d. 27.) R. 2. William de Dacre, 7, (d. 10. 31.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10,
(d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24) 12, (d. 42) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16,
(d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23,
(d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2.
d. 4.) H. 4. Thomas de Dacre de Gisland, 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.)
4, (d. 10.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 14.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2,
(d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) Chivaler, 9, (d. 18.) 10,
(d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23,
(d. 21.) 25, (d. 20.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33,
(d: 31.) H. 6. Reginald Dacre de Gisland, Chivaler, 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. Humfrey
Dacre de Gisland, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas de Dagworth, 21, (p. 2. d.
9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) E. 3. Roger Damory, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13,
(d. 13.) 14, (d. 15. 29.) E: 2. Richard Damory, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d.
11. 16.) 2, (d. 15, 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.) E. 3. Philip de
Darcy (de. Arcy) See Arcy, 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.)
E. 1. Philip Darcy, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 5. 23. 31.)
4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 9. 19, 36.) John Darcy de
Cousin, 6* (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) de Knayth, 22,
(p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 1.
5.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Philip de Darcy, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.)
4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) R. 2. Thomas Darcy, 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d:
35.) R. 2. Philip Darcy, 3, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11. (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.)
13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16* (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d:
15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) R. 2. John Darcy, 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p.
1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d: 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11,
(d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. Elie Daubeny, 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d:
8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d, 21.) E. 1. Ralph Daubeny, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3.
William Danmarle, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Rowland Davoyes, 32, (d. 14. E. 3. Da^dl^,
See Audeley. Descales, See S^^les. Hugh le Dispensor, Justicia^^^s Angliae, 49,
(d. 11.) H. 3. Hugh le Dispenser, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 25.) 27,
(d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33* (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.)
E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d:
11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7* (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) styled Senior, 9,
(d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14*) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14. (d: 15. 29.) 15, (d:
16.) E. 2. Hugh le Dispenser Junior, 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8.
14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 16, (d: 26.)
17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d: 27.) E: 2. Hugh le Dispenser, 13, (p:
2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17,
(p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 1. d. 7.) E: 3. Edward le Dispenser,
31, (d: 2.) 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 46, (d: 9.) E: 3.
Philip le Dispenser, 11, (d: 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d:
37.) 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d:
^7.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) H. 4. John Devereux, 8, (d: 37.) 9, (d: 45.)
10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d:
37.) 16, (d: 23.) R. 2. Walter Devereux de Fe^riers, Chivaler, 49, (d: 6.) H:
6. Dominus de Ferriers, 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and
23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Edward Deyncourt, de Eyncourt, 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3.
17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) Ed. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11
19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d:
3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11.
29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18,
(d: 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. William de Eyncourt, 6, (d: 9.
19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1.
d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 30.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p*
(...). d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18,
(p: 1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 2. d: 7.) 23, (p: 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 1. d. 3.) 25, (p:
1. d: 5.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 2. 28.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d:
14.) 34, (d: 14. 35.) 36, (d: 16.) 37, (d: 22.) E. 3. John D^yncourt, 39, (d:
2.) E. 3. John Dinham, Dynham, de Caredinham, Chivaler, 2, (d: 1.) 3, (d. 3.)
12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Richard de Draycot, 35, (d: 25.) E. 1.
Dufford, See Ufford. Oliver Dyna^^t, 23, (d: 4. 9.) 25, (d: 25.) 28, (d. 17.)
E. 1.
E
WIlliam de Ebr^icis, 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. William de Echingham, 5, (d. 17, 25.)
6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12,
(d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 19.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d: 16.) E: 2. John de E^ganie,
E^gayne, De^gayne, 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d. 16. 17.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8.
13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34. (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11.
14. 21.) 3* (d. 16. 17.) 4* (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d.
16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 12.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29^) 13, (d.
13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) E. 2. John de Egaine, 16 (p: 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 22,
(p. 1. d. ^. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. Thomas
D'engaine, 32, (d. 14.) E. ^. Henry de Erdington, 9, (d. ^.) E. ^. Nicholas de
Estle, 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Andrew de Astle, Estlegh, Estlye, Estelye, 23, (d.
4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. ^7.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34,
(d. 2.) E. 1. Thomas de Estelye, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3. Adam de Everingham, 2,
(d: 11. 20.) (...) (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d.
19, 35) 9, (d. 12.) E. 2. Adam de Everingham de Laxton, 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Roger
de Extr^noo (L^strange) 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 30, (d. 13.) E.
1. John de Extran^^, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.)
34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 19.) E. 2, See Lestrange. De
Eyncourt, See Deyncourt. John de Eyvil, 49, (d. 11*) H. 3.
F
John de Fasle, Falsley, Chivaler, 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 3. 5) 9, (d. 45.) 10,
(d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42. 13, (d. 5) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R:
2. John de Falewesle, 16, (d. 23.) R. 2. W^lter de Fa^o^nberge, Faucomberge,
23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27 (d. 16.) 28, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.)
33, (d: 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3,
(d. 16. 17.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11,
(d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) E. 2. John de Faucomberge, 9, (d. 8.) 10, (d. 1.
5.) 11, (p. 1. d: 8. p. 2. d. 11 (40.) 12, (p. 2. (d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1.
28.) 14. (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d.
25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14.) 20, (p. 2, d. 22.) 21, (p: 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.
p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 19.) 29, (d. 7.) E. 3. Walter Faucomberge, 24, (p.
1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27* (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2.
21.) 34, (d: 4. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) E. 3. Robert de Felton, 6, (d. 3.) 7, (d. 16.
27.) E. 2. William de Felton, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Thomas de Fencotes, 23,
(p. 1. d: 19.) E. 3. Fennys, See Fynes. William de ^errariis, (F^rrers) 25, (d.
25.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.)
E. 2. John de Ferrarii^, 27, (d. 16. 17.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32,
(d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 11, 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3,
(d. 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) 5, (d: 17. 25.) 7, (d. 16.) 12, (d: 12. 29.) E: 2.
William de Ferrariis, 6, (d. 3. 3^.) 7, (d. 16. ^7.) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d.
22.) 11, (d. 8. 14) 13, (d. 13.) 15, (d: 16.) 16, (d. 21, 26) 17, (d: 27.) E:
2. Henry de Ferrariis, 4, (d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p: 1. d: 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.)
6, (d. 9. 19. 38.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d, 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: p. 5.)
11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2, d: 11. 40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 16, (p: 1. d. 39. p:
2. d. 13.) E. 3. Robert de Ferrariis, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E: 3. William de
Ferrers, 28, (d: 26.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E: 3. Robert de Ferrers, de
Wemme, 49 (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3. (d.
32.) R. 2. Henry de Ferrari^^, Ferrers de Groby, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3,
(d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7* (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10,
(d. 42.) 11, (d: 24.) R. 2. William de Ferrariis de Gr^by, 20, (p: 1. d. 15.)
21, (p. 1. d. 27) 23, (d: 3.) R: 2. ^, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d: 17.) 5,
(p: 1. d: 28. p. 2. d: 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14,
(d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d. 6.) 3, (d* 16.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7,
(d. 9.) 8, (d: 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H: 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 2. (d: 18.) 3, (d.
9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 12,
(d: 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) Dominus de
Ferrariis de Greby, 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) H. 6. Brian Fill, Al^ni,
(Fitz-Alan) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24* (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d: 18.) 28, (d. 3.
17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. Thomas Fill. Bernardi
(Fitz-Bernard) 6, (d. 3. 31:) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 12,
(d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Archerus Fill. Henrici, (Fitz-Henry,
2, (d. 1^.) 4, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d.
22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 12.) 14, (d. 15.) 15* (d: 16.)
16, (d. 26.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Henry Fill. Hugh (Fitzhugh)
14 (d: 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 34.) 19, (d. 27.)
20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 23.) 5, (d: 7. 25.)
6, (d. 9. 19^ 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18:) 10, (d. 1. 5.)
12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d.
37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.)
21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d: 23.) 25. (p: 1.
(d: 5.) E. 3. Henry Fitzhugh, 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d.
32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d: 16. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d:
42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16,
(d: 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d:
3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d.
4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11. (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 2, 2.) H. 4. 1, (d.
9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 16.) 8, (d: 2.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) H. 6. William Fitz
Hugh Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15,
(d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) H: 6. Henry Fitz Hugh Chivaler, 33, (d: 38.) 38, (d: 30.)
49, (d. 6.) H: 6. 1, (d: 35.) 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) E: 4. Richard
Fitzhugh, Chivaler, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. John Fill. Iohanuis (Fitz-Iohn)
49, (d: 11.) H: 3. Richard Fill. Iohannis, 23, (d: 9.) E: 1.) Matthew Fill.
Iohannis, 25, (d: 25.) E. 1. Robert Fill. Pagani, (Fitz-Pagan, Fitz-Payn) 25,
(d: 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d:
21.) 34, (d: 2.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 14. 21.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (d:
11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 9, (d. 29. 35.) E: 2. Robert le
Fitz-Payn, 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31) 3, (d:
19.) 4, (d. 23. 32.) 5^ (p: 2. d: 7.) 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 38.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8,
(^: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. p. 2. d: 11. 40.) 12,
(p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1. d: 37.)
16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 24 (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) E. 3.
John Fitz-Rauph, 31, (d. 14.) E. 1. John Fitz-Reginald, 25, (d: 25.) 28, (d: 3.
17.) E. 1. Robert Fill. Rogeri, (Fitz-Roger) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d:
6. 25.) 27, (d: 18.) 28, (d: 17.) 30, (d: 8* 1^.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34,
(d: 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E: 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.)
E: 2. John Fill. Rogeri, 27, (d: 18.) E: 1. Andrew Fill. Rogeri, 27* (d: 16.) E.
1. Robert Fil-Walteri, (Fitz-Wanter,) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) de Dauntre,
25, (d: 25.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33,
(d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 14. 20.) 3, (^: 16. 17.)
5, (d, 17. 25.) 6, (d: 31.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 1.
29.) 15, (d: 16.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27) E: 2. John
Fitz-Wa^ter, 15, (p: 1. d. 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p:
1. d: 14.) 22, (p: 1. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d.
5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) (34, (d:
4.) E. 3. Walter, Fitz-Wa^ter, 43, (d. 24.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E.
3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.)
7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 15.) R. 2. Walter, Fitz-Waulter, 14, (d:
42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16) d: 23) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.)
23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5. (p. 1. d. 28. p.
2. d. 4.) H. 4. Walter, Fitz-Wa^ter, Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) H. 6.
Fulco Fill. Warini, (Fitz-Waren) 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d, 6. 25.) 27,
(d: 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.)
35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d: 20.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 25.) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 24. 35.) Senior, 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12,
(d. 11. 39.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 18, (d. 5.
34.) ^. 2. 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 2^. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.)
8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) E. 3. William Fill. Warini, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3.
Ralph Fill. Willielmi (Fitz-William) 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7) 25, (d. 25.) 27,
(d. 18.) 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) E. 1. 4, (d. 3.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.)
E. 2. Robert Fill. Willielmi, (Fitz William) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d. 21.) 34,
(d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) E. 2.
Godfry de ^olecumbe, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John de Folevil, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
Jordan Foliot, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Hugh de
Frene, 10* (d. 1. 5.) E. 3. Ralph de Freschevil, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Thomas de
Frowike, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Baldwin de Fryvil, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de
Fulnatly, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Furnivall, sometimes styled senior, 23,
(d. 4. 9.) 24 (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 26, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 13. 17.) 30, (d. 8.
13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1* (d. 8. 11. 19.)
2* (d. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16* 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 2. 31.) 7, (d. 16.
27.) 8, (d. 23. 35.) 9, (d. 26.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 33.) 13, (d. 13.)
14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17* (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19,
(d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d.
19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.
18.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11, p. 1. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 28) E. 3. Thoma^ de
Furnival, Junior, 1^, (d. 11* 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.)
16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 15.
23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 30.) E.
3. Thomas de Furniv^l, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 22.) 24, (p. 2. d. 7.)
25, (p. 1. d. 5) 26, (d: 26.) 28, (d. 8.) 29, (d. 19.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d:
14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) 35, (d: 36.) 36, (d: 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38,
(d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. ^. William de Furnival, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44,
(d. 1.) 46, (d. 9. 10. 11.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 1. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.)
2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 37.) 6, (d. 37.) R. 2. James
Fyenes, Fennys, Miles, Dominus de Say et Seal, 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.)
William Fennys, Dominus de Say et Seal, Chivaler, 29, (d. 41.) 33, (d. 36.) 38,
(d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4. Richard
Fennys, (Fynes) Dominus de Dacre, Chivaler, 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1,
(d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E.
4.
G
GIlbert de Gandano, or de Gaunt, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.)
^5, (d. 25.) E. 1. Geoffry de Genvil, Genevil, Geynvil, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d.
17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. John Giffard, Gifford, de
Gifford, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. O^bertus Gifford,
25, (d. 25.) E. 1. John Gifford de Borinesfeld, 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9* (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12* (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.)
14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. John Gifford de Beof, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John Golafre,
32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Raduph de Gorge, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.)
5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31*) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d.
26.) E. 2. Ralph de Gorge, 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. ^. 29.) E. 2. William de
Grandisson^, (Grandison) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32,
(d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19*) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.)
3, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16.) 8, (d. 29. 35.)
9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d.
16.) 16, (d. 26) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21* 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Osberne de
Grandissono, 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21. E. 1. Peter de Grandisson^,
11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Thomas de
Grandisson^, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. Thomas de Grelly, de Gresly, 1, (d. 8.) 2,
(d. 2. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Ralph de Grendon, 28, (d. 17.) E.
1. Robert (de Grendon) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E, 1. John, Baro de Greystoke,
Graystoke, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24. (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. The same (as I
conceive) summoned by the name of John de Craystoke, and Graystoke only, 28,
(d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 2^.) E. 1. Ralph de Creystoke,
Creystoke, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) E. 2. William de Greystoke,
22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. styled Baro de Greystoke, 24, (p. 2.
d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.
21.) E. 3. Ralph, Baro de Greystoke, Creystoke, 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d.
6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d* 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6,
(d. 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.)
12, (d. 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d: 30) 18,
(d: 23.) 20, (p* 1. d. 15.) 21, (p: 1. d. 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2,
(p: 1. d. 3.) 3, (d: 17.) 5, (p: 1. d. 28. p: 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8, (d: 2.)
11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d.
15.) 4, (d. 16*) 5, (d. 11.) H. 5. John, Baro de Greystoke, 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d.
2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) Chivaler, 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d: 15.)
5, (d: 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.) H. 6.
Ralph, Baro de Greystoke, Chivaler, 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. summoned
without the addition of Baro, as Chivaler only, 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25,
(d. 25.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38,
(d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d.
41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Reginald de Gray, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.)
25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d:
21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. John de Gray, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Henry de Gray, 27, (d.
16. 18.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. John de Gray, 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.)
3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29.
35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.)
15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) E. 2. Richard de Gray,
2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16.
27.) 8, (d. 29. 31.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.)
14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19,
(d. 27.) E. 2. 1, (p. 1. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13.
23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8,
(d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) E. 3. Henry de Gray, 19, (d: 27.) 20,
(d: 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4, (d: 13.
23. 32. 41.) 5, (d: 7. 25. p: 2. d: 7.) 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.)
8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8. 18.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p: 1. d: 8. 15. p: 2. d: 11.
40.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13, (p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p: 1.
d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d.
14) 20, (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d: 9.) 22, (p: 1. d: 22. p: 2. d: 7.) 23; (p:
1. d: 23.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) E. 3. John de Gray de Codenore, 9, (d: 8. 28.) 13,
(p: 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d: 39.)
17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 22, (p. 2. d: 7.) 23, (p: 1 d. 23.) 24,
(p: 2. d. 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.) 27, (d: 12.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 8.) 31, (d.
2.) 32, (d: 8. 14.) 34, (d: 4.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d:
22.) 43, (d: 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d: 8. 9. 10. 11.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d: 4.
6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E: 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d. 32.)
5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11,
(d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d: 37.) R. 2. John Gray
de Rotherford, Rotherfield, 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15,
(p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39. p. 2. d: 13.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d:
14.) 22, (p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.) 24, (p: 2. d: 3.) 25, (p: 1. d: 5.)
27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 34, (d: 4.) 38, (d:
3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d: 9. 10. 11.) 47,
(d. 13.) E. 3. Reginald de Gray, 17, (p: 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p:
2. d. 22.) 21* (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d: 23.)
Senior, 25, (p: 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.
21.) 34, (d: 4.) E. 3. Reginald Gray de Ruthyn, 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d: 7. 8.) 31,
(d: 2. 21.) 32, (d: 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 37, (d: 22.) 38, (d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42,
(d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d. 9 10 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.)
50, (p: 1. d: 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5,
(d: 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10, 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11,
(d. 24.) R. 2. Ralph de Gray, 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d: 14.) E. 3. Henry Gray de
Shorland, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. Henry Gray de Wilton, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d: 13.
29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9, (d: 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d:
42.) 15, (d: 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) R. 2. Roger Gray de
Ruthyn, 11, (d. 13.) R. 2. Reginald Gray de Ruthyn, 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.)
15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 3.) 21, (p:
1. d: 27.) 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d: 37.) 2, (p: 1. d: 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1.
d. 28. p: 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d.
22.) H. 4. 1, (d: 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 5, (d: 11.) 7,
(d. 9.) 8, (d: 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler, 2, (d: 18.) 3, (^:
9.) 4, (d. 14.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d: 10.) 13,
(d. 2.) 15, (d: 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. Richard Gray de Codenore, 16, (d. 23.)
17, (d. 30.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d:
37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (p: 1. d: 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d: 30.) 8,
(d: 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 6.)
3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) H. 5. Ralph Gray de Raby, 20, (p: 1. d. 15.) R. 2. John
Gray de (...), 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 7, (d. 2.) H. (...) Henry
Gray de Codenore, Chivaler, 9, (d* 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.)
15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6. Reginald Gray de Ruthin, Chivaler, 18, (d. 33.)
H. 6. Edward Gray de Ruthin, Chivaler, 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d: 21.) 25, (d: 24.)
27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d: 36.) 33, (d: 36.) 38, (d. 30.)
H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. Reginald Gray de Wilton, Chivaler, 23, (d.
21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d.
36.) 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d: 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d.
3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Edward Gray, Miles, 25, (d. 24.)
27, (d. 24.) Dominus de Gr^by, 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d.
36.) H. 6. Thomas Gray, Dominus de Richmond, 29 (d. 41.) Miles, 31, (d. 36.)
33, (d: 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) E. 4. Henry Gray, Chivaler, 38, (d:
30.) 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Edward Gray
de Lisle, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. John Gray de Powis, 22, and 23, (d. 10.)
E. 4. Ingelram de Gynes, 23, (d: 4. 9.) 24, (d: 7.) 25, (d: 25.) 27, (d. 16.
18.) E. 1. Reginald de Gynes, 27, (d: 18.) E. 1. Ingelram de Gynes, 6, (d. 3.)
7, (d: 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13,
(d. 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d: 7.) E. 2.
H
EUstace de Hacche, 27, (d: 16. 28.) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d.
2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. John de Hale, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John de Hanndlo, 16,
(p: 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Andrew de Harcla, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. John de
Hardreshull, 16, (p: 1. d: 39.) E. 3. Henry de Hastings, 49, (d: 11.) H. 3.
John de Hastings, de Hastinges, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 27, (d: 16. 18.) 28,
(d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d. 8. 19. 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E. 1. 1, (d: 11.
19.) 2, (d. 11. 14.) 5, (d: 1. 25.) 6, (d: 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (d: 29.
35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.)
15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) E. 2. Edmund de
Hastings, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d. 31.) 34, (d. 2.)
E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) E. 2. Robert de Hastings, 5, (d: 17.) E.
2. Hugh Hastings, 6, (p: 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Thomas de Hastinges, (Hastings) 16,
(p: 1. d: 39. p. 2: d. 13.) E. 3. William Hastinges, Chivaler, 2, (d. 3.) de
Hastings, 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Richard
Hastings de Wells, 22, and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Edmund Hastings de Hungerford,
22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. William de H^tton, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. John de
Haverings, 27, (d: 16. 18.) E. 1. John de Haverington, (Harrington) 18, (d.
21.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 19.) 4,
(d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d: 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d.
18.) 9, (d: 8. 28.) 10* (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p: 2. d: 32.) 13,
(p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d: 23. 33.) 15* (p: 1. d: 37.) 16, (p: 1. d: 39.)
17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d: 14*) 20, (p: 2. d: 22.) 21, (p: 2. d: 9.) 22,
(p: 1. d: 32. p: 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. Robert de
Haverington, Harrington, ^, (d: 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5*
(d. 40.) 6, (d: 37.) 7 (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9* (d. 8.) 10, (d: 42.) 11, (d:
13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23) 17 (d.
38.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 15.) 21, (p: 1. d: 37.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1,
(d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d: 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p: 2. d. 4.)* 7, (d: 9.)
8, (d: 2.) 11, (d: 32.) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d:
16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 19.) H. 5. William de Harrington, 8, (d: 23.) 9, (d:
13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d: 18) 3, (d: 9.) Chivaler, 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.)
7, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 18.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) H. 6.
John de Haustede, 6, (d: 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9, (d: 8.
28.) E: ^. Ralph de Hemenhale, 32, (d: 14*) E. 3. William Herbert, Chivaler, 6,
(d: 1.) E. 4. Robert de Herle, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. William Her^n, 44, (d: 1.) E.
3. 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p: 1. (d: 13.) 21* (p. 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Chivaler, 2, (p:
1. d: 3.) 3, (d: 17) 5 (p: 1. d: 28. p: 2. d: 4.) H. 4. Robert de Hibernia, 23,
(d: 4.) E. 1. Robert de Hilton, 23, (d. 9.) 24, (d: 7) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1.
Alexander de Hilton, 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d.
8. 28.) E. 3. Thomas Hoe, H^^, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. Thomas Hoe, Hoo, Chivaler,
27, (d. 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29, (d: 42.) 31, (d: 36.) H. 6. Robert de Holand, 8,
(d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d:
5. 29.) E. 2. Robert de Holand, 16, (p: 1. d: 33.) E. 3. Thomas de Holand, 27,
(d: 14.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) E. 3. Robert de Holand, 37, (d: 22.) 38,
(d: 3.) 39, (d: 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d: 1.) 46, (d* 8. 9. 10. 11.) E. 3. John
de Holand, 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. Walter de Hopton, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John de
Hotham, 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Mr. Adam de Houghton, 32, (d: 14.) E. 3. John Howard,
de Howard, Miles, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4.
Walter Hungerford, 4, (d. 15.) Chivaler, 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: 2.) 9 (d. 18.) 10,
(d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23,
(d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) H. 6. Robert Hungerford, Chivaler* 23, (d.
21.) ^ominus de Mollins, 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.)
31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Robert Hungerford, Senior, Miles, 31, (d. 36.) H. 6. Robert
Hungerford, Miles, 33, (d. 36.) H. 6. Walter de Huntercombe, Huntercumbe, 23,
(d. 4. 9.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d.
2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Roger de
Huntingfield, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. William de Huntingfield, 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27,
(d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) 46, (d. 11.) 47,
(d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. John de Huntingfield, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.)
38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) E. 3. Henry Huse, Husee,
Husie, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 27, (d. 18.) 28. (d. 8. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 22.) 34,
(d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.
29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18,
(d: 15. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. Henry Huse, Husee, 11* (p. 1. d. 8. 15. p. 2.
d. 11. 30) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p.
1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13. 32.) 17, (p. 2. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d.
22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3.
Roger Husee, 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
I
ANdrew Ideverel, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Oliver de I^g^ham, 2, (d. 15. 23.) 3, (d.
19.) 4, (d. 23. 32. 41.) ^6, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. John de Insula, de Insula
Vectae, de Isle, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 8.) 33, (d. 21.) 34,
(d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 17.) 11, (d. 8. 14.)
17, (d. 27.) E. 2. Robert de Insula, de Isle, 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.)
9. (d. 22.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13. (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d.
26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4) E. 2. 1, (p. 2.
d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 15. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1.
d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9,
(d: 8. 18.) 10* (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2.
d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3.
Robert de Insula, de Rube^-monte, 24, (p. 1. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d.
13.) 28, (d. 26.) 31, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. Gerard de Insula, 31, (d: 2.)
32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Warin de Insula, 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47,
(d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d.
32.) 5, (d. 40) R. 2.
G
EDward de Kendale, 32* (d. 14.) E. 3. Roger de Kerdeston, 6, (d. 49. 19* 36.)
7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d, 8. 28.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8.) E. 3.
William de Kerdeston, 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1.
28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d.
25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) Senior, 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. Thomas de
Kerdeston, 27, (d. 12.) E. 3. Thomas de Kirketon, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. John
de Kirketon, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 32.) E. 3. John Kiriel, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
Bago, (Drago) de Knovil, 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8.
13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Philip de
Kyme, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.)
33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d.
16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27*) E. 2.
William de Kyme, 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d* 4.) E.
2. ^, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 16. 23. 32.) 3, (d. 13.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32.
41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 29. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 19.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.)
9, (d, 8. 18.) E. 3.
L
John de Lancastria, (Lancaster) 25, (d. 25) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.)
32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1. (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11.
20.) 9, (d. 16. 17.) E. 2. Henry de Lancastria, (styled Nepos Regis in some
Writs) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28. (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d.
21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3,
(d. 16. 17.) 4 (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. ^. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27, 8, (d.
29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5.
29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d: 26.) 17, (d.) 27.) 18, (d: 5.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2.
Thomas de Langele, 32, (d. 14) E. 3. Roger de Lascel, Lasceles, 23, (d. 4. 9.)
24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Thomas le Latymer, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2)
33, (d. 21.) E. 1. William le Latymer, Junior, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) E. 1. William le Latymer, Senior, 28, (d. 17.)
30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2,
(d: 11. 14.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) ^, (d: 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d:
16. 27.) 8, (d: 29. 35.) 9, (d: 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) ^2, (d: 11. 29.) 13, (d:
13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15* (d. 16.) 16, (d: 16) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34.) 20,
(d: 4.) E. 2.) 1, (p: 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d: 13.) 4, (d. 13.
23. 32. 41.) 5, (p: 1. d. 7. 25. p: 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 26.) 7, (p. 2. d.
3.) 8, (d: 13.) 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. William de La^ymer, 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d: 24.)
44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d.
13. 29*) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2. John de Latymer, 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d: 32.)
12, (d: 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) ^, (d: 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d.
16.) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) Chivaler,
2, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) H. 6.
George Latymer, Chivaler, 10, (d: 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d. 18.)
18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d: 24.) 27, (d: 24.) 28 (d: 26.)
31. (d: 36.) 33, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E.
4. John A^t^ Lee, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Mr. ^ohn Leech^, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John
Lestrange de Knokyn, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.)
7, (d. 16. 27.) E. 2. Fulco L^strange, 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4,
(d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 6. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9,
(d. 22.) 11, (d: 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14, (d: 5. 29.) 15, (d:
16.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d: 34.) 20, (d: 4.) E. 2. Ebul. Lestrange, Strange, 1,
(p. 1. d: 11. 16.) 2, (d: 15. 23. 3^.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d: 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5,
(p. 1. d: 7 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d: 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d: 3.) 8, (d: 18.) 9,
(d. 26.) E: 3. John le Strange; Straung, 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.)
6, (d. 9. 19. 36) 7 (p: 2. d. 3.) 9, (d: 28.) 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (d: 1. d: 8.
15. p. 2. d 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d: 30.) 13, (p: 2. d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 2. d. 23.
33.) 15, (p: 1. d. 37.) 16, (p: 2. d: 39.) 17, (p: 1. d: 25.) 18, (p: 1. d:
14.) E. 3. Roger Lestrange, Straung, 16, (p: 1. d. 39.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23,
(p: 1. d. 23.) 29, (d: 3.) 31, (d: 2. 21.) 32, (d: 4.) 33, (d: 24.) de Knokyn,
44, (d. 1.) 46, (d: 9 10. 11.) 47, (d: 13.) 49* (d* 4. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d: 37.) 2,
(d: 13. 29.) 3, (d: 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d: 40.) 6, (d: 37.) R. 2. John
Lestrange, de Knokyn, 7, (d: 10. 37.) 8, (d: 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d: 42.) 11,
(d: 13. 24.) 12, (d: 42.) 13, (d: 5) 14, (d: 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d: 27.) 17,
(d: 30.) 18, (d: 23.) 20, (p: 1. d: 27.) R. 2. Richard Le Strange, 7, (d: 35.)
8, (d: 2,) 11, (d. 32) 12, (d: 2.) 14, (d: 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d:
16.) 3, (d: 15.) 4, (d: 16.) 5, (d: 11.) 7 (d: 9.) 8, (d. 2.) 9, (d: 13.) H. 5.
1, (d: 22.) 2, (d: 18.) Chivaler, 4, (d: 15.) 5, (d: 4.) 7, (d: 2.) 9, (d: 18.)
10, (d. 10.) 11, (d: 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d: 18) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d: 27.) 23,
(d: 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d: 24) H. 6. John le Strange, Chivaler, 49, (d: 6.)
H. 6. 6, (d: 1.) 9, (d: 3.) 12, (d: 41.) E. 4. William de Leybourne, 27, (d:
16. 18) 28, (d: 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33, (d: 21.) 34, (d: 2.) E:
1. 1, (d. 8. 11, 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d: 16. 17.) 4, (d: 1.) E. 2. John
de Leybourne, 11, (p. 1. d: 8. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2.
d: 1. 28.) 14, (p: 1. d: 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p.
1. d: 25.) 18, (p. 1. d: 14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 21, (p: 1: d: 9.) E. 3. Henry
de Lorty, 19, (d: 27.) E. 2. John Lovel, Luvel, de Tichemersh, 25, (d. 25.) 27,
(d. 16. 18.) 28, (d: 3. 17) 30, (d: 8. 13.) 32, (d: 2.) 33. (d: 21.) 34, (d.
2.) 35, (d: 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d: 11. 14. 20) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5,
(d. 17) 6, (d. 13. 31) 7, (d. 6. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Thomas Lovel, 16,
(p. 2. d. 32.) E. 3. Richard Lovel, 22, (p. 2. d. 9.) 23, (p: 1. d. 23.) 24,
(p. 2. d. 3.) E: 3. John Lovel 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. de
Tishemersh, 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d: 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6,
(d. 37.) 7* (d. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d: 13. 24.) 12,
(d: 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 32.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 27.) 17, (d: 30.) 20,
(p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d.
3.) 3, (d. 28.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7 (d. 30) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.)
12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2. (d. 6.) H. 5. Thomas Lovel de
Helmshire, 16, (d: 23.) 17, (d: 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R. 2. William Lovel de
Tichemersh, Chivaler, 3, (d: 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) 10, (d. 10.)
11, (d 10.) 13, (d: 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d: 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25,
(d. 24.) 27, (d 24.) 28, (d: 26.) 29 (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 30.) H. 6.
John Lovel, Chiv. 38, (d. 30) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. William Lovel
de Morley, Chiv. 49 (d. 6.) H. 6. 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41:) E. 4. Francis Lovel
de Lovel, Chivaler, 22, and 23, (d: 10.) E. 4. Robert de Loundres, 32, (d. 14.)
E. 3. Thomas de Lonvillers, 16, (p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3. John de Longevilliers, 32,
(d. 14) E. 3. Geoffry de Lucy, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. 25, (d. 5.) E. 1. Antony de
Lucy, 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d: 5. 34.) 19.
(d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 16. 23. 31) 3, (d. 19.)
4, (d. 13, 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 9 (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d.
1. 5.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 32. p. 2. d. 1. 18.) 14, (p. 2. d. 23.
33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) Thomas de Lucy,
16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d: 6.) 22,
(p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p: 2. d. 23.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 13.)
28, (d. 36.) 29 (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34* (d. 4. 35.) 35, (d. 36.) 36, (d.
26. 42.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) E. 3. Ralph de Lumley, 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d.
45.) 10. (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d: 5) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d.
37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21. (p. 1, d.
27) 23, (p. 1.) R. 2. 1. (d. 37.) H. 4. Thomas Lumley, Chivaler, 49, (d. 6) H.
6 Dominus Lumley, 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9 (d. 3.) 12 (d: 41.) 22, and 23, (d.
10.) E. 4. Robert Lutterel, 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. John de Lyonns, 32, (d. 14.)
E. 3.
M
PEter de Malo-lacu, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 13.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 15.)
32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3.
(d. 16. 17) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d: 16. 27.) 8, (^. 29. 35.) 9, (d.
22.) 11, (d* 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d: 13.) 14 (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.)
16, (d: 26.) 17, (d: 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) E. 2. 9, (d. 2.) E. 3. Peter de
Malo-lacu le Quint, 10, (d: 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13,
(p. 1. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15 (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 29.)
17, (p. 1. d. 29.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 1. d. 9) 22,
(p. 1. d. 32. p. ^. d. 7) 23, (p. 1. (d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d.
5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 16.) 29, (d. 18.) E. 3. Peter de Malo-lacu le Sisme,
31 (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 47, (d: 13.) 49, (d: 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3.
1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 4.) 6, (d. 37.) R.
2. Peter de Malo-lacu, 23, (d: 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d.
28.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d.
2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) H. 5. Thomas
Malesore, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Baldwin de Maneriis, 3, (d. 17.) E. 2. Walter de
Manny, 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d.
3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31,
(d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d. 16) 37, (d. 22.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43,
(d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. John de la Mare, 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 37.) 30, (d.
13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11. 19) 6,
(d. 3. 31.) 7 (d. 27.) E. 2. William de Marescal (Marshal) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.)
3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6* (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.)
E. 2. Robert Markamote, 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. William Marmyon, 43, (d. 11.) E. 3.
John de Marmyon, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. ^, (d. 27.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16) 20, (d.
4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 10. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23.
32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 13.)
8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.) E. 3. William de Marmyon, 32, (d. 14. E. 3. Robert
Martyn, 32, (d. 4.) E. 3. William Martin, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d.
3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 9. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d.
19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d.
3. 3^.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.)
14, (d. 5. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d.
27.) ^8, (d. 5. 11. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. John Ma^uduit, 16, (p. 2. d. 22.)
E. 3. Peter de Maule; Mauley, 37, (d. 32.) 38, (d. 3.) 42, (d. 12.) 43, (d.
24.) 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Nicholas de Sancto Mauro (S^ymore) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9,
(d. 22.) William de Sancto Mauro, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5.)
15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Nicho^as de Sancto Mauro, 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. John Mautrav^rs,
(styled in some Rolls Junior,) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) E. 3.
Nicholas de Meivil, M^ignell, Meynill, Mervile, Morvie, 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d.
*18.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d.
8. 14. 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. 9,(d.
8.) 10, (d. 15.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (^. 2. d. 1. 28.)
14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Richard de
Merton 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Metha^ 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Io^n de Moiles,
25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.)
5, (d. 7.) E. 2. Nicholas de Moiles 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Robert de
Mohaunt, Morhaunt 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16. 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3,
(d. 19.) E. 3. John de Mohun, Moun 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, d. 8. 13.)
32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) 2, (d. 11. 14.
20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 8 (d. 29. 35.)
9, (d. 22.) 10, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, ^d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15,
(d. 16.) 18, (d. 21.) 19, (d. 17.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 24.
31.) 3, ^d. 13.) 4, (d. 13. 31. 41.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. John de Mohun de
Dunste^, 22, (p. ^. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39 (d.
2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 46, (d. 9, 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. William
Moigne 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Simon de Monte acuto, Montecute, Montegue) 28, (d.
17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, d. (21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.)
2, (d. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 10. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d.
22.) E. 2. William de Monte acuto, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. 4,
(d. 23. 32.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 15. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d.
3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5. 22, p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d.
23.) E. 3. Edward de Monte acuto 18, (p. 1. d. 39.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p.
1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 31,
(d. 2.) 32, (d. ^ 4.) 34, (d. 4. 35.) E. 3. John de Monte acuto 31, [d. 2.] 44,
(d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.)*
7, (d. 10. 37^) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 24.) 1. 1, (d. 42.) 12, (d.
42.) 13, (d. 5.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) R.
2. Roger de Monte alto 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Robert de Monte alto, 27, (d. 18.) 28,
(d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 14.) 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. Simon
de Monte alto 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 13.) E. 1. John de Monte forti, (Mountfort,
Momford) 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Peter de Monteforti 9, (d. 8.)
16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 23.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. John
de Monte Gomeri, [Mountgomery] 16, (p. 1. d. 39) E. 3. Ralph de Monte Hermerii,
2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 23.) 8, (d. 29. 35.)
9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15,
(d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34) E. 2. Edward de Monte
Hermerii, 11, (p. 1. d. 8. 15.) E. 3. William de Morle, Morley 28, (d. 17.) 32,
(d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Robert de Morle, Morley, Mallory, 11, (d.
8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.)
17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 21. 34) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2 (d. 15.
23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.)
6, (d. 19. 36.) 7, (p: 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11,
(p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.)
15, (p. 1. d. 23) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1.
d. 14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.)
(...), (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.)
29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John de Morle 6, (d. 9.) E.
3. William de Morle, Morley 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22) 43, (d. 24.)
Chivaler 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) R.
2. Thomas de Morle, Morley 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7,
(d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.)
13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) Chivaler 15, (d. 32.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30) 20, (p.
1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3,
(d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. (d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 1^,
(d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.)
H. 5. Thomas de Morle, Chivaler, 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) H. 6. Ralph de Morle,
Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. John de Morley, Chivaler, 10, (d. 10.) 11, d. 10.)
H. 6. Thomas de Morley, Chivaler, 13, (d. 2.) H. 6.) Robert Morley, Chivaler
20, (d. 27.) H. 6. Edward de Mortuo-mari, (Mortymer) 23. (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16.
18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Simon Mortymer, 24, (d. 7.) E. 1.)
Edward de Mortuo-mari, 25, (d. 25) E. 1. Hugh de Mortuo-mari, 25, (d. 25.) 27,
(d. 16. 18,) E. 1. William de Mortuo-mari de Atteleburge, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1.
Roger de Mortuomari de Wigmore 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.)
32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 25.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2,
(d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8,
(d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 14, (d. 5.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. Roger de Mortuo-mar^ de
Chirke, Chirkes, 1, (d. 11. 19.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.)
7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.)
13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. Edmund de Mortuo-mari 5, (p. 2.
d. 7.) E. 3. Constantine de Mortuo mari, 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) E. 3.
Roger de Mortuo-mari de Wigmore 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 25.) 24, (p. 2.
d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) E. 3. Roger de
Moubray, Mubray 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. John de Moubray
1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 7. 11.) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.
29*) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 24.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11.) 2, (d. 31.) 3, (d.
19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.^ 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.)
7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11,)
12. (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33) 15 (p. 1. d,
37.) 16. (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13) DOMINUS Insulae de Ax^olme d. 22) 17, (p 1.
d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14,) 20, (p 2. d. 2.) 22, (p. 1. d. 22. p. 2. d. 3. 7.)
23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d.
12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10) 34,
(d 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Thomas de
Multon, 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30 (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) E.
1. 8, (d. 11. 29.) 9, (d. 9. 22.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Thomas de
Multon de Egresmond 1, (d. 19.^ 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6,
(d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 18. 27.) 11, (d. 8. 14) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. Tho: de
Multon de Gillesland 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 7,
(d. 18. 27.) E. 2. John de Multon 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d.
18.) E. 3. William de Munchensey 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Walter de Muncy 27, (d.
18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1.
John Musard 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas de Musgrave, 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1.
d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21) 32, (d. 14.) 34
(d. 4. 35.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43,
(d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 3.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3.
N
SErlo de Naus^adron 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d.
2.) E. 1. Ralph de Nevill 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.)
E. 1. Ralph de Nevill 5, (d. 7. 11.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 14, (d. 5.)
15, (d 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 17.) 20, (d.
4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23.
32. 41) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d.
8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28,) 14, (p. 2. d.
23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d.
14) 20, (^. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (d. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p.
1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, (^. 4.
35.) 36, (d. 13.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Hugh de Nevill 5,
(d. 7.) 5, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.)
17* (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) E, 2. 6, (d. 49. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8,
(d. 28.) 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. Gilhert de Nevill 4, (d. 23.) E. 3. John de Nevill
de Essex 9, (d. 8.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 18. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2.
d. 32) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 2. d. 37.) 16, (p.
1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 35.) 18, (p. 2. d. 14.) 22, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, ( p. 1.
d. 23) E. ^. Robert de Nevill 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Iohe de Nevil de Raby 42
(d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1) 50* (p. 2. d 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13.
29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5. (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) R. 2. Thomas de
Nevill de Halmshire, Halumshire, 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d.
42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 18,
(d. 23) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 23.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. ^.)
11, (d. 32.) 12, (^. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. Ralph Nevill de Raby 12, (d. 42.)
14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23) 17, (d. 30.) 20, (p. 1. d. 25.) 21, (p. 1.
d. 27.) R. 2. William de Nevill Chivaler, 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.)
13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 25, (d. 24.) H. 6. Edward
Nevill DOMINVS de Bergavenney 29, (d. 41) Chivaler, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.)
38, (d. 30.) 39, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12.
(d. 41) E. 4. William Nevill de Fauconbridge Chivaler, 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d 30)
H 6. 1, (d. 35.) E. 4. John Nevill DOMINVS de Mounjoy [Mountague] Chivaler, 1,
(d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) E. 4. George Nevill Chivaler 22, 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. William
de Neyrford 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Wal^er de Norwico (Norwich) 8, (d. 35.) E. 2.
John de Norwico, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 32, (d. 14.) 33, (d. 10.) 34, d. 35,) E. 3.
Irhn de Norwode, Northwode 6, (d. 9. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 17.) 8, (d. 29. 36.) 9,
(d. 22. 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) E. 2. Roger de Northwode 33, (d. 10.)
34, (d. 35.) E. 3. John de Northwode, 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42.
(d. 22) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 12.) 46, (d. 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 6.) E. 3.
Adam de Novo Mercato, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Thomas de Novo Mercato 32, (d. 14.) E.
3.
O
RObert de Ogle DOMINUS de Ogle Chivaler 2, (d. 3.) 6, (^. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) E. 4.
Owen Ogle, de Ogle Chivaler, 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 1. John de Oldcastle
Chivaler 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 2^) H. 4. 1, (d. 37) H. 5. John de
Orreby 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d: 17.) 4 (d. 1.) E. 2.
P
John de Palton 32. (d. 14.) E. 3. John de Pateshull 26, (p. 1. d. 29.) E. 3.
John de Paynell 28, (d. 3. 17. 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d.
2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 3, (d. 17.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) E. 2. William
Paynell, Paignell, 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6,
(d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 35.) 9. (d. 22) E. 2. John de Payure 27, (d.
16. 18.) E. 1. 11, (d. 14.) E. 2. Gilbert Pecche, de Petche 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 8. 1^.) 32, (d. 23.) ^4, (d. 2.) E. 1. 15 E. 2, d. 16. Robert Petche, 25,
(d. 25.) E. 1. 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. John Pecche, Petche, de Petche 14, (d. 5.) 15,
(d. 16.) 16, d. 26,) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d, 27.) 20, (d. 4.)
E. 2. 1, (^. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 32. 41.)
5, (d. 7. 23.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 38.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18) 9, (d. 8. 28.)
32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John de Peitz 11, (d. 8.) E. 2. Henry de Percy 27, d. 8.
18.) 28, (d. 3. ^7.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 8. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E.
1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d.
17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Henry de Percy 15, (d.
16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E.
2. 1. (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2 (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.)
5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d.
18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 12. (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 28.) 14,
(p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18,
(p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d.
7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d.
12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36,
(d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 42, (d. 22. ( Le Percey) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d.
1.) 46, (d. 3.) 49, (d. 4. 6) E. ^. Henry Percey DOMINVS de Poynings, Chivaler,
27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26. 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. ^6.) H. 6. Thomas
Percey DOMINVS de Egremont, Gremont, 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H.
6. Ralph Per^t, 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Henry Peverell 32* (d. 14.) E. 3. Hugh de
Peyngn 23. (d. 9.) E. 1, Hugh de Sancto Phileberto, 27 (d. 18.) E. 1. Hugh de
Sancto Philberto 22, (p. 2. d. 7,) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) E 3. Henry Picard 32, (d.
14.) E. 3. Henry de Pinkeney 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 17) E. 1.
Ralph Pipard, Pypard, Pipart 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Robert de Playez 11, (d. 14.) E. 2. Giles de Playez 25, (d.
25.) E. 1. Richard de Plaiez, Playez, 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5.
29.) 15, (d. 10.) E. 2. Magister Richard de Plescy 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Hugh de
Plessetis 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Alan de Pluckenet, Ploukenet,
Plugenet 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. 5, (d. 11.) E. 2.
Michael de la Pole 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 46, (d. 9.) 49, (d. 4.
6.) Admirallus Flote Navium versus parts Boriales, 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1,
(d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 31.) 5, (d. 40) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d.
10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) R. 2. Michael de Ponitz, Pointz 23, (d. 4.) 24, (d. 7.)
25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 19.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d.
21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Nicholas de Pointz 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3,
(d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. Hugh de Pointz, 11, (d. 8, 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.)
13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 18, (d. 21.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p.
2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p. 2. d. 7. 25. p.
2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d,
1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 11.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.)
14, (p. 2. d. 23, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.)
E. 3. Robert de Pointz 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) E. 3. Thomas de Poynings, 11, (p. 1.
d. 8. 15.) E. 3. Michael de Poynings, 16, (p. 1. d. 39. 22, (^. 2. d. 7.) 23,
(p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.)
28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d. 4.) 36, (d.
16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) E. 3. Luke de Poynings,
42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4.
6.) E. 3. Richard de Poynings 7, (d. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. Robert
Poynings 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1,
(d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) 17, (d. 9.) 8, (d.
2.) 9, (d. 14.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.)
5, (d. 4. 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d.
18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27) 23, (d. 21.) H. 6.
R.
THomas de Reins 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. John de Ripariis 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3.
17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 6,
(d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Ludowic Robesart
Chivaler, 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Thomas de la Roche
28 (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, ((d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1.
Sayerus de Rocheford, 32. (d. 14.) E. 3. Robert de Ros, 49, (d. 11.) H. 3.
Robert de Ros de Work 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. William de Ros, Roos de Helmeslake,
Hamelake 23, (d. 9.) 27, (d. 16. 18.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d.
20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 17.) 7, (d. 6. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.)
9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 15.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15,
(d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p.
1. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 10.) 4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (p.
1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9,
(d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2.
d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 29. p. 2. d.
13. 22.) 23, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) E. 3. John de Ros, Roos, 6, (d. 9.
19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1.
d. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) E. 3. Thomas de Ros, Roos de
Hamelake, 35, (d. 36.) 36, (d. 16. 32.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.)
42, (d. 22.) 43 (d. 24.) 49, (d. 4.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, (d.
32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37,) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35) R. 2. John
Roos de Hamelake, 10 (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d.
42) 15, (d. 32.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) R. 2. William Roos de Hamlake 18,
(d. 23.) 20, (p. 2. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2,
(p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.)
11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) H. 5, Thomas Roos de
Hamelake Chivaler, 7, (d. 2.) H. 6. Thomas DOMINUS de Roos, 27, (d. 24.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) Miles, 31, (d. 36.) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6.
Thomas de Rous 32 (d. 14.) E. 3. William de Ryther, Rithre, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 8.) 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2.
William Ryvill 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
S
WIlliam Sampson 28, (d. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. Roger
de Sancto Iohanne (Seint-Iohn) 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. John de Sancto Iohanne de
Lageham 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8, 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.)
34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d.
11. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8.
14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 28) E. 2.
John de Sancto Iohanne (usually styled Junior) 28, (d. 17) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d.
21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.)
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. John de
Sancto Iohanne de Basinges 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5.
21, 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. John de Sancto Iohanne 20, (d. 20.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2.
d. 11. 16,) 6, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 13. 41.) 5, (d. 25.) E. 3. John de
Sandall 6, (d. 35.) E. 2. Arnold Sauvage 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Geofry de Say 7,
(d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22) 11, (d. 8. 14) 12, (d. 11. 19.) 13, (d.
13) 14, (d. 5. 29.) E. 2. Geofry de Say 16, (p. 1. d. 29.) 22, (p. 2. d. 9.)
23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, d. 12.) E. 3. William de Say 36, (d. 13.)
37, (d. 20.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2) 42. (d. 22.) 43^ (d. 24.) 44, (d. 1.) 46,
(d. 9, 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) E. 3. Rober^ de Scales, D'escales, 27, (d. 16.
18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1.
1, (d. 11. 19.) 6, (d. 3. 31. ^ 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35) 9, (d. 22.) 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29,) 13, (d. 3. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2.
Robert de Scales, 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, p. 1. d. 5.) 28, (d.
26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 43, (d. 24.) 50, (p.
2. d. 6.) E. 3. Roger de Scales, Skales 49, (d. 4. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d.
13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9, (d. 45.) R. 2. Robert de Scales 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.)
23, (d. 3.) R. 2* 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) H. 4. Thomas de Scales, Miles
23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.)
33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30) H. 6. Henry le Scrop 8, (d. 35.) E. 2. Henry le Scrop,
3, (d. 19.) 6, (d. 4.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.)
26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.)
44, (d. 1.) 46, (d 9.) 47, (d. 13.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37) 2, (d.
13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) Chivaler, 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10.
37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45*) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.)
14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) R. 2. Richard le Scrop 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d. 13. 39.) 3,
(d. 32) 4, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d.
42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21,
(p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d, 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5,
(p. 1. d. 25.) H. 4. Stephen de Scrop de Masham 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 20,
(p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d.
3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4.
Henry le Scrop de Masham, 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9.
(...)) 2, (d. 16.) H. 5. John le Scrop de Masham, Ch^^^ter, 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d.
4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.)
18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.)
29, (d. 41.) 31, [d. 36.] 33, [d. 36.] H. 6. Henry le Scrop de Bolton, Chivaler
20, [d. 27.] 23, [d. 21.] 25, [d. 24.] 27, [d. 24.] 28, [d. 26.] 29, [d. 41.]
31, [d. 36.] 33, [d. 30.] H. 6. John de Scrop de Bolton, Chivaler 38, (d. 30.)
49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 33.) 12, (d. 41.) 22
and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas le Scrop de Masham Chivaler 38, (d. 30.) 49, (d.
6) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 33) 12, (d. 41.) 22 and 23,
(d. 10,) E. 4. Nicholas de Segrave 49, (d. 11.) H. 3. Nicholas de Segrave
senior 23, (d. 9.) 25, (d. 6. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32,
(d. 2.) 33, (d. 10. 21) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 11* 19,) 2, (d*
14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29.
35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29)
E. 2. Nicholas de Segrave Junior 23, (d, 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. John de
Segrave 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 6. 25.) 27, (d. 16, 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8.
13.) 32, (d. 2.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 14. 20) 5, (d. 11.
17. 25) 6, (d. 3. 13.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.
12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d.
27.) 18, (d. 5, 34.) E. 2. John de Segrave 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11. (p. 1. d. 8. 15,
p. 2. d. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) 14, (p. 2. d. 23. 33) 15,
(p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p, 1, d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.) 17. (p. 1. d 25.) 18, (p. 1. d.
14.) 20, (p. 1. d. 22.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 23,
(p. 1. d. 23) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 21, (p. 1. d. 5.) E. 3. Thomas Seymor 32, (d.
14.) E. 3. Richard Seymour, Seymore, 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d.
10. 33.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 10. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 13,
(d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20,
(p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (p. 2. d. 3.)
5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. William de
Shareshall 6, (d. 4.) E. 3. Edmond de Sleye 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. John de Somery
1, (d. 8.) 2, (d. 11, 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6,
(d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29, 35) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, (d.
13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. William Spenser 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
Edward BARO de Stafford 27, (d. 16. 28.) 28, (d. 3. 17) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d.
2.) 33, (d. 20.) 34, (d. 2) E. 1. 1, (d. 11. E. 2. Ralph de Stafford 10, (d. 1.
5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 40.) 12, p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 2. d.
23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25) 21, (p. 2. d.
9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32.) E. 3. BARO de Stafford (listed amongst the Earls) 18,
(p. 1. d. 14) and then amongst the Lords by this title BARO de Stafford, 22, p.
2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23) 24, (p. 2. d.
3.) E. 3. Richard de Stafford, 32, (d. 14.) 46, (d. 9, 10, 11.) 47, (d. 13.) 49
(d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37) 2, (d 13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) R. 2.
Hugh de Stafford 44, (d. 1.) E. 3. Hugh Stafford 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22) H. 4.
Humfry Stafford de Southwick Chivaler 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) E. 4. Thomas de
Stanley Chivaler 38, (d. 6.) 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 1. (d. 35.) DOMINUS Stanley 2,
(d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 31.) 22 and 23* (d. 10.) E. 4. George
Stanley de Lestrange Chivaler 22 and 23, (d. 10.) E. 4. Nicholas de Stapleton
6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16, 27.) E. 2. Nicholas de Stapleton 16, (p. 1. d. 39.)
E. 3.) Miles de Stapleton 32, (d. 34.) E. 3. Henricus de Staunton 8, (d. 29.
35.) 9, (d. 22.) E. 2. Strange, See Lestrang, de Extrane^. John de Strivelin,
16, (p. 2. d. 39) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.)
E. 3. John Stourton Miles, DOMINUS de Sturton 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d.
36.) 33, (d. 36,) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35) E. 4. William Stourton de
Stourton Chivaler 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. 9 (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) E. 4. John Stourton
Chivaler 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. John de Suby, Sudeley, Sudele, Sully, Sudle
28, (d. 3.) 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1,
(d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.
29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29) E. 2. John de Sutton 18, (d. 21.) E. 2. John
Sutton de Holderness 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8.)
10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2.
d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16* (p. 1. d. 39.) 17, (p.
1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) E. 3. John de Sutton de Duddele 16, (p. 1. d.
39.) E. 3. John de Sutton de Essex 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. John Sutton
de Duddeley Chivaler 20, (d. 27) 23, (d. 21) 25, (d. 24.) 27, (d. 24.) 29, (d.
41.) 31, (d. 36) 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35) 2, (d. 3.) 6, (d.
1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41.) 22, and 23, (d. 10) E. 4. Adam de Swyllington 20,
(d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 31) E. 3. Roger de Swynerton 11, (p.
1. d. 8. 15. p. 2. d. 11. 40.) E. 3.
T
GIlbert Talbot, Talebot 4, (d. 32.) 5, (p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d, 8. 18.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40.)
12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13. (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d.
37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22,
(p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d. 22.) 44, (d. 1.) 47,
(d. 13,) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3*
(d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d.
45.) 10 (d. 42.) R. 2. Richard Talbot 4, (d. 23. 33) 6, (d. 9. 19.) 7, (p. 2.
d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8.) 12, (p. 2.
d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p.
1. d. 39.) 18, (p 1. d. 14.) 21, (p. 2. d. 9.) 2^, (p. 1. d. 23) 24. ^p. 2. d.
3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12.) 28* (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 36,
(d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) E. 3. Thomas Talbot de Blackmore 7, (d. 10.) R. 2.
Richard Talbot de Blackmore 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) Chivaler 11,
(d. 24.) R. 2. Richard Talbot de Goderich-Castle 11, (d. 13.) 12, (d. 42.) 13,
(d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) R. 2. Gilbert
Talbot 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2) 14. (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d.
9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.) 5, (d. 11.) H. 5. John Talbot
DOMINVS de Furnival 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.)
2, (d. 6.) 4, (d. 16) 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. John Talbot Chivaler 4, (d. 1^5.) 11,
(d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) H. 6. John Talbot de Lisle Chivaler 23, (d. 21,) 25, (d.
24*) 27, (d. 24) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) Vicount de Lisle, 31, (d. 36.) H. 6.
Robert de Tateshall 22, (d. 4.) 24, (d. 7.) 25, (d. 6. 25) 27. (d. 16. 18.) 28,
(d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) E. 1. Walter de Tey 27, (d. 16. 28.) 18, (d. 17.)
32, (d. 2.) 33. d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Henry de Teyes,
Teyeys, Teyers, Tryes, 27, (d. 18) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8, 13.) 32, (d. 2.)
33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 1, (d. 29.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d.
16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8, 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d.
13.) 14, (d. 5. 29) E. 2. John de Thorpe 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 4, (d.
1.) 5, (d. 11. 17.) 6, (d, 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.)
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 15.) 15 (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d.
5. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. William de Thorpe 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d.
37.) 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 4^.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 24.) 12,
(d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) R. 2. Pagan de Tibetot, Tibetorte 1, (d. 8.)
2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31) 7, (d.
16. 27) E. 2 John de Tibetot, Tibetorte, Tibetote, Tipetote, Tiptoft, 9, (d. 8.
28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11. (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 40.) 13. (p. 2. d. 1.) 14, (p. 2.
d 23, 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 17, (p. 1. d. 35.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p. 2.
d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 5.) 27, (d. 12.) 28,
(d. 26.) 29, (d. 7. 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d* 4.) 36, (d. 16.
42.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3. Robert Tibetot. 42, (d. 22.)
44, (d. 1.) E. 3. John Tibetot, Tibetoft, Tiptoft, Chiveler. 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d.
4.) 7, (d. 2.) 9, (d. 18.) 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.)
18, (d. 33,) 20, (d. 27.) H. 6. John Traverse 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. John Tregoz,
Tregoitz 25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 16. 18) E. 1. Henry Tregoz, Tregoitz 32, (d. 2.)
33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13) E. 1. 1, (d. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d.
16, 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.)
12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13) 14 (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.) E. 2. Thomas Tregoz 6,
(d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18) 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. John Trouett
32, (d. 14) E. 3. William Trussell 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Theobald Trussell
32 (d. 14.) E. 3. William Tuchet, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.)
33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. John Tuchet 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d.
30.) 8, (d. 2.) H. 4. Marmaduke Twenge, Thwenge 35, (d. 13.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11.
20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.)
11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 27.) 15, (d. 16.) 16,
(d. 26) E. 2. William de Twenge 18, (d. 22.) E. 2.
V
ADomaru^, Eimerus de Valentia 25, (d. 25.) 28, (d. 3. 17,) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32,
(d. 2.) 34, [d. 2] E. 1. William la Vavasour, Vavassor 27, (d. 28.) 28, (d. 3.
17) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.)
2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11.) 6, (d. 31) E. 2. Walter le
Vavassour 7* (d. 27) E. 2. Peter de Veel 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) 32, (d. 14.) E. 3.
Hugh de Veer 27, (d. 16* 28.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 8. 13,) 32, (d. 2.) 33,
(d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13) E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 29.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.)
^, (d. 11.) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8,
(d. 25. 29.) E. 2. Robert de Veer 9, (d. 22) 11, (d. 8. 14) E. 2. Theobald de
Verden, Verdon, Verdun, Verdoun 23, (d. 4. 9.) 25, (d. 25.) Senior. 28, (d.
17.) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 2, (d. 11. 19) 3,
(d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 11. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d.
32,) E. 2. Theobald de Verdun Junior 28, (d. 17) 30, (d. 8.) 32, (d. 2.) 33,
(d. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 1.) E. 1. John de Verdon 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8* 28.) 16, (p. 1. d. ^9.) E. ^. John de Vescy
49, (d. 11.) H. 3. William de Vescy 23, (d. 4. 9.) E. 1. 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d.
16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) E. 2. Kobert de Vfford, D'ufford 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3,
(d. 16, 17) 4, (d. 1.) 5, (d. 17. 25.) E. 2. Robert de Vfford 6, (d. 9. 19.
36.) 7, p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 16, (p. 1. d.
39.) E. ^. John de Vfford 33, (d. 10.) 34, (d. 35.) E. 3. William de Vfford 38,
(d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) E. 3* Thomas Vghtred, de Vghtred 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 22, (p.
2. d. 7.) 23, (p. 1. d. 23.) 24, p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1* d. 5.) 26, (d. 14.)
27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 7, 8.) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 32, (d. 14.) 34, (d.
4.) 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) 38, (d. 3.) E. 3. Gilbert de Vmfravill 23, (d. 4.
9.) 24, (d. 7.) E. 1. Robert de Vmfravil 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Henry de Vrtiaco 25,
(d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) E. 1. Peter de Vvedale, 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2.
d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 18. 28.) E. 3.
W
THomas de Wa^ull 25, (d. 25,) E. 1. John de Wake 23, (d. 4. 9.) 24, (d. 7.)
25, (d. 25.) 27, (d. 18.) 28, (d. 17.) E. 1. Thomas de Wake 11* (d. 8. 14.) 12,
(d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15* (d. 16) 16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5.
34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.)
3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 41) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 31.) 7,
(p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) de Lydell, 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2.
d. 11. vacat) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) 14, (p. 1. d. 2^. 33) 15,
(p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39 p. 2. d. 13. 22.) 1^, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1.
d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21, (p* 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 3^, p. 2. d. 7.) 23,
(p. 1. d. 23.) E. 3. Richard Walkefore 32 (d. 14.) E. 3. Thomas Walkefore 32,
(d. 14.) E. 3. Richard Walleyes 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. Ralph de Ward 28, (d. 27.) E.
1. Robert de la Ward 28 (d. 3.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) E. 1. Simon de
Ward* 18, (d. 21.) 20, (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 29. 31,)
4, (d. 13. 23. 32. 41.) 5, (d* 7. 15) 6, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) E. 3.
Richard Ward Chivaler, 49, (d. 6.) H. 6. Roger la War* 27, (d. 16. 18 28, (d.
3. 17.) 31, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 10. 21.) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1. (d.
19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) 3, (d. 17) 4, (d. 1.) E. 2. ^ Robert la War 33, (d. 21.)
E. 1. John la War 1, (d. 8 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5,
(d. 11. 17. 25.) 6, (d. 3. 31.) 7, (d. 16. 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d. 22.) 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 29.) E. 2. John la War 16, (p. 1. d. 39.) E. 3. Rich: de
la War 32, (d. 14) E. 3. Roger de la War, 36, (d. 16.) 37, (d. 22.) E. 3.
John la War, 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9*) 47, (d. 13.) 49, (d. 4. 6.) 50. (p. 2.
d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d 35.) 2, (13, 29.) 3, (32.) 4, (d. 3 2.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d.
37.) 7, (d. 10. 37) 8, (d. 35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 37.) 12, (d.
42.) 11, (d. 37.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.) 15, (d. 37.) 16, (d.
29.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15. (21, p. 1. d. 27) R. 2.
Magister Tho. de la War, 23, (d. 33.) R. 2. 1. (d. 37.) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3,
(d. 17.) 5, (p. 1. d. 28* p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12,
(d. 2.) 14, (d. 22.) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16.)
5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.) 8, (d, 2.) 9, (d. 13.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) 2, (d. 18.) 3,
(d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 14.) H. 6. Reginald la War Chivaler 5, (d. 4.) 7,
(d. 2.) H. 6. Robert de Watevill, 20, (d. 3.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16.) 2,
(d. 11. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 41.) E. 3. Adam de Well, Wells, 27 (d.
16. 18.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21) 34, (d. 2.) E. 1. 1, (d. 8.
11.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16. 17.) 4, (d. 1) E. 2. Adam de Wells, de
Well, 6, (d. 4^9. 23. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 18.) 10, (d.
1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d. 11* 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.) 13, (p. 2. d. 1.
28) 14, (p. 1. d. 23. 33.) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d. 39. p. 2. d. 13.
22.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1 d. 14.) E. 3. John de Wells 31, (d. 2.) 34,
(d. 4.) Chivaler, 49, (d. 4.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 13.
29.) 3, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 11, (d. 24.) 12, (d. 42.) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d. 42.)
15, (d. 37,) 16, (d. 23.) 17, (d. 30.) 18, (d. 23.) 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p.
1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, (d. 37,) 2, (p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17.) 5, (p. 1.
d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.) 11, (d. 32.) 12, (d. 2.) 14, (d. 22)
H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37.) 2, (d. 16.) 3, (d. 15.) 4, (d. 16) 5, (d. 11.) 7, (d. 9.)
8, (d. 2.) H. 5. 1, (d. 22.) ^, (d. 18.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 15.) 5, (d. 4.) 7,
(d. 2.) H. 6. Leonel, Leonard de Wells, Chivaler 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d. 10.) 13,
(d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21.) 25, (d. 24.) 27,
(d. 24.) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36) H. 6. Richard Wells DOMINVS de
Willoughby, Miles 33, (d. 36.) 38, (d. 30) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3.) 6. (d.
1,) 9, (d. 3) E, 4. John Wenlock de Wenlock Chivaler, 3, (d. 3.) 6, (d. 1.) 9,
(d. 3.) E. 4* Thomas de West 16, (p. 1. d. 39,) E. 3. Thomas West Chivaler 5,
(p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) H. 4. Reginald West Chivaler, 10, (d. 10.) 11, (d.
10.) 13, (d. 2.) 15, (d. 18.) 18, (d. 33.) 25, (d. 24,) 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d.
26.) H. 6. Richard West Chivaler 38, (d. 30.) H. 6, 1, (d. 35*) 2, (d. 3.) 6,
(d. 1.) 9, (d. 3.) 12, (d. 41) 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. John de Whitingdon 25,
(d. 25) E. 1. Thomas de Wodestoke 14, (d. 19.) E 2. Richard Woodvill, Wodevill,
Miles, DOMINVS de Rivers 27, (d. 24.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 41.) 31, (d. 36.)
38, (d. 30.) H. 6. 2, (d. 3.) E 4. Anthony Wodevill, DOMINVS de Scales 2, (d.
3.) Chivaler 6, (d. 1.) H. 6. John de Wylington, Wyllington 3, (d. 19) 4, (d*
23. 31.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 1. d. 8. p. 2. d* 11. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.)
13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) E. 3. Ralph de Wylington, 16, (p. 1, d. 29.) E. 3. Adomar
de Wylington 32, (d. 14.) E. 3. Robert de Wilghby (Wylug^by 7, (d. 16. 27.) E.
2. John de Wyloughby Wiloughby, Willoughby 6, (d. 9. 19. 37) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.)
8, (d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (p. 2. d. 11. 40) 12, (p. 2. d.
32) 13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33) 15, (p. 1. d. 27.) 16, (p. 1. d.
39. p. 2. d. 13. 22) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.)
21, (p. 2, d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 31. p. 2. d. 7.) 23, (^. 1. d. 23) de Eresby
24, (p. 2. d. 3.) 25, (p. 1. d. 6) 27, (d. 12.) 28, (d. 26.) 29, (d. 6, 7.) 31,
(d. 2. 21) 34* (d. 4.) 36, d. 16.) 37, (d. 22) 38, (d. 3.) 39, (d. 2.) 42, (d.
22) 43, (d. 24) 44, (d. 1.) 46, (d. 9.) E. 3. William de Wylughby, 32 ^d. 14.^
E. 3. Robert de Wyloughby 49 (d. 4.) 50, (p. 2. d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37.) 2, (d.
13. 29.) 3, (d. 32.) 4, (d. 32.) 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37. 7, (d. 10. 37.) 8, (d.
35.) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42.) 11, (d. 13. 37.) 12, (d. 42) 13, (d. 5.) 14, (d.
42.) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23) 17, (d. 30) 18, (d. 23.) R. 2. William de
Wyloughby 20, (p. 1. d. 15.) 21, (p. 1. d. 27.) 23, (d. 3. R. 2. 1, (d. 37.) 2,
(p. 1. d. 3.) 3, (d. 17) 5, (p. 1. d. 28. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, d. 30.) 8, (d. 2.)
11, (d, 32) H. 4.) Robert de Willoughby 12, (d. 2) 14, (d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9.
37.) 2, (d. 16.) 4, [d. 16] 8, (d. 2.) H. 5. Robert Wyloughby Chivaler 15, (d.
18.) 18, (d. 33.) 20, (d. 27.) 23, (d. 21) 25, (d. 24) 27, (d. 24.) 28 (d. 26.)
29, (d. 41) H. 6. William de Wyndesore 5, (d. 40.) 6, (d. 37.) 7, (d. 10. 37)
R. 2.
Z
ALan de la Zusche, Zousche, Zouche, 25, (d. 6.) 26, (d. 16, 18), 28, (d. 3.
17.) 30, (d. 8. 13.) 32, (d. 2.) 33, (d. 21.)* 34, (d. 2.) 35, (d. 13.) E. 1.
1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 3, (d. 16, 17.) 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 3.
31.) 7, (d. 15. 27) E. 2. Will: la Zousche (another, not of Haringworth) 2, (d.
11. 20) 3. (d. 16, 17.) 6, (d. 3. 31) 7, (d. 16, 27.) 8, (d. 29. 35.) 9, (d.
22.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, (d. 13.) 14, (d. 5. 29.) 15, (d. 16.)
16, (d. 26.) 17, (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34) 19, (d. 27.) E. 2. William la
Zousche de Haringworth 17. (d. 27.) 18, (d. 5. 21. 34.) 19, (d. 27.) 20, (d.
4.) E. 2. 1, (p. ^. d. 11. 16.) 2, (d. 23. 31) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 13. 23, 32,
41,) 5, (p. 1. d. 7. 25. p. 2. d. 7.) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36.) 7, (p. 2. d. 3.) 8,
(d. 18.) 9, (d. 8. 28.) 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11, p. 2. d. 21. 40.) 12, (p. 2. d. 32.)
13, (p. 2. d. 1. 28.) 14, (p. 1. d. 23, 33,) 15, (p. 1. d. 37.) 16, (p. 1. d.
39, p. 2. d. 13.) 17, (p. 1. d. 25.) 18, (p. 1. d. 14.) 20, (p. 2. d. 22.) 21,
(p. 2. d. 9.) 22, (p. 1. d. 32. p. 2. d. 7.) E. 3. William la Zousche de Castro
Rici 19 (d. 27.) E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 11. 16) 2, (d. 31) E 3. William la Zousche
de Mortuomari, Mortymer 2, (d. 15. 23) 3, (d. 19) 4, (d. 13. 28. 32. 41) 5, (d.
7. 25. p. 2. d. 7) 6, (d. 4. 9. 19. 36) 7, (p. 2. d. 3) 8, (d. 18) 9, (d. 8)
10, (d. 1. 5.) E. 3. William la Zouche de Asheby 9, (d. 28.) E. 3. William la
Zousche de Haringworth Junior 23, (p. 1. d. 23) 24, (p. 2. d. 3) 25, (p. 1. d.
5) 26, (d. 14.) 27, (d. 12) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 7, 8) 31, (d. 2. 21) 32, (d.
14) 34. (d. 4) 35, (d. 30) 36, (d. 42) 37, (d. 22) 38, (d. 3) 39. (d. 2) 42,
(d. 22) 43, (d. 24) 44, (d. 1) 46, (d. 9) 47, (d. 13) 49, (d. 4. 6) 50, (p. 2.
d. 6.) E. 3. 1, (d. 37) 2, (d. 13. 29) 3, (d. 32) 4, (d. 32) 5, (d. 40) 6, (d.
37) 7, (d, 10. 37) 8, (d. 35) 9, (d. 45.) 10, (d. 42) 11, (d. 13. 37) 12, (d.
42) 13, (d. 5) 14, (d. 42) 15, (d. 37) 16, (d. 23) 17, (d. 30) 18, (d. 23) 20,
(p. 1. d. 15) R. 2. William la Zouche de Haringworth 2, (p. 1. d. 3) 3, (d. 17)
5, (p. 1. d. 18. p. 2. d. 4.) 7, (d. 30) 8, (d. 2) 11, (d. 32) 12, (d. 2) 14,
(d. 22) H. 4. 1, (d. 9. 37) 2, (d. 16) H. 5. William la Zouche de Haringworth,
4, (d. 15) 5, (d. 4) Chivaler, 7 (d. 2) 9, (d. 18) 10, (d. 10) 13 (d. 2) 15 (d.
18) 18, (d. 33) 20, (d. 27) 25, (d. 24) 27, (d. 24) 28, (d. 26) 29, (d. 41) 31,
(d. 36) 33* (d. 36) 38, d. 30.) H. 6. 1, (d. 35.) 2, (d. 3) 6, (d. 1.) E. 4.
As these last Alphabeticall, Chronologicall Tables will be very useful to all
Heralds, and the ancient Nobility of the Realm, and add much luster to Mr.
Brooks his Catalogue of Nobility; Mr. Vincent his Discovery of the Errors
therein, James York his Union of Honors, William Martyn his succession of the
Nobility of England at the end of his History, and other Writers of our
Nobility; (who were Seldens Titles of Honor. pars 2. chapter 4. sect. 3. 4. 5. 6.
to 20.
originally hereditary for the major part) so by the serious perusal of the
later of them, you may clearly discern beyond all contradiction,

1. That there are at least 98. Laymen in the later Catalogue summoned only
once, and no more hui once, by our Kings at sundry times, to several
Parliaments and See Claus. 32 E 3. do^^. 14.
Great Councels of the Realm, by the self same general Writs of Summons as the
Earls, Peers, and Barons of the land were summoned, and enrolled amongst them
in the Lists of Summons and Resummons; and specially commanded by their Writs,
Quod personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, and caeteris
Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni nost^i, super negotiis praedictis
tractaturi, Vestrumque Consilium impensuri, etc. yet neither themselves, nor
any of their Name or Posterity were ever summoned afterward to any other
Parliament or Great Council, for ought appears by the Clause Rolls, and Lists
of persons summoned.

2. That there are at least 50. others of them, thu^ summoned by general Writs,
and listed amongst the names of the temporal Lords, Barons, and Great men, some
of them only, to 2. others of them, to 3. others, to 4. others, to 5. or 6.
Parliaments and great Councils at several times; yet not one of them, or their
Progeny afterward called by Writ to any succeeding Parliaments or Councils.

3. That John ap Adam was called by Writ to no less then 16. successive
Parliaments and Grand Councils of the Realm, under King Ed. 1. 2. and 3. Roger
de Banent to 22. under Ed. 2. and 3. Guido de Bryan to 37. under E. 3. and R.
2. John de Claverings to 45. under E. 1. 2. and 3. Philip de Columbariis to 44.
under E. 2. and 3. Sir William Herne to 8. under E. 3. R. 2. and H. 4. as
likewise Walter de Manny, John de la Mare, Nicholas de Meyvill, Thomas de
Musgrave, John Somery, Henry de Teyez, Thomas Vhtred, and some others, summoned
by general Writs, to sundry Parliaments and Councils, by one or more of our
Kings; yet they and their Posterities of the same name, were afterward totally
omitted out of the Writs, and lists of Summons, and never summoned again in
succeeding times.

4. That Gilbert and William de Acton, Richard and William de Aldeburge,
Gilbert and William de Aton, (perchance the same with Acton) Robert and William
de Felton, John, Richard, and Matthew Fitz John, Ralph and Robert de Grendon,
Robert and Alexander de Hilton, Adam and Thomas de Novo Mercato, Hugh and Hugh
de Sancto Phileberto, Giles and Richard de Playez, Miles and Nicholas de
Stapleton, William and Theobald Trussell, William and John Tuchet, to omit
others, were successively summoned to one, two, or three Parliaments, Great
Councils, not immediately succeeding each other, but some good distance of
years and time after the other, (during which, many Parliaments and Councils
intervened, to which none of them were called by Writ) and then totally
omitted* none of their name or posterity (for ought appears) being ever
summoned again, as the last Table visibly demonstrates.

From which 4. particulars, I conceive it experimentally evident beyond
dispute, That as the Kings Writs to his Counsel, Justices, and other
Assistants (mentioned in the next Section) did neither constitute them nor
their issues, Peers or Barons of the Realm, nor Assistants for life, though
they sat, advised with the King and Lords upon all weighty occasions in the
Lords House:) and as the elections, retornes of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses,
Barons of Ports, by the Kings Writs of summons to Parliaments, and their
sitting, voting in the Commons House in one or more Parliaments, for which they
are elected; (though seconded with the Kings Writs for levying their expenses
after the Parliaments ended) do neither create them Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, Barons of Ports, nor Members of the Commons House, during their own
lives, much less their issue Males in succession after them, but only during
the session and continuance of these particular Parliaments and Councils for
which they are elected and returned; which being once* determined, they
presently ceased to be Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons, in any succeeding
Parliaments or Councils, unless newly elected and returned to serve in them by
the Kings new Writs, as our 4 E 4 f 4 ^. B^ook* Officer. 25. 34 II. 8. c. 24.
Law books and experience resolve: so, the Kings general Writs of summons
directed to Knights, Gentlemen, and other Laics, who held not by Barony, and
are no Lords nor Barons by special creations, or Descent from their Ancestors,
to treat with the King and the rest of the Lords and Great men in the Lords
House, and their sitting therein once, twice, or oftener, by Virtue of such
Writs, does in truth and reality neither make, nor create themselves, nor their
heirs Males after them, in point of law or right, either Peers, Lords or
Barons of the Realm for life, or inheritance, nor give them (much less their
issues after them) a right of summons to, or voice amongst those who are real
Peers and Lords by Tenure, Creation or Descent, in all succeeding Parliaments;
but only a temporary right to treat and advise with the King and other Lords in
those Parliaments and Councills to which they are particularly summoned, and
not in any others; as it did in the cases of Abbots, Priors, and other
ecclesiastical persons thus summoned to, and sitting now and then in the Lords
House, but holding no Lands by Barony, whose general Writs of summons to, and
session in Parliaments and Councils made neither themselves during their lives,
nor their successors after them, actual Peers or Barons of the Realm, as 4.
Institutes p. 44. 45.
Sr Ed: Cook, and Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor. p. 370* to 376. Spelmanni
Glostarium, p. 3. 4.
others acknowleg, and I have My Plea for the Lords* p. 151. to 160.
elsewhere proved, there being the self same reason, and by consequence the
self same Law in both cases; Else our Kings (by Instit. p. 1.
Sir Edwards own doctrine) had been and should be bound Ex debito Iustitiae to
summon every one of those Knights and Laymen once summoned to, and sitting in
any of their Parliaments, and Great Councils (by virtue of their general Writs,
without any other creation) during their natural lives, and their beires males
being of full age after their deaths, to all succeeding Parliaments and
Councils, and ought not to have omitted them out of the lists of summons at
their pleasures, and their posterities after them in all succeeding
Parliaments, as we experimentally find they did, without the least question,
claim or complaint made by them or their heirs, for ought I find in Records or
Histories. Whereas not only the Earls and Barons in the Parliamentary Great
Council at London under King Mat. Paris. p 884 See my Plea for the Lords, p.
21. 22. 23. 24. 25. etc.
Henry the 3. Ann. 1255. refused to grant any aid, or act any thing therein,
because All the Barons were not at that time summoned to Parliament, as they
ought to be by the tenor of Magna Charta; but even other succeeding
Parliaments have done the like; And in the Parliament of 2. Caroli See Mr. John
Rushworth his Historical Collections. p. 240. 241. etc.
An. 1626. the Earl of Bristoll, being a Peer of this Realm, and not
receiving a summons to Parliament, according to the Privilege of his Peerage:
thereupon compiained thereof to the Lords House: who referring the buisnesse to
their Committee of Privileges; Upon the Earl of Hertfords report from the
Committee; The Lords resolved it necessary for them to beseech his Majesty,
that a Writ of Summons might be sent to this Earl, and also TO SUCH OTHER LORDS
WHOSE WRITS ARE STOPPED; except such as are made incapable BY JUDGMENT OF
PARLIAMENT, or some other legal judgment. Whereupon writs were issued to them;
It being a great intrenchment upon the Liberty, Privileges, and Safety of the
Peers of the Land, and of dangerous consequence for the King at his pleasure to
omit any of them out of the Writs of summons, keep back their Writs, or
restrain them from the Parliament after their receipt; as they then resolved in
his case, and the Mr. Rushworths Historical Collections, p. 361. to 375.
Earl of Arundels likewise the same Parliament.

5. From this Table we may discern the observation of learned Sir Glossarium.
p* 80.
Henry Spelman in his Glossary, touching the summons of the Greater English
Barons to Parliaments, to be in a great measure justifiable. Denuo autem crebra
bella and simultates, quas Reges veteres aliquando habuere cum his ipsis
MAIORIBVS SVIS BARONIBVS, alios etiam eorum interdum omitterent, alios vero NON
BARONS, ad Parliamenta evocarent, habitique sunt deinceps PERPETVO OMISSI PRO
NON BARONIBVS, evocati contra BARONVM Titulo salutantur. Aegre hoc ferentes
Proceres, Johannem adigere sub magno sigillo Angliae pacisci; Vt
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, and MAJORES BARONS REGNI, sigillatim per
literas sommoniri faceret. Quod autem adeo neglexit Henricus 3. Vt cum ipsemet
(Anno Regni sui 41.) ducentas quinquaginta Baronias in Anglia Numerasset,
vocaretque ad Parliamentum An^o 49. regni sui. 120. Praelatos Ecclesiae, Laicos
tantum, Barons. 29. accersivit ( the rest were newly slain in the Battle of
Evesham, or in actual rebellion, which was the true cause hereof) ut ^e Schedis
constat ejusdem Parliamenti. Neglexit utique Edovardus I. multos quos vocass^t
Hen. 3. etiam silios plures, quorum ipse parts 1 admisissit, aliis interim
introductis. Sic antiqua illa Baronum dignitas, secessit sensim in titularem
and arbitrariam, REGIOQUE TANDEM DIPLOMATE ID^IRCO DISPENSATA EST; to wit, by
his special Seldens Titles of Honor. p. 663. 665. 747. 748, 751. 757. 763.
Patents of creation, with particular Clauses granting them and their heirs
Males, ut eorum quilibet Sedem et Locum in Parliamentis Nostris et H^redum et
Successorum Nostrorum, infra Regnum nostrum Angliae tenendis, inter ALIOS
BARONS, VT BARO, etc. not by any general Writs of Summons, which have not the
word BARO in them.

6. That although some of our ancienter Kings, as Henry the third (to settle
Peace after the battle of Jews, and Barons Wars) Claus. 49. H. 3. d. 10. 11.
Cedula, King Edward the 1. and 2. in some of their Parliaments, and King Edward
the 3d. in his Great Council, cl. 32. E. 3. d. 1 4. did upon extraordinary
Occasions and Necessities, summon not only sundry Abbots, Priors, and
Ecclesiastical Persons, but likewise diverse Laymen (of Great estates, Wisdom,
Parts and abilities) who were no Peers, Lords nor Barons of the Realm, by
Tenure, Patent or Descent, by the self same form of general Writs as they
summoned the Bishops, Abbotis, Spiritual and Temporal Lords, who were real
Peers and Barons of the Realm; Vobiscum, etc. and Nobiscum, and cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus super dictis negotiis ^ractaturi,
Vestrumque Consilium impensuri, etc. and that only once, twice, thrice, or
perchance oftener, never summoning them nor their heirs or successors
afterward, or very rarely: so it is observable, 1. That they did it very
seldom, upon extraordinary emergent necessities; not customarily, or
frequently. 2ly. That they did it not out of any affront or opposition to the
ancient Hereditary, real, spiritual or temporal Lords, Peers and Barons of the
Realm, to seclude, overvote, baffle, disparage all or any of them; but by their
advise, consents and approbation, as the Writs, Rolls, attest, 3ly. That their
numbers usually, (except in 49 H. 3. when See here p. 160. 161.
most of the Barons were slain at Evesham, or in actual arms against the King;
or when some extraordinary aid, advise or assistance was required of them) were
not very great nor considerable; the ancient spiritual, and temporal Lords and
Barons, being usually double, treble, quadruple to them; and for the most part,
six or ten to one, as you may easily discern by comparing their names in every
list of summons. 4ly. That there are very few Presidents under King Edward the
3. of an^ con^iderable numbers of such spiritual or temporal persons called to
his Parliaments, but only to one general Council, in 32 E. 3. d. 14. 5ly. That
after King Edward the 3d. his reign, there is not one president of any
Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior or religious persons, summoned to any
Parliament to my remembrance, but only of those who held by Barony, and were
constantly summoned as Spiritual Peers to all our Parliaments. And very few
Presidents, if any, of a Knight, Gentleman, or other Layman whatsoever,
summoned by any general Writs to the Lords House, to treat and consult together
with them, unless they were ancient Earls, Lords, or Barons of the Realm, or
newly created such by special Patents, before their summons, or by special
clauses of creation in the Wri^s by which they were summoned, as all the lists
of summons in the Clause Rolls, the precedent Table, the Statutes of 5 R. 2.
Stat. 2. c. 4. 31 H. 8. c* 10. and Mr. Martyns Catalogue of them at the end of
his History, clearly manifest. 6ly. That in my best observation there is no
president from 49 H. 3. till the last Parliament of King Charles, nor in any
age before, where any of the ancient Nobility, Peers, Lords or Barons of the
Realm, at least any considerable number of them, (unless such who were
actually outlawed, or attainted of High Treason, or See here p. 217. 218. 219.
absent in foreign parts, or in actual service in the Wars, or under age) were
omitted out of the Writs of summous, or secluded from sitting in the Lords
House in any Parliament by force or frand, (unless by See here p. 221. 222. My
Plea for the Lords. p. 278. 279. 282.
Mor^imer, in the Parliament at Salisbury, An. 2. E. 3. and in 21 R. 2.) nor of
others, who were no real Lords, Peers by Patent, Tenure, or other legal
creation, summoned to the Lords House out of England (much less out of
Scotland and Ireland) to supplant them, or supply their places, under any name,
notion, or pretext whatsoever. Neither were they or any of them, secluded,
disinherited of their seats, Votes, Peerage in Parliament, See Mr. R^shwor^hs
H^storical Collections p*^ 40 ^41. 242. 243. ^44. ^67. to 376.
without or before the least legal hearing, trial, impeachment, or conviction
whatsoever, of any capital crime which might for^eit their Peerage, against all
the Great Charters, Statutes, Records, Declarations, Orders, Ordinances, Votes,
Protestations, Oathts, Covenants, (mentioned in my Plea for the Lords, and
House of Peers) which ratify and perpetuate this their Birthright to them and
their Posterities, and the very law of all Nations. 6ly. It is very observable,
that both Houses of Parliament in their Propositions sent to King Charles at
their last Treaty with him in the Isle of Weight, to prevent the creation and
introduction of any New Lords into future Parliaments, to the prejudice,
seclusion, or overvoting of the Ancient Nobility, or Commons house, did amongst
other things propound. See the Proposiri^ns and my Speech in Parliament. p. 43.
44.
That BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT, all LORDS and PEERS made by the King since Edward
Lord Littleton deserted the Parliament, and carried away the Great Seal the 21.
of May, 1642. should be unlorded, unpeered, set by, and their Titles of Honor,
Patents, revoked, declared null and void to all intents, and never hereafter
put in use. And that NO PEER WHICH SHOULD BE HEREAFTER MADE BY THE KING, HIS
HEIRS OR SUCCESSORS (who have only and solely a just, legal power to create
them, and none else, as they hereby declare) SHALL SIT IN THE PARLIAMENT OF
ENGLAND WITHOUT CONSENT OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT. Which the King then fully
and freely consented to without any limitation or exception whatsoever. Since
which Proposition of both Houses, and concession by the King, how any person or
persons who assented to, or approved thereof in any kind* as reasonable, or
beneficial to the public; without any special Patent or creation from the
King, his heirs or successors; and without the consent of the House of Lords,
and ancient Peers of the Realm (the only proper members of and As King James
acknowledged. See Mr. R^shworths Historical Collections p. 25. to 34.
Judges in it) and of the Commons House, (yea against both their consents and
approbations) can justly, by any other authority, Patent, Writ, or instrument
whatsoever, assume unto themselves the Titles of Lords or Barons of the Realm,
or of the Lords House it self; to the disseasing, disinheriting, suppressing of
the ancient undoubted Peers and House of Lords: Or how any who have Voted down,
declared against, and abolished the Lords and Lords House, in sundry Febr. 6.
March 17. 19* An. 1648.
printed Papers, as Useless, Dangerous, Inconvenient, Oppressive to the
People, obstructive to the Proceedings in Parliament, and the like; and
afterward by several Votes, and printed January 2 An. 1649.
New Knacks, took and subscribed themselves, and prescribed to all others under
severest penalties, a public Engagement, To be ^rue and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England* as it was then established, (as they thought by
themselves, though the event soon after proved the contrary) Without a King or
House of Lords; can or dare become this very Selfsame Vselesse, dangerous,
oppressive, obstructive, grievance, etc. themselves; and against their own
Votes, Declarations, Acts, Subscriptions, Engagements, style or assert
themselves to be either real Lords, or an House of Lords, without the greatest
Praevarication, Contradiction to, and Apostasy from their own former
Principles; or how they can ever probably expect that either the ancient Lords
or Commons of England should submit unto them as such, let their own judgments,
consciences and reasons resolve them. The rather, because diverse of the Earls,
Nobles made by King Stephen were styled, yea deposed as mere Imaginary, false
Earls and Lords, ( Quosdam Imaginarios et Pseudo-Comites) and both their
Titles and Crown lands given them by Stephen (though King de facto) resumed by
King Henry the 2. right heir to the crown, because Stephen was an Usurper; and
Chartae Invasoris praejudicium legitimo Principi minime facere deberent, as the
Chronicle of Normandy, the Book of the Abbey of Waverly, Titles of Honor. p. 650.
Mr. Seldom out of them; Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
Gulielmus Neubrigensis, and Chronicle of Bromton. Col. 1046. inform us. Whose
President may justly deter them from any unjust disseisin of the ancient
Lords, and setting themselves in their Places.

And thus much for my Observations on, and from the Writs in this second
Section.

SECTION 3.
Of Writs of Summons to the Kings Counsil and other Ordinary Assistants to the
Lords in Parliaments and Parliamentary Councils; with annotations on them.
THe next Writs of Summons after those to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords
entered in the ancient Clause Rolls, are those to the Kings Counsil, different
only in one or two Clauses from the former, in which else they usually
accorded. These persons commonly summoned to Parliaments as the Kings Counsil
by distinct writs from the Lords, as ordinary Assistants both to the King and
them in all causes, controversies, Questions of Moment, were mostly the Kings
Great Officers, as well Clergymen as Secular persons, who were no Lords nor
Barons of the Realm; as namely his Treasurer, Chancellor of the Eschequer,
Judges of his Courts at Westminster, Justices in Air, Justices assigns,
Barons of his Eschequer, Clerks, Secretaries of his Counsil, and sometimes his
Sergeants at Law, with such other Officers and Persons whom our Kings thought
me^ ^o summon.

The first writ of this kind I yet find extant in our Records is thus entered
in Clause 23 E. I. dorso 9.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Gilberto de Thornton, salutem: nostrum, ac Vos,
coeterosque de Consilio nostro tangentibus, quae sine, etc. ( ut supra* p. 6.)
Vobis mand^mus in ^ide and dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini, etc. ( ut supra,
in Mandato Episcoporum, p. 6. usque in finem) Test ut ibi.

Eodem modo mandatum est, Justiciariis de utroque Banco, and de Itinere,
Justic. assignatis, Justiciar, juratis de Consilio, Baronibus de Scaccario, et
aliis Clericis de Consilio, quorum nomina inferius annotantur, viz.

Gilb^ de Thornion, ut supra Rogero Brahazon Magistro Iohanni Lovell Iohanni de
Metingham Willielmo de Bereford Petro Malorre
Hugoni de Cressingham Willielmo de Ormesby Willielmo de Mortuo Mari Roberto de
Swillington Roberto de Ratford. Iohanni de Insula
Iohanni de Cobham Willielmo de Carleton Petro de Leycestr. Magistro Iohanni de
Lacy Philippo de Willughby Decano Lincoln Magistro H. de Newwerke Decano Ebor.
Magistro I. de Derby, Decano Li^hf.
Roberto de Hertford Iohanni de Berewik Iohanni de Lichegreyns Hugoni de Cave
Ade de Crokedayk Willielmo Inge
Henr. de Enfeld Iohanni de Bosco Iohanni de Batford Willielmo Haward Osberto
de Spalding^on Rogero de Burton
Magist. Gerard de Wyspayn^ Archid. Richm. Magistro I. de Crancumb, Archid.
Estrid Magist. Rob: de Redeswell Magist. W. de Grenefeld Magist. Regi. de
Brandon Magist. W. de Kilkenny Gilberto de Roubury Magistro Petro de Dene.
In Clause 25 E. 1. d. 25. there is no writ at all to the Counsil; But after
the writ at large to the Earl of Cornwall, follows, Consimile mandatum habent
singuli Comites, Barons, et Milites subscripti, viz. etc. And after the Earls
and Barons names with a lines space between them, the Justices names follow,
with Milit^s Milit^s*
in the Margin, in this order.

Rogerus Brabazun Willielmus de Bereford Petrus Malorie Johannes de
Leithgreines Iohanneo de Cobham Adam de Crokeda^k Henr. de Euefeld
Johannes de Bosco* Bogo de Knouill Willielmus Judge Johannes de Insula
Willielmus Haward Henr. Spigurnel; without any others of the Clergy.
The next writ on Record is this of Claus. 27. E. ^.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Rogero de Brabazon, salutem; Quia super negotiis
nostris ultramarinis vobiscume et cum caeter^ls de Consilio nostro habere
volumus Colloquiunt et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide e^ dilectione quibus
Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, ^uod prima Dominica, etc. ut supra (to the
Archbishop, p. 9, 10.) Test ut supra.

Consimiles li^erae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 20 more* Justices and others,
most of them the same as in the 2. former lists.

The 4. writ is this of Claus. 28 E. 1. dors. 17.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Philippo de Wyllughby Cancellar. Scaccarii sui,
salutem. Quia ad salvationem Coronae nostrae and communem utilitatem popul^
regni nostri s^cunda die Dominica Quadragesimae prox. futur. Londini
Parliamentum tenere, and vobiscum, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super
Negotiis Nos et idem Regnum nostrum contingentibus speciale Colloquium habere
volumus et tractatum. Vobis ma^damus firmiter injungentes, quod ad praedictos
diem and locu^^ etc. ( ut supra, p. 164. to the Earl of Cornwall.) T. ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. Rogero Brabazun, and 22
Justices and Laymen more, whereof Iohanni de Havering Justic. Northwalliae,
and Hugoni de Leominster Thesaur. de Karnarvan, are two; and to 24 Clergymen, 3
of them Archdeacons, and 2 of them Deans. The total number of them being 38.

De veniendo ad Parliamen^um*


Rex dilecto Clerico suo Magistro Reginaldo de Braundon, salutem. Quia super
jure et dominio quae Nobis in Regno Scotiae competit, and quae Antecessores
nostri Reges Angliae in eodem Regno Scotiae habuerunt temporii bus retroactis,
cum Iurisperitis, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro speciale Colloquium habere
volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod modis omnibus
sitis ad Nos apud Lincoln. in Octabis Sancti Hillar. prox. futur. Nobiscum, et
cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super praemissis tractatur. vestrumque
Consilium impensur. Et hoc sicut Nos et Honorem ac commodum Regni nostri
diligitis nullatenus omittatis* T. Rege apud le Rose 28 die Septembris.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, videlicet.
Magistro Willo. de Grenfeld Decano Cicestr. Magistro R. Decano Sancti Pauli
London. Magistro Willo. de Sardene Offic, Cantuar. Magistro Roberto de
Radeswell Archid. Cestr. Magistro Petro de Insula Decano Wellen. Magistro
Iobanni de Derby Decano Lichf. Magistro Iohanni de Crancumbe Archid. Estriding.
Magistro Pho. Martell. Magistro Willo. Pikering Magistro Robert^ Pikering
Magistro Willo de Kilkenny Magistro Rico. de Plumpsted Magistro Thomae de
Lugore Magistro Petro de Dene. Magistro Iohanni de Lacy.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Johanni de Metingham, salutem. Quia nuper de
quibusdam arduis Negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri tangentibus in Octabis
Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. apud Lincoln. speciale Colloquium ^abere volumus,
and ^ractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod ad praedictos diem and
locum modis omnibus personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum, and cum caeteris de
Consilio nostro super dictis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur.
Et ^oc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud le Rose, 26 die Septembris.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz.
Rogero Brabazon Willo. de Ormesby Gilberto de Roubyry Willo de Bereford Elie
de Beckingham Willo: Haward Petro Mallore Willo: de Carleton Pho: Willughby
Canc. Scac. Petro de Leicestr. Johanni de Insula. Ade de Crokedayk Joh: Lovel
de Snotescumb Willo: Juge Henr: de Gildeford Rogero de Hegham Johanni de
Betesford Henr: Spigurnell Hugoni de Leominster Thesaur. de Karnarvan. Roberto
de Retford J: de Havering Iusti^. Wall.
Immediately after which follows this writ to the Chancellor and University of
Oxford.

Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Cancellario et Universi^ati Oxon. De mittendis
Jurisperitis ad Parliamentum.
salutem. Quia super jure et dominio quae No^is in Regno Scotiae competit, and
quae Antecessores nostri Reges Angliae in eodem Regno Scotiae habuerunt,
temporibus retroactis cum Iurisperitis et ceteris de Consilio nostro Colloquium
habere volumus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod Quatuor
vel quinque de discretioribus et in ^ure scripto magis expertis Universitatis
praedictae ad Parliamentum nostrum apud Lincoln mittatis. Ita quod sint ibi in
Octabis Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. ad ultimum, Nobiscum and cum caeteris de
Consilio nostro super praemissis tractaturi, suumque consilium impensuri; Et
hoc sicu^ Nos and honorem ac commodum Regni nostri diligitis nullatenus
omittatis. T. Rege ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est Cancellar. et Universitati Cantebr. quod mittant ad
dictum Parliamentum duo vel tres de discretioribus et magis in ^ure scripto
expertis, etc.

Then follows a writ to sundry Abbots, Priors, Deans and Chapters, (with the
same recital) Quia super Iure and Dominio, etc. (as in the last) De mittendi^
Chronic ad Parliamentum etc. of which in its due place, more fully. The
occasion and result whereof, and of sending these Lawyers from the Universities
to the Parliament, you may read at large in Matthew Westminster. Anno 1302. p.
419. to 438. and in Thomas de Walsingham. Hist. Angl. p. 32. to 58.

Before I proceed to the ensuing Writs, I shall here observe, 1. That this
recital, Quia super jure and Dominio quae Nohis in regno Scotiae competit, etc.
is not mentioned at all in the Writs of Summons to the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, temporal Lords, Justices, or Sheriffs of Counties; but only to
the Clergymen of the Kings Counsil, Universities, and to those Abbots, Priors,
Deanes and Chapters, who were to search and send their Chronicles to the
Parliament, that had any thing in them concerning the Kings right to Scotland.
2ly. That (for the Honor of my Quondam nursing Mother the University of
Oxford) she is here preferred before the University of Cambridge; and her
Chancellor and she enjoined to send 4. or 5. of the discre^test and most exact
Lawyers of the said University to the Parliament, to treat with the King and
the rest of his Counsil, concerning his ancient right and dominion to the
Realm of Scotland; whereas the Chancellor and University of Cambridge, are
commanded to send only 2. or 3. such Lawyers of it for that purpose. 3ly. That
these Lawyers sent from the Universities upon this special occasion, were only
extraordinary assistants, there being no such president of any thus sent to
succeeding Parliaments.

The 6. Writ of this kind is in Claus. 30. E. 1. d. 13. Rex dilecto^ and
fidelissimo suo Rogero la Brabazun, salutem. Quia super quibusdam arduis
negotiis, Nos and totum Regnum nostrum specialiter tangentibus, Vobiscum and
Cum caeteris de Consilio Nostro habere Volumus colloquium and tractatum, Vobis
mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod in Octabis Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae prox. futur. ad ultimum apud Westminster. omnibus modis personaliter
inters^^is ( Without, and cum caeteris de Consilio nostro.)
Nobiscum, super^dictis negot^is tractatur* vestrumque consilium impensur. and
hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege ut supra. p. 13.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. 33. more Judges and others,
mentioned in the former Catalogues.

Anno. 34. E. 1. dors. 2. There is no Writ to the Eodem modo, after the Lords
and great men, with a^little space between their names for distinction sake.

The next Writ of this kind is thus briefly registered,

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Rogero^ le Brabazun, salutem. Quia super quibusdam,
etc. ut supra, usqu^ ibi vobiscum and cum caeteris fidelibus nostris etc. and
Magnatibus, etc. Test Rege ut supra. p. 14. 15. eodem modo scribitur
subscriptis. viz. 29. more Justices, Clerks, and others.

In Claus. 1. E. 2. d. 9. There is no Writ: but after Eodem modo mandatum est
subscriptis. viz. Willielmo Judge and 36. others, whereof 2. only were
Clergymen.

The next Writ is in Claus. 1. E. 2. dors. 8. Rex dilecto Rogero de Brabazon,
salutem. Quia etc. ut supra (p. 15.) Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod
dictis die and loco omnibus aliis praetermissis personaliter intersitis ibidem,
Nobiscum and Cum caeteris de Consilio Nostro super dictis negotiis tractatur.
vestrumque consilium impensur. and hoc nullatenus om^ttatis. T. R. apud Westminster.
x. Die Martii.

Consimiles literae diriguntur, to 35. others, Justices,

In Claus. 2. E. 2. d. 14. 11. 20 Schedula, there are 4. Writs of the same
form with the last. With cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, twice reci^ed in 2.
of them, and bu^once in the o^ther.
The 1. to Roger de Brabazon, and 34. others, whereof one only was a Clerk. the
2. to him, and 16. others, whereof 7. were Clerks: the 3d. to him and 22.
others, whereof 6. were Clerks; and two others Escheators, the one ultra
Trentam, the other citra Trentam; The 4th. to him and 6. more, the one of them
a Clerk.



Rex dilecto and fideli suo Willielmo de Bereford, salutem. Quia super diversis
and arduis negotiis Nos and Statum Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus in
instanti Parliamento nostro die Dominica prox. ante festum Sancti Laurentii
prox. futur. fecimus summoneri, Vobiscum, and cum caeteris de Consilio nostro
Colloquium habere volumus and tractatum, Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes,
quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die and loco personaliter intersitis,
Nobiscum and cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super praemissis tractaturi,
Vestrumque consilium impensur. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. ut supra. (^p.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis. viz. 16. Laymen more.

eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, after the Earls and Lords, with a lines
space between them, and this distinction made between them in the margin of the
Roll.

Iohanni de Sandale Iohanni de Merkingfeld Waltero de Norwico Clericis.
Iohanni Abell Consilii.
Magistro Ricardo de Abyndon Magistro Johan. de Everdon Magistr. Roberto de
Pickering Magistro Iohanni de Nassington senior;
Rogero Brabazon Willielmo de Bereford Gilberto de Roubury ^ustic^ar.

Stephano de Malo Lacu Waltero de Thorp. Magistro Tho. de* Cobham. Magistro
Golberto de Middleton Magistro Tho. de Loggore Willielmo de Goldington. Johan.
de Chaynell Roberto de Cliderhow
Johan. de Foxle Roberto de Re^ford. Willielmo de Ormesby
Henrico de Stourton Henr. le Scroop Johan. de Benstede Johan. de Insula
Lamberto de Trikingham
Johan. de Mi^ford Henr. de Guldeford Johan. de Doncastr. Willielmo Inge Henr.
Spigurnel.
In Claus. 6. E. 2. d. 31. There is such a Writ to Roger le Brabazon, as the
fore rehearsed; with Vobiscum and caeteris de Consilio nostro, etc. twice
repeated* in it, and an eodem m^do mandatum est, to 42 besides; (most of them
in the preceding Catalogues) sub^data ^pud Windesore, 14. die Februar. when as
the writs to the spiritual and temporal Lords bear date thence. 8. die Januar.
Claus. Anno 7. E. 2. d. 27. There is a like writ issued to Roger le Brabazon
and 29 others.

I find this memorable writ issued to Willielmo de Chief Justice of the Common
Bench, Claus. 9. E. 2. d. 20. varying from the first there issued to him and
the rest of the Coun^ill.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Willielmo de Bereford. De veniend^ ad Regem.
Quia Volumus Vobiscum una cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, in Parliamento
nostro quod apud Lincoln. in Quindena Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. secimus
summo^eri super Negotiis Nos tangentibus habere Colloquium and Tractatum; Vobis
mandamus firmiter^ injungentes* quod magis ardua negotia coram Vobis and sociis
vestris, in instanti termino Sancti Hillarii, cum omni deliberatione qua
poteritis expediatis, Ita quod sitis in dicto Parliamento nostro, viz. sexto
die post Quindenam supradictam, ad tractandum ibidem nobiscum and cum caeteris
de Consilio nostro, super negotiis antedictis. Onerantes dilectos and fideles
nostros Lambertum de Trikingham, and Iohannem Bacun Justiciarios nostros, and
Socios vestros de Banco praedicto, quod residua negotia in Banco preaedicto
expediant, cum festinatione qua poterunt, sucundum legem and consuetudinem
Regni nostri. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege apud Clipston. 27. die
Decembris.

Claus. 7. E. 2. dors. 25. De interessendo Parliamento.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Iohanni de Insula, salutem. Cum pro diversis and
arduis negotiis Nos and Statum Regni nostri tangentibus ordinavimus
Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Dominica prox. post festum Sancti Matthei
Aposteli prox. futur. tenere, and Vobiscum and cum caeteris de Consilio nostro
super dictis negotiis habere Colloquium and Tractatum, per quod vobis
mandavimus, quod dictis die and loco interlitis Nobiscum, and cum caeteris de
Consilio nostro super dictis negotiis tractatur* Ac jam intelligimus, quod vos
una cum quibusdam aliis ad Assisas tam in Episcopatu Dunolm. quam in diversis
Com. versus parts boriales capiend. certos dies statim post dictam diem
Dominicam praefixistis, unde plurimum miramur; praesertim cum per captiones
Assisarum si durante dicto Parliamento nostro procederent, negotia nostra in
eodem tractanda possent non mediocriter perturbari. Vobis mandamus firmiter
injungentes, quod omnibus hujusmodi captionibus Assisarum, and omnibus aliis
praetermissis, dicta die Dominica apud Westminster. modis omnibus intersitis Nobiscum
and cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super negotiis praedictis tractatur. Et hoc
sicut indignationem nostram, and grave dampnum vestrum vitare volueritis, nullo
modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Windesore, sexto die Septembris. Per Breve de
Privato Sigillo.

Eodem modo scribitur subscriptis, viz.
Thomae de Fisheburn Hugoni de Louthre Ricardo de Berningham Ade de Middleton
Iohanni de Dancastr. exceptis illis Verbis, tam in Episcopatu Dunolmens. quam.
From which writ is apparent; 1. That the Justices of Assizes were usually
summoned by writ to Parliaments, as Members of the Kings Counsil; as the words
cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, thrice repeated in it and in other writs,
demonstrate. 2ly. That their summons by writ to attend and counsel the King in
Parliament; was a super sedeas to them to take Assizes during the Parliament;
and their proceeding to take Assizes notwithstanding, inconsistent with their
attendance in Parliament, yea a contempt and offense punishable by the King.
3ly. That the Sea Cooks 4 Instit. p. 24.
Assizes and Suits of private persons ought to give place to public affairs
of the King and kingdom in Parliament, and to be deferred, when they may
hinder or disturb the affairs of Parliament, or keep any Members or
Assistants from their personal attendance in them, when summoned to them.

In the Clause Roll of 8. E. 2. dors. 35. There is Eodem modo, I find sundry of
them here and there promiscuously inserted amongst the Barons names, and not
after them, as usually in other Rolls, sc. Iohanni de Hotham, Waltero de
Norwico, Iohanni de Foxle, Rogero la Brabazon, Gilberto de Roubery, Willielmo
I^ge, Iohanni de Insula, Henr. le Scrop, Henr. Spigurnel, Iohanni Benstede,
Lamberto de Trikingham; always listed amongst the Justices, and Kings Counsil
in precedent Rolls, and in 7 E. 2. d. 27. the very next before this, and those
succeeding it. In Cl. 8. E. 2. d. 29. the Counsil are coupled together with the
Barons in the Eodem modo mandatum est, without any writ, with a space of
distinction between them, all of them after the Lords, without intermixture
with them, being in all 33.

In Cl. 9. E. 2. d. 22. They are named only in the eodem modo, with a small
distance after the Lords, being in all 34. without any special writ entered. In
Claus. 12. E. 2. d. 29. in Cedula, There is no special writ to any of the
Counsil entered, but only a list of their names in the Eodem modo, being 24. in
Vltra and citra Trentam; others of them Deacons, Archdeacons, Clergymen and
Justices, with Magistro Iohan^ de Walewayn Thesaur. Regis. And likewise in
Claus. 12. d. 11. they are listed in the same manner, being but 25. whereof two
were the Escheators forenamed. And in Claus. 13 E. 2. dors. 13. they are
listed in the same form being 25. and in Claus. 14 E. 2. d. 29. where they are
32.

Willielmo de Bereford, and 37 others, whereof 2. were Escheators, and the Dean
and a Canon of York two others; Cl. 15 E. 3. d. 16. there is the like writ
sent to him, and 33. more. Cl. 16. E 2. d. 26. the like writ to him and 22.
others. And Cl. 19 E. 2. d. 7. the like writ to him and 22. besides; the Dean
of York being one of them, as in most of the precedent lists. Cl. 20 E. 2. d.
4. the writ issued Waltero de Norwico, and 22. more.



Rex dilecto et fideli suo Waltero de Norwico, salutem. Quia super magnis et
arduis negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri tangentibus, Vobiscum, et cum
Praelatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus, ac cum caeteris de Consilio nostro apud
Lincoln. in crastino Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis prox. futur. Colloquium habere
ordinavimus et Tractatum. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus
aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, si
interesse possumus, seu interveniente impedimento, deputandis a Nobis, super
dictis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impen sur. Et hoc nullatenus
omittatis. Test Rege apud Stanhope, 7, die Augusti.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 33. 0there is there named. And in the
same Roll, dors. 3. there is the like writ to him, and 7. more only.

The writ Claus. 2 E. 3. dorse 31. thus varies from the former.

Waltero de Norwico, salutem. Cum in Parliamento nuper apud Eborum convocato
magna et ardua negotia proposita fuerunt, quae propter absentiam quorundam
Praelatorum, Magnatum, et Procerum Regni nostri tunc non poterunt terminari;
super quibus et aliis diversis Negotiis de assensu Praelatorum, ac Magnatum et
Procerum in eodem Parliamento nostro tunc existentium, apud Northhampton, a die
Paschae prox. futur. in tres Septimanas Parliamentum tenere, et Vobiscum, ac
cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus Regni nostri, et eum caeteris de Con^
silio nostro Colloquium et Deliberationem habere volumus. Vobis mandamus
firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco
personaliter intersitis, Nobiscum super dictis Negotiis tractatur: vestrumque
Consilium impensur. Et hoc sicut Nos ac honorem nostrum, ac salvationem Regni
nostri diligitis nullo modo omittatis. Test Rege ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est, to x. more: the first of them Magistro Gilberto de
Middleton Archid: Northhampton. Clause 23: of the same Roll, there is the like
writ (different only in the recital, as to the Archbishop, p. 28.) to x.
Justices and Assistants, the same with the former; and so in dorse 15.

In Claus. 3 E. 3. d. 19. there is no writ entered to Eodem modo mandatum est;
where I meet with Magist: Rico: Erinm, (perchance Ermin) Magist: Antonio de
Bek, Decano Ecclesiae beatae Mariae Lincoln, Galfro: le Scrop, Wil^^: le
Herle, Roberto de Malberthorp, Rico: de Willug^by, Iohi: de Traverse, Ade de
Herewinton, Henry le Scrop, Roberto de Wodehouse, Archid: Richmond, Willo: le
Dennie, Io^i: de Cante^rigg Rico: de Aldeburge, Magist. Gilberto de Middleton,
Archid: Northampton, and Rob., Baynard; inserted into the List of the Lords,
being usually listed amongst the Justices and Counsil, in precendent and
subsequent Rolls.

Clause 4 E. 3. d. 41. the writ runs in this most usual form, except in the
recital.

Roberto de Wodehouss Archid. Richmond. Thesaurar. suo, salutem. Quia pro
magnis et arduis negotiis Nos et statum Regni nostri multipliciter
contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Winton die Dominica prox. ante festum
Sancti Gregorii Papae prox. futur. tenere; et Vobiscum, ac cum caeeteris de
Consilio nostro habere Colloquium disposuimus et tractatum. Vobis mandamus
firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et loco
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super
dictis negotiis tractatur. vestrumque consilium impensur. Et hoc nullatenu^
omittatis. T. ut supra, p. 30.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz. 8. more: Ibidem, dors. 13. the like
Writ (except in the Prologue, Qualiter, etc. as p. 31.) issued to this
Treasurer, and the same 8. persons more: But in dorso 23. there is no writ
entered, but only the names of 5. of the Counsil, in the Eodem modo after the
Lords, with a space for distinction.

Dilect^ and fideli suo Galfrido Le Scrop, Capitali Iusticiario suo, etc. (as
p. 32.) in the recital, and then in the usual form, as the precedent writ in
the later Clause: there being 12 more names in the Eodem modo: Dorse 7. the
like writ issued to him and x. more: both of them entered after the Writs to the
Sheriffs and Warden of the Cinque Ports, (usually registered before them, next
after the writs to the Lords in all precedent Rolls, but frequently after them
in most Rolls after this.) Clause 6 E. 3. d. 9. 19. and 36. there are three
writs of this nature entered after those to the Sheriffs and Wardens of the
Cinque Ports, issued to this Chief Justice Scrop, the first to 7, the second to
30, the third to 9 more, Justices and others. Claus. 7 E. 2. pars 2. dors. 3.
the writ entered is to him, and 20. besides, after all the rest of the Writs but
one, (as in many more ensuing Rolls) and so Claus, 8 E. 3. d. 18. to him and
22. more, whereof the Chancellor of the Exchequer is one, and the Kings
Treasurer another.

Claus: 9 E. 3. d. 8. the Writ entered is to to the same Geoffry Le Scrop, and
15 others; and Dorse 28. to him and 22 more: But in Claus. 10. dors. 1, and 5.
the Writs enrolled issued, Magistro Roberto de Stratford, Archid. Cantuar: and
14 more in both lists, whereof Roberto Parnings, Willo: Scot, Simoni Trewosa,
Servientibus Regis, are 3. These are the two first Eodem modo mandatum est I
meet with, wherein the Kings Sergeants at Law were summoned to Parliaments, who
are last named in both these Lists.

Clause 11 E. 3. pars 1. d. 15. After the Lords, 5 are Justice: added to them,
and 3 besides. In d. 8. there is only this entry, Eodem mode mandatum est
dilecto Cler. suo Mro: Joh: de Ufford, mutatis mutandis after the Lords names:
to which 9. of the Counsils and Justices names are conjoined without
distinction, before this entry. But in Clause 11 E. 3. part 2. dorse 40. the
writ entered is directed Rob: de Stratford Electo Cicestr. different in the
recital from the writs to the Temporal and Spiritual Lords in this Membrana,
and agreeing with that in Claus. 11. pars 1. m, 8. to which it should refer:
upon which Account I shall transcribe it.

Rex dilecto Clerico fuo Mro. Rob: de Stratford, Electo salutem. Quia super
certis responsionibus solennibus Nunciis nostris per Nos ad parts Franciae
ultimo pro quibusda^ negotiis nostris ibide^ expediendis transmissis datis,
necnon pro quibusda^ aliis negotiis urgentis^limis, Nos et statum Regni nostri,
ac aliarum terrarum nostrarum intime contingentibus, cum Praelatis, Magnatibus,
et Proceribus regni nostri apud Westminster. die Veneris prox. ante festum Sancti
Michaelis prox. futur. ordinavimus habere Colloquium et Tractatum. Vobis
mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis dictis die et
loco personaliter intersitis Nobiseum, etc. ut supra. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est, etc. to 10. more, most of them Justices, and the
Chancellor of the Eschequer.

Here a Bishop elect is summoned as one of the Counsil; though usually summoned
as a Spiritual Peer; and the Guardian of the Spiritualties of the Bishopric of
Chichester, sede vacant, summoned in the list amongst the Bishops, not this
Bishop elect, who is summoned as a Bishop the next year and Parliament; Claus.
12 E. 3. d. 11. the Writ issued Galfrido Lescrop and 12. more, whereof the Kings
Treasurer, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, were two.

Iohanni de Ston^re, with the same recital as p. 41, 42. and then Quod omnibus
aliis praetermissis intersitis cum dicto Custo^e, et cum caeteris de Consilio
praedicto, super dictis negotiis tractatur. etc.

Eodem modo mandatum est to 13 others, whereof the Kings Treasurer, and
Chancellor of the Exchequer are two* and the last Robto: de Sadyngton Capitali
Ba^dni de Scaccario: the first I observe summoned by this Title. Claus. 13 E.
3. pars 2. d. 28. the writ entered is of the self-same form with the last: and
to the same 13 persons, though not listed in the same order; and with this
addition of Regis, after Staccario, to the Chief Baron. Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 2.
d. 1. we have the same form of writ to Stonore and 13 more, the very same as in
the two former lists: Claus. 14 E. 3. pars 1. d. 33. the like to him, those 13,
and one more: and Pars 1. d. 23. to him and 14 more.

Dilcto et fideli suo Roberto de Parnings Thesaurar: suo, and 9. others. Claus.
17 E. 3. pars 1. d. 25. Roberto de Sadington, and only 6. more. Claus. 18 E. 3.
pars 1. d. 14. Willo: Scot, and but 4. more, Cl. 20 E. 3. pars 2. d. 22. Willo:
Scot, Quod personal^^er intersitis Nabis^um si praesentes fuorimus ibidem* seu
cum Custode dicti Regni nostri si abesse nos contigerit, and cum caeteris de
Consilio nostro, super dictis negotiis, etc. and 14 others, the two last
Roberto de Thorpe Servienti Regis, Henry de Grene, Servienti Regis. Claus. 21
E. 3. pars 2. d. 9. Willielmo de Thorpe (with the same recital, as to the
Archbishop, Here, p. 52, 53. and the same Seire vos volumus, quod dictum
Parliamentum non ad auxilia, etc. as in that writ:) Eodem modo mandatum est to
16 others, the 4 last the Kings Sergeants at Law: namely Roberto de Thorpe
Servienti Regis, Henr: de Grene Servienti Regis, Willo: de Notton Servienti
Regis, Thomae de Seton Servienti Regis. Claus. 22 E. 3. pars 1. d. 32. the writ
issued Willo: de Thorpe, and 16 more, the 4 last the Kings Sergeants forenamed.
This writ is registered next after the Lords: As is that in Clause 22 E. 3. pars
2. d. 7. issued to Judge Thorpe, and 15 more, the 4. last the Kings Sergeants
forenamed.

In Claus. 24 E. 3. pars 2. d. 3. the writ runs in this

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Willo: de Shareshull, salut: Quia pro quibusdam
arduis et urgen^ibus negotiis, Nos, and statum, et bonum regimen Regni nostri
Angliae, et aliaru^ terram^, et Dominiorum nostrorum Parl: nostrum apud Westminster.
in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere; and cum
Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Angliae, and aliis de
Consilio nostro, Colloquium habere volumus and tractatum. Vobis mandamus, etc.
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, and cum dictis Praelatis, Magnasibus et
Proceribus dicti regni, Super dictis negotiis tractatur. etc.

Eodem modo mandatum est to 12. more, the 4 last are the Kings forecited
Sergeants at Law: Claus. 25 E. 3. pars 1. d. 5. the same form of writ as the
last, issued to William Shareshull, and 13 others, whereof the last are the 4.
Sergeants. Claus. 26 E. 3. d. 14. there are two writs registered one after
another; the first to Shareshull, and 7 Justices more: The 2. Dilecto Clerico
suo Magistro Iohanni de Leech, and 8 Masters more. So Claus. 27 E. 3. d. 12.
there are two distinct writs to the same parties, and to 6 Justices, and 3.
more Masters.

In Claus. 28 E. 3. d. 26. There is only one Writ William de Shareshull, of the
same form with that of 24 E. 3. and to 11 more, whereof 4 are the Kings
Sergeants; namely, Thorp and Notton forecited, Willo: de Skipwith, Servienti
Regis, Ioh: Mowbrey Servienti Regis, last named. The same form of writ to him,
and 13 others is registered Claus. 29 E. 3. d. 8. wherein the Kings said
Sergeants are last listed. Claus. 31 E. 3. d 21. there is the like writ to him
and 14 others; where Notton, Skipwith, and Mowbrey are listed without the
addition of Kings Sergeants: Claus. 31 E. 3, d. 2. the like writ is entered to
him, and 15 others, without the addition of Sergeants to those so styled in
former lists.

William de Shareshull and 13 others, is only, and cum Praelatis et caeteris
Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti Regni Colloquium habere, etc. Dictis die et loco
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum dictis Praelatis, Magn^tibus et
Proceribus dicti Regni, etc. without the clause, and caeteris de Consilio
nostro, in either place, or any other part of the writ. So is the writ Claus.
36 E. 3. d. 16. Henr: Grene, and 8 others: and Claus: 37 E. 3. d. 22. to him
and 8. more; and Claus: 38 E. 3. d. 3. to him, and but 5 besides: and Claus: 39
E. 3. d. 2. Iohi: Knyvet, and 13 more, whereof Mro: Thomae Young Offic: Cur:
Cancel. is one^ the first I find so styled in the Rolls: The like writ Iohanni
Knyvet, is in Claus: 42 E. 3. d. 22. and 8 others: and Claus: 43 E. 3. d. 24. ^
Claus: 44 E. 3. d. 1. the same in form, persons, number, without any Clause
cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, in them.

There is this form of writ in Claus: 46 E. 3. d. 11. different from the
precedent.

Iohi: de Cavendish, Capitali Justiciario suo, salutem. Qui^ pro quibusdam
arduis, etc. (ut supra, p. 67:) teneatnr, et cum Praelatis, Magnatibus et
Proceribus Regni nostri Angliae tractatus et Colloquium habeantur. Vobis
mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, dictis die et
loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, si praesentes fuerimus ibidem, seu cum
Ricardo filio Carissimi Primogeniti nostri Edwardi Principis Aquitaniae and
Walliae Custode Regni nostri Angliae, et locum nostrum tenente in eodem Regno,
si abesse Nos contigerit, et CUM CAETERIS DE CONSILIO NOSTRO, super dictis
Negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; et hoc nullatenus
omittatis. Test ut supra. Without any Eodem modo to others. Claus. 47 E. 3. d.
13. there is a writ issued to him, with a different recital (as p. 67.) and a
personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, with
Consimilia Brevia to 6 more Justices: The like writ to him is in Clause 48 E.
3. dors. 24. with Consimilia Brevia to 8 others, whereof two are Masters: These
writs are entered after those to the Sheriffs, and before the writs to the
Warden of the Cinque Ports; as the like writ to him is, Claus. 50 E. 3. pars 2.
dors. 6. with Consimilia Brevia to 8 mo^e; the two last Mro: Iohanni Barnet,
and Mro: Nicho de Chaddeston, as in the last before.

The next writs of this nature, are in Claus: 1 R. 2. Iohanni Cavendish,
Capitali Justiciar: suo, and 11 others in both Rolls, with a personaliter
intersitis Nobiscum, and cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super dictis negotiis
tractaturi, etc. But that of Claus: 3 R: 2 dors; 32. runs thus: Quod omnibus
aliis praetermissis dictiss die and loco personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, and
CUM CAETERIS PRAELATIS, MAGNATIBUS, ET PROCERIBVS Regni* nostri DE CONSILIO
NOSTRO tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri, etc. The like Ordinary writ
issued to Cavendish and 9 others: Claus: 4 R: 2: dorso 32: After which this
form of writ is registered.

Rex dilecto Servienti suo David Hannemere, salutem: omittatis. Test Rege apud
Westminster, 26 die Augusti.

Roberto Tresilian Capitali Justic suo, and 7 more. Claus. 6 R* 2. pars 1. d.
4. and 7. to him and 8 others in both dorses. Claus. 7 R. 2. d. 10. and 17. to
him and 7. others in both. Claus. 8 R. 2. d. 35. to him and 10. besides, Claus.
9 R. 2. d. 45. to him and 9 more. Claus. 10 R. 2. d, 42. to him and 12 others.
Claus. 11 R. 2. d. 24. to him and 11 more. Claus. 12 E. 3. d. 42. the writ
issued Waltero Clopton Capitali Justice. suo, and 7 others. Claus. 13 R. 2. pars
1. d. 6. and Cl. 14 R. 2, d. 42. to him and 12 more. Cl. 16 R: 2. d. 37. to him
and 12 others, whereof the chief Baron of the Exchequer was one. Clause 16 R.
2. d, 23. to him and 11 others: and d: 32 to him and 12. more. Claus. 17 R. 2.
d. 30. to him and 12 others. Cl. 18 R. 2. d: 23. to him and 10 besides. Claus.
20 R. 2. d. 11. to him and 11 more. Cl. 21 R 2. d. 27. and Cl. 23 R. 2. d. 3.
to him, and 11 others.

Waltero Clopton Capitali Justice: suo, and 12 others: and still to the Chief
Justice for the time being throughout his reign; all or most of the rest of the
Assistants being Justices, whose names you may find in the ensning Table.

Willielmo Hankeford Capitali Justice: suo, etc. But that in dors: 37: Willielmo
Gascoyne, Capitali Iusticiario suo, and 11 others, most, or all Justices, and
so throughout his reign.

Henry the 6. his reign, Claus. 1 H. 6. dors. 22. the writ is directed Willo:
Hankeford Capitali Justice: suo, and 10 more Justices; and so in other years to
the Chief Justice for the time being, and other Justices.

Iohi: Markham and 12 Justices and Lawyers besides; and so throughout his reign
to the Chief Justice and Justices for the time being, and few else besides them.

Sergeants at Law, the Mr: of the Rolls, and some Masters of the Chancery, have
been usually summoned as Assistants, to counsel and advise both the King and
Lords in all matters of Law and difficulty, wherein their advice is necessary,
as also to carry messages, Bills and Orders from the Lords to the Commons
House, and return answers from them upon such occasions, when they please to
return answers by them, and not by Messengers of their own.

Useful Observations upon the precedent Writs to, and concerning the Kings
Counsil summoned to Parliaments and Parliamentary Councils.
IT is observable, 1. That in many ancient Rolls and Lists of Summons to
Parliaments and Parliamentary E: 1. d. 2, 3, 4. 24 E. 1. d. 7. 25 E. 1. d. 6.
27 E. 1. d. 9. 16. 28 E. 1. d. 16, 17. 30 E. 1. d. 9. 32 E. 1. d. 2. Cl. 33 E.
1. d. 8. Cl. 35 E. 1. d. 13. Cl. 3 E. 2. d. 16, 17. 7 E. 2. d. 16. 9 E. 2. d.
22, 18 E. 2. d. 5. 21, 34. 20 E. 2. d. 4. Cl. 5 E 3. pars 2. d. 7. 1^ E. 3. p.
1. d. 15. 16 E. 3. pars 1. d. 39. 16 E. 3. pars 2. d, 13. 29 E 3. d. 7. 32 E.
3. d. 14. 33 E. 3 d. 10. 34 E. 3. d. 35. and 49 E. 3. d. 4. to omit others:
Which Parliaments it seems were held without any of the Kings Counsil, or
Justices summoned to them; or else the Clerks through negligence or
slothfullness omitted the entries of their Writs or names in all these Rolls of
Summons: Therefore they are no essential Members of the Parliaments or Great
Councils of England, which may be held without them, being none of the 3.
Estates.

Parliamentum nostrum tenere, and Vo^iscum ac ^um Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Proceribus dicti regni nostri Angliae Colloquium ha^ bear volumus and
tractatum: Or the personaliter inters^^is Nobiscum, ac cum dictis Praelatis,
Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti Regni super dictis Negotiis tractaturi,
vestrumque consilium impensuri, which have never this Clause, and cum ^aeteris
de Consilio nostro, inserted into them: Therefore they are no essential
constitutive Members of our Parliaments or Great Councils, but Cooks 4 Ins^it.
p. 4.
Assistants only to the King and Lords, as there is occasion.

Sec ^* 341, 342.
40, in some others above 30, in most under 20, usually in later times but 10,
11, 12, 13, or 14, sometimes but 4, 5, 6, or 7; once or twice but one.
Sometimes most of them were Deans, Archdeacons, and other Clerks or Clergymen
who had always* the Title MAGISTRO, praefixed to their names both in the writs
and lists of their names; other times the major number were Justices, Laymen,
and but two or three Clerks: In later times the Clergymen, were wholly omitted,
or very rarely inserted, and that when they were Treasurers, or Temporal
Officers to the King: An unanswerable apparent Argument and demonstraon, that
they were no essential Members of our Parliaments or Great Councills, since the
King might thus summon more or fewer of them, or which of them he thought
fittest, and omit all or any, or as many of them as he would at his pleasure
out of the summons.

Kings Chief Justices, and other Justices of his Courts at Westminster: and Chief
Baron, were constantly summoned in more or less numbers, and the Kings
Sergeants very frequently: yea the writs of Summons entered in the Rolls, were,
for the most part, issued to the Kings Chief Justice; because there was most
use of the Justices and learned Lawyers advice and counsel in Parliaments in
all matters of Law there debated, in^writs of Error there pending, in the
penning of New, and altering, explaining, or repealing of former Statutes; in
Pleas of the Crown, and other cases criminal or civil heard and determined in
Parliaments, than there was of inferior Clergymen of the Counsil; the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Spiritual Lords there present as
Members, being sufficiently able to advise the King and Temporal Lords in all
Ecclesiastical matters there debated or treated of; especially when assisted
with the Clerks of the Convocation usually summoned, without any Clergymen of
the Kings Counsil.

5ly, That by the King and his Counsil, Us and Our See my Table to An Exact
Abridgement, Title Councils and Counselors.
Us and the rest of our Counsil, aliis ac caeteris de Consilio nostro, in the
precedent and other writs in the Clause Rols, the Rolls of Parliament, the
afetrcited Statutes, and other Acts of Parliament; the Kings Justices and
others summoned to Parliaments and Great Councils as his Counsil, not as
Spiritual or Temporal Lords; are properly meant and intended, not the Lords of
the Kings Privy or continual Council, nor yet the Lords in Parliament, or
Parliament it self; the Parliament in the writs of Summons to the Bishops, in
the Clause of Praemunientes Decanum, Capitulum, Archidiaconos, totumque Clerum
vestrae Dioc: etc. and in the writs to the Sheriffs and Wardens of the
Cinqueports, being usually styled, Commune Consilium Regni nostri, as the
Clause, Ad consentiendum hiis quae tunc ihidem de Communi Consilio regni nostri
contigerit ordinari: inserted into the last part of these Writs, informs us:
And so is it styled in the writ prescribed by the Statute, De non ponendis in
Assis^s, Anno 21 E. 1. and in other Writs grounded upon Acts of Parliament in
the Register of Writs and Natura Brevium: Or the Kings Common or General
Council, as in the Stat: of Vouchers 18 E. 1. in the Statutes of Wast, and de
Defensione Iuris, An: 20 E: 1. and other printed Acts; and long before this, in
Pat. 1 John: R^: m. 3 n. 3. Pat. 1 H: 3. m. 3. Pat. 3 H, 3. ps. 2. m. 6. and
sundry other writs and Patents in his reign

6ly, That although Sir 4 Instit. p. 4.
Edward Cook and others make this the chief or sole distinguishing Cla^se, or
proprium quarto modo, between the writs of Summons to the Lords and Members of
the Lords House, and Assistants; that the one are always summoned, quod in
propria persona intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum dictis, or caeteris Praelatis,
Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti regni nostri, super dictis negotiis tractaturi,
vestrumque consilium impensuri: The others only summoned; quod personaliter
intersitis Nobiscnm, et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, super dictis negotiis
tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; Yet this is not a general truth:
For 1. in sundry forecited writs to the Kings Counsil, Justices, and
Assistants; this clause, Et cum caeteris de Consilio nostro, etc. is totally
omitted, though it be in most of them: and intersitis Nobiscum only, or,
intersitis Nobiscum, et cum See p: 357:
dictis Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus super dictis negotiis tractaturi
vestrumque consilium impensuri; (without any and cum caeteris de Consilio
nostro,) inserted in lieu thereof; yet with this distinction, (not formerly
observed by any to my knowledge) that in the writs to the Spiritual and
Temporal Lords, the words always run thus in the first Clause of the writs;
Vobiscum, ac cum CAETERIS Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni
nostri, to a Spiritual Lord: and, Vobiscum, and cum Praelatis, ac CAETERIS
Magnatibus et Proceribus, etc: to a Temporal Lord: and thus in the mandatory
part; dictis die et l^co personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, ac cum CAETERIS
Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus, if to a Prelate: and if to a Temporal
Lord, Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, et CAETERIS Magnatibus et Proceribus
Praedictis super dictis negotiis tractaturi, etc. the word Caeteris is always
omitted in the writs to the Justices, and other Assistants of the Counsil in
both these clauses; because they are no Spiritual nor Temporal Lords of
Parliament, nor summoned as such; and, cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Proceribus, without caeteris, being only used in their writs; both where and
cum caeteris de Consilio nostro is inserted into their writs after the word
Proceribus, or elsewhere; and where it is totally omitted: So that the omission
of the word caeteris in this place and manner in all writs to the Justices and
other Assistants, and the inserting it as aforesaid, into the writs of the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords, is the principal distinguishing word that puts a
difference between them, not this Clause alone, Nobiscum, and cum aliis de
Consilio nostro, twice inserted into the writs of Prorogation and Resummons
both to the Temporal and Spiritual Lords, as well as to the Justices and
Assistants, Claus: 33 E. 1. d. 9, 10. which I shall recite at large in its due
Section.

7ly, That in the writs of Summons to the Kings Proxies, or Attorneys, as the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords sometimes are; but in proper person alone.

8ly, That such of them who were Deans, Archdeacons,

9ly, That though the Kings Justices and others of Counsil summoned to our
Parliaments, were no real essential Members of them, but rather Assistants to
the King and Lords, yet they had a very great hand, power, authority, not only
in making Ordinances, Proclamations, desciding all weighty controversies,
regulating most public abuses, and punishing all Exorbitant Offenses out of
Parliament in the Star Chamber and elsewhere, Coram Rege et CONSILIO SVO, as is
evident by 19 E. 3. Fitzh: Judgment 24. 20 As^. 14. Br. Dures 12. 39 E. 3. f.
14. b. Brook Judges 13. Judgment 117. 43 Ass. 15. 38. Register pars 1. f. 191.
b. pars 2. f. 124. b. 125. a. 13 E. 4. f. 9, 10. 27 H. 6. 5. b. 2 R. 3. f. 2.
10, 11. 1 H. 7. f. 3. 4. Brook Parliament 37. 105. Fitz. Parl. 2. 135. An
Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 157, 169, 197, 426, 428, 459,
460, 560, 591, 638, 641, 651. Lambardi Archaion, p. 108. to 116. and the
records there cited, transcribed by Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Institutes, c. 5,
Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 29. etc. de Court de Starr-chamber, et
matters avaunt LE COUNCIL LE ROY, Ashes Tables, Courts 2. and the Lawbooks,
Statutes, there cited, with others anon remembered; but likewise in receiving,
answering all sorts of Petitions, determining, adjudging all weighty doubtful
cases, pleas, yea in making Acts, Ordinances, Statutes, and transacting all
weighty affairs concerning the King or kingdom, even in Parliaments
themselves, when summoned to them by the premised writs; which being not
commonly known to the Kings Counsill, or others, nor insisted on, nor cleared
up by Sir Edward Cook, or any others who have written of our PARLIAMENTS, I
shall briefly and satisfactorily illustrate by these four following particulars.

1. By sundry Petitions upon several complaints and occasions presented and
directed to the King and HIS COUNSEL, See my Table to the Exact Abridgement of
the Records of the Tower, Title Coun^ell.
OR SAGE, OR GOOD COUNSEL in sundry of our ancient Parliaments, entered in the
Clause and Parliament rolls, more especially in Claus. Anno 1. E. 3. pars 1.
and 2. Where multitudes of Petitions are thus directed; A nostre Sign^ur. le
Roy, et ASON COVNCILL, Au BON COVNCIEL nostre Signior le Roy, etc. Which
Petitions were usually answered and determined, sometimes By the KING and His
COUNCIL, jointly, other times by His COUNSEL alone; and sometimes by the King
with the assent or advice of his COUNSEL, as these entries; Coram Rege and
CONSILIO concessum est and emendatum: per agard de toute LE COUNCIL: soit le
COVNCIEL certify; Coram CONSILIO NOSTRO in praesenti Parliament^ venire
faciatis scriptum praedictum; ad faciend. inde ulterius, quod per idem
CONSILIVM NOSTRVM ibidem CONTIGERIT ORDINARI* Videtur CONSILIO: Il semble AV
COVNCIEL que ce est bone affair* Veniat Inquisitio CORAM CONSILIO. Place at
Dom. Regi and CONSILIO SVO ordinare: with the like, most frequently occurring
in these Petitions, and the answers to the proceedings and resolutions upon
them, abundantly evidence.

2. By this subscription or addition to many Writs, Patents, Charters, in the
Clause, Patent, Charter, and Parliament Rolls, per ipsum Regem and Consilium in
Parliamento, being all made, issued, granted, approved, entered by Order of the
King and those of His COUNSIL in Parliament.

3. By the Placita coram ipso DOMINO REGE ET EJUS CONSILIO AD PARLIAMENTA SUA,
and. AD PARLIAMENTUM SUUM, etc. recorded in the Parchment Book of Pleas in the
Tower of London..^ Wherein, the Proceedings, and the Judgments on them, were
given sometimes by the Kings COUNCIL alone; sometimes by the King and his
COUNSEL, and other times by the King, with the advice of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and others, or the rest of His COUNSEL; and sometimes
Fines and Recognizances were acknowledged before the COUNSEL in Parliament. To
instance in some particulars. In the Placita coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus
Consilio, ad Parliamenta sua post festum Sancti Hillarii, et etiam post Pascha,
Anno 18 E. 1. Willielmus de Wasthull quaeritur Domino Regi et ejus Consilio,
per quandam petitionem, against a deceit and covin in levying a fine: Johannes
Comes de Dew venit coram Rege et ejus Consilio, ad Parliamentum suum post
Pascha, etc. and petiit, etc. So Domino Regi et ejus Consilio Johannes
Episcopus Wynton. alias coram Auditoribus quaerelarum monst^avit, etc. Petrus
Maulore, venit coram Domino Rege et ejus Consilio, ad Parliamentum, etc. et
petiir, etc. Dominum Regem et ejus Consilium certiorari faciant Querela
Willielmi de Valentia Consilio Domini Regis in Anglia, dum Rex suit in
Vasconia. Macolomus de Harlegh monstravit Consilio Regis per quandam
petitionem, etc. So Placita Parliamenti apud Clipston and Asherugg, etc. Anno
18 E. 1. Margeria de Mose uxor Thomae de Weyland, and Ricardus filius ejusdem
Thomae monstraverunt Domino Regi, et ejus Consilio, etc. coram ipso Domino Rege
et ejus Consilio venerunt praedicti Cemites Gloucestr. and Hereford: Quod ipsi
habeant corpora eorundem Comi^um coram ipso Domino Rege et Consilio suo, etc.
ad faciendum et recifiendum id quod Dominus Rex de Consilio suo duxerit
ordinandum. Prior de Goldelyne queritur Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, de hoc,
etc. Memorandum quod Recordum, quod Episcopus Wynton et socii sui miserunt
coram Consilio de magno placito Abbatis de Rupl. etc. Robertus Bardolph habet
diem per adjornamentum in pleno consilio, etc. Maria quae fuij^uxor Willielmo
de Brewosa petiit coram Domino Rege et ejus Consilio versus Willielmum, etc.
medietatem manerii de Wykeham, etc. Placita coram Rege et Consilio suo ad
Parliamentum suum post Pascha apud London. Anno 21 E. 1. Willielmus de Mere,
etc. et Reginaldus do Legh coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio allocuti, ad
rationem positi de hoc, etc. Stephanus Rabez Vicecomes Leicestr. and Warwic:
coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio arrenatus, ad rationem positus de hoc,
etc. Placita coram ipso Domino Rege et Consilio suo ad Parliamentum suum post
festum Sancti Michaelis, Ann. 21 E. 1. Malcolinus de Harley Eschaetor Domini
Regis citra Trentam monstravit Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, etc. et super hoc
vocatis coram domino Rege et ejus Consilio: Decano de Wellen* etc. Placita
coram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilia apud Cantuar. etc. Anno 21 E. 1. The
Judgments and Orders upon such Petitions and complaints, were sometimes given
by the Counsil alone. As in the case of Theobaldus de Verdun coram ipso Rege et
ejus Consilio apud Bergaveny, de diversis Transgressionibus et inobedientiis
factis Domino Regi, arenatus; and found guilty of them by Inquisition, returned
and read C^ram ipso Domino Rege et ejus Consilio, in the Parliament of 20 E. 1.
praedictus Theobaldus de Verdun per considerationem et Iudicium totius Consilii
committebatur Goalae, et exhaeredatus fuit de tota liberate sua Regali, quam
habuit in terris suis de Ewyas Lacy, pro so et hoeredibus suis imperpetuum; But
mostly by the King and Counsil: Witness these Clauses in Plac. Parl. Anno 18 E.
1. Loquela inter Johannem de Sancto Johanne, and Willielmum de Valentia ponitur
in respectum usque in Octabis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, eo quod per Consilium
Domini Regis et Iusticiarios suos judicium certum in loquela illa nondum est
provisum, etc. Postea ad diem illum Dominus Rex et ejus Consilium in praesentia
praedict^rum partium habito consilio de procedendo ad judicium, etc. The
Summons to Theobald de Verdun; ad faciendum et recipiendum qu^d Dominus Rex de
Consilio ordinaret; And the acquittal of the Servants of The^bald de Lacy, upon
the returns of the Inquisitions against them, lecta et audita coram dom. Rege
et ejus Consilio. In the Plea between the King and the Bishop of Winchest. de
Custod: Hospitii S. Juliani Southampton, upon full hearing and examining of the
cause, Uidetur Domino Kegi et ejus Consilio, quod Iusticiarii secundum quod in
recordo suo praedicto continetur, debito modo and secunduin consuetudinem Regni
ad captionem praedictae Inquisitionis processerunt, etc. In the case of the
Earl of Ewe in Normandy petitioning for the restitution of the Castles of
Hastings and Tikehall belonging to his Granmother Alicia, whose heir he was,
and by her delivered into the Custody and protection of King Henry the III. Et
quia Domino Regi et ejus Consilio manifest constat, quod praedicto Comi^i
alias responsum fuit ad consimilem Petitionem, etc. Nec videtur Domino Regi aut
ejus Consilio, quod ratione aliquarum literarum praedictarum praedicto Comiti
aliud responsum dare debeat, etc. In the Parliament of ^0 E. 1. The case of the
Prior of Gisburn, Coram Rege et ejus Consilio apud Norham. Anno 19 E. 1. where
per ipsum Regem and CONSILIVM suum ordinatum et concordatum est, that a
Recognisance of 600 marks acknowledged in Chancery by the Prior should be
cancelled. In the case of the differences between the Citizens of London and
Merchants of Gascoigne, both cited Coram ipso Domino Rege and CONSILIO SVO.
Anno 20 E. 1. Vt auditis coram ipso Domino Rege et CONSILIO SUO allegationibus
et disputationibus, rationibusque quibuscunque per praedictas parts porrectis,
fieret in hac part quod Dominus Rex de Consilio decreverit, etc. et contentio
praedicta finem debitum per ipsum Dominum Regem et CONSILIUM SUUM sortietur;
who then made an Order and peace between them, and likewise in the Parl. of 21
E. 1. In the case between John Gifford, and Robert Tybetot touching the Commot
of Hysk ynny, the King at Berwick Anno 21 E. 1. Cartam praedictam coram se and
CONSILIO suo legi fecit, et ad ambiguitatem quorundam verborum in praedicta
Garta contentorum de caetero auferendam, eadem verba declaravit in hun^ modum.
etc. An. 21 E. 1. The Bishop of Durham (having his liberties unjustly seized by
the award of the Justices in Eyr,) Supplicavit ipsi Domino Regi et CONSILIO SUO
instanter, quod praedicta processus et Recordum coram eis recitarentur et
examinarentur, et errores in eisdem contenti pro se and Ecclesia sua Dunolm.
prout justum fuerit, and secundum legem et consuetudinem Regni emendarentur.
Which being accordingly done, and the cause fully heard and debated before
them; consideratum est per ipsum Regem and Consilium, quod judicium praedictum
revocetur, and adnulletur, et quod omnes libertates praedicti Episcopi,
Ecclestae suae and hominum suorum, quae per considerationem Justiciariorum
^tinerantium, in manum Domini Regis captae fuerunt, eidem Episcopo, Eccles^ae
and hominibus suis plenarie and integre restituentur.

I shall instance only in three more memorable cases at large.

The 1. is in the Placita coram ipso Rege and Consilio suo, ad Parliamentum
suum post Pascha apud London. in Manerio Archiepiscopi Eborum; Anno regni Regis
Edwardi 1. 21. De Petentibus arreragiis de tempore Iudae^rum. Quia plures
Capitales Domini, de quibus Iudaei ante Exilium suum de Regno isto tenementa
sua tenuerunt, diversa arreragia petunt, de servitiis ^orundem tenementorum
^ibi detentis, tempore quo tenementa illa in manu Domini Regis, ut Eschaeta sua
per Exilium eorundem Iudeorum devenerunt, and similiter a tempore postquam
tenementa illa per concessionem and donationem suam, in manus nunc tenentium
devenerunt, quod per eosdem tenentes aut eorum haeredes, aut assignatos
plenarie satisfiat, capitalibus Dominis de quibus tenementa illa tenentur, de
omnibus serviciis and consuetudinibus eisdem Dominis capitalibus feodi debitis
and consuetis, and quae servicia Iudaei ante Exilium suum; dum tamen sibi
facere consueverunt and debuerunt, and secundum quod iidem Domini capitales
legitime verificare poterunt, servicia illa and consuetudines sibi deberi, and
quod Iudaei dum tenementa illa tenuerunt pro tenementis illis sibi ^acere
consueverunt, cum singulis Cartis Domini Regis de talibus tenementis cuicunque
concessis semper contineatur, quod servicia debita and consueta inde faciant
capitalibus Dominis feodi illius. Et de toto illo tempore quo tenementa illa in
se^ina Domini Regis remanserunt postquam per Exilium ^orundem Iudeorum ^eisita
fuerint usque diem quo eadem tenementa per concessionem ipsius Domini Regis in
seisinam aliorum devenerunt respond^atur, satisfiat Capitalibus Dominis ac
Scaccarium per ipsum Dominum Regem, singulis pro sua portione, et secundum quod
verificare poterunt prout superius dicitur; cum quilibet de suo tempore
tantummodo teneatur respondere, et de isto tempore quo Rex tenebitur respondere
satisfaciant ipsi modo tenentes Capitalibus Dominus, et ipsis allocetur in
pacatione sua facienda, aut redditu suo, vel secundum quod The saurarius et
Barons de Scaccario, melius viderint expedire. De tempore autem Iudeorum quo
ipsi tenementa illa tenuerunt, non videtur Domino Regi, aut ejus consilio, quod
alicui petenti debet responderi, cum iidem Capitales Domini semper suerant et
esse debuerant sufficientes et potentes ad servitia et consuetudines sibi
debita petenda, et pro eisdem distringenda si quid aretro fuit, vel cum ipsi
Iudei forte satisfecerunt de hoc quod modo petitur, et inde habeant
acquietancias. Et si quid a retro fuerit hoc fuit per negligentiam et
stultitiam eorundem Dominorum Capitalium, quorum negligentia merito ^ibi ip^is
imputanda, et cum dicitur, Vigilantibus et non dormientibus jura subveniunt.

21 E. 1. ro^. 4. 22 E. 1. rot. 5. Cooks 2 Instit p. 508. The 2d. Part of my
Demurrer, p. 123.
The second is the case of the Prior of Bridlington, before the King and his
Counsil the same Parliament. Prior de Bridelington allocutus coram ipso Domino
Rege et consilio suo de hoc, quod cum quidam Bonamy nuper Iudeus Eborum:
mutuasset eidem Priori Trescenta Libras Sterlingorum, solvendas eidem Iudeo ad
Gulas Augusti, Anno regni Regis nunc vicessimo, Et idem Iudeus ante terminum
praedictum; Per commune Exilium Iudeorum de regno isto exularet, per quod
praedictum debitum simul cum omnibus aliis bonis quae fuerant ejusdem Iudei in
Anglia, et quae in regno remanserunt post eorum Exilium, in quorumcunque manus
fuerunt ipsius Domini Regis Catalla fuerunt, et ipsi Domino Regi reddi
debuissent; Praedictus Prior debitum praedictum quod fuit etc. esse Catall.
Dom. Regis, ad terminum statutum ipso Domino Regi non solvit, nec ipsum Dominum
Regem aut suos inde premunit; Immo totaliter concelavit, detinuit* and adhuc
detinet, in lesionem fidei sui qua Domino Regi tenetur, and ad grave dampnum
ipsius Domini Regis, etc. Et Prior been cognoscit, quod Praedecessor suus
immediatus pecuniam praedictam de praedicto Iudeo mutuavit termino praedicto
solvendam, and quod ipse ratione mutui illius, adhuc ad solutionem pecuniae
illius tenetur. Set dicit; quod Johannes Archiepiscopus Eborum qui nuncest, in
tertia septimana Quadragesima proximo praeterito ad domum suam de Bridelington,
prout ad officium suum pertinet, visitavit, and inter caetera in visitatione
sua ibidem inventa, quaesivit de debitis domus in quibus idem Prior, and
quibus, and pro quo tenebatur? ita quod tunc inuenit, quod domus praedicta
praedicto Iudeo indebitabatur in pecunia praedicta; et statim in Capitulo ipso
Priori injunxit, quod pecuniam illam solveret ejusdem valecto tunc ibidem
praesenti ad festum Nativitatis Sanctae Mariae proximum, quem valectu^ idem
Archiepiscopus dicebat esse Attornatum praedicti Iudaei. Et ipse Prior prout
ratione obedientiae suae tenetur; praecepto praefati Archiepiscopi obedivit,
and eandem pecuniam tunc solvere promisit. Et quia idem Prior cognoscit, quod
praedicta pecunia praedicto Iudeo debebatur, nec ei solvebatur. ante exilium
Iudeorum, and quicquid remansit de eorum debitis and catallis in Regno post
eorum exilium, Domini Regis fuit. Consideratum est, quod Dominus Rex recuperet
praedictam pecuniam, ut Catalla sua versus praedictum Priorem. Et dictum est
praedicto Priori, quod non exeat e villa, priusquam Domino Regi, de praedicta
pecunia satisfecerit. Et quia praedictus Archiepiscopus praedicto Priori
injunxit; quod catalla Domini Regis praedicto vallecto solveret, ad dampnum
Domini Regis, and similiter quia Dominus Rex intellexit, quod Archiepiscopus
praedictus quoddam scriptum obligatorium, per quod praefatus Prior praedicto
Iudaeo tenebatur in debito praedicto, contra fidem Domino Regi debitam, and
Sacramentum fidelitatis suae a praedicto Iud^o emit aut perquisivit, ad
elongandum Dominum Regem de Catallis suis praedictis, and ibi appropriando
malitiose: Praeceptum est Vicecomiti Eborum, quod venire faciat praedictum
Archiepiscopum coram Domino Rege, a die Sancti Michaelis, in Quindecim dies,
ubicunque, etc. ad respondendum Domino Regi de receptione praedicta. Et
similiter quod praedictum scriptum, ut dicitur, remanet in custodia Abbatis
Sanctae Mariae Eborum^ aut Prioris Sancti Andre^ Eborum, ideo praeceptum est
Vicecomiti praedicto, quod venire faciat eosdem Abbatem and Priorem, ad
terminum praedictum, ad respondendum de eodem scripto.

Hereupon the Sheriff summoned the Archbishop; Ad respondendum Domino Regi de
hoc, quod nunc Prior de Bridelington et ejusdem loci conventus per scriptum
suum obligatorium tenebatur cuidam Bonamy quondam Iudeo Eborum, in Trescentis
libris sterlingorum certis terminis solvendorum: et idem Iudeus Per Commune
Exilium Iudeorum de Regno isto, ante solutionem praedictae pecuniae sibi facta^
Exuleret; praedictus Archiepiscopus de Curia Romana rediens apud Paris cum
praedicto Iudaeo conventionem and mercatum faciens, praedictum debitum, quod
fuit and est Catalla Domini Regis ab eo emit, and post in visitatione sua ad
Prioratum praedictum facta, eidem Priori et Conventui per obedient^am injungit,
quod pecuniam praedictam cuidam Valecto ipsius Archiepiscopi, aut nuncio
praefati Iudaei, certo termino solverent; contra fidelitatem in qua Domino Regi
tenentur, and in alienationem pecuniae Domini Regis* ad dampnum Domini Regis
mill librarum etc. Et praedictus Archiepiscopus modo venit, and super hoc
facto praedicto CORAM DOMINO REGE ET CONSILIO SUO arenatus, express dicit;
Quod nunquam cum praedicto Iudaeo aliquam conventionem fecit, seu mercatum de
pecunia praedidicta sibi adquirenda; set revera dicit, quod in visitatione sua
ad domum praedictam invenit, et per Prio^em et Conventum ejusdem domus sibi
ostensus fuit, quod domus illa indebitabatur praedicto Iudeo de prae^icta
pecunia. Et idem ad salvationem animarum sua^um prout tenebatur, eidem Priori
et Conventui dixit, quod pecuniam illam salva conscientia retinere non possent,
et quod sic facerent quod animas suas salvarent: set quod nunquam eis injunxit,
quod pecuniam illam sibi aut al^i nomine praedicti Iudei solverent, paratus est
se acquietare, si placuerit DOMINO REGIET EJUS CONSILIO. Et Dominus Rex super
hoc, de gratia sua speciali, et ad instantium MAGNATUM DE CONSILIO SUO, licet
per patriam de jure inquirere posset veritatem praemissorum, concessit
praedicto Archiepiscopo, quod in fide in qua ei tenetur, veritatem praemissorum
fatetur et cognosca^. Et idem Archiepiscopus in fide, etc. fatetur et dicit,
quod in veniendo de Curia Romana apud Paris: been audivit and intellexit per
praedictum Iudeum quod praedicta pecunia ei debebatur, et quod idem Iudeus eum
rogavit, ut ei pro Deo esset in auxilium ad praedictam pecuniam suam
^ecuperandam. Et postea, ut praedictum est, in visitatione sua ad domum
praedictam hoc idem invenit per confessionem praedictorum Prioris et Conventus;
et eis dixit, quod ^ic facerent, quod animas suas salvarent. Et quia idem
Archiepiscopus been cognoscit, quod POST EXILIUM DICTI JUDAE^, and ALIORUM
JUDAEORUM DE REGNO ISTO, a praedicto Iudeo intellexit, quod pecunia praedicta
^ibi in regno isto debebatur, et POST EORUM EXILIUM, omnia quae sua fuerunt, et
in regno isto remanserunt, tam debita quam alia bona quaecunque ipsi Domino
Regi remanserunt, et Catalla sua fuerunt, et super hoc incontinenti POST EORUM
EXILIUM solempnis Proclamatio siebat per totum regnum, et quod omnes qui debita
aliqua alicui Iudeo debebant, aut de eorum debi^is it is, bonis and catallis
aliquid sciebant Domino Regi, aut alicui de Consilio suo scire facerent, de qua
quidem Proclamatione nullus dedicere potest, quin scivit, a^^ scivisse debuit.
Et idem Archiepiscopus de debito praedicto scivit, prout fatetur, tam per
Iudeum, quam per Priorem and Conventum, nec de hoc Domino Regi, aut alieui de
suis constare fecit; Immo debitum illud concelando, et a Domino Rege alienando
contra fidem qua Regi tene^ur, injunxit praefato Priori et Conventui, quod
animas suus-salvarent, quod tantum valuit, quantum si dixisset; quod Iudeo
satisfacerent, concordatum est, quod praedictus Archiepiscopus remaneat in
misericordia Domini Regis, pro concelamento and transgressione praedicto, etc.
et idem Dominus Rex sibi ipsi reservat Tax ationem illius misericordiae. From
these 2. Records I shall observe, That the General Banishment of the Jews out
of England, and the escheat and forfeiture of their Lands, Goods, and Debts to
the King, by this their general exile, is no less then 10. several times
precisely mentioned in these 2 Records, and the very groundwork of them;
besides some hundreds of other Records and Authors cited by me in the 1. and 2.
Part of my Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued Remitter into England: And
therefore I must admire 2. Institutes p. 106. 707. 568.
Sir Edward Cooks peremptory denial of it in print, in his Commentary on the
Statute de Iudaismo, in the very date whereof he is mistaken, as well as in
most of his Comments thereupon, as I have largely proved in my Demurrer. 2.
That it is a breach of the Oath of Fealty and Allegiance in any Subject, and an
offense for which he is punishable, to conceal from, or defraud the King of any
of his just debts and rights, especially when engaged by Proclamation to
discover them. 3ly. That the King and his Counsel gave judgment in these
causes; and that in the later of them the King reserves the taxing of the
Amerciament of the Archbishop for an offense against him, wholly to himself.

The 3. case is that of John Sa^veyn, his wife and her sister, in the Placita
coram ipso Domino Rege apud Westmonasterium in Parliamento suo in Octabis
Nativitatis beatae Mariae, Anno regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici 33.
which is very memorable, and thus recorded.

Johannes Salveyn, Margareta uxor ejus, Isabello soro^ ejusdem Margaretae,
filiae and haeredes Roberti de Ros de Werk, per Petitionem suam in forma
sequenti ostendunt Domino Regi, et petunt, quod cum Dominus Rex de gratia sua
speciali concessit et ordinavit, Quod omnes gentes de regno Seotiae,
cujuscunque fuerint, et quae ad pacem suam venerint, exceptis aliquibus
personis in eadem See this Ordinance enrolled at large, Claus. Ann. 33 E. 1. m.
13. dorso in Cedula, and remembered by Mat. Westminster. pars 2. p. 451, 452.
Ordinatione nominatis, admittantur secundum conditiones subsequentes;
videlicet, quod salva sit eis vita et membra, et quod quieti sint de
imprisonamento, et quod non exhaeredantur. Ita quod de eorum exemptione et
emendis de Transgressionibus, qnas ipsi Domino Regi solummodo fecerint, et de
estabilamento terrae Scotiae staret ordinationi suae, sicut before continetur
in Ordinatione supradicta. Et in^ super Dominus Rex concessit omnibus qui
secuti fuerint seisinam de terris quas ipsi et eorum Antecessores tenuerunt in
principio Guerrae In quorum manus terr^^ illae devenissent; quod ipsi Johannes,
Margareta, and Isabella, uti possent et gaudere concessione et Ordinatione
praedictis, quoad terras quae dictus Robertus tenuit in Anglia and Scotia in
principio guerrae. Ita quod non sin^ exhaeredati. Et Willielmus de Ros de
Hamlake, qui tenet praedictum Manerium de Werk, ex dono et concessione Domini
Regis, per praemunitionem sibi factam venit^, et tam pro seipso tanquam tenenti
dictum Manerium, qua^ pro Domino Rege quo ad alias terras et tenementa quae
fuerunt dicti Roberti, tam in regno Angliae quam in terra Sco^iae, dicit; Quod
praedicti petentes nichil in eisdem per medium praedicti Roberti clamare
possunt ut ipsius haeredes, nec ad illa petenda, seu aliquam partem earundem
audiri debent, prout petunt. Dicit enim, quod ipsi petunt tenementa praedicta
ut haeredes praedicti Roberti, et virtute c^jusd ^m Ordination^s, quam Dom^nus
Rex nuper fecitet concessit illis hominibus de terra Scotiae, qui in ultima
guerra in eadem terra ad pacem suam venerunt et admissi suerunt; et per illa
ver^a videlizet, [quod non ^x^aeredentur,] Et etiam petunt, quod ipsi uti
possunt, et gaudere concessione et Ordinatione praedictis quo ad terras quas
dictus Robertus tenuit in Anglia and in Scotia in principio guerrae, Ita quod
non sint exhaeredati, prout in sua petitione continetur, quod nullo modo
admitti debent. Quia dicit, quod praedictus Robertus diu ante principium istius
gueriae, ad quod tempus Ordinationi praedicta reddito terrarum et concessio se
extendunt, Inimicus Domini Regis devenit mani^estus, parti Scotorum Contra
Homagium et Filelitatem suam felonice et traditiose adh^rendo, et sic omnes
terras et tenementa sua ubicunque infra Dominium et potestatem Domini Regis
existentia, simul cum aliis bonis suis quibuscunque totaliter forisfecit; nec
unquam postea in vita sua ad pacem Domini Regis rediit, set in inimicitia sua
ut Felo et Traditor obiit. Occasion cujus Inimicitiae sic commissae Dominus
Rex terras illas et tenementa statim in manu^ suam seisivit; et postea ipsum
Manerium de Werk ipsi Willielmo dedit. Et hoc paratus est verisicare, tam p^o
Domino Rege quam pro seipso, si petentes praedicti in petitione sua praedicta
audiri debent, etc. Et quia habito super praemissis diligenti tractatu per
ipsum Dominum Regem et totum Consil^um, express recordatum est, quod dictus
Robertus de Ros, per multa tempora ante principium istius ultimae guerrae
contra Homagium, Fidelitatem et Ligeantiam suam, de ipso Domino Rege traditiose
et felonice se elongavit, et Inimicus ipsius Domini Regis manifest devenit
parti Scotorum adhaerendo tunc Inimicorum et Rebellionum Domini Regis
existentium, nec unquam postea in vita sua ad pacem Domini Regis rediit, set
inimicus ^^^s obiit, visisque articulis et conditionibus contentis in
Ordinatione per ipsum Dominum Regem facta in ea^dem ultima guerra hominibus de
terra Scotia, et concessione de redditione terrarum suaru^ eisdem facienda,
quam de aliis in eadem Ordinatione contentis, et virtute cujus Ordinationis
petentes praedicti modo tenementa praedicta petunt: Uidetur Domino Regi et
Consilio suo, quod petentes praedicti ratione illius Ordinationis seu
redditionis in Petitione sua praedicta audiri non debent. Propter quod
Concordatum est et consideratum per ipsum Dominum Regem et Consilium suum, quod
praedictus Willielmus eat inde sine die, etc. Et quod praedicti petentes nichil
capiant per Petitionem suam praedictam, etc. After which, upon the suit of the
Petitioners to King Edward the 2. in the 4. year of his reign, being in
Scotland, there issued two several writs to Gilbert de Roubyry, to search the
Then in being, but since not extant.
Rolls of Parl. and certify the Tenor of the Petitions aforesaid, and the
Answers given thereunto, and proceedings thereupon coram dicto Patre nostro
(Edw. 1.) et Consilio suo in Parliamentis suis fa^ta; because this John Salve^n
coram Nobis et Consilio nostro prosecutus fuerit petenda, etc. that the King
would receive his homage for the moity of the lands descended to his wife, as
one of the Coheirs of Robert de Ros, and restore the same unto him.

For Judgments given in Parliament upon Petitions or Complaints by the King,
Lords, and Kings Counsil jointly, you may peruse Placita in Parl. Anno 33 E. 1.
ro^. 17. 2^.
Nicholas de Segraves case, in Cooks 3 Instit. p. 7, 8. and My Plea for the
Lords, p. 361. with others there cited: I shall here for brevity recite only
two Memorable ones.

The 1. in the Placita in Parliamento apud London in crastino Epiphaniae, Anno
regni Edwardi 1. vicesimo, the long, great and famous case between Humfry de
Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford, who invaded one another lands by force and arms in a warlike manner,
and committed many rapines, burnings, murders and enormities against the Kings
peace and prohibition: after many Inquisisitions and debates touching this
business before Justices assigned, and afterward before the Kings Counsil, and
then before the King and his Counsil, by these passages often mentioned in the
record; Concordat^m est per DOMINUM REGEM and CONSILIUM, Decretum est PER
CONSILIUM, Videtur CONSILIO DOMINI REGIS, per dictum DOMINUM REGEM and
CONSILIUM, etc. evident^r compertum est (twice repeated) Quod corpora eorum
habeat coram. DOMINO REGE and EJUS CONSILIO, ad voluntatem ipsius Domini Regis
audiendam et faciendam, et recipiendum id quod DOMINUS REX DE CONSILIO SUO
DUXERIT ORDINANDUM) fully evidence. At last both the Earls. Voluntati Domini
Regis se omnino submiserunt, ut de eorumque libertatibus faciat quod sibi
placuerit. Whereupon Dominus Rex super hoc non voluntary tantumniodo, imo
pro^t de jure et secundum legem et consuetudinem regni fuerit faciendum, et
etiam per Consilium Archie-piscoporum, Cpiscoporun^; Comitum et Baronum
caeterorumque De Consilio suo existentium facere volens in praemissis, et ut
voluntas sua justa sit et rationabilis pro^t decet, eorumque Assensum in
praemissis petiit et Consilium. Propter quod habito tractatu ^oram ipso Domino
Rege et Consilio suo super praedictis, tam ipso Domino Regi, quam caeteris
Praelatis et Magnatibus et singulis de Consilio suo vide^ur, quoad Comitem
Gloucestriae, quod libertas sua praedicti, etc. pro se et haeredibus suis
forisfacta est ratione delicti praedicti, etc. Dictum est eidem Comiti
Gloucestriae per considerationem et Iudicium Archiepiscoru^^, Episcoporum,
Comitum, Baronum, et totius consilit Domini Regis, quod libertas sua praedicta,
etc. totumque regale in eisdem terris remaneant Domino Regi et haeredibus suis
ut forisfacta tota vita ipsius Comitis Gloucestriae, et idem Comes retor^etur
prisonae, et inde redimetur ad voluntatem domini Regis* et etiam quod
praedictus Comes Hereford recuperet versus eum Centum libras pro dampnis
praedictis. Et similiter quoad praedictum Comitem Hereford, ^o quod videtur
Domino Regi, et ejus Consilio habito super hoc tracta^^ diligenti, quod
libertas sua in terris suis de Brekenno^, etc. ratione delicti praedicti
forisfacta esset. Dictum est eidem Comiti Hereford, per considerationem et
judicium Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum et Baronum, et totius Consilii
Domini Regis, quo libertas sua praedicta remaneat Domino Regi et haeredibus
suis forisfacta de ipso Comite Hereford et haeredibus suis imperpetuum, et
corpus suum prisonae retornetur et inde redimetur ad voluntatem Domini Regis;
Et quia videtur Domino Regi et ejus Consilio, quod transgressio de qua idem
Comes Hereford convictus est, non est ita carcans, nec tantam poenam requirit
quantum et facta transgressio praedicta de qua praedictus Comes Gloucestriae
convincitur: and because he had espoused the Queens kinswoman; therefore the
forfeiture was mitigated, and ordered to continue to the King and his heirs
during the Earls life only: After these Earls had continued in prison for some
time; the Earl of Gloucester, finem fecit Domino Regi pro December Mill Marc. pro
Transgre s^ione praedicta, and put in 5 Noble men for his pledge^; And the Earl
of Hereford likewise, finem fecit Domino Regi pro T^ansgressione praedicta, pro
Mill Marcis, et re^ipitur per plegios, who are named in the Record: After
which Io^^ de Crepinghes, and others of the Earls Assistants in these riotous
Misdemeanors, ad instantiam Praelatorum, Comitum and Baronum, et aliorum de
Consilio sus, who moved the King to show mercy to them* were put to several
fines.

The 2. is in the Placita co^am^ipso Rege and Consilio suo ad Parliamentum
suum, post Pascha apud London, Anno 21 E. 1. the Archbishop of Yorkes case.
Johannes Archiepiscopus Eborum attachi^tus fuit ad respondendum Damino Regi de
pla^i^o quare cum placita de Imprisonamento et aliis Transgressionibus in regno
Regi^ contra pacem Regis factis ad Regem and coronam et dignitatem suam
specialiter pertineant. Idem Archiepiscopus per Johannem Priorem de Bolton in
Cravene Commissarium suum in venerabilem Patrem Antonium Episcopum Dunolm: dum
nuper in partibus Borialibns in obsequio Regis juxta la^us suum per praeceptum
ipsius Regis sub protectione extitit, pro eo quod Ballivi esusdem Episcopi
Willielmum de Wrleton (...) Johannem Roman apud D^nolm. inventos ceporunt et
imprisonaver^nt, Excommunicationis sententi^m in Regis contemptum et Coronae
and dignitatis suae laesionem, and contra reverentiam Regis in hac part
debitam, in dispectum ipsius Regis viginti Mill librarum, fecit fulminari, et
illam Excommunicationem demandari. Propter quod idem Rex ta^um contemptum and
tantum irreverenti (...) sibi illatam^ransire impunitam sustinere non valens,
maxim cum tam ipse Rex quam praellictus Episcopus quanium in ipso suit,
praefato Willielmo and Johanni de imprisonamento praedicto celeris justitiae
complementum juxta regni consue^udinem semper fuerunt parati exhibere, etc.
After the Archbishops Plea thereto, and a long debate of the business in
Parliament; Videtur Domino Regi in pleno Parliamento praedicto, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Iusticiariis, and similiter toti Consilio ipsius Domini Regis, quod
praedictus Archiepiscopus quantum in ipso fuit niteba^ur occupare and usurpare
super Coronam Regiam et Dignitatem, in casu^isto deliberationes imprisonatorum,
contra legem et consuetudinem regni, et Contra ^^dem in qua idem Archiepiscopus
Domino Regiet Coronae suae astringitur, ad exhaeredationem Do^^ni Regis et
haeredum suorum manifestam. Propter quod per Comites, Barons et Iusticiarios,
et dinnes alios de Constlio ipsius Domini Regis concordatum est, quod
praedictus Archiepiscopus committatur prisonae, pro offensa and transgressione
praedictis. Et super hoc ante Iudicium pronunnciatum licet unanimiter de
consilio praedictorum Magnatum et aliorum concordatum fuisset tenendum in hoc
casu, et similiter in casibus consimilibus imperpetuum, praedictus
Archiepiscopus Maguates et alios de Consilio ipstus Domini Regis rogavit, quod
pro eo Dominum Regem requirerent, ut Ante Pronuntiationem Judicit ipsum ad
gratiam suam admitteret. Et Dominus Rex ad instantiam eorundem Magnatum, de
gratia sua speciali hoc idem ipso Archiepiscopo concessit. Et idem
Archiepiscopus humiliter supplicavit, quod possit de omnibus praemissis alto
and basso Voluntati Domini Regis se submittere. Which the King assenting to at
the Lords request, Dictum est eidem Archiepiscopo sub gravi forisfactura, quod
non recedat a Parliamento isto ^onec super praemissis Domini Regis audivit
voluntatem. Postea venit praedictus Archiepiscopus, et fecit finem Domino Regi
pro Transgressione praedicta, pro quatuor millibus marcarum, per scriptum suum
obligatorium: 5 others being bound with him for due payment thereof to the King.

It is observable, that in all these Pleas, Proceedings and Judgments, there is
no mention at all of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Commons in
Parliament, (no shar^rs in them) but only of the King, Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Justices, and Kings Counsel.

4ly. The power of the Kings Counsel and Judges in Parliament, is evident by
sundry Prefaces to, and passages in our printed Acts of Parliament: as namely
by the preface of the printed Statute of Bigamie, 4. Octo^. An. 4. Ed. 1. In
the presence of certain Reverend Fathers, Bishops of England, and OTHERS OF THE
KINGS COUNCIL, the Constitutions underwritten were recited, after heard, and
published before the King and HIS COUNCIL: forasmuch as ALL THE KINGS
COUNCIL, AS WELL IVSTICES AS OTHERS DID AGREE that they should be put in
writing for a perpetual memory, and that they should be steadfastly observed.
See Poultons Statutes at large. p. 39, 43, 44.
etc. By the exposition of the Statute of Gloucester An. 6. E. 1. made by the
King and HIS IVSTICES. By the Statute of Mor^main An. 7. E. 1. which recites.
We by the advice of our Prelates, Lords, Barons, and other our Subjects, BEING
OF OUR COUNCIL, have provided, made and ordained, etc. By the Statute of Acton
Bnrnell. 13. E. 2. Forasmuch as Merchants etc. The King for himself, and BY HIS
COUNCIL has ordained and established, etc. The Prologue to the Statute of
Wes^m. 2. An. 13. E 1. Whereas of late our Lord the King the 6. year of his
reign calling together the Earls, Prelates, Barons, and HIS COUNCIL at
Gloucester, etc. (so as there were writs of summons then issued to them all,
though not entered in the Clause Rolls of 6. Ed. 1. nor any other now extant.)
By the Statute of Merchants, An. 13. E. 1. The King and HIS COUNCIL at his
Parliament holden at Acton Burnell, the 11. year of his reign, ^ath Ordained
establishments thereupon, for the remedy of such Merchants: which Ordinances
and establishments, the King commands, that they shall be firmly kept
throughout the Realm. By the Statute of Wast. Anno 20. E. 1. Other Instices
with the more part OF THE KINGS COUNCIL, were of the contrary opinion, etc.
Wherefore our Lord the King in his full Parliament, in the 20th. year of his
reign, by A GENERAL COUNCIL, has ordained, etc. Articuli super Chartas, An.
28. E. 1. c. 2. Nevertheless the King and HIS COUNCIL do not intend by reason
of this estatute to diminish the Kings Right, for the ancient Prises due and
accustomed And chapter 20. Notwithstanding all these things, etc. both the King and
HIS COUNSEL, and all they that were present at the making of this Ordinance,
will and intend, that the right and prerogative of his Crown, shall be saved to
him in all things. The Statute for Escheators. Anno 29. E. 1. At the Parliament
of our sovereign Lord the King, By his Counsel it was agreed, and also
commanded by the King himself, etc. according to advice of etc. Treasurer to
the King, Chancellor, and other of the Counsel there present before the King,
etc. By the New Statute of Quo Warranto, 30 E. 1. Cum nuper in Parliamento
nostro a^u^ Westminster. per Nos et Consilium nostrum provisum sic et Proclamatum,
quod Praelati, Comites, Barons, and alii etc. By the Ordinance for Inquests,
33. E. 1. It is agreed and ordained by the King and all his Counsel, etc. By
Ordinatio pro statu Hyberniae, An. 17. E. 1. made and agreed on at Nottingham,
By the assent of our Counsel there being. By the Preface to Articuli Cleri, 9.
E. 2. In our Parliament holden at Lincoln^ the 9th. of our reign, We caused
the Articles underwritten, with certain Answers made to some of them, to be
rehearsed before Our Counsel, and made certain Answers to be corrected; and to
the residue of the Articles underwritten, answers were made By us and our
Counsel, of which Articles and Answers the tenours here ensue. By the Statute
of Gavelet, An. 10. E. 2. It is provided by our Lord the King, and His
Justices, etc. By the Statute De Terris Templariorum, 17. E. 2. It was moved in
Parliament in the presence of the Prelates, Barons, Nobles, and Great men of
the Realm, and others there present; Whether the Order of the Templers being
dissolved, the King and other Lords of the fees might retain them by the Law of
the Realm, and with safe conscience? Whereupon the Greater part of the Kings
Counsel, as well the Justices as other Lay-Persons being assembled together,
the said Justices affirmed precisely; That our Lord the King, and other Lords
of the fees aforesaid, might well and lawfully by the laws of the Realm
retain the foresaid Lands as their Escheats, in regard of the ceasing and
dissolution of the Order aforesaid. But upon other grounds of Conscience, they
settled them on the Hospital of S. John's of Jerusalem by this Statute. 1. E. 3.
c. 3. But it is not the mind of the King nor of His COUNSEL, that they who
have sold there Lands, etc. should have any benefit of this Statute. The
Prologue of the printed Statute of 1. E. 3. Parl 2. At the request of the
Commonally by their Petition made before the King and HIS CONSELL in
Parliament, by assent of the Prelates, Earls and Barons, etc. 9. E. 3. c. 1.
Our Sovereign Lord the King, desiring the profit of his people, by the assent
of his Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles of his Realm, summoned at his
present Parliament, and By the a^vice of his Counsel, being there, etc. has
ordained and established the Stat^^te of Money 9. E. 3. c. 7. When and where it
shall please us and OUR COUNCIL to make Exchanges. 11. E. 3. c. 1. Till by the
King and his COUNCIL i^ he otherwise provided. 14. E. 3. c. 5. The Chancellor,
Treasurer, the Justices of the one Bench, and of the other, and other OF THE
KINGS COUNSEL. 14. E 3. Stat. 3. Of the Clergy. Prologue. Wherefore We their
petition seen and regarded, and there upon deliberation with the Peers of the
Realm, and other of OUR COUNCIL, and of the Realm, etc. have granted, etc.
And chapter 5. Our Chancellor and Treasurer taking to them other of our Counsel,
etc. 20. E. 3. Prologue. By the assent of the Great men, and other wise men of
Our Counsel, We have ordained these things following. And c. 5. We have
ordained to come before us at a certain day, or before them whom we shall
depute of Our Counsel. 23. E. 3. c. 8. should be converted to a public and
common profit, by advise of His Counsel. And always it is the intent of the
King, and of His Counsel, that according to the first Ordinance, it should be
lawful, and shall be lawful for every man, etc. 25. E. 3. of Laborers.
Prologue. It was ordained by our Sovereign Lord the King, and by assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other of His Counsel. 25 E. 2. Stat. 2. Of those
born beyond the Seas. Our Sovereign Lord the King. willing that all doubts and
ambiguities should be put away, and the Law in this case declared, and put in a
certainty, has charged the said Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other wise men
of his Counsel, assembled in this Parliament, to deliberate upon this point;
which of one assent have said, That the Law of the Crown of England is, and
always has been such, etc. 25. E. 3. Parl. 5. c 2. of Treasons. And if
percase any men of this Realm endeavor covertly or secretly against any
other, to slay him, or to rob him, or take him, or retein, till he has made
fine or ransom, or to have his deliverance, it is not the mind of the King,
Nor His Counsel, that in such cases it shall be judged Treason; but shall be
judged Felony or Trespass, according to the Laws of the Land of old time used,
and according as the case requires. And chap. 4. It is accorded, assented and
stablished, that from henceforth none shall be taken by petition or suggestion
made to our Sovereign Lord the King, or to his Counsel, unless it be by
Indictment or presentment of his good and lawful neighbors. 25. E. 3. Parl.
6. Statute of Provisors. Whereas in the Parliament of Edward King of England,
Grandfather of the King that now is, the 25. of his reign holden at Carlisle,
the Petition heard, put before the said Grandfather and HIS COUNSEL by the
Commonalty of his Realm etc. 27. E. 3. c. 1. Provisors shall have day
containing the space of two months, by warning to be made to them, etc. to be
before the King and HIS COUNSEL, or in his Chancery, or before the Kings
Justices, in his places of the one Bench or the other, or before other the
Kings Justices which shall be deputed to the same, to answer in their proper
persons to the King of the contempt done in this behalf. chapter 2. It is assented
by the King and all his Counsel. 27. E. 3. of the Staple. chapter 21. That the
same Mayor and Constables do not ordain any thing contrary to these Ordinances,
nor make interpretation, nor exceptions to them, otherwise then the words
purport, but if there be any thing that is doubtful, it shall be showed unto
Our Counsel, and there declared by good advise. chapter 23. And in case that
debates arise betwixt them, upon the discussing of any plea or quarrel, the
t^nour of the said Plea or quarrel shall be sent before the Chancellor, and
other of Our Counsel, to be by them determined without delay* chapter 25. And now
late it is done Us and our Counsel, to understand by the complaint of the said
Merchants. chapter 28. And in case any thing be to be amended, added, changed, or
withdrawn of any of the said points in time to come, by a true cause. we will
that the same be done by deliberation, and advice of the Great men, and Other
of our Counsel in Parliament. 31. E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 3. It is accorded by our
Sovereign Lord the King, the Great men, and all the Commons in this present
Parliament, that the Chancellor and Treasurer taking unto them the JUSTICES and
OTHER THE KINGS COUNSEL, such as to them shall seem meet, shall have power to
ordain remedy of the buying and selling of Stockfish of St. Botulfs, and Salmon
of Barwick, and of Wines and Fish of Bristow, and elsewhere; and that the
Ordinances by them made in this party be firmly holden. The offenders against
the Ordinance of Fish, made in 31. E. 3. c. 2. are to be attached and detained
in Prison as Rebels and Transgressors, till the King and HIS COUNSEL have
ordained of them, that right requires after the quality of their Trespass.
34. E. 3. c. 21. By assent of the King and of HIS COUNSEL, passage was granted
of Wools and other Merchandises of the Staple to Denizens, contrary to the
Ordinance of the Staple, that only Merchants Aliens, and no Merchants Denizens,
should transport them; which passage was confirmed by Parliament, and this Act.
35 E. 3. Upon doing us and OUR COUNSEL TO UNDERSTAND, etc. It was adjudged by
US AND OUR COUNSEL, that the Fishers of herrings at Great Yermouth should be
free to sell their herrings to all people that will come to the fair of
Yermouth, without disturbance of their host or any other, and accordingly
enacted by this Parliament. The printed Pardon granted by the King in
Parliament, An. 36. E. 3. was prayed by the Commons to be showed to the King
and to HIS COUNCIL, and to the other Lords, ere passed, according to the
tenor of the Commons Petition. 37 E. 3. c. 15. Clot^ makers and Drapers, shall
be constrained by any manner, way that best shall seem to the King and his
Counsel, that the Ordinance of new Apparel be in no point broken. 37 E. 3. c.
18. enacts, That those who make false suggestions to the King, be sent with the
said suggestions before the Chancellor, Treasurer and His Counsil, and that
they there find surety to pursue their suggestions and incurr the same pein
that the other should have had, if he were attainted, in case that his
suggestion be found evil. 38 E. 3. c. 11. enacts, That all Merchants Denizens
may pass into Gascoigne, and bring in Wines from thence without any
disturbance, or impeachment. Always provided to the King, that it may be
lawful to him, whenever it is advised to him or to His Counsil, to ordain of
this article in the manner as best shall seem to him for the profit of him and
his Commons: 38 E. 3. c, 3. Provisors and Offenders against this Act, who do
not present themselves before the King or His Counsil within two months after
that they are thereunto warned, etc. shall be punished according to the Statute
of 27 E. 3, and otherwise as to the King and His Counsil shall best seem to be
done, without any grace, pardon, or remission. And Cap. 5. if any person
maliciously or falsely make any pursuit against any person (as a Provisour) and
be thereof duly attainted, he shall be duly punished at the Ordinance of the
King and His Counsil, and nevertheless he shall make gree and amends to the
party grieved. The Statute of 42 Edward 3. c. 3. made upon a Petition of the
Commons in Parliament beginning thus. Plese a nostre Seigneur le Roy and son
BON COUNSEL pur droyt government de son peuple Ordeigner: Which complains that
diverse upon false and malicious suggestions have been taken and caused to come
before the Kings Counsil by writ and other command of the King upon grievous
pein against the Law.

To these I might superadd the Statutes of 1 R. 2. c. 4. 3 R. 2. c 3. 5 R. 2.
c. 2. Stat: 2. 6 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1. 8 R. 2. c. 4, 10 R. 2. c. 11. 11 R. 2. c.
2, 6, 7, 12. 12 R. 2. c. 1, 2, 10. 13 R. 2. c. 2. 18. Parl. 2. c. 3. 16 R. 2.
c. 5, 17 R. 2. c. 5, 6, 7. 1 H. 4. c. 6, 7, 9, 13. 4 H. 4. c. 4, 23, 30. 1 H.
5. c. 6. 2 H. 5. c. 8. Parl. 2. c. 2. 9 H. 5. c. 3, 5. 1 H. 6. c. 1, 5. 2 H. 6.
c. 6. 4 H. 6. c. 5. 8 H. 6. c. 13, 27. 10 H. 6. c. 3, 4. 14 H. 6. c. 2. 27 H.
6. c. 11. 31 H. 6. c. 1. ^3 H. 6. c 3. 14 E. 4. c. 1, 2. 17 E. 4. c. 1. 3 H. 7.
c. 1. and 4. 4 H. 7. c. 4. 11 H. 7. c. 7. 25. 19 H. 7. c. 1. 13, 18. By all
which and other Acts, as likewise by Mr. William Lambards Archaion, p. 118. to
216. compared with Cooks 4 Institutes, c. 5. and the records in My Plea for the
Lords, p. 273, 330, 331, 385, 390, 398, 399, 418, 419, 420, 505, 507. the
Authority, Power, Jurisdiction, use, proceedings of the Kings Counsil and
Justices both in and out of Parliaments, is fully explained, declared; to which
I shall subjoyn two memorable records for a Conclusion hereof.

Claus: See Claus. 38 11. 3. dors. 13.
37 H. 3. dors. 7. Rex Ricardo Comiti Cornubiae, salutem: Alias allocuti sumus
Episcopum Sarum, quod intenderet Consilio nostro, and praebuit se difficilem,
propter quod ad praesens nolumus habere alios Consi^^arios quam ordinavimus,
sicut scitis; sed cum aliqua difficultas emerserit super Iudicium reddendum,
vel aliis communibus negotiis ta^^ gentibus legem terrae, been placet Nobis
quod ad hoc intendat cum a Vobis interpellatus: and ad ipsum vocandum cum
hujusmodi necessitas evenerit, plenam Vobis concedimus potestatem. Test Rege
apud Portsmouth 7 die Augusti.

By this record it is evident, That the Kings Counsil in those days usually
gave judgment in cases of difficulty, and other common cases concerning the
Law of the realm, calling those who were learned in the Laws for Assistants
therein. Of which amongst many others we have a memorable president in the
Pleas of Mich. 53 and 54 H. 3. rot: 37. in the case of Assise of Mortdauncester
brought by Alexander King of Scots against John de Burgo, for the Manor of
Westlye with its appurtenances before G. de Preston, and other Justices in
Air, who determining nothing therein; thereupon King Hen: writ to the Justices
to proceed to a speedy determination, or else to adjourn it coram Nobis et
Consilio nostro in Quindena Michaelis; which they did. When the King of Scots
appearing by his Attorney, and John de Burgo in person before S. de Litlebyr
and Sociis suis Iusticiariis de Banco, Rich: de Middleton then the Kings
Chancellor, Thomas Basset, Robert Augulon, and Mr. Richard Stane^, they
resolved, that the writ of Mortdancester would not lie in that case, claiming
both as heirs to one Ancestor; but because the King of Scots title to it was as
heir to Margaret wife of Hubert de Burgo, they said to John de Burgo, that he
should show cause, Quare praedictus Rex Scotiae praedictu^ Manerium habere non
debeat: And so much touching the Counsils power and jurisdiction in former
times. Whose excessive power in later ages incroaching upon the Ordinary Courts
of Justice, Freeholds, Liberties, Properties of the Subjects to their great
oppression and vexation: thereupon in the late Parliament of 16 Caroli, Cap.
10. there was an excellent Act made, For Regulating the Privy Counsill, and for
taking away the Court commonly called the Starr-chamber, fit to be put in
vigorous execution against the transcendent infringers of it. By all which it
appears, that the Kings Justices, and Counsil in Parliaments (as well as out of
them) had formerly a principal hand in making Laws, Ordinances; and resolving
points, questions of Law, and other matters of moment.

I shall close up my Observations on this Section with these 4. memorable
Records, relating to the Kings Counsel, and the Nobles, in Scotland and
Ireland, as distinct from his Counsel and Parliamentary Assemblies in England.

Cl. 37. H. 3. d. 9. Rex mandat quod Abbas Westminster.-moretur in Anglin de Consilio
Reginae, propter recessum Regis ad parts Vasconiae. Et mandatum est eidem
Reginae quod ipsum ad hoc admittat, accepto ab eo prius corporali Sacramento,
quod officium illud fideliter intendat. T. ut supra.

Cl. 38. H. 3. dors. 13. Rex H. Cantuar. De Magnatibus Vocatis ad Consilium.
Archiepiscopo salutem. Cum quaedam ardua and urgentia negotia Statum nostrum
and Regni nostri tangentia, habeamus Vobis communicanda, quae sine consilio
Vestro and aliorum Magnatum nostrorum noluimus expediri, Vobis mandamus in fide
quia Nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes, quatinus sicut Nos and honorem
nostrum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis, quin a die Sancti Hillarii proximo
futuri in quindecim dies, sitis apud Westminster. coram Regina nostra and R. Com.
Cornub. fratre nostro, and aliis de Consilio nostro, super dictis negotiis
tractaturi, nec retardetis adventum vestrum quin sitis ad dictum diem
tempestive. Test A. Regina and R. Com. Cornub. apud Westminster. The cause of this
meeting is at large related in another Writ to this Archbishop, forecited. p.
3. 4.

Upon the same occasion the King issued this Writ to the King of Scots, entered
in the same Roll and dorse.

Claus. 38 H. 3. dors. 13.
Rex Regi Scotiae salutem. Quia ratio Vinculi and foederis inter nos contracti
requirit, quod Vobis and fidelibus Vestris ardua and urgentia negotia Statum
nostrum and terrae nostrae tangentia communicemus, and Vos Nobis vice versa;
Serenitatem vestram ex toto cord requirimus, quatinus in Quindena
Purificationis beatae Mariae prox. futur. apud Castrum puellarum de Edinburgh
personaliter interesse velitis; convocantes and inducentes Praelatos and
Magnates Regni Vestri, ut ad dictos diem and locum representent se coram Vobis
modis omnibus. Nullo enim modo expediret honori and proficuo nostro and vestro,
quin modo praedicto ad praedictos diem and locum compareatis; audituri per
nuncios nostros qui de Vasconia Vobis ibidem occurrent, praedicta negotia
arduissima and urgentissima, in quibus necesse est, quod vos and fideles vestri
consilium vestrum pariter and auxilium apponatis. T. ut supra, per Reginam and
Comitem.

It is observable, that the King by this Writ does not summon the King of Scots
and his Nobles to his Parliament, or Counsel of England, as members thereof,
to advise and assist him in this necessity, notwithstanding the strict
alliance and league between them, but to assemble together at Edinburgh in
their own country, by themselves alone, as the Officers and Nobles of Ireland
were then also required to meet in Ireland by themselves, by this ensuing Writ
of the same date with the former.

Claus. 3^ H. 3. dors. 13.
Rex Mauricio filio Giraldi salutem. Quia Rex Castle cum multitudine Exercitus
Christianorum and Saracenorum terram nostram Vasconiae in Quindena Pasche prox.
futur. ingressurus est hostiliter, non solum ad eandem terram destruendam and
occupandam, set and ad terras nostras Angliae and Hiberniae, per introitum
dictae terrae, si eam optineret, quod absit, invadendas aspirat, and Nos in
propria persona nostra cum eodem Rege bellum campestre aggredi proposuimus; de
universa fidelitate vestra, quam in agendis nostris fructuosam semper
invenimus, plenam gerentes fiduciam, vos requirimus, and in fide qua Nobis
tenemini affectuose rogamus, quatinus sic^t Nos and honorem nostrum and
indempnitatem corporis nostri diligitis, in hac necessitate nostra non
parcentes personae aut rebus vestris, nulla ratione seu occasion differatis
quin poteritis vos praeparare ad veniendum ad nos in Vasconiam, omnes amicos
vestros ad hoc idem inducentes. Ita quod sitis apud Waterford in Octabis Pasche
prox. futur. cum equis and armis and bona gente, prompti and parati statim
naves ascendere ad transfretandum ad Nos in terram praedictam. Scitote
indubitanter qui Nobis in hac part subvenerint, eorum amici erimus and
benevoli imperpetuum; and qui Nos in hac urgenti and inexuperabi^i necessi^ate
relinquerint, de eis alias minus confidere poterimus, and eis minus grati
erimus. Nunquam etiam futuris temporibus tanta Nobis imminebit necessitas
consilii and auxilii sicut in presenti negotio. Et ad regerendum vobis before
pericula nostrorum Inimicorum, Iohannem filium Galfridi, Justiciarium nostrum
Hiberniae, ad parts illas (misimus) cui apud Dublinum ad in stantem mediam
Quadragesimam; una cum aliis Magnatibus nostris Hiberniae quibus^id mandavimus
accedatis, audituri voluntatem nostram, and cum ip^o super praemissis, before
tractaturi. T. ut supra.

An Exact Alphabetical Table of all the Kings Counsil, whether Judges,
Sergeants at Law, Officers of State, Deans, Archdeacons, (...) other Clergy men
or Laymen, from 22 E. 1. till 23 E. 4. with the Years, Rolls, Dorses of each
King wherein they were summoned to Parliaments. By which you may find, who
were Chief Justices, Judges, Officers, in each Kings reign.
A
John Abell 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.)
14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Magister Richard de Abyngdon 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11.
20.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31. 16.) 7, (d. 2.) 8, (d. 29.) 9 (d. 22.) E. 2.
Magister Robert de Aileston, Archidiac: Berks, 6, (d. 9. 19.) Thesaurarius
Regis, 7 E. 3. Richard de Aldeburge 3, (d. 19.) 7, 8, E. 3. Peter Arderne, 23,
25, 27, 29, 31, 33, (twice) 38 H. 6. 1, 2, 6 E. 4. Magister Robert de Ashton,
1, 2, 3 (d. 13. 19.) R. 2. Henry Asty, and Astee, 49, 50 E. 3. 1, ^, 3, (d. 13.
19.) 4, 5, 6 R. 2. William de Ayremine 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 11. 27.) E. 2.
William Ayscogh 20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31 H. 6. William Ayshton 23, 25, 27,
28, 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6. 1, 2 E. 4.
B
William Babington 7 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 H. 6. John Bacun,
11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. Thomas Bacoun, 7 (p. 2. d. 3.) 8, (d. 18.)
E. 3. Magister Robert de Baldock, 11, (d. 11. 19.) Archidiac: Midd. 12, (d. 11.
29.) 13, (d* 13.) 14 (d. 23.) E. 2. John de Banquell 1, (d. 11.) E. 2. Magister
William de Bardelby 6 E. 2. (d. 16.) Robert de Bardelby 7, (d. 27.) E. 2.
Magister John Barnet 29, 31, (d. 2. 21) 50 E. 3. (Clericus) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5 H. 4. Robert de
Bartermine 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Mr. Thomas de Barton Cleric, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 R.
2. William Basset 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 12.) 23, 24, 25 E. 3. William Batford 23
(d. 9.) E. 1. John de Batesford 28, (d. 9. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d.
8. 11* 19.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 14) E. 2. Roger de Bukwell
20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23 (p. 1. d. 18) E. 3. Robert de Baynard 2, (d. 15. 29.
31.) 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Robert de Bealknap 49, 50 E. 3. 1. 2, 3, (d. 13. 29.) 4.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Magister Robert de Bedeswell 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Magister
Antony de Bek Dean of Lincoln 3 (d. 9.) E. 3. Ely de Bekingham 27, 28, 30, (d.
9.) 32 E. 1. Roger Beler 17, 19 E. 2. Robert de Bellofago 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2,
(d. 20.) E. 2. John de Benstede 2, 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31. 16.) 7, (d. 27.)
8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 29. 11.) 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. William de
Bereford 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8.
11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.)
9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2.
Richard de Bermingham 8, (d. 9.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14,
(d. 23.) E. 2. John de Berwike 23, (d. 9.) 27, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11, 19.) 2,
(d. 11. 14. 20.) F. 2. Robert de Betford 28 (d. 3.) E. 1. See Retford. Thomas
Billing 38, 49 H. 6* 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 E. 4. Nicholas de Bolingbroke 8, (d. 29.) 9
(d. 22.) E. 2. John de Bosco 23 (d. 11.) E. 1. John de Bowsser, Bousser 14, (d.
5.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) E. 3. Roger B^abazon 23, (d. 9.) 27,
28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, (d. 2.) 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, d. 11.
14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9 E. 2. Magister
Reginald de Brandon 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 2.
William Brenchesle 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 H. 4. John de
Breton, Bretton, 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Most likely the Author of
Britton. Adam de Brom 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. Magistro Andrew de Bruges 14, (d. 5.) 15
E. 2. Thomas Bryan 12 (Miles) 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Magister Thomas de
Buckton 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39 E. 3. William de Burgh 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Roger
de Burton 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Richard de Burton 14, (d. 5.) 15 E. 2. William de
Burn 8 (d. 2, 9.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14) E. 2. Richard Byngham 25, 27, 28, 29, 31,
33, 38, (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 9 E. 4.
C
MAgister John de Cadamo 28, (d. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12) 32, 34 E. 1. 1. (d. 8. 11.
19.) 2, (d. 20.) 11, 14 E. 2. Thomas de Cantebrig. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d.
11. 20.) E. 2. John de Cantebrig. 3, (d. 19.) 5, (d. 7. 25,) 6, (d. 36,) 7, 8,
E. 3. William de Carleton, Charleton, 23 (d. 3.) 27, 28, (d. 37.) 30, (d. 9.
11.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Magister Thomas de
Carleton, or Charleton, 14, (d. 5.) E. 2. 34, (d. 4.) 36 E. 3. Magister John de
Carleton, 29 (Dean of Wells) 31, (d. 2. 21.) 37, 38, 39 ^. 3. John de Carleton,
or Cherleton, Capitalis Iusticiarius Regis de Com: Banco, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, (d. 23. 30.) 18 R. 2. John Cassy, Capitalis Baro de Scaccario Regis, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, (d. 23. 30.) 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1 H. 4. John Catesby 49 H. 6.
9, 12, 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Hugh de Cave 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. John de
Cavendish, Capitalis Justiciarius Regis, 46, (d. 11.) 47, 49, 50 ^. 3. 1, 2,
(d. 13. 29.) 3, 4 R. 2. Magister Henry Chadesden, written also Chaddeston, 20,
21, 22, 24, 25, 28 E. 3. Mag: Nicholas de Chadesdon, and Chaddeston, 42, 43,
44, 47, 49, 50 E. 3. (Clericus) 1, 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3. 4, 5 R. 2. John de
Chaynnel 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12. (d. 11.
29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. William Cbeyne 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, H. 5. 1, 2.
(Capitalis Justiciarius Regis) 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10* 11, 13 H. 6. Richard Chikle,
or Chicke, 33, 38, (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 9, 12, 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4.
Richard de Clare Escheator beyond Trent: 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E.
2. Robert de Cliderhow 5, (d. 17.) E. 2. Walter Clopton 11, (Capitalis
Justiciarius Regis,) 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2 H. 4.
John de Cobeham, Cobham 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3, 17.) E. 1. Magister Thomas
de Cobham 5, (d. 17,) 6, (d. 31.) 7, d. 27.) E, 2. John de Cobham 14, (d. 23.)
E. 2. John de Cokeyn 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 7^ 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5
(d. 4.) H. 6. John Colepepper 5. 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1 (d. 9. 37) H. 5.
William de Colneye 1, (d 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d, 20.) E. 2. William de Cornish 28
(d. 17.) E. 1. John Cottesmore (unus Servientium Regis ad legem,) 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 9, 10, 11, 13 H. 6. Magister John de Crancombe, or Crancumbe, Archidiac:
Estrid. 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d, 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 10.) 32 E. 1. Hugh de
Cressingham 23 (d. 9.) E. 1. Adam de Crokedaykes 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.)
30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Ralph de Crophill Escheator citra Trentam 12, (d. 11.)
13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2.
D
MAgister Peter Damory 31, (d. 12.) E. 1, Robert Danby 28, 29, 31, 33, 38, 49
H. 6. 1, 2, 6 (d. 1.) E. 4. Robert Danver 29, 31, 33, 38 H. 6, 1, 2, 6, (d. 1.)
E. 4. Magister Peter de Dene, or Denny 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.
10.) 32, 34 E. 1. 8, (d. 29.) 10, (d. 5.) 11, (d. 8. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23. 33.)
15 E. 2. William de Dennie 3 (d. 19.) E. 3. John de Dennom, or Dennum 14, (d.
5.) 15, 16, 17, 19* 20 E. 2. 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) E. 3. William de Dennum 7, 8 E.
3. Magister John de Derby Decanus Litchf. 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d.
9. 12.) 32 E. 1. Edmond Deyncourt 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. John de
Donecaster 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 8, (d.
29.) 9, 11, d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2.
E
GEofry de Edenham 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 36.) E. 3. Henry de Enfeld 23 (d. 9.)
E. 1. Magister Rich: de Erymn 19 (d. 27.) E. 2. 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Geoffry de
Eton 17, 19, (d. 7.) 20 (d. 4) E. 2. Magister John de Everdon, and Everden, 1,
(d. 11.) 2, (d. 11.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8* (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d.
8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) 15, 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. William de Everdon, 7, 8, 9,
(Cancellarius Scaccar.) 15 E. 2. John de Eure 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) ^.
2. William Exon Episcopus; Thesaurarius Regis 17, (d. 27.) E. 2. summoned both
as a Bishop, and as one of the Counsil besides, in this Roll.
F
GVido Fairfax 49 H. 6. 6, 9, 12, (Miles) 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas de
Fencotes, 22, (d. 7.) 23, 24, 25 E. 3. Nicholas Fernibaud 1, (d. 19.) E. 2.
William de Finchenden, and Fincheden 39, 43, 44, 47, 49 E. 3. William Fishride
31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. John Fortescue 20, (Miles) 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38
H. 6. John de Foxle, or Foxley 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11.) 4, 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 16.
31) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15 E. 2.
Magister John Fraunceis 6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. John de Fresingfeld,
Tresingfeld 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 2. 27.) E. 2. Walter de Freskemy 14, (d. 5.)
15, 16, 17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) E. 3. William de
Fulburne 17, 19 E. 2. Roger de Fulthorpe 49, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10 R. 2. Thomas Fulthorp 13, 18, 20, 23, (Miles) 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 H.
6.
G
WIlliam Goscoigne 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, (Capitalis Justiciarius Regis) 3, 5,
7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1 H. 5. Walter de Gloucester 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d.
11. 20.) 4 E. 2. Richard de Gloucester 20 E. 2. 1, (d 2,) 2, (d. 3.) E. 3.
William Goderede 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 20, 23 H. 6. William de Goldington 5,
(d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2.
Magister Peter de Granvill 2, (d. 14.) E. 2. Henry de Green (the Kings Sergeant
at Law, afterward a Judge) 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 22.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31,
(d. 2. 31.) 34, 37, 38, 39 E. 3. Magister William de Grenfeld 23, (d. 1.) 27,
(Dean of Chichester) 28, (d. 3.) 31, (d. 12.) E. 1. Henry de Guldeford,
Gildeford, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 3.) E. 2.
H
DAvid de Hannemere 7, 8, 10 R. 2. William Hankford 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20,
21^ 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, (Capitalis Justiciarius
Regis) 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2 H. 6. Magister Michael de Harcla, 14, (d.
5.) 15, 16 E. 2. William Havely 23 (d. 3.) R. 2. 1, ^ H. 4. John de Havering,
Justiciarius Northwalliae, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. Magist: Rich. de Haverings 8,
(d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. ^. William Haward 23, (d. 7.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 13)
30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19) E. 2. Roger de Hegham 28, (d. 3. 17.)
30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Ralph de Hengham 28,
(d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 20.) E. 2. Adam
de Herewinton 14, (d. 5.) 15, E. 2, 3, (d. 19. 23.) 10 E. 3. William de Herle
6, (d. 16.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17,
19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d, 15. 23. 33) 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 19. 23. 43.)
5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40)
12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E 3. William de Herleston 20 (d. 4.) E. 2.
Geoffry de Hertelpole 1, (d. 8. 15.) 2, (d. 20.) 6, (d. 16.) 14, (d. 5.) 15,
16, 17, 19 E. 2. Robert de Hertford 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. Robert Hill 11, 12, 14 H.
4. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1 H. 6. Magister John de Hildersle, or Hildesle
14, (d. 5.) 15 E. 2. (Cancellarius Scaccarii) 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11.
40.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E. 3. Roger Hillary 15, 18, 20, 21,
22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 28, 29 E. 3. John Hody 18, (Miles, and Capitalis
Justiciarius Regis) 20 (d. 27.) H. 6. John Holt 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Roger Horton 4,
5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1 H. 6. Robert Hoter 3 (d. 15.) H. 5. John de Hotham, Hothnm
6, (d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. William Huddessend
22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Hugh Hulls, Herle, Hales 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3,
5, 7, 8, 11, 12 H. 4. 1, 2, H. 5. John Hulls 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, (one of the
Kings Sergeants at Law) 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11 H. 6. William
Hussce 12, (Miles) 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. William Hynderston 33 (d. 36.) H.
6.
I
MAgister Henry de Iddesworth 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 16.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7.
25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, ^, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 41.) 15, 17 E.
3. William Ienny 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. William Inge, or Judge 27, 28, (d. 3.)
29, 30, (d. 3. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. ^. 11. 14. 20.) 5,
(d. 17.) 6, (d. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16 E. 2. John
Inge, or Judge 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 19. 30.) 7, 8, 9, 11 (d. 11.) 12, 13, (d.
11. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33) E. ^. Thomas de Ingleby 34, (d. 4.) 35, 37, 38, 39,
42, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50 E. 3. 1. (Breve nou fuit signatum) 2 R. 2. John de
Insula 23 (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8.
19.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 5, (^. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) E. 2. Magister Simon de Islep 17, 20, 21, 22, (d.
32.) E. 3. John Iuyn 3, 4, 5, 7, 9. 10, 11, 13, (Capitalis Justiciarius Regis)
18 (d. 3^.) H. 6.
K
RIchard de Kelleshull 20, 21, 22. (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25 E. 3. Magister
William de Kilkeny, or Kilkenny 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.)
32 E. 1. John de Kirkeby 1, (d. 11.) E. 2. Roger de Kirketon 47, (d. 13.) 49
(d. 6.) E. 3. Magister William de Knapton 2, (d. 14.) E. 2. Gilbert de Knouill
1,, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. John Knyvet 31, (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.)
36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43, 44 E. 3. (Chivaler) 1, 2, (d. 13. 29.) 3, 4 R. 2.
L
MAgister John de Lacy 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. John de Lancaster
8, (d. 29.) E. 2. William Layton 49 (d. 6.) H. 6. Magister John de Leech 22,
(d. 7,) 23, 25, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Peter de Leicestr. 23, (d. 9.)
28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 13.) ^. 1. Hugh de Leminster, Thesaurarius de Carnarvan 28
(d. 3. 17.) E. 1. John de Lichegreins 25, (d. 25.) E. 1. Thomas Littleton 23,
38, 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 (d. 41) E. 4. Thomas de Lodelowe 39, 42, 43, 44 E.
3, William Lodington 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 H. 5. John de Lockton 10 (d. 42.) R. 2.
William Lockton 6, 9, 12 R. 2. Magister John Lovell, Luvel, de Snotescombe 23,
(d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 6, (d. 16.) E. 2. Hugh de
Louthre 2, (d. 19.) E. 2. Thomas de Louthre 5, (d. 25.) E. 3. Thomas de Louche
5, (d. 7.) E. 3. Magister Thomas de Lugore, Lugorre 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d.
9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2. Adam de
Lymberge 20 (d. 4.) E. 2.
L
RObert de Madingle, Maddingle 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Robert de
Malberthorpe (Babthorp) 4, ^d. 5.) 15^ 16, 17, 19, 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. 1, (d, 3.
16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 3, (d. 19.) E. 3. Peter Malorre 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28,
(d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) E. 2. Stephen de
Malo-la^u 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27) E. 2. John Markham 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8 H. 4. John Markam 23, 25, 27,
28, 29, 31. 33, 38 H. 6, 1, 2, 6 E. 4. Magister Philip Martell 28, (d. 3. 17.)
30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. John Martyn 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13 H.
6. Roger de Meres, Merkes, 50 (d. 6.) E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4 R. 2. John de
Merkingfeld 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27) E. 2. John de Metingham 23
(d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) E. 1. Adam de Middleton 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. Magister
Gilbert de Middleton 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 14, (d. 5.) 15,
17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) (Archidiaconus Northampton) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.)
3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 19. 41.) E. 3. Magister Thomas de Middleton 6, (d. 17.) E.
2. Magister Adam de Mirymouth, Merymouth 8, 9. 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.)
12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33) 15 E. 3. John de Mitford, Mutford 1, (d. 8.
19.) 2, (d. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 20.) 9, 11,
(d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. ^, (d. 3. 16.) 3 E. 3.
Magister Jordan Morant, Menaunt 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. William
de Mortuo-mari 23, (d. 9.) 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 8, 11.
19 2, (d. 20.) 8 (d. 29.) 9 E. 2. Henry de Motelowe 31, (d. 2. 21. E. 3. John
de Moubray (the Kings Sergeant at Law) 28, 29, 30, 31. (d. 2. 21.) 34, (d. 4.)
36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 44 E. 3. Walter Moyle 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 38 (
Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6 E. 4.
N
MAgister John de Nassington 2, (d. 14.) Senior. 5, d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7,
(d. 27.) Canonicus Ebor. 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) E. 2. John
Nedeham 38, (Miles) 49 H. 6. 1, 2, 6, 9, 12 E. 4. Richard Neel 49 H. 6. 9, 12,
22 (d. 6.) and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Magister H. de Newarkes Decanus Ebor. 23, (d.
9.) ^. 1. Richard Newton 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, (Miles) 20, 23, 25 H. 6. Magister
Robert de Norton 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. Walter de Norwich 5, (d. 17) 6, (d. 16. 31.)
7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.)
15 16, 17, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 33.) E. 3. Robert de
Nottingham 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. William Nottingham 31, 33, 38 H. 6. William de
Notton (Serviens Regis ad legem) 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29,
31, (d. 2. 21) E. 3. Richard Notton, written often Norton 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1,
(Capitalis Justiciarius Regis de Com. Banco) 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 H. 5.
O
John de Ockam (Cobeham) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15 E. 2. Magister John
de Offord, Vfford 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.)
(Serviens Regis) 11, (d. 11. 40.) 15 E. 3. William de Ormesby 23, (d. 9.) 28,
(d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 14. 20.) 4, 5,
(d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 8, (d. 27) 9, 10, (d. 14.) E. 2. Adam de Osgoteby 6,
(d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) E. 2.
P
MAgister Roger Page, Clericus 13, 14, 15 R. 2. Robert Parnings 7, 8, 9, 10,
(d. 1. 5.) Serviens Regis 10, 11, 12, 14, (d. 23. 33.) Thesaurarius Regis 15 E.
3. Edmund de Passeleiwe 14, (d. 5.) 15, 16, 17, 20, E. 2. William Paston 5, 7,
9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 20 H. 6. John de Sancto Paulo 20, 21, 22, (d. 32.) E. 3.
Henry Percehay 2, 3 R. 2. Richard de Pere 13 E. 2. 6 E. 3. Magister Robert de
Pickering 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11, 19.) 2, (d.
11. 20.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, d. 16. 31.) (Decanus Ebor.) 12, (d. 11. 29) 13, 14, (d.
5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. Magister William Pickering 28, (d. 3.)
Archidiaconus Nottingham, ^0, (d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 2. Richard Pigot 49 H. 6.
9, 12, 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E. 4. Thomas Pinchebecke (Capitalis Baro Scac. Regis)
11, 12 R. 2. Magister Richard de Plescy 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Robert de
Plesington Capitalis Baro de Scaccar. Regis, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Magister
Richard de Plumsted, writ Plumstoke. 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12. 22.) 34 E. 1.
8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Ralph Pole 33, 38 H. 6. John Portington
20, 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31 H. 6. John Preston 3, ^4, 5, 7, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, H. 6. John Prysot 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 (Miles) 38 H. 6.
R.
MAgister R. Decanus Sancti Pauli London 28, (d. 9. 30, (d. 32.) E. 1. 1, (d.
8. 11. 19) E. 2. Magister John de Radeswell 20 (d. 4.) E. 2. Magister Richard
de Radeswell Archidiac. Cestr. 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1.
Magister Robert de Radeswell, Redeswell 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. 2, (d. 14.) E. 2.
John Randolfe 1, (d. 8. 9.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Robert de Ratford, or Retford 23,
(d. 6.) 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9. 12.) 32 E. 1. 1, (d. 4. 11. 19.) 2, (d. ^. 11.
14. 20.) 4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16.) 8, ^d. 29.) 9, (d. 11, 12.) 11. ^d. 8. 14.)
E. 2. See Batford. Robert de Reinford 6, (d. 31.) E. 2. Richard de Rodeway 6,
(d. 16.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 9.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) Eschaetor citra Trentam 14,
(d. 5.) 15 E. 2. Gilbert de Roubury, Rubery 23, (d. 9.) 27, 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 9. 12.) 32, 34 E. 1. 1, (d. 8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11, 14. 28.) 4, 5, (d. 17.)
6, (16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29^) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 14, (d. 23.) E. 2. William
Rykill 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 H. 4.
S
RObert de Sadington, Capitalis Baro Scac. Regis, 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d.
23, 33.) 15, 17, 21, 22 (d. 32.) 23 E. 3. Gerard de Salvayne Eschaetor ultra
Trentam 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11.) E, 2. Magister Boniface de Saluciis 1, (d. 11.)
2, (d. 11. 14) E. 2. Magister Thomas Sampson 7, 8, 9, 10. (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d.
11. 15. 40.) 12, 13, (d. 1, 28.) 17, 18 E. 3. John de Sandale 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2,
(11, 14, 20.) 5, (d. 17.) E. 2. Robert de Sapy Eschaetor citra Trentam, 12, (d.
29,) E. 2, Magister William de Sardene Offic: Cantuar. 28, (d. 3.) 30, (d. 9.
12.) E. 1, Roger Savage, Sauvage 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (11.) E. 2. William Scot 10,
(d. 1, 5.) Serviens Regis 15, 18, 20 E. 3, Roger le Scoter 4, (d. 2.) E. 2.
William Screne 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3 H. 5. Geoffry le Scroope 12, (d. 11.
29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 E. 2. 1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23.
31.) 3, (d. 9.) 4, (d. 19, 23. 41.) Capitalis Justiciarius 5, (d. 7. 25.) 6,
(d. 9. 19. 36.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1, 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40.) 14, (d. 23. 33.)
E. 3. Henry le Scroope 1, (d. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 14.) 4, 5, (d. 17,) 6, (d. 16.)
7, (d. 27) 8, (d. 7. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5.
23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. 3, (d. 19. 23. 41.) 4, (d. 19. 23. 31) 5, (d. 7. 25.)
6, (d. 36.) 8, 9 E. 3. John de Seton Serviens Regis 21, 22, (d. 7. 22,) 23, 24,
25, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Magister John de Silveston, Selveston 27, 28,
(d. 17.) E. 1. Thomas de Sinterton 1, (d. 19.) E. 2. John de Shardelowe 7, 8, 9
E. 3. William de Shareshull 6; (d. 9. 19.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 19.) 11, (d. 11.
15. 40) 13, (d. 4. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 18, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24,
25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2, 21.) 34, (d. 4.) E. 3. John de Shoredike, Shordich
8, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E.
3. William de Skipwith Serviens Regis 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21) 34, (d. 4.) 36,
37, 38, 50 E. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 R. 2. Osbert de Spaldington 23
(d. 9.) E. 1. Henry Spigurnell 28 (d. 3. 17.) 30, (d. 12.) 32, 34 E, 1. 1, (d.
8. 11. 19.) 2, (d. 11. 42. 26.) 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 11. 16.) 8, (d. 27.) 9, 11.
(d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. Richard
de Stanford 13 (d. 13.) E. 2. Henry de Stanton 1, (d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11. 20.)
4, 5, (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d. 29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12,
(d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, 17, 20 (d. 4.) E. 2, (d. 16.) E. 3.
Gilbert de Stapleton Escheator citra Trent^ 14, (d. 4.) E. 2 John de Stoner,
Stonore, Stonnore, 6, (d. 16.) 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 1. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5.
23.) 15, 16, 17, 19 E. 2. 3, (d. 15. 23. 31.) 4, (d. 19. 23. 41.) 5, (d. 7.
25.) 6, (d. 9. 19. 36) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 15. 40.) 12, 13, (d.
1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26 E.
3. John de Stonford Sonford 13, (d. 1. 28) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 15, (d. 26.) 21,
22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Henry Stotehill
49 (d. 6.) H. 6. 1, 2, 6, Miles 9 E. 4. James Strangeways 4, 5, 7, 8, (Unus
Servientium Regis ad legem) 9 H. 5* 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11 H. 6. Mr John de
Stratford 12, (d. 11.) 13, 14, (d. 5. 23) 15 E. 2. Magister Robert de Stratford
Archidiaconus Cantuar. Cancellarius de Scaccario 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11,
(d. 11. 15. 40.) E. 3. Magister John Strecche Decanus Lincoln 39, (d^ 2.) E. 3.
Herincus de Sutton 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2, (d. 20.) E. 2. Robert de Swillington 23,
(d. 9.) E. 1. Richard de Sydenham 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, ^8 R. 2.
T
GIlbert de Thornton 23, (d. 9.) E. 1. William de Thorpe 15, 20, 21, 22, (d. 7.
32.) 23. 31, (d. 2. 21.) E. 3. Magister Walter de Thorpe 2, (d. 14.) 5^ (d. ^.)
11, (d. 8. 14) E. 2. Robert de Thorpe Serviens Regis 20. 21, 22, (d. 7. 22.)
23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31, (d. 2. 21.) 33, 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 43,
44 E. 3. William Thurning 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, Capita^^lis Justiciarius
de Com. Banco 21, 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1 H. 5. William de
Toudeby, Tontheby 12, (d. 11. 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5, 23.) 15, 16, 17. 19, 20 E. 2.
1, (d. 3. 16.) 2, (d. 15. 23. 31.) E. 3. Roger Townsend 22 and 23 (d. 10.) E.
4. John Traverse 3, (d. 19.) 5, (d. 25.) E. 3. Thomas Tremoyle 22 and 23 (d.
10.) E. 4. Robert Tresylian 2, 3, 4, Capit: Justiciarius Regis 5, 6, 8, 9, 10
R. 2. John de Trevaignon 7 (p. 2. d. 3.) E. 3. John de Trewosa 8, 10, (d. 1.
5.) E. 3. Simon de Trewechosa 11, (d. 11. 40.) 12 E. 3. Lambert de Trikenham 1,
(d. 8. 11.) 2, (d. 11, 20.) 4, 5. (d. 17.) 6, (d. 16. 31.) 7, (d. 27.) 8, (d.
29.) 9, 11, (d. 8. 19.) 12, (d. 11, 29.) 13, 14, (d. 5, 21.) 15, 16 E. 2.
Thomas Tyldeslye 5, 7, 8, 11 H. 4. Magister William Tingewykes 39 (d. 2.) E. 3.
Robert Tyrwhite 23 R. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14 H. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7,
8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 5 H. 6.
V
John Vampage 23, 25, 27, 28, 29 H. 6. William la Vavassor 1, (d. 8. 19.) 2,
(d. 20.) E. 2. Magister Gerard de Vippeins Archidiac. Richmond. 28, (d. 17.) E.
3.
W
John Wadham 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21 R. 2. Humfry de Waledon 20 E.
2. 1, (p. 2. d. 16.) E. 3. Magister John Walewayne 11, (d. 8. 14.) 12, (d. 11.)
Thesaurarius Regis (d. 29.) 13, 24, (d. 5,) E. 2. Magister John de Waltham 39
E. 3. 7, 8, R. 2. Ingelard de Warle 11, (d. 8. 14.) E. 2. Nicholas de War 1,
(d. 8. 19.) 2. (d. 20.) E. 2. Magister Henry la War 12, 14 H. 4. 1 H. 5.
William Westbury 5, 7, 9, 10, 13. 18, 20, 23 H. 6. John de Westcote 6, (d. 17.)
E. 2. William de Weston 17, 19, E. 2. 2, (d. 23. 31.) E. 3. Philip de
Willoughby Decan. Lincoln. 23, (d. 9.) Cancel. Scac. Regis 28, (d. 3. 17.) 30,
(d. 9, 10.) 32 E. 1. Richard de Willoughby, Willughby 3, (d. 19.) 4, (d. 19.
41.) 5. (d. 7. 25.) 6, (d. 9, 10, 30.) 7, 8, 9, 10, (d. 1. 5.) 11, (d. 11. 40.)
12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 20, 22, (d. 7. 32.) 23, 24, 25, 26, 31,
(d. 2. 21) E. 3. Robert de Wodehouse 14, (d. 5. 23.) 15, 16, E. 2. (Archidiac,
Richmond) 3, (d. 19.) (Thesaurarius Regis) 4, (d. 19. 41.) 5, (d. 7. 25.) 12,
13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) 16, 17 E. 3. William de Wychyngham 42, 43, 44,
47, 49, 50 E. 3. 1, 2 R. 2. Magister Gerrard de Wyspanes Archidiac, Richmond
2^, (d. 9.) 28 E. 1.
X
WIlliam Yelverton 23, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31. 33, 38 (Miles) 49 H. 6, 1, 2, 6, 9
E. 4. Magister Thomas Young 34, (d. 4.) 36, 37. Offic. Cur. Cancellar. 39, 42,
43, 44, 47, 49 E. 3. Thomas Young 49 (d. 6.) ^. 6. 6, 9 E. 4.
Z
MAgister William de la Zousche Decanus Ecclesiae beatae Mariae Ebor.
Thesaurarius Regis 11, (d. 11.) 12, 13, (d. 1. 28.) 14, (d. 23. 33.) E. 3.
Where the Dorses are for brevity omitted in any years of this or any the
precedent Tables after a particular name you may readily find them in the
precedent Sections, in the writs to the Prelates, Temporal Lords and Counsil,
which are all entered together in the self-same Rolls, and Dorses, when they all
occurr.

General useful Observations on and from the precedent Writs of Summons,
mentioned in the premised Sections; and the 7. Sections next ensuing in the
second part following them.
HAving thus presented you with 3* distinct Sections or Squadrons of Writs of
Summons, to our Parliaments, Great Councils and Convocations, issued to
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical Lords; the P.
of Wales, Dukes, Earls, Barons Temporal Lords, and great men of the Realm, the
Kings Counsil, Justices, with some useful particular Observations on them in
each Section, I shall for a close of this first part of my brief Register,
Calendar, and Survey of them, superadd some general necessary Observations on,
and Conclusions from them, and the 7. next following Sections (which I intended
to have annexed to this first part of my Register, but now shall reserve for
the second,) for the further information of the Readers, the benefit of
Posterity, and rectifying some Oversights in sundry printed trivial Discourses
of our English Parliaments.

First, From the manifold rare, delightful Varieties, Forms, Diversities, and
distinct kinds of Writs of Sommons, transcribed out of the Clause Rolls, in a
Chronological method; Va^ied from time to time by our Kings, their Chancellors,
Counselors, and Officers, who formed them, as there was occasion, without the
privity or direction of their Parliaments, before the Statutes of 7. H. 4. c.
15. 6. H. 6. c. 4. 8. H. 6. c. 7. 23. H. 6. c. 11. 15. which ordered some new
clauses to be inserted only into the Writs for Election of Knights of Shires,
(and none else) for preventing and rectifying abuses in such elections, but
prescribed no set unalterable future form^, for those or any other Writs of
Sommons, leaving the King and his Counsil at Free Liberty as before, to vary
and alter them as they saw just cause; The Judicious Readers may clearly
discern, what little credit is to be given to Reverend Sir Edward Cooks
ob^ervation, in his slight 4. Institutes p. 10.
discourse, Touching the Writs of Sommons of Parliament, which are to be found
in the close Rolls from time to time; Which begins thus. And it is to be
Observed, that the substance of the Writs, ought to continue in their Original
Essence, without any Alteration or Addition, unless it be by Act of
Parliament. For if Bractan. l. 5. f. 413. Britton. 122. 227. Fleta. l. 2. c. 12
West. 2. c. 23. 1. part of the ^nsti^. Sect. 101 f. 73. b.
Original Writs at the Common Law can receive no Alteration or Addition, but
by Act of Parliament, A multo Fortiori, The Writs of the Sommons of the Highest
Court of Parliament, can receive no Alteration or Addition but by Act of
Parliament, etc. But had this great Oracle of the Law, diligently considered
the manifold varieties of the Writs of Sommons to Parliaments, With their
several Alteraions and Additions, made from time to time upon emergent
occasions, without any Act or Order of Parliament; Or, had he remembered old
Lib. 5. f. 413.
Bractons, and his own distinction of these two different sorts of Original
Writs, in the places he refers us to in his margin, viz. Brevia Originalia,
quaedam sunt formata sub suis casibus, and de cursu, and De communi Concilio
totius Regni concessa et Approbata; quae quadem Nullatenus mutari poterint,
absque consensu et voluntate ^orum: and quaedam Magistralia, et saepe variantur
secundum varietatem casuum, factorum et quaerelarum, and that by the Masters
and Clarks of the Chancery themselves, according to the variety of every Man's
case; as Instis. f. ^3. b.
himself, and the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 23. resolve us, without any Act, or
common consent in Parliament, And then judiciously pondered, that Writs of
Sommons to Parliaments, are all of this latter kind, only Migistrali^, and
frequently varied according to the several varieties of the causes, Public
grievances Dangers, Emergences, Businesses, Complaints, occasio^ing their
Sommoning, expressed usually in these Writs different Prologues; he would
certainly never have made such a strange erroneous Observation as this upon
these Writs, contradicted by so many Presidents on record in all former ages;
nor alleged such a pitiful mistaken Argument a multo Fortiori, and such
Authorities to justify it; Which diametrically contradict both his reason and
observation, the Writs of Sommons being all of them Magistralia, not Formata
sub suis Casibus, (as the miserably mistook them to be.) Therefore if such
Magistral Writs are of^ ^imes varied, according to the variety of cases, facts
and complaints in particular men's cases, by the Clerks of Chancery, and
Cursitors themselves, without Act of Parliament, a multo fortiori, may Writs of
Sommons to Parliaments of the self same kind, which concern the great weighty
affairs of the King, Kingdom and Church of England, be varied, altered by the
King himself, with the Advice of his Great Officers, Judges, Council, according
to the variety of emergent occasions, requiring Parliaments to be called,
without any Act or consent of Parliament authorizing it, notwithstanding Sir
Edwards groundless Assertion to the contrary, though prefaced with and it is
to be observed; as I conceive it will henceforth be for a great mistake,
although formerly believed as an undoubted Truth, upon his Ipse dixit; whose
venerable reputation has canonized many of his Apochryphal conceits, which
have dangerously seduced most Students and Professors of the Law, with others
who peruse his Institutes; for whose better Information, and Vindication of the
truth alone, I have upon all just occasions both detected and corrected his
formerly undiscerned Errors; and this here insisted on, I hope without just
offense to any of his surviving Friends or Progeny; if they consider the duty
and protestation of every ingenuous Christian, and Chronographer thus briefly
expressed by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 8. See the 2. and 3. part of my Historical
Collection and Vindication. My Abridgement of the ancient Councils and
Parliaments of Eng.
We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

Secondly, It is observable, that the word Parliamentum, is but once used or
mentioned in any Writ of Sommons, Act, Statute, Charter, Patent, or other
Record that I have yet seen, either before or during the Reigns of King John or
Henry the 3d. but only the word Concilium, Commune Concilium, Colloquium,
Tractatum; placitum magnum, etc. which frequently occur, and are always used
in them to express that Assembly of the States by, which in after times, and
now is usually called Parliamentum. The very first mention, and use of this
word, in any Writ or Record I have perused, is in the Writ of Sommons to the
Cinqueports, Cl. 49. H. 3. d. 11. so^moning the^ ad instans Parliamentum
nostrum, The next is in the Writ of Prorogation of the Parliament. Cl. 3. E. 1.
20. in dor. where it is twice thus mentioned in the Writ; Generale Parliamentum
nostrum, eodem Parliamento, and once in the Margin, Do veniendo ad
Parliamentum; And this Writ assures us that it was used in the Original Writs
of Sommons to this Parliament, though not extant, compared with the printed
Prologue to the Acts therein established. The Writs of Sommons from 3. to 23. E.
1. being not extant in the Rolls; the next use of this word I find, is in the
Writ^ of Sommons and Prorogation, in Clau^. 23. E. 1. dorse 9. Cl. 28. E. 1. d.
3. 17. Cl. 30. E. 1d. 7. 9. Cl. 32. E. 1. d. 1. Cl. 33. E. 1. d. 9. 10. 21.
Claus. 34. E. 1. d. 2. and Claus. 35. E. 1. d. 13. In all which Writs under
King Edward the first, not only. Colloquium and Tractatum, but also the word
Parliamentum is mentioned, and also thus expressed in the Margin of the Rolls.
De Parliamento tenendo, Deveniendo ad Parliamentum, De Parliamento Prorogando.
And so is it likewise in the Writs de expensis Militum qui venerunt ad
Parliamentum Regis, clau. 28. E. 1. dors. 12. cl. 29. E. 1. d. 17. cl. 33. E.
1. d. 15. cl. 34. E. E. 1. d. 11. and cl. 35. E. 1. d. 14. In the Writs and
Rolls of Sommons, and De expensis Militum and Burgensium, under Edward the 2d.
it is commonly used and mentioned, as the premises evidence; Yet I find
Parliamentum totally omitted again in sundry other Writs of Sommons and
Prorogations, and the words Colloquium, Tractatum, and Commune Consilium, only
made use of in them; as in cl. 23. E. 1. d. 2. 4. cl. 24. E. 1. d. 7. cl. 25.
E. 1. d. 25. cl. 27. E. 1. d. 9. 16. 28. cl. 28. E. 1. d. 3. cl. 1. E. 2. d.
11. 19. cl. 2. E. 2. d. 11. 13. 14. 20. cl. 9. E. 2. d. 17. and in some other
succeeding Rolls; yet in the Margin over against these Writs, I find in diverse
of these Rolls, De Parliamento tenendo; De veniendo ad Parliamentum, Summonitio
and Prorogatio Parliamenti, written, though the words Parliamentum, be not
extant in the Writs themselves.

The first use of the word Parliamentum, in any Act or Statute in my
Observation, is in the Prologu^ to the Statutes of Westminster, 1. An. 3. E. 1.
which it styles, Son Primer Parliament general apres Son coronement. The next
usage of it is in 7. E. 1. Rastal Armor 1. Wherein it is twice mentioned:
After which I find it used in the Prologue of Westminster, 2. 13. E. 1. and c.
24. In the Statute of Merchants, 13. E. 1. The Statutes De Quo warranto; De
terris vendendis and emendis, 18. E. 1. The Statute of Waste for Heirs, end of
Defending Rights, 20. E. 1. The Statutes De non ponendis in Assisis, and De
Malefactoribus i^ parcis, 21. E. 1. The Statute of Persons appealed, 28. E. 1.
And the Prologue to Articuli super cartas the same year: The Statutes De
Escheatoribus, 29. E. 1. The New Statutes of Quo warranto, 30. E. 1. Ordinatio
Forestae, 33. E. 1. De asportatis Religiosorum, c. 1. In most succeeding
Prologues to all Statutes and diverse Acts, ever since King Edward the 1. it is
commonly and frequently used; (as also in our Matthew. Westminster, 2. p. 363,
264, 387, 321, 405, 411, 415, 438, 439, 463, 464, col. 1965, 1977.
Historians in that age) In the Prologue to Articuli Cleri, An. 9. E. 2. there
is this observable Recital. Sciatis quod cum Dubum temporibus Progenitorum
nostrorum Regum Angliae, in diver sis Parliamentis suis, and similiter postquam
Regni gubernacula suscipimus, In Parliamentis nostris, etc. Ac nuper in
Parliamento nostro apud Lincoln, etc. Attributing this title of Parliamentum,
not only to the Parliament^ held under Edward the 2d. and first, but to General
Councils of State, and Conferences held by our Kings, Lords, and great Men, in
the Reigns of their Progenitors, who were totally unacquainted with this Word,
and never used it for ought I can yet discover. It is agreed by all who have
written of the Cooks 1. Instit. p. 109, 110, 4. Instit, c. 1.
Antiquity, or use of our English Parliaments, that the word Parliamentum, is
no proper Latin word, Cromtons Jurisdiction of Courts, Chapter 1. The Antiquity of
the Parliaments of England, by Justice Dodridge and others, p. 43. 65, 66.
for that we call a Parliament, but Colloquium, Tractatus, and commune
Concilium Regni nostri, still retained in the Writs of Sommon^, as well since
the use of the word Parliamentum grew common, as before in was inserted into
such Writs: That it is originally a mere French Word, first introduced amongst
us by the Norman Monks, or being taken from the French, who styled the public
conventions of their Kings and Princes a Parliament, in their own Language, and
coined this new Latin word Parliament^m out of it. But when, and by whom it was
first introduced and used in England, is a great dispute amongst truly
judicious Antiquaries. Many there are who conceive it to be used in the S^xons
time, and The Antiquity of the Parliament of England, p. 78, 79. writes, that
this word was first brought into this Realm by the French Monks and first used
by the Statists in the time of H. 1. and that Abbot Ingulphus, first used it,
who dyed in the year 1109.
long before the reign of King Henry the 3d, because many Latin and English
Historians and Chronologers, who (have written since the Reign of King Henry
the 3d.) do sometimes give the title of Parliamentum, and Parliament, to our
great Councils and Assemblies of the King, and of the spiritual and temporal
Lords in those ancient times, in their relations of them: But this questionless
is a gross mistake; since not one of all their great Councils in any of their
Titles, Prologues, Laws, Cannons, Edicts, Acts, recorded by Brompton, Lambard,
Sir Henry Spelman, Whe^lock, Fox, and others; nor any of our Historians living
and writing in those times, before the later end of King Henry the 3d. (as
Gildas, Beda, A^helwerdus, Asser Menevensis, Ingulphus, Willielmus, Malmes
buriensis, Eadmerus, Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon Dun^lmensis, Aelredus
Abbas, Henry de Huntindon, Sylvester Gyraldhes, Gulielmus Neubrigeusis, Simeon
and Richardus Hagustaldensis, Radulphus de Diceto, Roger VVendover, Thomas
Spotte, Gervasius Doroberniensis, and Tilburiensis, Willielmus Stephanides,
Gualterus Mapes, Gualterus Coventriensis, Richardus Heliensis, Thomas Stubs,
and Petrus Hen^am) nor yet Glanvill, Bracton, Andrew Horn, and other Lawyers
flourishing under H. the 2. and 3. do once use, or apply this word
Parliamentum, to any one Grand parliamentary Council, which they always call
by other Names, for ought I can yet discover upon my best search and inquiry.

The very first of all our Writers or Historians in my Observation, who made
use of this word, and applied it to the Common Councils of our Realm, is
Matthew Paris See Balaeus. Script. Brit. cens. 4. c. 26. p 315, 316.
flourishing about the midsts, and dying before the end of King Henry the 3d.
Anno. 1259. the 43. of his Reign. He in his Historia Angliae, from the
beginning of the Conquerors Reign, till the year 1246. (the 30th. of Henry the
3d.) always made use of the words Concilium, Concilium magnum, Colloquium
Tractatus, and the like, to express all Parliamentary Great Councils, and
State Assemblies held in England; near the space of 200. years before he Writ,
and never of Parliamentum. But in Anno gratiae, 1246. and 1247. and in no other
years before or after, he uses this word five or six times only, in these
ensuing passages Edit. Tigrui. 1589. p. 674. 677. 686. 687.
Anno 1246. Convenit ad Parliamentum Generalissimum totius Regni Angliae
totalis Nobilitas Londini. etc, Over against which the Publisher, not he, adds
in the Margin Parliamentum habitum Londini, After which he subjoynes
Convenientibus igitur ad Parliamentum m^moratum totius Regni Magnatibus: Then
follows, Et postea in Anglia in Parliamento Regis ubi congregata fuerat totius
Regni tam Cleri quam Militiae Generalis Vniversitas, deliberatum, etc. Yet in
the very next page, he returns to his old term again. Die vero translationis
Thomae Martyris habitum est magnum Concilium, inter Regem and Regni Magnates,
apud VVintoniam. Over against which, his continuer or publisher has placed
this marginal Note. Parliamentum habitum apud Winton. The like he does in p.
560. 561, 687, 714. and elsewere, inserting in the Margin, Parliamentum
Generale, etc. When as Matthew Paris uses it not, but Concilium only, or the
like in his Text. In his Ibidem p. 702. 707.
History of the next year 1^47. He proceeds thus. Dominus Rex Francorum Regni
sui Nobiles tam Cleri quam Populi generaliter Edicto Regio fecit convocari, ut
Ad Parliamentum communiter convenientes, ardu negocia Regni sui statum
contingentia, diligenter, deliberando, contrectarent. And Five pages after,
Dominus Rex (H. 3.) jussit omnem totius Regni Nobilitatem convocari, etc.
Oxoniis: Praelatosautem maxim Ad hoc Parliamentum vocavit arctius. Applying
the word Parliamentum, to these Assemblies of the King, Lords and Nobles, both
in France and England, held this year, about the weighty affairs of their
respective Kingdoms. In his Additamenta to the last Addition of his History
printed at London, p. 170. he uses the word Parliamentum only once, and that
in another sense; For the conference and discourse of Monks with one another
after their repasts, then prohibited the black Monks by special Order, as an
impediment to their contemplations and prayers. In no places else of his
History or other printed pieces, do I find he made use of this word. Indeed,
the continuer of his History from the year 1258. to the end of King Henry's
Reign 1273. (whom Scriptorum Brit. Cen. 4. c. 94.
John Bale inform^ us to be William Rishanger) flourishing under King Edward
the 1. and 2. (when this word Parliamentum grew common both in Writs of
Sommons, Statutes, and vulgar Speech) makes frequent use thereof in his
History, applying it to great Councils of the Realm, in the latter end of Henry
the 3d. both in the Text and Margin; as in Page 788, 933. 935. 938. 940. 948.
960. 967. 974. of his continuation, Editione Tiguri, 1589, and so does Matthew
Westminster (who continued the History of Matthew Paris) flourishing under the
Reign of King Edward the third, See the Praeface to Mat Paris, and Mat Westminster,
(...) Script. Brit. Cent. 6. c. 31.
when this word Parliamentum was commonly used in all Writs of Summons,
Statutes, Writers and Vulgar speech) makes frequent use thereof, applying it to
the Great Councils of State toward the latter end of King Henry the third, in
his Flores Historiarum, Londini 1570. pars 2. p. 206, 207, 223, 254. 261. 280,
296, 300, 317, 345. and in subsequent Pages to the Parliaments held under King
Edward the first. Henry de Knyghton a Canon of Leicester flourishing under King
Richard the 2. de Eventibus Angliae, l. 1. c. 3. l. 2. c. 10, 12, 15. Col.
2318, 2387, 3446, 2455. applies this word to the Great Councils held under the
Danish and other Kings, before the Reign of Edward the 1. Canutus vixit per 20.
annos, and postea celebravit Parliamentum apud Oxoniam, etc. Ranulfus Consul
Cestriae cum Rege (Stephano) concordatus est, Set tito post, in Parliamento
apud Northamptoniam delose captus est, etc. Anno 1261. Rex (Hen. 3.) convocato
Parliamento suo Oxoniae, questionem movit Magnatibus suis. Tenuit Rex (H. 3.)
Parliamentum suum apud Merleberg. Anno Regni sui 52. and ad exhibitionem
communis justitiae multa fecit statuta, quae dicuntur statuta de Marleberg. The
Author of the Chronicle of Brompton (who Mr. Seldens Praeface, Historiae
Anglicanae Scriptore^ X. Londini. 1652.
writ after the beginning of King Edward the 3.) does the like in these
passages, according to the language of the age wherein he writ. Chron.
Johannis Brompton. Col. 866. l. 50. 908. l. 36, 937. l. 28. 1005. l. 65. 1066.
l. 62. 1058. l. 66. 1282. l. 66.
Edgarvis Rex Parliamentum suum apud Salisbiriam convocavit. Post haec
(Canutus) apud Oxoniam Parliamentum t^nuit, etc. cito post in Parliamento suo
apud Wintoniam. Rex (Edwardus Confessor) and omnes Magnates ad Parliamentum
tunc fuerunt, Anno 1164. Rex (Henricus 2.) Parliamentum apud West^inst tenuit.
Rex Angliae (Richardus 1.) congregatus Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus Regni
sui Parliamentum Londoniae super hoc habuit and Tractatum. Rex (Johannes)
Parliamentum suum usque Lincolniam convocaverat. So does Polychron. l. 7. c. 38.
Radulphus Cicestrensis, Ypodigma Neustriae, Londini. 1574. p. 61, 62.
Thomas of Wal^^ngham (who writ under K. Henry the 6.) and after them Fabian,
Caxton, Polydor Virgil, Grafton, Speed, Stow, Holinshed, Daniel, Baker, and
other of our late Historians; Whereupon their injudicious credulous Readers of
all sorts, conceit not only the words Parliamentum and Parliament, but even
the thing it self (as since constituted of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, as
well as of the King, spiritual and temporal Lords, Nobles, Barons, and Great
Men) to have been in common use both under our Saxon, Danish, Norman, and
English Kings, long before the Reign or 49. year of King Henry the 3. when as
neither the name nor thing it self (as now compacted) was either known to, or
used by any Aniquaries, Councils, Records, Historians, or English Writers
before Mat. Paris, that I have yet seen or heard of. From whence (to omit other
Arguments, with the Writs de Expensis Militum and Burgensium levandis,
mentioned in the Modus tenendi Parlamentum, though in no Records before, Claus.
28. E. 1.) it indeniably appears, that this absurd ridiculous Modus, so much
magnified, followed, relied upon by 4 Inst. p. 12. 341. 1. Instit. f. 10. 2.
Instit. p. 7, 8.
Sir Edward Cook, in sundry of his Books, as a most ancient authentic Record,
both known, and used in Edward the Confessors time; For Certain rehearsed
before William the Conqueror, by the discreet men of the Realm, and by him
approved, and used, who kept a Parliament according to its Prescription, (which
the Book of 21. E. 3. f. 60. he cites to prove it, directly contradicts) After
which King H. the 2. fitted and transcribed this Modus into Ireland in a
Parchment Roll for the holding of Parliaments there. Which no doubt he did by
the advice of his Judges, etc. That this Modus was seen by the makers of Magna
Charta, Anno 9. H. 3. c. 2. concerning the reducing of ancient Reliefs of
entire Earldemos, Baronies and Knights fees, according to such proportions as
is contained in the Modus, which they could not have done so punctually if they
had not seen the same: (all which he asserts with so much confidence, as if
he had been an eyewitness thereof himself, though most gross untruths) is in
verity a late spurious Imposture: written long after the Reign of King Henry
the 3. and Edward the 1. himself confessing that some part thereof is cited in
(he should have said taken out of) the Parliament Roll of Anno 11. R. 2. and
other Records of Parliament, and not compiled before the latter end of King R.
the 2. See Spelma^ni Concilia, p. 534.
The word Parliamentum being not only used many hundred times, almost in every
line throughout this Modus, and not the words Concilium or Collequium, but
likewise intituling and denominating the very Treatise it self, which grew not
into such Vulgar use, till after the Reign of King Henry the 3. under King
Edward the 3. and succeeding Kings, as appears by Thomas Walsingham, Hist,
Angliae. p. 5, 8, 12, 13, 17, 25, 28, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 44,
45, 46, 70, 71, 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 83, 88, 96, 105, 110. Ypodigma Neustriae.
p. 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 82, 83, 87, 88, 98. and De Eventibus Angliae. Col. 2463,
2491, 2528, 2549.
Henry de Knyghton, and was totally unknown to, and not used by any Lawyers,
Statesmen, Clerks, Writers of our English Annals before the Reign of King
Henry the 3. Which I much wonder Sir Edward Cook (who writes, that after
diligent search he could find nothing against this Modus, and demands, Quis
vitupera^it?) and some Gul. Lambardi Archivon. The Antiquity of the Parliaments
of England. p. 28, 29.
others of ou Antiquaries observed not, being so palpable an Imposture, as
Titles of Honor. p. 613. 738, to 745.
Mr. Seldom, In his Letter Mr. William Hackwel.
Archbishop usher, and others, have discovered it to be. Indeed I found one
Roll in the Tower, Anno 9. E. 2. styled Modus Parliamenti, which upon its first
view I conceited might have some affinity with, or at least give some color to
this forged Modus; but upon perusal it proved only a Roll of the Proceedings
in the Parliament of 9. E. 2. far different from this Modus, and having no
affinity with it, yet peradventure the Author of this Imposture, borrowed his
Title from it.

Besides the late introduction of the word Parliamentum into England, does
likewise discover Preface to the 9. Reproof.
Sir Edward Cooks other pretended ancient Manuscript of the Monastery. of St.
Edmonds (which he much cried up, yet never would send judicious Spelmanni
Council. p. 534.
Sr. Henry Spelman to peruse, perchance lest he should detect its Novelty and
Imposture) to be of no such Antiquity (as he conceited it to be, written, See
my seasonable Legal Historical Vindication. part. 3. p. 231, 232, 233.
in King Cnutes Reign, or not long after it) but after Henry the 3. his Reign;
since the words Parliamentum, in suo public^ Parliamento, tunc in eodem
Parliamento personaliter existentibus were not grown in use till Edward the 1,
2, and 3. and the whole clause he prints out of it in his Preface to his 9.
Reports, prove it to be written under one of these three Kings Reigns, if not
after them, as the Modus was: By both which you may easily discern, how little
insight this great Lawyer had in Histories, Antiquities, or Records, as to be
cheated, besotted with such Impostures, and bottom his Discourses of our
Parliaments upon such spurious rotten Foundations as these.

3. That no Oath nor Engagement whatsoever was anciently imposed on the Members
of the Lords or Commons House, ^. 11. p. 40.
to debar or seclude any of them from sitting or voting, much less were any of
them suspended or forcibly kept out of either House till they had taken any
new-invented Oath, prescribed them only by a prevailing party, without a Legal
Act of Parliament ratified both by the Kings, Lords, and Commons in an orderly
manner; such enforced seclusive Oaths, being inconsistent both with the
Freedom, Privileges, Rights of old English Parliaments. The Parliament of 1.
Eliz. c. 1. upon the abolishing of Popery, and restitution of the Protestant
Religion, having by unanimous consent of the three States, made and prescribed
an Oath of supremacy (for the preservation of the ancient Rights and Royalties
of the Crown of England, and of the persons of the Queen, her heirs and
successors, against the usurpations, claims, practices of the Bishop, of Rome,
and his confederates) on all Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Clergymen,
and temporal officers: By reason of the manifold Plots and Treasons of the Pope
and Papists against the Queens person, Crown, and Realm, the Parliament of 5.
Eliz. c. 1. thought fit to prescribe this Oath, for the better detection of
persons popishly affected, not only to all Readers, Barresters, Graduates in
the Universities, Schoolmasters, Sheriffs, and other inferior Officers, but
likewise to all future Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament;
enacting, That every person who shall be hereafter elected or appointed a
Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the five Ports, for any Parliament or
Parliaments hereafter to be holden, shall from henceforth, before he shall
enter into the Parliament House, or have any voice there, openly receive and
pronounce the said Oath before the Lord Steward for the time being, or his
Deputy or Deputies for that time to be appointed. And that he which shall
enter into the Parliament, House, without taking the said Oath, shall be deemed
no Knight, Citizen, Burgess, nor Baron for that Parliament, nor shall have any
voice, but shall be to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as if he had
never been returned or elected Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron for the
Parliament, and shall suffer such pains and penalties, as if he had presumed
to sit in the same without Election, return, or authority. Provided, that this
Act, nor any thing therein shall not extend to compel any temporal person of or
above the degree of A Baron of the Realm, to take or pronounce the Oath
abovesaid, nor to incur any penalty limited by this Act for not taking or
refusing the same. This is the first Act ever imposing an Oath upon any Members
before their sitting and voting in the Parliament House: wherein five things
are observable.

1. That this Oath was made by unanimous consent of the Queen, Lords and
Commons in Parliament.

2. That it was five years a probationer, and approved, ratified by two
successive Parliaments, before it was imposed upon any Members, and not
actually administered to any till the Parliament of 8. Elizabeth.

3. That it was imposed only upon the Members of the Commons House, not upon
any temporal Lords or Barons of the Realm.

4. That the principal end of prescribing it was, to abolish the Popes usurped
supremacy, and prevent his and his instruments Traitorous attempts against the
Queens person, Crown, Kingdom, discover persons popishly affected, and seclude
them from sitting or voting in the Commons House if elected, returned, unless
they should first take this Oath: Not to debar or exclude any real Protestants,
when duly elected, from entering into the Parliament house to discharge their
trusts and duties.

5. That it appoints no Officers or armed Guards forcibly to seclude any
Knight, Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the Ports till he has openly taken and
pronounced this Oath, but only lays 2 particular inhibition upon every such
Member himself, not to enter the House without taking it, under the
disabilities and penalties therein mentioned: leaving every Member a liberty to
seclude himself in case he were unsatisfied, or could not in conscience or
prudence take this Oath, but authorizing none else to keep him perforce out of
the House, if he had a mind to rush into it without taking it. After this the
Par^iament of 3. Iacobi. c. 4. upon the detection and prevention of the
in^ernal Gunpowder Treason of the Pope, Jesuits and Papists, to blow up the
King, Queen, Prince, Lords, Commons, and Parliament, when all assembled
together in the Lords House, November 5 Anno 1605. by unanimous consent of the
three Estates, made and prescribed a New Oath of Allegianoe to all persons,
except Peers of the Realm, who actually were, or should be suspected to be
Papists, for their better discovery and conviction, without imposing it upon
any Members of either House. Which Oath many Papists oppugning with false and
unsound Arguments, 7. Jac. c. 6.
though tending only to the declaration of such duty, as every true,
well-affected subject, not only by his bond of Allegiance, but also by the
commandment of Almighty God ought to bear to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors; Thereupon the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of 7. Jacobs:
(when this Oath had been approved four years space) not only enacted, chapter 2.
that every person who should henceforth be naturalized or restored in blood,
should first take this oath; but to show their great approbation thereof,
humbly prostrating themselves at his Majesty's feet, did earnestly beseech him,
that the same Oath might be administered to all his Subjects what soever; And
thereupon it was enacted, chapter 6. That all and every Knights, Citizens,
Burge^^es, and Barons of the Five-Ports of the Commons House of Parliament,
^before he or they shall be permitted to e^ter the said House, shall make,
take, and renew the said corporal Oath upon the Evangelists before the Lord
Steward for the time being, or his Deputy or Deputies, without imposing any
disability or penalty, or appointing any Officers forcibly to seclude those
from entering who refused it. Since these recited Acts, all Members of the
Commons House have constantly taken these two Oaths voluntarily, without
coercion or forcible seclusion, before they entered or sat as Members in the
House. The last Parliament of 16. Caroli in their first Act, for preventing the
inconveniences happening by the long intermission of Parliaments, enacted: That
all and every the Members that shall be elected to serve in any Parliament
hereafter to be assembled by virtue of this Act, shall assemble and enter into
the Commons House of Parliament, and shall enter into the same, and shall have
voices in Parliament, before and without the taking of the several Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, or either of them, any Law or Statute to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, that if the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall at any time during any Parliament
hereafter to be assembled by virtue of this Act, award or direct any Commission
to any person or persons whatsoever to take or receive the said Oaths, of all
or any Members of the Commons House of Parliament, and any Members of the House
being duly required thereunto, shall refuse or neglect to take and pronounce
the same, that from thenceforth such person so refusing or neglecting shall be
deemed no Member of that House, nor shall have any voice therein, and shall
suffer such pains and penalties, as if he had presumed to sit in the same
House without Election, return or authority. These Statutes being all in their
full force, never legally repealed, and authorizing no Officers nor Soldiers
whatsoever forcibly to seclude or punish any Member of the Commons House, for
not taking both or either of these two Legal Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
ratified by so many indubitable Parliaments one after another, and backed by
the A Collection of Ordinance^. p. 420. K. 430.
solemn League, Covenant, and Protestation; it is neither in the power of the
King himself, or his Counsil, nor of the House of Lords, or any other persons
whatsoever (much less of the Commons House alone, or any prevailing party in
it, who never in any age had the least Legal right or authority to administer
an Oath in any case to any witness or person whatsoever, much less to impose
any New Oaths upon their Fellow Members sitting with them, or secluded by them,
and on all succeeding Members of that House in future Parliaments) to enforce
any New Oath or Engagement whatsoever, inconsistent with, or repugnant to these
two Legal Parliamentary Oaths, or to suspend, exclude, or eject any Knight,
Citizen, Burgess, or Baron of the Ports duly elected and returned, from sitting
or voting with them in the Commons House, for refusing such new Engagement or
Oath; it being directly contrary not only to the Freedom, Privilege of our
English Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, but to the very letter of the 3 Caroli.
Petition of Right ratified by K. Charles himself, which complained of, and
provides against the administering of any Oath not warranted by the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, and enacts, That no Man hereafter shall be called to
take such Oath (as being repugnant to their Rights, Liberties, the Laws and
Statutes of the Land (much less then no Members of Parliament enforced by their
Fellow Members to take such an Oath, or else be suspended, secluded the House
of Commons) Mr. Rushworths Historical Collections. p. 423.
and that former proceedings of this kind (in the case of Loanes, wherein such
an oath was prescribed, exacted) should not be drawn hereafter into consequence
or example; Yea contrary to the House of Commons Exact Colection. p. 8.
Remonstrants of the State of the Kingdom, 15. December. 1641. who therein
charge the Kings evil Counselors, That New Oaths have been enforced upon the
Subjects against Law, and new Iudicatures erected without Law (which some who
thus remonstrated have since that actually done, to the secluding of sundry
Members of their own new-model'd Parliaments, for refusing to take new illegal
Oaths, and Engagements, repugnant to their old ones of Supremacy and
Allegiance) if not the very third Article of the late Petition and Advice, viz.
That the ancient and undoubted Liberties and Privileges of Parliament (which
are the Birthright and Inheritance of the people, and wherein every man it
interessed) be preserved and maintained, and that you will not break nor
interrupt the same, nor suffer them to be broken or interrupted. And
particularly, that those persons who are legally chosen by a free Election of
the people to serve in Parliament, may not be secluded from sitting in
Parliament to do their duties, but by judgment and assent of that House
whereof they are Members. Therefore not by any armed Guards without any hearing
or judgment whatsoever: Which had some of those Army Officers and Swordmen
well considered, who assented to this Article and Petition; they would never
have forcibly secluded, secured, imprisoned my self, and sundry other Members
of the late Parliament, only for the faithful discharge of our Oaths, Duties,
without, yea against the judgment of the House whereof they were Members,
which God in judgment has repaid on some of them since that, with a suitable
Retaliation, Seclusion, Restraint, by some of their own confederates in that
unrighteous Anti-parliamentary action.

4 That there is no one President exstant in our Histories or Records in former
Ages, nor from 49. Henry 3. till the end of King Charles his Reign, of any
Writs issued to Sheriffs or other Officers in Ireland, or Scotland (though
subordinate and subject to our English Kings and Parliaments) for electing
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or Commissioners to sit or vote as Members of the
Commonshouse in any Parliaments or great Councils of England; nor yet for any
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses out of Gersy, Gernsey, Alderny, Serke, Man, Silly,
or other Islands belonging to England. 37. H. 8. c. 26. 34 H. 8. c. 26.
Yea the Principality of Wales it self (though ever subjected and united to
England as part thereof) never sent any Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses to the
Parliaments of England, as Members thereof, till enabled by special Acts of
Parliament, Anno 27. H. 8. c. 26. and 35. H. 8. c. 11. Nor yet the County
Palatine of Chester, though a part and member of England, till specially
enabled by the Statute of 34. H. 8. c. 13. neither did, much less then can or
ought any Counties, Cities, Buroughs in Scotland, or Ireland, to claim or
pretend the least color of Right, Law, or Reason, to send any Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, (or Peers) to sit or vote in the Parliaments of England,
neither ought any such if elected, returned to be of right admitted into our
English Parliaments.

1. Because they never enjoyed this privilege heretofore in any Age, nor
pretended to it.

2. Because they are very remote from the places where our English Parliaments
are held, and it will not be only extraordinarily troublesome, expensive,
vexatious, inconvenient for them, when elected, to resort so far to our English
Parliaments, but dangerous, (especially to cross the Seas out of Ireland in the
Winter season) and mischievous.

Thirdly, Because if any of them be unduly elected, returned (as is most
probable the most of them will be so) it must necessarily put them to
intolerable expenses, trouble, vexation, and almost an impossibility to
examine, determine the legality or illegality of such Elections, and returns
from Scotland and Ireland. The Parliaments being likely to be determined, or
adjourned before the Sheriffs and other Officers, who unduly returned them, can
be summoned, and witnesses produced thence to prove the abuses or injustice of
such Elections: so that any persons thence returned by those in power, though
never elected, or very unduly through favor, power, or corruption of Officers,
shall sit and vote as Members, whilst those who were duly chosen and entrusted
by the people, shall be secluded and left without relief.

4 Because Scotland and Ireland, See my Argument of the case of the Lord
Maguire.
though united to England, always were, and yet are distinct Realms and
Republics, never incorporated into England, or its Parliament, as natural
proper Members thereof: they all having by their own Fundamental Laws,
Statutes, Customs, Rights, Privileges, their peculiar proper Parliaments,
Peers, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Courts, Iudicatures, Councils, and Judges
distinct, divided from, and not intercommoning with one another. The Peers,
Lords, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of England having no place, voice, nor
right of Session in the Parliaments of Scotland or Ireland, though in many
things subordinate to the Parliaments of England, and subject to Acts of
Parliament made in them, and the Lords, Peers, Citizens, Burgesses of the
Parliaments of Scotland, and Ireland, being no Lords, Peers, Knights, Citizens
or Burgesses at all in England or its Parliaments, being distinct from theirs,
and summoned unto their own Parliament only, as I shall hereafter manifest in
its due place. This is evident not only by the distinct printed Laws and
Statutes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and those Historians, who have
written of them (especially Holinshed, Bucana^, and Mr. Cambden) but likewise
by Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 2. c. 5, 6, 7, Cooks 4 Institutes, chapter 1.
75, 76. Cooks 7 Reports, Calvin's case. The Statute of 1 Iacobi, chapter 1, 2, 3.
Iacobi, c. 3, 4. Iacobi, chapter 1. 7. Iacobi, chapter 1. which fully confirm and
establish the distinct Parliaments, Rights, Laws, Liberties, Customs,
Jurisdictions, Iudicatures of the Realm^ of England, and Scotland.

5. Because the calling and admission of Scottish Knights, Citizens, Burgesses,
or Peers unto the Parliaments of England, and giving them a voice and
Legislative power therein, both in Relation to England, Scotland and Ireland,
though united under one King and Sovereign Lord, is diametrically contrary,
First, to all these recited Acts, and the Propositions, proceedings mentioned
in them, referred to the consideration and determination of the Parliaments of
both Realms, as separate and distinct from each other, and not incorporated
into one body, Realm, or Parliament; whose peculiar distinct Rights,
Jurisdictions, Powers, Parliaments, are since that in precise terms confirmed
and perpetuated, without any union or incorporation into one undivided body
politic. Secondly, Because it is expressly contradictory to the late Act of
17. Caroli, passed, ratified in and by the Parliaments of both Kingdom, for
the confirmation of the Treaty of Pacification between the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland. Wherein the Commissioners deputed by the Parliament of
Scotland, to treat with the Commissioners appointed by the King and Parliament
of England, for the saving of the Rights of Scotland, that the English might
not claim any joint right or interest with the Scots, in the things that
concerned their Parliaments, or Kingdom, in their papers of the 7. of August
1641. did declare and make known, that although they were fully assured that
the Kingdom and Parliament of England, was for the present far from any
thought of usurpation over the Kingdom and Parliament of Scotland, or their
Laws and Liberties, yet for preventing the misunderstanding of posterity, and
of strangers, and for satisfying the scruples of others not acquainted with the
nature of this Treaty, and the manner of their proceedings, which may arise
upon their coming into England, and their treating in time of Parliament: That
neither by our treaties with the English,, nor by seeking our Peace to be
established in Parliament, nor any other action of ours, do we acknowledge any
dependence upon them, or make them Judges to us or our Laws, or any things that
may import the smallest prejudice to our Liberties. But that we come in a free
and brotherly way, by our Informations to remove all doubts that may arise
concerning the proceedings of our Parliament, and to join our endeavors in
what may conduce for the peace and good of both Kingdoms, no otherwise than if
by occasion of the Kings Residence in Scotland, Commissioners in the like
Exigence, should be sent thither from England. Thirdly, It is pointblank
against the solemn League and Covenant, ratified and confirmed in the most
sacred and public manner, The 3 Article whereof, taken with hands lifted up to
heaven, and subscribed by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and all others
well-affected in both Realms, does thus preserve the distinct Privileges of
the Parliaments of both Realms, in these words. We shall with the same
sincerity, reality, and constancy in our several vocations, endeavor with our
estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland; which
are likewise distinguished from each other in every other Article, the Prologue
and Conclusion of the League and Covenant, and all Ordinances that confirm it.
4. As if this were not sufficient; it is directly contrary to the A Collection
of Ordinances, p. 877, 878.
Declaration of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, 17, April,
1646. of their true intention inviolably to maintain the Ancient and
Fundamental Government of the Kingdom, by King, Lords and Commons, the
Government of the Church, securing the people against all arbitrary Government,
and maintaining a right understanding between the two Kingdoms of England, and
Scotland, according to the Covenant and Treaties; To the Commons printed
Answers to the Scots Commissioners Papers 28 of November 1646. Yea to the Lords
and Commons Houses joint Declaration, the 29. of June 1646. In all which they
See the Independency of England, by Henry Martin, 1628.
do professedly declare, assert, argue, resolve, the absolute Independency,
distinct Rights, Jurisdictions of the Kingdoms and Parliaments of England and
Scotland, from the very Articles of the solemn League and Covenant, and
Treaties between both Kingdoms, and other Evidences, grounds, reasons,
positively asserting, That the Parliament and Kingdom of England is, and ought
to be the sole and proper Judge of what may be for the good of this Kingdom;
and that the Kingdom and Parliament of Scotland, neither have, nor ought to
have any joynt-concurrent share or interest with them therein, nor right of
joynt-exercise of interest in disposing the person of the King in the Kingdom
of England. And that the self-same liberty and privilege always had been
admitted, and ever shall be carefully and duly observed by them and the
Parliament and Kingdom of England, to the Kingdom and Parliament of Scotland
in all things that concern that Kingdom; And that it was not the intention of
the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England, nor of the Commissioners of
the Parliament of Scotland, in sending Propositions to the King, in the name,
and in the behalf of both Kingdoms, by joynt-consent, that any construction
should be made therefrom, as if either Kingdom had any interest in each others
Propositions, or in the Legislative Power of each other concerning any of the
said Propositions; but that it remains distinct in each Kingdom and
Parliament respectively. And that notwithstanding any joynt-proceedings upon
the said Propositions, either Kingdom has power of themselves to continue,
repeal, or alter any Law that shall be made upon the said Propositions for the
good and government of either Kingdom respectively. And both Houses did
therein declare, that they are fully resolved to maintain, and preserve
inviolable the solemn League and Covenant, and the Treaties between the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland. Now the calling and incorporating of Scottish
and Irish Peers, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses into the Parliaments of
England, as Members, Voters, Legislators, together with the English, to oblige
both England, Scotland, and Ireland, against the ancient, unquestionable,
distinct, fundamental Rights, Privileges of the Kingdoms, Parliaments,
people, both of England, Scotland, and Ireland (all whose Parliaments, Rights,
Privileges, Liberties, will be totally subverted by it as well as our English)
is so contradictory, so repugnant to, and inconsistent with all and every of
these recited Acts, Ordinances, Declarations, clauses of the solemn League and
Covenant, to the Great Charter of King John, all ancient Writs of Summons to
English, Irish or Scottish Parliaments, all Acts for Electing Kn^ghts,
Burgesses, and concerning Parliaments formerly established in all these three
Kingdoms, as distinct, that no conscientious Heroic Englishman, Scot, or
Inhabitant of Ireland, who cordially affects the honor, maintenance,
preservation of his own native Countries, Kingdoms, or Parliaments fundamental
Rights, Privileges, Liberties, or makes conscience of violating the Articles
of this solemn League and Covenant he has formerly taken, and subscribed in
the presence of Almighty God, Angels and Men, with this protestation; we shall
not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever combinatien,
persuasion or terror to be divided or withdrawn from it, either by making
defection to the contrary part, or by giving our selves to a detestable
indifferency or neutrality; but shall all the days of our lives constantly
continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
Power against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and this we shall do in the
sight and presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer the contrary at the great
day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; can ever in conscience,
justice, reason, policy or prudence submit thereto, but is bound to oppose and
resist with all his power, for the premised Reasons.

6. Because the proportioning and distribution of the thirty persons to be
elected for Scotland, and the thirty others for Ireland, and incorporating of
these sixty Scottish and Irish Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses into the
Parliaments of England, was not projected, effected, approved, ratified by the
free, full, and joynt-consents of the respective Parliaments of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, but only by about twenty or thirty Army Officers, in a
private Cabinet Conventicle, at Whitehall, without yea against their privities,
and consents, by their Instrument of Government, which they then published, 16
December. 1653. Artic. 9, 10, 11. having not the least shadow of any Legal Power
or Authority, to oblige our 3 distinct Kingdoms, Nations, Parliaments, much
less to subvert and abolish them, by new melting them into one body, contrary
to their very fundamental Laws, Constitutions, Rights, Privileges, to their
grand prejudice and dishonor. Therefore there is no reason for either of them
to submit and conform thereto. The rather, because this Instrument was never
ratified by any, but opposed by every public Convention, since its
publication, yea totally set aside (if ever valid) by the last of them, in and
by this clause of their humble Petition and Advice, Artic. 3, 4. That the
number of persons to be elected and chosen to sit and serve in Parliament for
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and distribution of the persons so chosen,
within the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs of them respectively, may be
according to such proportions as shall be agreed in this present Parliament:
which agreed nothing concerning the same: And both the Instrument and Advice
being now set aside by those in present power, by issuing Writs for electing
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses throughout England, according to the ancient
Laws, Usage, Custom, and not according to the Instrument or Advice, by which
the English and Commons House are now remitted to their old Parliamentary
Rights and Privileges. They are obliged upon all these Reasons, Authorities,
and Considerations, henceforth to seclude all Scottish and Irish Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, or Peers, from sitting or voting amongst them as Members,
and ought to treat with them only as Delegates or Commissioners sent from both
Nations touching such affairs as particularly relate to Scotland and Ireland,
according to Ordinatio, pro stabilitate terrae Scotiae, cl. 33. E. 1. dorse 13.
Cedula. Rustal Partition. 2. 1. Jac. c. 2. 16. Caroli. here p. 414, 415, 416.
ancient and late Presidents, but not to permit them any place or vote at all
in the Commons or Lords House, as joynt-Members, Legislators with the English,
in the Parliaments of England.

7. Because the thrity persons to be chosen for Scotland, and the other thirty
for Ireland, and the several Counties, Cities, and Borroughs within the same,
to represent and oblige both these Kingdoms and Nations, as their
Representativees and Attorneys, are not to be elected by the generality of both
Kingdoms, as in justice, reason, equity they ought to be, but by such as the
Major part of the Council at Whitehall shall prescribe, as the 9th. Article in
the Instrument declares, some whole Counties, and eminent Cities in both
Kingdoms, having no voices at all in the Elections of these Members, and
therefore not to be obliged by them, as 44. E. 3. f. 19. 11. H. 7. 14. 21. H.
7. 40. 23, H. 8. Br. Lert. 27. 7. H. 6. 35. 6. Dyer 373. b. resolve. This being
a general Rule in Law, Justice, Reason, inserted into the very Writs of Summons
to Parliament, Claus. 24. E. 1. m. 7. dorso (here) p. 6. Ut quod omnes tangit
ab omnibus approb^tur. And the sole reason why Acts of Parliament oblige all
those who send Knights and Burgesses to them, and not tenants in Ancient
Demesne, is only this, because they assent unto them, in and by their
representatives, as the Statute of 1 Iac. c. 1. 4. H. 7. 10. Brook Parliament,
25. 27. 41. Ash Parliament, 10. and Proclamation, 39. and the Law Books
Authorities there collected to this purpose determine.

8. In the Sea Mr. Rushworths Historical Collections. p. 237.
Parliament of a Caroli, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then in Parliament
assembled, exhibited this Petition to the King: That whereas they heretofore in
civility as to strangers yielded precedence according to their several degrees
unto such Nobles of Scotland and Ireland, as being in Titles above them, have
resorted hither; Now diverse of the natural born Subjects of these Kingdoms
resident here with their families, and having their estates among us, do by
reason of some late created dignities in those Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland, claim precedence of the Peers of this Realm, which tends both to the
disservice of your Majesty, and to the di^paragement of the English No^ility,
as by these Reasons may appear.

1. It is a nobelty without President, that men should inherit honors where
they possess nothing else.

2. It is injurious to those Countries from whence their Titles are derived,
that they should have a vo^e in Parliament where they have not a foot of Land,
etc. Upon the consideration of which inconveniences they humbly beseeched his
Majesty, that an order might be timely settled therein to prevent the
inconvenience to his Majesty, and redress the prejudice and disparagement to
the Peers and Nobility of this Kingdom occasioned thereby, which the King
promised to do. And is it not a far greater inconvenience, prejudice and
disparagement to the Nobility, Gentry, and Parliaments of England, yea a
greater Novelty and Injury than this they then petitioned against, not only for
the Nobility, but for the very Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, of Scotland, and
Ireland, to sit with, and take place of the ancient Peers, Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses of England, according to their several Titles, and to enjoy an
equal vote, judicature, privilege with them in every particular, in the very
Parliaments of England, which they never formerly did, though they have not one
foot of Land in England, nor the English any vote of place in their
Parliaments? No doubt it is. Therefore as fit to be timely redressed, as that
grievance, upon the self-same grounds, being more universal, prejudicial and
dishonorable to the whole English Peerage, Parliament and Nation, than this
which concerned the English Peers alone, and that only out of Parliament.

9. This number of Members sent from Scotland and Ireland to the Parliaments of
England, holds no just not equal proportion or distribution with the numbers of
Members, which they formerly elected and sent to their own respective
Parliaments, in Scotland and Ireland, as is evident by the Irish Statutes of
18, E. 4. c. 2. 10. H. 7. c. 16, 38. H. 8. c. 12. 33. H. 8. c. 1. Cooks 4.
Iustit. c. 75, 76. and Regiam Majestatem, nor yet in reference to the number of
the Members and Parliament Men in England, being near ten to one to the Members
of both these Nations conjoined, which inequality upon all occasions may prove
very prejudicial to them both.

10. It will be an extraordinary grievance, oppression, expense, vexation,
mischief, delay and obstruction of Justice to all the Inhabitants of Scotland
and Ireland, not only to bear the Expenses of all the Members they send to the
Parliaments of England, but to be enforced to resort unto them in person,
together with their Witnesses, Evidences, and Council, for all grievances,
oppressions, injuries, errors, complains and misdemeans in Officers or Courts
of Justice formerly redressed, and remediable only in their own proper
Parliaments, much nearer home, and now only to be heard, examined, redressed,
determined in the Parliaments of England, as the Claus. Roll. of 39. E. 3. M.
12. De erroribus corrigendis in Parliament is tenend is in Hibernia (printed in
my Epistle to my Argument of the case of the Lord Mag^^re) most fully and
excellently resolves: And the multitudes of complaints, out of all three
Kingdoms will prove so great in every Parliament, that it will be impossible
to hear and determine the moity of them at any one Session or Parliament, and
the attendance will prove so tedious to all or most, that it will become a
greater grievance to them than any they complain of, and if they gain any
relief, it will be in effect, a Remedy as bad or worse, as the diseas^ it
cures: Yea an express violation of Magna Charta. chapter 29. Nulli negabimus, nulli
differemus justitiam aut rectum: Finally, This patching of New Scottish and
Irish Members into our old English Parliament, will be so far from uniting
and contenting the three Nations and Parliaments in one, that it will
discontent and disunite them more than before, and make the rent the greater
upon every occasion, as Christ himself resolves, with whose words I shall close
up this observation: Mark. 2. 21.
No man seweth or puts a piece of new Cloth upon an old Garment, Luke 5. 36.
else the new piece that fills it up, takes away from the old, and agrees
not with the old, and the rent is made worse.

5. That as the Writs of the Common Law, are the foundations whereon the whole
Law, and subsequent proceedings do depend, as De Legibus and consuetudini,
Regni Angliae.
Glanvil, Lib. 5.
Bracton, Cap. 48.
Britton, Lib 2. c. 12.
Fleta heretofore, Prae^ace to Na^. Brevium.
Fitzherbert, D^gest of Writs.
Thelwell, 1. Instit. f. 73. b.
Sir Edward Cook, and others of later times resolve; upon which account if the
Writs be vicious, erroneous, invalid, illegal, or null in Law, they abate,
vitiate, and annihilate the whole Process, Declarations, and Struotures
grounded on them, as Britton. c. 48. Statham. Fitzherbert, Brock, Thelwel, Ash
Title, Brief, Abatement de Brief and Error.
all our Law Books assert; So the Writs of Summons to Parliaments and Great
Councils are the very foundations, and corner-stones whereon our Parliaments,
Great Councils, and all their Votes, Judgments, Proceedings, Acts, Ordinances
do depend. Therefore if they be defective, erroneous, invalid, illegal,
insufficient, or null in themselves, the Parliaments and Great Councils
convened by, founded on them, with all their Judgments, Proceedings, Acts,
Ordinances, must of necessity be so likewise, as the Statutes of 1. Hen. 4. c.
3. 21. R. 2. c. 1. 39. 8. H. 6. c. 1. H. 8. c. 1. 17. E. 4. 5. 7. 1. H. 4. rot.
Parl. n. 1. 66. 1. E. 4. rot. Parl. n. 8: to 17. 1. H. 7. c. 9. 27. H. 8. c.
24. in England, largely evidence, and the Statute of 10. H. 7. c. 27. in
Ireland, determines; repealing a Parliament holden at Drogheda before Sir
Robert Preston, decreed and deemed void to all Intents, by the Kings Council in
Ireland.

1. Because the Duke of Bedford, Lieutenant of Ireland, (by whose Deputy it was
summoned and held) surrendered his Patent of Lieutenancy before the said
Parliament summoned.

2. Because there was no general summons of the said Parliament, to all the
Shires, but only to four Shires.

3. Because the said Deputy had no m^nner of Power by his Commission to summon
or keep a Parliament: For the which causes it was ordained and enacted, that
the Parliament to holden be deemed void, and of none effect, by the whole
Parliament of Ireland, Anno 10. H. 7. And the Parliament of 18. E. 4. chapter 2. in
Ireland, touching the Election of Knights and B^rgesses, further manifests it.

6. That the summoning (as likewise pro^^guing, adjourning, dissolving) of all
Parliaments and Great Councils in England and Ireland, is a peculiar
inseparable royal Prerogative, belonging only to the Kings of England, and
incommunicable to any other person or persons, yea to Parliaments themselves,
which cannot appoint a succeeding Parliament to be called but by the Kings
consent, and that (though appointed to be held at a prefixed day and place) to
be Here p. ^3.
summoned only by the Kings Writ. That all Writs of Summons and Prorogation
always issued, and of right ought to be iss^ed only in the Kings name, style,
authority, whether absent out of, or present within the Realm, whether within
age, or of ripe years, and that by his special Commands alone, or his and his
Councils joint precept, as the style, name, contents of all precedent and
subsequent Writs; the subscriptions under them, Per ipsum Regem, per ipsum
Regem and Consilium, per ipsum Regem, Custodem and Consilium (in the Kings
absence) per breve de privato sigi^^o, etc. the style, tenor of all Writs, De
expensis Militum and Burgen sium, the Statutes of 5. R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 4. 7. H.
4. c. 14. 6. H. 6. c. 4. 23. H. 6. c. 11. 27. H. 8. c. 24. 31. H* 8. c. 10.
most Acts of late times for the subsidies of the Clergy and Temporalty, Tonage,
Foundage; the Prologues to our ancient and modern printed Statutes, the Kings
Chancellors and others speeches upon the convention of most Parliaments, in
Parliament Rolls, together with the Act of 16. Caroli, for preventing of
inconveniences happening by the long intermission of Parliaments, Cooks 4.
Institutes, chapter 1. and all who have written of our English Parliaments,
abundantly evidence and resolve beyond contradiction. Hence our late See Mr.
Rushworth his Historical Collections, p. 4 10, etc.
King Charles, in his Declaration of the causes of assembling and diss^lving
the two last Parliaments, June 13. 2. Caroli, affirms, That the calling,
adjourning, proroguing, and dissolving of Parliaments, do peculiarly belong
unto himself by an undoubted Prerogative inseparably uniied to his impertal
Crown, and the Statute of 16. Caroli. c. 1. made by the unanimous consent of
both Houses declares, That by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the
appointment of the time and place for the holding of Parliaments, and the
summoning of them (by Writ in the Kings Name) has always belonged, as it
ought, to his Majesty, and his royal Progenitors, and none else.

7. That the Kings of England, have as true, full, real and legal an
haereditary right, Title, Interest, Propriety in and to the Parliament, as they
have in and to the Kingdom and Crown of England, as these Clauses in all their
Writs of Summons, Prorogations of Parliaments, issued to the spiritual and
temporal Lords, Kings Counsil, Sheriffs, and Warden of the Cinqueports resolve;
Ordinavimus quoddam Parliamentum nostrum, etc. tenere: In ultimo Parliamento
nostro; post ultimum Parliamentum nostrum, sitis ad nos ad Parliamentum
nostrum, and the like; compared with Statum Regni nostri Angliae: Et cum
Praelatis and Proceribus Regni nostris sicut commodum Regni nostri Diligitis:
Iura Coronae nostrae, etc. in the same Writs: The Writs de expensi: Militum and
Burgensium; The Titles and Prologues of most printed Acts of Parliament: The
Statutes of 8. H. 6. c. 7. 23. H. 6. c. 11. 23. H. 8. c. ^3. 27. H. 8. c. 24.
31. H. 8. c. 10. 1. Iac. c. 1. and sundry Writs in the Register, stiling the
Parliament, the Kings Parliament, his Parliament, our Parliament in relation to
the King, and Seldens Titles of Honor. p 663, 665, 747, 748, 751, 757, 764,
etc.
his Patents for creating Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Peers and Barons of the
Realm, granting them and their Heirs males, Sedem and locum in Parliamentis
nostris, Haeredum and successorum nostrorum in^ra Regnum nostrum Angliae.
Therefore the Parliaments of England can no more exist or subsist without the
King, than the Kingdom or Crown of England, the King being both Caput,
Principium and finis Parliamenti, as Modus tenendi Parliamentum, 4 Inst p. 3.
Sir Edward Cook and others resolve, our Parliaments living and dying with our
Kings, and determining when summoned and sitting by the Kings decease (since
they can neither treat nor confer with him of any businesses concerning him or
his Kingdom, nor be his Parliament after his death) as the Parliaments of 1.
H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 1. 2. 3. 1. H. 5. rot. Parl. n. 16. 4. E. 4. f. 44. Cooks
4. Instit. p. 46. adjudge: the Parliament of 23. R. 2. dissolving by this
resignation of the Crown, and the Parliaments of 14 H. 4. King Cha^les his
Declaration, 13. June 2. Car. Mr. Rushworths Historical Col^ectiods, p. 411.
and 24. Iacobi being dissolved by their respective deaths, as their Judges and
Parliaments resolved, and the Parliament of 18. Caroli by the self same reason,
as I have My Legal Vindication against illegal Taxes.
elsewhere evidenced, seeing he could neither vobiscum and cum caeteris
Magnatibus and Proceribius Regni nostri colloqaium habere and Tractatum, super
diversis and arduis negoc^is Nos and Regnum nostrum co^tingentibus, nor the
Commons do and assent hiis quae tunc ibidem per N^s, etc. ordinari contigerit
super negotiis antedictis, as the Writs of Summons and Prorogation prescribe.

8. That when ever there was a Here p. 43, 44, 46, 50, 51, 52, 67, 68, 80, 84,
85, 86, 87, etc An exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 542, 543,
552, 561, 597.
Custos Regni, during the Kings absence in foreign parts, or a Protector
during his Minority, the Writs of Summons and Prorogation issued always in the
Kings style, name, and by his authority and direction, and the Test only in
the Custos, or Protectors name, with a per ipsum Regens, per ipsum Regem and
Consilium, or, per ipsum Regem, Custodem and consilium subjoyned.

9. That when our Kings could not be personally present at any Parliament by
reason of their wars, sickness, extraordinary occasions, absence in foreign
Parts, or minority, they held them by a Here p. 9. 41, 42, 44, 46, 48, 49, 50,
93, 64.
Custos Regni, or Commissioners authorized by special Commissions issued to
them in the Kings name under his Great Seal, to hold these Parliaments in his
Name and Stead, which were publicly read at the beginning of the Parliament,
and entered in the Parliaments Rolls; for which I shall present you with these
presidents only, omitting all others of this kind, agreeing with them, or
varying little from them, in form or substance. The first is this.

Anno 13. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 4. Edward^s Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus
Hiberniae, and Dux, Aquitaniae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus and omnibus aliis ad instans Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. summonitum conventuris salut^m. Cum dilectus and fidelis
noster Edwardus Dux Cornubiae, Comes Cestr. filius noster carissimus Custos.
Regni nostri, propter quaedam negocia sibi incumbentia sit ad praesens
Parliamentum praepeditus, quo minus isto die Iovis in Octabis Sti. Hillarii
apud locum praedictum vale at personaliter interesse: de circumspectionis and
industriae magnitudine venerabilis Patris Iohannis Archiepiscopi Cantuar.
totius Angliae Primatis, and discretorum virorum Magistri Williel^i de le
Zouche Decani Ecclesiae beati Petri Ebor, Thesaurarii nostri Ricardi de
Willoughby, Iohannis de Stonore, and Iohannis Decani Sti. Pauli plenam fiduciam
reportantes; ipsos quatuor, tres aut duos eorum ad inchoand. and continuand^m
Parliamentum praedictum, nostri, and dicti filii nostri nomine; and ad faciend.
ea quae Pro Nobis per praedictum filium nostrum facienda fuerint, usque
adventum filii nostri ibidem, Deputamus and Assignamus. Et ideo vobis mandamus,
quod iisdem Archiepiscopo, The saurario, Rico. Iohi. and Iohi. quatuor, tribus
and duobus eorum intendentes sit is in praemissis in forma praedicta. Test
Edwardo Duc^ Cornub. and Comite Cestr. filio nostro carissimo Custode Angliae,
apud Langle XIX. die Ianuarii, Anno Regni nostri tertio decimo.

The second is thus registered, Ann^ 25. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 1. 2.

Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Militibus, and omnibus aliis ad instans Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster
Summonitum conventuris, salutem; Cum Nos ex certis ca^sis sumus ad parts
transmari^as profect^ri, per quod ad primum diem dicti Parli^menti forte non
poterimus interesse, Nos in casu quod citra dictum diem non redeamus Leonello
filio nostro carissimo ad inchoand: Nomine nostro Parliamentum praedictam, and
ad faciend. ea quae pro Nobis and per Nos faci^nd^ fuerint, usque adventum
nostrum ibidem, plenam tenore praesentiu^^ committimus potestatem. Et ideo
Vobis mandamus quod eidem filio nostro intendentes sitis in praemissis, in
forma praedicta: In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri ^ecimus
patentes. Test m^ipso apud Turrim London. 20. die Januarii. Anno Regni nostri
Angli^^, 24. Regni vero nostri Franciae undecimo. Per ipsum Regem.

The third is thus recorded in the Parliament Roll of 51. E. 3. n. 1. with this
Prologue.

Enle 15a. s^int Hilar, etc. que fuist le primer jour de ce present Parliament,
tr^z nobles and p^issent Sir Richard Prince de Gales, Duc de Cornwelle, and
Count de Cestr. and auxint les Prelets, Seigneurs, Justices, Comenes, and
auters que fuerent venuz per Sommons de ce present Parliament, sesemblerent en
le palayes de Westminster. en le Chamber de peinte; and illoeques en lour presence le
dit Prince alos seent in my lieu de uly, Cestassav^ir en la place du Roy
mes^es, nostre le dit Seig^ieur le Roy esteant meismes benemont, venier en sa
proper person, envoy ast en dit Parliament returns ses Literes patents ^o^z
son grant Seal enseales, en la form que ensuant.

Edwardus Dei gratia, etc. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, militibus, and omnibus aliis in instanti
Parliamento conventuris salutem. Cum ex certis cansu sum^s ad pr^^s^ns
praep^diti, ita quod ad primum diem Parliamenti praedicti ad locum praedictum
personaliter non poterim^s interesse; de circumspectionis and industriae
magnitudine carissimi filii nostri Ricardi, Principis Wallia, Duci^ Cornubiae,
and Comitis Cestr, plenam fidu^iam reportantes, eidem filio nostro ad
Parliamentum praedictum nostro nomine inchoand. and ad faciend. (...) quae pro
Nobis. and per ^os ibidem faciend. fu^runt, plen^^m tenors^ praesentium
committimus po^estat^m. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod eidem Principi,
intendentes fitis in praemissis in forma praedicta. In cujus Rei, etc. Test
meipso apud Havering. 26. die Jan. Anno Regni nostri A^gliae, 51. and Franciae,
38.

The fourth is thus entered, Rot. Parl. An. 1. H. 6. n. 1.

Fait assavoir (...) comm^nc^ment del Parliament tenuz le Lundy prochein de ^a^t
le feste de Seint Martyn, I'a^ del regne du Roy Henry Sisme, p^is le conquest;
primerement un^ Commission du Roy fait desoutz son grande Seal, and direct^z al
Honorable and puissent Prince, Humphry Duc de Glocestre, son-Uncle, per la
quell le Roy av^i^ done poiar a mesme son Uncle a tenit le dit Parliament en le
nom du Roy, folon^ laffect and la contenuz de mesme la Commission; en la
preseuc^ de'l dit Duc seant en la Chamber de peinte, deinz In Palayes de Westminster.
and anxy de les Seignieurs espuelz and temperelz, and les Chivalers des
Countees, and des Citeins, and Burgeois del Roialme, Deingleterre pur toute lay
Comme de mesme la Rolalm^ au dit Parliament tenuzilleoqes alors esteantz, ^uit
overtement le e^z, don't le tenure-cy ensuyt.

He^ritus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus
ad quos praesentes litetrae pervenerint, salutem, Sciatis, quod cum de
avisamento Concilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negociis nos,
and statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, ac Ecclesiae Anglicanae*
contingentibus, quoddam Parliamentum nostrum, apud Westminster. Die Lunae prox: ante
sestum Sti. Martini prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, Et quia vero propter
certas causas ad Parliamentum Praedictum personaliter non poterimus interesse;
Nos de circumspectione and industria carissimi Avuncu^i nostri Humfredi Duc^s
Gloucestr. plenam fiduciam reportantes, eidem Avunculo nostro ad Parliamentum
praedict. nomine nostro i^choand and in eo procedend. and ad facienda omnia,
and singula quae pro Nobis, and per Nos, pro bono regimi^e and gubernatione
R^gni nostripraedicti, ac aliorum Uominiorum nostrorum eidens Regno nestro
pertinent^um; ib^dem suerint faciend. Nec non ad Parliamentum illud ^^^iendum
and dissolvendum, de assensu Concilii nostri, plenam tenore praesentium,
committimus potesta^e^s. Dantes ult^r^us, de assensu ejusdem Concilii nostri,
tam universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Dusibus, Comitibus, Baronibus and Militibus; quam omnibus aliis quorum interest
ad Parliamentum nostrum praedict^ conventuris, similiter tenore pr^sentum in
mundatis* quod eide^^ Av^^culo nostr^ intendant^^^ praemissi^^^ forma supra^
dict^. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. T.
m^ipsa apud Westminster. 6 dis Novembris. Anno Regni nostri primo.

The like Commission I find made to the same, Duke in the Parliamant Roll of
2. H. 6. n. 1. word for word, except in those additional words and clauses in
the Commission it self. Nos de circumspectione, fidelitate and industria, etc.
Eidem Avunculo nostro ad Parliamentum praedict. nomine nostro inchoand.
negociaque praedicta exponend. ac declarand. ac exponi and declarari faciend.
necnon in negociis illis, and Parliamento praedicto, ac omnibus and singulis in
eo emergentibus procede^d, etc. Ne^non ad Parliamentum illud si necesse fuerit
continuand. and prorogand* ac ad idem Parliamentum finiend, etc. plenam
committimus potestatem; quam in eventu praedicto Parliamento nostro and tempore
aliquo forsan in persona nostra adess^ contigerit revocare intendimus. Dantes,
etc. Ut supra: with the like in other Parliaments, during this Kings Minority,
and in 33 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 30.

It is observeable, that none of these Custodes Regni, or Protectors, had any
power given them to summon or hold Parliaments in their own Names, or by their
own inherent Authority as Protectors; nor to create new Peers or Barons of the
Realm, by Writs or Patents, for ought I find, the very words of their Patents,
and the Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 564, 568, 869, 592,
658.
Parliaments of 1. H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 24, 25, 26, 2 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 15,
16. 6 H. 6, rot. Parl. n. 22, 23, 24. (a notable Record.) 8 H. 6. rot. Parl. ^.
13. 33 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 30. to 42. resolving the contrary.

By all these forecited Commissions, Patents, and the Patent to the Protectors
themselves during the Kings Minority, enrolled in the Parliament Roll of 1. H.
6. Number. 24, (which I have In the second part of my sovereign power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms, p 67, 68.
elsewhere published) it is most apparent; That as the 1 Pet 2. 13, 14. 1 Timothy
2. 2. Prove. 8. 2. 4 Dan, 2. 37, 38.
Scripture and New Testament it self, in express terms resolve; The King alone,
to be the Supreme Magistrate: So the Common and Statute Laws, Lawyers, Writs,
Records, and Parliaments of England, have always hitherto, resolved, declared,
proclaimed (as Bracton, l. 1. c. 8. l. 3. c. 16. f. 134. l. 3. c. 3. 9. Fleta.
l. 1. c. 5. 17. The Walsingham. Hist, Angl. p. 55, 56, Mat. Westminster. p. 435, 536.
Henry de Knyghton de eventibus. Angl. l. 3. c. 13. Col. 3529.
Parliament of Lincoln. 29 E. 1. 16 R. 2. ^. 5. 25. H. 8. c. 19, 21. 22. 26 H.
8. c. 1. 27. H. 8. c. 15. 28 H. 8. c. 7, 10. 31 H. 8. c. 10, 15. 32 H. 8. c.
22, 24, 26. 33 H. 8. c. 29. 35 H. 8. c. 1. 3, 27, 19, 37 H. 8. c. 15. 1. E. 6.
c. 2. 1. Eliz. 5. 1. 3. 4. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 8 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Iac. c. 1. 2. 3. Iac.
c. 4. 7 Iac. c. 6. The Prologues of all ancient Parliaments, and the very words
of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, (prescribed to all Members of the
Common House, Judges, Justices, Officers, Barristers, Attorneys, Sheriffs,
Graduates, Ministers and SchoolMasters by our Parliaments) abundantly
evidence;) The King of England alone (not the Custos Regni, Protector, nor any
other person whatsoever, nor the Pope himself) to be the only Supreme
Governor, Head, Magistrate of the Realm of England, and the Dominions
thereunto annexed, and that in and over all spiritual and ecclesiastical
persons, things, causes, as well as temporal, without recognizing any other
Sovereign Lord, Governor, Magistrate, for ought I find in History or Record.

10. That the causes of summoning and proroging all Parliaments ought to be
generally or particularly expressed in the Writs of Summons and Prorogation,
together with the precise days whereon, and places wherein they are to meet
upon the Summons or Prorogation; that so all may know ^ertainly at what time
and place to meet. That the days and places of their meeting and prorogation,
were absolutely in the power of our Kings, who varied them according to
emergent occasions, and the places of their necessary residence. For instance;
When the wars or affairs of Scotland drew our Kings and Nobles toward the
Northern parts, they usually summoned or prorogued their Parliaments to York,
Karlisle, Newcastle, Stanford, Lincoln, Leycester, Northampton, Cambridge,
Stainford, Conventry, Nottingham. When the wars and businesses of France called
them toward the South, they frequently summoned their Parliaments, to Winton,
Salisbury, Southampton, Canterbury. When the wars or negotiations of Wales or
Ireland occasioned their removal toward them, they convened their Parliaments
at Gloucester, Worcester, Salop, Hereford, Bristol, Oxford, or Malborough. But
most usually they were summoned and prorogued to Westminster or London, as the
center and Metropolis of the Realm, and the most indifferent and convenient
place of meeting, as the Writs of Summons and Prorogation attest.

11. That for the most part all Writs of Summons and Prorogation both to the
spiritual and temporal Lords, Kings Counsil, Sheriffs of Counties, and Wardens
of the Cinque Ports, have the self-same Test, date, Prologues; yet now and
then some of them, are different in their dates, yet very rarely in their
recitals. That there is frequently a different space of days and times between
the dates of the Writs of Summons and Resummons upon Writs of Prorogation, and
the days of the first meeting of the Parliaments, and Great Councils to which
they are summoned and elected, as you may easily discern by comparing them;
there being sometimes two months space or more, sometimes fifty days, but
usually forty days, or more (according to the Charter of King John) between
the date of the Writs and days of appearance in Parliaments, and Grand
Councils. Yet in cases of extreme necessity, upon sudden unexpected dangers, I
find two Parliaments summoned to meet within the space of forty days; as in
Hen. p. 31.
Claus. 4 E. 3. d. 19. Where there was only two and thirty days between the
date of the Writ and Parliament, which being unusual, there is an express
clause in the Writs, that it should not be drawn into consequence for the
future: So in 28 Eliz. the Writ bore date the 15th. of September, and the
Parliament was to begin the 15th. of October following, but thirty days after.
All other Writs (to my best remembrance) these two excepted, having at least
forty days between the Test, and days of appearance, that so the Members
might have competent time to prepare themselves to repair to Parliaments and
Great Councils after their Summons and Elections.

12. That in ancient times our Parliaments and Great Councils were more
frequently summoned to meet and See p, 7, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24,
27, 30, 63, 64, 162, 164, 168, 169, 171. 343, 348, etc.
appear on the Lords Day, than on any other day of the week; which abuse in
succeeding times was reformed and quite discontinued even in times of Popery,
as well as since the reformation of Religion.

13. That our Kings upon extraordinary public dangers, and other occasions,
may summon Parliaments, Great Councils, Convocations as often as they think
meet: That they were anciently summoned once or twice every year at least (and
some times thrice, four or five times in one year) according to the ancient
Constitution in the. Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c 5. Spelmanni Council. p. 153.
Council at Hereford, Anno 673. Can. 7. The Law of Horne^ Myrrour. p. 1. Cooks
1. Instit. f. 110. ^.
King Alfred, Rotul. Ordinationum, 5 E. 2. n. 31. 4 E. 3. c. 14. Rot. Parl. n.
14. 36. E. 3. cap. 10. 50. E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 181. 1 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 95.
2. R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 4. 5. and 16 Carol. cap. 1.

14. That the more weighty, difficult, pressing, urgent the occasions and
dangers were of summoning Parliaments the Sea p. 13, 14, 19, 21, 27, 28, 44,
177.
more importunate, vehement, urgent, mandatory, minatory, and compulsary, were
the expressions, mandates, clauses in the Writs of Summens for the Lords and
Commons personal appearance and attendance, without admitting any excuses, or
procurations, and not to depart from them without special license.

15. That when any public weighty businesses intended to be propounded,
dispatched in one Parliament or Great Council, by reason of other businesses,
or shortness of time, could not be propounded or concluded, therein; thereupon
See p. 27, 28, 29, 32, 41, 43, 177.
another Parliament or Council was soon after called to dispatch it, the day
and place whereof was sometimes appointed in and by the Parliament next
preceding before its dissolution.

16. That though anciently before the word Parliamentum came in use among our
Ancestors, Great Councils were the same in substance with Parliaments; yet
since the summoning of Knights, Citizens, Bu^gesses and Barons of the Ports to
Parliaments, and the insertion of Parliamentum, into the Writs of Summons and
Statutes, you may ob^erve some differences See p. 19, 20, ^4, 30, 38, 39, 40,
4^, 48, 52, 57, 62, 63, 174, 187, to 192.
between Parliaments and Councils, and the Writs of Summons to them, which are
frequently distinguished in the margin of the Clause Rolls; by this different
entry; Summunitio Parliamenti, De veniendo ad Parliamentum, etc. and Summonitio
Concllil, de veniendo ad Concilium, etc. The principal differences between them
are these.

1. That many Bishops, Abbots and Nobles are usually omitted in the Summons to
Councils, which were usually summoned to Parliaments, and seldom omitted in
the summons to them, unless absent in foreign parts.

2. That many persons were summoned to Councils, which we never find summoned
to Parliaments.

3. That there is no Clause of Praemunientes in the Writs of Summons to
Councils issued to Archbishops, and Bishops, to summon their Chapters, Deans,
Archdeacons, and Clergy of their Diocese; as there is usually in their Writs of
Summons to Parliaments.

4. That Writs of Summons to Councils, issued to the Lords and Great men are
seldom accompanied with any Writs of Election for Knights, Citizens, Burgesses
and Barons of Ports issued to Sheriffs, or the Warden of the Cinqueports; as
Writs of Summons to Parliaments are; and if any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses
be summoned to them, it is in a different manner and number, than when they
were summoned to Parliaments.

5. Writs of Summons to Parliaments are usually accompanied with Writs of
Summons to the Kings Counsils, but those to Councils are never attended with
such Writs, distinct from those issued to the spiritual and temporal Lords, as
Writs of Summons to Parliaments are. Which differences some injudicious Writers
and Antiquaries not observing; have both confounded those Writs together as
one, and mistaken one of them frequently for the other.

17. That the principal end, See p. 11, 12, 13, 29, 45, 48, 49, 53, 54, 56, 59,
63, 64, 67, 74, 88, 93. Ho^ns Myrrour, chapter 5. sect 11. p. 282.
scope of summoning Parliaments ought to be the common benefit, ease, profit,
welfare of the people, the execution, promotion of public Justice, the Peace
and good Government of the Realm, the reformation of all public grievances,
and oppressions, the enacting of wholesome Laws, the maintenance of the Great
Charters and Liberties of the people, and freeing them from all unjust
exactions, impositions, taxes, not granted by Parliament, nor warranted by Law;
the necessary defense of the Realm by common consent against foreign enemies;
and not to exact and impose unnecessary, insupportable, excessive, endless Aids
and Taxes on the people.

18. That no public war ought to be undertaken, See p. 6, 7, 8, 12. 17, 45,
46, 6^, 68, 70. 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 131, to ^24, 232, 233, 234.
nor no Aids, Taxes, Imposts, Customs or Tallages imposed on, or exacted,
levied on the people by our Kings, or any other, but only by common consent,
and Grant of the Lords and Commons in a full and free Parliament, though it be
for the necessary defense of the Kingdom by Land or Sea, the defense or
regaining of the Lands and Rights of the Crown in foreign parts; and that
only in moderate and just proportions, granted only for a short season, and
leavyed in a legal manner. Nor no men's Rights precluded or forejudged in
Parliament by any general Act, before they be heard. Nor the Clergy taxed by
the Lords and Commons, but only by themselves in their convocations.

19. That the Writs of Summons to Parliaments enjoining all the temporal Earls,
Peers, Lords, and Barons of the Realm, and commanding them upon and in the
Love, Faith, Homage, Allegiance they owe unto the King, to appear in proper
person in their Parliaments, and that with a Quanunque excusation^ cessant^;
(...) and salvationem Regni nostri and Ecclesiae Anglicanae and expeditionem
dictorum negotiorum diligitis, Nullatenus omittatis, etc. as the Writs enjoin
them. And the Writs de 23 H. 6. c. 12. 6. H. 8. c. 16. Register^ 192 Cooks 4.
Instit. p. 46. 1 H. 5. Rot. Parl. n. 26.
Expensis Militum, and Burgensium levandis (issued only after each Parliament
ended, not before) allowing every Knight, Citizen, Burgess, and Baron of the
Ports his wages, In Ueniendo, Morando, et Redeundo; both in coming to,
continuing at, and returning from the Parliament when dissolved; (forfeited by
his departure thence without special license:) It must needs be the highest
contempt against the Kings authority, the greatest injury, affront to the
persons summoned, and those for whom they serve as Trustees or Attorneys, the
most audacious, apparent violation of the Privileges and Freedom of
Parliaments, for any person or persons whatsoever, by mere armed force, or
other Machiavillian practices, to suspend or seclude any Lord, or other Member
duly summoned, elected, returned from sitting, voting, and discharging his
trust in the Parliament House: Which the King and all his loyal subjects are
bound in public Justice carefully to prevent; as is evident not only by the
forecited passages and Records, (p. 27. 28 177. 219. to 222.) but by these two
memorable Writs and Patents purposely issued for this purpose, in the case of
the Archbishop of York.

There happening Mat. Farker. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. tan. p. 113. 114. 124. 125^^
198. 333. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops in Canterbury and York.
many differences between the Archbishops of Canterbury and York in former
times, about carrying up their Crosses before them in one another Provinces,
when summoned to Councils and Parliaments, to the great disturbance of the
public peace and proceedings in Parliament, often interrupted, prorogued,
adjourned by this means, and their absenting themselves from them, when
summond out of their own Provinces, the Parliament at York (as some others
before it) being adjourned upon this occasion. Anno. 6. E. 3. as the Writ of
Prorogation to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Claus. 6. E. 3. m. 4. dorso
recites; hereupon the King to prevent the like inconveniences and Archbishops
absence, issued this special writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, not to
prejudice or interrupt the Archbishop of York or his servants, for carrying his
Cross before him within his Province, nor to enforce them to lay it down in
coming to, continuing at, and returning from this Parliament at Westminster to
which he was summoned.

Claus. 6. E. 3. m. 13. dorso.
Rex Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi,
totius Angliae Primati, Salutem. Cum dudum tempore celebris memoriae Domini
Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae patris nostri, inter tunc Archiepiscopum Cantuar.
praedecessorem vestrum, and Venerabilem Patrem Willielmum Archiepiscopum
Ebor-Angliae Primatem, pro malis and dissens^onibus quae saepius ex bajulatione
Crucis Praedecessorum vestrorum in Eboracensi Provincia, and Cruci^
Archiepiscoporum Eborum, in Provincia Cantuariensi oriebantur, sedandis and
pacificandis, fuisset in praesentia ipsius Pa^ris nostri and Praelatorum and
aliorum Magnatum de Regno nostro plurimorum, ut pro certo dedicimus, ordinatum;
Quod praefatus Praedecessor vester and successores sui ad Parliamenta and
Tractatus dicti Patris nostri and Haeredum suorum quae infra dictam Ebor.
Provinciam teneri contigerint, and praefatus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus and
ipsius successores ad hujusmodi Parliamenta and Tractatus infra dictam Camuar.
Provinciam tenenda, ad mandatum ipsius Patris nostri and haeredum suorum
venientes Cruces suas ante se erectas portarent absque perturbatione inibi
facienda, NE REGIA ET COMMUNIA REGNI N. GOTIA EA OCCASION IMPEDIENTUR: ac
praefatus Archiepiscopus Eborum ad Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Westmon. in
crastino Nativitatis Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, ad
tractandum Nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis and Magnatibus Regni nostri super
diversis and arduis negotiis Nos and Statum Regni nostri contingentibus, jam de
mandato nostro sit venturus: Nos nolentes nostra and Regni nostri negotia
occasion dissensionum hujusmodi aliqualiter retardari, sed volentes concordiam
praedictam quantum ad Nos attinet firmiter observari; Vobis injungendo
mandamu^, quod eidem Archiepiscopo Eborum seu hominibus suis super bajulatione
Crucis ejusdem Archiepiscopi ante se infra vestram Provinciam in veniendo ad
dictum Parliamentum, ibidem moran do and exinde ad propria redeundo, non
inferatis, seuper alios inferri vel procurari aliqualiter faciatis dampnum,
vituperium, impedimentum aliquod, seu gravamen, contra formam concordiae
memoratae. Test Rege apud Kyderminster. xviil, die Augusti, Anno Regni sui
sexio.

And lest any others by the Archbishop of Canterburies instigation, and menaces
of excommunication should instigate any Officers or others (as his Autiquitates
Eccles. Brit. p. 1^8. 333.
Predecessors had done) to interrupt the Archbishop of York or his servants,
and deny them meat, drink or lodging for their moneys, for carrying his Cross
erected before him within the Province of Canterbury, the King directed this
special Inhibition and Mandate to them, of the same tenor and date with the
Writ to the Archbishop by these Letters Patents.

Patent. An. 6. E. 3. part. 2. m. 15.
Rex, Vicecomitibus, Majoribus, Ballivis, and omnibus aliis fidelibus suis tam
infra libertates quam extra ad quos etc. salutem. Cum Venerabilis Pater
Willielmus Archiepiscopus Ebor. Angliae Primas, ad Parliamentum nostrum quod
apud Westminster. in crastino Nativitatis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. tenere
ordinavimus de mandato nostro sit venturus, Vobis mandumus, quod eid^m
Archiepiscopo aut hominibus suis in personis aut rebus eorum super bajulatione
Crucis ipsius Archiepiscopi ante se in veniendo ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum,
ibidem morando, and exinde ad propria redeundo non inferatis, seu quantum in
vobis est ab aliis inferri permittatis dampnum, impedimentum aliquod, seu
gravamen, sed eis potius salvum and securum conductum cum per destrictum
vestrorum local transitum fecerint, suis sumptibus habere faciatis, quotiens
and quando per ipsos, seu eorum aliquo^ super hoc ex part nostra fueritis
requisiti. In cujus rei etc. (has literas fieri fecimus Patentes) usque ad
festum Omnium Sanctorum prox. futur. duraturas. Test Rege apud Kyderminster.
18. die Augusti, Anno Regni sui sexto. Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.

If our Kings had then so great a care, that neither of these two Prelates, nor
their successors, nor any other of his officers or subjects by their
instigation, should interrupt or disturb each other about this great
controversy of Crosse-bearing within each others Province, in coming to,
residing at, or returning to any Parliaments to which our Kings and their
heirs should legally summon them; nor seclude each other from sitting in them
upon any pretense or difference between them; Then by the self same reason, all
other lawful Members both of the Lords and Commons House, ought to enjoy the
self same Protection, Privilege, Freedom, immunity, and no ways to be
interrupted, molested, disturbed by any other Officers, Subjects, Persons or
Members whatsoever from freely repairing to, residing in, or returning from our
Parliaments; much less to be forcibly secluded out of them by armed guards,
new oaths, or popular tumults; Neither may, can, ought the House of Commons
alone, nor any prevailing party in it, to exclude, eject any duly elected,
returned Member, once admitted, without any Legal accusation, trial, cause at
all; nor yet for betraying of his trust, or misdemeaning himself as a Member
after his election, nor for any real offense as a Member, without and against
the Kings and Lords concurrent Judgments and assents, (in whom alone the power
of Judicature resides in such as well as in all other causes, as I have My Plea
for the Lords, p. 371. to 419.
elsewhere evidenced by unanswerable Presidents and the rules of right reason)
he being summoned only by the Kings Writ and authority, empowered, trusted by
his electors only, as their peculiar Trustee, Attorney (not his fellow Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses) to do and assent to such things as shall be ordained by
the King, Nobles and Common Counsel of the Realm, touching the weighty
public affairs of the King and Kingdoms, and obliged anciently by Manucaptors,
and since by their Indentures of retorn, See Cooks 4. Instit. p. 15. to 21. 5
R. 2. S^at. 2. c. 4. My Plea for the Lords, p. 29. 9. H. 8. c. 16.
and our Laws, not to depart from the Parliament, without the Kings special
license, under pein of his indignation, and other penalties: Therefore no more
to be suspended, secluded, ejected, imprisoned by his fellow-Commoners, without
the Kings and Lords concurrent Judgments and Assents, than one Judge or
Justice on the Bench can unjustice, unjudge, uncommission another; one Trustee,
Executor or Attorney discharge his fellow Trustees, Executors, Attorneys of
their trusts; one Grand Jury man thrust another out of the panell without the
Judges consent; or one Common Counsel man of a City, or Livery man of a Company
James Baggs case, Cooks 11 Reports, f. 93. t^ 100.
disfranchise and discommon another, without the consent or judgment of the
Mayor and Aldermen of the City, or Master and Wardens of the Company whereof
they are Members; Whatever exorbitant irregular practices have of late times
been usurped by, or presidents made in the Commons House to the contrary,
almost to the total, if not final subversion of all future Parliaments and
their privileges; It being a Bracton, l. 5. c. 5. f 412. See my Ardua Regni.
Maxim in Law and Reason; Par in parem nonhabet Imperium, multo minus
Superioritatem, especially in the Kings own Parliament, and Supreme Court of
Justice, wherein See my Plea for the Lords.
himself and his- Nobles only sit as supreme Judges, not the Commons, as a
distinct Court and independent Judicature of themselves, as some would fancy
them in their Utopian brains and practices; much less can they ^e^^ude, vote
down any Members of the House of Peers, or the whole ancient House of Lords, or
dishinherit them of their Birthrights, as some furious Bedlam Members of a
dismembered, dissolved House of Commons have most insolently and injuriously,
without hearing, trial, (against their own Acts, Declarations, Protestations,
Vows, Covenants, Commissions, Trusts,) attempted to intrude themselves into
their places and Tribunals, and make themselves more than Lords and Caesar's,
not only over their Fellow-Commoners, but our Kings, Peers, Parliaments and
Kingdoms, which they have trampled under their Papal feet, and metamorphosed
at their pleasures, into sundry misshapen, mutable, unsettled new models, to our
apparent approaching ruin, if God of his infinite mercy prevent it not by
their reestablishment upon their ancient bases and foundations.

20. That if the forcible seclusion or disturbance of any Lord, or Member of
the Lords House duly summoned, who ought of right to sit, vote in the Lords
House, be so great a breach of Privilege, Injury, as I have evidenced, then
the forcible suppression, seclusion of all the ancient Peers and House of
Lords, by any real or pretended Members of the late House of Commons, contrary
to the express Clauses, Forms of all ancient Writs, and the very writs in 16.
Caroli, without any legal jurisdiction, hearing, trial, must needs be a
greater breach of trust, Privilege, Injustice in them, fit to be redressed for
the future peace, Justice, settlement of our distracted Nations, and restoring
our Parliaments to their pristine Splendor, Honor, ends, uses, for the
redressing of all public Grievances.

If any Republicans, Objection.
Army Officers, New Grandees, or others, here object, as some now do; That it
will be both perilous and inconvenient to the Subjects, the House of Commons
and its Members, to restore the ancient Lords and House of Peers to their
pristine Rights, Privileges, Jurisdiction, Judicature over them, in that
latitude I have asserted, evidenced it by Histories and Records in my Plea for
them, without prescribing some new just bounds and regulations unto them by the
Commons House.

I answer. Answer.
1. That the Lords being the only original ancient Members of our Great
Councils, Parliaments, many hundreds of years before any Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, or House of Commons were called, admitted to them by the King and
House of Lords, and receiving no power, Judicature or Jurisdiction at all from
the Commons, but what they have of right enjoyed, exercised in all precedent
ages, without the least complaint, opposition or contradiction of the Commons
in any former Parliaments before 17. Caroli; The Commons have no more
authority, right, reason, ^urisdiction to limit, or restrain this their ancient
right, Judicature, Privilege (much less to abrogate) then the Grand or Petty
Jury have to limit, regulate the Judges or Justices Commissions, Authority on
the Bench; or the Tenants the Jurisdiction of their Lords Courts, or every
Committee of the Commons House, the Excesses of the House it self; or the
Unparliamentary Iuncto, which voted them down and engaged against them, without
the least color of Jurisdiction, Law, reason, hearing, impeachment, trial,
had to usurp such a transcendent power over them, not to be paralelld in any
age, nor now approved by assenting to it.

2ly. That the old Lords and House of Peers in no cases ever exercised such an
exorbitant, arbitrary, tyrannical Jurisdiction, Illegal power in all kinds,
as the Commons House, and every of their Committees and Sub-Committees of
Examinations, Sequestrations, Compositions, Sale of Delinquents estates, Crown
Lands, Obstructions, Appeals, Scandalous Ministers, and High Courts of Justice
have done, without the least Report to the House it self of their proceedings,
both over the King and his Posterity; the Peers of the Realm, their fellow
Members, (secluded, secured, imprisoned, close imprisoned, ejected, exiled by
them without any cause or hearing at all) and their fellow Commoners of all
sorts Exact Collection, p. 321.
deprived of their Inheritances, Estates, Offices, Liberties, Callings, Lives,
and the benefit of the Laws themselves, for not taking their new Oaths and
Engagements, contrary to Law, and their former legal Oaths, Leagues and
Solemn Covenant and Protestation, w^^hout a legal Indictment, or trial by a
Jurie of their equals, or witnesses viva voce upon Oath, since their
slighting, suppressing of the old House of Lords; who should have restrained,
reformed these their unparallelld extravagancies, which I could prove by
hundreds of sad Instances, and have briefly hinted in my ^lea for the old
Lords, page 413. to 419. For which very reason they ought now to be restored;
Exact Collection, p. 321.
being an excellent Bank and Screen between the Prince and People, to assist
each against any encroachments on the other, and by just judgments to preserve
that Law, which ought to be the Rule between every one of the three, and
trusted with a Iudicatory power to this very end.

3ly. Some of those very Members of the late Commons House, Army, and
Whitehall, who would disseise them of their House, Privileges, Birthrights, and
ancient Jurisdiction, before they took upon them the Title of Lords, or of the
House of Lords, as pretended Members of the Commons House, a little before and
since their votes against the old House of Lords; as Committees of that House;
or Commissioners in their new ^rected High Courts of Justice, Members of the
Counsil of State at White Hall, or Counsil of Army Officers; or Major Generals,
and Deputy Major Generals, have acted a thousand, times more exorbitantly,
arbitrarily, tyrannically to the subversion of the Fundamental Laws, Liberties,
properties, Government, Justice of the Nation, oppressing, improverishing,
vexing, dishinheriting, destroying, enslaving of the Freemen of England, than
ever any old Lords, or House of Lords, or Kings of England in Parliament
heretofore did in any age whatsoever; Witness their usurpations of a more than
absolute Parliamentarie power to themselves, by their own Votes, Or^ers,
Declarations alone, to alter, new model (over and over) the whole frame of our
Parliaments, Laws, and public Government; their electing Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses for what they styled a Parliament, without the least privity or
election of the people; their dissolving, and declaring the long Parliament to
be dissolved, against an express Act of Parliament; their repealing many old
Laws, Acts, Oaths, enacting new Laws contrary to them; creating New Treasons
and misprision of Treasons; yea imposing heavy, excessive New Taxes, Customs,
See their Whitehall Ordinance of 24. December. 17. March 1653. and May 4. June 8.
1654. The first part of my Seasonable Legal, Historical Vindication. London.
1655 p 67. to 100. The Instructions to the Major Generals; My Summary
Collection of the Fundamental Rights Liberties, Properties of all English
Freemen. p. 53. to 64.
Excises of all sorts, on the three Nations, not only in their private
Westminster conventions, but by their Army and Whitehall Ordinances (amounting
to a large Folio Volume) without any Parliament or legal Act of Parliament;
ordering them to be levied, by fines, forfeitures, sales of the refusers real
and personal es^ates, imprisonments, soldiers quartering, and the like;
Injoysing All Courts of Justice, Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Officers of this
Commonwealth, Counselors, Attorneys, and other Persons, to conform themselves
accordingly without any opposition or dispute whatsoever; and committing their
very Counsel to the Tower as Traitors or Grand Delinquents, only for arguing
their Cases upon an Habeas Corpus in Westminster Hall, according to Law and
their Duties; Their taking away the lives, liberties or estates, freeholds of
thousands, without any legal Trial, or Indictment of their Peers; their
banishing, confining, imprisoning, close imprisoning hundreds, yea thousands at
a time, upon mere fears and jealousies; and binding them and all their servants
in excessive bonds with sureties; their disfranchising Majors, Bailiffs,
Aldermen, others in corporations; enforcing diverse to release their legal
actions, Judgments, Executions, and committing them at their pleasures till
they did it, against the express tenor not only of the Grand Charter,
Petition of Right, and other. Acts, but the very letter of the late Act; For
preventing of Inconveniences, happening by the long intermission of
Parliaments, The Acts for the 3. first subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage; The
Act for regulating the Privy Counsel, For declaring unlawful and void the
late proceedings touching Ship-mony, and other Acts passed by some of their own
Votes, in the Parliament of 16. and 17. Caroli, of which, or the like
exorbitances, no ancient Peers, or House of Lords, were ever yet guilty. And if
some of those persons who would usurp, or abridg the old Lords power have been
so arbitrarie and tyrannical in all kinds, before they claimed the Title of
Lords, or House of Lords, how exorbitant, in all probability, are they likely
to grow in a short time, (having Command in the Army, and other Courts) if
they should be established in their new Lordly Power, and the old House of
Lords put by, who should correct, restrain these their unparalelld Excesses for
the whole Nations ease and benefit.

4. If these new Peers, be in truth, Law, Herauldry, no true or real Lords,
Barons, Peers of the Realm by their Writs of Summons, for the premised reasons
(but See p. 240.
merely imaginary, Titular and false ones, like those created by the usurper
King Stephen;) then the House of Commons can neither in Law nor verity agree or
assent to any thing that shall be ordained by them, according to the tenor of
the Writs of Summons; nor establish any settlement that can be reputed legal or
obligatory to Posterity, in a Parliamentary Way, if the ancient real Peers
and legal House of Lords be set aside and disowned. And therefore they must of
necessity own, close with them alone, and remit them to their old hereditary
right, else they can never make nor expect any real lasting settlement of our
distracted State and Government; and all they vote will quickly prove abortive,
illegitimate; as the late New-models, Instruments, and Advices have done.

5ly. The setting aside the ancient Lords and House of Peers, and establishing
their very Disseisors in their places, as the only future Lords and House of
Peers: will both justify all their recited Exorbitances, Excesses, Violences,
and Tyrannical proceedings against the old Lords, their Fellow Commons, and
others, (transcending Straffords, Caterburies and the worst old Counsel-Table
Lords excesses by many degrees) and ratify, yea reward, crown them with the
highest public Honor, Trust, Power they are capable of, even in Parliaments
themselves. Which will not only probably excite, encourage others in
succeeding times, to the like dangerous extravagancies, excesses, to the
public prejudice and desolation; but animate them, when settled in their new
Lordly Authority, to pursue their former practices, and turn greater Tyrants,
Oppressors in all kinds then formerly they have been, to the utter enslaving of
our Nations, and embroyling them in new Tumults. Yea, how far it may tend to
the Total and Final suppression of the Commons House it self in succeeding
times, is worthy sad and serious consideration. For if the Commons House shall
not only silently connive at, but openly approve and assent to the dissolving,
suppressing of the old Lords and their House, by pretext of former illegal,
unrighteous Votes ( Ea quae contra leges siunt non solum inutilia, sed etiam
pro infectis habenda sunt. Justin. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 22. Gratian, Cause. 25. qu. 2.
mere nullities by all Laws) made by a Fragment of a dissolved House of
Commons, sitting under a force, not having the least Jurisdiction or power of
Judicature over them, against all rules of Justice, the very fundamental Laws
of the Land, the undoubted Rights and Privileges of Parliament, Prescription
time out of mind, all old and late Acts, Records of Parl. their very Solemn
League, Covenant, Protestation, and hundreds of late Declarations and
Remonstrances to the contrary: They may justly fear, and well expect by way of
divine and human retaliation, that their very New erected House of Lords when
once established, having the power of Judicature (if not of the Army) in them,
to preserve themselves from the like Usurpations of the Commons over them in
after ages, will upon the first opportunity, Vote down (by this their
president) the whole House of Commons, and quite suppress it for the future,
as Vselesse, dangerous, factious, Tumul^uous, seditious, arbitrary,
Tyrannical, oppressive to the people, degenerated from its ancient duty,
bounds moderation; as not only Mr. John Rushworths Historical Collections, p.
43, 44, 47, 50, 51, 53, 57, 140, 151, 195, 360, 362, 365, 410, to 417, 643,
631, 672, etc. Appendix, p. 1, 2, etc.
some of our late Kings, but of those new intended Lords have publicly
branded, proclaimed it to be, in The Declaration of the General Officers of the
Army, 22 August 1653 p. 4, 5, 6. A true State of the Commonwealth of England,
p. 2. to 14.
late printed Declarations; and constitute all future Parliaments only of a
House of Lords and Great men of the Realm, (assisted with the Counsel and
Justices) without any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports, or House
of Commons, according to all ancient long continued Presidents in former ages,
before 49. H. 3. when (for ought appears) the Commons were first admitted, and
called unto Parliaments out of mere grace by the Kings Writs: Or at least the
disinherited ancient Nobility (in case they regain their pristine Rights of
Session, Judicature in Parliament, without the Commons assistance, of which
there is no absolute future improbability) may by way of Justice and
retaliation, set the Commons House quite aside, for their late transcendent
breaches, abuses of their Trusts toward them, in secluding, and voting them
quite down, against their Writs, Indentures, Duties, Oaths; by which they have
legally forfeited all their Privileges and right of Parliamentary session,
according to this received Maxim in all Laws, Gratian, Causa 25. qu. 2. f.
493. See Littleon, sect. 178. Cooks 1 Instit. f. 23. 11 Report, f. 98. 9 H 6.
55. Brook Officer 44, 48, 51. Here, p 450.
Privilegium amittat qui improbabili temeritate quod non accepit usurpat; and
sua authoritate non legitime utitur, sed abutitur potestate. Which weighty
consideration (though seconded with none else) should engage all Commoners to
pursue the golden rule, precept of Christ himself, as well in point of
prudence, conscience, Justice, as morality toward the old Lords: Matthew. 7. 12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets: For with the same measure
that ye meat withal, it shall be measured to you again, as Luke 6. 38. Judge.
1. 6. 7. Psalm. 137. 8. Rev. 13. 10. c. 16. 5. 6. Ezekiel. 35, 10. 11. 14. 15.
Obad. 15. 16. Joel. 3. 6. 7. 8. Genesis 9. 6. Mat. 26. 52. Iam. 2. 13. do all
infallibly resolve us, as well as late experiments.

21. That the first and principle things specified in the Writs of summons, as
the prime ends for which Parliaments are summoned, is to debate and consult of
quaedam specialia and ardua negotia Nos, et Statum regni nostri, et etiam Iura,
Salvationem, et Defensionem Coronae nostrae Regiae (as well as Regni nostri et
Ecclesie Anglicanae) specialiter and intime contingentib^s. And all Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports elected, returned to serve in Parliament
in the Commons House, receive plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se, et
Communitate Comitatuum, Civitatum, Burgorum et Portuum, from those Commonalties
who elect them, only ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem de
communi Consilio Comitum, Baronum, or dicti Regni nostri contigerit ordinari
super Negotiis antedictis, quod hoc breve, or, prout breve illud in se exigit
and requirit; as the express words of the Sea Retorna Brevium, Cromptons
Jurisdict. of Courts, f. 2. Daltons Office of Sheriffs, and the Returns and
Indentures in the Tower, and Rolls.
Sheriffs returns and their Indentures evidence: Therefore their enacting any
thing by themselves alone, without the Earls, Barons and Lords House; or
Majoritie of their Fellow Commoners; or against their Counsel, Votes, advice,
to the prejudice, destruction, subversion of the Kings Person, State, Kingdom,
and the Prerogative, Rights of his Royal Crown and Dignity.* which they were
purposely summoned by the King, and authorized, entrusted only by their
Electors, Commonalties, people, to preserve, support, and defend; and to do and
consent to nothing else inconsistent with, or repugnant to these ends; is the
highest prevarication, treachery, violation of their Trusts, Duties, that can
possibly be imagined, deserving the most exemplarie punishments: And those
Republicans who lately acted in this kind, to the destruction of the King,
kingdom, the prerogatives, Rights of the Crown, Parliament, Lords and Monarchy
of England, upon this pretext, See their Declaration Votes of Jan. 2. Feb. 6.
March 17. 19. 1648. The 2. Part of the History of Independency.
that they were entrusted, empowered thus to do by the people, and those who
did elect them; are the most notorious Impostors, Prevaricators, Infringers,
Peruerters, Falsifiers of their trusts and power in this kind that ever
England yet produced; as all the forecited Writs, compared with their their
retorns, unanimously resolve, against their false absurd pretenses to the
contrary, wherewith they have endeavored to blind and cheat the people; in
whom they verbally voted, placed the Sovereign power, only by this forged,
hypocritical pretext, actually to usurp, appropriate it to themselves, as their
Trustees, and Representatives; presently thereupon in all their new published
Knacks, Papers, intitling themselves alone, (not the people) the SUPREME
AUTHORITY OF THE NATION, making the people greater Slaves and Uassalls to them
in respect of their Laws, Lives, Members, Liberties, Freeholds, Franchises,
Properties, Estates, than ever they were in any age, under Beheaded King
Charles, or the worst of all our Kings and Lords; who never acted half so
arbitrarily, tyrannically in every kind, as they, their See A true State of
the Commonwealth of England, p. 8. to 16.
Committees, High Courts of Justice, Counsils of State, Major Generals,
Excise-men, and other Officers have done; since their late Exorbitant
Anti-parliamentary Usurpations, Innovations, Proceedings, under the disguise
and Notion of the Parliament of England, without A KING, and HOUSE OF LORDS, or
the secluded MAIORITY OF THE COMMONS HOUSE it self; the forced absence,
seclusion of all and every of which 3. made them no real Parliament at all,
but an Anti-Parliamentary Conventicle, and all their mi^intitled Acts,
Ordinances, mere Nullities both in Law and Conscience, fit to be enternally
exploded by the whole English Nation, and all future new Parliaments, to
prevent the like pernicious Extravagances in after ages, which have involved us
in so many various Miseries, Wars, Perplexities, Fears, Dangers, Oppressions,
Factions, Troubles, Changes, Unsettlements, and Confusions, which, without Gods
insinite mercy, presage naught else but total and final Desolation both to our
Church, State, and Nations.

Our Dyer, f. 60. a. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 1. 3.
Law Books resolve the Parliament to be a Corporation, consisting of the King
as thief head, the Lords as the Superior, and the Commons as inferior Members,
who ought mutually to preserve each others interests, and unite their counsels
for the public good, without any seizure or encroachment upon one another. For
as there is nothing but giddiness, torture, distemper, consumption,
restlesness, sickness, inactivity, maimedness, and confusion in the body
natural, whiles the head, or chief joints, bones, parts of it are inverted,
dislocated, fractured, severed, and kept out of joint; and no other means left
when thus distorted, to restore it to rest, health, soundness, activitie, and
prevent its dissolution by death, but with all speed and cate to restore every
Member, bone, joint to its proper place, posture, office, and preserve them
from subsequent dislocations and fractures. So it has been and will be with
this body Politic: It will never be reduced to its pristine health, soundness,
vigor, use, ends; or become medicinal, to settle or advance the public weal of
the Nation, till all its dislocated broken Members be restored to their due
places and power in it, without which it will soon come to utter desolation, as
1. Cor. 12. 12, to 31. Gal. 5. 15. Mat. 12. 25. Isa 19. 2. 14, 15. Prove. 30.
21. 22, will assure all carnal Politicians who think the contrary,

22. That as it was the prudence, policy, justice of our Parliaments, Nobles,
Great men in former ages, not to vote, conclude, or enact any thing in
Parliament, when any of their chief Members See Here, p. 28, 29, 31, 41, 43,
177. My Plea for the Lords, p. 23. to 30. 49 to 55.
were absent, or not summoned, or restrained from them, and to determine all
Great Affairs in FULL PARLIAMENT: So it was also their special care to preserve
the Jurisdiction of the Kings Courts of Common Law, as a chief right and flower
of the Crown, and the ancient Laws and Customs of the Realm, against all
encroachments upon them by Popes, Bishops, or any others, as is evident by 2^
H. 3. c. 9. An Exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower, 1. Table, Law, Old
and Common Law.
sundry instances elsewhere cited; and by this memorable Writ of Prohibition,
isiued in King. H. 3 his name, on the behalf of the Nobles of England to the
Bishop of Durbam; Proving the interpretation of the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, (in any doubtful cases of public concernment) to belong only to the
King and his Nobles, ( See Here, p. 366. to 394.
assisted with the Judges and Counsil) not to the Clergy, Commons, or any
other person or persons.

Claus. 43, H. 3. 4. dorso.
R^x Waltero Episcopo Dunolm: salutem. Cum secundum Leges et Consuetudines
regni nostri, quae^tio de Jure Patronatus Ecclesiarum Regni ejusdem, adjus and
dignitatem Coronae nostrae pertineat, et de soro nostro, vel eorum qui Regalia
jura de nostravel Praedecessorum nostrorum largitione susceperunt, de plano
existunt. Ac de COMMUNI CONSILIO PROCERUM NOSTRORUM DUXIMUS PROVIDENDUM ET
FIRMITER STATUENDUM, ut leges ^t consuetudines Regni nostri super hiis et
aliis, ab omnibus observentur qui concessis fibi regalibus, et aliis
Libertatibus gaudent, vel de unitate ac pace nostra et regni nostri censeri
voluerint. Cumque interpraetationes Legum et Consuetudinum praedictarum AD NOS
ET PROCERES NOSTROS PERTINEANT, NEC AD ALIVM VEL ALIOS ipsas leges vel
consuetudines declarare vel interpretari possit aut debeat pertinere: Vobis DE
CONSILIO PROCERVM NOSTRORVM PROHIBEMVS, ne ^icut usum Regalium libertatum quas
vos habere praetenditis gaudere volueritis, alicui interpraetationi per
quemcunque alium factae vel faciendae innitamini, vel aliquid per eam fieri
procuretis, vel fieri pronunciatis, contra leges et consuetudines in regno
nostro usitatas, et hactenus observatas. Maxim cum secundum leges et
consu^tudines supradictas judicari debeat ad quos vel quem, et per cujusmodi
assignationes seu concessiones debeat jus Patronatus cum Maneriis vel
Feodalibus in Regno nostro, ad alios transire. Quod si super re praedicta
aliter fieri seu judicari contigerit, ipsas libertates regales praenotatas ad
Nos per vestrum abusum censemus devolvendas. Test Rege apud Westin. 11. die
Septembris. Per Comitem Gloucestriae, and Hug. le Bigod Justic. Angliae, EX
PART MAGNATUM.

What else is worthy Observation, from or concerning these, or other
Parliamentarie Writs, I shall adjourn to the succeeding Parts of this Register,
Calendar and Survey; till whose publications,

Horatius, ^ p. 200.
Dimidium facti qui been caepit, habet. FINIS.

