THE MODERATION OF THE Church of England, Considered As useful for allaying the
present distempers which the indisposition of the Time has contracted.

BY TIMOTHY PULLER, D. D.

Pref. to the Book of Com. Pr. It has been the wisdom of the Church of
England, ever since the first compiling her public Liturgy, to keep the Mean
between the two Extremes --

-- In which review we have endeavored to observe the like Moderation.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXIX.

NISI DOMINUS ADFUISSET NOBIS 24, Psl: 1.

Pr^^ Ieus Simpl

MODE BATION

Printed for Rich: Chiswell in St Paul's Church yard.



ANIMO ET FIDE

The Right Honble. Francis North Baron of Guilford 1703



TO THE MOST REVEREND Father in GOD WILLIAM By Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop OF CANTERBURY, Primate of all ENGLAND and Metropolitan, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
THis Essay for the Vindication of Our Church, addresseth in just Gratitude to
Your Archiepiscopal See, with this assurance, that the Moderation of the Church
of England owes it self as much to the wisdom and admirable temper of Your
Graces Predecessors, as to any one thing whatsoever, next to the most Divine
and supreme influences, which so signally governed them, and the rest of our
first Reformers, to follow incomparably the sage advice which Gregory the Great
anciently sent to Your Predecessor Austin of Canterbury; That of the diverse
usages of several Churches, he should choose what was most religious and right
for the use of the English: for (said that Bishop of Rome) things are not to be
loved for the sake of a place, but places for the sake of good things;
according to which determination of that Learned and Pious Father, it may be
easy now to decide, What Church, whose Primates, which Constitution deserves
our love and honor most: unless any will prefer that which is extravagantly
corrupt, before what is most moderately and excellently reformed.

Your Grace best knows, how that Brotherly Novit Fraternitas tua, etc. B. Greg.
Ep. ex Registro l. 12. Indic. 7. c. 3.
sort of Communication was generally preserved in the Church by other
Patriarchs, even with the Bishops of Rome, so long as these were Examples of
the same Moderation with S. Gregory; who with a Primitive Roman Courage,
protested against the insolency of their stiling themselves Universal; which
well enough agrees with the Solecism of those who call only themselves
Catholics.

Before which novel kind of Phantastries, it is well known, such as Boniface the
Martyr, the Apostle of the Germans, (as Baronius mentions Ad an. 726. n. 58.
Tom. 9.
) mutually desired advice, not only from Rome, but of the Primates of England.

And whereas (even since the first Reformation) there have been Archbishops of
Canterbury, who have not only, with wondrous success, governed, and defended
Our Church, from both sorts of Adversaries, but have testified to the Equity of
Her Rubricks, with their own Blood; when we consider what kind of adverse
parties were the Authors of Their Martyrdom (even the same who have given the
Reformed Church of England, Her two most extreme refining Trials) We must
acknowledge them in the direct succession with Your Grace, to be not only the
Glorious Instruments, but also the most famous Witnesses and Proofs of the
Moderation of our Church: who bear the first Names in Her Dipticks, and deserve
here first with Reverence to be mentioned to Your Grace: who also for your
inviolable adherence to the Church in spite of sufferings, must hereafter be
celebrated among Her Confessors.

There may be some account, why in this Argument such an undertaking as this
(were it more worthy) should especially desire Your Patronage: not only in
humble deference to the Authority Your Grace does sustain in our Church (to the
universal joy, and serious triumph of all, whose affections have not been
depraved with Schism and ill nature:) but, in a more immediate reference,
because to Your special Archiepiscopal Prerogative belongs the peculiar right
and faculty of those dispensations, which are a part of the Equity of our
Church, and her liberal benignity in that (...), which has been always
honored as a most venerable part of Her Laws.

Since therefore unto Your Clemency, is so suitably committed, in this public
Constitution, the Custody of our Churches Indulgence and Benignity; The
Moderation of the Church, with more than usual confidence, returns to Your
Grace for what her Casuists calls Inculpata Tutela; and fears not now to be
denied, since Clemency is not only the Dignity of Your Title, but Your Nature:
Neither is Your Primacy in our Church more eminent than Your Moderation is
exemplary and known unto all: Which I presume only to mention, to borrow from
thence a most Reverend Luster and Life to the Noble Truth I have defended.

And so far as I have not improperly now asserted the Cause of the Church, in
which You preside, I am sure not to sink in my trust of being supported by Your
Graces good acceptance of the sincere undertaking of

May it please Your Grace, Your most obliged, humble and dutiful Servant, TIMO.
PULLER.

TO THE READER.
IF ever the practice of Moderation, as well as any discourse thereon, were
seasonable; it may be supposed now, when for ought we know, the lasting
happiness of the Kingdom and the Church, may depend immediately upon this rare
and desirable temper, acknowledged of all most excellent.

Yet it is a most unaccountable mystery of our present condition, that
notwithstanding the late surprising discoveries have had nothing more
notorious, than that the chief design of the Jesuit Faction, among the
Romanists, has been the utter subversion of the present established Church of
England: nevertheless, they who call themselves our Protestant Dissenters,
cannot be induced to come into entire union with our excellent reformed Church;
but rather choose to unite with those Romanists in many of their unreasonable
Cavils.

One of the methods which they who are Principals or Accessories in our
Divisions, for our extirpation have used, has been to engage the outcry in
popular appeals concerning Persecution, or Moderation.

This word and thing it self has indeed much in it which is very Divine; and
therefore the more likely to be made use of with design, by those who have used
the most holy things to the most unhallowed purposes.

But I suppose the Experience which the late Age has taught us, will not so
presently be out of print in our minds, as to make us remit all our caution
against the rigours of both extremes; however they bear the same goodly
pretenses, and unite in the same reproach of our Church.

Wherefore in sincere desire to assist the truth and equity of our Churches
cause, as well as to awaken (if I may be so happy) some into a more intimate
sense of our common real interest: I thought it an act of Justice, as well as
duty, to enter some kind of Protestation, and proof also of the Moderation of
our Church.

That if our Dissenting Brethren will but please to come near, and view such
fair and open testimonies as I have enumerated; some sympathy with so just a
temper, may help to cool some of those Calentures, to assuage and allay some of
those unreasonable disorders, which have discomposed the minds of many at
present adverse to our Peace.

That while so remarkable a part of our Churches beauty appears from such a
lifting up of her Veil, so gentle and cheerful an aspect may we hope win over
some of those into better esteem of our Communion, whom any Symmetry can
affect, whom any Moderation can overcome; if they are not already
irreconcilable: that so the mildness and gentleness of our Church may no longer
aggravate their separation, with so much the more injustice, unthankfulness,
and disingenuity: even as the Moderation of our Church and Government renders
the attempts of such Romanists as are concerned in them, not only more
scandalous and pernicious, but most impious, horrid, and execrable.

As for others among us, who sometime have appeared weary of their contests;
however unsettled, hovering as it were in some motions for Union, and frequently
are toiling themselves in tedious contemplations of new Plots and Schemes of
Government; framing to themselves Idea's, not very Platonical, for peace and
settlement; I conceive a seasonable conviction among such of the real
Moderation of our Church, might save some of them their grievous labors for
the future: for how deficient they generally have been, they themselves have
showed: and if our Church is very moderate already, I need not say they have
been very superfluous.

There are indeed those who are still requiring that the Protestant Profession
among us be settled in a due Latitude; whereas we sincerely think the very thing
desired is already the true temperament of our Church: and such also as in no
sort encourages any indifferency or neutrality in Religion, nor offers any
such Principles to her Sons, as allows them, Proteus, or Vertumnus like, to be
susceptible of diverse shapes and forms in Religion; as our Adversaries who do
not understand our Church, do suspect: whereas the more any are fixed according
to the right Principles of our Church; the truer and firmer Protestants such
are, we shall manifestly prove: and the more any are such, the more truly
moderate they are, and their designs for peace must needs be the most discreet
of any, and the more to purpose.

So great a blessing I confess is less to be hoped for, so long as the Masters
of Factions have got such a mighty Dominion over the minds of their followers,
and have so far entangled them in their own passions and prejudices: neither is
it any wonder, that noise and passion, and hardy confidence, iced over with
some sanctimonious pretenses, can engage the affections of the vulgar, more
than ingenuity and real Moderation: and when once this humor obtains of
disaffecting what is settled, with a lust after Novelties; if what some love to
call the pattern in the Mount, should slide down from Heaven in the midst of
them, it would not continue long in favor; and therefore no wonder if the
Church of England is antiquated among such who are for new Modes in
Ecclesiastical matters, to gratify their sickly phansies, and most divided
interests.

While this affection is thus cherisht, and thus kept up; the mischief on it is,
as when we preach such Doctrines as the duty of Communion with the Church, and
the like; they generally are most absent, whom the same concerns most; so all
testimonies which are brought in the cause of Gods Church, are seldom taken
notice of by such, whom they are most proper to convince: among the Romanists
and the Separatists, the Keepers of the peoples understandings, not suffering
them to peruse what may awaken or enlighten them: and the more proper any thing
is for that purpose, the more industrious are they slily to stifle the
reputation of such endeavors.

However, I think it but just to vindicate unto public authority the same fair
interpretations, which all private persons would gladly have for what they say
or do: and where the Church has given mild interpretations, on purpose for the
general satisfaction of all, it is but reasonable to make recognition of the
same; and when they are perversely wrested, fairly to set them forth: and
certainly, it is our duty to consider public appointments, which oblige us,
with all respect to their true ends and measures, equally represented: and it
may be thought but a debt of gratitude for us to acknowledge such Liberties and
Indulgences as we enjoy; and to defend from malignant detractions the just
wisdom of the Church, in its excellent poise between undue extremes.

And so long as I have uprightly designed so just a duty, the easy foresight of
many ignorant or malicious exceptions has not dashed me out of countenance, but
excited me; and the more, because I hope I have not only endeavored to set
forth the Moderation of the Church, but to imitate the same: In so much, that
where any thing is spoken to our Adversaries (in our own defense) I hope it
has not taken example from their own intemperate heats: and since the Son of
Syrach has bid us (Eccl. 37. 11.) Not consult with a coward in matters of war,
nor with an envious man of unthankfulness, nor with an unmerciful man touching
kindness: we despair to communicate advice of the Churches mildness, with those
who are of unmerciful tempers themselves: therefore the more need we have all,
as well as we can, to confirm one another in the recognition of those Virtues,
which justify the wisdom of our Church, and afford our selves greater
satisfaction in our Conformity: although some are continually of such disturbed
Spirits, uneasy to themselves and morose, they can seldom allow any time to
reflect cheerfully and thankfully upon the blessings they enjoy; however they
may give us leave to delight our selves in the serious contemplation of such
proportions and measures, as in the frame of our Church are most observable.

Which cannot but afford a rare and serious pleasure as well as use; as it must
be very delightful to behold any imitation of the Divine Wisdom, which has
made all things in number, weight, and measure; which governs the World and all
his Creatures, according to unsearchable measures of Righteousness and Equity,
who dispenses all things sweetly and easily.

The more any Civil or Ecclesiastical Governments partake of such proportions,
it cannot but afford a fine and delicate reflection to find them out and admire
them: Such is the lovely prospect which we cannot but with delight take on the
goodly frame and constitution of our Church of England.

Suitable to the rare temper of our excellent Monarchy we live under, and the
most benign disposition of our Laws: which give very much to (...).. 27.
subjects industry, liberty, and happiness; and yet reserve enough to the
Majesty and Prerogative of any King.

Suitable also to the moderate Elevation of our Clime -- Nulli violabilis astro
Servat temperiem regio: non uritur aestu, Non reditura timet glaciali; Sidera
brumae: -- foelicior omni Terra solo: -- non altera credam Arva Beatorum. H.
Gro. ad Reg. Brit. Silv. l. 2.
: upon which account many have reckoned England amongst the most fortunate
Islands: a true Garden of delight. Our lot is fallen in a fair ground: yea, we
have a goodly heritage: The Zone here for Ecclesiastical affairs being very
temperate (as Sir William Boswell's expression was to the Learned Mede.)

We (says Bishop Bramhall) live in the most temperate part of the temperate
Zone, and enjoy a Government as temperate as the Climate it self: we cannot
complain of too much or too little Sun: where the beams of Sovereignty are
neither too perpendicular to scorch us, nor yet too oblique, but that they may
warm us (...). In Evagrio, l. 3. c. 14. de Alexandria.
.

The Moderation of this Church is fitted also to promote that Good nature,
which is noted to have such a peculiar sense in the English; which other
Languages do as incompletely express, as many of their models do her frame.

And which is above all, this temper is most suitable to our Christianity:
which is not only the best, but the Dean of Canterbury, Nov. 5. 78.
best natured institution in the World; which the Moderation of our Church does
properly cherish: and appears to be a most noble effect of the mild Economy of
the Gospel: in the quiet and peace of whose general reformation of the World,
Blessed be God the particular reformation of the Church among us, was very much
alike: when a singular spirit of Moderation descended upon our Church, like the
gentle dew upon the Fleece of Gideon, or as the bountiful gifts came down from
Heaven, accompanied with the sensible appearances of cloven tongues, in an
innocent and lambent flame, on the heads of the Apostles, and did them no harm:
with such harmless Peace and Moderation was the Reformation and Restoration of
our Church brought about.

But alas! since the very mildness and gentleness of our Lord Christ, by which
S. Paul so affectionately entreats the Corinthians, (2 Cor. 10. 1.) too
ineffectually prevails on the Christian World: (Notwithstanding no kind of
temper has such proper charms for the very nature of mankind) no wonder if
that Moderation which is the proper glory of the Church of England, cannot
persuade, either the Romanists or Enthusiasts, to be sensible of that wisdom
and law of kindness which attempers all the Commands and Constitutions of our
Church: wherefore I know no method which can more usefully and compendiously
demonstrate the true merit of our Churches praise, than by her Moderation, in
which all virtues as it were, by one act of comprehension, are already
contained.

And if none hitherto have on set purpose undertaken to display the same at
large, the true reason might be, there are so many Virtues in our Churches
Constitution, no wonder if none have applied their labors unto every one of
them in particular.

It is this Moderation of our Church which renders her so like the Primitive
and Apostolical pattern; and makes her have so much sympathy with the true
Catholic Church of Christ.

Unto the judgment of which Church Universal, as our Church of England submits
her self, and would at any time (as King James used to declare) refer her self
to a free and general Council, if it could be had: (Which is a worthy instance
of her real Moderation)

So and for the same reason, do I here most readily and heartily submit
whatsoever I have said or writ, to the Judgment of the Church of England: and
if in the variety of matter before me, any thing contrary to, or diverse from
the truth she asserts, has escaped me, I solemnly retract the same.

T. P.

VErum apud Sapientes, atque in famosa nobilique Ecclesia, and cujus
specialiter filius sum -- Quae dixi, absque praejudicio sane dicta sunt sanius
sapientis. Hujus praesertim Ecclesiae authoritari atque examini totum hoc,
sicut and caetera quae ejusmodi sunt, universa reservo: Ipsius si quid aliter
sapio, paratus judicio emendare.

S. Bernard Ep. 174. Ad Canon. Lugdun. Imprimatur,

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Apr. 28. 1679. Geo. Thorp, Rmo in Christo Patri and Dno Dno
Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF Moderation in general.. 1. The loud demands of late among us for
Moderation taken notice of.. 2. The specious pretenses of several Factions
thereunto, exposed.. 3. The general meaning of Moderation noted.. 4. The use of
the Greek word for Moderation ((...)) as it is borrowed from the Law,
explained.. 5. The forensick notion of Moderation applied to Moderation in
Religion.. 6. What is justly expected of those who causlesly blame our Church
with want of Moderation.. 7. Moderation considered, not only as a virtue of
public, but of private persons; both toward their Governors first, and also
toward one another.. 8. Some general rules or measures according to natural
Justice and Christianity, whereby we may judge of the Moderation of the Church;
with the design of this Treatise, declared. p. 1

Chap. II. Of the false notions of Moderation which many have taken up.

. 1. How it comes to pass that the name of Moderation is so seldom applied to
what it ought to be.. 2. The sense of that Text inquired into, Phil. 4. 5. Let
your Moderation be known unto all.. 3. Those words of the Apostle purposely are
directed to the suffering sort of Christians.. 4. Some false notions and evil
meaning of the word Moderation briefly animadverted on and overthrown. p. 22

Chap. III. Of Moderation with respect to the Church of England.

. 1. What is to be understood by the Church of England.. 2. The Moderation of
our Church frequently confessed by her Adversaries: sometime truly, sometime
upon design; but most often our Church is reproached and opposed for her
Moderation by each sort of Adversaries.. 3. From the joint opposition made
against our Church by her Adversaries on either hand, is taken the chief
inartificial proof of her Moderation. p. 33

Chap. IV. Of the Moderation of our Church in respect to her Rule of Faith.

. 1. In holding to her true and just measure, as is proved from her Articles
and Canons, and other Monuments of the Church.. 2. In her avoiding the extremes
of those who take away from the due perfection of Holy Scripture, and of others
who seem officiously to add thereunto.. 3. In her judgment of the letter and
sense of Scripture, and in the use of such consequences as are duly drawn from
thence.. 4. In reference to the Versions and Translations of Holy Scripture,
several instances of Moderation in our Church.. 5. In her Orders also for
dispensing the Holy Scripture to all within her Communion.. 6. In governing the
reading of the Scripture; and communing on the same.. 7. In her judgment of the
Canonical and Apocryphal Books.. 8. The Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture,
our Church rather does take for granted, than prove too laboriously or
uncertainly.. 9. All immoderate extravagancies concerning interpretation of
Holy Scripture, avoided by our Church. p. 48

Chap. V. Of the Moderation of the Church in applying the Rule of Faith to it
self.

. 1. Avoiding extremes on either hand, in relation to the authority of the
Universal Church.. 2. The Decrees of Councils.. 3. The Testimony of the
Fathers.. 4. Other Traditions.. 5. Our Churches own Testimony.. 6. The use of
Reason.. 7. The Testimony of the Spirit.. 8. Of the testimony and operation of
the Holy Spirit; the judgment of our Church according to great Moderation, more
largely declared. p. 77

Chap. VI. The Moderation of the Church in its judgment of Doctrines.

. 1. Our Church does wisely distinguish between what is necessary for
Salvation, and what is not.. 2. Her Articles are few.. 3. Which are generally
exhibited, not as Articles of Faith, but consent. Concerning subscription.. 4.
Our Articles are propounded so as to avoid unnecessary controversy.. 5. The
wise Moderation of the Kings of England, in their Injunctions to Preachers, and
Orders taken to preserve Truth, Unity, and Charity.. 6. The Controversies of
the late Age are well moderated, by the determinations of our Church.. 7. As
our Church requires our consent in nothing contrary to sense or reason, so it
has also contained it self from immoderate curiosity, in treating of venerable
mysteries.. 8. Our Church does not insist upon such kinds of certainty as
others without just cause do exact.. 9. Doctrines are so propounded to those in
our Churches Communion, as not to render useless their own reasons and
judgments: The reasonableness of which is proved, and the Objections answered..
10. The use which we are all allowed of our private judgments, is required to
be menag'd with a due submission to the Church. The duty of which submission is
laid down in sundry Propositions. p. 114

Chap. VII. Of the Moderation of our Church in what relates to the worship of
God.

. 1. Our Prayers are not mingled with controversy.. 2. They are framed
according to a most grave and serious manner, with moderate variety, and proper
length.. 3. In the zeal of Reformation our Church did not cast off what was
good in it self.. 4. In all our Churches there are the same Rules.. 5. Common
Prayers for the vulgar required in English. To Ministers and Scholars a just
and moderate liberty allowed.. 6. The obligation of the Church leaves the
method of private Devotions to a general liberty.. 7. Of the Moderation of the
Church, in appointing her hours and times of Prayer.. 8. In her use and
judgment of Sermons.. 9. In what is required of people with reference to their
Parish Church.. 10. The excellent Moderation of the Church in her Orders for
the reverent reading of Divine Service, and Consecrating the Sacraments in such
a voice as may be heard.. 11. In her Form and use of Catechizing.. 12. The
interest of inward and outward worship, are both secured according to an
excellent Moderation in our Church.. 13. The Moderation of the Church in what
relates to Oaths. p. 166

Chap. VIII. Of the Moderation of the Church in relation to Ceremonies.

. 1. In the Ceremonies of our Church which are very few, and those of great
antiquity, simplicity, clear signification and use; our Church avoids either
sort of superstition.. 2. They have constantly been declared to be in
themselves indifferent and alterable: but in that our Church avoids
variableness, is a further proof of its Moderation.. 3. They are professed by
the Church to be no part of Religion, much less the chief; nor to have any
supernatural effect belonging to them.. 4. Abundant care is taken to give plain
and frequent reasons and interpretations of what in this nature is enjoined to
prevent mistakes.. 5. The Moderation of our Church even in point of Ceremonies
compared with those who have raised so great a dust in this Controversy.. 6.
Many innocent Rites and usages our Church never went about to introduce, and
why.. 7. The Obligation of our Church in this matter is very mild.. 8. The
Moderation of our Church in her appointment of Vestments.. 9. The Benedictions
of our Church are according to great Piety and Wisdom ordered.. 10. The
Moderation of our Church in her appointments of Gestures.. 11. Of the respect
which is held due to places and things distinguished to Gods Service; our
Church judges and practices according to an excellent Moderation. p. 201

Chap. IX. Of the Moderation of our Church, with respect to Holy Days, namely,
both the Feasts and Fasts of the Church.

. 1. The Feasts of the Church are few; and those for great reason chose: with
care to avoid the excesses of the Romanists.. 2. The further behavior of the
Church in her Feasts, most useful and prudent.. 3. We celebrate the memory of
Saints, but of none whose existence or sanctity is uncertain.. 4. The excellent
ends of our Churches honor to Saints, are set down.. 5. That they are
Festivally Commemorated, not out of opinion of worship, or merit, or absolute
necessity thereof to Religion.. 6. Our Church runs not into any excess, in any
Prayer to Saints.. 7. Nor with reference to Images.. 8. Whether our Church in
any of these practices, be justly charged of Popery, by those, who Canonize
among themselves those who are of uncertain sanctity.. 9. The Moderation of our
Church in its honor given to Angels.. 10. And to the Blessed Virgin.. 11. Our
Church has taken great care, that a special honor be had to the Lords Day;
and that the Lords Day, nor any other Festival, be abused to Luxury and
Impiety.. 12. The Moderation of the Church, with reference to its Music and
Psalmody.. 13. The Moderation of our appointed Fast: The Lenten or Paschal
Fast, how far Religious by the Precept of the Church. p. 234

Chap. X. Of the Moderation of the Church in reference to the Holy Sacraments.

. 1. The Moderation of our Church raises no strife about words relating
thereunto.. 2. Her Moderation in what is asserted of the number of Sacraments..
3. In that her Orders for the Administration of the Sacraments are most
suitable to the ends of their appointments.. 4. In that our Church does not
make the benefit of the Sacraments to depend upon unrequired conditions.

In reference to Holy Baptism,. 1. Our Church does make nothing of the essence
of Baptism, but the use of the invariable Form.. 2. The Moderation of our
Church toward Infants unbaptized. Her sound and charitable judgment of such as
die after Baptism.. 3. In some necessary cautions referring to the
administration of Baptism.. 4. Referring also to the susceptors.. 5. In what is
required of them who administer that Sacrament.

In reference to the Holy Supper of our Lord,. 1. The same is with us
celebrated in both kinds.. 2. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation is rejected by
our Church: not running to the other extreme of denying a real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament.. 3. The Moderation of our Church in complying with the
necessity of the Age: but not with the Church of Rome and others, who require
their people to communicate not so much as thrice a year.. 4. Participation of
the Holy Supper required after Confirmation, but not after the rigid
Examinations of some, or the auricular Confessions of others: Neither is it
made a private banquet.. 5. In our Church there is not to be a Communication of
the Eucharist without Communicants: The Moderation of the Church in other
Rubricks referring to the Holy Communion. p. 272

Chap. XI. Of the Moderation of the Church in reference to other Rights and
Usages.

. 1. The Moderation of the Church in its Judgment and use of Confirmation.

. 2. Concerning Matrimony, allowing her Clergy to marry: affording opportunity
of voluntary celibacy in our Universities, according to a commendable
moderation. Undue degrees of Marriages, and some particular Times forbid, etc.

. 3. In reference to Holy Orders. 1. The Moderation of the Church in her
Consecrating Ministers. 2. In taking care to have them be as they ought to be,
both before and after Ordination, with good effect. 3. Yet if not so great as
is desired, why the Church ought not to be accused. 4. In retaining such Orders
of Ministers in the Church as are Primitive. 5. The Moderate Judgment of the
Church concerning such as have been ordained in the Church of Rome, and
elsewhere. 6. Our Church endeavors to preserve all due regard to whatever is
consecrated to God. 7. The Power of the Keys asserted in our Church with due
moderation.

. 4. Of Penance. 1. The Moderation of our Church, between those who slight
Penance, and those who explain it extravagantly. 2. The Confession of our
Church which is required, is suitable to the design of Repentance. 3. The Seal
of Confession in our Church is as sacred as it ought to be. 4. The use of
External Penance in our Church, according to due Moderation. 5. The use of
Absolution in our Church maintained according to a just temper.

. 5. For Visitation of the Sick. 1. The worthy care of the Church therein, and
some Instances of its Moderation referring thereunto. 2. Our Churches care for
preparing those who are of her Communion for Death, without extreme Unction in
use in the Church of Rome. 3. Many Instances of the Moderation of the Church,
referring to the Burial of the Dead. p. 289

Chap. XII. Of the Moderation of our Church, in what concerns the Power of the
Church.

. 1. The Moderation of our Church, owns the Power of the Church to be only
Spiritual.. 2. All other Power which Ecclesiastical Persons receive, is readily
acknowledged entirely depending on the favor of our Kings.. 3. The Interests
of the Kingdom and the Church, are excellently accommodated in our
Constitutions, which is not done in other Models.. 4. The pious Moderation of
our Kings preserving their own rightful Supremacy, and leaving to the Church
the exercise of their Spiritual Power, acknowledged by our Church.. 5. The just
Right of Kings shamefully invaded by other Sects pretending Divine Right:
Concerning which Claim, the Moderation of our Church observed.. 6. The dutiful
Moderation of our Church in asserting Monarchy: The first Canon, 1640.
justified.. 7. All Interests of Humane Society, especially of Subjects
Allegiance in our Church abundantly secured, which is not done by those in
separation from her.. 8. The Ordinances of our Church, are framed with great
Mildness and Moderation.. 9. The same compared with the mild Obligation which
Cardinal Bellarmine pretends the Church of Rome lays upon those of her
Communion.. 10. Sundry Instances of our Church's great regard to Equity. p. 331

Chap. XIII. Of the Moderation of the Church and Kingdom, referring to the
Administration of Public Laws toward Offenders.

. 1. The occasion of that Mistake which is concerning the unlawfulness of
Coercion in cases which concern Religion.. 2. It may be very well consistent
with the Moderation of the Church (besides her own Censures) to approve and
sometimes desire such Coercion.. 3. The Use thereof in many Cases relating to
Religion, the undeniable Right of the Christian Magistrate.. 4. Some of the
chief Objections hereunto Answered.. 5. Sundry proper Instances of the great
Gentleness and most indulgent Care of our Church toward all its Members.. 6.
The Moderation of the Church and Kingdom not without their requisite and just
Bounds.. 7. The Recourse which our Church desires may be made to the Secular
Arm, is not but upon urgent and good Occasion.. 8. Our Government defended from
unjust Clamours of Persecution, of the Romanists on one side, and the
Separatists on the other.. 9. The Kings of England since the Reformation, and
especially his present Majesty, Glorious Examples of this Moderation. The
effect of this Moderation yet much desired and wanted. p. 353

Chap. XIV. Of the general Moderation of our Church toward all that differ from
her, and are in error.

. 1. Our Church takes universal care to satisfy and reconcile those who differ
from her: Particularly our Domestic Dissenters, to whom sundry Concessions
have been made.. 2. Our Church is not forward to denounce Curses against those
who are not of the same Judgment with her.. 3. Our Church does not judge all
according to the Consequences of their Doctrines.. 4. In refusing an adverse
Party, Our Church gives an excellent Example, not to use odious Names.. 5. Our
Church uses great care to preserve and restore peace.. 6. The Moderation of
the Church gives it a singular advantage to convince Dissenters upon right and
proper Principles.. 7. The Moderation of our Church does incomparably qualify
Her to arbitrate and reconcile the present differences of the Christian
Churches.. 8. A Supposition laid down of the most possible means of Reconciling
a Protestant, and such a Romanist as lays aside Infallibility: and that the
Church of England has done her part, in what was fit, toward any just
Reconciliation.. 9. An Answer to that common Calumny of the Separatists, that
our Governors in the Church of England have more peace and reconciliation for
Papists, than for the most moderate Protestant Dissenters. p. 385

Chap. XV. Of the Moderation of the Church toward other Churches and
Professions of Men.

. 1. In that Universal Concord which our Church has maintained with all, so
far as lawfully and usefully it may.. 2. Her protesting against unsufferable
Abuses, well consisting with her Moderation and Charity.. 3. Our Church leaves
other Churches to the use of their liberty, and vindicateth that use mutually..
4. Her especial Moderation and Charity toward the Greek Church.. 5. Our
Church's Modesty and well-becoming Behavior toward other Churches; and their
mutual affection unto Ours. p. 411

Chap. XVI. Of the Moderation of the Church of England in her Reformation.

. 1. The Reformation of our Church, as it had just grounds, and was by just
Authority, so it was managed with due Moderation; the Idea of our Reformation
having been impartial.. 2. The whole manner of it (so far as concerned our
Church) was with great temper.. 3. She separated from the Romish Errors, not
from their Persons any more than needs must.. 4. Our Charity exceeds that of
the Church of Rome, which denies Salvation to all who are not of her
Communion.. 5. The Preparation of our Church to submit to the Church Universal,
saves us from Schism. 6. The Reformation of our Church was the more Christian,
because not fierce, but well governed.. 7. Albeit the Moderation of our Church
seems to have enraged her Adversaries; yet because of this Moderation, our
Church is the better prepared to survive Persecution.. 8. The Moderation of our
Church in her Reformation, was founded on Rules of absolute Justice, as in
sundry great Instances is made to appear. p. 423

Chap. XVII. Of the Moderation of our Church in avoiding all undue Compliances
with Popery, and other sorts of Fanaticism among us.

. 1. Notwithstanding our Reformation is the most of any opposite to Popery, how
it has been the craft of the Roman Agents, to raise of it such a suspicion of
Popery, as has been artificially made a very unhappy Instrument of the
Divisions which are from our Church.. 2. How the great Labors of our Bishops,
and our Clergy, remaining the most impregnable defense of the Reformation, has
stirred up the more earnest opposition of the Church of Rome to our Church.. 3.
The vain and ungrateful jealousies of our Separatists and Enthusiasts, are the
more unjust, because they have appeared really acted by that Interest, (not in
intention, but in event).. 4. Therefore it is a most seasonable work at this
time to cast open those M^squcrades.. 5. Some Moderate Cautions here inserted
to prevent any unkind Mistakes.. 6. Some Objections to such an undertaking here
answered.. 7. That our Separatists and Enthusiasts generally (more or less) do
conspire (in fact, albeit not in intent) with the Romanists; instanced as a
Specimen, in twenty Particulars.. 8. Particularly how the Quakers are one with
the Papists (how ignorantly soever) in sundry Instances.. 9. By what steps and
degrees these Progresses commonly are made toward Popery by such as separ^te
from Communion with our Church.. 10. What has been said, confirmed by other
rational Proofs.. 11. Some further Reasons why the Clergy, and faithful Sons of
our Church, cannot be thought thus concerned, in so much as an Eventual
Conspiracy.. 12. An easy Divination of the Consequences of these things, if a
due sense of these Matters be rejected, when so fairly and often recommended to
the common notice of all, with a sincere and affectionate close to such as this
Address most does concern. p. 455

Chap. XVIII. Of the Moderation of our Church, as it may influence Christian
Practice, and especially our Union.

. 1. Some proper Inferences from what has been insisted on at large.. 2.
Sundry general Rules agreeable to Reason and Christianity; by which the
Moderation of private Persons may be measured and directed, particularly of our
Dissenting Brethren.. 3. Some proper means to reduce Dissenters into Union with
the Church, with all Moderation proposed.. 4. The hearty Profession of the
moderate and sincere purposes of the Writer.. 5. One or two Caveats entered, to
prevent mistake; and for the Caution of such as will attempt to disprove the
main Proposition here designed to be evinced.. 6. Some good Wishes to the
Adversaries of our Church on both sides, such as a fit to conclude a Treatise
of the Moderation of our Church. p. 507

ERRATA.
-- Vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille Qui minimis urgetur -- Horat.
PAge 5. marg. r. importabile, p. 55. l. 10. for (*) r. (,) p. 128. marg. r.
Fur, p. 294. marg. r. quam, p. 306. r. carybdin, p. 311. r. sacerdotali, p.
315. r. apud, p. 324. marg. r. exprimo, p. 325. marg. r. Milev. and exeq. p.
328. l. 22. dele those, l. 24. dele were, p. 346. l. 8. r. Counsels, p. 378. l.
27. r. oppress, p. 385. l. 20. r. refuting, p. 387. l. 26. r. rightly, p. 485.
l. 8. r. austerity, p. 495. l. 1. r. Pucklington, p. 533. l. 16. r. laughed.

THE MODERATION OF THE Church of England.
CHAP. I Of Moderation in general.
. 1. The loud demands of late among us for Moderation taken notice of.. 2. The
specious pretenses of several Factions thereunto, exposed.. 3. The general
meaning of Moderation noted.. 4. The use of the Greek word for Moderation
((...)) as it is borrowed from the Law, explained.. 5. The forensic notion of
Moderation applied to Moderation in Religion.. 6. What is justly expected of
those who causlesly blame our Church with want of Moderation.. 7. Moderation
considered not only as a virtue of public, but of private persons; both toward
their Governors first, and also toward one another.. 8. Some general rules or
measures according to natural Justice and Christianity, whereby we may judge of
the Moderation of the Church; with the design of this Treatise, declared.

. 1. WE have of late with both Ears, heard the loud demands made for Moderation
among us: even since the Restitution of our Church, to its own admirable and
equal temper; even since the unspeakable Clemency of our most Gracious King,
and the extraordinary indulgence of the Laws, have really anticipated so much
Moderation, as reasonably might have dampt some of those vehement outcries,
which seem still to offer violence to our senses, as well as to the peace of
the Kingdom, and the Church.

But that the sound might come more awful to religious Ears, on both sides the
cry has been set up in the words of Holy Scripture: Let your Moderation be
known unto all, the Lord is at hand. (Phil. 4. 5.)

Moderation therefore being the word in fashion, by which all divided parties
among us use to sanctify their appeals, and make their pretenses seem virtuous;
It is first to be wished that real Truth and Goodness, which are the genuine
effects of true Moderation, were as common as the noise of either.

. 2. All agree that Moderation is an excellent virtue, as they said of
Hercules, Who ever dispraised him? hence the several Factions make such
specious pretenses thereunto: The sanctimonious Pharisees affected the
appearance of mighty moderate Men: they could in the very twinkling of an eye,
cast their countenances into a solemn mortified guize: and they were the first
that inveighed against Persecution; and cried out: If we had been in the days
of our forefathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of
the Prophets: (S. Matt. 23. 30.) however they were in their principles prepared
to fill up the measure of their Fathers: Wherefore our Blessed Lord called them
Serpents (v. 33.) a subtle, nimble, insinuating generation, full of folds and
intrigues, humble and flexible in all appearances of Moderation, to wind and
turn their pretenses, but they were a generation of Vipers, immoderately cruel
and dangerous.

In this (as in many other Instances) many of the Romanists and the
Enthusiasts, exceedingly agree, as acted by the same spirit and practice of
Pharisaism. The first compass some Emissaries of Rome take to make a Proselyte,
or a Novice (as our Homily calls him Hom. of good Works.
) is with all goodly semblance of Moderation: This they show, this they
promise, this they challenge from others, as especially their due: this upon
sundry occasions they extol as peculiarly signal among themselves.

In the Recantation framed for Antonius de Dominis, he is made to extol the
mild and fatherly care of the Holy Inquisition Sanctae Inquisitionis benigna ac
paterna cura super Dominicum gregem. Consil. reditus, p. 23. Engl. transl. p.
29.
; which watches attentively over our Lords flock; the ordinary armor of which
tribunal, are sound doctrine and instruction full of charity. The Answer also
made in his name P. 56. Parum absuit quin ego Philarides and Mezentios apud vos
experirer. Ibid.
to Bishop Hall, says: The Roman Church does by no means pursue those who
differ from it, but teaches and instructs them friendly, hears them
peaceably, etc. And the Catholic Apologist P. 305.
very earnestly contends, that Papists are more merciful than Protestants to
Dissenters; and do use them very kindly: Mark in this matter (says the Rhemist
Pref. to the Rhem. Transl. of N. T.
) the wisdom and moderation of Holy Church. After I knew (says de Cressy
Exomolegesis, c. 41. p. 290.
) that the Church of Rome was more moderate and condescending than before, etc.
Yea the pretenses to Moderation have swelled to that height among some in the
Roman Church, that Erasmus Erasin. in N. T. ad. 1 Timothy 1.
has noted, Some in his time disputed, whether the Pope was not more mild and
moderate than Christ himself, who never was read to have recalled any from the
pains of Purgatory. But of all methinks Card. Bellarmine has a most V.
Apologiam Smytheam de benignitate Ecclesiae. Non est quod querantur onus legum
Pontificiarum and numero and gravitate esse impossible. Lorinus in 15. Actor.
28.
pleasant Chapter, only to show the exceeding gentleness and Moderation of the
Church of Rome, in the mild obligation, and sparing number of its Laws (which
we shall afford a particular consideration, Chapter 12.. 9.)

By almost infinite arts of this nature they are very industrious to decoy the
credulous into the belief of themselves: always representing the Bosom of their
Church, as a warm, soft, easy place, full of mercy and indulgencies: And thus
far their pretenses may be allowed of, that they both recommend and use all
soft and gentle means to bring men to an allowance of that Doctrine they would
insinuate; but as it is only there where they cannot use more forcible ones, so
that course continues no longer than till they have brought them over to their
Church, whose authority over its own members is always kept up in its utmost
force and rigor.

S. Austin Contra Gaudentium, l. 2.
tells us, how the Enthusiastic Donatists (though both they and after them the
Circumcellions, were intolerably severe to the Catholics when they had power,
yet) were great Advocates for Liberty of Conscience in the free practice of it:
Which because Julian Monebat Julianus ut quisque (nullo vetante) religioni suae
serviret intrepidus: quod agebat adeo obstinate, ut dissentiones augente
licentia non timeret unanimem plebem. Am. Marc. l. 22.. 3.
the Apostate granted them (in crafty design to confound Christianity Eo modo
Christi nomen de terris perire putavit, si sacrilegas dissentiones liberas esse
permitteret. S. Aug. Ep. 166.
) how did they magnify him as a mighty Moderate Quod apud eum solum Justitia
locum haberet. S. Aug. c. Petil. l. 2. c. 97.
Prince, and set up his Image? and Ecclesiastic History abounds with instances
of most Heretics, who invaded the Church by this serpentine way of
insinuation: entering in by all supple accommodation to the innocence and
mildness of the Dove: but afterward they appeared of another spirit: like the
Locusts of the bottomless pit: Rev. 9. 9. Which had hair as the hair of Women,
but their teeth were as the teeth of Lions; and they had tayls like unto
Scorpions, and they had stings in their tayls: v. 10. So among the
Disciplinarians to the fifth Monarchy man; when they want power and
opportunity, they have all show of gentleness, and of calmness, as a Lamb Nulla
bestia mansueta dicitur quae neminem mordet cum dentes and ungues non habet.
; but when the evil spirit moves them to resist and overthrow; how full are
they of the highest Corybantick Fury!

. 3. Since then so many opposite parties pretend all to Moderation O mites
Diomedis equi, Busiridis arae Clementes, Tu Cinna pius, Tu Spartace lenis!
, as the special virtue in which they themselves excel, and require it of
others with a countenance of pity that they want it: the mistake is, either
they know not what true Moderation is, or else they judge amiss of them to whom
it belongs. To proceed therefore more clearly, We shall first enquire into the
name and thing it self: for the better understanding also of that Text, Phil.
4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all: and for the right application
thereof.

Moderation in general may note that fit and proper temper which is observed in
matters of judgment and practice: a taking right measures (as the phrase is)
and avoiding all undue extremes: and therefore is the effect of such a Prudence
as does contain the affections and endeavors within those proportions and
bounds as are most suitable to the goodness of the end, and the necessity and
use of the means: and thus it does not differ much from that Mediocrity, in
which Aristotle places the formal reason of virtue, the definition of which he
does no otherwise establish (...). Arist. Eth. l. 2. c. 6.
, than in the judgment of a truly prudent man: All virtue consisting either in
a Mean, or in a Moderation; and being the effect of prudence, it may receive
several names Potest tamen esse quod nomen (...) apud Graecos per quandam
similitudinem transferatur ad omnes moderationes. D. Thom. 2. 2 dae. Q. 120.
art. 2.
, according to the condition of the matter about which it is conversant.

. 4. (...), or (...) (which we commonly render) Moderation is a word frequently
used by Aristotle: and was taken from the Greeks into the Treatises of the
Roman Laws: Yea, so excellent is the sense of the word, according to the
explication of the Philosopher; that the most skilful in the Roman Laws and
Language; and Justinian himself, and his Reformers of the Laws, never fitted
any Latin word for the same entire sense: Neither does any common language
reach the full comprehension of the same signification: wherefore the Civilians
Bonam fidem Graeci (...), nos bonum and aequum dicimus. Minsinger. l. 4. Tit. 6.
, and Schoolmen D. Tho. 2. 2 ae. Q. 120. art. 1. V. Suarez. de Legibus.
, and others, do very frequently accept of the same Greek word, thereby to
express that kind of Equity, which sometime gives a remission to the rigor of
Laws; sometime does supply their deficiencies.

So that (...), Moderation as it is now generally used, is a word borrowed from
the Law, and is used by the Masters thereof to denote such a gentle and benign
temper, as disposes those who have the administration of the Laws to remit of
their rigor, where either (first) they press too hard upon particular persons;
or else (secondly) to supply the defects of the said Laws, where they provide
not sufficiently for particular Cases: in order thereunto, squaring their
determinations by the natural rules of justice and goodness, rather than by the
letter of the Law.

. 5. The reason why I first make gentleness, or meekness, a part of the
definition of this ((...)) Moderation, is, because of the derivation of the
word: and because those who are presumed best to understand the sense of words
(as Phavorinus (...). Phavorinus.
, Hesychius (...). Hesychius.
, Suidas (...). Suidas.
, and the Glossary (...), Glossario mansuetudo, clementia, modestia. Gro.
, and others) do unanimously interpret what we render Moderation (and (...).
Suidas.
such words as have cognation with the same) by those other expressions of
gentleness, meekness, and a mild disposition, to yield to those we have to do
with: but especially they aim to express in its signification, such a calm and
quiet temper, as is not ruffled with passion: A temper of mind, not only
exceedingly requisite in a Judge, but also pre-required to that benignity and
kindness which we have said this (...) Moderation does include: Rough and angry
minds being not likely to consult the ease of those that are to be judged by
them.

Secondly, There is the like evidence from the same authorities (...).
Phavorinus. (...). Hesych.
, for including benignity and kindness in the definition of ((...)) Moderation;
which is much according to Aristotle's mind (...). Arist. Nicom. l. 5. c. 14.
; and the Latins also generally render the same by aequum and bonum Male
igitur Accursius aequum and bonum distinxit. Bud. in Pandec.
: and indeed this goodness and kindness properly belong to the account of this
Moderation, because of those benign effects which we have affirmed it disposes
men to, which are next to be considered.

For the better understanding whereof, we are to remember, that though (...)
Moderation, may in a more general sense extend to other things which may stand
in need of Correction; yet in the forensic sense wherein we take it, it refers
only to the Laws, and is defined by Aristotle (...). Aris. Eth. l. 5. c. 14.
to be the Correction of the Laws wherein because of their universality they
are deficient. From whence, as it must be supposed, to be confined to those to
whom the administration of the Laws is committed, who alone can have the power
of correcting them: So nothing therefore will be further requisite to show,
than that it disposes them, where the Laws press too hard upon particular
persons, to relax the rigor of them; as on the other side, where they do not
sufficiently provide for them, to supply their defect.

All Laws we know are for the punishment of evil doers, or for the praise of
them that do well: but it being impossible so to provide for the punishment of
evil doers, as not sometime to bring even the innocent within the compass of
it; because what generally considered, ought to be looked upon and censured as
evil, may yet upon sundry considerations and circumstances have nothing of evil
in it, or at least be worthy of pardon; Either the innocent must suffer
together with the nocent (which so benign a virtue as that we treat of cannot
allow) or it must dispose those to whom the administration of the Laws is
committed, to remit of their rigor in such particulars, and exempt them from
the undergoing of it: It being in like manner impossible for Laws so to provide
for the encouragement of those who deserve well, as that sometime such may not
be past over neglected; partly because all cases cannot be foreseen by the
Lawgiver; and partly by reason of the shortness of his expressions; Either some
who may deserve encouragement may be excluded from partaking of it (which so
benign a virtue as we speak Est scriptum legis angustum interpretatio diffusa.
Sen. l. 4. controv. 27.
of cannot easily permit) or it must dispose those to whom the administration
of the Laws is committed to ampliate their favors; and to take such within the
compass of them.

Only, whereas the excess and defect Jusfinitum est propter circumscripta
mandata, at bonitas sive aequitas est veluti sons perpetuo scatens and
perennis. Tract. de legib. l. 2. c. 6.
of Laws in these particulars, cannot be supposed to be corrected by such
measures of justice and goodness as are not of a certain and fixed nature; so
there being no such measures, beside the natural rules of justice and goodness;
the same ((...)) Moderation must consequently be thought to prompt them, to
whom it belongs, to govern their determinations by these rules, in order to the
attaining its benign and equitable designs. And indeed the true love of the
common good does properly lead to this benignity which tempers justice Aequitas
est benignitas juris. Est rationabilis modus sive temperamentum recedens ex
causa a communibus regulis Juris. Bartol. l. 1. F. de legibus.
: wherefore Equity and Moderation is the public honesty of the Laws; without
which, Justice often would be turned into Wormwood: It contains the excellent
spirit ((...)) the mind and reason of the Law, and is the most sacred and
venerable part of it: As it is the honor and perfection of the Laws Quid aliud
est restituere in integrum, nisi laxare juris rigorem? Calv. lex. jurid.
; so it is the Sanctuary of such as happen to be oppressed by the rigor of the
Letter.

I have insisted somewhat long upon this notion of ((...)) Moderation, as
because it is the primary one, and the standard of all the rest; so because it
will help us to discover what is the true notion of it in Religion (which is
that we are most especially to enquire into.) Taking it in the strictest sense;
so it can have no other meaning when applied unto Religion, than such a meek
and benign temper as may dispose those to whom the administration of it is
committed, to relax the rigor of the Laws; where they press too hard in
particular Cases: or secondly, To supply the defects of those Laws where they
provide not sufficiently for them.

. 6. But as those who would blame our Church for the want of this ((...))
Moderation, ought first of all to show, that there are such rigours, or defects
in her Laws as to particular persons; and then that they are not considered:
So, if they cannot do this, they must acknowledge that which they would blame
in the Church to belong to themselves. 2. Such ought to evidence their charge
from the natural principles of justice and goodness; or at least by those which
Christianity has taught us: these, and these alone, being the measures by
which this ((...)) Moderation is to proceed, and therefore to be satisfied of
the other by.

. 7. But because words do not always continue in their strict and proper sense,
but extend also to such senses as hold Analogy with the other: and because too,
it is certain, that the Scriptures make use of this very word in other
significations (as their making it the duty of private as well as public
persons, does sufficiently demonstrate) therefore it must be granted, that
there are other sorts of ((...)) Moderation required, beside that before
mentioned; but which must be judged of by the Analogy they hold with it; yea,
with the whole definition of it: for otherwise they may not only not deserve
the name, but may have nothing commendable in them; for even lenity and
benignity (how excellent soever in themselves) may become evil, when employed
where severity ought to be used: Wherefore that we be not condemned in what we
seem to approve, it will be requisite that we have that notion in our Eye,
which is the standard of all the rest: I mean ((...)) Moderation truly so
called.

Which may be considered: as a Virtue in private, or in public persons. As in
private persons again with reference to public persons (and particularly the
Governors of the Church) or with reference to one another. 1. If we consider
the ((...)) Moderation of private persons to public persons, so it will be
found to consist in the judging of the Laws of their Superiors, by the rules
of Justice and Charity; and particularly by that Charity the properties whereof
are described by S. Paul, in the 1 Corinthians. 13 Chapter For if that be a Charity
which is due from Existunt etiam injuriae saepe calumnia quadam and nimis
callida and malitiosa juris interpretatione.
one to another, even to the meanest Members of Christ's Body; how much more to
the Governors thereof? For as Cicero Cic. de off. l. 1.
truly says, There are often injuries done by a too crafty and malicious
interpretation of the Law: which is a dishonor and reproach to Government, and
is most removed from (bona fides) fair and equal behavior. Some by their own
ill tempers make the Laws appear to them more rigorous than they are: Others by
their weakness, and fear, and scrupulousness, cannot fully satisfy their own
thoughts with that real benignity which the Laws do exhibit (non aequi and
boni consulentes) not taking them in good part, but interpreting almost every
thing to the worst sense (...). Arist. Eth. l. 5.
; torment themselves by their own scrupulous and superstitious humor. Both
these extremes the Wise man seems to refer to in his double admonition,
(Eccles. 7. 16.) Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise,
why should thou destroy thy self Noli esse justus nimium: debet enim
justitiam temperare moderatio. S. Ambr. de poen. l. 1. c. 1.
, or why should thou be desolate? as it were by thy own rigor and
scrupulousness deprive thy self of the great benefits of Society?

2. If we consider the ((...)) Moderation of private persons toward one
another, so it will be found to consist in judging of one another actions by
the same equitable and charitable measures. And is often taken for such actions
themselves as are joined with gentleness, benignity, and good will (...). 2
Macc. 9. 27.
: such as are forgiving personal wrongs; bearing with the infirmities of those
we have to do with; interpreting doubtful things fairly, determining our
liberty in a real indifferent matter with compliance and condescension to
others; accommodating our selves and our matters, according to the possibility
and necessity of our Neighbors; governing those impressions of self-love which
are in us all, by such considerations and ends, as rational nature has
sometimes a more principal regard to, namely the greater good of our Neighbor,
the ends of Peace, and our superior relation to God. The instances of this
((...)) Moderation are shown also in one man's requiring less of another than in
right he might exact Dummodo non se acerbum exactorem prabeat sed Moderatum,
and cum efficaci^ benignum and cum instantia humanum. Ulpian.
: or in granting more than of right could be required, which is using (as we
say) a Conscience: wherefore Equity is called not only the Religion of the
Judge, but the Piety of a good man; the equitable man being esteemed in the
same breath a good man. So the good and gentle are by S. Peter joined in
opposition to the froward ((...), 1 Pet. 2. 18.) and the Apostles injunctions
comprehend not only whatsoever things are just, but whatsoever things are
lovely, and such being true Moderation, (...) quaecunque accommoda Er. (Phil.
4. 8.)
it is but the proper effect of that Wisdom which comes down from above, which
is pure, and peaceable, and gentle (...). Jam. 3. 17.
: Which disposes private persons one toward another, to remit what is
rigorous, and to supply all defects they may, by kindness, courtesy, and
benignity.

. 8. The ((...)) Moderation of public persons consists either in the equitable
and benign administration of Laws (spoken of before:) or,

2. In the framing of such Laws as are in themselves equitable and benign.

Now whether the Laws of this or any other Church be such, is to be judged by
comparing them with the natural Rules of Justice and Goodness, but more
particularly with such Rules as our Christianity does offer for the direction
of our Judgments.

Some of those Rules which natural Justice, and Christian Prudence may direct
us to, are such as these.

1. Benignity is not to exclude Justice: The Rules of which therefore are to be
considered in this ((...)) Moderation, as well as those of the other.

2. In those Laws which respect Ecclesiastical Polity, and particularly the
administration of the public Assemblies, there is to be considered a Justice
to God, as well as to one another; because it is his worship and service which
is to be celebrated.

3. The Justice which we owe to God cannot be satisfied, nor his honor
consulted, unless all things be done decently and in order, because God is the
God of Order and not of Confusion.

4. That all things be done decently and in order, some certain Rules are to be
prescribed, within such bounds and for such ends as there is general direction
given; without which Rules, order among a multitude can never be preserved.

5. Against which Rules so prescribed, no such exception can reasonably be
allowed or considered, which tends alike to the overthrow of all.

6. It Is fit the Governors of every particular Church should consider the same
in its relation to the Church Universal, of which it is a part; and in their
particular Society, benignity to one sort of men ought not to exclude the
consideration of others, especially the major part.

7. Benignity is to be showed to the humble and peaceable, but it can in no
wise be challenged by the proud and froward: especially who are manifestly
prepared to make ill use of the benignity of the Church, as much as possible to
the ruin of the Church, and their own and others greater mischief.

8. True benignity aims more at the real profiting any person whatsoever, than
the gratifying their humors and sickly phancies. These and the like Rules seem
to be the proper measures of ((...)) Moderation where they are observed: And
that these and such other rules as are comprehended in the nature of true
Moderation, are wisely and faithfully observed by our Church; the design of
this Treatise is by variety of proper proofs and instances to make evident: and
that it may the more certainly appear, I shall for the most part compare this
Moderation of our Church with the extremes of Popery and Enthusiasm.

CHAP. II. Of the false notions of Moderation which many have taken up.
. 1. How it comes to pass that the name of Moderation is so seldom applied to
what it ought to be.. 2. The sense of that Text inquired into, Phil. 4. 5. Let
your Moderation be known unto all.. 3. Those words of the Apostle purposely are
directed to the suffering sort of Christians.. 4. Some false notions and evil
meaning of the word. Moderation briefly animadverted on and overthrown.

. 1. THE reason why this word Moderation is so seldom applied in its most
proper and useful sense, by them that make most noise about it, is because the
licentious humor and wanton appetites of those who affect novelty in Religion,
are (through the liberty they have had) become more and more insatiable; like
the Horseleech, they are ever crying, Give, Give; and the more Moderation is
used, the more their cries are renewed; and to make their demands more
plausible, Moderation is called for by the Authority of St. Paul, Let your
Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.

. 2. The continual claim for Moderation being so often repeated in those words
of the Apostle: Since they are so exceedingly misunderstood by some, or
obstinately misapplied by others; it may be judged very fit to render the true
sense of the words as evident as may be, before we proceed. Those who consider
the context may find the Blessed Apostle exhorting the Philippians, and in
their name all that should be persecuted in the glorious cause of Christianity;
that they would endure their trials at least with all patience and equanimity;
and if it might be, that they would rejoice in the midst of their suffering
condition: v. 3. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Let your
Moderation be known unto all: as if the Apostle had said See Erasmus Paraphrase
Commended in the Injunctions of K. Edw. 6. 1547. of Q. Eliz. 1559.. 6. Ordered
to be had in every Church: and by all the Clergy under B. D.
, O ye Christians, in the midst of your afflictions I exhort you again and
again to rejoice in God, because of the double need thereof in your suffering
condition, and that you would maintain a present and an upright mind; although
the iniquity of your persecutors is immoderate against you, yet let your
Moderation and patience be known unto all men, not only your Brethren and
Fellow Sufferers for their encouragement and support, but even to the
adversaries and opposers (...). S. Chrysostom. in loc.
; that by your goodness and even temper, they may be won over and reconciled to
the Christian Religion they now persecute: I would not have you bear any
revengeful mind, nor envy them their prosperity, for the coming of the Lord is
at hand, who can and will in due time execute his justice on the Enemies of his
Church, and deliver his people as he pleases, or reward their patience
abundantly: For in the third and fourth verses, S. Paul solemnly mentions his
Fellow Sufferers with honor, and according to a right Apostolic care of them,
v. 3. I entreat thee true Yoke Fellow, help those women which labored with me
in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers whose
names are in the book of life: where by Fellow Laborers certainly are meant
his Fellow Sufferers, which only could be understood by those Women who
suffered with him in the Gospel ((...) Rogo eis opitulare quae mecum
certaverint in evangelio, Foeminas nempe quae una cum Beato Paulo p^ssae essent
afflictiones. Erasmi Paraphr.
) who for the Faith strove together and contended with himself through sundry
difficulties and sufferings: whom in the sixth verse, he further continues his
speech to: Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, and
the peace of God shall keep your heart, etc. And when the Blessed Apostle wrote
this Consolatory Epistle to the Philippians, S. Paul was not only in bonds in
defense and confirmation of the Gospel, Chapter 1. v. 7. But unto them of Philippi
also, was this grace given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in
him, but also to suffer for his sake, v. 29.

. 3. Thus it is evident that this Exhortation of S. Paul here to Moderation, is
indeed directed by him absolutely to the patient and suffering sort of
Christians. Which let those take notice of especially who affect so much to be
counted the suffering party, which if they are who call themselves so, then the
Apostle speaks more to them than any, Let your Moderation be known unto all Of
this perhaps they may be better satisfied from Mr. Pools Synopsis Criticorum.
De afflictionibus hic agitur. Zanch. Ver. Er. Bez. etc.
.

But it is the cause only makes the Martyr: Some may suffer indeed justly as a
due reward of their deeds (through their own ill will:) Others according to the
will of God (1 S. Pet. 4. 16, 19.) when they have done nothing amiss: S. Luke
23. 41. and this I take to be the real Case of the Church of England.

Wherefore we seriously wish they would present themselves real examples of the
thing it self who make so much noise of the word: We may heartily wish, they
who seem so earnest for Moderation, would consider whether it seems not
agreeable to that equal temper of mind recommended in the Text, for all to be
disposed to interpret every thing to the best, and to go as far as they can for
peace and unity in the Church, and compliance with what is enjoined. I wish
such would please to consider and read the words in their true sense: with any
of those Versions which are given of them: Let your equity Bez. Castle.
: Your gentleness Trem. Dr. Ham.
: Your patient mind Our old English Tr. Erasm. Par.
: Your taking all in good part Bez Com.
: Your reasonable Conversation S. Ambr.
: Your modesty Vulg. Lat. S. Hier.
: Your giving way one to another Erasmus.
: Your Moderation be known unto all.

. 4. That we may the more clearly understand the Moderation of our Church, we
will further inquire into their false notions of Moderation, who so vehemently
seem to require it in our Church: which requiries are made either to private
persons, or to those in authority. 1. When private persons are called upon to
let their Moderation be known unto all men: They (as far as they know their own
minds themselves, and are not averse to declare it in their writings and other
expressions of their meaning undeniable) by Moderation would have

1. Either an Indifferency, whether they do or do not what is required: or, 2.
They mean an Omission of what is appointed: or, 3. They understand by it the
doing quite contrary.

When appeal for Moderation is made to Governors: by Moderation they would
understand, either

1. A forbearance of the execution of Laws, (especially which relate to matters
Ecclesiastical:) or 2. An abolition of them: or 3. An utter alteration of
Government: So that all the burden for Moderation relates to the remission of
the obligation and observance of the Laws (especially) of the Church: and their
whole sense of Moderation does contain many odd suppositions: particularly,
that the conditions of our Communion are very unlawful, very immoderate, and
inexpedient.

Wherefore if in the following discourse we make it appear, that the entire
constitution of our Church does exhibit as great Moderation, and as equal
temper, as any Church in the Christian World does or ever did since the
Primitive Times; we shall justify our Constitutions from those exceptions
mentioned, and a thousand times as many more as they can raise.

For supposing at present, which afterward I shall plainly demonstrate, that
the conditions of our Communion are not unlawful, and that the appointments of
the Church as they are, and what relates thereunto, are very moderate: then it
will plainly and necessarily follow,

1. That an indifference in doing or not doing what is required: or an omission
of what is matter of duty: or doing quite contrary, must needs be so far from
Moderation, that it will appear to be a great affront to the authority of a
well-setled Kingdom and Church: and the more moderate this is, the higher will
be the aggravation of their crime.

2. As to the forbearance of the execution of such Laws, I shall only say thus
much: That if for political considerations Superiors should give way at any
time to such a forbearance, it may not be unseasonable to consider, as among
the Jews there were some things permitted or tolerated; not for their own
goodness, but because of the hardness of the hearts of the people:

So when Constitutions equal in themselves are remitted in consideration only
of the weakness of the people, the people ought to be instructed of the reason
they have to be humbled for their own imperfection, that they may not glory in
their shame, lest they go on to take heart against the Laws, and accustom
themselves to frowardness.

3. As to change, or abolition of Laws, I only here touch upon what hereafter
will be more amply showed.

That the Moderation of our Church is such, that she always has publicly
professed, That the Rites of the Church, and particular forms of worship, are in
their own nature indifferent and mutable: And it is notorious matter of fact
among us, that the Church has often made those alterations which occasion has
required, and for the same reasons can do the like again.

4. As to an utter alteration of the Government, which some there are would
look at as a prime point of Moderation: I should be very injurious to truth if
I should not observe, That some who begin with but desires of Moderation, never
leave till they end in the utter subversion and extirpation of what they
declare themselves averse from: which renders this undertaking more necessary.
Thus King Charles I. (...). Med. 11.
took notice of some Reformers, who by vulgar clamours and assistance, did
demand not only Toleration of themselves in their vanity, novelty, and
confusion, but also abolition of Laws against them, and a total extirpation of
that Government, whose Rights they have a mind to invade.

Lastly: To take their words in the most mild sense, not for an absolute change
of the entire Government, but for such an alteration of the Laws as seems to be
meant by the word ((...)) Moderation: as it is sometimes taken for a correction
of the Laws by Equity.

Most known unto all it may be that the Church of England never refuses this:
But in cases of such mitigations and remissions as are called for, we must
consider, there is generally supposed either an unjust sentence, or some rigor
of the Law; or some great inconvenience attending: All which the wisdom of
Government will not hastily and at every motion determine: especially when such
alterations are challenged as matter of duty, and when they cannot be done
without a public acknowledgment of some great error or sin before admitted
See the Proclamation of K. Edw. 6. for the authorizing an Uniformity of
Common Prayer.
: Wherefore such Concessions are not properly admitted without great reasons
moving thereunto, because of the public honor of Laws in them concerned: Lest
also the frequent change of public Laws, encourage the mutable vulgar in their
common unreasonable levity, and desire of Innovation: Lest well-setled Order
and the common Peace be disturbed, and lest good men be discouraged in their
regular obedience: therefore Christian ((...)) Moderation does not in such like
Cases encourage alterations, especially when there is no end of gratifying such
sick phancies, and where it is not agreed between the parties complaining what
they would have relieved.

This would be to expose the dignity of the Church, and of Constitutions settled
by such long prescription, to the scorn of every bold dissenter, which can have
no other effect but to encourage them in their Schism, and heap contempt upon
our selves, when we prostitute Law and authority to such affronts. Unless our
dissenters had the humility and the honesty to confess they had been mistaken,
and were now resolved to go as far toward the repairing of breaches as their
Consciences could allow; and did propose a clear Scheme of what they would
submit to, and on what terms they would again enter into the Communion of the
Church; then I am confident such candid dealing would find an entertainment
beyond what they can justly hope for Modest Survey of Naked Truth.
.

CHAP. III. Of Moderation with respect to the Church of England.
. 1. What is to be understood by the Church of England.. 2. The Moderation of
our Church frequently confessed by her Adversaries: sometime truly, sometime
upon design; but most often our Church is reproached and opposed for her
Moderation by each sort of Adversaries.. 3. From the joint opposition made
against our Church by her Adversaries on either hand, is taken the chief
inartificial proof of her Moderation.

. 1. TReating of the Moderation of the Church of England, some will not be
ashamed to ask what is meant by the Church of England V. Reasons for the
necess. of Reform* p. 3.
. It Is pretty odd, that in a settled Church as ours is, such a question should
be so confidently made as it is by some, who while they ask it, may be members
of it, if they please. But because this Treatise is so immediately concerned in
this question, I shall make the answer more clear from all exceptions, if I
come thereunto by some steps.

The Church in general is a select Society; that is, of such as are called out
of the World to the worship of God (...) coetus evocatorum. (...). Clem. Alex.
Strom. l. 7.
. This Society is either that invisible Company of all the faithful throughout
the World, who are inwardly and really holy, known unto God: Or is the Society
of those who confess Christ before men, and by this visible profession of the
true Faith, have right to the Sacraments and other privileges of their
spiritual Community; especially those which are a necessary and public sign
before God and Man, that such do confess Christ Jesus: For God who is the alone
searcher of hearts has left only this presumption for the rule of mortal men,
that the visible profession of the Faith should give right to the outward
privileges of the Church: without granting which, even the true members of the
invisible Church could never communicate in any outward Society: which all that
call themselves Christians are obliged to do: and therefore the nineteenth
Article of our Religion begins thus: The visible Church is a Congregation of
faithful people, etc. In every moderate Constitution as I show ours is, the
Rule obtains, Every one is presumed to be good, till the contrary appears in a
lawful manner: Wherefore, that visible Company of faithful people, who here
under the Dominion of our Sovereign Lord the King, call themselves Christians,
and profess the Faith of Christ; which he defends (They) are the Church of
England: Hooker 's Eccl. Pol. l. 3.. 1.
For as the main body of the Sea being one, yet within diverse Precincts has
diverse names; so the Catholic Church is in like sort divided into a number of
distinct Societies; every one of which is termed a Church within it self; so
the name of Church is given betokening severally; as the Church of Corinth,
Ephesus, England, and the like Multas quidem Ecclesias and tamen unam modo
unaquaeque intra seipsam, and cum universali, adeoque cum omnibus ejus partibus
servat Catholicam unitatem. Forbesi, Iren. l. 2. c. 20.
.

But to come to the head of the exception, which commonly is this; If the
Church be a Congregation of faithful people, as the Article defines the visible
Church; How comes the determination of the Convocation, the Orders of the
Bishops, to be looked upon as the appointments of the Church? which are also
governed by the will of the King; What of all this is the Church of England?

In answer hereunto, let such take notice, that the people among us, do bear as
great a part as they ought, in what is constituted in our Church; whether they
will own it or no: For where the consent of the people is not actually
required, it is either included in the Laws of the Land (by which they are
governed) or in the will of the King; to whom, beside his own power over the
Church in his own Kingdoms, which is very great; in many Cases they have made
over their right Refertur ad universos quod public fit per majorem partem. ff.
de reg. ju. ad sect. refertur.
, whatever it is, themselves: and frequently by their Ecclesiastical
Governors, they also consent to what is constituted in the Church: For we must
remember what our Article expresses, That the Church is a Congregation of
faithful people (as it there follows) according to Gods Ordinance: We must also
remember, that the Church in its beginning did not form it self; neither did it
ordain or appoint its own Rulers: For Christ gave some Apostles, Pastors,
Teachers (Ephesians. 4. 11.) 1 Cor. 12. 28. Yea, they had their power given them,
somewhat before the Church was formed, Mat. 28. 18, 19. to show that they were
not to depend upon the people for their power.

Whatever voluntary condescensions were made by the heads of Ecclesiastical
Communion in the tender beginnings of the Church, to oblige them more firmly in
their Christian Fellowships: yet all rights of Administration of the spiritual
power of the Church did always properly belong to the Rulers of the Church,
within their own limits: So S. Ignatius, Cyprian Cum Ecclesia quae Catholica,
una est, connexa and cobaerentium sibi invicem sacerdotum glutine copulata. S.
Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 9.
Hierom, and others of the Fathers fitly call the Church a Company united to
their Pastor: For the Administration of the power of the Church cannot belong
to the body of this Society considered complexly, but to those Officers in it,
whose care and charge is to have a peculiar oversight and inspection over the
Church, and to redress the disorders in it: Wherefore the Church is not
improperly expressed by the Clergy, which may be justly counted, the Church
representative, that as S. Cyprian says, Every act of the Church may be
governed by its Rulers Vt omnis actus Ecclesie per praepositos suos gubern^tur.
S. Cypr. Ep. 27.
; For when we speak of the Church making Laws, we must mean the governing part
of the Church Du^. dub. l. 3. chapter 4. p. 589.
.

In the form of Church Policy presented to the Parliament in Scotland, 1578. by
Andrew Melvill V. Spots. Hist. l. 6. p. 289.
, it was agreed, That sometime the Church was taken for them that exercise the
spiritual Function in particular Congregations. More certain it is, that the
Form of Christ's Church is that outward disposition and order of superior and
inferior communicating mutually to the conservation of the whole body and the
edification and increase of every member thereof. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Col. 2. 19.
And in those things which concern the outward form and manner of Government in
a National Church; where the King is supreme, in all Causes, and over all
Persons; many matters necessarily and properly belong to the disposition of the
supreme Power, the people exhibiting their consent by the King; upon these and
the like good Foundations, The third Canon declares the Church of England a
true and Apostolical Church: and the ninth Canon declares the same, the
Communion of Saints, as it is approved by the Apostles Rules in the Church of
England; upon which account the Authors of Schisms in the same Canon are
censured, and the 139th Canon of the Church concerning the Authority of
National Synods does thus declare, Whosoever shall affirm, that the sacred
Synod of this Nation, in the name of Christ, and by the Kings Authority
assembled, is not the true Church of England, by Representation, Let him be
Excommunicated, and not restored till he repent and publicly revoke that
wicked Error.

. 2. Having now explained what is meant by Moderation, and what by the Church
of England; we may more intelligibly proceed in justifying the Moderation of
the Church of England: of which some inartificial proofs may be premised. The
first of which may be the Confession and acknowledgments of our Adversaries on
both sides: Yea, if the scattered Concessions which have been made by our
Adversaries at sundry times and upon diverse occasions, should be gathered
together in a bundle; there is scarce any judgment, or practice, or
constitution of our Church, but has been acknowledged sometime by some or
others of them, as reasonable and moderate.

Yea, there is scarce any extravagance among themselves, but has been also
confessed and decryed by several of their own Communion: so great is the force of
truth upon the minds of men at some times; when they are in a free humor to
disclose themselves; and it might make a very pleasant and useful Collection,
to have these well gathered and set together: particularly, they have in their
lucid intervals acknowledged the Moderation of our Church, sometime as really
convinced thereof: Notwithstanding (says one who left our Communion De Cressy
's Exomolog. c. 9.
) the English Church has been more moderate and wary than publicly to pretend
to such a private spirit, and by consequence has left a latitude and liberty
for them in her Communion to renounce it, as many of the most Learned among
them have done. Another of them speaks thus of the Church of England Conference
between a Prot. and a Papist, 1673. p. 6, 7, 8.
. I believe her Moderation has preserved what may one day yet much help to
close the breach betwixt us. We observe that she, and peradventure she alone,
has preserved the face of a continued mission, and uninterrupted Ordination:
Then in Doctrines, her Moderation is great. In those of greatest concern has
expressed her self very warily. In Discipline she preserves the Government by
Bishops, but above all we prize her aversion from Fanaticism, and that wild
error of the private spirit, with which it is impossible to deal: from this
obsurdity the Church of England desires to keep her self free: She holds
indeed, that Scripture is the Rule of controversy; but she holds withal, That
it is not of private interpretation: for she is for Vincentius his method. But
I see that moderate counsels have been discountenanced on both sides.

Others of the same denomination have appeared to acknowledge the Moderation of
our Church, but it is manifest they have done it upon design; using that
acknowledgment only as an Art, either to Proselyte some uncertain ones of our
Communion, or else to divide us: thinking by their public owning our
Moderation, thereby to render us more odious to those of another immoderate
extreme. Yet the generality of both extreme adversaries join together in
reproaching us for this Moderation; and by their immoderateness in so doing, do
also justify the Moderation of our Church.

Thus do the great Bigots of the Church of Rome, and the rigid Disciplinarians
and other Novellists, in their zeal count all merciful Moderation lukewarmness
(...). Med. 12.
.

Wherefore these apply to us what the Spirit said to the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea Vid. Mr. Henderson 's 1. and 2d. Paper. Collegium Laodicensium est
senatus Moderatorum hominum. Brightman in Apocal. c. 3. p. 105. Antitypum est
nostra nimirum Anglicana. ibid. p. 101.
, Rev. 3. 16. Because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will spue
thee out of my mouth: reproaching commonly our Moderation by the name of
neutrality and want of zeal Cesset igitur Anglia Medietatem suam quae mera
neutralitas est, sub titulo prudentiae and moderationis palliare, poti^^ serve
and resipi^ce. Parker de Eccl. Pol. l. 1. c. 25.
; and when some temperate interpretations have been offered the Romanists Scio
enim ejusmodi Modificationes (ubi aliquid temperatum offerebatur) nihil aliud
esse quam Satanae dolos, etc. Ep. c. Bellarm. ad Archipresb. Anglic.
, they have received them with invidious reflections, lest any of their Company
should be won over to us by the Moderation of our Church: In the mean while
none pursue the Church of England upon this account so much as the rigid and
severe of either extreme; the hot heads among the Romanists with their
Anathema's, and the other Zelots with their Curse ye Meroz.

Whereas the learned men of other reformed Churches, have not only observed
frequently, and admired the Moderation of our Constitution (as Dr Durel in his
View of the Reformed Churches, has plentifully instanced) but so far forth as
they judge the same Moderation found among themselves; they seem to mention it
with a great joy Retinemus ex singulis regiminibus exquisitam temperaturam: J.
A. Comenius, de Ord. Eccl. apud Bohem.
, and count the same worthy of imitation Atque hic Commemorare libet ad
Exemplum quanta sapientia, quantoque temperamento, compositae fuerint
precationum formulae quibus Gall. and Genev. utuntur. Amyrald. de secess. ab
Eccl. Romans p. 225.
.

. 3. Wherefore the most general and inartificial, but most plain proof of the
Moderation of our Church (such a proof as is sufficient to evince the whole
enquiry) is the consideration of the condition of our Church among her
Adversaries; that is, as the 7. Canon 1640. has it, between the groundless
suspicions of the weak, and the aspersions of the malicious; Pref. to the
Liturgy conc. Cerem.
between those addicted to their old Customs, and the newfangled who would
innovate all things; the Church of England has been a patient sufferer.

And as the true Religion has always been tried by real persecution of its
extreme Adversaries, and thereby has become more approved and more glorious;
so by the wonderful Providence of God, this temper and Constitution of the
Church of England, has had its Essays in two very refining Trials. 1.
Immediately after the Reformation in its persecution from those of the Romish
Communion; and lately in its second Trial, from other Domestic Adversaries:
from both which sufficient proofs, the Moderation of our Church may be known
unto all, It Is a hard condition: The Church of England professes the ancient
Catholic Faith, and yet the Romanist condemns her of Novelty in her Doctrine:
She practices Church Government as it has been in use in all Ages and places
where the Church of Christ has taken any rooting, both in and ever since the
Apostles times, and yet the Separatist condemns her for Anti-Christianism in
her Discipline: The plain truth is, she is betwixt these two Factions as
between two Milstones: And it is very remarkable, that while both these press
hard upon the Church of England; both of them cry out upon Persecution
Archbishop Laud against Fisher. Pref.
: among whom she is placed as an humble representation of her Blessed Savior:
for as he was Crucified amidst Criminals: so the Church of England has most
constantly suffered betwixt such Factions and Sects of Men, as have run into
the utmost extremes, from the judgment and practices of the Universal Church of
Christ: such are the Romanists, and other Sectaries and Schismatics amongst
us: Thus Manasseh vexed Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh, and both against Judah.
(Is. 9. 21.) Thus Herod and Pontius Pilate, otherwise at variance, became
Friends, to be but the worse Enemies to our Savior: thus both the Jews and
Gentiles opposed the Christian Religion: and afterward the later Jews and the
Circumcellions, joined against the Catholic Christians: and since Judaism and
Gentilism have been overcome by the light of the Gospel, the corruption of the
Christian Religion has arisen from its own Professors; which is the corruption
of Christianity into Popery, and other Sects amongst us (for what is best in it
self, is worst when corrupted:) and as the Christian Religion is the perfection
of other Philosophies; so these corruptions of Christianity have in them much
of the very dregs of Judaism, and the worst imitation of Gentilism. And now how
earnestly do the several Factions from Rome, and the whole gang of Sects among
us, oppose our Church? whose wise Moderation and excellent Constitution do
place her amidst such extremes: Between the (Ignes fatui) pretenders to new
lights on one hand, and the Boutfeaus, the male-contented Incendiaries on the
other hand: Between both these we must be served as the Guests of Procrustes
(...). Plutarch. in Theseo.
were in his famous Bed; the Romanists think us too short and deficient in most
of our measures, and therefore they would needs have us stretched, (if not upon
the rack:) the Sectaries count us redundant in many superfluities, and would
fain have us cut precisely according to their Models: so their mutual testimony
rightly applied, may thus far be accepted; that indeed we are guilty of neither
extreme, but really do bear the Test to be in the golden Mean.

To this purpose, the Excellent Hammond begins his Preface to his View of the
Directory: There is no surer evidence (and (...)) by which to discern the great
excellency of Moderation in that Book (of the Liturgy of the Church of England)
and so the apportionateness of it to the end to which it was designed; than the
experience of these so contrary fates which it has constantly undergone
betwixt the Persecutors on both extreme parts; the Assertors of the Papacy on
the one side, and the Consistory on the other; The one accusing it of Schism,
the other of compliance: The one of departure from the Church of Rome, the
other of remaining with it; Like the poor Greek Church, our Fellow Martyr,
devoured by the Turk for too much Christian Profession, and damned by the Pope
for too little: It being the dictate of natural reason in Aristotle, That the
middle virtue is most infallibly known by this, that it is accused by either
extreme as guilty of the other.

For as S. Greg. Nazianzen, in his third Oration of Peace (...),
, says: Whatsoever is peaceable and moderate does suffer much of both the
extremes; and either is despised or resisted: of which sort, while we are now,
who blame what is amiss; we therefore are placed as in a seat of strife and
envy, and no wonder if we are bruised in pieces between both. Neither is there
any more certain Argument of the equal and just Constitution of the Church of
England, than that the Factions among us are so ready to join with the
Romanists in the very same accusations.

It follows now, that we give more particular instances of the real Moderation
of the Church.

CHAP. IV. Of the Moderation of our Church in respect to her Rule of Faith.
. 1. In holding to her true and just measure, as is proved from her Articles
and Canons, and other Monuments of the Church.. 2. In her avoiding the extremes
of those who take away from the due perfection of Holy Scripture, and of others
who seem officiously to add thereunto.. 3. In her judgment of the letter and
sense of Scripture, and in the use of such consequences as are duly drawn from
thence.. 4. In reference to the Versions and Translations of Holy Scripture,
several instances of Moderation in our Church.. 5. In her Orders also for
dispensing the Holy Scripture to all within her Communion.. 6. In governing the
reading of the Scripture; and communing on the same.. 7. In her judgment of the
Canonical and Apocryphal Books.. 8. The Divine Authority of the Holy Scripture,
our Church rather does take for granted, than prove too laboriously or
uncertainly.. 9. All immoderate extravagancies concerning interpretation of
Holy Scripture, avoided by our Church.

. 1. WHereas Moderation has its name (and being) from the equal measures
observed by it: the first instance of the Moderation of our Church is most
properly to be taken from the right rule and measure in Religion, which this
Church of ours constantly receives and holds close to: by which she is safely
preserved from all undue extremes; having to her self the same rule and measure
of her Moderation which the universal Church of Christ in all Ages has had,
such a rule as is beyond all exception, and is of undeniable Authority, namely
the Holy Scriptures; which are the same right and just measure by which she
measures out to others, and desires to be measured by her self; in whatever she
receives and delivers out as matter of Faith and required practice, in the
necessary parts of Religion, and the worship of God. Whereas (next to the
extreme of them who have no Religion nor no Rule) the vanity and extravagance
of those is very notorious, who set up themselves to be their own Rule; which
is done in the pretenses of infallibility on one hand, and enthusiasm on the
other: between that Rock and this Gulf; the Moderation of our Church does
safely conduct its own judgment and practice, and all that follow her. In the
Sixth Article of Religion, see how our Church does own the perfection of Holy
Scripture as a Rule. Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to
Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
is not required of any man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith,
or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation: and the reason why the
Church of England does require her self to be acknowledged of her own Canon 3.
1603.
as a true and Apostolical Church, is because she teaches and maintains the
Doctrine of the Apostles; and in the fourth Canon, the Church censures all
Impugners of the worship of God, and whosoever shall affirm her Form contains
any thing in it repugnant to the Scriptures.

In the 36. Canon, Article 2. All who are to subscribe, are willingly (and ex
animo) to affirm, That the Book of Common Prayer, and of ordering Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the word of God: and
Article 3. That he acknowledges all and every of the 39. Articles to be
agreeable to the word of God. In the 19th Article of Religion, The visible
Church of Christ is defined; a Congregation of faithful men, in the which the
pure word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered according
to Christ's Ordinance.

And in the ordering of Bishops and Priests, it is asked: Be you persuaded that
the Holy Scriptures contain sufficiently all Doctrine required of necessity for
eternal Salvation through Faith in Jesu Christ? And are you determined with the
said Scriptures to instruct the people committed to your Charge; and to teach
nothing (as required of necessity to eternal Salvation) but that you shall be
persuaded may be concluded and proved by the Scriptures? The Answer is, I am so
persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.

In the 20th Article of Religion, it is declared, It is not lawful for the
Church to ordain any thing contrary to Gods word written; neither to expound
one place that it be repugnant to another. From all which passages (and many
more which might be repeated out of the Monuments of our Church) it is evident,
that as our Church is formed in her whole Constitution, with an uniform respect
to this Rule; and has framed her Articles, Liturgy, Homilies, and Orders
thereby; so it does require her self to be acknowledged in those, but in
subordination to this Rule and measure as before, and superior to it self:
which does manifest the exceptions of many of the Separation to be very
unreasonable, who seem to give such deference to the Holy Scriptures, and at
the same time renounce Communion with the Church of England; which does so
religiously hold to the Sacred Scriptures; of which our Church in union with
the whole Church of God, is a sure Keeper, a faithful Witness, a zealous
Defender, and a most sober Interpreter.

. 2. The Moderation of the Church of England further appears, in avoiding the
extremes of those who take away from the true perfection of Scripture; and of
others, who seem officiously to add thereunto. Of the first sort of those who
detract from the true perfection of Scripture, are they who frame an additional
Canon of their own, as the Church of Rome does; who declares, that the
Apocryphal Writings and Traditions of men, are nothing inferior nor less
Canonical, than the Sovereign dictates of God; as well for the Confirmation of
doctrinal points pertaining to Faith, as for ordering of Life and Manners; and
that both the one and the other ought to be embraced with the same affection of
Piety, and received with the like religious Reverence Council. Trid. Sess. 4.
Decr. 1.
, not making any difference between them: Thus (as it is in the second part of
the Homily of good works) Christ reproved the Laws and Traditions of the
Scribes and Pharisees, because they were set up so high, as though they had
been equal with Gods Laws and above them: They worship Me in vain, that teach
for Doctrines the Commandments of men: For you leave the Commandments of God to
keep your own Traditions: Yet He meant not thereby to overthrow Men's
Commandments; for He Himself was obedient to the Princes and their Laws made
for good order. On the other extreme, They of the Separation among us, are busy
to attribute to the Holy Scriptures, such a perfection as God never intended
them; namely, particularly to determine of all actions of Mankind, and every
matter of order and decency in Religion. Between these two, see by how even a
thread our Church divides the controversy: first asserting the real perfection
of Scriptures as a Rule to be as much as need to be, to be as great a
perfection as God has given it, in order to its end, namely to guide our
belief and practice in things needful to Salvation: Article 20. Besides the
same (namely Gods word written) ought not the Church to enforce any thing to be
believed for necessity of salvation: and in the same Article: It is not lawful
for the Church to ordain any thing contrary to Gods word written: Yet the
Article begins thus: The Church has power to Decree Rites and Ceremonies, and
has Authority in controversies of Faith: Wherein, according to an accurate
Moderation the Church does behave itself, in attributing to the Holy Scriptures
their just and full perfection.

On the other hand, our Church does thankfully accept of that Christian Liberty
which God has left her, and indeed which he has given all particular
Christians according to their measures; namely, leave to determine their
particular actions according to the general Rule of Holy Scriptures, and
sometimes of Prudence, where other Laws are not given to determine their
Liberty.

And indeed this Article of the sufficiency of the Scriptures, and the use of
them as a Rule, is the very dividing point, at which those of the Separation on
either hand leave our Church and her Moderation at once: For those who are
ready on one hand to receive all Traditions which the Church of Rome can offer,
with affection and reverence equal to the written word of God; so that (as it
is in our Homily Homily of good works, 3 d. Part.
) The Laws of Rome (as they said) were to be received of all men as the four
Evangelists, No Moderation can contain the extravagancies such belief leads
them to. On the other hand, to accept of no appointment for outward order and
government in the Church or Kingdom, but what is set out in the express word of
God for the direction of every particular action, under pretense of defending
Christian Liberty, is verily so gross and unreasonable a Pharisaical confining
it, that this principle is the first Sanctuary of ignorance, and disobedience
in most of our Separatists; who under an immoderate pretense to Religion, and
the honor of Scriptures, really offer great abuse and disservice to both: as
it is a real abuse to a person, though of honor, to give him Titles which do
not belong to him; so it is an occasion to Atheists and profane persons,
captiously to detract from the true perfection of Holy Writings, when they find
attributed to them such Titles as are false and imaginary: We must take heed
(says the judicious Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 3.. 8.
) lest in attributing to Scripture more than it can have, the incredibility of
that do cause even those things which it has most abundantly, to be less
reverently esteemed.

On this foundation of our Churches Moderation in what she judges concerning
the perfection of Holy Scripture; both the Protestant and the Christian
Religion is established: For as Bishop Sanderson says Pref. to his Sermons.
, The main Article of the Protestant Religion is, The Holy Scriptures are a
perfect Rule of Faith and manners: so the very mystery of Puritanism is, That
no man may with a safe Conscience do any thing for which there may not be
produced either command or example in Scripture.

. 3. We are to note the Moderation of the Church in her judgment of the letter
and sense of Holy Scripture: and in the use of such consequences as are duly
drawn from thence.

Whereas the Romanists 1. look on the letter of Holy Scripture, but as so many
dead and unsensed Characters Richworth's Dialogues. J. S. Surefooting.
, of variable and uncertain signification Ni^. Cus^nus Card. Ep. 7. ad ^^hem.
. 2. They make the sense of Scripture entirely depend on the Authority of their
Church V. Council. Trid. Sess. 4. Decret. de usu S. Scr.
. 3. They presume the Church of Rome only can make authentic all the Books of
Holy Scripture Nullum Capitulum nullusque liber Canonicus habetur absque illius
authoritate. Greg. 7. Dict. 16. in Council. Romans
: and by her sole Authority is to determine which are to be Canonical. 4. They
will not allow the clear consequences of Scripture to prove any matter of
doctrine V. Discourse upon a Conference, Apr. 3. 1676.
.

In these (as in many other instances) our Sectaries generally agree with the
Romanists: 1. They also make the Holy Scripture a dead Letter without their
interpretation. 2. In making the sense which they vouch, to be the Word of God.
3. Such Scriptures as seem to serve their turn they allow, others they reject.
4. The clear consequences from Holy Scriptures against them, they cast by, as
only the results of carnal reason.

Between these two opposers of Holy Scripture, at present there appears this
difference: instead of an external infallible Interpreter on one side, the
other sets up the witness of their own private spirit for an infallible
interpreter also.

When time serves, They that make the difference, can compromise it.

Amidst these extremes, observe we the Wisdom and Moderation of the Church of
England.

1. It gives all due honor to the Letter of Holy Writ, referring her self and
her Sons chiefly to the Originals V. B. of Homilies, passim. Caeterum in
lectione D. Scripturarum si quae occurrerint ambigua vel obscura in V. Test.
earum interpretatio ex font Hebraicae veritatis petatur: in N. autem Graeci
codices consulantur. Reform. Leg. Eccles. de fide Cathol. c. 12.
; using all care in keeping the Letter of Holy Scripture: and preserving the
Originals, and setting them forth correctly, and translating them as faithfully
as may be.

2. The sense of Scripture, our Church accounts chiefly as Scripture, viz.
The Word of God therein: The mind of God being thought by our Church to consist
not in words but in sense. For is the Kingdom of God, words, and syllables
Translators of the Bible, Pres.
?

3. The clear consequences in Scripture are in our Church accounted a good
proof in matters of doubtful Doctrine.

Whatsoever is not read therein, nor proved thereby, is not to be required,
says our sixth Article. Wherefore Mr Chillingworth Chillingworth 's Pref. 28.
did not without reason thus declare. I profess sincerely, I believe all those
Books of Scripture which the Church of England accounts Canonical, to be the
infallible word of God: I believe all things evidently contained in them, or
even probably deducible from them Simpliciter necessaria Rex appellat quae vel
express Verbum Dei praecipit -- vel ex verbo Dei necessaria Consequentia vetus
Ecclesia elicuit. Rex Jacobus ad Card. Perr.
.

. 4. In our Church no one Version nor more are made equal, much less superior
to the original: Nothing is declared authentic but what is judged truly and
originally so. Although the Church of Rome has declared the vulgar Translation
to be only the authentic Scripture Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. Decr. 2.
, according to which, all points in Question are to be decided: and though the
same in our Church has been convinced by sundry learned men of some
imperfections; yet wherein it is most faithfully performed; the innovations of
Popery, even from thence, may be sufficiently manifested.

Other ancient Versions and Translations, which have been of Holy Scripture,
our Church is so far from rejecting or undervaluing, that it has made great
use of them, and does constantly acknowledge their usefulness: and does esteem
them according to their antiquity and the approbation they have had in the
Church of God. Yea, in the worst of our late times, when the true Church of
England was most of all accused of Popery and opposition to the Scriptures,
then were sundry learned and religious Sons of the Church, diligently employed
in defending and illustrating the Holy Scriptures, in the admirable Edition of
their Originals, and their most famous and approved Versions. Although our
Sacred Polyglot Bible has no more escaped its Prohibition at Rome Indice
librorum probibitorum Alexandri 7. Pontif. Max. jussu edito. Biblia Briani
Waltoni Angli cui Titulus, etc.
, than it did the feeble assaults of some others here at home.

2. Whereas the Church of Rome will not allow Translations ordinarily to be
made into the vulgar tongue Prohibentur Biblia lingua vulgari, etc. Monition.
general. Reg. 5. cum Indic^ libr. prohib. Alex. 7. P. V. Council. Trid. Sess.
22. Can. 9.
, unless in a particular policy to serve some extraordinary occasion: as when
the Doway Translation was admitted (as they tell us) because of the importunity
of Heretics: And when such Translations are unwillingly made, they are not
suffered without particular License Non sine jac^ltate in scriptis habita. Reg.
In l. Council. T^id.
: obtained under the hand of the Bishop or Inquisitor, by the advice of the
Confessor: which some call a Prudential dispensing of Scripture V. Pref. to the
Doway Bible.
: Yea such Faculties of licensing sometimes in show of Moderation, are granted
to the Bishops (as was done by Pope Pius IV.) but soon after they are recalled
again very strictly: which was performed by P. Clement VIII. and also by P.
Paul. V. in a very smart Breve, dated 1612. The Translators of the Engl. Bibl.
to the Reader.
So much are they afraid of the light of the Scripture, that they will not
trust the people with it, no not as it is set forth by their own sworn men; no
not with the license of their own Bishops and Inquisitors.

The Church of England from time to time has taken a just care to have the
holy Originals rendered into the common Language, that all Gods people may be
enriched more and more in the knowledge of God; as Epiphanius tells us, the
ancient Church had its ((...)) Interpreters of the Divine Books: and therefore
the Translation of the Holy Bible in English has by the Command of Authority
had its several reviews, and its Translation also into the Welsh or British
Language, has been ordered in the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth.

3. Whereas in the Translation of the Holy Bible, many have attemper'd their
Versions to their own private and particular sentiments, as is notoriously done
in the English Translations at Doway, and Rhemes: and as Grotius Inter multa
quae fidei nocent hoc non est minimum, quod versionem quisque attemperat ad
suas sententias, and sua cuique Deus fit dira cupido: hoc vero non est Idola
sacere? imo semet collocare in templo Dei. Gro. Animadv. ad Artic. 32.
has charged Beza, and Piscator, and others, for inclining their Translations
somewhat to their particular suppositions and opinions; and as King James (at
the Conference at Hampton Court) noted the same of the Geneva Version: The
Moderation of the Church of England has been such (even beyond the care of all
kind of Elective Philosophers) that she appears sincerely to have espoused the
Truth it self, without any Dowry Veritas sine Dote. Herbert de Verit.
of interest and affection to opinions. The more gross was the calumny of
Gregory Martin to our Translators of the Bible. It is evident, you regard
neither Hebrew nor Greek, but only your Heresy. Whereas our Church has
followed no particular Versions, but wisely consulted the others then extant,
which could come to the Translators hands (as they themselves testify and
enumerate in the Preface to the Bishops Bible) the better to enable them to
attain the true sense of the Original: Not making a second hand Translation,
such as the Rhemish, which was but a Translation of the vulgar; yet avoiding
(also) as the Translators of our Bible themselves profess, On one side the
scrupulosity of the Puritans, who leave the old Ecclesiastical words, and be
take themselves to other, as when they put washing for baptism, and
Congregation instead of Church: as also on the other side, we have shunned the
obscurity of the Papists, in their azymes, tunike, holocausts, prepuce, and a
number of such like; yet such is the further modesty and Moderation of our
Church; it does not assume to her self to have perfected or made absolute her
labor herein, but owns it such as may be made more consummate upon further
light and experience.

. 5. Between the extremes of those who on one hand keep the Holy Scriptures
from the vulgar, as does the Church of Rome: and on the other hand, those who
account the Scriptures fit only for the vulgar (as many of our Sectaries who
think themselves already so perfect as to be above consulting the word of God
(as they call it) without them:)

The Church of England according to an excellent Moderation, commends unto all
of her Communion, even to the vulgar, a diligent hearing and reading the Holy
Scriptures K. Edw. 6. Inj. 1547. Q. Eliz. Inj. 1559.
: as appears in sundry places of the Homilies, more particularly in the first
Homily, which is, a fruitful exhortation to the reading and knowing of Holy
Scripture. That man (says the Homily Homily 1.
) is ashamed to be called a Lawyer, Astronomer, Physician, Philosopher, that is
ignorant in the Books of Law, Astronomy, Physic, Philosophy; and how can any
man then say, that he professes Christ and his Religion, if he will not apply
himself to read, hear, and know the Books of Christian Doctrine The Collect for
the second Sunday in Advent. Inter Libros prohibitos non habet Ecclesia
Anglicana Libros sacros and a Deo profectos. Rex Jacobus.
Severi Homines centum circiter Bibliorum editiones prohibent and proscribunt.
Bened. Turretinus 1619.
. And though the people by daily hearing of Holy Scripture read in the Church,
should continually more and more increase in Christian Knowledge; yet it is
intended and required, that especially, the Clergy and Gods Ministers in the
Congregation, should by often reading and meditating on Gods word, be stirred
up to Godliness themselves, and be more able to exhort others, and confute the
Adversaries of the Truth: as we observe from the Preface concerning the service
of the Church: and at the beginning of the second part of the Homilies, there
is a particular Admonition to all Ministers Ecclesiastical, That they above all
others do aptly, plainly, and distinctly, read the Holy Scriptures.

. 6. For the governing our reading of Holy Scriptures: whereas before the
Reformation, the Godly and decent order of the ancient Fathers was broken Pres.
of the service of the Church.
and neglected by planting in uncertain stories and legends; so that many Books
of the Bible were but begun and never read through: Now the order Preface
concerning the Service of the Church.
for Prayer and for reading the holy Scripture, is made agreeable to the mind
and purpose of the old Fathers, and a great deal more profitable and commodious.

It is more profitable because there are left out many things, whereof some are
untrue, some uncertain, some vain and superstitious, and nothing is ordained to
be read, but the very pure word of God, the holy Scriptures, or that which is
agreeable to the same; and that in such a language and order as is most easy
and plain for the understanding, both of the Readers and the hearers.

It is also more commodious both for the shortness thereof, and for the
plainness of the order, and that the rules be few and easy.

Since the Reformation, those who love not to be contained in any good bounds,
when they read the Bible, choose to do it out of all Canonical Order, or
generally snap upon the Chapters fortuitously; or affect for their most common
reading the most difficult Books and Chapters: The wisdom of our Church has
provided, that the Old Testament may be read out every Year once: Tale aliquid
audio esse nunc in Ecclesia Anglicana in qua Psalterium singulis mensibus al
solvitur, and totum utrumque Testamentum unico anno continuata lectione
percurritur. Vtinam reliquae Ecclesiae reformatae, etc. Spala^ensis l. 7. c. 12.
All the Psalms once every Month: and the New Testament thrice every Year V.
The Order how the Holy Scripture is appointed to be read.
: Yet with this Moderation, some difficult and very mysterious places are
excepted: Yet so that the Church declares: Though the rehearsal of the
Genealogies and Pedigrees of the Fathers, be not so much to the edification of
the plain ignorant people: Yet there is nothing so impertinently uttered in all
the whole Book of the Bible, but may serve to spiritual purpose in some
respect, to all such as will bestow their labors to search out the meaning
Homily of certain places of Scripture, 2d Part.
.

Thus manifest is it, that our Church does really intend edification in her
Institutions: and can the wit of man B. Jer. Tailor Pref. to his Collection of
Offices.
conceive a better temper and expedient, than this of the Church of England;
that such Scriptures only and principally should be laid before them, in daily
Offices which contain in them all the mysteries of our Redemption, and all the
Rules of good Life? That the people of the Church may not complain that the
Fountains of our Salvation are stopped from them; nor the Rulers of the Church,
that the mysteriousness of Scripture is abused.

And further to prevent the inconvenience of the vulgars use of Scripture:
there was a wholesome Injunction of Queen Elizabeth 1559*. 37.
, fit here to be mentioned: That no man should talk or reason of Holy Scripture
rashly or contentiously, nor maintain any false doctrine or error, but shall
commune on the same when occasion is given, reverently, humbly, and in the fear
of God, for his comfort and better understanding.

For as it is in the Homily against contention. Too many there be which upon
Ale-benches, and other places, delight to set forth certain Questions, not so
much pertaining to edification as to Vainglory: whence they fall to chiding
and contention.

With reference to which Injunction, it was, that some Bishops in their
Articles of enquiry, had this for a Question, Whether any were known in their
Diocese, who profaned the Holy Scripture in Table-talk: which was captiously
misunderstood by many in their intemperate heats against the Bishops; as if
they thereby did forbid all sober Conference on any places of Holy Scripture:
whereas the Injunction of the Queen (which ought still to have effect) should
reasonably interpret their enquiry; which certainly was the ground thereof.

Besides, many of those Bishops themselves, when Masters of Colleges in the
Universities, observed, and caused to be observed, those Statutes which in most
Colleges require reading of Scripture at Meals; Ordering, that Communication
which is thereon, to be such, as in the Queens Injunction was beforementioned.

. 7. Our Church according to great wisdom has received such Books as
Canonical, of whose authority there was never any doubt in the Church 39.
Article 6. Scio tamen Vualdensem tenere quod declarandi and approbandi Libros
sacros sit in serie Patrum omnium and fidelium ab Apostolis succedentium. Fr.
S. Clara. ad Artic. Confess. Angl. 6.
: rejecting what truly are not of the Canon, which the Church of Rome thrusts
in of its own head; and does not leave out any which are, as many have done in
other times and places: In relation to those Books whose Title is the
Apocrypha, the Moderation of our Church expresses an excellent temper. 1. In
that in their Title, as of uncertain Writings, they are distinguished from
Canonical. 2. All the Apocryphal Books are not recommended to be read in the
Church. 3. Nor on all days, particularly not on the Lords Day, (as such.) 4.
Those our Church does use (together with other Canonical Scripture, as it
plainly and publicly declares, in her sixth Article of Religion, and as St
Hierom says S. Hier. Pres. ad ^ild. V. E^^phan. c. (...).
) for example of life, and instruction of manners (as Clemens Romanus to the
Corinthians, and other such Writings were read in the ancient Church Sunt and
alii libri qui leguntur quidem sed nonscribuntur in Canone. H. de S. Vic. Cap.
6. de scripturis, etc.
:) but does not apply them to establish any Doctrine: as if they had such
authority alone by themselves.

Our Church indeed does prefer them before any other Ecclesiastical or private
Writings, because of the many excellent and sacred instructions in them: for
which good and religious use, which may be made of them by all; we do them the
honor to bind them up with our Bibles, though we make them not of equal
authority thereby, or of divine inspiration, (as we do not also either the
English Meeter of the Psalms, or the Epistle of the Translators of the Bible.)

. 8. The Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, our Church according to great
wisdom does rather take for granted than labor much to prove such an undoubted
principle of Religion; justly supposing there is no reason either to question,
that the Church has surely received those Divine Oracles, or surely delivered
them: and therefore our sixth Article speaks of them as of whose authority
there was never any doubt in the Church: Our Church (justly thus supposing)
immediately therefore applies her self in an Exhortation to a diligent reading
the Holy Scriptures (Homily 1.) and so long as those of her Communion are by
any just means convinced of their authority, our Church according to a great
Moderation leaves it to the Providence of God by what particular arguments (of
the many which lie before us) we may come to this satisfaction: Not causing the
satisfaction of any to depend upon one sort of means to the neglect of another:
Because there are so many Arguments which may sufficiently satisfy any of their
Authority; because some are convinced by some, others by others. We are
encouraged in our Church to receive the Holy Scriptures as the word of God,
both from inward and outward motives; both of divine and moral consideration:
But for our greater certainty and safety in a matter of so great concern; our
Church does not lay the weight of so great a cause, on slight or uncertain
Foundations; as the infallibility of the Church (much less demonstration from
the evidence of oral tradition) or the testimony only of the Divine Spirit,
held by some so absolutely necessary to convince every one of the Divine
Authority of Scriptures, that without such an inward testimony there can be no
kind of certainty whatsoever. The Moderation of our Church excellently governs
her judgment herein; neither refusing the just Authority of Gods true Church,
nor denying any necessary influence of the Holy Spirit of God: according to
which Moderation, guiding our selves, we shall have occasion elsewhere to
justify the real certainty of our Faith, chapter 6.. 8.

In convincing also those of the Authority of Holy Scripture, who do deny the
same; the wisdom and temper of our Church prudently has omitted a twofold
medium, as improper to confute obstinate Adversaries: The one is, of proving
the Divine Authority of the Scriptures by Scriptures themselves; which though
it be a sufficient proof among them who have received them as divine, yet to
others it can never stop the objection from returning infinitely, if the
objector please to be dissatisfied: The other method is, alleging the
Testimony of the Spirit; for though the Church of God has the Holy Spirit, yet
those that dispute this point may not have the Spirit; neither can any ones
saying so, be a proper Argument to convince another: Thirdly, Our Church avoids
the Circle of proving the Scripture by the Church, and the Church by the
Scriptures again, because our Church does first acknowledge the Holy Scriptures
as superior to it self Article 6. and 20.
, as one of the first principles of its Doctrine, and against those who deny
that principle of the Holy Scriptures veracity, it does dispute no otherwise
than by reasons convincing the certainty of Tradition. But as Archbishop Laud
(in his Preface against Fisher) takes notice, While one Faction cries up the
Church above the Scripture, and the other the Scripture to the neglect of the
Church: According to Christ's Institution, the Scripture where it is plain
should guide the Church; and the Church where there is doubt should expound the
Scripture.

. 9. Whereas many run into very immoderate extravagancies concerning the
interpretation of Holy Scripture; our Church contains it self within very wise
and just proportions in its judgment and practice concerning this matter.

1. Concerning Holy Scripture, it does own what the Ancient Fathers S. Chrysostom.
Hom. 3. in ^ Thessalonians. S. Aug. in Ps. 8. V. Second Part of the Homily of the
knowledge of H. Scrip.
have testified, That what is absolutely necessary unto Salvation of all,
either for knowledge or practice, is so fair and intelligible and plain to be
understood of any, that there needs no interpreter of the meaning of the sense
to them who understand the words.

2. For the understanding other places in Holy Scripture which are more
obscure; our Church does suppose and acknowledge plentiful means allowed of
God, both to the Church, and by and in the Church to all particular persons, as
much as is necessary, that such places be understood: For those which are
mysterious and intricate, are for the curious and wise to enquire into: They
are not the repositories of Salvation, but instances of labor, and occasions
of humility, and arguments of mutual forbearance, and an endearment of
reverence and adoration: [as the Archbishop of Spalato, and our Bishop Tailor
use to speak.]

Such means for the interpretation of Scripture are the ordinary assistances of
the Holy Spirit of God: The instructions of the Church, the use of our Reason;
especially in comparing one Scripture with another: which excellent means of
finding out the sense of Holy Writ, our Church her self does often use, and
recommends the same to those of her Communion, according to the ancient
practice of the Church: Yet if we speak properly, we do not call the Scripture
the interpreter of it self; nor properly a Judge of matter of Faith S.
Scripturam Judicem qui sentiunt, recte sentiunt, sed sigurate ^oquuntur. Gro.
de Imp^rio sum. pot.
. Though it be the Rule according to which the judgment which is of Doctrines
is made: and in Analogy with which Interpretations of Scripture also are to be
governed. But because of the danger of the vulgars being misled, our Church
does send them frequently to their Pastors and Ministers, for public
instruction, and private advice and counsel: and inferior Ministers it refers
to their Bishop Exhortation to the Holy Communion. Canon 53.
.

The same method our Church directs for resolution of doubts which may arise
referring to the Liturgy.

Preface concerning the Service of the Church.
Forasmuch as nothing can be so plainly set forth but doubts may arise in the
use and practice of the same; to appease all such diversity (if any arise) and
for the resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to understand, do,
and execute the things contained in this Book; the parties that so doubt shall
always resort to the Bishop of the Diocese, who by his discretion shall take
order for the quieting and appeasing of the same. And if the Bishop be in
doubt, he may send for the resolution thereof to the Archbishop.

3. Our Church does not attribute more or less authority to the means of
interpreting Scripture, or any part thereof, than God has given it for that
purpose: and here the Moderation of the Church might be illustrated from the
manifold extravagancies others have run into, in this matter, on all sides.

1. Some make the Holy Spirit of God the only immediate interpreter of
Scripture (unto all persons whatsoever, that at any time understand any thing
thereof.) Others run into another extreme of slighting the illumination and
assistance of the Holy Spirit. 2. Some assert the Church (of Rome only) to have
an infallible and absolute Authority herein: others deny both the Church
Universal, and all parts thereof, all authority to teach those under her
Discipline, or interpret any Scripture to them. 3. Some have maintained, that
the public Magistrate is the only interpreter of Scripture: others deny him
any kind of authority over or about the Church. 4. There are those who make
humane reason the only interpreter of Scripture: Others reject all use of
reason in divine matters. Among these and many more extravagancies of men, The
Moderation of our Church keeps on one hand from the Tyranny of those who make
such Authorities the Rule of interpreting Scripture, which never were so
appointed: And on the other from the wild inordinacy of them who make their own
private principle (whatsoever it be) the rule of Scripture interpretation.
Among all, wisely making use of, and asserting and recommending such means as
are given for the conveyance, or interpretation (or both for the conveying and
interpreting) of Divine Writ. Something further of which will more distinctly
appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of the Moderation of the Church in applying the Rule of Faith to it
self.
. 1. Avoiding extremes on either hand, in relation to the authority of the
Universal Church.. 2. The Decrees of Councils.. 3. The Testimony of the
Fathers.. 4. Other Traditions.. 5. Our Churches own Testimony.. 6. The use of
Reason.. 7. The Testimony of the Spirit.. 8. Of the testimony and operation of
the Holy Spirit; the judgment of our Church according to great Moderation, more
largely declared.

. 1. THE Moderation of the Church of England appears very great in her due
applying this Rule of Faith to her self: wisely and fitly making use of all
those Instruments which are most proper and useful in conveying to us that
Rule, or which are most subservient to the right understanding our Rule,
avoiding either extreme of those who attribute too much or too little to those
instruments of conveyance and interpretation: Such as the Authority of the
Universal Church: The Decrees of Councils: The Testimony of the Fathers: Other
Traditions: The Witness of our own particular Church: Right Reason alone: The
Testimony of the Spirit.

To all and every of these enumerated instruments; either of certain
conveyance, or interpretation of Scripture; our Church gives their due place
and esteem, according to their influence and use, and no more: which must needs
demonstrate a great deal of Wisdom and Moderation in the judgment of the Church.

1. The Universal Church it self is no where by the Church of England made the
Rule of her Faith, but a Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ: Art. 20. Yet the
judgment of the Catholic Church of Christ, was always by the Church of England
held in greatest veneration next unto the testimony of the Spirit of God
himself; because of those famous Promises made by Christ himself to the Church,
which we read of in the New Testament: Yea, in the Old Testament, The
Prophecies concerning the Messiah, and concerning the Church, and the Ministers
of the Church, always are joined together, as I have sometime heard a great
Prelate of our Church teach us: And because whatever Arguments we have for the
truth of Holy Scriptures (as thanks be to God we have many beside) yet also
from the witness and keeping of the Church Ecclesia non discernit sed ni^a
traditioni legitimae testatur quae sint Canonicae Scripturae. Spalatens. l. 7.
chapter 1.
we receive the Holy Scriptures themselves: and in the sixth Article, In the
name of Holy Scriptures, the Church does understand those Canonical Books of
the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority there was never any doubt in the
Church. So that as the Archbishop of Spalato has it, we have recourse to the
Church, not as to an Authoritative Judge, but as to a Treasure and Repository
Haec sunt quae Patres intra Canonem concluserunt: Haec nobis a Patribus
tradita. S. Hieron. Ruffinus.
in which the Canonical Books, and all things necessary to Salvation, are
preserved by faithful Tradition. Wherefore the Catholic Church it self is
called not a Judge nor a Rule Credo Ecclisiam: credo Ecclesiae: per E^clesiam.
Non di^imus credo in Ecclesiam, ^^t credo in Ecclesi^. Ep-Es^en^.
, but more truly a Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ: and for interpretation of
Scripture, and for our help in judging of Doctrines according to our Rule, the
Church of England values above all others the Judgment of the Catholic Church,
so far forth as we can attain the testimony of the Catholic Church, by such
instruments as are approved and undoubted. For though Second Di^^native against
Popery, l. 1. ^. 1.
, If by Catholic you mean all particular Churches in the World; then though
truth does infallibly dwell amongst them, yet you can never go to School to
them all to learn it, in such questions as are curious and unnecessary, and by
which the Salvation of Souls is not promoted: Yet we know, that in the
Primitive Time the Christian Church was in a less compass, and more undivided.
Wherefore if such matters which are most essential to the being and well-being
of the Church, are both delivered from that time, and with their conveyance
have been approved by the Church in common ever since: If the Church may be a
sure instrument of conveyance of the Books of Holy Scripture, why not also of
such matters wherein all so well agree from the first, and do in no sort thwart
the Tradition of the Holy Scripture it self? Wherefore in the Canon set forth
in our Church, with the Articles of Religion, 1571. it is cautioned, That
nothing be at any time taught, either to be held or believed upon the account
of Religion, but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old and New
Testament; which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered from
thence: Which Golden Rule of our Church, I find twice extolled by the
Illustrious Grotius: once De imp. sum. potesta. c. 6.. 9. p. 181.
in these words: I cannot but commend that famous Canon of the Church of
England, That etc. And again, in one of his Epistles Apologi^ Eccl. Anglicanae.
Accessimus vero ad illam Ecclesiam in qua -- omnia cast and reverenter and
quantum nos assequ^ pot^imus proxime ad priscorum temporum rationem.. 118. Inde
enim putavimus restaurationem petend^m esse unde prima Religionis initia ducta
essent.. 150.
, He takes occasion from this Canon of the Church to say, He wonders any should
deny, In England they attribute more to the ancient Church than they do in
France. The form also of profession in the admission of Professors in Divinity
in the University, because it does very fully express the sense of the Church
of England, I repeat the tenor thereof.

I from my heart do embrace and receive all the Holy Canonical Scripture, in
the Old and New Testament comprehended: and all those things which the true
Church of Christ, Holy and Apostolic, subject to the word of God, and governed
by the same, does reject; I reject; whatsoever it holds, I hold --

Concerning the Church of England, in this matter, hear we what the Learned
Casaubon has declared in an Epistle to Heinsius Ep. Ecclesiasticae, p. 345.
: This (says he) is my judgment, Whereas there will and can be but one true
Church; we are not hastily to recede from those Doctrines of Faith which the
consent of all the ancient Catholic Church has approved; and whereas I own no
other Foundation of true Religion, than the Holy and Divine inspired
Scriptures, with Melancthon, and the Church of England, I wish all Doctrines of
Faith were brought to us, derived from the Fountain of Scripture, by the
Channels of Antiquity; otherwise, what end will there be of innovation? And
thus our King James of Happy Memory did declare (in the words of St Austin)
That what could be proved the Church held and observed from its first beginning
to those Times; That to reject He did not doubt to pronounce to be an insolent
piece of madness: So that the counsel and judgment of the Church of England
seems to be moderated according to the Sentence of St Hierom, in his Epistle to
Minerva: My purpose is, to read the Ancients, to prove all, to hold fast what
is good, and never to depart from the Faith of the Catholic Church: and
conformably King Charles I. His Majesty's fifth Paper to Mr. Henders.
My Conclusion is, That albeit I never esteemed any Authority equal to the
Scriptures, yet I do think the unanimous consent of the Fathers, and the
universal practice of the Primitive Church, to be the best and most authentical
Interpreters of Gods word. For who can be presumed to understand the Doctrine
and practice of the Christian Religion better than those who lived in the first
and purest times? Wherefore Of Heresy,. 14.
Dr Hammond reckons it among the pie Credibilia, that a truly general Council
cannot err.

. 3. And because the Catholic Church is, and has been so much divided, and
the Monuments of the ancient Church Universally accepted, do contain but a few
determinations, Therefore the Church of England moderately remits her Sons to
the first four general Councils; as in the 28th year of K. Henry 8. Fullers
Eccl. Hist; ad An. 1536.
it was Decreed, That all ought and must utterly refuse and condemn all those
opinions contrary to the said Articles, contained in the three Creeds,
contained in the four Holy Councils, that is to say, in the Council of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon; and all other since that time in any
point consonant to the same.

So in the Institution of a Christian Man, set forth 1537. and approved by the
Convocation, 1543. it is there said, A true Christian man ought and must condemn
all those opinions contrary to the twelve Articles of the Creed, which were of
a long time past condemned in the four Holy Councils; that is to say, etc.

Isaac Casaubon also in the name of King James to Cardinal Perron, says, Primo
R. Eliz. c. 1
The King and the Church of England do admit the four first Ecumenical
Councils; and following the judgment of the Church, the Law of the Kingdom does
declare, Dicimus Ecclesiam Britannicam adeo venerari Concilia generalia, ut
speciali statuto caverit, ne quisquam spirituali jurisdictione praeditus
praesumat censuras suas Ecclesiasticas aliter distringere vel administrare, aut
quicquam Haereticum pronunciare quod non a scripturis Canonicis and quatuor
Conciliis generalibus aut alio quocunque Concilio pro tali judicatum fuerit. J.
B. de antiq. liberate Eccl. Brit. These. 4.
That none however Commissioned, shall in any wise have authority or power, to
order or determine, or adjudge any matter or cause to be Heresy, but only such
as heretofore have been determined, ordered, or adjudged to be Heresy, by the
authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four general Councils,
or any of them, or by any other general Council, wherein the same was declared
Heresy, by the express and plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures, or
such as hereafter shall be ordered, judged, or determined to be Heresy by the
Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the Clergy in their Convocation. Thus
the authority of the four first general Councils, are placed by our Church in
the superior order of Tradition; forasmuch as Spalatensis (according to St
Austin A plenariis Conciliis tradita: Quarum est in Ecclesia salubr^^ima
authoritas. S. Aug. Ep. 118.
) speaks of such Councils, they have obtained a wholesome authority, because from
the Apostolic Declarations faithfully received, they have explained the Holy
Scriptures: and beside, because they have been approved by the Universal
Church: which with great reason contradicts what Curcellaeus Curcell. Rel.
Christianae Instit. l. 1. c. 15.
has delivered to depreciate the honor, even of the first four Ecumenical
Councils. So that Mr Cressy, in Answer to Dr Pierce, might very well cite the
Protestant acknowledgments of the Authority of Councils: as that of Ridley
(Acts and Mon. p. 1288.) Councils indeed represent the Universal Church, and
being so gathered together in the name of Christ, they have the promise of the
gift and guiding of the Spirit into all truth: To the same purpose are named
Bishop Bilson, Hooker, Potter, etc. Instead of all these, he might have owned,
if he had pleased, the judgment of our Church it self, giving all due honor to
general and Provincial Councils, whose wholesome Decrees she has accepted and
imitated: Yea, our Church maintains the right of Provincial Synods, taken away
by the Sea of Rome Tertullianus veneratur Provinciale Concilium quasi esset
Oecumenicam, assentiente sc. universali, vel iis decernentibus secundum
universale, quomodo fit repraesentatio totius nominis Christiani, and
virtualiter tota Ecclesia.
. Neither is this honor diminisht by the further Moderation which our Church
has shown, in not taking those for Councils, or general Councils, which are
not such, as neither the Council of Florence, nor Lateran, nor of Trent: and we
know that our Articles, though they are very moderately framed, are many of
them directly opposed to those of Trent, being in those points of Doctrine
wherein the Church of Rome has departed from the Catholic Church, and made
her Doctrines of design more than truth, the unjust conditions of Communion. A
truly free, and general Council, we look upon as the best expedient on Earth
for composing the differences of the Christian World, if it might be had; but
we cannot endure to be abused by mere names of Titular Patriarchs, but real
Servants and Pensioners of the Popes, with Combinations of interested parties,
instead of general Councils Dr. Stillingfleet's first Part of an Answer, etc.
284.
. When Pope Paul III. called a Council (then) to be held at Mantua, and King
Henry VIII. refusing thither to send, He defended his Protestation in a Letter
to the Emperor and other Christian Princes (1538.) In which the King declares
Acts and Monuments, p. 11^2.
:

Truly as our Forefathers invented nothing more holy than general Councils,
used as they ought to be; so there is almost nothing that may do more hurt to
the Christian Faith and Religion, than general Councils, if they be abused to
lucre, to gains, to the establishment of errors: And verily, we suppose that it
ought not to be called a General Council, where alone those men are heard which
are determined for ever in all points to defend the Popish party, and to arm
themselves to fight in the Bishop of Romes quarrel, though it were against God
and the Holy Scriptures: It is no general Council, neither ought it to be
called general, where the same men be only Advocates and Adversaries: defending
his Primacy, born by the ignorance of the World, nourished by the ambition of
the Bishops of Rome, defended by places of Scripture falsely understood.

Neither secondly, is our Churches honor to general Councils lessened, because
she declares, they are not infallible, as in our 21. Article of Religion. When
they be gathered together, Forasmuch as they be an Assembly of Men, whereof all
be not governed with the spirit and word of God, they may err and sometime
have erred even in things pertaining to God; wherefore things ordained by them
as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor authority unless it be
declared, that they be taken out of Holy Scripture Itaque legantur Concilia
quidem Cum honor, sed interim ad scripturam piam, certam rectamque regulam
examinentur. Reform. leg. Eccl. c. 14.
. Notwithstanding they are not infallible, yet for the establishing consent,
King James may be presumed to declare the sense of our Church, of the use of
such Councils lawfully assembled: Come (says He Rex Jacobus ad Card. Perr.
) put it to the Issue, allow a free general Council, which may not depend upon
the arbitrary will of one man, and the Church of England is prepared to give a
Reason of its Faith: For even anciently it was a great complaint in the Church,
as the Fond of all their mischiefs Nilus Archiep. Thes^al. l. 1. (...).
, That Controversies were not determined after the Primitive Rite and manner.

. 3. Concerning the Testimony of the Fathers, the Church of England has
observed the same wise Moderation in her judgment, and use of them also; no
where judging of them as unliable to error: according to the arguing of the 21.
Article. Because they are but men, and sometimes have erred in things
pertaining to God, neither has our Church any where swallowed their errors
through the Veneration of their Piety and Antiquity.

Yet because of their Proximity to the Apostolic times, and the just authority
in the Church, which for their Learning and Piety they have obtained, and all
along has been given them, Our Church in her Monuments, gives a great
deference to their judgment, testimony, and practice.

In the 31. Canon. Forasmuch as the ancient Fathers of the Church, led by the
example of the Apostles, appointed, etc. We following their Holy and Religious
Example, do Constitute and Decree. Canon 32. According to the judgment of the
ancient Fathers, and the practice of the Primitive Church, We do Ordain. Canon
33. It has been long since provided by many Decrees of ancient Fathers: That,
etc. According to which Examples, we do Ordain. Canon 60. Forasmnch as it has
been a solemn, ancient, and laudable Custom in the Church of God, continued
from the Apostles time, That, etc. We will and appoint.

So in the 30. Canon: The lawful use of the Cross in Baptism, is explained from
the practice of the Primitive Times. And in King Edw. VI. Proclamation before
the Common Prayer Book, the reason for our Forms and Rites, is justified from
the practice of the Primitive Church, and in the Preface concerning the Service
of the Church, Here you have an Order for Prayer and reading the Holy
Scripture, much agreeable to the mind and purpose of the old Fathers: and in
many other places where they are named, and where they are not named. The
footsteps of their ancient Piety, have very discernable impressions throughout
the whole Constitution of our Church.

Wherefore as it is in the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical Laws of England,
as was intended Reform. leg. Eccles. Angl. c. 15.
: Let the Authority and Reverence be continued to the Ancient and Orthodox
Fathers, but such as may be subject to the determination, truth, and authority
of the Holy Scriptures. For always the ancient Fathers Neque enim quorumlibet
disputationes quamvis Catholicorum and laudatorum hominum velut seripturas
Canonicas habere debemus, ut nobis non liceat (salva Honorificentia quae illis
debetur hominibus) aliquid in eorum seriptis improbare -- Talis ego sum in
scriptis aliorum, Tales volo esse intellectores meorum. S. Aug. Ep. 3. V. Ep.
19. ad S. Hier. Chilingw. Pref.. 25.
themselves refused any other kind of honor or respect: frequently admonishing
the Reader, that he admit their opinions, or interpretations, but so far as he
sees them agree with the Holy Writings. So that since Protestants are bound by
Canon to follow the ancient Fathers; whosoever does so with sincerity, it is
utterly impossible he should be a Papist.

And indeed the Reverence of the Church of England, to the ancient Fathers, as
it is most regular and well governed, so it is most uniform and constant,
whereas nothing is more ordinary with the Romanists, than when they are pressed
and urged by the authority of the ancient Fathers against them, to depreciate
their testimonies, and add some scurvy false insinuations concerning them: as
has been often observed of C. Baronius, Bellarmine, Stapleton, and others.
Whereas the constant Reverence of the Church of England to the ancient Fathers,
is such, that the Romanists cannot but acknowledge it very often, as De Cressy
Exomolog. p. 102. 135.
says, Indeed the Protestants in England make honorable mention of the
Fathers. They profess greater Reverence to Antiquity than any other Sect
whatsoever.

. 4. There are many things of excellent use in themselves, which come to be
suspected and reproached, because of the abuse they have had in the Roman
Church: Of which, Tradition may be a great instance: Because the Church of Rome
has made Tradition equal if not superior to Holy Scripture; therefore others
run to the other extreme of undervaluing all kind of good and lawful Tradition,
not considering that Holy Scripture is Tradition Recorded. And forgeting that
in the Church of God, one great proof of the integrity of the Canon of Holy
Scripture it self, has been always Tradition; which these men so confidently
despise. There are also some Traditions not contrary to the Holy Scripture
which if they be rightly qualified, have and ought to have great authority with
us: Wherefore upon all occasions is celebrated among us, that famous passage of
Vincentius Lirinensis Vinc. Lir. adv. Haer. c. 3.
: Whatsoever is universally delivered, which every where, which always, which
of all is believed, that is accounted as indubitable and certain.

We receive not (says Bishop Bramhall to M. Militiere) your upstart
Traditions, nor unwritten Fundamentals, but we admit genuine, universal,
Apostolical Traditions. -- And we are so far from believing Tradition without
allowing the Papacy; That one of the principal motives why we rejected the
Papacy, was the constant Tradition of the Universal Church.

. 5. Concerning our Churches own Testimony, Her Modesty and Moderation has
been always exemplary, so far from assuming the Title of Catholic to her self
only (as (St Austin tells us) the Arians did, and since them the Romanists) S.
Aug. Ep. 48. ad Vincen.
That she has counted it a sufficient honor to be an humble (and nevertheless
for that, eminent) Member of the Universal Church; and with her a Witness and
Keeper of Holy Writ; and though she vindicates to her self an authority to
interpret the Holy Scripture, within the bounds of her own Discipline, for the
edification of her own Family, in Truth and Love, and also asserts to her self
an Authority in Controversies of Faith, Article 20. namely, for the avoiding
diversities of opinions, and for the establishing consent touching true
Religion; yet I cannot well omit to observe, the wise modesty of our Church in
her asserting her own authority in Controversies of Faith: which expression, I
may have leave to illustrate from such another instance of Wisdom and
Moderation, in the recognition required to be made of the Kings Supremacy in
our subscription (according to the 36. Canon) and in our Prayers, wherein we
acknowledge Him Supreme Governor of this Realm, in all Causes, and over all
Persons: It is not said, over all Causes as over all persons; forasmuch, as in
some Causes, Christian Kings do not deny some spiritual power of Gods Church
distinct from its temporal Authority; which yet refers to the King, as their
Supreme Keeper, Moderator, and Governor: Even so the Church declares her
Authority in Controversies of Faith, not that the Church of England, or any
other Church, no not the Universal Church, has power to make any thing which
is in controversy matter of Faith, which God has not so made: The Church owns
that she has no power against the truth, but for the truth. Neither may it
expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another: (Article 20.)
But she has power to declare her own sense in the Controversy: and (that I may
express my own meaning in better words than my own Pref. of Bishop Sparrow's
Collection of Eccl. Records, etc.
) To determine which part shall be received and professed for truth by her own
Members, and that too under Ecclesiastical penalty and censure, which they
accordingly are bound to submit to, not as an infallible verity, but as a
probable truth; and rest in her determination, till it be made plain by as
great authority, that this her determination is an error; or if they shall
think it so by the weight of such reasons as are privately suggested to them,
yet are they still obliged to silence and peace, where the decision of a
particular Church is not against the Doctrine of the Universal; Not to profess
in this case against the Churches determination (because the professing of such
a controverted truth is not necessary, but the preservation of the peace and
unity of the Church is) is not to assert infallibility in the Church, but
authority. Wherefore Mr Chilingworth Chilingw. Pres.. 28.
had very just reason to declare, Whatsoever has been held necessary to
salvation, either by the Catholic Church of all Ages, or by the consent of
Fathers, measured by Vincentius Lirinensis his Rule; or is held necessary,
either by the Catholic Church of this Age, or by the consent of Protestants,
or even by the Church of England, That against the Socinians, and all others
whatsoever, I do verily believe and embrace. Whereas the Pope and Church of
Rome do challenge to themselves an authority supreme, over all Causes and
Persons, by their Infallibility, by which they exclude all others from their
peace, and themselves from emendation: Neither are their followers much in the
way thereunto, by what Card. Bellarmine does assert of this supreme Authority:
If the Pope (says he C. Bellarm. de Pontif. To. l. 4. c. 5.
) should err, in commanding any Vices, or forbidding any Virtues, The Church is
bound to believe those Vices are good, and those Virtues are evil, unless it
would sin against Conscience In bono sensu, dedit Christus Petro potestatem
saciendi de peccato non peccatum, and de non peccato peccatum. c. Bell. c. 31.
in Barklaium.
. (However in his Recognitions Locuti sumus de actibus dubiis vi^t^tum aut
vitiorum. Recogn. operum c. B. p. 19.
, he minceth the matter in a distinction of doubtful and manifest Vices and
Virtues.) O Blessed Guides of Souls! How did the Illustrious Cardinal miss
being Canonized for that glorious Sentence? and to help him for a Miracle to
qualify him for an Apotheosis, why did not some cry out of it; So many words,
so many Miracles? Thus many of the Romanists make the Pope such a Monarch in
the Church, as Mr Hobbs does his Prince in the State Hobbesius de Cive c. 7.
art. 26. c. 12. art. 1.
. The interpretation of Holy Scripture, the right of determining all
Controversies, to fix the rules of good and evil, just and unjust, honest and
dishonest, does depend on his authority, in the power of whom is the chief
Government. But this Doctrine is as bad Philosophy as that of the Cardinals is
Divinity. Among these excesses, let us not forget the Moderation of our Church,
which holds, she may revise what has slipped from her: wherefore in her 19.
Article she declares: As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, have
erred, so also the Church of Rome has erred: (a charge agreeable to the
Moderation of our Church, considering what might have been further said:) which
by the same proportions of reason she supposes true of her self, and of all
others, viz. That they are fallible and may err.

. 6. Of the use of Reason, with Reference to divine matters, there may be
elsewhere occasions in this Treatise to discourse Chapter 6.. 9, 10.
. Yet here it is to be observed, our Church does not make its own reason a rule
of Faith; nor the sole Interpreter of Scripture, much less the reason of
private men: yet because mankind has no reasonable expectation of Miracles,
especially, when ordinary means are sufficient and abounding; and because the
Holy Spirit of God in the testimony of his Church, has all along certainly
conveyed to us the sense of many places; beside, That what is most needful to
be heeded is very plain; our Church does allow and suppose rational men's
perceiveing the sense of Scripture by the due use of their understanding; which
practice must also necessarily engage such to a high regard of what was
anciently received in the Catholic Church. For as nothing is held among us
more agreeable to reason than our Religion, so in expounding our Religion, and
in interpreting Scripture, our Church makes use of the best and the truest
reasons (as is manifest in what she declares and enjoins) and encourages also
those other helps which are any ways useful to the better understanding the
sense of Holy Scripture: as namely, the knowledge of Tongues, Arts, and
Sciences, and whatever else may improve the industry and sincerity of the
enquirer. Because as our Homily says Hom. of Com. Pr. and Sacraments.
, No man comes to the knowledge of Tongues, otherwise, than by diligent and
earnest study: and elsewhere Hom. of the peril of Idolatry, 2. Part.
, The Church (taking notice, how the worshipping of Images came in times of
ignorance, negligence, and barbarity) laments the wastes made on learning, by
the Goths, and Vandals, and Hunns, They burning Libraries, so that learning and
true Religion went to wrack, and decayed incredibly.

Wherefore the Church of England has been always a bountiful and careful
cherisher and Patron of our Famous Universities; as They have been and are,
most dutiful and zealous observers of the Church.

And because our Church governs it self according to such just measures in the
Interpretation and Exposition of Scripture, we see she does neither practice
nor encourage the turning of Holy Scripture into Cabala's and Allegory, as too
many have precariously and groundlesly done, according to the humor of their
own imaginations: our Church observing that Moderation which St Austin commends
De Civ. Dei l. 17. c. 3.
, when he blames some for one extreme, that will allow no type or signification
in things done and recorded; and others who contend, all things in Scripture
recorded, have their Allegorical Interpretation Mihi multum errare videntur qui
nullas res gestas aliquid aliud praeter id quod eo modo gesta sunt significare
arbitrantur: it a multum audere qui prorsus ibi omnia significationibus
allegoricis involuta esse contendunt. Erasin. Eccles. l. 3. Nunquam dubia
aenigmatum intelligentia ad autoritatem dogmatum proficere. S. Hieron. in Mat.
13.
, even the Doctrines of Catholic Faith; which (in his Epistle to Vincentius)
he calls a grievous piece of impudence to hold: yet as Erasmus (in his
Ecclesiastes) adds, It is not fit to doubt of such Types and Allegories, which
Canonical Scripture have revealed to us.

. 7. Though the Moderation of the Church shows it self in that it does not
vain-gloriously boast of the Spirit, yet it may well consist with her excellent
modesty to believe of her self, That in the interpretation of Holy Scripture,
she has such an assistance of the Spirit of God as is promised to the Church
in general: The Church of England being a true part thereof, subject to and
governed by the word of God: upon which account in 139. Canon, it requires,
That the sacred Synod of this Nation, in the name of Christ, and by the Kings
Authority assembled, be acknowledged the true Church of England by
Representation: and it may be presumed, That where the lawful representative of
the Church is gathered together rightly, the assistance of Gods Spirit is not
wanting; wherefore it argues immoderate presumption in them who receive with
impious scorn, our Confession of our undoubted hope, that the Church of England
has the testimony of the Spirit of God in her interpretation of Scripture; and
yet these depravers of the Scripture Qui ingenium suum faciunt Ecclesiae
sacramenta. S. Hier. Ep. 9.
, shall with glorious assurance affirm to themselves and their Accomplices, the
wonderful illapses and impulses of the divine Spirit, when at the same time
they contradict the Holy Catholic Church Neque -- id defendere velim contra
consensum antiquitatis and spiritum qui Ecclesiae corpus: Quod si mecum in
rebus aliis caveant ilii, jam spiritus ille privatus Ecclesiae Divisor perdet
fascini sui efficaciam. Grotius ad Riv. art. 1.
and themselves; and when also many pretenders to a double portion of the
Spirit, have acted as the eldest Sons of Belial.

Whereas indeed the testimony of the Spirit, in the hearts of the faithful
themselves, for the interpreting Holy Scripture, and determining doubtful
matters, has been more often urged than understood; yea, if we could suppose
it was not a precarious assertion, to be sure it is an improper method to
convince Gainsayers: yet to those who are out of Communion with the Church, it
must needs be a most uncertain and insufficient testimony.

. 8. Many we know there have been and are, who pretend to such extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Spirit, as were peculiar to the first Ages of the Church:
thus does the Church of Rome (as did the Donatists of old) make such miraculous
testimonies, the necessary sign of a true Church: and somewhat like both these,
are the Enthusiasts of our late age, who would make the privileges of the Holy
Spirit, special and singular to their enclosures; affirming a particular
inspiration of the Spirit absolutely necessary, To convey into our minds the
sense and interpretation of Holy Scripture: To assure all Christians of the
certainty of their Salvation: To furnish them with words and petitions in
Prayer: To convince any of the authority of Holy Scriptures, and the certainty
of Faith,

Our Church declares Homily for Whit-sunday, 2d Part.
, It is not the part of a Christian under pretense of the Holy Ghost, to bring
in his own dreams and fantasies into the Church, for such blaspheme and belly
the Holy Ghost: whereas, the proper office of the Holy Ghost is not to
institute and bring in new Ordinances, contrary to the doctrine before taught,
the doing of which the Homily declares, is the sign of a false Church, and of
such as are deceivers.

It is to be acknowledged, that the discourses concerning the operation and
testimony of the Spirit are liable to many difficulties: but, The principal
conclusions which are rightly made in this matter, I suppose may be truly made
out to be the sense of our Church declared in her own words.

1. For interpretation of Holy Scripture, the reason why our Church holds such
extraordinary illumination not necessary, is because 2d Homily of Scripture.
, All things necessary for our Salvation are plain to understand, that is, as
the Homilies deliver, to such as use the means: and so far as their explicit
knowledge is required.

For our Church does speak of the illumination of the Spirit and interpretation
of Scripture, as generally joined with the use of means: When any apply their
minds to the study of the Scripture, to hear, read, and search, thus God
opens the dark things of Scripture unto faithful people: It cannot be, says
St Chrysostom, that such should be left without help. When our Homily mentions
the Holy Ghost inspiring the true meaning of the Scripture, it adds, to them
that with humility and diligence do search therefore: which clause is not to be
left out (as it is by the Author of the Scriptures genuine interpreter, p. 5.)
Those that thus thankfully, cheerfully, and diligently hear, read, meditate,
and ruminate on Holy Scripture; such have the sweet juice, spiritual effect,
taste, comfort, and consolation of them: which Doctrine of our Church is most
intelligible and sober, and different from what some others mystically have
discoursed of concerning spiritual gusts, which they attribute to unaccountable
Communications.

The ordinary means to which the interpretation of Scripture is generally
annexed, our Church judges the same which Dr Hammond mentions in his
Postscript concerning Divine Illuminations: Study, search, Meditation, the
Collation of places of Scripture, (or bringing one place together with another
Homily 1.
) the use of reason, and learning, and skill in original Languages; the help of
our spiritual guides; the Declarations of Gods Church; the analogy of received
doctrines constant Prayer for Gods blessing; the necessary assistance and
gracious aids of Gods Spirit.

Our Church indeed teaches us, that Carnal reason is an enemy to God, and to
perceiving the things of the Spirit: which carnal reason, some do expound the
wisdom, some the sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh.
But our Church esteems it a great reproach to humane nature, and the Creation
of God, to call that carnal reason, which is our rational perception and use of
what is delivered us to understand: or a comparing, and as we said out of the
Homily, a bringing together one place with another; and drawing easy and plain
consequences from Scriptures, which we are to search: whereas the Scriptures
are propounded to the reasons of Men; and the belief of them is an act of the
greatest reason that can be. Indeed in the things revealed, when any thing
exceeds the comprehension of our reason; our Church advises us to sequester
our reason: In such cases, says the Homily Hom. of Places of Script. 2. Part.
, Reason must give place to Gods holy Spirit.

From the Doctrine of our Church, it is also very plain, That no more
supernatural and immediate operation of the Holy Spirit is necessary to the
interpretation of the Scriptures than what is necessary to make us faithful and
good Christians.

Wherefore our Church lays down the same means for improvement in divine
knowledge, as it does for obtaining the Holy Spirit: namely,

1 and 2d. Homily of Scripture.
The love of God and Godliness, the having a care of being drowned in worldly
vanities; leaving sin and the world: Our forsaking the corrupt judgment of
fleshly men.

3d Part of the Homily for Rogation Week.
Let us endeavor our selves (says our Church) diligently to keep the presence
of the Holy Spirit: Let us renounce all uncleanness, for he is the Spirit of
purity: Let us avoid all hypocrisy, for this Holy Spirit will flee from that
which is feigned: Cast off all malice and evil will, for this Spirit will never
enter into an evil willing Soul: Let us cast away all the whole lump of sin
that stands about us; for he will never dwell in that body which is subdued
to sin: If we do our endeavor, we shall never need to fear: And the Holy
Spirit will suggest to us what is wholesome, and confirm us in all things.

To attain also the spiritual Wisdom of the Scriptures, Our way, says the
Church, is to attend the time, and win the time with diligence, and apply our
selves to the light and grace which is offered us.

Lastly, Let us meekly call upon that bountiful Spirit, the Holy Ghost, which
proceeds from our Father of mercy, and from our Mediator Christ. That he
would assist us and inspire us with his presence, That in him we may be able to
hear the goodness of God declared unto us, to our Salvation; for this cannot be
obtained but by the direction of the Spirit of God, and therefore it is called
spiritual wisdom.

2. Our Church does not judge, that the particular immediate Testimony of Gods
Spirit is necessary to every Christian for his comfortable assurance of
Salvation; but supposes that the best assurance of Salvation, is from the sure
trust and belief of Gods promises: and a certain consciousness of our own
sincerity, according to what is required of us.

Homily of Salvation. V. Homily of Almesdeeds, 2. Part. V. Homily of falling
from God, 1. Part.
If you would be sure of your Faith, try it by your living; the true Christian
Faith is no dead, vain, or unfruitful thing: Therefore let us by such Virtues
as spring out of Faith, show our Election to be sure and stable.

3. Our Church does not judge an immediate gift of the Spirit necessary to
every Christian, to furnish them with words in Prayer; but does rightly
suppose, that the Holy Spirit does effectually assist every sincere devout
person using a good form of Prayer: because he by whom the Spirit is given to
the Church, did teach his Disciples, and in them all Christians, a form of
Prayer; requiring them to use the same. Our Church also has furnished those of
her Communion with general Prayers, according to their occasions: judging also
that such common Prayers Homily of Prayer.
are most available before God: And the means of obtaining the Holy Spirit, to
be most assisting us in our Prayers, our Church declares, is for us, to humble
our selves in his sight, and in all our Prayers both public and private, to
have our minds fully fixed on him; so that our Church supposes those that are
thus humble to pray by the Spirit.

How far the testimony of the Holy Spirit is necessary to convince us of the
certainty of our Faith, and of the authority of Holy Scriptures, See Chap. 6..
8.

From which few passages already cited (in comparison of those very many to the
same purpose, which abound in the Homilies for Whit-sunday; the Homily of good
works; of Salvation; of falling from God; of Alms-deeds:) It is most evident,
that our Church judges rightly concerning the Holy Spirit of God; and lays
down the best Rules for discerning who have the Holy Spirit; for according to
the Doctrine of our Church, believing and obeying the Gospel, and having the
Spirit are all one.

Homily of Salvation, 3. Part.
For how can a man have true faith, when he lives ungodly, and denies Christ
with his deeds: contrariwise, he is most inspired with the Holy Ghost, who is
most changed in his life.

So then this is to be taken for a most true lesson taught by Christ's own
mouth, Homily of good works, 2. Part.
That the works of the moral Commandments of God be the very true works of
Faith, which lead to the blessed life to come.

Our Church also does suppose, that those who receive most of the Spirit, are
such as are most truly virtuous and good; such have most of the divine grace,
to confirm and strengthen them in all goodness; as it is in the Office for the
Holy Communion: If with a true penitent heart and lively faith we receive the
Holy Sacrament, then we dwell in Christ and Christ in us, etc.

1. Part of the Sermon for Whitsunday.
Wherefore if any say, O, but how shall I know that the Holy Ghost is within
me? Some man perchance will say, forsooth as the tree is known by the fruit, so
is also the Holy Ghost: The fruits of the Holy Ghost, according to the mind of
St Paul, are these; Gal. 5.
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faithfulness,
Meekness, Temperance, etc. Contrariwise, the deeds of the flesh are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Debate, Emulation, Wrath, Contention, Sedition, Heresy, Envy, Murder,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, and such like: Here now is the Glass wherein thou must
behold thy self, and discern whether thou have the Holy Ghost within thee, or
the spirit of the flesh. If thou see thy works be virtuous and good, consonant
to the prescript rule of Gods word, savoury and tasting, not of the flesh but
the Spirit; then assure thy self thou art endued with the Holy Ghost:
otherwise, in thinking well of thy self, thou do but deceive thy self: The
Holy Ghost does always declare himself by his fruitful and gracious gifts.

2d Part of the Hom. for Whit-sunday.
But to conclude, ye shall briefly take this short lesson. Wherever ye find the
spirit of arrogance and pride, the spirit of envy, hatred, contention, cruelty,
etc. Assure your selves, that there is the spirit of the Devil, and not of God;
albeit they pretend to the world outwardly ever so much Holiness: for as the
Gospel teaches us, The Spirit of Jesus is a good, holy, sweet, lowly, merciful
Spirit, full of charity and love, full of forgiveness and pity, not rendering
evil for evil, extremity for extremity. According to which rule, If any man
live uprightly, of him it may be safely pronounced, That he has the Holy Ghost
within him; if not, there is a plain token, he does usurp the name of the Holy
Ghost in vain.

As for the manner and measure of the operations of the Holy Spirit, The
modesty and Moderation of our Church does not decree any thing, lest (as St
Austin says) Humane infirmity proceed beyond what is safe.

Yet our Church gives a right account in sundry places of its Homilies, Second
Part of the Homily of Falling from God.
How the Holy Spirit comes to be withdrawn from men: By all these Examples of
Holy Scripture, we know, that as we forsake God, so shall he even forsake us:
When he withdraws from us his word, the right doctrine of Christ; his
gracious assistance and aid (which is ever joined with his Word) and leaves us
to our own wit, and will, and strength; He declares then he begins to
forsake us: First Part of the Homily of falling from God.
which is (as it follows) after any do neglect the same; if they be unthankful
to him, if they order not their lives according to his Example and Doctrine,
etc.

From whence we see also that our Church judges the promise of the spirit is
(as the blessings of the Gospel are generally) conditional: For as God, for his
part, delivered his Son to suffer death for us: so again, we for our parts,
should walk in a godly life, as becomes his Children so to do. 2. Part of the
Homily of Almsdeeds.
He that is first made good by the Spirit and Grace of God, afterward brings
forth good fruits.

As for those who affirm a supernatural and immediate illumination necessary,
without which, other ordinary means are insufficient, either to give us
certainty of the authority, or interpretation of Divine Writ,

1. They affirm that which no where is declared:

2. That which we have little reason to credit from them that affirm so: We
having neither experience of their extraordinary knowledge, or goodness: but
have found them most mistaken of any in their interpretations of Scripture: and
also by the notes of having the Spirit (delivered in Scripture) what is quite
different has appeared.

3. The holding such an opinion, tends to lessen the authority of the written
word of God; and to make the dictates of the humane spirit (if not sometime the
Diabolical) equal with the Holy Canon. And those others who lay the stress of
the proof of the authority of Scripture, and the certainty of Faith, and the
interpretation of Scripture, upon such uncertainties as only the internal
testimony of the Spirit (as is yet neither proved necessary or real; however,
of which there is no proof unto others) verily, such labor unprofitably to
overthrow Christianity, and render all our Faith uncertain.

4. Their Doctrine leads to such Enthusiasm, as is not consistent with the
peace of Kingdoms, much less the peace of Gods Church.

But such is the constant Moderation of our Church, though it does reject and
oppose all fanatical and ungrounded pretenses to the Spirit: Yet our Church
most frequently, and with all humble reverence, owns the necessity of the
gracious aids and assistance of the Spirit (as the phrase is in our Homilies
several times used) as without which we can do nothing pleasing to God: For in
the power and virtue of the Holy Ghost, rests all wisdom and all ability, to
know God and to please him 3d Part of the Homily for Rogation Week.
: Therefore we pray, that in all things he will mercifully direct and rule our
hearts: we pray to God, to grant us his Spirit, that those things which we do
may please him In the Absolution, Collect after the H. C. Hom. of falling from
God*
: To prevent us in all our doings, etc. because of the ill condition of those
who are not governed by the Spirit of God.

CHAP. VI. The Moderation of the Church in its judgment of Doctrines.
. 1. Our Church does wisely distinguish between what is necessary for
Salvation, and what is not.. 2. Her Articles are few.. 3. Which are generally
exhibited, not as Articles of Faith, but consent. Concerning subscription.. 4.
Our Articles are propounded so as to avoid unnecessary controversy.. 5. The
wise Moderation of the Kings of England, in their Injunctions to Preachers, and
Orders taken to preserve Truth, Unity, and Charity.. 6. The Controversies of
the late Age are well moderated, by the determinations of our Church.. 7. As
our Church requires our consent in nothing contrary to sense or reason, so it
has also contained it self from immoderate curiosity, in treating of venerable
mysteries.. 8. Our Church does not insist upon such kinds of certainty as
others without just cause do exact.. 9. Doctrines are so propounded to those in
our Churches Communion, as not to render useless their own reasons and
judgments: The reasonableness of which is proved, and the Objections answered..
10. The use which we are all allowed of our private judgments, is required to
be menag'd with a due submission to the Church. The duty of which submission is
laid down in sundry Propositions.

. 1. BEcause all things in Divine Revelation are alike true, but not alike
necessary for furtherance of Faith and Piety, and establishing Union among
Christians, and Peace in the Church; Our Church has wisely distinguished,
between what is necessary absolutely, and what only in some circumstances is
necessary to Salvation: Those things (says the Homily 2d Part of the Homily of
Scriptures.
) that be plain to understand, and necessary for Salvation, every man's duty is
to learn them; and as for dark mysteries, to be contented to be ignorant in
them till such time as it shall please God to open those things unto them: Hom.
1.
If it shall require to teach any truth, -- or to do any thing requisite for
our Salvation. All those things (says St Chrysostom) we may learn plentifully
of the Scripture. And in the 19. Article of the Church: The Preaching of the
pure word of God, and the Administration of the Sacraments, are made
indispensable notes of the visible Church: namely, in all things that of
necessity are requisite to the same: and the 8th Article declares, The three
Creeds ought thoroughly to be believed and received, for that they may be proved
by most certain warrant of Holy Scripture; where our Church gives the reason of
her Faith, and shows her earnestness in contending for it: But the Moderation
of our Church contains her self within the bounds of what is before made
necessary. The principal and essential points of the Doctrine of Salvation
(such as are fit to make up the unity of the Faith, and constitute a Church)
are no other among us, than what Christ and his Apostles at first made
necessary, which also the ancient Church received as necessary unto Baptism,
and for distinction of Heresy: which fundamental Maxims of Christian Science,
are frequently and plainly repeated in Scripture, and by our Church were first
of all insisted on at the reformation of our Church: as we see in the
Institution of a Christian Man (1537.) in the first Injunctions of our Kings,
and our Form of Catechism. Whereas the Catechisms and Systems which have been
set up in opposition to the Catechism and Articles of the Church of England,
have abounded with many doubtful and unnecessary definitions; yet so insisted
upon by some, as if the Hinges of the Gate of Heaven turned upon those
Propositions: whereby many have agreed with Pope Pius the Fourth, who by his
Bull set out the Apostles Creed in a larger Edition of about as many more
Articles, without belief of which is declared no Salvation Extra quam Nemo
salvus esse potest. Bulla Pii quarti, super forma Juramenti professionis fidei,
sub finem Concilii Trid.
: Unto such a strange Circumference is the body of their unnecessary belief
extended: whereas the Religion of our Church tends to the Center. Which
distinction of things necessary, from what was not so, King James (according to
the sense of our Church) declares of great use to lay a foundation for the
public peace of the Church Vt de necessariis conveniat omnis opera insumatur,
in non-necessariis libertati Christianae locus. Rex Jacobus ad Card. Perr.
, and of particular men's minds, and the furtherance of true Faith and Piety.

. 2. Those Articles which are delivered by our Church, for the avoiding of
diversities of opinions, and establishing consent touching true Religion: 1.
They are few, especially those of positive Doctrine, and the other negative
positions were necessary to assert our liberty from the abuses and
encroachments of the Romanists in their contrary affirmatives: few, if we
consider, either the time, or the occasion of their being framed; it being just
about the meeting at Trent, made it necessary for our Church to declare her
sense of many Doctrines, for the better satisfaction and directions of her
Sons, and to testify her equal conditions of Communion: Especially also, if we
consider the cruel number of Articles, which either the Westminster Divines, or
the Trent Counselors have imposed on their followers.

Bishop ^ramball, fol. p. 1018.
Indeed the Romanists do call our Religion a negative Religion, because in all
the Controversies between us and them, we maintain the negative; that is, we go
as far as we dare or can, with warrant from holy Scriptures, and the Primitive
Church, and leave them in their excesses, or those inventions which they
themselves have added; but in the mean while, they forget that we maintain all
those Articles and truths which are contained in any of the ancient Creeds of
the Church, which I hope are more than negative.

The Church of England (says Archbishop Laud Archbishop Laud against Fisher,
5. 14.
) comes far short of the Church of Romes severity; whose Anathema's are not for
39. Articles, but for very many more, above one hundred in matter of Doctrine,
and that in many points as far remote from the foundation, though to the far
greater rack of Men's Consciences; they must be all Fundamental if that Church
have determined them. Whereas the Church of England never declared, that every
one of her Articles are fundamentals in the Faith; For it is one thing to say,
no one of them is superstitious or erroneous, and quite another to say, every
one of them is fundamental: Besides, the Church of England prescribes only to
her own Children, and by those Articles provides but for her peaceable consent
in those Doctrines of truth; but the Church of Rome severely imposes on all
the World her Doctrine, and that under pain of damnation.

. 3. These Articles of Religion are generally exhibited as Articles of Peace
and consent, not as Articles of Faith and Communion, and as such they are
propounded to all the Communicants in our Church Schisin guarded, p. 150.
Bishop Lanies Sermons, p. 48.
in general. For the avoiding Diversities of Opinions (as the Title of the
Articles is.) Not such a consent as Curcellaeus Curcellaeus: Religionis
Christianae Institut. C. 15.
means, where he supposes some in the dregs of the Age of the Reformation,
obtrude their Confessions and Catechisms, as a secondary rule, if not of truth,
yet of consent; such as ought to be urged only to an infallible truth; it is
likely he might know many who did so: But the consent designed to be
established by our Articles, is such a consent as may keep the Peace of our
Church undisturbed: according to the sense of the fifth Canon: Where the
Prohibition is directed against such as should speak against the 39. Articles,
as superstitious and erroneous: such as may not with a good Conscience be
subscribed to: Whosoever shall hereafter affirm Quicunque in posterum
affirmabit, etc. Ecclesiae Anglic. Canon 5.
, -- not as the Council of Trent Si quis contra senserit, Anathema sit. Council.
Trid. de peccato Originis.
directs its Anathema against those that shall so much as think diversely.
Wherefore our Church no where delivers our Articles as necessary to be
believed, neither by virtue of their own necessity, or her own Command: as
several with Bishop Bramhall have noted: For which reason, subscription unto
them is not required of any Lay-person whatsoever, merely in order to his
Communion with our Church: Although the Church of Geneva A quibus discedere
neque Ministris neque ^ivibus liceret: Be^a in vita Calvini.
urges subscription, not of the Ministers only but the people Extet forma
quaedam Doctrinae ad quam omnes Episcopi and Parochi jure-jurando astringantur,
ut nemo ad munus Ecclesiasticum admittatur nisi spondeat. Calvin. ad Angl.
Protect.
. There is perfectly another reason why subscription is required of all who
receive the privilege of degrees in our Universities: and in Case of factious
Appellants Canon 98.
; who are inhibited, unless they first subscribe; and especially of the
Ministers of the Church Discrimen latum est inter verbi Ministros and plebeios
homines quos Ministri informant: Testis enim est historia Ecclesiastica non per
plebeios sed poti^s per Clericos introductas esse haereses and Schismata.
Forbesius in Irenico l. 2. c. 12.
: namely, because she may be as secure as she can of them to whom she commits
so great a trust in the instruction of the people. Wherefore of them who are
entrusted with the Ministry of the Church, it is required that they disavow all
obligations and opinions to break the Peace of the Church, and that they assent
to the use of those things which are for the unity of Christians in this
Kingdom among themselves; which is no more than the Law of Nature has granted
every Society, which the Church has in all Ages practiced, and which our
Adversaries themselves did use: For the Vi. Disc. of Toler. Sect. 13.
Presbyterians required a subscription to their solemn League, and the
Independants had their Church Government: Therefore in that our Church takes
all the security she can by Sponsors at Baptism, and by subscription of
Ministers, is a proof of her wisdom and great care of her own; especially among
us, where the Ministers of the Church have, blessed be God, another Tenure than
in Holland, during the precarious pleasure of their Pay-Masters: Beneficed men
among us having a Freehold, and not to be turned out but in a legal way upon
great cause deserving. Neither is subscription required by our Church of its
Ministers, unless they can do it willingly, and [ex animo], nor unless they can
with freedom of mind assent and consent to the uniform practice of the Church.
This if they cannot do with a quiet mind, they are left free by the Church to
enjoy a laical indulgence, which is very large, and exceeding bountiful. As for
dissatisfaction or weakness: what said King James Conference at Hampton Court.
, How long will such Brethren be weak? Are not 45 years sufficient Qui
decennali disciplina nondum usque ^o prosecerunt ut tam faciles in Theologia
quaestiones intelligant, non possunt apti esse ad sustinendum onus pastorale in
E^clesia Dei. Forbes. Iren. l. 2. c. 12.
to grow strong in? Some of them are strong enough, if not Headstrong. But I
wonder there should be such earnest Recusants to subscription, of the followers
of Calvin among us: whenas he to the English Protector writes thus: It Is fit to
look after the desultory humor of them who would have too much lawful to
themselves. The door is to be shut to curious doctrines; and one expedite means
for that purpose is, if there were a summary of doctrine received of all, which
all may follow in Preaching; to the observing of which, all Bishops and Parish
Priests, may be bound by an Oath, that no one may be admitted to any
Ecclesiastical Office, unless he first engage that he will keep inviolate that
consent of Doctrine. And so for Catechism. And as to a Form of Prayer and
Ecclesiastical Rites, I very much approve, that there be a constant Form
extant, from which it may not be lawful for the Pastors in their Functions to
depart, in regard of the simplicity and unskillfullness of some, and that the
consent of the Churches among themselves may more certainly be manifest.
Lastly, to prevent the desultory levity of those who affect Novelties. And in
his Epistle to Farellus Calv. Ep. 87.
, Calvin writes, It always prevailed in the Church which was decreed in ancient
Synods, That those who would not be subject to the Laws of Common Discipline,
should be dismissed from their Function.

. 4. The very frame of the Articles shows the great Moderation and Wisdom of
the Church, they being propounded on purpose so as to avoid unnecessary
controversy: propounded not with a Laodicean indifference, or lukewarmness, in
what we ought to contend for Parkers Eccles. Pol. l. 1. c. 25.
(as some charge our Church with) It is not meant here or elsewhere by
Moderation such a Latitude which (Bishop Tailor says Ductor Dub. l. 3. ^. 4..
23.
) has something of craft, but very little of ingenuity: which can only serve
the ends of peace and external Charity, or a fantastic Concord, but not the
ends of truth and holiness, and Christian simplicity.

It is not meant here as if our Articles were framed like the dubious Oracles
of Delphos, that the Subscribers might understand them which way they please:
like a shoe for every foot: as if they were to deceive by ambiguous terms
Conference at Hamp. C. p. 15.
.

The Judicious Bishop Sanderson Pax Ecclesiae, p. 52.
, in his directions for the Peace of the Church, lays down this as the first:

That particular Churches would be as tender as may be in giving their
definitions and determinations, especially where there may be admitted a
Latitude of dissenting without prejudice done, either to the substance of the
Catholic Faith, or to the tranquillity of the Church, or to the Salvation of
the dissenter: In which respect the Moderation of the Church of England is much
to be commended, and to be preferred; not only before the Roman Church, which
with unsufferable tyranny binds all her Children upon pain of Damnation, to
all her determinations, even in those points which are no way necessary to
Salvation: but also before sundry other Reformed Churches, who have proceeded
further than this Church has done.

It is a sufficient proof of the sincerity of our Church, if what it has
declared and intended to declare, has a true, clear, and certain meaning: and
her Articles do surely conduce to peace, if it appear all agree in the true,
usual, literal meaning: But in respect of what is not intended to be declared
by them: King Charles I. Declaration 1630. published with the Articles.
If even in these curious points in which the present differences lie, most men
of all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England for them; then may be
inferred what the Right Reverend Bishop of Chester has said:

No necessity of Reformation of the Doctrine of the Church of England, 1660.
This rather gives a Testimony of the great Wisdom and Moderation of the
Church, which in points doubtful and controverted, has propounded only that
which no sober man can make matter of doubt, or subject of controversy. As in
the 16th Article it is said, Not every deadly sin willingly committed after
Baptism, is sin against the Holy Ghost: Now certainly, this is in it self a
most sound, certain, infallible, plain, and perspicuous Doctrine; and being so,
the want of liberty to interpret one term of it deadly sin, cannot render it
doubtful: for interpret it which way you will, either all sins are deadly, or
say all sins are not deadly, it will be equally true, that every deadly sin is
not the sin against the Holy Ghost.

In the like manner, whether we may fall from grace totally and finally, which
has a great doubt; Without any question, After we have received the Holy
Ghost, we may depart from grace given; of that there has never been any
question.

In the third Article of Christ's descent into Hell Compare the Articles of K.
Edw. 6. 1552. and those of 1562.
, The Church purposely has waved all the Controversies thereof; and plainly
propounded the Article Hujus Articuli verum and genuinum sensum neque Apostoli
^^^dideru^^ neque Ecclesia definivit. Rem itaque credimus, modum nescimus.
Archiep. Spalat. l. 7. c. 12.. 125.
. In the 17th Article there is not one word of the horrible decree of absolute
reprobation: rather in the close of the Article, there is a wholesome caution
against extreme curiosity: Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises as they
are set forth to us in Holy Scriptures, and in our doings That will of God is
to be followed which is expressly declared to us in the word of God; and in the
Homilies our Church 2d Part of the Homily of falling from God.
takes notice of some who Hearing the loving and large promises of Gods mercy,
and so not conceiving a right Faith thereof, make those promises larger than
ever God did, etc.

So evident is it, that the Church of England was intent on Peace and
Edification of her Sons; Wherefore the Articles of the Protestant Church in the
Infancy thereof, were drawn up in general terms, foreseeing that posterity
would grow up to fill the same: meaning that these holy men did prudently
discover, that differences in judgment would unavoidably happen in the Church,
and were loath to unchurch any, and drive them off from an Ecclesiastical
Communion for petty differences, which made them pen the Articles in
comprehensive words to take in all who differing in branches meet in the root
of the same Religion Historia quinque articularis, Part 2. Chapter 8.
. So that I think the modest survey of Naked Truth p. 4.
did not fly one jot too high, when he says, It cannot be denied but the
Articles of our Church were compiled with the highest discretion and Moderation
that ever was used by un-inspired men; so that it is a most unreasonable charge
on the Church of England, to say, she has tyrannically imposed many unnecessary
conditions on her Members, in point of Faith and Doctrine: so large a Scope is
left in our Church for mutual charity, and the enquiries of the studious.
Bishop Bramhall was far from one of those which some called Latitudinarians;
yet he says Fair Warning, Chapter 1.
, If it were not for this Disciplinarian humor which will admit no Latitude
Sunt ergo res aliquae ita comparatae ut benignam sibi interpretationem suo
quodam jure concedi postulent; quae sc. non sit interclusa verborum angustiis,
sed cum quodam (ut Ciceronis verbo utar) Laxamento liberior. De Juram. oblig.
prael. 2.. 8.
in Religion, but makes each nicety a fundamental, and every private opinion an
Article of Faith, which prefers particular errors before general truths; I
doubt not but all reformed Churches would easily be reconciled: Wherefore, in
such points which may be held diversely of diverse men (salva fidei compage) I
Chilingworth Pref.. 28.
would not take any man's liberty from him, and humbly beseech all men, that
they would not take mine from me Non per difficiles quaestiones nos Deus ad
beatam vitam vocat. S. Hilar. l. 10. de Trin. Sunt quidem nonnullae quaestiones
e curiosis and inquietis hominibus excitatae, etiam doctis and piis viris
negotium faciunt, in his ea Moderatio adhibenda, etc. Spalat. de officio pii
viri.
.

And here I think the Judgment of Jur. praedest. p. 21.
Bishop Andrews may fitly be repeated, as most agreeable with the Moderation of
our Church.

I truly ingenuously confess, I have followed the counsel of St Austin; These
mysteries which I cannot unfold, I admire them shut: and therefore for these
sixteen years, since I was made Priest, I neither publicly, nor privately,
have disputed nor Preached of them: and now I had rather hear than speak of
them: And truly since it is a slippery place, and has on either side its
Precipices; and since these places of St Paul are always esteemed among those
which are hard to be understood; and many of the Clergy are neither fit to
explain them, nor many of the people can be idoneous hearers; I would e'ne
persuade silence enjoined on both sides: and truly, I judge it more expedient,
that our people be taught to seek their Salvation in the plain way of a holy
and upright life, than in the hidden paths of the divine Counsels: into which,
too curious inspection, use to cause giddiness in their Heads, and mists before
their Eyes.

. 5. In persuance of the same design of the Church, for Peace and Moderation,
it is very proper here to mention the seasonable and wise Declarations and
Injunctions of our Kings of England, to Preachers and all others, to keep them
within the bounds of the same peaceful Moderation.

In the Injunctions of King Edw. VI. 1547. Of Sermons, It is enjoined, That
they shall purely and sincerely declare the word of God, and in the same,
exhort their hearers to the works of Faith, Mercy, and Charity; especially
prescribed and commanded in Holy Scripture.

In Queen Elizabeth's Articles for Doctrine and Preachers, They are admonished,
to use sobriety and discretion in teaching the people; namely, in matters of
controversy; and to consider the gravity of their office, and to foresee with
diligence the matters which they shall speak, to utter them to the edification
of the Audience.

King James (Jan. 18. 1616.) sent instructions to the Universities; That young
Students in Divinity should be excited to study such Books as were most
agreeable to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England: and bestow
their time in the Fathers, and Councils, and Schoolmen, Histories and
Controversies; and not to insist too long on Compendiums and Abbreviations,
making them the ground of their study. August 4. 1623. In his Letter to the
Archbishop: Whereas diverse young Students, by reading of late Writers and
ungrounded Divines, do broach many times unprofitable, seditious and dangerous
Doctrines, to the scandal of the Church: He enjoined, That none under a Bishop
or Dean, do presume to preach in any popular Auditory, the deep points of
Predestination, Election, Reprobation; or of the Universality, Resistibility,
or Irresistibility of Gods Grace. But rather confine themselves wholly to those
two Heads, of Faith and a good Life, which are all the subject of the ancient
Sermons and Homilies: That no Preacher of any denomination whatsoever, shall
presume to fall into bitter invectives, and undecent railings, against the
Persons of either Papists or Puritans; but modestly and gravely, when they are
occasioned by their Text, free both the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England, from the Aspersions of the Adversaries.

King Charles (of Blessed Memory) set forth with the Articles a Declaration
1630. wherein he required thus: In these curious and unhappy differences which
have for so many hundred years in different times and places exercised the
Church of Christ; We will that all further curious search be laid aside, and
these disputes shut up in Gods promises, as they be generally set forth to us
in Holy Scriptures, and the general meaning of the Articles of the Church of
England.

It is to be wished, that all the Directions concerning Preachers, in the
several Kings Reigns, since the Reformation, were Imprinted on the minds of all
the Clergy and others; especially, His present Majesty's Directions, Dated
October 14. 1662. Which among other great reasons inducing, were set forth
because of the extravagance of sundry young Divines, who took upon them in
their popular Sermons, to handle the deep points of Gods Eternal Counsels and
Decrees, and other fruitless controversies, serving rather to amuse than profit
the hearers; which is done for the most part, and with greatest confidence by
such persons as least understand them.

Therefore they are admonisht not to spend their time in the search of such
abstruse and speculative notions. However, that they presume not positively and
doctrinally to determine anything concerning the same: And for the edifying the
people in Faith and Godliness, That they in their ordinary Sermons insist
chiefly on Catechetical Doctrines (wherein are contained all the necessary and
undoubted verities of Religion) declaring withal, unto their Congregations,
what Influences such Doctrines ought to have into their Lives and
Conversations; and stirring them up effectually, as well by their Examples as
their Doctrines, to the practice of such religious and moral duties as are the
proper results of the said Doctrines; as Self-denial, Contempt of the World,
Humility, Patience, Meekness, Temperance, Justice, Mercy, Obedience, and the
like, and to a detestation, etc. And because these licentious times have
corrupted Religion in the very roots and foundations, That where there is an
Afternoons Exercise, it be especially spent, either in explaining some part of
the Church Catechism, or what may conduce to the Exposition of the Liturgy, and
Prayers of the Church, as occasion shall be offered, The only cause they grew
into contempt among the people being this, that they were not understood.

The subscription for University Preachers in the University of Cambridge,
keeps its Subscribers within the same bounds; and by the way, I may note the
Moderation and Excellent temper of our Universities at this time: Having known
for many Years together, in Cambridge, there have seldom been disputed in our
Schools, those Controversies, which in the Age before did so much divide both
Foreign Churches and ours, and also our Universities themselves: of our other
University, I am assured the same, from my most Reverend Diocesan, the Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

Having mentioned our Universities, I conceive a very proper proof of the
Moderation of our Church of England, may be taken from the general practice in
our Universities (those noble Seminaries of the Church) where among the Theses
which are disputed in the Divinity Schools, commonly one is given to assert our
Church against the Romanists, the other to defend our Church against other
Sectaries.

The care of very many of our Bishops has been also the same, as may appear
from one of their Exemplars of Subscription; I have set it down in the Margent
Ego Curatus cui licentia praedicandi verbum Dei concedenda est, sacras literas
pure and sincere tractabo, easque prudenti simplicitate populo exponam, nec in
sermonibus meis de rebus jam constitutis suscitabo Controversias, nec spargam
contentiones, neque innovationem ullam doctrina vel Ceremoniis suadebo. V. 1.
Vol. Episcopii praes. Praevorstii de concionibus.
, because of its excellent use.

In the Instructions of King James 1618. to the Divines He sent over to the
Synod of Dort, One was, That they should advise the Ministers of those
Churches, that they do not deliver in the Pulpit to the people, those things
for ordinary Doctrines which are the highest points of Schools, and not fit for
vulgar capacity, but are disputable on both sides; and that they carry
themselves with that advice, moderation and discretion, as became them, etc.

After all these great Testimonies of Moderation in our Church, it is proper to
mention what we meet with in the Pacific Dr Hammonds Discourse of Gods Grace
and Decrees,. 24. This I suppose the reason, both of our Churches Moderation in
framing the Article of Predestination, and of our late Kings Declaration in
silencing the debate of the Question: For if by these methods the Church could
but have prevailed to have the Definitions of the several pretenders forgotten:
All men contenting themselves as our Article prescribes, with the Promises of
God as they are declared in Scripture; the turmoil, and heat, and impertinence
of disputes, had been prevented, which now goes for engagement in Gods cause.

And blessed be God, the design of the Churches Moderation, and of our Gracious
King (the Churches Moderatour and Governor) has thus far had excellent effect
in the Church and our Universities; that for a long time there has been a
great silence from that noise and learned squabble, which sometimes formerly
disturbed the Churches Peace: so that now we may be more at leisure, without
prejudice and passion, to review and admire the wise and excellent
determinations of our Church.

. 6. To show how well the Controversies of the late Age have been moderated by
our Church, might deserve a just Treatise by it self: But our Church seems to
observe the same advice which King James gave to the Divines going over to
Dort, 1618. In case of opposition between any overmuch addicted to their own
opinions, their endeavors should be, that certain Positions be moderately laid
down, which may tend to the mitigation of heat on both sides.

Our Church throughout has done the same thing, as might be instanced at large
in the Controversies between us and the Romanists; and between others also:
Indeed the Articles, and especially the Homilies, do copiously and fitly
moderate in these disputes, which not long since very much exercised
Christendom: as for instance, when the Homilies declare, Justification is not
the office of man, but of God only, which we receive of him by his free mercy,
and by the only merits of his most dearly beloved Son. Yet our Faith in Christ
(as it were) says unto us, It is not I that take away your sins, but it is
Christ only; nevertheless by Faith we embrace the promise of Gods mercy. Such a
Faith, whereof does follow a loving heart to obey his Commandments.
Justification by Faith, only freely and without works, is spoken to take away
clearly all merit of works, as being unable to deserve our justification at
Gods hand, and thereby does express the weakness of man, and the goodness of
God: (Yet) the true, lively, and Christian Faith, is no dead, vain, or
unfruitful thing, but a thing of perfect virtue, and of wonderful operation,
and working, and strength; bringing forth all good motions and good works:
therefore let us by such virtues as spring out of Faith, show our Election to
be sure and stable.

In such and many like passages, are known the excellent Wisdom and Moderation
of our Church: particularly, as we have seen, attributing unto good works, no
more nor no less, than what is consistent with the grace of the Gospel:
declaring most earnestly against the Roman opinion of merit by them: and yet
(according as K. Edward's, and Q. Elizabeth's Injunctions have it) does
recommend Charity and Hospitality as a true worshipping of God. And albeit the
Romanists have much vaunted in this particular, it has not been doubted but
the Church of England since the Reformation, has as great Monuments of Charity
as ever were before (under Papacy) in the same compass of time and place: so
truly does the public Exhortation, to the Contribution of St Paul's building,
conclude: Our adversaries of Rome may be convinced, that our Piety is as
generous and charitable as theirs, but would not be so arrogant and
presumptuous; and whilst we disclaim the merit, yet we most steadfastly believe
the obligation and necessity of good works.

How far our Sectaries are deficient in this matter, it shall not be our
business here to enquire, nor to repeat how slightly and reprochfully they have
spoken against the truth in this matter.

It may suffice to observe from what has been said, Nothing has more
vindicated the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Grace of God, and merits of our
Savior, and established the necessity of a good life, and prepared us for a
comfortable death, than the doctrine of our Church rightly understood: wherein
she has delivered her self from all those fond opinions on which the Church of
Rome and other, have founded their peculiar Doctrines, which have disquieted
and confounded so many Christians, and disturbed the Church: Insomuch that some
who have been otherwise much addicted to their own suppositions, yet in many
matters of controversy have readily acknowledged the Moderation of our Church.

The Presbyterian Brethren in their first Paper of Proposals to his Majesty,
say: We take it for granted, that there is a firm agreement between our
Brethren and us, in doctrinal truths of the Reformed Religion, and in the
substantials of divine worship.

Very famous (says Dr Tully) through the whole World, is the most prudent
Moderation of the Church of England in her definitions of Faith, in which
surely to all she offers her self in so equal a poise, that she can afford no
offense to sober minds and lovers of truth; nor does she give any occasion of
cavilling to slight and petulant dispositions, of which in our Age, there is
such a swarm. And Sancta Clara says, The English Confession goes on safely
within this Latitude, neither binding its followers to one side or other, but
freely leaves these matters (of Controversy) to Scholastic disputation.

. 7. As of Doctrines, some are plain, others mysterious: and as our Church
requires consent in nothing contrary to sense and reason; so also she has
always contained her self from immoderate curiosity, even in treating of
mysteries; using good caution, and yet not so much as to become skeptical:
making good search for her own and others satisfaction, as is fit; and yet not
too much, so as to run into extreme or nice curiosity.

Of such mysteries as are revealed, our Church has faithfully declared those
which God has made requisite for us to know (so far forth as is necessary) yet
such Moderation is used in the manner of declaring them, that she has
prudently kept to the form of sound words in holy Scripture, and the
Declarations of the ancient Church: not disclaiming the use of such expressions
which the authority of the first Councils, and the great consent of the learned
have received, while the words follow the thing it self delivered in Holy
Scripture, though in so many syllables perhaps there not set down: which are
not introduced into our Church to corrupt primitive simplicity, but to prevent
the double meaning which others have invented for other Scripture expressions:
and as our Church does not intermeddle with what is above humane enquiry (
First Part of the Sermon for Rogation Week.
It shall better suffice us in low humility, to reverence the Divine Majesty
which we cannot comprize, than by overmuch curious searching to be overcharged
with the glory) so it does not determine in those things which are (as I may
say) below its enquiry: namely, in things unnecessary to be known Quod legit
Ecclesia Angl. pie credit; quod non legit, pari pietate non inquirit. Rex Jac.
ad. C. Perr.
.

. 8. In giving a reason of our hope, and in convincing our selves or others, of
the truth of matters of Faith and Christian Doctrine; our Church does not
insist upon such kind of certainties as others without reason do exact: The
point of certainty is a nice step which is taken in the first consideration of
Religion, and of great consequence; wherefore we cannot but observe the great
Moderation and care of our Church:

1. Resolving the first motive and reason of believing, into the Testimony of
God only, submitting all rational enquiries unto the Divine Testimony: when
once there is assurance that the same testimony is Divine, our Church does not
make (nor suppose that there can be made by) any humane Judgment, a measure of
what is incomprehensible.

2. Our Church does accept and use such rational evidences, as God has given
us, as the means of being assured of the certainty that the Revelations which
we receive as Divine, are such: Because the Divine Testimony is not immediate
to us, nor necessary it should be so, but is conveyed to the assent of the
understanding by some proper and just evidence. The ordinary way of knowledge
(allowed us) is the conviction of our judgments and reasons, concerning the
truth of the Proposition we assent to: which conviction is made by such proper
arguments as may sufficiently induce our belief: now, though there are
innumerable arguments which convince us of the certainty of the Divine
Testimony in the matters we have received; yet such is the Moderation of our
Church, she does not require every one in her Communion, necessarily to know
and receive all the reasons of certainty which are and may be given; nor yet to
rely on one to the neglect of another; but leaves us to be satisfied according
to the means and opportunities, which we have abundantly offered unto us:
justly supposing there are so many reasons persuading the truth of what we
believe, that some are convinced by some, others by others, as the Providence
of God disposes things.

3. Our Church no where makes infallible certainty of assent, a necessary
condition of Faith: it being sufficient to make our Faith certain, if our Rule
be infallible, and that applied with moral evidence; that is, such an evidence
as we can have of things and actions past, as is sufficient to guide and govern
our manners and behavior.

Some of late have contended (with very ill success) that an infallible
certainty of assent is necessarily wrought by demonstration (and what they love
to call scientific Evidence) in every Believer: which doctrine of J. S. is
condemned by his Adversaries, even of Rome Animadv. P. Talboti Arch. Dubl. in
Prop. 2. p. 54.
, as the pith of Manicheism: because it lays this burden on the Church, or an
Ecumenical Council, evidently to demonstrate its own infallibility.

If destroying the first foundation of the Roman infallibility were all, we
might dispense with that inconvenience, as it renders their motives of
credibility insufficient, which before the doctrine of infallibility is
received, used to be the only way they had to recommend the Church of Rome to
the approbation of Proselytes: but to affirm, that all certainty of Christian
Faith is generally wrought by such demonstration; in case that doctrine proves
false, the consequence is, If Christian Faith have no other certainty,
Christianity it self is left uncertain in its very foundations.

Others there are who deliver, that an infallible certainty of assent wrought
only by the immediate extraordinary operation of the Spirit of God, is
necessarily in every true Believer.

Now, though our Church does as much as any can do, own the necessity of Gods
Grace and holy Spirit, to prevent, assist, and follow us; especially in what
concerns divine matters: yet our Church is not so bold with the Holy Spirit of
God, to affirm, that such an inward testimony of the Divine Spirit (working
together in our Spirits an infallible assent) is so necessary to assure us of
the certainty of Faith, and of the authority of Holy Scriptures, and of the
truth of other Doctrines in question; as without which, we could have no such
belief as is required to Salvation.

Which precarious presumption tends to render useless, all those sufficient
evidences we have of Divine truth, by the gracious means which God has
appointed ordinary in his Church: and whereas the assertors of this
extraordinary spirit, exclude all other means of real certainty as
insufficient; such a Doctrine being false, must needs tend also to overthrow
all Christian Religion.

Such is the sad consequence of the Doctrines both of Dr I. O. and Mr I. S. in
making (though on differing grounds) an infallible assent necessary to a true
belief.

They agree together also in the injury they do Christian Religion, by
traducing our Faith as a probable, fallible, humane, natural Faith, (which are
the very words they V. Dr I. O. Reason of Faith, p. 72. Mr I. S. Faith
Vindicated.
both unite in, to expose our belief to contempt) which is grounded on such
evidences as God has abundantly afforded us, to assure us of the truth of his
Divine Testimony. Which evidences, especially in matters of Faith, necessary to
Salvation, since they are so plain and certain; Our Church has always held
needless, such an infallible guide, as the Romanists would impose upon us: And
for the same reasons that we do not expect any new Revelations, nor any
ostentation of new miracles necessary to a true Church or true Faith (they
being superseded by the ordinary means of Faith which are sufficient:) for the
same reasons we cannot presume to expect (much less to make necessary to every
true belief) such extraordinary illapses of the Divine Spirit (which makes
those who only think they have it, think themselves only infallible.) And thus
we may discern how many are led to Popery, by the way of Enthusiasm: For it is
usual for those into whose head Enthusiasm is flown, to reel from one extreme
to another.

4. To preserve us from these uncertainties, among the very many reasons which
we have from rational and moral evidence, whereby the truth of the Divine
Testimony is confirmed to us abundantly; Our Church owns no one greater (since
the miraculous gifts) than the testimony of Gods Church, now and in all Ages
since Christ and his Apostles time, because of the sundry Evidences also which
confirm to us the truth of the Churches testimony: All which amount to more
than high probability; for as ^. Lomini Hi^l. and Consul. haeres. Blacklo. P.
2. c. 4.. 5.
Lominus tells J. S. Probability on one side does not exclude probability also
on the opposite side: but the reason of moral evidence and certainty, does
exclude any probability on the contrary part, and that so manifestly, that only
grievous ignorance and pertinacy can incline a man thereunto.

. 9. As the Moderation of our Church allows us to be reasonably satisfied of
the certainty of our Faith: much more are other doctrines so propounded to
those of our Communion, as not to render useless their own reasons and
judgments. Notwithstanding our Church does sufficiently vindicate her own just
power, and the authority of what she testifies and determines, Article 20. 34.
etc. and by her Canons requires a just submission: All care being also taken by
the Church to prevent error, and dissentions, and wresting the Scriptures:
(Canon 34. 49. 139.)

Yet all is performed among us with a most excellent and golden mean: And in
that nothing in our Church is determined contrary to truth, nor the judgment of
the Catholic Church, nor right reason, the Church of England can the better
allow her Sons their right to search, examine and discern, what they must
approve: Which Bishop Davenant, and Bishop Bramhall, and some others,
understand by their judgment of discretion: though the word sounds not so
pleasing to some Religious Ears, because it seems by the use of the phrase in
English, to incline private persons to a power of refusing what the Church
rightly determines, which is not to be allowed: For as the suffrage of our
Church has been constantly unanimous with that of the Apostle, We can do
nothing against the truth but for the truth: much more ought private persons to
be bounded thereby, if the Apostles and the Church are.

The Moderation of the Church will appear the more remarkable if we compare it
with other extremes.

The Church of Rome calls her self the Mother and Mistress of all other
Churches Credo and agnosco To. Eccl. omnium Ecclesiarum Matrem and Magistram.
Bulla Pii IV. Vid. Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 3. Con^il. Romans sub Greg. 7.
Council. Lugd. Council. Flor. Council. Lat. sub Lion. X. S^ss. 2.
; holds her self and her Bishop the Universal Monarch. Supreme over the whole
Catholic Church diffusive, and over all particular Churches and Bishops:
Infallible also, in determining all Controversies, in interpreting all
Scriptures; in whatsoever Articles he or they please to add to our Faith.

Hereupon he requires an absolute obedience from all, without allowing any
judgment of discerning, instead thereof, commanding an implicit Faith, and
which is more insolent, not from private Christians only within its own
district, but over all other Christian Churches in the World: Which our Church
in the 5th Homily against wilful Rebellion, calls an intolerable usurpation.

I shall not stay the Reader to compare Ita in Talmude quando due Rabbini in
contrarias sententias diversi abeunt, neminem ob^^qui debere, utru^^; enim
Doctrinam suam accepisse per Traditionem oral^^ a monte Sinai: Amborum verba
etsi contradictoria verba sunt Dei viventis. Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. c. 1.
the Church of Rome with the model of Mr Hobs his City; but to set out the
show, we may cast an eye upon the other extreme of those, who because some
under the name of the Church Catholic, assume so unmeasurably to themselves;
therefore affrighted thereat, have seemed to run out of their wits into another
excess; and in the place of the Church and its true authority, have set up
their own private Images, diversely by them called; whereby they have only
changed the Idol Idolum fori in Idolum specus. Verulamius.
; like some that pulled down the Crosses, and then set up other inventions of
their own, every jot as unreasonable.

The Romanists (says Bishop Sanderson De oblig: Consc. Prael: 4.. 25.
) while they use all endeavor that nothing be lost of the authority of their
Church, they allow little to reason: On the other hand the Socinians rejecting
all authority of the Church, they measure Faith only by reason: there is one
error to both, though it deceives under various shapes: either Rock, will be
avoided, if authority with reason, and reason with authority, be discreetly
joined.

Among the intemperate Assertors of humane reason some have supposed, There are
no mysteries in Religion but such as their humane reason adaequately
comprehends; and have declared, That submitting our judgment to authority, or
any thing else whatsoever, gives universality and perpetuity to every error.
[in a late Tract of Humane Reason, p. 4.] That they are most guilty of Schism
who will not allow difference of opinions: (p. 37.) These Diseases of the Soul
(errors) are not so deadly as the Physicians of the Soul make them for the
exalting of their own reputation: That under various errors all may retain the
same entire Conscience and Obedience toward God (p. 19. p. 39.) That all
opinions may be lawfully held and maintained.

How well in our Church all these Rocks and Gulss on either hand are avoided,
by that accurate Moderation by which she governs us; in this Chapter, and
diverse other places of this Treatise will appear.

As for the Romanists, that we may with one Shovel cast away that heap of
Controversy; let me here only repeat what from the Church of England they have
often heard; Let the Romanists bring their Books, and show us one lawful proof
where there is appointed any such Infallible Judge or Interpreter; and that
from some stronger Authority than that of Pasce Oves Mirabile est quot officia,
quot dignitates, quot potestates unic^ illo Pasce contineantur. Spalatensis l.
7.
; otherwise, we shall presume that our Blessed Savior knew better than they
how to procure the Peace of his Church, and the Salvation of Mankind.

Wherefore the Church of England owns no such living Oracles upon Earth as the
Church of Rome pretends to; our Church has no public Conscience, nor public
Faith, nor public Merits of her own which she makes show of to invite to her
Communion, much lefs to set to sale for Worldly lucre sake: She says with the
Apostle: (...). -- Gal. 6. 4, 5. Qui noll^t cum debet (...) do^ec (...)
inv^^t^^ it, id a D^o just impetret ut eum tradat (...). i. e. In s^n^^m
m^^temque quae nec probet Deum neque approbetur a D^o. (...),* etc. Romans 1. 28.
Let every one prove his own work, and then he shall have rejoicing in himself
alone, and not in another; for every man shall bear his own burden. According
to this Apostolical Equity and Moderation, our Church does no where go about to
take from those of her Communion, that fundamental right of Christianity, as
well as of humane nature; to discern and examine what they must know, and what
they must assent to, in a matter of such great and intimate concern as is our
Religion; especially, since the sober use of our reasons and judgments, is most
agreeable to the nature of Mankind; and the very frame of our Religion does
admit and invite such a search, which the more it is made, the more reasons are
discovered to convince our minds of its truth (...). Origin. l. 1.
: Yea, the very Laws of our Religion, do require such a voluntary and
reasonable service, as is the effect of right judgment, as well as of
conformable wills and affections: And the more we improve our powers by their
use and exercise, and our inward senses to discern and compare the Truths of
God one with another, and the clear consequences which may be drawn from them,
the more we may advance our Faith, and Knowledge, and spiritual Comfort Oportet
in e^ re maxim in qua vitae ratio ver^atur, sibi quemque considere suoque
judicio and propriis sensibus uti ad investigan^um veritatem; quam credentem
aliis erroribus decipi tanquam rationis expertem: Quare cum sapere, id est
veritatem quaerere omnibus sit i^natum, sapientiam sibi adimunt qui sine ullo
judicio inventa probant majorum and pecudum more ducuntur. Lactantius l. 4. c.
8.
.

For indeed nothing has more obstructed a great and laudable progress of all
sorts of knowledge in the Christian World, than some mean and servile
abdications, which some men of great understandings have made of their own
judgments. For as in the Church there are grievous inconveniences by
renouncing the due government of the Church; so on the other extreme, no where
have errors grown more thick and tough than where men have suffered themselves
in all things to understand by Proxy; such are in ready disposition to swallow
all Poisons, and are liable to the guilt, not only of their first solitary
error, but all which are consequent thereon: whereas those who use a sober
examination, after they are convinced of one error, will be more cautious of
others; and the truth they come to of choice and judgment, is also more
praiseworthy and more tenible.

I should swell this head into too great a bulk, if I should enumerate the
sundry places wherein our Blessed Lord, and his Holy Apostles, did stir up and
provoke the industry of the Christian Disciples; to search, discern, prove,
try, examine what they received, lest at any time they were seduced by false
Prophets: The same admonitions and method have the ancient Fathers of the
Church persued. Both which would be endless here to recite.

Indeed all sorts of persuasions of men, seem to confess the necessity of first
convincing the reason and judgment of what is to be received as truth: And
therefore the Romanists use so many motives of credibility to induce belief of
their Church, in which, if once the Proselyte is caught, they serve him as the
Chaldees did King Zedekiah, after they had taken him Captive, they put out his
Eyes Caeco judicio imperata facere quantumvis ea blasphema sint atque impia.
Apol. Eccl. Anglic.. 138.
: (2 Kings 25. 7.)

Where indeed the mystery we are sure is certainly declared and delivered by
God, there we ought to captivate, not only our imaginations, but our reasons,
to the obedience of Faith; not staying for a connection of the parts of the
Proposition to be believed by Scientific evidence: (which Mr Sergeant makes his
Sure-footing:) But where we are not assured of the matter of fact of the Divine
Revelation; nor otherwise understand the reasons for such an assent; No one can
put off humane nature so far, as to believe what they please Nullus credit
aliquid verum esse quia vult credere id esse verum, nam non est in potestate
hominis sacere aliquid apparer^ intellectui suo verum quando voluerit. Picus
Mirandula.
.

Indeed it is the great honor of our Church, that it does not testify nor
require attestation unto any thing but where some good reason why we do so is
sufficiently manifest; which right as she maintains toward others, so she
vindicates the same to her self: namely, of examining what is offered to her
under the venerable name of the Catholic Church; and if need be, of reforming
any abuses or errors within the bounds of its own Discipline; and so separating
the precious from the vile; which power of examining Doctrines being forbid by
the Church of Rome to her Sons, seems to prevent the first occasion and means
of Reformation (...). De Eutychianis inter Athanasii opera. Consulatur integer
Tractatus. (...).
, and renders her even incorrigible in her errors and corruptions, and
remaining so, irreconcilable.

But some do Object: That if we allow a right of private judgment, it will be a
direct means to establish among us an enthusiastic private Spirit, which will
rely upon its own judgment to the despising all others: and if all may use a
private judgment, why may they not follow it and profess it? Then you open a
Window to all Divisions and Heresies, and render the Church useless, and all
her Guides.

We Answer: It is one thing to use our Faculties of discerning in a discreet
manner, which includes all due Reverence to all those instruments which God and
the Church have given us for our direction and conduct: and another thing, to
rely on our own prudence, to wrest the Scripture to our own sense (as the
Council of Trent Nemo prudentiae suae innixus S. Scripturam ad suos sensus
contorqueat. Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. Decr. 2.
speaks) which the Church of England first of all detests: [Article 20.] Every
private person being here required to hear and obey the public reason of our
Church: Which being also clear and true, can allow the being searched into; and
for that purpose she desires but her Sons to open their own Eyes: Wherefore the
sober use of our own faculties, ought not to be called a private Spirit; which
judges according to the general notices of Truth and Good, and the common
sense of Mankind, and the judgment also of the Church: such a Spirit is the
Candle of the Lord. Not an evil Spirit, nor a Spirit of Innovation, nor
Dissension, nor a Spirit of Pride, nor Temptation: as many of the Church of
Rome blazon it.

As for the growth of Schisms and Heresies, from the use of such a private
judgment as the Church allows: (Which Objection was anciently made against the
Christian Religion, as of old, by Celsus to Origin: (l. 3.) Unto which was
answered, That where any thing was received which was very excellent, such
differences were common; as among the Philosophers and Jews, so among
Christians: but) These now who make the Objection (generally those of the
Romish Communion) yet know, that though they carry as well as they can an
outward show of unity to their people. they have as great divisions as any are:
And though indeed the corruption of good things is greatest by the abuse of ill
men; This ill consequence through the Vice of some, ought not to take away the
common right of all, no more, than the contentions which arise from the Laws,
should be thought to render them dangerous to be proclaimed. The Christian
Religion of it self is sufficient to keep all from error or vice, if all men
would comply with its wholesome and pacific Decrees (as Arnobius Quod si omnes
omnino salutaribus ejus pacificisque decretis aurem vellent accommodare
paulisper, and non fastu and supercilio Luminis suis potius sensibus quam
illius Comminationibus crederent, universus jamdudum orbis mitiora in opera
conversis usibus ferri, tranquillitate mollissima degeret, and in Concordiam
salutarem incorruptis foederum sanctionibus conveniret. Arnobius l. 1.
long since has delivered:) And the Church in observance hereof, does procure
her own Peace as much as may be, in that all are bound not to publish their
private sense to the detriment of public Peace, and by her Censures has a
power of repressing public Dissenters; and in case of doubt arising, our
Church wisely sends the parties so doubting to their Superiors Preface
concerning the Service of the Church.
.

And whereas Gods true Religion is but one, the profession of which (Article
19.) and no other (Article 18.) is absolutely necessary to the being of Gods
Church, and therein to our Salvation: Blessed be God, in our Church there is
abundant care taken of Gods Holy Religion, both by the Laws of the Kingdom and
Church, for the instruction and government of its members unto edification and
peace: and every one may be satisfied in his Conscience and Judgment, of the
Religion he professes. Yet, This reserves him not a right of liberty in
Religion; but only supposes that he has a right of trying, examining, and
using his best judgment, in order to the satisfaction of his Conscience: which
right, if he duly uses, it will certainly fix him in the true Religion;
whether that Religion be professed by his Prince, or Nation, or no: [(...)]
Prove or try all things; Hold fast that which is good: says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Here is a right to try, examine, and judge, but no right or
liberty in Religion: This trial is only in order to the holding fast that which
is good Dr J. Beaumonts Observations upon the Apology, 1665.
As the Royal Coin, no one can refuse, every one may examine, and try the same,
before he receives it: So every Christian keeping himself within the bounds of
due obedience and submission to his lawful Superiors, has a judgment of
Discretion: He may apply the rule of Holy Scripture, for his own private
instruction, comfort, edification and direction, and for the framing of his
Life and belief accordingly: The Pastors of the Church -- have more than this,
a judgment of direction, to expound and interpret the Scriptures to others, and
out of them to instruct the ignorant, etc. The Chief Pastors -- have yet a
higher judgment of Jurisdiction to prescribe, to enjoin, to constitute, to
reform, to censure, to condemn, to bind, to loose judicially, authoritatively
in their respective charges Bishop Bramhall's Answer to M. Militeira, p. 72.
.

Thus the danger of using a private judgment, is prevented. If it be further
Objected, 2. That such a permission is vain, because of the impossibility in
the vulgar to make use of it: We Answer: That such a mere ineptitude does not
take away ones right Vt ratus sit actus pauciora requiruntur quam ut recta sit
actio. Grotius de Imperio. page 111.
.

Beside, our Gracious God requires of none otherwise than according to that
ability which he has given. Wherefore the Moderation of our Church imitates
the grace of God herein; which requires nothing necessarily but what is so
clearly propounded as to leave all inexcusable: and therefore those that have
skill to look to themselves in the common business of Life, may discern as much
as is required: Those who have not use of their abilities (the Idiotae) the
Moderation of the Church leaves to the mercy of God, and the care of their
Governors, so far as they are capable; for as Origin argues, when Celsus
objected to the Christians, that they did ((...) Origin c. Celsum l. 1.
believe without any reason or examination: The contrary thereunto Origin shows
at large: Yet of the vulgar, he says, indeed it is impossible that all people
should attain to the reasons of all Doctrines. How can he get wisdom who is
diligent to give the Kine Fodder, etc. (Eccles. 38. 26.)

Wherefore (says Origin) what more compendious way could be contrived to
relieve the poor multitude, than the plain doctrine of Jesus; for this we find
by experience, that they that before wallowed in Vice, thereby now are
delivered: but why should the Stoics and Platonists quarrel at Christians for
believing, when all of them believe those they apply themselves to, in the Sect
they judge most excellent?

. 10. So great being the Moderation of our Church; because (never the less, as
the temper of men generally now is among us, since these licentious times
especially have corrupted them) the most are very captious of what has the
femblance of privilege (and such also are most apt to neglect their duty) It
is very great justice and equity, that all be convinced of the due submission
we also owe to the Church, in reference to this matter: The sum of which duty,
I shall lay down in such brief Propositions as are agreeable to an easy reason
to infer from the comparing of relations.

1. All good Christians who love the Church of God, and its Peace, will for
Truth and Conscience sake, hearken to the Church, and those set over them, on
purpose to guide and direct them: especially in case of doubt.

2. Such will well weigh the moments of reasons which the Church offers, and be
ready with all due regard to entertain what the Church resolves: and readily
also approve of those resolutions, unless it appear manifestly, that such
determinations contradict the word of God, and the sense of the Universal
Church; which no good man will unadvisedly conceive, much less seek occasions
for exception.

3. In a doubtful and equal Case, such will incline to what is publicly
determined: because of the relation of superiority between the Church and its
Members: and because of the many great advantages they know the Church has in
its judgment above themselves; because also the better any are, and the more
humble and sincere, the more they are prepared to suspect and distrust their
own judgments, and not to lean unto their own understandings.

4. If in any case it should happen that such should differently opine or
judge, however such will afford a practical submission in many Cases which they
may and ought; the liberty of their own thoughts remaining, which is
sufficient, if they cannot but dissent. Modest and pious persons will upon many
occasions have their Faith to themselves, and reserve their different
apprehensions in a continent silence, which is to be wise unto sobriety.

5. If before they come to know the judgment of the Church, they should go
about to divulge their sense in speaking or writing, such will do it with
submission to the Church, and to those to whom is committed the care of
censure. If there should happen such a lawful and necessary occasion which they
cannot avoid, to declare their apprehension different from the Church; If the
dissenter errs, and cannot submit with consent, he must e'ne bear patiently the
inconvenience of his error: which, if in a less principal matter, on this side
Heresy and Schism, such an infirmity Aliter sapere quam se res habet, humana
tentatio est. S. Aug. de Bapt. l. 2.
, and temptation incident to humane nature happen Qualiter pro hoc ipso falsae
opinionis errore in die judicii puniendi sunt, nullus potest scire nisi judex.
Salvianus de gubern. Dei, c. 11.. 4.
:

They that would retain their integrity, must preserve,

1. An entire Charity to others.

2. A reverent respect to the Church, and as much as is possible an inviolable
Communion therewith.

3. Such ought to endeavor to comply in other points more diligently.

4. Such ought to profess their dissent from the Church with great reluctance
and sorrow.

5. They must be very willing to own their error when they are convinced
thereof. In the mean while they are bound to lay it aside.

Whereby retaining inviolable Communion with the Church, such already being in
preparation of mind disposed to renounce their error when they know it to be
such, are in a hopeful and ready way to be reduced.

Lastly, If the dissenter from the Church err not, but the Church does
manifestly enjoin unjust conditions of its Communion; whoever they are who from
the word of God Catholickly interpreted, and the use of their own reasons come
into the profession of the true Faith and Christian Doctrine, If they are
divided from that part of the Church which is unjust in its conditions of
union, (they themselves not being the cause of the Division) they in very deed
(notwithstanding) are united mean while to the Church Catholic.

I conclude this Chapter with that in the Answer to the Bishop of Condom.
(Part. 6. p. ^.) Error as Vice, is for the most part in extremes; we owe
respect, teachableness and submission unto all them whom God sets over us to
instruct us; this is not contested: But this is no reason, to change this
submission into voluntary blindness, which is rather a Spirit of servitude.

CHAP. VII. Of the Moderation of our Church in what relates to the worship of
God.
. 1. Our Prayers are not mingled with controversy.. 2. They are framed
according to a most grave and serious manner, with moderate variety, and proper
length.. 3. In the zeal of Reformation our Church did not cast off what was
good in it self.. 4. In all our Churches there are the same Rules.. 5. Common
Prayers for the vulgar required in English. To Ministers and Scholars a just
and moderate liberty allowed.. 6. The obligation of the Church leaves the
method of private Devotions to a general liberty.. 7. Of the Moderation of the
Church, in appointing her hours and times of Prayer.. 8. In her use and
judgment of Sermons.. 9. In what is required of people with reference to their
Parish Church.. 10. The excellent Moderation of the Church in her Orders for
the reverent reading of Divine Service, and Consecrating the Sacraments in such
a voice as may be heard.. 11. In her Form and use of Catechizing.. 12. The
interest of inward and outward worship, are both secured according to an
excellent Moderation in our Church.. 13. The Moderation of the Church in what
relates to Oaths.

. 1. IN treating of the Moderation of our Church, in what relates to the Divine
Worship; I first speak of Prayer (because the matter of the Sacraments is
handled by it self, Chapter 10.) In our public Prayers, our Churches Moderation is
apparent, in that it never intended to intermingle matters of doubtful
Controversy; but has sufficiently provided for the simplicity of the plainest,
and the devotion of the most intelligent: Thus our Bishops according to great
Moderation also, justified our Church in their debate with the Presbyterian
Brethren.

The Church has been careful to put nothing into the Liturgy, but what is
either evidently the word of God, or what has been generally received in the
Catholic Church; neither of which can be called private opinion: and if the
contrary can be proved, we wish it out of the Liturgy. Yet, because as (Bishop
Tailor says) they could not Prophecy; they put in some things which since
have been called into question Exorti sunt in Anglia, morosi, scrupulosi and
delicatuli nimium (ne superstitiosos plane dicam) homines, quibus Ecclesiae
suae hactenus usurpata Liturgia, visa est multis abroganda, etc. Ludo. Capellus
de Liturg.
by persons whose interest was highly concerned to find fault with something
Quaedam sunt quae rapi possunt ab inquietis in materiam contentionis. Bucer. de
Liturgia Anglic.
.

. 2. Our Prayers are framed, both according to a grave, modest, and serious
manner; every one of them being moderately short, and all together not
immoderately long; and so, more accommodate to render Devotion more earnest and
intent: and properly intermitted by other parts of Divine Service, that by a
moderate variety, the Devotions of Christians may be both entertained and
advantaged. And to stir up Devotion in Christian people, they bear in our
Church a moderate part in the public Prayers and Praises: for (as Mr Baxter
well notes Christian Direct. p. 856.
) It was the decay of zeal in the people, that first shut out the Responses:
The use of the tongue keeps awake the mind, and stirs up Gods Graces in
his Servants: and so much does the edification of the people give measure to
the appointments of our Church, that the parts of Divine Service are to be used
in the accustomed place of the Church, Chapel, or Chancel; Or in such place as
the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ecclesiastical Canon 14*
Ordinary of the place shall think meet for the largeness or straitness of the
same, so as the people may most be edifyed.

. 3. The Moderation of the Church is always to be admired, That in the heat of
Reformation, when the Essays were first had for the refining our Liturgy from
Romish corruption and innovation; our Church was not so transported with zeal,
but that it retained what was pious and profitable among the Prayers in use:
And whereas generally oppositions are most fierce at first, and in process of
time they become moderate; the excellent temper of our Church was such, it was
most moderate at first: which wisdom and mercy of God, in tempering the Spirits
of the first Reformers, can never be enough taken notice of: Wherefore the use
of some Collects and passages in our Liturgy, which before were had in the
Romish Communion; is so far from being a real argument against our Church, that
it is a proper proof of our Churches just Reformation, that it maintained its
freedom from prejudice and passion, in the midst of its zeal. If some parts of
the Prayers themselves, and Liturgy, have been drawn into matter of debate; it
is no more than what all words and writings are liable to, when they meet with
those who are concerned to be displeased: But the exceptions against them being
such, that (I speak my Conscience in what I know) the most probable means to
reconcile any to a just apprehension of our Liturgy, and to confirm them in the
same, is well to consider the feeble weakness of the exceptions which are used
against it: Which King James noted long since; How mighty and vehement
informations against the Common Prayer, were supported with weak and slender
proofs! But (says the King King James's Proclamation for Uniformity, 1603.
) we were nice, or rather jealous, that the public Form thereof should be
free, not only from blame, but from suspicion; so as neither the common
adversary should take advantage, nor the troublesome at home cavil; between
which two sorts of Adversaries, the Moderation of the Church has always been
tried.

So that all these things considered, Archbishop Cranmer Archbishop Cranmer's
Letter.
had very good reason to declare, that he with some others, he should choose,
would (by Gods Grace) take upon him to defend not only the Common Prayers of
the Church, the Ministration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies; but
also the Doctrine and Religion set out by King Edw. VI. to be more pure, and
according to Gods word, than any other used in England these thousand Years,
etc.

. 4. In all the Churches of this Kingdom, Cathedral and Parochial, the Church
now has moderately appointed the same Rules and Cautions, and the same use
among us every where, and those few in number, plain and easy to be understood;
The Preface to the Common Prayer Book.
Whereas the Rubricks and Orders of the Church of Rome, are so innumerable,
intricate, and various, that scarce an Apprentiship may suffice to learn the
practice of them; which, whether it suit with the simplicity of the Christian
Gospel, may without difficulty be judged. Among us an easy Calendar is prefixed,
with few Canons and Prescriptions, and those very intelligible: wherein
according to an excellent Moderation the People have their parts for excitation
sake, and to unite their affections: (although no where in what is properly
ministerial.)

. 5. The Moderation of our Church is sufficiently known to the whole World, in
requiring our Common Prayers to be in the vulgar tongue, for the general
benefit of all; According to our 24. Article. It is a thing plainly repugnant
to the word of God, and the Custom of the Primitive Church; to have public
Prayer in the Church, or to administer the Sacraments in a tongue not
understood of the people. Which Article is further confirmed and proved in the
Homilies, especially in that of Common Prayer and Sacraments: from the nature
and end of Prayer: Resolving also: As for the time since Christ, till that
usurped power of Rome begun to spread it self, and to enforce all the Nations
of Europe to have the Romish Language in admiration, it appears by the
consent of the most ancient and learned Writers, there was no strange tongue
used in the Congregation of Christians.

Yet for the same reason that common people should have their Prayers in
English among us; those who have been educated in sufficient learning, are
allowed to use them in another tongue: as in Universities and Colleges. The use
of the Latin Form of Prayers is also commended to the Ministers of the Church
of England, by Queen Elizabeth's Letters, Dated April 6. 1560 Bishop Sparrow's
Collection, and also the first Rubric before the Preface of Ceremonies.
. In all which, the Moderation of our Church does comply (as the Queens Letters
does express it) with the necessity of those who do not understand other
tongues, and the desire of those who de.

. 6. Notwithstanding, the Church has provided most excellent Prayers, for the
use of private devotion upon all general occasions, and what is readily and
properly applicable to more occasions particular: yet the Moderation of the
Church has not thought fit any where, to bind all who are of her Communion to
the use of her Common Prayers in private Families or Closets.

The Rubric which enjoins, All Priests and Deacons, to say daily the Morning
and Evening Prayer, either privately or openly, is set down with great
Moderation.

Not being let by sickness, or some other urgent cause.

In the Family, or in Visitation of the sick, if the particular condition of
the one or the other do require it; and in private, and in the Closet, It is
not supposed by our Church, but that every one may ask their own wants in what
form of words he shall think fit Dr Hammonds Pract. Cat. of Prayer.
. The Consideration of which Liberty indulged by the Church, caused I suppose
another excellent Writer Dr Patricks Devout Christian, Preface.
thus also to express himself: It is possible also, that some may judge this
whole work to be but a needless labor, since they have the Book of Common
Prayers at hand, which they can use at home as well as at the Church. With
these persons I shall not contend, but only deliver my opinion freely about
this matter: which is, that the reverence due to that Book, will be best
preserved, by employing it only in the public Divine Service, or in the
private, where there is a Priest to officiate: However, the design of it is not
to furnish the people with Prayers for all those particular occasions, wherein
devout Souls would make their requests known to God; and the constant opinions
of pious Divines, in this and other Churches, we see by their Writings has
been, that other Books of Prayers are necessary for the flock of Christ, beside
their public Liturgy. Though in the choice of such Prayers as are so
accommodate to the occasions of humane Life, and such Cases as are incidental
to the spiritual needs and circumstances of Christian people, there has been
sometimes wished, some further advice and recommendation made common by
Authority.

The 55. Canon thus directs, That before all Sermons, Lectures, and Homilies,
Preachers and Ministers shall move the people to join with them in this Form,
or to this effect: as briefly as conveniently they may [in hunc aut similem
modum.] The Title in the Latin Canons is, Precationis formula a
concionatoribus in Concionum suarum ingressu imitanda: In the English Canons,
the Title is, A Form of Prayer to be used by Preachers before their Sermon.

From all which I only note, That the Moderation of the Church is certain and
undoubted: But the disagreeing variety in practice consequent thereon; whether
it be so convenient, it remains for Superiors to judge.

. 7. Although some of the ancient Christians used the distinction of Hours of
Prayer, which at first was thought orderly and useful, as a voluntary task; and
determining of the Christian Liberty of those, who profess Gods Service is
perfect freedom: Yet our Church considering the common employment of most, and
the natural infirmities of all, has appointed and required only a daily
Sacrifice of Morning and Evening Service (as of constant observance) not
excluding, but inviting other voluntary oblations of a sincere Devotion to God
according to our leisure and opportunity: But our Church does no where
countenance the novelties of those that put any trust in the bare recital only
of a few Prayers Dr Cosins of the ancient times of Prayer.
, or place any virtue in the Bedroll, or certain number of them at such and
such hours; notwithstanding many of the said Prayers are also directed
otherwise than Prayers should be.

. 8. Although according to the judgment of the Church, and in truth, the entire
worship of God is complete in the Divine Service of the Church (even as among
the Jews; Sacrifices, Prayers, and Thanksgivings, made up the entire notion of
Divine Worship; so under the Gospel, the Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanksgiving,
do absolutely complete the worship of God:) yet our Church judges according to
an excellent temper of the use and necessity of Sermons, acknowledging their
great use as occasion requires, to convince, reprove, to excite and comfort
Christian people: Let Archbishop Laud be heard for once by those who have
doubted his judgment in this matter Archbishop Laud,. 16. Number. 31.
. I ever took Sermons and do still, to be the most necessary Expositions and
applications of Holy Scripture, and a great ordinary means of Salvation: (To
the same purpose, Hooker's Eccles. Pol. l. 2.. 22.) Neither has the Church of
God, ever had any where more useful, practical, and judicious Preachers, than
those, who with the Church of England, have thus ingenuously and equally judged
of the use and necessity of Preaching: on one hand esteeming its real use and
benefit; on the other hand, not judging it the chief exercise of Religion, and
the worship of God; nor allowing, that for the hearing of a Sermon, which
spends its Life in its Birth (as Mr Hooker says) the Prayers of the Church
should be slighted, neglected, or mangled In concione sola totum ferme Divini
cultus ritum collocant, non tales erant antiquae and piae Synaxes. Ar. Spalat.
l. 7. c. 12.
.

At the Conference at Hampton Court, the Bishop of London humbly desired his
Majesty, That there might be a praying Ministry among us, it being now come to
pass, that men think it the only duty of Ministers to spend their time in the
Pulpit: I confess (says he) in a Church newly to be planted, Preaching is most
necessary, not so in one long established, that Prayer should be neglected. I
like (says King James) your motion exceeding well, and dislike the Hypocrisy
of our time, who place all Religion in the Ear.

At the very dawning also of the Reformation, Preaching was also especially
useful, and few were exercised therein, and had a right skill therein; which
made the Institution of a Christian man, (set out 1537.) because of the
difficulty thereof, say: Surely the office of Preaching is the chief and most
principal office, whereunto Priests or Bishops be called by the authority of
the Gospel: though by Preaching there might be meant, the Annunciation of the
Gospel, which is done by lively reading of the Scriptures, and in sundry other
Ministerial Offices. Wherefore in the Church of England, we have the lively
Oracles of the Holy Scriptures declared and read among us Coimus ad divinam
Literarum commemorationem. Tert. Apol.
: We have Catechizing, and Expositions on the Church Catechism. We have also
excellent Homilies too much despised for their plainness; yet the same which
Bucer Quid illi qui non sustineant audire erectis animis and cupidis tam breves
easque tam salutares Homilias totas? Censura M. Buceri.
magnified, as short and wholesome Sermons: not only for the help of
non-Preaching Ministers, but withal a pattern, and as it were a boundary for
the Preaching Ministers: (as King James has it in his Directions, 1623.) of
which how modestly and moderately, does the Church her self speak in its 35.
Article: That they contain a Godly and wholesome Doctrine, necessary for these
times.

We have also the Lives and Counsels of the Church's Ministers (which are
living Sermons too Vereor ne pancae extant inregno vivae conciones, Calv. Ep.
87.
:) So that among us, we have all sorts of Preaching, if the commonness of it
did not make it despised. Great care also is taken for other Sermons too Canon.
45, 46. Rubric after the Nicene Creed.
: Yea, our Church has used all possible means, that the Preaching of her
Ministers may be useful, and as they ought to be: as appears from the
exhortations which are made at the Ordinations of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, and the subscriptions which are made before the Bishops; which are
also incomparably enforced by V. librum quorundam Canonum, 1597. Can. 50. andC.
54. Q. Elizabeth's Articles for doctrine and Preaching, 1554.
their Majesty's directions from time to time: (as has been instanced, Chapter 6..
5.) Notwithstanding, many are of the mind with those in Scotland, who esteemed
the Directions of King James to Preachers, to be Limiting of the Spirit of God
Spotswood History of Scotland, ad an. 1622.
. What would they have thought of the Proclamation of King Edw. VI. which
inhibited all Preaching throughout the Kingdom, that the Clergy might apply
themselves unto Prayer: (The Copy of which Inhibition, is in Fuller's Church
History Fuller 's History Ec. ad. an. 1548. 2 Ed. 6.
.)

In the Preface to the Directory, we see the Prelates accused for the crime of
making Preaching inferior to the Common Prayer: which charge contains a
fallacy like that of a complex Interrogation: For our Liturgy does not exclude,
but suppose and require Preaching: and does contain in its daily Offices,
sundry sorts of real Preaching: beside, Among professed Christians ought
Preaching to contend with Prayer? either as to the necessity of it, or dignity;
when Prayer is our duty to God immediately, and does suppose people already
instructed.

In the Notes on the view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law P. 3. Chapter 4.. 3.
, it is very well concluded. All this while we should not detract any thing
from Preaching, considering our selves to live under a State so maturely
composed, and so thoroughly advised and settled in the Faith; it would be
expected that we should so far moderate our opinion of Preaching, as that our
magnifying thereof may no way tend to the discredit or disadvantage of most
necessary Prayer.

Our Church does not admit to the Office of Preaching, any but who are ordained
and licensed thereunto: Yet our Church does allow such kind of Sermons as we
call in the Colleges, Common places, for the training up of Candidates in
Divinity, and for their trial of skill before competent Judges.

The Moderation in our Church is further known, in that among us its Ministers
are not expected, nor do they endeavor to take the people in their Preaching
by mysterious nonsense, or by storm and sensible noises, and uncouth tones and
grimaces, whereby a tumult and confusion is raised in the animal passions;
scaring weak people almost out of their wits and common sense: just as the
Valentinian Heretics (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 4.
used hard words and thundering noises in their Conventicles to cause
astonishment in the people: Nihil tam facile quam vilem plebeculam and indoctam
concionem linguae volubilitate decipere, quae quicquid non intellexit plus
miratur. S. Hier. ad Nepotian. Ep. 3.
Our design is otherwise, by a rational and sober surrender of their minds to
gain our Hearers to truth and goodness: Whence it follows, that among such (as
Mr Hooker well notes Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 2.
) The vigor and efficacy of Sermons do grow from certain accidents, which are
not in them but in their maker, his gesture, his zeal, his motion of body,
inflexion of voice, etc.

Here it is not improper also to justify the Moderation and good reason our
Church has for the distinction it has made between a Preaching, and a
non-Preaching Minister Canon 46, 67. Preface to the Homilies.
; who, though he be not so profoundly learned as others (of which learned sort
blessed be God we have some good abundance,) yet if he be blameless in his
Life, and faithful in his Office, and observant of the appointments of the
Church, by the grace of God, there are so many helps ready provided by the
wisdom of the Church among us, That a not-Preaching Minister may perform a
Ministerial Office, both for the necessary edification of the people, and the
just satisfaction of the Church, more than many Preaching Ministers, of whose
discretion, and wise order, the Church cannot be so well secured. Hear we
Archbishop Whitgift: Answer to the Admon. 1572.
I am fully persuaded, That he comes nearer the mind of the Apostle, who
orderly preaches once a Month, than some who are back-biters at other Men's
Tables, and run up and down, seldom or never studying, though they preach twice
a day.

For though no Church does more promote and encourage the proficiency of her
Sons in all useful literature, yet the Church thinks it not reason to reject
the Ministry of a not-preaching Minister, otherwise reasonably qualified (Can.
34.) where it is necessary; especially, when as the Church declares, the
Sacraments are effectually administered by them that have not the gift of
Preaching (Artic. 26.) The care of the Church is also to be taken notice of; in
requiring those who are beneficed to procure at least a Sermon to the people
once a Month Can. 46, 47.
: And especially, there being wholesome Homilies for the other Days; the Church
has done her part in providing for the spiritual sustenance of her Children,
both for their necessity and entertainment: and those who can Preach, as
(Blessed be God) there are many, think it their duty to do the same, frequently
and constantly.

. 9. The order of the Church is also, That none neglect their own Parish
Church: and with great reason to avoid unspeakable confusion: Yet even in Stat.
1. R. Eliz. c. 2. 32 Eliz. c. 1.
Q. Elizabeth's Injunctions, 1559.. 33. the Precept is expressed with this
indulgence, Except it be by the occasion of some extraordinary Sermon in some
Parish of the same Town: and in the Articles for enquiry, in the first Year of
her Reign; one was, Whether you know any that in contempt of their own Parish
Church, do resort to any other Church: So in the Homily The Homily of the right
use of the Church.
, it is said, That to the said House or Temple of God, at all times, by common
order appointed, are all people that be Godly indeed, bound with all diligence
to resort; unless by sickness, or other most urgent causes, they be let
therefrom: So willing was always our Church, and the Constitution of the
Kingdom, to allow all reasonable Liberty, provided it might not be abused: No
Man (says the Bishop of Londonderry, in his Vindication) was ever punished for
instructing his own Family, but it may be for holding unlawful Conventicles; or
for instructing them in Seditious, Schismatical, or Heretical Principles: Nor
for going to the next Parish to hear a Sermon: thousands did it daily, and
never suffered for it: But it may be for neglecting, or deserting his Parish
Church Quisque in sua Parochia sacris coetibus ad^^ and ibi Christi Ceremoniis
vacet, Sacramentaque omnia percipiat, ut qui haec sacere ^^^ligal,
Excommunicetur. Eucer. de Eccs. Angl. Censura, c. 3.
, and gadding up and down after Non-Conformists, and strange unknown Forms of
serving God.

. 10. Because (as Bucer observed) too many did not in the reading or reciting
the Divine Service, use that devout, reverent, and intelligible manner as was
fit; The special care of the Church has always been very great of this: as
appears from the admonition to all Ministers Ecclesiastical, in the beginning
of the second Part of the Homilies; and in Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, 1559.
and in the several Articles for enquiry: by all which all care is taken, Vi.
Librum quorundam Canonum, 1571.
That all Ministers, and Readers of public Prayers, Chapters, and Homilies,
shall be charged to read leisurely, plainly, and distinctly 39 Article 35.
; and the Rubric requires the Minister, to read the Lessons standing, and
turning himself so as he may best be heard of all such as are present.

Which Precepts contain as much as the general Missal Liquet omnino requiri ut
Ministri Ecclesiarum has preces, Psalmos and conciones recitent summa
gravitate, and religione, diserte quoque and perspicue. Bucer. de Ordin. Eccl.
Anglic. c. 1. Canatur and legatur drticulatim explanate and reverendo gestu ad
aedificationem orantis interea laici. Wicelii Meth. concor. c. 17.
Rubricks, which require the Priest to read neither too precipitantly fast, nor
too morosely slow; with a voice mean and grave, fit to excite Devotion, and
which is accommodate to the Hearers.

But whereas in the Mass, the Romanists are enjoined a secret and private
whispering; In our Church it is otherwise Ordered for the common benefit: which
Order our Homily of the Common Prayer and Sacraments defends, from diverse
testimonies of Scriptures and Doctors, and the Constitution of Justinian
Justin. Novel. Constit. 23.
, who lived 527 Years after Christ, which is this.

We Command that all Bishops and Priests do celebrate the Holy Oblation, and
the Prayers in Holy Baptism, not speaking low, but with a clear or loud voice,
which may be heard of the people, that thereby the minds of the hearers may be
stirred up with great Devotion, in uttering the Prayers of the Lord God, for so
that Holy Apostle teaches in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 14.
Therefore for these causes it is convenient, that among other Prayers, those
things also which are spoken in the holy Oblation, be uttered and spoken (of
the most religious Priests, unto our Lord Jesus Christ our God, with the Holy
Ghost) with a loud voice. Which is, as our Homily takes notice, a plain Decree
of Justinian, for Praying and Administering of Sacraments in a known tongue,
contrary to the opinion of them that would have ignorance make devotion.

To this head of right reading the Divine Service, belongs the Order of our
Church to use the Divine Service in public, as Order has prescribed Non
transcu^^^ndo (...) Syncopando Syn. Ling. 14 4. Can. 14.
: not chopping and changing, adding and plucking away Second Part of the Homily
for Whit-sunday.
, as the Homily speaks of the Romanists intermingling their own Traditions.

Yet though the Church does not allow her Clergy to mangle her Offices; yet,
where need is, remissions are allowed; as in the Office of private Baptism,
Communion of the sick, and the like.

And if any Liberties left to the prudence and discretion of the Ministers, be
a proper instance of the Moderation of the Church, many might be given which
are allowed (with which, such may be contented:) as in some cases where some
present resolution and practice is required; in other matters of less concern,
where an indifferent variety is allowed: but more instances there are of what
is left to the discretion of the Ordinary See the Preface concerning the
Service of the Church, Canon 53. Second Rubric before the Preface of the
Ceremonies. Admon. to Min. Eccles. before the second Part of the Homilies.
Sundry Rubricks.
.

. 11. Having spoken of the Moderation and Wisdom of the Church in what relates
to Sermons: because Catechizing Canon 59. 1603. Lib. quor. Canonum. 1571.
is an useful sort of Preaching, I cannot but note the Moderation of the
Church, in framing such a Form of Catechism, as the ancient Fathers S. Aug. de
Catechizandis rudibus. S. Ambros. de iis qui S. Mysteriis initiantur.
commended. So full and comprehensive is the Exposition of the foundations of
our Religion, and yet without those curious questions which are not needful to
trouble the green heads of those who are to be Catechized; however, which are
not to be set forth as fundamental. This was the excellent judgment of King
James Conference at Hampton Court.
, who approved of one uniform Catechism, in the fewest and plainest affirmative
terms that may be, all curious and deep questions being avoided: not like the
ignorant Catechisms in Scotland, set out by every one who was the Son of a good
Man. Thus the judicious Pax Ecclesiae, p. 54.
Bishop Sanderson, for the Peace of the Church, and to preserve Unity and
Charity; his third direction is, That Catechisms should not be farced with
School points and private tenets, but contain only clear and undoubted Truths.
Whereas the Church of Rome, and many other Sects, have stuffed their Catechisms
with some of their private opinions; even so much, that sometimes their
Catechisms are not only to contain the sums of Christianity, but they are the
distinctive notes of their party, in maintaining which, some of them place so
great a part of Religion; and therefore no wonder, if according to their great
wisdom in other things, they enamel their Catechisms with what is to them so
precious.

I shall only here add, what Dr Hammond says, of this our Church Catechism
Vindication of the ancient Liturgy of the Church of England,. 40.
: If we would all keep our selves within that Moderation, and propose no larger
Catalogue of Articles to be believed by all than the Apostles Creed, as it is
explained in our Catechism, and lay greater weight upon the Vow of Baptism, and
all the Commands of God, as they are explained by Christ, and only add the
Explication and use of the Sacraments, in those commodious and most
intelligible expressions (and none other) which are there set down; I should be
confident there would be less hating and damning one another, more Piety and
Charity, and so true Christianity among Christians and Protestants, than
hitherto has been met with.

. 12. This Chapter ought not to be dismissed before we take notice, how the
interest both of the inward and outward worship of God, is according to a just
Moderation secured in our Church.

For 1. In all the Instructions and Precepts of the Church, Her designs and
intent appear very sincere to promote the worship of God according to his Will:
Wherefore our Church makes none else partakers of the Divine Worship; as
neither Saints nor Angels, nor the Blessed Virgin.

The Ceremonies (as will be further showed) are not held by our Church as any
part of the Divine Worship: but only outward signs and helps of Devotion. Our
Church lays also greatest stress upon the inward affection and intention of the
mind, as the most necessary and principal part of the Divine Worship; as that
which only can render all outward expressions of our Honor of God acceptable:
Because in the affection of the Heart is the consummation of all moral goodness
Actus exterior nihil addit bonitatis aut malitiae actui interiori nisi per
accidens. D. Tho. 1. 2^. q. 20. Art. 4.
; especially in the worship of God; For the best Being is to be served with the
most excellent operations of our best Faculties; Therefore God, who is the most
Excellent, most Infinite, and most pure Spirit, must be worshipped in Spirit
and in Truth; in due regard to which just consideration, all the Offices of our
Church are framed, so as to promote chiefly a due sense of God, and of the
Divine Attributes; a Heavenly and spiritual disposition of Mind, a real and
unaffected Piety, a sincere and hearty Devotion: For (as the Homily says Of
Holy Scripture, first Part.
) Without a single eye, pure intent, and good mind; nothing is allowed for good
before God. But notwithstanding, the inward worship of the Heart is held most
necessary and principal; in our Church is instantly required the outward
worship of God also: as in all acts of outward as well as inward obedience (in
many of which, the affection cannot be sincere, without the outward exercise of
such acts, when they can be performed) as in consecrating also a just portion
of our time and Estates to the honor of God, the humble service of our bodies,
reverend gestures and behavior, which are but proper and fit to increase in
our selves and others the inward honor of God also: In respect to both these
parts of worship, those who duly honor God, may be fitly denominated devout
persons. But the probable reason why many who call themselves Saints, do
disdain the name of Devout, is, because the Attribute of Devotion seems to
intimate also the outward reverent behavior of body, as the necessary
Companion of the inward integrity of the mind; which outward reverence such
judge too meanly of.

Lastly, In our Church, the worship of God is supposed to proceed, not so much
from a principle of fear and dread, as of love and thankfulness: Whereas some
in a way to overthrow all Religion, have given out, That the fear of God is
only the dread men have of some unknown, arbitrary, and uncontrollable power:
Such a fear, they suppose the only motive to the worship of God; the only
foundation and bond of Justice: An Experiment taken up to keep men obedient to
Laws. The Moderation of our Church governs it self very justly in this matter,
accounting the due fear of the Sovereignty and power of God, very useful to the
good as well as the bad, to make all heedful and careful in their duty:
Therefore in the Office of Commination, as in many other places also, the
threats of God against impenitent Sinners, are by our Church denounced: Yet the
first and the chief reason of our worship of God, is frequently owned (in the
Offices of our Church) and supposed to be a sense of the Infinite Divine
Excellencies, and his constant bounty and benefits, and gracious goodness to
mankind, especially in our Lord Jesus Christ: which of themselves are
sufficient motives to Religion: and make the same proceed from the most free,
and most suitable, and noble principle that can be of affection and
thankfulness to God.

. 13. Because an Oath is an act of Divine Worship, in which we solemnly invoke
God as a witness to what we swear: It is but proper here to take notice of the
Moderation of our Church in what relates to Oaths.

1. Our Church does (in the 39. Article of Religion) excellently declare, and
(in the Homily against perjury) at large prove, The lawfulness and benefits of
swearing for causes necessary and honest, and for the ending of controversy,
and sets forth also the sore danger of perjury.

2. Our Church does at large testify against customary and unnecessary
Swearing, and the mentioned Homily declares the danger and vanity thereof: Both
these purposes of the Homily are briefly contained in the 39th Article: Thus:
As we confess vain and rash Swearing is forbidden Christian men by our Lord
Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle: So we judge, That Christian Religion does
not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in a
cause of Faith and Charity; so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in Justice, Judgment, and Truth.

In a few lines also of the Homily, our Church seems fully to determine the
whole Controversy, which our Sectaries have raised concerning Swearing: When
Christ so earnestly forbad Swearing, it may not be understood as though he did
forbid all manner of Oaths; but he forbids all vain Swearing and
forswearing, both by God and by his Creatures; as the common use of Swearing in
buying and selling, and in daily Communication, to the intent every Christian
man's word, should be as well regarded in such matters, as if he confirmed his
Communication with an Oath: for the truth is (as Theophylact writes) no man is
less trusted than he that uses much to swear.

Beside the practice of the Gentiles, to swear by Creatures, the Jews had
fallen into that Custom, which gave our Savior and St James occasion to forbid
such S. Mat. 5. 34. S. James 5. 12.
kind of Swearing, which also was in use among the Manichees, as St Augustine
notes Jurabant saepissime nulloque mentis scrupulo per Creaturas. c. Faust. 22.
.

Seeing then all Swearing by the Creatures is counted by the Homily
Vain-Swearing; It can be deemed no other, to swear by the V. Catechism. Trident.
Blessed Virgin, or by Saints (or their relics:) since they have no delegated
power to know our hearts, or to punish Perjury. At the solemn Inauguration of
the Emperor, he says, I swear unto God, and S. Peter, etc. When any enter
into a Monastery, they say: I vow unto God, and to the Blessed Virgin, (and to
S. Dominic: or some other their particular Saint.)

3. Concerning the matter and obligation of lawful and unlawful Oaths; we may
hear our Church excellently advising and declaring: Therefore, whosoever makes
any promise, binding himself thereunto by an Oath. Let him foresee, that the
thing he promises be good and honest, and not against the Commandment of God,
and that it be in his own power to perform it justly; and such promises must
men keep evermore assuredly: But if a man at any time, shall either of
ignorance, or of malice, promise and swear to do any thing, which is either
against the Law of Almighty God, or not in his power to perform, let him take
it for an unlawful Oath. Of an unlawful Oath, the same Homily determines in the
Case of Herod, That as he took a wicked Oath, so he more wickedly performed the
same. These full and just determinations of the Church, might be fitly
commented on, by what Bishop Sanderson has writ of the obligation of Oaths;
especially in his third Prelection: and may very justly also be applied to the
Case of the solemn League and Covenant: which sufficiently justifies the
abjuration of the Covenant, as it is required in the Act of Uniformity.

4. Our Church lays a great charge and weight on the words of the Prophet
Jeremiah: (Chapter 4. V. 2.) Thou shall swear in Judgment, Truth, and
Righteousness: Whosoever swears, let him be sure in his Conscience, That his
Oath have these three conditions; Homily against Perjury.
which also are mentioned in the 39th Article; and largely insisted on in the
Homily. All which do sufficiently testify against the Equivocations, and mental
reservations, which the Jesuits allow and defend: which is a most notorious
artifice of deceit: a great profanation of the divine name, and contrary to the
nature and end of Oaths.

And that we may observe how rightly our Church judges of the Power of the
Pope, or of any other in rescinding and dispensing with lawful Oaths Vi. Duo
brevia Pontisicis To. 1. dat. 1606. 2. dat. 1607. contra juram. Fidel. in R.
Jac. Apologia.
(yea, dispensing with men aforehand, to make unlawful Oaths and Vows; as in
Marriages, within the degrees Levitical) Apol. of certain Proceedings in Courts
Eccles. p. 2. c. 2. p. 18.
The sixth part of the Homily against wilful Rebellion, speaking of the Bishops
of Rome, discharging the Subjects of the Kings of England, of their Oath of
Fidelity to their Sovereign Lord (as particularly, Innocent III. to King John)
calls it fitly, A feigned discharging of their Oath and fealty: and a vain
cursing of the King. Which practices of the Popes, rely upon two Principles of
the Church of Rome.

1. That the Pope has an absolute and Ecumenical Authority over the whole
World, and that all Oaths are to be taken with a reserve of his pleasure: and
that he has the sole power to declare and dispense in what relates unto them.

2. That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics: which Doctrines are published
in the Books of the Famous Romanists; neither prohibited nor animadverted on
Nullo modo Fides servanda Haereticis etiam Juramento firmata. Simanca.
.

In interpreting Oaths, as our Church does not encourage any loose sense, that
the taker by any evasion may collude the design of the Law: so also our Church
rejects such rigid interpretations, which force the words to a severe sense:
but where a fair and easy construction may be made by the natural
interpretation of the words, which is agreeable to truth and justice, and may
secure the intention of Superiors, such a construction our Church is ready to
allow of and encourage Vi. Q. Eliz. Admon. V. Article 37.
.

5. The general Oaths enjoined or defended in our Church, are but few, and
those for great causes appointed, and with great Moderation framed. As 1. The
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; The necessity and Moderation of which, has
been largely expounded in the Apology of King James and others See the
Admonition of Q. Eliz. 1559. of the Oath of Supremacy. Nunc mitius ac
moderatius substitutum est. Sander. de Schism. Angl. p. 149.
: since which, the Artifice of the Romanists has had great effect on our
Sectaries, in their obstinate refusing the said Oath of Supremacy, whereby they
are become the more prepared for the Papacy. And that we may see how the
Romanists and the Sectaries are united in their first Principles, and how both
become more obstinate even the more Moderation is used to either; Their
refusing together the Oath of Allegiance is too undoubted a testimony.

Yea, Of the Moderation of his Majesty's Government, and the immoderate
obstinacy of the governing part of the Romish Clergy, The History of Father
Walsh concerning the Loyal Formulary in Ireland, 1666. will be an eternal
Monument; which shows at large with what art and industry the desire of the
more peaceable Romanists was opposed (even from the Roman Cardinals and other
their Superiors) to give his Majesty but the security of their Allegiance, in
a brief and very moderate Form.

2. The Oath against Simony Injunct. Q. Eliz.. 26. Canon. 40. 1603. Nemo gradum
sacerdotii venalitate pretii mercetur, quantum quisque meretur, non quantum
dare sufficit aestimetur. Cod. Tir. de Episco. and Cleric.
does justify the integrity of our Church, and the Laws in that behalf, and
that all the endeavor possible is used to prevent all guilt of Simony in the
Clergy.

3. The Oath of Canonical obedience is offered unto all with that most moderate
and just clause, [In all things lawful and honest:] which Canonical obedience
is no other than is sworn in other Reformed Churches, as appears by the Form
set down by D. D. Durell Of Reformed Churches, p. 10.
.

4. In the Oath of continual residence in a Vicaridge, half the clause is for
the Moderating the Oath: unless it shall be otherwise dispensed by the Diocesan.

Many object earnestly against the Oath which the Churchwardens are obliged to
take: Whereas such are to consider, the nature and end of their Office cannot
well be procured but by obliging them in that matter. 2. Such may consider,
their Presentiments are of matters governed by their Superiors: in which they
are but to make Presentment according to enquiries before them; in making of
which, they may be directed by the Minister.

Of other Oaths, thus the Homily against Perjury: When Judges require Oaths of
the people, for declaration or opening of the truth, or for execution of
Justice: Also when men make faithful promises, with calling to witness of the
name of God; to keep Covenants, honest Promises, Statutes, Laws, and good
Customs; as Christian Princes do in their Conclusions of Peace, and private
persons promise their fidelity in Matrimony, etc. And all men when they do
swear to keep common Laws, and local Statutes, and good Customs, for due order.
When Subjects do swear to be true and faithful to their King; and when Judges,
Magistrates, and Officers, swear truly to execute their Offices, etc. All these
manner of swearing, for causes necessary and honest, be lawful. By lawful Oaths
common Laws are kept inviolate, Justice indifferently ministered, harmless
persons are defended, mutual Society, amity, good order, is kept continually in
all Communal^ies, etc.

Lastly, Of the Ceremony in taking Oaths, with laying hands on the Bible, or
Testament, and Swearing by the Contents of it, and kissing the Book: we may
hear what Tindal On 5. S. Matthew. p. 208.
well says, When thou swearest by the Holy Gospel or Bible, the meaning is,
that God if thou ly, shall not fulfill unto thee the promise of mercy therein
written; but contrariwise, to bring upon thee all the Curses, Plagues, and
Threatenings, therein threatened to the disobedient and evildoers. And by these
Ceremonies the Civil Law tells us, an Oath is held more inviolable T^ctis
sacr^sanctis Evangeliis. L. ^em non novam.. Pat^^^^. de judi^iis. See our
Ancient Statute, 51 H^nr. 3.
.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Moderation of the Church in relation to Ceremonies.
. 1. In the Ceremonies of our Church which are very few, and those of great
antiquity, simplicity, clear signification and use; our Church avoids either
sort of superstition.. 2. They have constantly been declared to be in
themselves indifferent and alterable: but in that our Church avoids
variableness, is a further proof of its Moderation.. 3. They are professed by
the Church to be no part of Religion, much less the chief; nor to have any
supernatural effect belonging to them.. 4. Abundant care is taken to give plain
and frequent reasons and interpretations of what in this nature is enjoined to
prevent mistakes.. 5. The Moderation of our Church even in point of Ceremonies
compared with those who have raised so great a dust in this Controversy.. 6.
Many innocent Rites and usages our Church never went about to introduce, and
why.. 7. The Obligation of our Church in this matter is very mild.. 8. The
Moderation of our Church in her appointment of Vestments.. 9. The Benedictions
of our Church are according to great Piety and Wisdom ordered.. 10. The
Moderation of our Church in her appointments of Gestures.. 11. Of the respect
which is held due to places and things distinguished to Gods Service; our
Church judges and practices according to an excellent Moderation.

. 1. AS in the foregoing Chapter I have not thought it necessary to stay the
Reader by presenting to his consideration, the many proofs of the lawfulness,
antiquity, and advantages of Liturgy in general; or by arguing the excellence
and usefulness of our public Forms of Prayer in particular; because any such
labor has been sufficiently saved, from the copious and unanswerable
performances of so many learned and judicious men of our Communion, who have
largely vindicated, and also have given the particular reasons of our
Institutions:

So in this Chapter of the Ceremonies of our Church, which are only the
Ecclesiastical Institutions for order and decency, I hold it (for the same
reasons mentioned) unnecessary, by many Arguments to defend the lawful use or
establishment of Ecclesiastical Rites, since the same have been abundantly
proved: both from the liberty allowed to the Jewish Church; and also from what
is warranted by the Apostolical Doctrine and practice; and is defended from the
practice and judgment of the Primitive Church, and other Protestant Churches:
and cannot (without very evil Consequences, as are destructive to the interest
of Religion) be denied any Christian Church.

All which, and much more, for the Vindication of our Church, has been fully
and judiciously evinced, particularly by my Excellent Friend Mr Falkner (in his
Libertas Ecclesiastica.) To whose solid defense also of our other
Ecclesiastical appointments, and becoming gestures in the Service of God; and
also the Holy Days and Festivals of our Church, as agreeable to Holy Scripture
and reason, I take leave to refer the Reader; and I presume it may satisfy my
design, and sufficiently justify our Church, if unto what has been so amply
and irreproveably performed, I add the just instances and proof of our Churches
Moderation.

The Ceremonies of our Church are but very few, and those of great antiquity,
simplicity, decency and clear signification, hardly to be wrested to the
prejudice of inward piety: wherefore they are neither unprofitable, nor
burdensome (of which they are charged in the Preface to the Directory.) Our
Church avoiding extremes on one hand of the Church of Rome Council. Trid. Sess.
7. Can. 13.
, whose Ceremonies are so cumbersome for their number Quia ad aures ipsorum
totius serme orbis justissimae querelae pervenerint de moderanda and corrigenda
onerosa multitudine quorundam rituum. Chemnit. Examen. ib. p. 34.
, that they make no end of commanding and forbidding, till they come to the
other extremity of moroseness: of which humor, St Austin S. Aug. Ep. 118.
in express words complains: Religion which God in his mercy has made free
with few and clear. Sacraments, is made more burdensome than ever was the
Jewish. Wherefore our Church is most careful, lest by any excess of Ceremonies,
Religion should be any wise obscured, and by outward and sensible things, the
minds of people should be diverted to the neglect of what is inward and
spiritual. Therefore our Church in its Preface of Ceremonies, why some be
abolished, complains, That the excessive number of Ceremonies was so great, and
many of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, than declare and
set forth Christ's benefits unto us. On the other hand, our Church avoids that
other kind of superstition, of those that consider not the frame of men, nor
the use and experience of having some Rites, for comeliness and edification V.
Pref. to the Liturgy.
; and for exciting Piety and Devotion, in the public worship of God. Let me
for the sake of those who rather will accept such a truth from Mr Perkins
Reformed Catholic 7.. of Traditions.
, repeat his words. We hold, that the Church of God has power to prescribe
Ordinances, Rules, or Traditions, touching time and place of Gods worship, and
touching order and comeliness to be used in the same; and in this regard, Paul,
1 Cor. 11. 2. commends the Church of Corinth for keeping his Traditions; and
Acts 15. 29. the Council at Jerusalem decreed, that the Churches of the
Gentiles should abstain from blood and from things strangled: this Decree is
termed a Tradition: and this kind of Traditions, whether made by general or
particular Synods, we have a care to maintain and observe; these Caveats being
remembered Ritus pauci numero, sine sumptu, minime graves. Grot. in Cassand.
Artic. 15.
: 1. That they prescribe nothing childish or absurd to be done. 2. That they be
not imposed as any part of Gods worship. 3. That they be severed from
superstition or opinion of merit: Lastly, That the Church of God be not
burdened with the multitude of them. And indeed a worthy instance of the
prudent Moderation of the Church of England is, that in her reformation from
Rome, she has delivered her self from such an Endless Europae Speculum. p. 3.
multitude of Superstitions and Ceremonies, enough to take up a great part of a
man's life to gaze on and peruse; a huge sort of which are so childish and
unsavory, that as they argue great silliness and rawness in their inventors,
so can they naturally bring no other than disgrace and contempt to those
exercises of Religion wherein they are stirring. Yet after the fashion of a
modest and prudent Matron, though our Church does not appear tawdry dressed, with
too great a variety of ill placed cost, yet does she endeavor always to appear
discreet and comely in her attire: On purpose retaining some Rites, in respect
to the practice of the ancient Church: and to vindicate her self from the
imputation of moroseness; and not to side with the other extreme of those who
in the exercise of their Religion, affect carelessness and neglect of any good
Form. The Church of England does retain some Ceremonies in her Offices, thereby
also to vindicate real Christian Liberty: namely, the public liberty of Gods
Church; one part of which (as Bucer in the beginning of the Reformation well
noted) is for the Church to choose its own Rites, and also to vindicate the
Liberty of private Christians, who by the Orders of the Church have their
choice directed for their own edification, and the better order of Divine
things. For Diversity of Ceremonies in diverse Churches do serve to testify the
Christian Liberty, and does greatly conduce to teach the true judgment of
Ceremonies, namely, that all men by this diversity may understand, That those
things which are not delivered in Holy Scripture, are not necessary to
Salvation, but may be altered as the time and circumstance of edification does
require Sprint's Necessity of Conformity in case of Deprivation. p. 115. It a
Forbesius in Irenico. l. 1. c. 7. Harmon. Confess. p 194.
. Which reason of them though it has been frequently repeated, yet has not
sufficiently been taken notice of by those who pretend to be such Assertors of
Christian Liberty, who fall foul into another servile and unquiet sort of
Superstition.

Yet when we consider the horrid, stiff superstition of such Precisians whom
the Moderation of the Church of England in point of Ceremonies does affright,
We cannot think them so moped, but others appear to have run into a greater
excess of madness: when we behold the exceeding number of Ceremonies and
observances, which the Roman Rubricks appoint in their Rituals, Missals, and
Pontifical, etc. We may bless our selves, who within the Communion of our
Church, are freed from such a bondage, more grievous than the Jewish:
especially, since their Rites (many of which are so ridiculous and trifling Vi.
Pontificale Romans de Ecclesiae Dedicatione. p. 237. Vi. Rituale Romans in
absolvendo excommunicatum jam mortuum, etc.
) Quando primo Clericis barbae tondentur, dici debet Pontifice sedente cum
mitra, Antiphona, Sicut Ros Hermon, etc. Pontificale, p. 550.
are not only approved, but required by the Council of Trent, under the pain of
Anathema Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 13.
: and that for surer notice repeated in the first page of their Ritual.
Wherefore as Plutarch well says of Religion, it has its place between
contempt of divine things on one hand, and superstition on the other: So the
Moderation of our Church is excellently tempered to keep Christians from
Enthusiasm in one extreme, and from what some call Rituality on the other D. H.
Mori Ethic. c. 5. p. 105.
: Of our Churches care in this last particular, Bishop Tailor thus endeavors
to satisfy some Consciences, There is reason, says he, to celebrate and
honor the wisdom and prudence of the Church of England, which has in all her
Offices retained but one Ritual or Ceremony, that is not of Divine Ordinance,
or Apostolical practice, and that is the Cross in Baptism, which though it be a
significant Ceremony, and of no other use, yet as it is a compliance with the
practice of all ancient Churches, so it is very innocent in it self, and being
one and alone, is in no regard troublesome. I said, she has only one Ceremony
of her own appointment; For the Ring in Marriage is the symbol of a civil and
religious contract; It is a pledge and custom of the Nation, not of the
Religion: And other circumstances of her worship, are but determinations of
time and place, and manner of a duty. They serve for other purposes, beside
signification, for order and decency, for which there is an Apostolical
Precept, and a natural reason; and an evident necessity, or a great convenience
Ductor Dub. l. ^. c. 4. R. 20.
. Neither is any Ceremony used in our Church by any beside the Minister.

. 2. The constant Moderation of the Church from the beginning of the
Reformation Instit. of a Christian man, p. 46.
, has always faithfully declared its Rites and particular Forms of Worship to
be such things as are in their own nature indifferent and mutable, that they
might be limited or revoked: Every particular national Church has authority to
ordain, change and abolish Ceremonies. (Article of Religion 34.) It may be
lawful for just causes, to alter, change, or mitigate, or recede from
Ecclesiastical Decrees: says the Homily of Fasting: Much more to the same
purpose. The Church declares, in the 20 Article, and in the Preface of the
Ceremonies; and in the Homilies, especially in the beginning of the last
Preface added to the Common Prayer Book, 1662. It has been the wisdom of the
Church of England, ever since her first compiling of her public Liturgy, to
keep the mean between the two extremes, of too much stiffness in refusing, and
too much easiness in admitting variation from it. In the same Preface it is
added, In which review we have endeavored to observe the like Moderation as we
find to have been used in like Cases in former times.

As this is an unquestionable proof of the Churches Moderation: So give me
leave to make it a good instance also thereof, in that on the other hand, she
does wisely avoid the other extreme of variableness, being not given to change,
but upon good reason thereunto moving: because of the many inconveniences that
ensue upon frequent unadvised mutations. So often as any private persons
willingly and purposely recede from the appointments of the Church; the 34th
Article provides for their open rebuke.

Neither are we ignorant (says King James, in his Proclamation for Uniformity)
of the inconveniences that do arise in Government, by admitting innovation in
things once settled by mature deliberation: and how necessary it is to use
constancy in the upholding of the public determinations of States; for that
such is the unquietness and unstedfastness of some dispositions, affecting
every year new forms of things, as, if they should be followed in their
inconstancy, would make all actions of States ridiculous and contemptible. And
if authority should upon all wrong apprehensions of parties make new usages;
nothing in the outward worship of God would continue, no not the very
Sacraments Illud autem penitu^ infixum esse oportet, nec tutum esse, nec ad
sovendam concordiam utile, temere desciscere ab iis quae Majorum autoritate
tradita sunt, quaeque longo saeculorum usu consensuque confirmata: nec quicquam
omnino novandum est, nisi hue aut cogat necessitas aut insignls invi^et
utilitas. Erasmus de amabili Eccl. Concordia.
.

. 3. The Moderation of the Church further appears, in that our Rites are no
where made any part of Religion or Worship; but only used in subserviency to
Religion, and without them the Religion and worship of God is acknowledged
entire: This is manifest from what has been declared before of their
indifferent and mutable nature: And to prevent all just occasion of exception,
the Church of England does publicly declare, that her Constitutions concerning
indifferent things, are made without any opinion of worship by them, or
absolute necessity of them Theatricum Ceremoniarum apparatum nimis rigide and
magnifice exaggerant Ceremoniarum Magistri and exactores, quasi sine illis nec
veritas nec dignitas nec efficaci a Sacramentorum consistat. Chemnitii Examen.
Can. 13. Sess. 7. Conc. Trid. King Edw. 6. Injunctions 1547.
: yea all are admonisht to consider, that God is not appeased by them, much
less is his grace by them merited, or satisfaction made for sins. In the 2d
year of King Edw. 6. In the Articles of Archbishop Cranmer; it is enquired,
whether the Ministers have declared unto the people the true use of Ceremonies;
That they be no workers of Salvation, but only outward signs and tokens (not
mystical, but of clear signification: not Sacramental, but naturally and
properly fit) to put us in remembrance of things of higher perfection: Then it
was also declared, That the Ceremonies are not superstitiously to be abused, as
thereby to drive away Devils, etc. or by putting trust and confidence for
health and salvation in the same See Bishop Gauden before Bishop Brownrigs
Sermons, of the Cerem. in our Church.
.

Thus our Church is (God be thanked) far from any such impious Tyranny and
Usurpation over men's Consciences, which the Pharisees of old did, and the
Church of Rome at this day does exercise, equalling, if not preferring her
Constitutions to the Laws of God: having declared her self by solemn
protestation, enough to satisfy any ingenuous, impartial judgment, That by
requiring obedience to these Ceremonial Constitutions, she has no other
purpose than to reduce all her Children to an orderly Conformity in the outward
worship of God: so far is the Church from seeking to draw any opinion, either
of divine necessity upon the Constitution, or of effectual holiness upon the
Ceremony Bi^hop Sandersons judgment in one View, p. 99. V. Bishop Morton Ep. to
the Non-Conf.
.

. 4. So great is the Moderation of our Church, that lest any should lose the
benefit of her Communion, or continue uneasy in their own scruples, she has
condescended to expound such Injunctions as could be foreseen to have any
objection Super his aliqua moderatio adhibenda est pro Conscientiarum
sedatione, etiam multitudini errantium pie condescendendo aliqua declaratio
facienda. Petr. de Aliaco, de reform. Eccl. Fascic. R. Expet.
. In the end of the Office for the Holy Communion, lest Kneeling should by any
persons, either through ignorance or malice, be misconstrued and depraved, It
is declared, that thereby no Adoration is intended, or to be done, etc. (as
there may be seen more at large.) To the same purpose is the 5. Rubric after
the Holy Communion, To take away all occasion of dissension or superstition.

In the 30th Canon, the lawful use of the Cross in Baptism is copiously and
excellently explained See second Rubric after public Baptism.
: For removing all scruple, and for sufficient caution against all Popish
Superstition.

First, The Church of England, since the abolishing of Popery has ever held
and taught, and so does hold and teach, that the sign of the Cross Nec nos
p^det Crucifixi, sed in part ubi pudori^ signum est, signum Crucis habemus. S.
Aug. in Psalm. 30. S. Cypr. Ep. 56.
used in Baptism, is no part of the substance of the Sacrament, neither does
add to the virtue or perfection of Baptism.

2. That the Infant baptized is by virtue of Baptism Crucis Ceremonia in
baptismace reti^etur, and explicatur (in Constitutionibus Londini, 1604.) ^ot
adhibitis cautionibus ut S. Sancti figni reverentia omnino aboleri potius quam
confirmari videatur. Thuanus (Pontificius) ad an. 1604.
(before it be signed with the sign of the Cross) received into the
Congregation of Christ's Flock, as a perfect member thereof, and not by any
power ascribed to the sign of the Cross: And that no invisible grace or virtue
is annexed to the sign: All Popish error and superstition being purged from the
use of it, and reduced in the Church of England to the primary institution of
it. For which reason also, lest any mysterious operation should be thought
imputed to the sign of the Cross, King James and King Charles I. and now King
Charles II. have forborne the use of that sign at the Healing Alliance of Divine
Offices, chapter 8.
(though therewith it was used in the Reigns of King Edw. 6. and Queen
Elizabeth) So great a Moderation and condescension have the Kings of England
used (as well as the Church) for the healing of the minds as well as the bodies
of their People.

In the 18th Canon, with great wisdom and Moderation, is procured all decent,
orderly, reverent, and attentive behavior in time of Divine Service Erunt
itaque recti moderatique gestus qui possunt servire purae Religioni Christi.
Buceri Cens. c. 5. Canon 111.
; where for kneeling at Confession, Supplication, and Prayers, standing up at
the Belief, paying a due, lowly Reverence, when in time of Divine Service, the
Lord Jesus shall be mentioned Injunction Queen Elizabeth. 52.
, are added the Reasons of the Canon, viz.

Testifying by these outward Ceremonies and Gestures, their inward humility,
Christian resolution, and due acknowledgment that the Lord Jesus Quae sane
Devotio plus afficitur erg^ nomen Jesu, quia nomen ipsum significat nobis
nostram salutem. Arch. Spalat. l. 7. c. 12.. 49. de Repub. Eccl.
Christ, the true and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of the World, in
whom alone, all the mercies and promises of God to mankind, for this Life, and
the Life to come, are fully and wholly comprised, etc.

Hooker's Eccles. Pol. l. 5. ^* ^0.
Which harmless Ceremonies, as no man is constrained to use, so we know no
reason any of them should withstand.

Against Infidels, Jews, and Arrians, who derogate from the honor of Jesus
Christ, such Ceremonies are most profitable.

In the Canons, 1640. with all Moderation possible, the Church did declare it
self concerning the situation of the Holy Communion Table, lest any should
esteem it otherwise than a figurative Altar See Dr. Cudworth of the true Notion
of the Lords Supper.
, as thereon was had a Commemoration of that full, perfect, and sufficient
Sacrifice, for the sins of the whole World: Wherefore in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, according to the advice of Bucer, it was to be so placed, that the
Minister might more conveniently be heard Q. Eliz. Injunction f^r Tables in the
Church. ^uceri censura. Inter opera Angl. ^. 457.
: And because of Gods Majesty, the obeisance which was only recommended, had so
great an allay of Moderation, that the Conclusion of the Canon is very
memorable to our purpose. In the practice or omission of this Rite, we desire
that the rule of Charity prescribed by the Apostle, may be observed, which is,
That they which use this Rite, despise not them who use it not; and that they
who use it not, condemn not those that use it Hic igitur nullus alium
dijudicet: Vescens non insultet abstinentibus, abstinentes non condemnent
vescentes. Erasm. de amabili Eccl. Concordia, p. 18.
. The same words his Majesty King Charles II. inserted in one of his Royal
Proclamations. (So far was this from being to be counted one of the Ceremonies
of the Church, as the Naked Truth calls it:) Of this bodily Reverence of God in
his Church, the Government is so moderate, (God grant it be not loose
there-while,) That no man is constrained, no man questioned, only religiously
called upon, O come, let us worship, kneel, and fall down, before God our Maker
Archbishop Lauds Speech in the Star Chamber.
.

. 5. So that in our Church, as our worship of God is suitable to solid and
rational Devotion, so in the appointments of our Church (which refer to the
Administration of the same) our Church appears neither to affect vain gaieties,
nor outward splendour, nor such luxuriant expressions, as are suited to feed the
humors and boundless fancies of men: Retaining what is reverent and becoming,
yet rejecting what is superstitious in sundry Consecrations, Benedictions, and
Exorcisms, which are in use in the Roman Church: which mild and wise Moderation
of our Church, renders their humors more unaccountably foolish and obstinate,
who are so peremptory in their Nonconformity to the Orders of our Church:
Since there is no Church in the World, which has all its Offices and
Sacraments so administered, conformably to the best Precedents, in words
understood, without any mixture of dangerous or superstitious encroachments;
and with that gravity, decency, and solemnity, which befits the service of God:
as Dean Lingard (whom for love and honor to his memory, I name) in a Sermon of
his before the King July 26. 1668.
.

Yet of these men who are so impatient of Ceremonies upon public Order, I
cannot but note what has been often observed See Friendly Debate, p. 221. Of
the many Ceremonies ordained in the taking of the Covenant, 1646.
, That many of them use two Ceremonies for one, after their own fancies; as not
only their emphatick looks, antic actions, odd postures; but further they
require of their Disciples some things of a Ceremonial nature, as special marks
of admission into their parties: It is Religion with many of them not to give
the Title of Saint but to their own people: And many think no Prayer acceptable
unless it be very long: especially before Sermon: and that no Sermon neither,
except it be in the Pulpit. As Aristotle observed of the necessity of Laws in
every Society; so the use of Ceremonies and Order, may be further proved at
large; for that all Factions, how different soever, do frame to themselves some
peculiar modes and figures of practice, in which they are so strict (although
in matter of their acknowledged liberty) that it is pity their observance is not
better placed: Even the Quakers themselves, in what they (in abuse of the Laws)
call Marriages, use Ceremonies of joining hands, and standing, while they also
declare their consent mutually in a Form: and in many other practices of
opposition; as meeting for what they call Marriage in the Afternoon: burying
their people in a cross manner; they are constant, and as formal (where they
are Antipodes to Authority) as any Romanists can be in his Crosses and
Incensings. So that if superstition Sensi enim dolens and gemens multas infir
morum perturbationes fieri per quorundam fratrum contentiosam obstinationem and
superstitiosam timiditatem. S. Aug. Ep. 118.
be going beyond measures, we may conclude, that none are so superstitious as
those on either hand who oppose the Moderation of our Church. And really it is
a very great justification of the Moderation of our Church, That our present
Anti-Ceremonial Dissenters (though they have wanted no endeavors to the utmost
of their wits and powers) hitherto have been able to make no other exceptions
against our Church, and what is therein constituted; than what have been
answered already, very often, and very fully; to the conviction of the most
learned, and the more ingenuous amongst themselves.

. 6. But so far is the Church of England from multiplying Ceremonies, that we
know there are many innocent usages See Sprint's Necess. of Conform. p. 85. to
101.
which have been in the Primitive Church, in sundry places, and at diverse
times, which our Church of England never went about to introduce, either by
practice or command: as the holy Kiss, the use of the Veil; the threefold
immersion, or use of the white garment in Baptism, and many others, which since
our Church passes by their use, we do not mention: which shows, that Order
and Edification, gives bounds (as is meet) to the number and use of Ceremonies
in our Church; which stops that objection in its career: Who shall determine
their convenient number Interest of England, p. 89.
? The Church has received just rules, and our Church has observed the same
with just Moderation. And hereunto may be added, that as our Church has not
rejected all Rites and usages, merely because they were in use in the Roman
Church (no more than the Reformation of Hezekiah, or Josiah, rejected all
things received or imitated in the corrupt worship of the Ten Tribes:) So, many
practices, which had pious and useful beginnings in the Church of Rome, and
afterward were grievously corrupted, have not been admitted in our Church:
partly, because she has not been forward to multiply ritual observances;
partly, that such occasions of corruption may not be invited, when by
experience it has been seen, how easily there has come excess: Among what had
useful beginnings cannot be numbered the old ways of superstitious purgations,
by Fire and Water Ordeals, and Combats, etc. which are all abolisht among us
V. Ridley's View, etc. l. 1. c. 5.. 5. Reform. leg. Eccl. de purg. c. 21*
.

. 7. Concerning the Ceremonies appointed in our Church, it must further be
taken notice, That the obligation to them is very mild: for though the intent
of the Church is doubtless to bind all to the preservation of regular order,
yet (as the Institution of a Christian Man has it P. 47.
) Forasmuch as such things be of themselves mean and indifferent, men may upon
causes reasonable well omit the same, so that it be not in case of contempt or
scandal V. Whitgift Answ. to Admon. p. 29. V. Bishop Sanderson's judgment, etc.
p. 19.
And of the Church we have no reason to complain, for securing its own Orders
against contempt, and for providing against scandal to those of her Communion:
especially, since her Rites themselves are such as might deserve every where to
be observed: But how far particular persons have to do to moderate yet further
the great Moderation of the Church, we leave it to all sober Consciences, and
to our Superiors to judge; who also must judge of the true interest of the
Church, how far popular exception ought to influence any change: Uniformity
certainly is so excellent, that the certain purchase of it would be worth
somewhat; but the truth is, our Governors have to do with those, that are so
unresolved of what they would have, that this makes their most cautious
deliberation necessary: Bishop Bramhal to M. Militier.
For as a learned Prelate observes, It is a rule in prudence, not to remove an
ill custom, when it is well settled, unless it bring great prejudices, and then
it is better to give one account why we have taken it away, than to be always
making excuses why we do it not. Needless alteration does diminish the
venerable esteem of Religion, and lessen the credit of ancient truths. Break
Ice in one place, and it will crack in more.

. 8. It may be as proper in this place as any where, to annex the notice of our
Churches Moderation in its appointments of Vestments Canon 24. 25. 58. 74.
for Holy Ministrations; as being herein neither undecently deficient, nor
immoderately extravagant. The Vestments in use, by order among us, being very
few, and those very modest and useful, for Ornament, distinction, and
commonefaction; free from all superstition and show of luxury: of the same kind
of those in use in the Reformed Churches D. D. Durel of Reform. Chapter Sect. 2..
21, 22.
. Neither are they in the Church of England Consecrated by any solemn
Benediction, nor to any supernatural effects; Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5.. 29.
As we think not our selves the holier because we use them, so neither should
others think us therefore unholy. In the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, 1559..
30. Canon. 74. (1603.) Etiam Episcoporum famuli in omni vestis genere se
modeste and composite ornabunt. V. Libr. quorundam Canonum, 1571.
Her Majesty being desirous to have the Prelacy and Clergy of this Realm, to be
had as well in outward reverence, as otherwise regarded for the worthiness of
their Ministry, that they may receive the honor and estimation due to the
special Messengers of God, wills and commands them to wear such habits,
etc. Not thereby meaning (as it is added) to attribute any special holiness or
worthiness to the said Garments, but as St Paul says, Let all things be done
decently: Wherefore in the third Part of the Homily of Idolatry, Our Church
excepts against that costly and manifold furniture of Vestments in the Church
of Rome, as fetched from the Jewish usage. (Hoopers ingenuous acknowledgment of
his error about Vestments, see in Dr Durel Vindiciae S. Eccl. Angl. l. 16. p.
140.
, a MS. Letter.)

. 9. The Benedictions of our Church are performed with great piety and wisdom:
Notwithstanding the contempt which many entertain the same with, has been much
increased by the extravagant practices of the Church of Rome in their
Benedictions.

1. To make way for their Exorcisms antecedent to their Benedictions they seem
to suppose worse of Gods Creation than they need, as if the Devil had such
interest and possession in the salt and water, and what else they commonly
exorcise: Sometimes they are as prodigal of their Blessings as at other times
of their Curses, imprinting thereby a servile and superstitious dread upon the
minds of men, whereby they suck no small advantage.

2. By their multitude of Ceremonies they seem unavoidably to confound the
People, and divert their minds from the true author and cause of blessing.

How many Crossings and sprinklings with Holy Water, Incensings, Exorcisms,
variety of actions of the Bishops and Priests, frequent shifting of Vestments,
many utensils and materials do they make requisite?

Whereas the Church of England does in a modest and solemn manner make use of
that Commission it has, to dispense by its Ministers the Divine Blessing in
the name of God, because the less is blessed of the greater. (Heb. 7. 7.)

Being 1. Very careful to make her people plainly sensible from whom the
Benediction by Prayer does proceed: 2. Our Church does carefully declare the
Divine Promises as they are made, that the people may take more effectual care,
to be duly qualifyed for the Divine Blessing. 3. Our Church does not hold any
Mediator for the Divine Blessing, but what God has appointed; neither Saint,
nor Angel, but only Jesus Christ our Lord. 4. Our Church does rightly suppose
its Ministers have authority given them, to declare and pronounce the Divine
Promises of blessing, with the conditions of receiving the same: and that they
have a special Commission given them to pray for Gods people and bless them: as
the Priests under the Law had Commission to bless the people in the name of
God, Numbers 6. 22. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 1 Chronicles. 23. 13. Which practice had nothing
Ceremonial in it, and peculiar to the Law. Wherefore Christ put his hands upon
the little Children, and blessed them, S. Mat. 19. 13. and Commanded his
Apostles and Ministers to bless his people, S. Mat. 10. 13. S. Luke 10. 5. and
without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. 7.
Wherefore for the dignity of the Episcopal Office, the Church does especially
delegate that Power and Commission to her Bishops for Confirmation, with
imposition of Hands, and in Ordination of Ministers, etc. Neither do our
Religious Kings in our Church, refuse the Benedictions of the Churches
Ministers: either as Christians, or as Kings at their Coronations: Yea our
Church indeed ascribes more to Blessing and Prayer than the Church of Rome
does: for by Blessing and Prayer, our Church holds the Bread and Wine in the
Holy Eucharist to be Consecrated, which the Roman Priests do not, till those
words be pronounced. [Hoc est enim Corpus meum.]

And here I cannot but add what the Archbishop of Spalato truly observed, of
the constant and ordinary blessing at Meals in England, according to pious and
Christian practice. Blessings (says he (...) Er^. S^are^^, (...). 2^.
) and thanksgivings at the Tables of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Laity;
at no time, and upon no occasion omitted; I never saw with such Religion and
Piety performed as in England.

Yea among those of the Church of England, the laudable Christian Custom is
maintained of Parents blessing their Children, and of Childrens humbly asking
their Parents blessing, whereby the authority of the Parent is maintained, and
each are put in mind of their respective obligation: The same laudable custom
is used to our Bishops.

To which may be added, that the laudable Customs, commonly in use in our
Church, as they are few which are generally received, so are they such as are
very suitable to this Moderation here commended: But the Church Canon 42. 36. 10
declares only such Customs to be laudable which are not contrary to the word
of God, or the Prerogative Royal.

. 10. As the wisdom of our Church does account it a reasonable service to offer
up our Bodies a holy and acceptable sacrifice in the worship of God: So she
requires such reverend and becoming Gestures, as are proper to betoken the
awful thoughts of our minds. Wherefore at our Prayers we are injoined meekly to
kneel upon our Knees; and at the Absolution also and repeating the Ten
Commandments, and at receiving imposition of hands; because the same are
accompanied with Holy Prayers: and at our receiving the Holy Supper of our
Lord, the same being the most suitable posture to testify and promote our
Humility, our Thankfulness, and our Reverent Worship of God.

To express also our Joy and praise of God (as at the Psalms:) and to witness
our steadfast, and resolved, and solemn profession of our Faith (as at the
Belief,) we use the posture of standing; and also at the Gospels; to express
our outward Reverence to the Holy Scriptures; especially because they generally
contain the actions and words of our Blessed Savior.

But in tender regard to the weakness and infirmity of many Christians, such is
the Moderation of our Church; she allows sitting at the longer Lessons and
Sermons, and at the Epistles, in accommodation to the reasonable ease of
people, after their long kneeling before.

. 11. Of that respect which is due to Churches and places, for the Divine
Worship and Service; our Church has determined according to great Moderation
and Truth: Keeping the middle way between the pomp of superstitious tyranny,
and the meanness of fantastic Anarchy (...).. 27.
: Moreover (says the Homily) the Church or Temple is counted or called holy;
yet not of it self, but because Gods people resorting thereunto, are holy, and
exercise themselves in holy and heavenly things. Wherefore though our Church is
most religiously careful, that the incommunicable honor due unto God, be
attributed unto no Creature else; yet because the inward honor due to God,
ought to express it self as well outwardly as it can; therefore whatsoever is
appropriate to the peculiar service of God, our Church requires should be used
with such a difference and distinction, as may set forth our due and singular
Reverence of God. It is easy to note how the extreme of superstitious curiosity
has crept into the Church of Rome; in so much, that it may well vye with the
Jewish for multitude and niceness of observances: a just Volume would not
contain the curious scruples of their nice observances, in their Vestments,
Consecrations, Sacramental Rites, and indeed in the whole carriage of their
religious devotions: but surely I fear these are not more faulty in the one
extreme, than many Christians are in the other, who place a kind of holiness in
a slovenly neglect: Who are apt to higgle with the Almighty, and in a base
niggardliness, pinch him in the allowances of his Service. Of Holy decency in
the worship of God. Bishop Hall in his Remains.
Wise Christians sit down in the mean, now under the Gospel, avoiding a
careless and parsimonious neglect on the one side, and a superstitions
slovenliness on the other: the painted looks and lascivious gaudiness of the
Church upon the Hills, and the careless neglected dress of some Churches in the
Valley. Far be it from me (says ^. 1. Disc. 2.
Mr Mede) to be a Patron of Idolatry or Superstition in the least degree, yet I
am afraid, lest we who have reformed the worship of God from that pollution
(and blessed be his name therefore) by bending the crooked stick too much the
other way, have run too far into the contrary extreme. To observe the just mean
in practice, is somewhat difficult, nevertheless, our Church in its rules does
no more favor Sacrilege than Idolatry: If the personal faults of any have
caused a scandal on us for either, the Church laments the same: and that there
may be the less public temptation to Sacrilege, among us (as it has been in
other Nations) the immoderate bounty of exorbitant Donations is limited, as by
Statute of Mortmain, lest the secular state should become impoverished: Though
that which was heretofore said of those things that were given, that they were
in a dead hand, may more justly be said of those things that are taken away
View of Civ. and Eccl. Law, Part. 3. c. 4.. 1.
.

The Monuments of our Church are also full of instances of our Churches
observing the mean between superstition and profaneness: The horrible abuses
(says Hom. of repairing of Churches.
the Homily) and abominations, they that supply the room of Christ, have purged
and cleansed the Church of England of, taking away all such fulsomness and
filthiness, as through ignorance and blind devotion has crept into the Church
these many hundred years. The Homilies also condemn such sumptuousness as put
people in peril of Idolatry: yet, They require all convenient cleanness and
ornament, where we cannot attain to an honorable magnificence: For as the
Homily says: When Gods House is well adorned with places convenient to sit in
Canon 83. 1603.
; with the Pulpit for the Preacher, with the Lords Table Canon 82.
for the Ministration of the Holy Supper; and the Font Canon 81.
to Christen in also is kept clean, comely, and sweetly, the people are more
comforted to resort thither, and tarry the whole time appointed them. Hom. of
Idolatry, ^. Part.
Thus the 85. Canon provides, That the Church be well and sufficiently
repaired, and so from time to time kept and maintained: that all things be in
such orderly and decent sort, without dust or any thing that may be noisome or
unseemly, as becomes the House of God: That there be a terrior of Glebe Lands,
and other possessions belonging to the Churches. Canon 87. That the Churches be
not profaned. Canon 88. That the Bible and Common Prayer Book, and the Book of
Homilies, be had in every Church, etc. Can. 80.

Unto all this, I wish some would add the Consideration of what Mr Baxter has
writ.

Temples, Vtensils, etc. devoted and lawfully Christian Direct. p. 915. Qu. 170.
separated by man, for holy uses, are holy as justly related to God by that
lawful separation. Ministers are more holy than Temples, Lands, Vtensils, as
being nearlier related to holy things: and things separated by God, are more
holy than those justly separated by man: And so of Days, every thing should be
reverenced according to the measure of its Holiness: and this expressed by such
signs, gestures, actions, as are fittest to honor God, to whom they are
related: and so to be uncovered in Church, and use reverent carriage and
gestures there, does tend to preserve the due reverence to God and to his
worship, 1 Cor. 16. 20.

CHAP. IX. Of the Moderation of our Church, with respect to Holy Days, namely,
both the Feasts and Fasts of the Church.
. 1. The Feasts of the Church are few; and those for great reason chose: with
care to avoid the excesses of the Romanists.. 2. The further behavior of the
Church in her Feasts, most useful and prudent.. 3. We celebrate the memory of
Saints, but of none whose existence or sanctity is uncertain.. 4. The excellent
ends of our Churches honor to Saints, are set down.. 5. That they are
Festivally Commemorated, not out of opinion of worship, or merit, or absolute
necessity thereof to Religion.. 6. Our Church runs not into any excess, in any
Prayer to Saints.. 7. Nor with reference to Images.. 8. Whether our Church in
any of these practices, be justly charged of Popery, by those, who Canonize
among themselves those who are of uncertain sanctity.. 9. The Moderation of our
Church in its honor given to Angels.. 10. And to the Blessed Virgin.. 11. Our
Church has taken great care, that a special honor be had to the Lords Day;
and that the Lords Day, nor any other Festival, be abused to Luxury and
Impiety.. 12. The Moderation of the Church, with reference to its Music and
Psalmody.. 13. The Moderation of our appointed Fasts: The Lenten or Paschal
Fast, how far Religious by the Precept of the Church.

1. COncerning Holy Days in general, it may suffice here, only to repeat the
words of our Bishops (in answer to the Presbyterian Brethren 1661. N. 6.) The
observation of Saints days, is not of divine but Ecclesiastical Institution,
and therefore it is not necessary that they should have any other ground in
Scripture, than other Institutions of the same nature, so that they be
agreeable to the Scripture in the general end, for the promoting of Piety: and
the observation of them was ancient, as appears by the Rituals and Liturgies,
and by the joint consent of Antiquity; and by the ancient Translation of the
Bible, as the Syriack and Aethiopick, where the Lessons appointed for Holy Days
are noted, and set down; the former of which was made near the Apostles times.
Besides, our Savior himself kept a Feast of the Churches Institution; viz. The
Feast of Dedication, S. Jo. 12. 22. The choice end of these days being not
Feasting, but the exercise of Holy Duties, they are fitter called Holy Days
than Festivals, and though they be all of like nature, it does not follow that
they are equal.

The exceeding number of Festivals in the Roman Church (that they have neither
mean nor measure, in making new Holy Days, as Mr Latimer says Sermon to the
Convocation.
) has been the frequent complaint, not only of many Learned Protestants Vetus
querela est de nimis magna festorum multitudin^. Chemn. Exam. Pars 4. p. 162.
, but also of very many of the Roman Communion (as might be instanced:) Who
have thought that the Salvation of men would have been better consulted, if
there were fewer Solemnities and greater Devotion: alleging that of St Bernard
Patriae est non exilii, frequentia haec gaudio^um; and numerositas festivitatum
Cives decet non exules. S. Bern. Ep. 174.
: Such a number of Festivities, is fitter for Citizens, than for Exiles and
Pilgrims: And Clemangius notes, that Moses appointed but three great
Solemnities; whereas at present the Romanists Quarta pars anni feratiunculis
conteritur. Wicelius Meth. Conc.. 19. Essraenis earum numerus. Centum gravam.
37. Turba festorum dierum de causis non necessariis, etc. Erasin. de amab.
Concor.
observe more Festivals than ever the Scribes and Pharisees did: neither had
they any Feast for the Chair of Moses, as the other have for the Chair of S.
Peter.

It Is true, a French Writer (with the approbation of some Sorbon Doctors) and
others of the same Communion have thought, that many of their Festivals might
be dispenst with, by the Popes leave; or without it, according to the
privileges of the Gallican Church: but now as they write under correction of
Superiors, it is pretty to see in their pruning the luxuriant number of Feasts;
what choice some Puritan Romanists offer at, in their Schemes of Reformation J
Bapt. Thiers de fest. dier. Imminutione, c. 48.
: For, the Feast of Circumcision they would blot out, because it falls on the
first of January: (a day of Gentile superstition.) The Feast of our Lords being
presented in the Temple, or of the Purification: because C. 51.
on that day the Gentiles honored Mars or Pluto, called Februus: and the Feast
of Epiphany they would have expunged, because on those days some choose King and
Queen: Yet how do they strain C. 49.
at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel? for these glorious Reformers of the Calendar,
will by no means have the Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin into
Heaven, omitted Assumptionis celebritatem servari par est. C. 52. p. 339.
: And at this day the Romanists keep for a solemnity the Immaculate Conception
of the Virgin Mary: By which, as St Austin speaks of some, they love to
Canonize their own Apocryphal Errors: notwithstanding among the Feast-days to
be deleted, the forementioned Reformers have the confidence to reckon up All
Saints days, and the Feast of St Michael, and the Holy Angels, and of all the
Apostles, C. 53, 54, 55.
except S. Peter, and S. Paul.

Whereas in the Church of England (as also in the Lutheran and other Reformed
Churches D. D. Durell, of Ref. Chapter Sect. 2.. 23, 24. Chemnit. Exam. par. 4. p.
163.
) after the reformation, a moderate number of Festivals were appointed V. The
Act for abrogation of superfluous Holy Days. Bishop Spar. Collect. p. 225. King
Edw. 6. Inj. 1547. Queen Eliz. Inj.. 46. Festos dies Protestants, Legum
praescripto, utcunque tenent eosdem omnes quos antiquitus celebravit Ecclesia,
satetur Sander. de Schism. Angl. p. 171.
, for the same reasons that the most sober Romanists have desired many of
theirs might be rescinded.

. 2. Another consideration which moderates the number of Festivals in our
Church, is, several of them fall in with the Lords day: and indeed most of them
have Relation to our Blessed Lord, and his Apostles: so that from the very
design of the Festival, the hard-handed Artizan may learn the name and meaning
of some Article of his Creed, (as Bishop Tailor speaks Pref. to Collection of
Offices,. 36.
) and by such anniversary remembrances of his Faith, may at once help his
memory and devotion: both which among the Romanists are much overcharged with
the exceeding number of Festivals; and also by them the mean man is much
hindered from maintaining his Family, and paying his dues: In the poor Man's
Almanac, the number of Festivals on one side, increasing the number of debts
on the other, together confound his devotion and his estate: Whereas in our
Calendar, the Festivals are set down with such choice, as Bishop Hall somewhere
has noted, that the meaner sort by skill in their Almanac, may be taught
their Christian Faith Festorum recurrens meditatio est veluti Catecheseos
Christianae inculcatio, etc. Forbes. Irenic. l. 1. c. 7.
.

. 3. As we cannot but account it a very scandalous reproach, which some of the
Romanists have used, that Richworth Dialogue 3.
Catholics have some Saints, Protestants none; So they may know, we celebrate
such whom the true Catholic Church always has celebrated: and which are also
Celebrated by many of the Reformed Churches V. Confess. Helvet. c. 24. Confess.
Eccl. Bohem. and Morav.
: Yea, and as we have had our Saints, so our Church has had her Martyrs too,
which are more than common Saints, who have been glorious Witnesses of the
Moderation of our Church, and of the extreme rigours of our Churches
Adversaries on either hand: In the Remembrance of whom (as Bishop Cozins
Private Dev. p. 92.
has taken notice) Such is the wisdom and Moderation of our Church, she has
taken one solemn day of the year to magnify God for the generality of his
Saints together, hereby avoiding the burden and unnecessary number of Festival
days: Neither is the memory of any Saint among us celebrated, of whose
sanctity, much more, of whose existence, we are uncertain Of the Canonization
of St. Thomas a Becket, V. Consid. of present Concernment,. 9. V. C. Baron. in
Martyrol. die 29. Decembr. S. Thom. Cantuar. Macte animo, macte virtute
Anglicanorum nobilissime ac gloriosissime coetus, qui tam illustri militiae
nomen dedisti, ac Sacramento sanguinem spospondisti: aemulor sane vos Dei
aemulatione, cum vos Martyrii Candidatos, ac nobilissimae purpurae Martyrs
aspicio. Quae verba dixit vir gravissimus non solum de his qui temporibus
Elizabethae, sed etiam de his qui suo etiam tempore sub Jacobo propter similem
causam passi sunt. Suarii Def. l. 6. c. 11. De veris Anglicanis Martyribus: H.
Garnetto, etc. V. Sander. de Schism. Angl. ad finem.
.

So far is our Church from allowing the Roman way of Apotheosis, whose Calendar
affords a red Letter for some who have died for the blackest and foulest crimes.

Nor does our Church obtrude upon those of her Communion, any Apocryphal
Legends Ludov. Viv. l. 2. de Cause. corrup. ar. V. de Fest. imminutione, c. 50.
p. 32^.
or Fables of Saints: nor receives any false Revelations or Visions for the
keeping new Festivals.

. 4. The ends propounded in our Church, why we celebrate the memory of Saints,
are most just and unexceptionable, namely, that we may bless God for their
gifts and graces, which have been eminent in them: which we magnify and
celebrate, that we may more cheerfully be enlivened to imitate Divos ac Divas
optim^ coli imitando vitam illorum. Erasm. de amab. Eccl. Concor. (...). S.
Chrysostom. To. 5. p. 625. (...). Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 14.
them, and breath after the glory they possess: there being one general
Assembly of the Church Militant on Earth, and Triumphant in Heaven: Wherefore
we pray on All Saints day, That God who has knit together his Elect, in one
communion and Fellowship in the mystical body of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
would grant us grace, so to follow his Blessed Saints, in all virtuous and
godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable joys, etc. But we are not
convinced of the necessity to acknowledge, that by the Solemnities of Saints we
can procure interest in their merits: or are thereby helped by their Prayers.

. 5. Many are the excesses which by the opinion of merits, the Church of Rome
has run into: This has been the fund for the treasury of their Church; and
hereon has been framed the artifice of Indulgences: Wherefore though our
Church has the greatest honor for the Saints departed that need to be, yet
does she not think that the Saints on Earth ever merited for themselves, much
less for others: according to the sense of the Romanists, which is, That Hom.
of good Works, 3. Part. De thesauro Ecclesiae superf^uentium satisfactionum B.
Mariae, and aliorum Sanctorum and dispensatione per Ecclesiam, Vi. C. Bell. de
Indulg. l. 1. c. 2, 3.
their Lamps always run over, able to satisfy, not only for their own, but also
for all other their Benefactors, Brothers and Sisters of Religion: Keeping in
diverse places, Marts, or Markets of Merits, being full of holy Relics and
works of overflowing abundance ready to be sold. Therefore we observe the wise
Moderation of our Church in taking particular care, that on our Saints days,
all our Prayers be offered, in and through the Mediation of Christ our Lord, in
whose merits only we place any hope: and our Homily concerning Faith says; In
the second of the Ephesians, the meaning of the Apostle is, not to induce us to
have any affiance, or to put any confidence in our works, as by the merit or
deserving Deus proprie nulli debtor est nisi forsita^ ex gratuito promisso,
quanquam and hoc ipsum ut praestemus promissi conditionem, illius est
munisicentiae. Erasm. de amab. Eccl. Concor.
of them, to purchase to our selves or others, remission of sin, for that were
mere blasphemy against Gods mercy.

. 6. Very many also have been the excesses of the Church of Rome in praying to
Saints departed; wherein, beside, that their doctrine relies on what is false
and uncertain (namely that they so well know our particular conditions, and are
ready at hand to hear our Prayers; Since V. Homily of Prayer.
it is none of their office to attend us; neither have they any Commission from
God to intercede for us, yet) the Romanists often pray solemnly to Saints, for
what is only proper for God to bestow; and thereby attribute unto Creatures the
incommunicable honor of the Creator V. Homily of the peril of Idolatry.
Whereas our Church both practices and requires Prayer and Invocation unto God
only: It no where applies the Lords Prayer, or the Psalms of David, unto the
Virgin Mary, or any of the Saints: nor allows nuncupating of Vows, or
offering Sacrifices to Saints, nor carrying about their Non video in multis
quod sit discrimen inter eorum opinionem de Sanctis and id quod Gentiles
putabant de Diis suis. Lud. Vives in S. Aug. de Civ. D. l. 8. c. 27.
Images and Relics, with theatrical pomp, as if they were inhabited Shrines
of the divine blessing and favor: giving temptation to the amused people, to
exhibit to them religious honor, peculiarly due to the Essential Sanctity of
God: the doing of which, the Saints themselves do most of all abhor V. Origin.
c. Cells. p. 238. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14. Eccl. Hist. Reformed Catholic,. 14.
Conclu. 2.
. For as our Homily of Prayer has it: The Saints and Angels in Heaven, will
not have us to do any honor unto them, which is due and proper unto God. If
any man (says Mr Perkins) can show us the bodily relic of any true Saint,
and prove it so to be, though we will not worship it, yet will we not despise
it, but keep it as a Monument, if it may conveniently be done without offense.

. 7. The special Moderation of our Church of England, with relation to the
Images of Saints, is best expressed in the Injunctions of King Edw. 6. 1547. All
Ecclesiastical persons are to teach their Parishioners, that Images serve for
no other purpose but to be a Remembrance, whereby men may be admonished of the
Holy Lives and Conversations of them the said Images represent Nos unam
veneramur Imaginem quae est Imago invisibilis and Omnipotentis Dei. S. Hieron.
in Ezekiel. 16.
. Where we see our Church is not for defacing of Images, so far as they are
only Historical Et quidem zelum, ne quid manu factum adorari possit, habuisse
laudavimus, sed frangere easdem imagines non debuisse judicamus: quatenus
literarum nescii haberent unde scientiam historiae colligerent, and populus in
picturae adoratione minime peccarent. Gregor. Magnus l. 7. Ep. 109.
Monuments, and instruments of remembrance and affection: but against the abuse
of them. It follows in the Injunction, which Images, if any abuse for other
intent, they commit Idolatry in the same, to the great danger of their Souls.
So the Homily Homily of Idolatry. 2. Part.
takes notice, how Image Worshippers (as all things that be amiss) have from a
tolerable beginning, grown worse and worse, till at last they became
intolerable Ad extremam vanitatem quam Ethnici, etc. Cassander p. 175.
: as is excellently set forth in the 14th Chapter of Wisdom. The corruption of
which Doctrines and practices in the Church of of Rome Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
is such, that they thereby give a great scandal to the Jews, and the
Mahometans; and the same is very much aggravated by their expunging out of the
Fathers, sundry passages which speak most plainly against such practices E. g.
in S. Aug. de re. Rel. p. 743. Froben. delend. Honorandi propter imitationem,
non adorandi propter religionem. Ita in S. Athan. c. Arianos. delend. (...). V.
Ind. Expurg.
. From all these instances we may observe, how steddily our Church does manage
it self between defect and excess of honor to the Saints departed this Life in
the Faith and fear of God. For the Celebration of Saints here, is not out of
any opinion of worship of them, or merit by that Celebration, or any absolute
necessity thereof to Religion, otherwise than that it is exceeding comely that
God should be honored in his Saints Vt eorum necessariam salubremque memoriam
festivitas concelebrata custodiat. S. Aug. l. 32. c. Faust. c. 12.
.

I may add here also what has been observed of the Modesty of our Church
reformed, Scintilla Altaris.
That to avoid excess of Dedications (wherein others are too burdensome) she
sometimes uniteth two of the Apostles at once in one Festivity; as S. Simon and
Jude: S. Philip and James.

. 8. The more immoderate is their reproach, who brand our reformed Church for
being guilty of Popery, only because the memory of the just among us is blessed
Co^^mus Martyrs cultu dilectionis non servitutis. S. Aug. c. Faus. l. 22.
. Notwithstanding those very exceptors are really like the Romanists,
Canonizing and Sainting one another for being of some particular humor and
faction: in this for one, that they will not keep a Festival, or remember an
Apostle with honor. Indeed in the Church of Rome they have Canonized the worst
of men, and let any one tell the difference, when many of those others Saint
each other, and affect no other Title but of your Holiness. And here, let any
equal and intelligent Christians judge, whether those who hold Communion with
the Church of God (notwithstanding sundry infirmities and failings) ought not
(and may not more properly, according to the style of Scripture) to be called
Saints, than those who separate from the outward Communion of Gods Church,
although they usurp the name peculiarly to themselves. And here we cannot but
observe the Modesty of those in Communion with the Church of England (which is
true Christian Moderation) They never were so forward to rush suddenly (as it
were) into the Holy of Holies, in calling themselves and one another absolute
Saints: but rather (while they are in their way and Pilgrimage) choose to be
honored with more modest titles: even as Pythagoras in all Ages has been
commended for his Moderation, in laying aside the great name of Wife, and chose
rather to be called a Lover of Wisdom.

. 9. The same Moderation which our Church uses toward Saints; she observes
likewise with respect to the Holy Angels: Yea, indeed great is the modesty and
sober wisdom of our Church, in that it is no where excessively curious, nor
positive in determining of the nature, actions, knowledge, number, Orders, or
special Guardianship of Angels. Our Church does not deny that there is a
distinct Order of Angels, but no where takes upon her to show how those Orders
are disposed. But avoiding the extreme of those who are stupidly insensible of
the conduct of Holy Angels, the Church of England does glorify God for their
Creation, for their admirable order and Ministry, and affection to us: we pray
to God we may imitate their readiness and cheerfulness in praising and serving
him, and ministering daily for the good of others; yet our Church has always
held the Angels to be in the number of those who worship, and not of those who
are worshipped: and for us to worship those who are themselves worshippers,
would be such a voluntary humility as is sinful; namely, to address our selves
to such substitutes as God no where has appointed to receive his peculiar
honor (...). Orig. c. Cells. l. 8. Neque Invocationibus Angelicis, sed (...),
pure and manifest Orationes dirigens ad Dominum qui omnia s^it. Iren. l. 2. c.
57.
: which the Synod of Laodicea (A. D. 364.) calls Idolatry.

. 10. The like Moderation does our Church excellently well observe, in the
honor she gives to the Ever Blessed Virgin Mary, so highly favored of God, as
to be the Mother of our Lord; whom our Church celebrates, and always humbly
calls her Blessed: And as it is in the Institution of a Christian man, set
forth by the Convocation, 1537. We may worthily say, she is the most blessed of
all other Women Maria Matter Domini principatum inter Mulieres tenuit. S. Aug.
Scrm. 136. Hanc ego Christi Matrem veneror -- sed non illi Divae modo sed and
Deae nomen tribuens. R. Jac. Apol. pro Jur. Honor Reginae judicium diligit,
Virgo Regia falso non eget honor. de B. V. Maria, S. Bernard. Ep. 174.
: and we no where doubt but she is highly graced in Heaven, as she received a
most special privilege upon Earth. But our Church does no where believe, that
she had an immaculate conception, which the Romanists celebrate with an
Holy Day on purpose: Neither does our Church believe, she was ever raised from
the dead, and assumed into Heaven; which they solemnize with another Festival.
Neither did Erasmus Erasm. Ecclesiastes, l. 2.
without cause admire how it came to pass they salute the Mother of Christ with
more Religion than they invoke Christ himself, or the Holy Spirit, calling her
the Fountain of all Grace: and sundry expressions they use of the like affiance
in the authority and merit of the Blessed Virgin, to succor, help, and save
Sinners, as may be seen in the Rosary and Psalter, and specially Litanies to
the Virgin Mary V. Consult. Cassandr. Art. 20. p. 140. Jube Filio, etc. Cum vix
aliud in toto choro sit alienius a scripturis sanctis and quod cum Evangelio
Christi atque doctrina Apostolica perditius pugnet. Wicelius de abusu Eccl. p.
392.
. In their form of auricular Confession, they are taught thus to begin, Manuale
Confessionum, Cap. 10. p. 128.
I Confess to the Omnipotent God, to the Blessed Mary, always Virgin, etc. and
when they enter into their Monasteries, they vow themselves to God and the
Blessed Virgin: and in all things they are so superdevout (...).
to the Virgin, that an Oath by her is accounted most sacred, and any of the
Festivals may be sooner expunged than that of her Assumption into Heaven; and
although they prohibit the Bible, yet they freely suffer sundry Books of
Devotion to the Virgin Mary in the Mother tongue.

. 11. Our Church has taken great care, that a special honor be had to the
Lords Day: and that neither the Lords Day, nor any other Festival, be abused to
Luxury or impiety Haeccine solemnes dies decent quae alios non decent? Tertull.
Ita Festa moderanda ut neque nimia -- neque tam flagitiose profanentur. Bucer.
Censur. c. 26.
: It appears from the Offices in our Liturgy, the Rubricks, Canons, Homilies,
and Statutes of the Land, and Injunctions of our Kings since the Reformation,
that there has been a first and special care taken for the Holy Celebration of
Sunday or Lords Day: wherein we are equal to any Church among the Reformed Vi.
D. Crackenthorp Defens. Eccl. Aug. c. 54.
: The other Festivals being overruled, that in a Concurrence of Offices they
may not disturb its Solemnity: the very religious observation of which, is
earnestly also persuaded in our Homilies: and especially in the 13. Canon (with
which agree the Injunctions of K. Edw. 6. and Q. Eliz.) requiring, Coimus in
coetum ut Deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus, orantes coimus ad
Divinarum literarum commemorationem, fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem
erigimus, fiduciam figimus, etc. Tertull. Apol.
All manner of persons within this Church of England, that from henceforth they
celebrate and keep the Lords Day, commonly called Sunday, and other Holy Days,
according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the Orders of the Church of
England prescribed in that behalf; that is, in hearing of the Word of God read
and taught, in private and public Prayers, in acknowledging their offenses to
God, and amendment of the same; in reconciling themselves charitably to their
neighbors, where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Holy
Communion of the body and blood of Christ, in visiting of the poor and sick,
and using all good and sober Conversation. Much to the same purpose is largely
insisted on in the Homily of place and time of Prayer.

All persons (says the late Statute Car. 2. 29.
) shall on every Lords Day apply themselves to the observation of the same, by
exercising themselves in the duties of Piety and true Religion, publicly and
privately; and no Tradesman shall do or exercise any worldly labor, etc.
(Works of necessity and Charity only excepted.) Cunctarum artium officia,
venerabili die solis quiescant. l. 3. Cod. Tit. de Feriis.
Which Statute of the Kingdom, seems to have taken its Rule of Moderation from
our excellent Homilies, Which do reprove those who ride Journeys, buy and sell,
and make all days alike: who profane such holy times by pride and other
excesses: Albeit the same Homily declares, the Commandment of God does not bind
Christian people so straightly to observe the utter Ceremonies of the Sabbath
Day, as it was given to the Jews Audimus apud Bohemos exoriri novum Judaeorum
genus, Sabbatarios appellant, qui tanta superstitione servant sabbatum, ut si
quid eo die inciderit in c^^lum nolint eximere. Erasm. de amab. Concord.
, as touching forbearing of work and labor in time of necessity: and so the
Injunctions of King Edw. 6. and Queen Eliz.. 20. conclude, Notwithstanding all
Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, shall teach and declare unto their Parishioners,
that they may with a safe and quiet Conscience, after Common Prayer, in time of
Harvest, labor upon the Holy and Festival Days, and save that thing which God
has sent: So by King Edw. 6. it was ordered, that the Lords of the Council
should upon every Sunday attend the public affairs of the Realm: The Church
also, and the Laws of the Kingdom, have taken the same wise care to set such
Holy Days in every term Taceat apparitio, advocatio delitescat; nihil ^odem
die sibi vendicat scena theatralis. l. 3. Cod. Tit. de feriis. V. Act for
abrogation of Holy Days, 1536. R. Hen 8. V. R. H. 8. Injunctions. Hist. of
Reform. Collection of Records, l. 3. p. 161. Legum conditores festos
instituerunt dies ut ad hilaritatem homines public cogerentur tanquam
necessarium laboribus temperamentum. Sen. de Tranquil. c. 15.
, that beside the ordinary Vacations, there may be some days of respite from
secular businesses, and contests of Law, for the exercises of Peace, Charity,
and Devotion: So careful have our Laws in Church and Kingdom been to avoid
profaneness on one hand, and on the other hand all sorts of superstition: that
is, either Heathenish or Jewish usages (as such.) For as the Homily of Prayer
earnestly blames them, who abuse holy times and places with intolerable
superstitions, as has been in use in the Church of Rome; so on the other hand,
it does not countenance those opinions which tend to establish among us such
observances as were peculiar to the Jews. After the recital of the fourth
Commandment in the Decalogue, our Church prays, That our hearts be inclined to
keep that Law, therein rightly acknowledging a moral equity, that Christians
should observe such a proportion of time as has been the practice of the
Church: in which time all impediments to sacred and religious duties, public
or private, are to be avoided according to the equity of the Divine Law, and
the Precept of Gods Church.

The Moderation of our Church, in its judgment of the Lords Day, Bishop
Bramhall has observed, from the Homily of the Church, as concurrent with his
own judgment Discourse of the Sabbath, or Lords Day, p. 932.
: 1. That the Homily denies not the Lords Day the name of Sabbath: That it
finds no Law of the Sabbath, Genesis 23. That the Homily finds no seventh Day
Sabbath before Moses his time: The Homily gives no power to the fourth
Commandment, as it was given to the Jews, to oblige Christians, but only as it
was, and so far as it was a Law of nature: The Homily makes the first day of
the week to signify the Lords Day: The Homily makes the end of changing the
Weekly Festival of the Church to have been in honor of Christ's Resurrection:
The Homily derives the Lords Day down from the Ascension of Christ immediately.
But the Homily does express, that p. 916.
the fourth Commandment does not bind Christians over-streightly; Not to the
external Ceremonies of the Sabbath; not to the rigorous part of it to forbear
all work. As to the question, By what authority this change was made, I find no
cause to doubt (says the Bishop) but that it was made by the authority of
Christ; that is, by divine authority. It Is true, we find no express precept
recorded in Holy Scripture for the setting apart the first day of the Week for
the service of God: Neither is it necessary, that there should be an express
Precept for it founded in Holy Scripture, to prove it to be a divine right. The
perpetual and universal practice of the Catholic Church, including all the
Apostles themselves, is a sufficient proof of the divine right of it; that at
least it was an Apostolical Institution and Ordinance, not temporary, but
perpetual.

. 12. With the Festivals it may not be improper to join the notice of the
Moderation of our Church, in reference to her Music and Psalmody; wherein the
Constitution of our Church shows us the true temper of Religion, which as it
is the most serious, so it is the most pleasant of all performances, and is
most suited to the nature, temper, and condition of man, in which joy and
sorrow have a very interchangeable interest; therefore S. James says, Is any
afflicted, let him pray; is any merry, let him sing Psalms: (Jam. 3. 13.)
Accordingly in our Church, Prayer and praise fill up the measures of Divine
Worship; and can there be any performance more pleasant, than to join with, and
imitate the Heavenly Host in the high praises of God? Neither does our Church
judge it enough for us to make melody in our hearts to the Lord, but does
require us to serve God also with our Omnes affectus spiritus nostri pro sua
diversitate habent proprios modos in voce and cantu, quorum occulta
familiaritate excitantur. S. Aug. Confess. 10. c. 33.
Voices and our hearing, and our affections raised by Psalms, and Hymns, and
Doxologies, and mutual incitements to praise God, and by musical instruments
also, where they may be had, that we may set forth the praises of God with all
our faculties; and in the most elevated manner we are capable.

In our Church is proposed to us great variety, in which we may entertain our
cheerful Devotion: for Psalms, we have the divinely inspired Psalms of David,
from whence every one, according to their condition, may be furnished with most
excellent Forms of praise and joy in God, according to their several
circumstances.

For Hymns (...), S. Jo. 17.
of Praise, we have select Forms taken out of Holy Scripture, or in use in the
ancient Church; in the variety of which (with Doxologies also and Hallelujahs)
we are entertained and delighted: We have also in laudable use, many excellent
spiritual Songs Carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Plin.
secundus ad Traj. Ep.
of more artificial composure Peculiares quaedam and magis artificiosae
Cantiones. Bez. in 5. Ephesians. 19. Ere Christiana foret si in Ecclesia Cantiones ad
populum intellectas ad usum pietatis permitterent Praesules: Wicelius p. 21.
; so that we may praise God according to the utmost of our abilities.

With these the Moderation of the Church does not only call off her people from
vain, obscene, and impious Songs, which do the Devils work in a sure and
insensible manner, which is to debauch and vitiate the dispositions and natures
of such as use them: but hereby we are furnished also to speak to our selves,
and to admonish one another (as the Apostle exhorts) in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, singing with grace, making melody in our hearts to the Lord
Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
. In which our Church, with the Apostle, does chiefly endeavor to promote the
grace and devotion of the heart, which is most worthy to inspire our praise:
The sincere elevation of the Spirit, being the life of all our Psalmody, even
that half which makes the whole, without which the tongues of men and Angels
(as without Charity) are like a sounding brass, or tinkling Cymbal. Where this
grace of the heart is united with the melody of the Voice, we may entertain our
selves with that joy in God, which is the most refined sort of delight we can
enjoy: We join with the Church Militant on Earth, and the Church Triumphant in
Heaven: We make the best use of that gift of Speech which we have given us to
interpret our thoughts by articulate voice, and stir up our own and others
affections to set forth the high praises of the most Excellent Majesty of God:
whom it becomes us to serve not only with our nature, but our skill.

If we ought to praise God with melody, then a grave and solemn Music, which
is useful to govern the melody, and also increase it, may be useful to the
praise and worship of God: and if persons love what is costly, as well as
useful, in their private Houses, why should any envy themselves or others, some
comely magnificence in the holy service of God? especially when such an
instrument may make our affections as well as our singing, more regular and
composed.

Neither is this help to melody ever the worse, because David used it in the
Holy Service of God: He praised God in the most excellent manner he could, upon
Harp and Organ, and such Musical Instruments as were in use for the honor of
God, and called upon others very earnestly and instantly to praise God with the
same: and it may be noted, that praising God by assistance of Instrumental
Music was more ancient than giving the Law in Sinai, more ancient Exodus 15. 20.
than the Ceremonies of the Tabernacle or the Temple: Wherefore it is rather to
be esteemed the effect of natural Religion, than any Ceremonial Law of Moses;
of which, the Music David used was no part; and being never appointed, was
never abolished; (according to the mistake of the Geneva Notes, and of many
others from them, whereas they might have been taught otherwise from Calvin
Psalmus sit in quo concinendo adhibetur Musicum aliquod Instrumentum p^ater
linguam. Calvin. in Col. 3. 16. and in Cap. 6. Amos v. 5.
himself, in his Comment upon Coloss. 3. 16. Where he expounds a Psalm to be
that, in the singing of which, some Musical Instrument is used beside the
tongue:) And in that David used the help of Instrumental Music (although there
was no express Command of God for so doing) much more among Christians Advers^s
q^osdam ^anaticos qui cantum Ecclesiasticum ^^o Inti^hristiano (...). Vorstius
in Ephesians. 5. 19.
(who are not required to look for particular Commands extraordinary) some
things may be used as circumstances and helps in the worship of God, which are
not required by any express Text of Scripture: So that from the example of
David, we are neither bound up to a strict imitation of every thing he did;
neither does the Church neglect his Example, where the reason remains the same;
but makes use of its Christian Liberty, as it judges most for edification and
good order in the service of God Curandum est ut illa quoque Musica sit digna
templo Dei. Erasmus de amab. Eccl. Concord.
: where may be observed the Moderation of our Church, in that Music is used
not as of necessity, but of choice: And though the Psalmody appointed in our
Church, is that which recites the divine praises as much as may be in the words
of the inspired Psalmists; although [singing of Psalms in meter is no part of
our Liturgy] yet great is the Moderation and condescension of our Church, in
permitting an accommodation in this matter to the most imperfect: as indeed the
whole use also of Music is in condescension to the imperfection of our state,
because our affections are more stirred up by the same means as our voices and
melody are assisted. The Moderation of our Church may be further observed
herein, in that 1. Nothing is ordered to be sung with instrumental Music, but
what is taken out of Holy Scripture Extra Psalm nos V. T. aliquid Poetice
compositum in Ecclesia ca^ere vetatur. Conc. Bracarens. Can. 30.
: 2. All is sung in the Common language: 3. The Music only governs and
moderates the Song, and increases the melody: 4. Our Music and Singing is
such as S. Austin commended at Alexandria, nearer pronouncing than singing:
designed wholly for edification, consistent with gravity Ad gravitatem att^^r.
peratus cantus. Calv. Instir. l. 3.. 20.
and Christian simplicity, answering the designs of Religion; framed not only
for delighting the Ear, but affecting the Heart Vt per ob^ectamenta aurium
animus in affectum pietatis ass^^gat. S. Aug. Confess. 10.
, and raising the Devotion: wherefore as it is in the 49. Injunction of Queen
Eliz. A modest and distinct Song is enjoined Itaque operosam Musi^am quae
figurata dicitur, inf^rri placet. V. Reform. Leg. Eccl. de Div. off. c. 5. V.
Vossium de viribus rythmi.
, such that the sentence of the Hymn may be understood. And for Organs or other
Instruments of Music in Gods worship, they being a help, Mr Baxter's Christian
Direct. p. 412.
partly natural, partly artificial, to the exhilarating the spirits, for the
praise of God; I know no argument to prove them simply unlawful, but what would
prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the tune, and meter, and melody of singing
unlawful.

And now we are discoursing of Melody, the use of Bells Vbi pulchriores and
plures and magis sonorae etiam ad modos Musicos confectae Campanae quam in
Anglia? Spal. contra Suarez. c. 2.. 27.
among us deserves our notice, since the Archbishop of Spalato has taken
particular observation, how choicely we are furnished in our Kingdom; for
Assembling the Congregation, for testimonies of public joy, and for pious
admonition of Christian people, to pray for such as are departing this life;
but among us, they are not used with any superstitions Nec Campanas
superstitiose pulsari vel in vigilia animarum, vel postridie omnium Sanctorum
qui dies non ita pridem geniis mortuorum sacer erat. Lib. quo Canonum, 1571.
: What Cardinal Bellarmine C. Bell. Apologia.
calls only Benediction of Bells, is not after that manner as might make it be
thought they are Christened Centum gravam. 51.
.

. 13. Having observed the Moderation of the Church in its Feasts, the same also
is very true of its Fasts: The keeping up of the Festivals and Fasts in the
Greek Church, has been observed as a chief means of preserving the Christian
Religion from sinking among them De Eccl. Gr. statu hodierno, p. 10. L. Canon.
72. 1603.
: Our Church is neither so remiss as not to give any Counsel or Command for
Fasting, nor suffers any (not Ministers) to appoint solemn Fasts without
authority In observantiis afflictivis videtur providendum de aliqua
Moderatione. Pet. de Aliaco in fasc. re. exp. Jejunium Ecclesiae non debuit
abrogari, licebit moderari. Wicelius in via Regia, p. 374.
, neither is she immoderate in what she injoins, but observes its due measures
as are most conducing to assist Meditation, Prayer, and the exercise of
Repentance, and works of Piety. With Fasting we join Alms, and the
Commemoration of what Christ has done and suffered for us: And as among the
Jews it was usual for them voluntarily to fast on that day yearly they buried
their Parents; so in the Christian Church, on the time that the Bridegroom was
taken away, before the Paschal Festivity, the Custom has been to fast more or
less. Some few times beside are appointed as opportunities to call off the mind
from the blandishments of sense: Mortification and temperance we are enjoined
by our Christianity; and further, it appears to all most reasonable, that there
should be some seasons proper for Fasting and Mourning, which private persons
may appoint to themselves Tantum tibi jejuniorum modum impone quantum f^^re
pot^s^s si^t tibi pura, casta, simplicia, moderata and non superstitiosa
jejunia. S. Hier. de vita cler. ad Nepotian.
; much more the public authority of the Church, for the common good of all. In
which appointed Fasts, let us well observe, that the Precepts of the Church
make no difference of meats, but require such an abstinence as may best subdue
the flesh to the Spirit. There are three ends of Fasting (says the Homily) To
chastise the flesh: That the Spirit may be more fervent to Prayer: and that our
Fast may be a witness with us before God of our humble submission to His
Majesty: So that the difference of meats which we observe, is accidental to the
Commands of the Church, and not at all directly intended in it, but left to
every ones Christian Liberty and choice P^^ temporibus and causis uni^scu^
^sque non pro imperio novae Dis^ipline. Tert. adv. Psych. Cap. 2.
, so long as the purposes of Religion beforementioned be observed, and the
Commands of Governors: Thus the Moderation of the Church leaves us here as she
finds us in our Christian Liberty.

But we are to consider, that it is part of the Christian liberty of public
Governors, in Cases left by God indifferent, therein to Command, especially
for public good: So that it is the Law of the Kingdom only which streightens
and confines our liberty from meats at some particular times. While therefore
it is the Law of the Kingdom, people must have a care of charging the Church
with a superstitious difference of meats, because the Church of Rome usurps
that power: The Statute indeed of Queen Eliz. provides concerning observing
Lent, and also that Lent be not counted a Religious Fast: that is, by the
Statute, None are to affirm, that any eating of fish, or forbearing of flesh,
is of any necessity for saving the soul of man, or that it is the service of
God, otherwise than as other politic Laws are: for as the Homily Homily of
Fasting.
further expounds it: The Laws of Princes are not made to put holiness in one
kind of meat or drink more than another, but are grounded merely on policy: All
subjects therefore are bound in Conscience to keep these Laws: Conscience, I
say, not of the thing which is in its own nature indifferent, but of our
obedience we owe to Gods Minister. According to which sense also must the Laws
be understood, which respect the Wednesday Fast (called by some the Jejunium
Cecilianum Quod putetur Cecilii esse inventum. De Schism. Angl. p. 172.
) If any person should affirm it to be imposed, with an intention to bind the
Conscience, he should be punished like a spreader of false news; that is, to
burden the Conscience with a superstitious difference of meats: or as of
necessity, to bind the Conscience by any Law equivalent to the eternal word of
God: which are the words of the Advertisement of Queen Elizabeth, in her order
of Ceremonies, 1554.

Thus in the Visitation Articles of King Edw. 6. The manner and kind of fasting
in Lent, and other days in the year, is but a mere positive Law, and therefore
all persons having just cause of sickness (...), Can. Ap. 69.
or other necessity, or being licensed by the Kings Majesty, may moderately eat
all kinds of meats without grudge or scruple of Conscience.

So careful is our Church according to the practice of the ancient Church, that
the Fasts be observed with all just and equitable Moderation, lest any fall
into an excess of abstinence (...). S. Basil. M. (...).
: But there is not one word in all the Liturgy, of the choice of meats.

Neither is this positive Law of the Kingdom the worse, but the better, because
it may be obeyed upon a political account; and also secondly, may be rendered
useful to the spiritual ends of Fasting, namely, to bring the body under
subjection to the spirit Vt carnalis appetitus melius compesceretur, etc. quare
universa Ecclesia in hanc jejunii Anti-Paschalis formam cito consentit. D.
Beverigius: de jej. quadrag. l. 3. c. 9.
, which may justly make a Fast, a Religious Fast, as it ought to be; and
thirdly, Upon a natural reason also; the Fast of Lent happens luckily at such a
time of year, namely in Spring, when most Constitutions may allow a greater
Moderation in diet for health's sake: So we have been taught: But in the
morning Lectures against Popery (Sermon. 25. p. 119.) is asserted, that the
Physicians have unanimously taught, we ought least of all to fast in Spring,
but to eat more largely, and that flesh, and abstain from fish; from whence
would be inferred, that those who are for a Spring Fast, are not only
Antichristian, but Anti-Physician; and the note of remark there is, It became
the man of Perdition, not only to destroy our Souls but our bodies also: I
leave it undecided, whose skill is greatest in this matter, those Physicians,
or this Divine: St Chrysostom in his Sermon of Fasting says, If we exactly
search the matter, we shall find, that it is the mother of health, and of the
good habit of the body, and says he, if thou believe not my words, ask the
Sons of the Physicians about it (...).
; and for the time of the year, S. Austin In qua enim part anni congruentius
observatio quadrage-simae constituatu? Ad Januar. Ep. 119.
asks, In what part of the year more congruously can the observation of Lent
be observed? And the ancient Therapeutae are memorable for their fasting in
Spring, not only for the health of their Souls, but their Bodies. The rest let
the Physicians speak.

I only add, that the practice of the Church, in reference to Ember and
Rogation Weeks, is very pious and useful, and attended with great Moderation:
For the putting people in mind of the stated times of Ordination, that by
Fasting and Prayer we may all beseech God for his Benediction on all that are
to be ordained to his Ministry, is without exception.

So the Rogation Week is not appointed to cherish any superstitious fear of
Prodigies, or inauspicious accidents approaching, but carefully to promote the
designs of Piety, Justice, and Charity, in a way far from superstition. For
although some kinds of Processions were put down: Yet Perambulations and
Circuits of the Parish Q. Eliz. Inj. 18, 19. V. Homilies for Rogation Week.
are retained, and at their return they are required to make their Prayers, and
to give God thanks for his benefits: and whereas in their other Processions in
time of Popery, they used to sing unto many of their Saints, Ora pro nobis:
ever since the Injunctions of 1541. V. Collec. of Records, Hist. of Ref. l. 3.
p. 181.
the suffrages which were advised, were rather, Spare us good Lord, Good Lord
deliver us.

Since therefore the Wise man says, There is a time to weep and a time to
laugh, Eccles. 3. 4. Since the Festivals and Fasts in our Church, are enjoined
for such excellent ends, as promoting the service of Qu. Eliz. Injunc.. 20.
Can. 13.
God and religious exercises, and moderated also with all respect, to the
conditions, necessities, and occasions of humane nature and life, with all
cautions against excesses in practice or opinion; it is heartily to be wished,
that all sober and wise Christians would be more careful of their observance:
that we may not lose all good order in this great corruption of the Age, in
which so many inconsiderate people are regardless of holy times: and the
Romanists frequently object, that many Protestants are never satisfied, till
their reformations end in a quite opposite extreme. It is heartily also to be
wished, that those who in their judgments do well allow such appointments, were
not so indifferent in their observance: Happy is he that condemns not himself
in the thing which he allows, Romans 14. 22. And what God said unto Moses and
Aaron, ought to be imprinted on all our minds: because the reason of the
command abides: Speak unto Aaron and his Sons, that they profane not my holy
Name, in those things which they hallow unto me: I am the Lord.

But as for those who will not Fast nor Feast with us, If I may use the words
of our Savior (S. Luke 7. 31.) Whereunto shall I liken the men of this
Generation? They are like unto Children sitting in the market place.

For as when John the Baptist (according to the infinite wisdom of God so
ordering it) appeared in all mortification and self-denial, as was most fit to
prepare the way of the Lord: humble in his habit and behavior, very abstemious
and sparing in his diet and course of Life: that he might bring off the Jews
from expecting a pompous Messiah, which they, newly oppressed by the Tyranny of
the Roman power, were hugely inclined to promise themselves: and after him our
Blessed Lord came more sociable and public in his Conversation, to recommend
his Doctrine and example more advantagiously unto all: Yet the men of that
Generation, the Scribes and Pharisees on one hand, and the gentile Philosophers
on the other, would neither conform themselves nor comply with either
dispensation; refusing to enter into the Temple, by the gate of the Bridegroom,
or by the gate of the Mourners; and instead of Piping or Dancing with their
Fellows, as each reason of the time required; they rather filled the Market
place with loud complaints, or with their own disorders: and instead of
accepting of the greatest wisdom, in accommodation to themselves; they highly
censured, one while John the Baptist for his mortification (as v. 33.) another
while our Blessed Lord for his Freedom (v. 34.) wherefore our Savior compares
them to Children, peevish Children; tossing to and fro, and never well, full
nor fasting. So of the same restless and unsatisfied humor, are the common
excepters against the appointments of our Church.

One while, if we observe the Rules of the Church, in our abstinence and
retirements, and imitate John Baptists severity, thereby to prepare the way of
the Lord: At other Seasons, if we imitate our Blessed Savior in his blameless
liberty, (albeit with such Moderation and Religion as the Church requires): Yet
both the Church for enjoining, and her Sons for observing those Injunctions
cannot escape the dint of their keenest censures. But wisdom is justified of
her Children.

CHAP. X. Of the Moderation of the Church in reference to the Holy Sacraments.
. 1. The Moderation of our Church raises no strife about words relating
thereunto.. 2. Her Moderation in what is asserted of the number of Sacraments..
3. In that her Orders for the Administration of the Sacraments are most
suitable to the ends of their appointments.. 4. In that our Church does not
make the benefit of the Sacraments to depend upon unrequired conditions.

In reference to Holy Baptism,. 1. Our Church does make nothing of the essence
of Baptism, but the use of the invariable Form.. 2. The Moderation of our
Church toward Infants unbaptized. Her sound and charitable judgment of such as
die after Baptism.. 3. In some necessary cautions referring to the
administration of Baptism.. 4. Referring also to the susceptors.. 5. In what is
required of them who administer that Sacrament.

In reference to the Holy Supper of our Lord,. 1. The same is with us
celebrated in both kinds.. 2. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation is rejected by
our Church: not running to the other extreme of denying a real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament.. 3. The Moderation of our Church in complying with the
necessity of the Age: but not with the Church of Rome and others, who require
their people to communicate not so much as thrice a year.. 4. Participation of
the Holy Supper required after Confirmation, but not after the rigid
Examinations of some, or the auricular Confessions of others: Neither is it
made a private banquet.. 5. In our Church there is not to be a Communication of
the Eucharist without Communicants: The Moderation of the Church in other
Rubricks referring to the Holy Communion.

. 1. OUR Church (according to that Moderation in which she excels) raises no
needless strife or controversy about words or names Saepe a. Eccl. Angl.
professa est, de verbo nullam litem se moturam, modo pristina sides sit
restituta. Rex Jac. ad C. Perr.
(particularly relating to the Holy Sacraments.) The name of Sacraments (says
the Homily Homily of Com. Pr. and Sacram.
) may in general acception be attributed to any thing whereby a holy thing is
signified: thus (as Chilingworth Chilingw. Pref.. 24.
notes) we use the names of Priest and Altar, and yet believe neither the
corporal presence, nor any proper propitiatory Sacrifice: Yea, so exceeding
moderate and prudent was the Church, that in the 7. Canon 1640. it abundantly
cautions, lest those words be used otherwise than in a metaphorical and
improper attribution In Liturgia Anglicana habemus quidem Sacrificii nomen,
offerendi verbum, etiam hostiae mentionem, sed nihil magis adversatur Missatico
sacrificio quam tota haec oration. Rivet. Gro. discuss. (...). p. 220.
: Notwithstanding all these just and careful explications, why should our
Church for the use of those words, be traduced as relishing of Popery, any more
than for favoring the Sabbatarian Doctrine, because in the 70. Canon in
English, the word Sabbath Day is used for the Lords day (and dies dominicus it
is in the Latin Canons:) in the Homily also of the time and place of Prayer,
it is called Sabbath day, that is the Sunday, the Holy day of rest: and in King
Henr. 8. Act of abrogation of certain days, it is said, since the Sabbath day
was ordained for man's rest: and in Qu. Eliz. Injunctions, the same word is (as
in the rest) used in a general accommodation to the improper use of the vulgar:
which clauses mentioned are known to have been before this word (among some
others) has been set apart as one of the Shiboleths of a party: Whereas,
rather the Moderation of the Church should be taken notice of, which insists
not so much on the nicety of the word, as on the integrity of its sense.

. 2. Our Church receives none as proper Sacraments (generally necessary to
salvation) but such as are so: Which said expression contains a great deal of
Moderation (notwithstanding it has been much cavill'd at by some of rigid
principles) for our Church does no where assert the receiving so much as the
true Sacraments to be always to every one particularly and absolutely necessary
to Salvation. Our Church (says Bishop Branthal To M. Militier
) receives not the Septenary number of Sacraments, being never so much as
mentioned in any Scripture, or Council, or Creed, or Father, or ancient Author,
first devised by Peter Lombard, 1439. First Decreed by Eugenius the 4th 1528.
First confirmed in the Provincial Council of Senes, 1547. and after in the
Council of Trent. The word Sacrament is taken largely, and then washing the
Disciples feet is called a Sacrament, then the sprinkling of ashes on a
Christians head is called a Sacrament, then there are God knows how many
Sacraments more than 7. Or else it is taken for a visible sign instituted by
Christ, to convey and confirm invisible grace, to all such partakers thereof,
as do not set a bar against themselves, according to the analogy between the
sign, or the thing signified: and in this sense, the proper and the certain
Sacraments of the Christian Church, common to all, or in the words of the
Church, generally necessary to Salvation, are but two, Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord: more than these S. Ambrose writes not of in his Book (de
Sacramentis) because he did not know them. And here it may not be improper to
add those memorable words of S. Austin S. Aug. Ep. ad Januar. 118.
which were recited in the Articles of Religion, 1552. published by King Edw.
6. and are cited also in our Homily of Sacraments: Our Lord Jesus Christ has
knit together a Company of new people, that is, Christians, with Sacraments
most few in number, most easy to be kept, most excellent in signification, as
are Baptism and the Lords Supper: beside which two Sacraments of the New
Testament, our Church appoints no other way of solemn engagement to
Christianity.

. 3. The Holy Sacraments among us are administered in such order prescribed as
is suitable to the end of their appointment: Our Church most strictly holding
to what is of Divine Institution, and adding nothing which is humane to the
Sacraments themselves: nevertheless, the Prayers, and Blessings, and
Exhortations, and what is enjoined, promote the true design of the
administration: In which the Moderation of our Church holds a just mean between
those who deny the Church any use of its Christian Liberty, and between the
intolerable excesses of the Church of Rome: yet so very moderate is our Church
in this particular, that the Lutheran Churches cannot compare themselves with
her for Moderation: for they retain Exorcism and other Ceremonies in use with
their Sacraments; beside their peculiar doctrines and usages referring to the
Holy Supper.

. 4. Our Church does not make the efficacy of the Sacraments to depend upon the
bare administration, whether the mind be well prepared or no: I dare not say
that most Romanists generally mean so by the Opus Operatum in the Council of
Trent Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 8.
, but the Explanations of several come to no less.

In our Church, although the due qualification of the receiver be required, and
the Authority of him who administers: yet the effect of the Sacraments is not
made to rely upon the present intention C. Tr. Sess. 7. Can. 11.
of the Minister, or his own inherent worthiness: The Sacraments being
effectual by virtue of Christ's Institution and promise, though they are
ministered by evil men Article of Rel. 26.
.

More particularly in reference to the Sacrament of Holy Baptism.

. 1. The Moderation of our Church judges nothing to be of the Essence of that
Sacrament, but the invariable form of Baptism: Neither the sign of the Cross
(Canon 30.) nor any words, Prayers, or usages: nor the intention of the
Minister: neither is the Consecration of Water used in our Church as of
necessity, but in reverence to the Sacrament.

. 2. Such is the Moderation of our Church, it does not censure, nor pass any
judgment on the condition of Infants who die unbaptized; however their
condition be worse: so in our Subscription for University Preachers at
Cambidge, We testify that we will not enter into judgment of such as die
without Baptism, when it cannot conveniently be used: for according to the good
pleasure of God, his extraordinary help is often found, when the help of man
does fail: (and the great danger justly supposed by us, is upon the contempt of
Gods Ordinance, and Holy Institution: but when the failure is of unavoidable
necessity, our Church charitably teaches us to refer such to the sure mercies
of God:) Bishop Bramhals Discourse of Persons dying before Baptism, fol. p. 981.
which makes more strongly against the Romish Limbus Infantum.

But of Infants who are baptized, and die before the Commission of actual sin,
our Church does pass a judgment of Charity for the comfort of Christian
Parents, and for the due honor of the Divine Sacraments, which is this:
Articl. 27. Rubric after Bapt. Chapter Cat. Homily of Salv. 1 Part. Libertas
Ecclesiastica, l. 1. chapter 5.
It is certain by Gods word that Children which are baptized before they commit
actual sin are undoubtedly saved.

. 3. Our Church according to great Moderation and care does caution that
dipping or immersion, be very discreetly and warily performed: and because of
the Clime, our Church does admit of pouring or sprinkling water upon the Child.
(See the Rubric immediately before Baptism) And although public Baptism be
expressly required where it can be had, yet in case of necessity, our Church
does moderately admit of private Baptism Canon. 69. 1603.
, in any decent place and time Sedulo legibus Eccl. provisum est, ut quovis
tempore and loco baptizandi infantes esset fa^ultas. Rex Jac. ad C. P.
: for which there is a special Office: Requiring nevertheless, that people be
admonished, that it be not done but upon great cause and necessity compelling:
and that it is expedient that the Child be brought to the Church: whereas the
Directory did forbid very uncharitably all private Baptisms: notwithstanding
most of its followers now adays, admit only private Baptisms. Nor can I see
(says Bishop Sparrow Rationale, p. 302.
) what can be reasonably objected against this tender and motherly love of the
Church to her Children, who chooses rather to omit solemnities than hazard
Souls. Which indulgence of her cannot be interpreted any irreverence or
contempt of that venerable Sacrament, but a yielding to a just necessity.

Yea, such is the Moderation of our Church, as she has made sundry alterations
in accommodation to the time, so she has when occasion required, made some
additions in its Offices: particularly, because of the growth of Anabaptism,
through the prevailing licentiousness of the times, our Church V. Preface to
the Liturgy, and the Office of Bapti^m, etc.
has compiled a peculiar Office for Baptizing such as are of riper years,
which is also useful for the baptizing of Natives in our Plantations, and
others converted to the Faith. Wherein the care of the Church is also to be
noted in requiring Sponsors, whom the Office calls their chosen Witnesses, who
are to call upon the persons baptized, to use all diligence to be rightly
instructed, etc. So that no burden lies upon the Sureties, but what may be
reasonably complied with: Neither is the use of Sureties, nor their promise in
the name of the persons baptized, made by our Church any necessary condition of
Baptism.

. 4. In our Church, those who are not secular persons, are not forbid to be
Godfathers (as in the Church of Rome V. Rituale To. de Bapt.
) nor are any susceptors supposed to contract any affinity, as that such an
undertaking should hinder marriage between the Sponsors and the persons
baptized (if otherwise it be lawful.)

. 5. Although in our first Rubricks, in Case of necessity, great liberty was
allowed for baptizing, when a Minister could not be at hand: yet the said
Permission, Dr Abbot in his Prelections 1598. V. Archbishop Whitgift, c. T. C.
tract. 9. c. 3.
assures us, was only in accommodation to the time; and that the Governors of
the Church did design from the first, the reformation thereof by little and
little: which right administration of this Sacrament is at length vindicated to
the Ministers of Gods Church: without that wondrous number of Ceremonies (in
Exorcism, Exsufflation, use of salt spittle, inunction, etc.) in the Church of
Rome required; unless in danger of dying, and then the Church of Rome allows
any Woman, or Lay Person, or Heathen, or Heretic, to baptize the Infant (in
some cases before it be born Si Infans ex utero caput emiserit baptiz^tur in
capite. V. Rituale To. de Bapt.
) from all which instances may be observed the just Moderation of our Church
between the extreme Sects of the Papists and the Anabaptists.

In reference to the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.

. 1. The Moderation of the Church appears, in that the same is reverently
celebrated in both kinds, both according to the ancient practice of the Church
for 1300. years, and according to the express command of our Lord to his
Disciples, Matt. 26. 27. Drink ye all of this Cup, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 17. V. Vulg.
Transl.
although (with a Proviso to the contrary notwithstanding Licet Christus
Dominus sub utraque specie etc. Hoc non obstante. Syn. Constantiense, Can. 13.
) the Church of Rome remands the Cup from the Laity.

Now for a specimen and admirable sample of the Moderation of the Roman Church:
(At the instance of some Princes for the Concession of the Cup): the Council of
Trent sets forth a Test, which is called the conditions on which the use of the
Cup is granted V. Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. V. Chemn. Exam. de concess. Call.
, namely, That such as would Communicate in both kinds, do in all other
matters, referring to that Sacrament, and all the other five Sacraments, (also
in every thing referring to Faith, and Doctrine, and Rites) agree in heart and
confession of mouth with all things received in the Roman Church, and all the
decrees of that Council made or to be made: exhibiting all duty to the Pope as
the universal Bishop of the Church, etc. Such gainful and advantageous bargains
will they be sure to make for themselves, and the keeping up their usurpations,
before they will allow any concession, or mitigate any extreme rigor, in their
most unwarrantable practices, or they will not fail to annex such conditions as
shall render their concessions ineffectual.

. 2. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which the Church of Rome receives as
an Article of Faith, absolutely and simply necessary to Salvation, and
propounds it to be received by all under a terrible Anathema Conc. Trid. Sess.
13. Can. 2.
, is by our Church plainly denied, as contrary both to Holy Scriptures, and all
testimonies of venerable antiquity; and as a doctrine liable to grievous
consequences V. Hist. Transubst. a Jo. Dunelmensi.
: which judgment of our Church may appear to them that peruse our Articles (28,
29.) Order of Communion, Rubricks, Homilies; several Statutes of the Land:
particularly the late Statute, wherein is provided, that all that are in
office, do declare, that they do believe, that there is not any
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in the Elements of
Bread and Wine; at or after the Consecration thereof by any person whatsoever:
yet such is the accurate Moderation of the Church of England, in avoiding one
error, it runs not into other extremes; for in the Office of the Holy
Communion, in the Church Catechism, in the Apology for the Church of England,
is asserted, the real presence Archbishop Usher's Sermon. 18 Febr. 1620.
of Christ in the Sacrament, according to Scripture, and the judgment Patres
dehortantur a quaestione (...)* Hac pia Moderatione si Rex and Eccl. Angl.
utuntur, quae invidia? R. Jac. ad C. Per.
of the Church of God: but the particular mode and manner thereof (any
otherwise than that it is spiritual, mystical, and sacramental) the Church of
England, according to the same Rule and practice of the Catholic Church, does
not too curiously pry into or search. (See Chapter 5.. 6.)

. 3. As the Church of England does earnestly and passionately invite, and
expostulates with those of her Communion to frequent the Holy Sacrament: as in
the exhortations before the Holy Communion; in the Conclusion of the Homily of
the place and time of Prayer: and in Q. Eliz. Articles for Doctrine and
Preaching, all Ministers are required to excite the people to often and devout
receiving the Holy Communion V. Librum quorundam Canonum 1571. Jam vero
singulis mensibus coenam celebrari maxim nobis placeret. Calvin. Ep. p. 452.
; and in Colleges and Collegiate Churches, the Holy Communion is required to be
administered every Sunday, unless there be reasonable cause to the contrary V.
Rubr. 4. after H. C. Canon. 23. V. Rubr. 8. after H. C. Canon. 21. 1003. Rubr.
8. after H. C.
: and on the first or second Sunday of every month: So also the Church of
England does lay its general Command, according to great Moderation, in
requiring every one thrice at least every year to Communicate Qui in nataii D.
Paschate and Pentecosle non Communicant, Catholici non credantur. Conc. Agath.
Can. 18.
: well tempering her Injunction, in accommodation to the necessity of the Age,
between the earnest practice of devotion which was in the Primitive Church
Quando Domini nostri adhuc calebat cruor, and fervebat recens in credentibus
fides. S. Hieron. ad Demetr. Ep. 8.
(when they commonly Communicated at least every Lords Day and Festival:) and
between the remissness of the Church of Rome Dolemus tantam Christianorum
incuriam ut semel tantum in anno sumant, etc. Council. Rhem. 1583.
, which expressly requires all of her Communion, to celebrate but once every
Year In Pentecoste rarior est Communio; and ideo fortasse Concilium Tridentinum
hoc tempore nuptias solennes fieri permisit. C. Bellarm. de Matrim. Sacram. l.
1. c. 31.
, and the followers of the Directory, who for many years together lamentably
neglected the administration and participation of the Eucharist V. Coena q.
(...). V. S. Eccl. Angl. Vindic. c. 3.
as (beside our own memory) Mr Prin often testifies: and the History of the
Times soon after the Reformation, tell us of some who from adoring the Elements
fell to contemn them, wherefore there issued out a Proclamation Fuller's Eccl.
His. P. 387.
concerning the irreverent talking of the Sacrament.

. 4. As our Church offers the Holy Eucharist only to those who have given due
testimony of their knowledge and Christian belief, in having been confirmed by
the Bishop V. Rubr. after Confirm. Injunctions of King Edw. 6. Canon 29.
: So it requires that none be admitted Godfathers or Godmothers, at Christening
or Confirmation, but such as have received the Holy Communion. Yet because S.
Paul remits every particular Christian to a Self-examination, without any
order, either to Minister or Lay-Elder, to exclude any from the Holy Communion,
upon their Examination: therefore the Moderation of our Church is such, it does
not depress adult Christians below the order of persons first to be Catechized,
requiring them to such rigid Examinations as have been sometime used (like the
auricular Confessions of the Romanists:) among which Examiners of the adult
Professors, the being of a party has been too often the note of preparation
for their Church Communion: Neither does our most moderate Church, judge any
incapable of the Sacraments, whom she judges not unworthy of her Communion
Homily of the Sacrament.
: We must take heed, says the Homily, lest of the Memory it be made a
Sacrifice: lest of a Communion it be made a private eating. Wherefore as the
redemption of our Lord is offered to all that do not wilfully reject so great
grace, so is the Holy Communion in our Church, to all that are not unfit to
receive it: And such as are, the Church is not wanting to admonish and forewarn
V. Exhorta. and Admon. before the H. C.
; and takes all due care to provide against their intrusion: (as the general
corruption of mankind now does admit) according to the Rubric and Canon Canon
26.
, concerning Notorious Offenders: On which Bishop Andrews his note was, Our Law
will not suffer the Minister to judge any man a notorious offender, but him who
is so convinced by some legal sentence.

. 5. Our Church of England does not admit any private Masses Conc. Trid. Sess.
22. Can. 8. 39 Artic. 31. Hom. of Sacr.
, which in the Church of Rome are multiplied, without Communicants, out of
which they suck no small advantage Minuatur ingens turba quotidie missantium
propter saginandum aqualiculum duntaxat. Wicelii Meth. Concord. c. 5.
; whereas our Church in great Moderation appoints the Sacraments to be freely
administered, without any charge for their ministration, and also at every
Celebration there is required a convenient number of Communicants 2d Rubr.
after H. C. Rubr. before Com. for sick. Last Rubr. after H. Com. for the sick.
, as in the Communion for the sick 2d Rubr. after the H. C. for the sick. Canon
71. 1603.
, there are always to be three or two at the least; except in case of
contagion: And in case that those who sincerely desire to Communicate are
lawfully hindered; the Moderation and wisdom of our Church has prescribed a
most pious instruction for the sick person, such as may at once most
exceedingly satisfy and comfort.

CHAP. XI. Of the Moderation of the Church in reference to other Rites and
Usages.
. 1. The Moderation of the Church in its Judgment and use of Confirmation.

. 2. Concerning Matrimony, allowing her Clergy to marry: affording opportunity
of voluntary celibacy in our Universities, according to a commendable
moderation. Undue degrees of Marriages, and some particular Times forbid, etc.

. 3. In reference to Holy Orders. 1. The Moderation of the Church in her
Consecrating Ministers. 2. In taking care to have them be as they ought to be,
both before and after Ordination, with good effect. 3. Yet if not so great as
is desired, why the Church ought not to be accused. 4. In retaining such Orders
of Ministers in the Church as are Primitive. 5. The Moderate Judgment of the
Church concerning such as have been ordained in the Church of Rome, and
elsewhere. 6. Our Church endeavors to preserve all due regard to whatever is
consecrated to God. 7. The Power of the Keys asserted in our Church with due
moderation.

. 4. Of Penance. 1. The Moderation of our Church, between those who slight
Penance, and those who explain it extravagantly. 2. The Confession of our
Church which is required, is suitable to the design of Repentance. 3. The Seal
of Confession in our Church is as sacred as it ought to be. 4. The use of
External Penance in our Church, according to due Moderation. 5. The use of
Absolution in our Church maintained according to a just temper.

. 5. For Visitation of the Sick. 1. The worthy care of the Church therein, and
some Instances of its Moderation referring thereunto. 2. Our Churches care for
preparing those who are of her Communion for Death, without extreme Unction in
use in the Church of Rome. 3. Many Instances of the Moderation of the Church,
referring to the Burial of the Dead.

. 1. OUr Church in its judgment and use of Confirmation, holds a just
Moderation, between those who reject the use of it, and others who make it a
proper Conc. Tri. Sess. 7. Can. 1. de Confir.
Sacrament: It being received as a holy and useful Rite perpetually expedient,
tho not of necessity to V. Instit. of a Christian Man.
Salvation: With which our Church does not join Chrism or Unction; as in
Baptism also we use not Oil, (there being no mention of either in Scripture, or
in Primitive Antiquity for such purposes).

Neither is the baptized Person brought Hic mos fuit ut Christianorum
puert-coram Episcopo sisterentur Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 19 4. Laudo: and
restitutam in purum usum velim. ib. V. Bez. in Hebr. c. 6.
to Confirmation, till every such a one be of competent years of understanding,
solemnly to take upon him the obligation entered into in Baptism; which being
duly performed, the Bishop does impose his Hands on every of them, with Prayer
and Blessing: Which is the order of our Church, for the honor and dignity of
Episcopacy, according to primitive and ancient Qui in Ecclesiis baptizantur
praeposito Ecclesiae offeruntur. S. Cypr. ad Jovin.
practice: Although such is the moderation of our Church, that its Presbyters are
taken into some society with the Bishop generally in those Ministeries.

Neither is any in our Professio baptizatorum infantium per susceptores facta,
in puberibus una congregatis solemni ritis renovetur. VVicelii Meth. Concord.
c. 4. Canon. 60. and 61. 1603.
Church to be admitted to the Holy Communion until such time as they are
confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be confirmed: So wisely moderate is our
Church to accept of a true preparation, and sincere desire of Confirmation,
when in some cases it cannot be had, either through the lamentable neglect of
those who ought to Si in hoc E^iscoporum negligentia peccatum est hactenus,
negligentia damnetur, n^n id quod per se bonum est. VVicelii Meth. Concord. c.
8.
perform it, or those who should desire it be performed: It was a discipline of
the Helvetians to forbid the Bannes of Marriage to such as could not give a
good account of their Catechism: which soon made all who had a mind to
Marriage, to be very diligent in learning their Lessons by heart: And by a
Canon of a Conc. Bituricens. 1584.
Council in France, None were to be admitted to the Eucharist or Nec enim alia
adversus foediss. ignorantiam via restabat, nisi Maritalis tori sit is in
subsidium Vocaretur. Hammondus de Confirm. c. 2.. 11.
Matrimony, but such who had been Confirmed: The same, if well looked into, is
indeed a Canon also of our A Book of certain Canons. 1571.
English Church. Especially they shall warn young Folks, not only Men, but also
Women, that it is provided by the Laws, That none of them may either receive
the Holy Communion, or be married, or undertake for a Child in Baptism, except
they before have learned the Principles of Christian Religion, and can fitly
and aptly answer to all the parts of the Catechism.

Neither is this Rite among us degenerated into a practice of mere Gain and
Covetousness, as Spalatensis complained of the Church of De Rep. Eccl. l. 5. c.
12.
Rome: (where Confirmation with Chrism is made such a Sacrament as they think
confers a greater Grace than the true Sacrament of V. Chem. Exam. de Confirm.
p. 69.
Baptism:) But the Moderation of the Church has restored the Ancient Primitive
Rite of Imposition of Hands, which for many hundred years has been extruded
from the Romish Confirmation by other superstitious Libertas Eccles. l. 2. c.
4.. 3.
Ceremonies.

. 2. The Moderation of the Church of England, in what relates to Marriage,
chiefly appears in that it esteems Matrimony honorable in Dei Ordinationem
nulla lex humana, nullum votum. potest tollere. Conf. Aug.
all; and particularly also in Priests and Ministers of the Church: and to make
Vows of perpetual Virginity, our Church does rightly judge there is no
Obligation: Our 32 Article thus declares; Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not
commanded by God's Law, either to vow the state of single Life, or to abstain
from Marriage; therefore it is lawful also for them, as for all other Christian
Men to marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve
better to Godliness. To the same purpose is the Injunction of Q. Elizah. 1559.
In all which our Church follows the Judgment and Practice of the Apostles
Christus Apostolos non Virgins eleg^t nisi unicum Joannem. Spalatens. l. 2. c.
10.
who were most of them married Men, as S. Ignatius (...). S. Ign. Ep. ad Philad.
and S. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. Hom. in Tit. (a) (...) Can. 5. Apost. V. Zoran.
and Balsam.
and other of the Ancients deliver: And also the Apostolical (a) Canons, and
sundry General Councils of greatest Authority. Very many of the Roman Communion
also having largely confessed the same. Tho the contrary was introduced by the
worst of Popes, (Hildebrand Hoc Insuave jugum nostris imponere Christus Nolu^^:
is it ^d onus quod adhuc quam -- plurima monstrae Fecit, ab a^daei dicunt pietate
repertum. Mantuan l. 1.
) thereby to secure the worldly Interest of the Roman See, as if, for the good
of the Church, Man could be wiser than God: Wherefore nothing has been more
lamentably notorious than the horrid impurities and tumults Quare ex nimis
rigida exactione, etc. gravissima scandala. Cassand. de Caelib. S ^^rd.
which the different imposition has caused in sundry places, particularly in
this Realm, (in and soon after the times of Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury.)

And to make the Moderation of our Church the more confessed in this Matter; It
is manifest that what was anciently commendable in the Monastic S. Augustini
tempore Monasteria ^rant libera Collegia: postea corrupta disciplina ubique
addita sunt vota caeteraeque impiae. Opiniones. Conf. August.
Life, may conveniently be practiced, by such a voluntary and useful celibacy
as may be enjoyed in either of our famous Universities in this Kingdom.

. 2. The degrees of forbidden Marriages are determined by the Ecclesiastical
Laws of England according to an Excellent V. Articles of Q. Eliz. 1564 V. Libr.
quoque Canonum. Can. 99. 1603.
Moderation: As appears from the Table of Matthew Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury 1563. confirmed by sundry Statutes and Acts of Parliament, and by
the 99 Canon 1603. commanded to be set up in our Churches. Wherein the
forbidden degrees are interpreted according to such just Rules as are common to
both Sexes equally.

2. The same effect (for making any degrees unlawful) is attributed to Affinity
as to Consanguinity: because the Husband and Wife are one flesh, Genesis 2. 24.

Neither is any degree forbid by our Canon, but what was forbid in the 18th and
20th Chapters of Leviticus, by the Law of God: either in express terms, or
(which is all one) by diverse necessary Consequences, from Likeness, Parity, or
Majority of Reason: The same was provided by that Clause of the Statute, 32.
Hen. 8. cap. 38. which is chiefly insisted on by way of Exception. Viz.

That no reservation or prohibition, God's Law except, shall trouble or impeach
any Marriage without the Levitical Degrees: Which plainly imports, that all
Marriages within the Levitical Degrees, shall be troubled and V. Table of
Incestuous Marriages. Printed 1677/8.
impeached, tho there were no exception against them by any other Law of God.

Even within these degrees of incestuous Marriages, the Bishop of Rome takes
upon him to dispense, to the great enlargement of his Authority and V. Reform.
Leg. Eccl. de gradibus in Matri. prohib. c. 3. etc. 7.
Revenue: and to make way for his Dispensations, he remits where God has
confined, and binds up where God has enlarged, making such Spiritual
Cognations V. Centum gravamina Germ.
to the hinderance of Marriage, as have no foundation in Holy Scripture or
Reason: as between the Susceptors in Baptism and Confirmation, and the Persons
they answer for: Not to aggravate the severity of the Canon in the Council of
Conc. Trid. Sess. Can. 7. Neque n. usque adeo debet integra persona crimine
alieno pr^mi.
Trent, toward the Innocent Person after divorce in case of Reform. Log. Eccl.
de Adulteriis and Divortiis, c. 5.
Adultery.

. 3. The prohibited Times of Marriage are also with much liberty declared: and
the Dispensations also from the general Rule, are with great Moderation
allowed: There is also a particular Canon, whereby a Moderation of those
Licenses is provided, and the Celebration of Matrimony is indulged, without the
three days publishing of Can 62, 63, and 101. 1603. Has cautionis leges non
improbamus. Altar Damasc p. 88
the Bannes.

. 4. Matrimony, tho it be owned a Rite, in which the Civil Societies of Men are
naturally interested; yet because it is for the supply of the Church, as well
as for enlarging the Civil Polities of Men, the solemnity of Marriage is only
to be performed by the Ministers of God's Church Ipsum conjugium benedictione
sacerdotali sanctificari oporteat. S. Ambros. Ep. 70.
(among us) both for the more venerable Solemnity, and for the blessing of the
Church, as has been the constant practice of the Church, and of Sponsus and
sponsa cum benedicendi sunt a sacerdote offerantur in Ecclesia. Conc. Carthag.
4. c. 13.
Christian Kingdoms: and L'estrange (in the Alliance of Divine Offices) highly
extols the admirable Piety and Wisdom of our Church in appointing the Wife to
be received from the hand of the Priest. The Minister (says the Rubric)
receiving the Woman at her Fathers or Friends hand, shall cause, etc. which
excellent mode he thinks proper to signify how a good Wife is from the Lord. In
all Reformed Churches (says D. Durell Sect. 2.. 57.
) Matrimony is celebrated in the public Congregation, and by the Minister.

. 3. In reference to Holy Orders, our Church observes an excellent Moderation.

1. Our Church always maintains a separate visible Order of Men, as not only
comely and convenient, but necessary for the Function of the Ministry. It is not
lawful (says the 32 Article) for any Man to take upon him the Office of public
preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called and sent to execute the same, etc.

2. We must take notice of the excellent design of our Church (which is in a
high measure attained) to have such Persons ordered and separated for that
Office, who are duly qualified for their Learning, Piety, and sound Doctrine:
The excellent design, and extraordinary care of the Church, appears in her wise
and prudent Canons in that behalf, and the strict enquities and admonitions of
the Church, of which her Ordinals most particularly give an account. After
their Ordination also, Of the Exemplary behavior of the Clergy, our Church
has taken all the care that may be: see we for instance that excellent Canon.

No Ecclesiastical Person shall at any Canon. 75.
time, other than for their honest necessities, resort to any Taverns or
Alehouses, neither shall they board or lodge in any such places: Furthermore,
they shall not give themselves to any base or servile labor, or to drinking or
riot, spending their time idly by day or by night, playing at Dice, Cards, or
Tables, or any other unlawful Game; but at all times convenient they shall hear
or read somewhat of Holy Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some other
honest study or exercise, always doing the things which appertain to honesty,
and endeavoring to profit the Church of God, having always in mind, that they
ought to excel all others in purity of Life, and should be examples to the
People to live well and Christianly, under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to
be inflicted with Quomodo inquiritur in excessus and defectus Ministrorum
Verbi. V. de Polit. Eccl. Anglic. c. 6. p. 322.
severity, according to the quality of their Offenses, whether it be to
suspension, deprivation, deposition, or other greater censures, as is the
demerit. To the same purpose have been sundry Articles, and Injunctions, and
Laws of the Land, and Rules of the Church V. Librum 9. Canonum: V. Articulos
pro clero. Canon. 33, 34, 35. 1603. 39 Article 26.
very express. At the Ordination of Ministers, it is asked them, Whether they
will be diligent to frame and fashion themselves and their Families according
to the Doctrine of Christ, and to make both themselves and them, as much as in
them lies, wholesome Examples and Spectacles to the Flock of Christ. Lastly; All
Promotions of the Church are distributed so equally, that any Son of a Layman
in the Kingdom otherwise fitted, is capable of the highest Eminence in the
Church. In her Canons, restraint is made of Plurality of Benefices, (Canon V.
Articulos proclero.
41.) with indulgence only in cases extraordinary; requiring * also convenient
V. Bishop Sparrows Collections.
residence and hospitality, and every one's discharge of their Functions. In
case of lawful absence, that a just and conscientious supply be provided:
Always letting the People see, that they do not seek their own Profit,
Promotion, or Advantage, more than the profit of the V. K. Ed. 6. Injunction.
Souls they have under their Cure, or the Glory of God.

Of the Effects of these Orders, if any enquire: Beside the judgments of other
Churches, (that the Clergy may not be the only Judges in this case) such may
consider what the great Verulam has witnessed; That scarce any Church since
the Primitive Times, has yielded in like manner of years, a greater number of
famous Writers, excellent Preachers, grave Governors, and the most and
chiefest of them of holy and good Life. And the famous University of Oxford, in
answer to the Petition of the N. C. 1603. replied:

To stop the Mouths of those that traduce us for a dumb Idol-Ministry, There
are at this day more Learne^ Men in this Kingdom, than are to be found in all
Europe: Which must not be imputed for Vanity, since the Apostle, when his
Ministry was reproached, defended his godly boasting. Which premised, Bishop
Hall may be allowed to speak for the Clergy of the Church of England; What
Christian Church under Heaven (says he) in so short a time, yielded so many
glorious Lights of the Gospel, so many able and prevalent Adversaries of Schism
and Antichristianism; so many eminent Authors of learned Works, which shall
out-bid time it self? Let Envy grind her teeth, and eat her heart; The memory
of these worthy Prelates shall ever be sweet and blessed.

3. If all this care of the Church has not its absolute and entire effect,
(which when it has not, is much lamented) according to the sincere desire and
intent of the Church: As also Nec hac Culpae est Christiani nominis, si
simulator religionis in vitio sit. S. Hier. Ep. 4.
that the Laws of Christ have not that effect upon all Christians as they
ought. Our Church in the mean while must be acquitted, while according to the
condition of the things, she has used her best care and endeavor; and if the
practices of Men always cannot, her Laws must bear her out Delictum personae in
detrimentum Ecclesia non debet redundare. Reg Ju.
. Wherefore very reasonable was the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, That for
defaults which people find in Ecclesiastical Persons, They are not to detain
their Dues,. 15. 1559
to requite one wrong with another, but to call for reformation thereof at
their Ordinaries and other Superiors; who upon complaint, and due proof
thereof, shall reform the same accordingly. Now of thousands who are apt to
complain of the Clergy, how few take the right course to rectify any thing? If
any are vicious among us, we protest against their practices, and are Advocates
for none in what is evil; but leave them to answer for themselves before proper
Judges.

Being sure it would be a happy World, if right Principles in the
understanding, and a conformable practice could always go together: but it is
an ordinary practice, whose Doctrine they cannot confute, their Life endeavor
to bring into hatred Cum Viderint Doctrinam nostram non posse recte accusari,
malu^run^ in mores nostros in vehere. Apol. Eccl. Angl. 53.
.

It may be added, According to an excellent Moderation are also the Ages
appointed of them who are to enter into holy Orders V. Preface to the Ordinal.
Canon 33. Artic. proclero.
.

. 3. Our Church maintains and preserves those Orders of Ministers in the
Church, (Bishops, Priests, Deacons) 39. Articl. 36.
which are truly Primitive: without the additional Train which the Church of
Rome makes necessary, (even seven kind of Orders suitable to their number of
Sacraments) and with much the like necessity, that the followers of the Geneva
Government appoint their Lay Elders.

The power of Orders consists partly in preaching the Word, and other Offices
of Public Worship, common to Bishops, with other Ministers; partly in ordaining
Priests and Deacons, admitting them to particular Cures, and other things of
that nature proper to them alone. The Power of Jurisdiction is either internal,
in retaining and remitting sins (in the Hoc male habet quosdam immoderatiores,
reddi jurisdectionem, restitui politiam Ecclesiasticam. Ph. Melanct. ad Camera.
Court of Conscience) common to them also, (for the substance of the Authority,
tho with some difference in the Degree) with other Of Episcopacy and Regal
Power. Bishop Sanderson, p. 33, 34.
Ministers. Or External, for the outward Government of the Church in some parts
thereof peculiar to them alone. The Government of the Church (according to
these Orders) in its own Constitution, has an excellent temper, between an
Ecclesiastical Monarchy (which the Church of Rome asserts, in making it self
the Mother and Mistress of other Churches, and its Bishop Supreme Monarch over
all the Bishops and Churches:) and between such Democracy and Populacy as is
held in the Independent and Presbyterian parity. Reti^emu^ ex singulis
regiminibus exquisitam temperaturam. J. A. Comenius Moravus de ord. Eccl. apud
Bohemos.


In our Government by Bishops succeeding the Apostles (which also was
Aristocratical, they having all a fullness of Order and Power among themselves)
Omnes Episcopi ejusdem meriti, ejusdem sacerdotii. S. Hier. ad Evagr.
a succession of Pastors our Church does not refuse, because derived for a
time in the same Chanel with the Roman Bishops: After the same manner (says
Bishop Jewel) we are chosen, invested, confirmed, admitted: if they were
deceived in any thing, we succeeded in their Place, not in their Error.

Of the real Moderation of our Episcopacy, Mounsieur Amyrald may speak for us,
because of many he may more readily be heard: The Bishops of the Amyraldi
Irenic. p. 196.
Church of England, because they neither acknowledge the Authority of the Roman
Pontif, nor do they assume to themselves any right or power over the
Consciences of Men, nor over the Truth of Christ, and in all other things they
most earnestly maintain the same Doctrine with us against the Errors of the
Papists, Cavendum ne Scyllae fuga, in Carybdi incidamus: Neve rigor nimius and
Vatinianum in Episcopos odium, eo imprudentes adigat ut veters Ecclesiae dicam
scribanius. Sam. Bochart. Ep. 8. ad Episc. Winton.
Anabaptists, Socinians, and others; We think therefore in somethings they are
to be born with, if there be any thing in that Order which does not altogether
suit to our Humor.

. 4. As our Church does not approve of the Roman Tonsures, Rasures, Unctions in
the imitation of the Jews; so she has cast out of its form of Ordination, all
those superstitious Rites used in the Church of Rome. Neither has any of her
Consecrations Instit. of a Chri. Man. 1537.
, any thing that is of it self Superstitious, or Ungodly 39. Articles. 36.
.

Yet so moderate is our Church toward the Church of Rome, That, 1. It allows it
to have not only the Essentials of a true Church, but of Ordination also.

2. Although it has only the Ancient and Apostolical Rites of Imposition of
Hands and Prayer; and accepts of the form of Ordination used by our Lord as
most suitable, and best: Nevertheless it does not hold all those Ordinations
void, which have been made in some other form of Words.

3. It imitates the Moderation of the whole Catholic Church, in being against
the Rebaptizing of any, who have had the Essentials of Baptism: And also
against the Reordination of those who keep the Essentials of Ordination; and
of such Churches where Bishops cannot be had, we use all Moderation of Judgment
Bishop Bramhal's Vindicat. p. 29, 31.
. Yet where our Constitution requires Ordination by Bishops, it is at liberty
not to make use of their Ministry, who peremptorily refuse the Ordination of
our Bishops: Non opus est Re^pub. Eocive qui parere nescit. M. Curious. Valor.
Max. l. 6. c. 3. Neque Ecclesia opus est iis qui spretis Episcopis suis, etc.
V. Vindic. S. Eccl. Angl. c. 6.
Or who would in a settled Church and Kingdom, set up a Church Government in
opposition to the Bishops who ordained them before.

. 5. Our Church does endeavor to preserve to its Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, all due Honor and regard suitable to their several Ministries and
Orders: Having the right of a Revenue, which is for the most part a convenient
provision for its Clergy, above some others of the Reformation: Yet, not only
below the Pompousness of the Roman Church, but much inferior in proportion to
the Provision God made the Priests and Levites among the Jews: As our Church
observes an excellent Moderation in reference to things peculiarly devoted unto
God, equally abhorring Idols and Sacrilege: And whatsoever is sanctified to the
peculiar Service of God, our Church Orders should be used in a suitable manner:
So in reference to Persons consecrated to the holy Service of God, a worthy
care is taken by the very constitution of our Government in Kingdom 1 R. Eliz.
c. 2.
8 R. Eliz. c. 1.
and Church, to secure their Office and Persons from such contempt as might
render their Religious Performances more useless and unprofitable to the
Church, and might discourage the worthy industry of those, who should devote
themselves entirely to a Function so honorable in it self. King Edward the
6th, and Queen Elizabeth, enjoined, that Whereas many indiscreet Q Eliz.
Injunction. 28.
Persons do at this Day uncharitably contemn and abuse Priest and Ministers of
the Church, yet for as much as their Office and Function is appointed of God:
The King's Majesty wills and charge all his loving Subjects, that they use
them charitably and reverently for their Office and Administration sake,
especially such as labor in setting forth God's holy Word. And for the more
remarkableness of the Moderation of our entire Constitution, may be considered
what Dr. Heylin makes out at large in his Treatise for undeceiving the People
in point of Tithes, 1657. Never was any Clergy maintained with less Charge to
the Subject, than the established Clergy of the Church of England: No Man
paying any thing of his own toward the Maintenance of his Parish-Minister, but
his Easter-Offering.

. 6. Because our Church asserts to its Ministry all just Effect. (See Art. 33.)
It makes the power of the Keys not only Declarative and Doctrinal, but
Authoritative, (of which more in the next Section of this Chapter).

Yet our Churchmen do not boast, as some of the Church of Rome do often, of a
Power Ascendant over the awful Presence of God, and the glorified Body of
Christ in Heaven, as if they made him corporally and immediately present in the
Eucharist upon their secret pronouncing of Hoc est enim Corpus meum V. Missale
Romans
.

Neither does our Church of England ascribe to the power of Priests, the
bringing Spirits out of Purgatory in their Suffrages for the Dead.

Nor does our Church hold any true Propitiatory Sacrifice for Dead, or Living,
to be offered up in the Mass; because that would derogate from the sufficiency
of Christ's Priesthood: Neither De Sacram. ord. can. 1.
does it define its Priesthood by the action only of such a Sacrifice, as does
the Council of Trent.

. 4. Our Church behaves it most moderately between the two extremes of those
who slight all due Penance, and of those who explain it differently from the
true nature of it.

The Council of Trent declares it of necessity by Divine Right for every one of
both Sexes, once a Year to confess to a Priest (as his Judge next to God) all
and singular their Mortal Sins which they can possibly recollect, even the most
secret with all their Circumstances, or else they had as good do nothing (as
the Council says Qui vero secus saciunt nihil Divinae bon^tati p^r Sacerdo^em
remittendum propo^unt. Conc. Trid. de Confess. c. 5.
) which Confession with Contrition and Satisfaction, are (with them) the matter
of Penance; and the form is the word of Absolution from the Priest, which make
up their entire Sacrament: Whereas our Anxietate Circumstantiarum and tortur^
conscientiarum sublata -- Wicel. Method. Concord. c. 6.
Church does suppose the nature of true Penitence does consist in true change
Quam conscientiae carnisicinam nemo moderatus approbat. Cassander ad Artic. 11.
28 H. 8.
of Mind, and effectual amendment of Life, which when it is sincere, there will
be so much of the rest as In confessione sacerdotali catholici quoque
Moderationem aliquam postulant. Wicelius, in via Regia. p. 360.
is useful. In the Convocation, 1536, at the first dawning of the Reformation,
it was determined, That perfect Penance which Christ required, consists of
three parts, Contrition, Confession, and Amendment of former Life, and a new
obedient Reconciliation to the Laws and Will of God: The same is earnestly
enforced in our Homilies.

Bishop Bramhal very compendiously enumerated the Romanists abuses of
Confession, In tricking it up in the Robes of a Sacrament; by obtruding a
particular and plenary enumeration of all Sins to Man, as absolutely necessary
to Salvation, by Divine Institution; by making it (with their Commutations) a
remedy rather for the Confessor's Purse than the Confitent's Soul: As Chaucer
observed, He knew how to impose an easy Penance, where he could look for a
good Pittance; by making it a Picklock to know the secrets of States and
Families: By absolving, before they enjoin Ecclesiastical satisfaction; by
reducing it to a customary Formality, as it were but the Page 975. fol.
concluding an old Score to begin a new.

. 2. Our Church does declare the necessity of such a Confession as is useful to
the purposes of true Repentance: That is, when Confession to the Minister of
God may be useful for Spiritual Advice, and for the quieting of any ones
Conscience in order to a good Life, or happy Death: And particularly in order
to the fruitful receiving the holy Communion V. Exhortation to the H. C.
. In K. Edward 6. time, in the order of the Communion, the Exhortation was
thus: And if there be any of you whose Conscience is troubled and grieved at
any time, lacking Comfort and Counsel, let him come unto me, or to some other
discreet and learned Priest taught in the Law of God, and confess his open Sin
and Grief secretly, that he may receive such Ghostly Counsel, that his
Conscience may be relieved Liberum (...) administrum habeat and ab illo
levationem aegritudinis accipiat. Reform. leg. E^cl. de div. Off. c. 7.
, and that of us as a Minister of God and of his Church, he may receive Comfort
and Absolution to the satisfaction of his Mind, and avoiding all scruple and
doubtfulness: Requiring such as shall be satisfied with a general Confession,
not to be offended with them that do use, to their further satisfying, the
auricular and secret Confession to the Priest; nor those also which think
needful or convenient for the quietness of their own Consciences, particularly
to open their sins unto God, and the general Confession to the Church: But in
all these things to follow and keep the Rule of Charity, and every Man to be
satisfied with his own Conscience, not judging other Men's Minds or Acts,
whereas he has no warrant of God's Word for the same. So much the Spirit of
Moderation did move in our Church, from the first of the Reformation, and was
perfected in what after was ordered Absit repetendi Confessionem superstitio,
absit anxietas enumerandi commissa and circumstantias. Erasm. de amab. Eccl.
Concord. Homily of. Rep. 2. part.
. If any Men do find themselves troubled (says the Homily) they may repair to
some godly learned Man, etc. But it is against true Liberty, that any Man
should be bound to the numbering of his Sins, as has been used heretofore in the
time of Ignorance.

In the mean while, how slanderously are we reported by the Romanists, in the
Recantation some of them made for Anton. de Dom.. 25. thus speaking of the Men
of the Church of England? Amongst them scant ever saw I any Reformation: For
the most part, all care of Conscience is cast away: They are not (except some
few) troubled with any scruples for Adulteries, Robberies, or Deceiving their
Neighbors: For they have wickedly abolisht Auricular Confession.

Indeed such Auricular Confession as is in practice in the Roman Church Scire
volunt secreta domus atque inde timeri.
, the Church of England has utterly rejected, it being devised to pry into the
secrets of Governments, and such private Circumstances of Actions, which to
unvail is neither the Interest of private Persons nor of Priests. It is more
plain ( Homily of Rep. 2. p.
says our Homily) that this Auricular Confession, has not its warrant of
God's Word, else it had not been lawful for Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople
Sozomen Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
upon just occasion to have put it down. Yet the same Homily earnestly commends
to us, Confession of our Sins before God, and one to another for reconciliation
of Offenses, and to the Minister of God, for his Ghostly Counsel and
Absolution, and publicly in case of public Scandal.

. 3. Whereunto may be added for the Honor of our Church's Moderation, that it
observes the Seal of Confession, as sacredly as Reason or Religion can possibly
permit, yet forbids not the disclosure in case of Murder or Treason, but in
those particulars, leaves us entire in our Obedience to the Common Laws of the
Kingdom: Of which, see we what our Church delivers in its 113. Canon. If any
Man confess his secret and hidden Sins to the Minister for the unburthening of
his Conscience, and to receive Spiritual Consolation, and ease of Mind from
him: We do straightly charge and admonish the said Minister, that he do not at
any time reveal and make known to any Person whatsoever any Crime or Offense so
committed to his trust and secrecy Cujus rigidam necessitatem qud apud vos
obtinet Eccl. Aug. molliendam putavit: Rem ipsam neque sustulit, etc. IS.
Casaub. ad Frontod. p. 129.
, (except they be such Crimes, as by the Law of this Realm, his own Life may be
called in question) under pain of Irregularity. For as H. Garnet (whom the
Romanists will have a Martyr for their Sacrament of Confession) confessed
himself, It is not fitting that the Lives of Princes should depend upon the
private Nicety of any Man's Conscience V. Proceedings against the Traitors.
.

And yet Suarius Suarius de poen. disp. 33.. 1.
determins, That in no case, for no end, though it was to save a whole
Commonwealth from a great Evil, Temporal or Spiritual, may it be lawful to
violate Confession. Ja. Binet I S. Casaub. ad Frontod. p. 140.
went higher, It was better all Kings should perish, than even once the Seal of
Confession should be violated.

The Catholic Apologist goes higher yet, Page 426.
The Sacrament of Confession is of such Reverence among us, that we cannot
lawfully disclose a secret known by it, tho it were to save Christianity it
self. Nay, the Apology for Garnet Eud. Jo. Apol. pro Garnetto p. 327.
, has a notable fetch to bring in all the Gunpowder Conspirators as Martyrs,
for says he, It is the common opinion of Catholics, That all who receive the
Matter from the Confessor (by the consent of the Penitent) are bound by
Religion of Secrecy. But what abuse of Confession is this, to hold those
Martyrs, who confessed a Wickedness they were resolved to commit: And their
Priests absolved them from a Treason, they were then sworn to undertake.

. 4. The Discipline of our Church does by no means exclude the use of External
Penance: And in its judgment is more right than the Church of Rome. To enforce
both inward and outward Penance, our Church has a special Office of
Commination upon solemn occasion to be used. And for some scandalous Sins (when
Notorious) solemn Penance is by a special Canon required, for the Humiliation
and Compunction of the Sinner, for the Example of others, and for the
Edification of the Church V. Artic. proclero.
: The Commutation of which (for very good Reasons requiring) the Church has
taken care sometime to moderate: But the Commutations allowed by our
Commutationem a. injunctae poenitentiae nec Cancellarius faciet nec Archidiac.
nec Officialis, nec Commissarius. Ea potestas multis gravibus de causis
Episcopo soli reservabitur. V. Libr. qu. Canonum. 1571.
Church are sincerely designed for the ends of Charity and Religion, and the
consideration of Piety, but are not taxed in a penitentiary Table, as it were
to invite Men to sin. The De Polit. Eccl. Angl. c. 6. p. 328.
godly Discipline of the Primitive Church of open Penance for the Conviction of
V. Office of Commination.
Notorious Offenders, the Church of England wishes may be restored again: But,
The satisfaction that God requires of us (says the Homily of Repentance) is
that we cease from evil, and do good; and if we have done any Man wrong, to
endeavor our selves to make him true amends to the uttermost of our power,
following in this the example of Zacheus, etc.

Nevertheless the Penances in the Church of Rome, which there are called
Satisfactions, and are counted Deletory of Sin, and Meritorious of Pardon, our
Church does account no otherwise than Superstitious.

. 5. The Absolution of the Priest has its due honor and use in our Church,
although it be made no part of any Sacrament of Penance. And that the Moderation
of our Church may be more perceived, observe, 1. That our Church ascribes not
the power of Remission of Sin to any but to God only.

2. It constantly holds, That Faith and true Repentance, are the necessary
conditions of receiving the benefit of Remission of Sin.

3. It asserts what is most true, that the Ministers of the Church have a
special Power and Commission, which other Believers have not, authoritatively
to declare this Absolution and Remission of Sin, for the benefit and
consolation of true Penitency, which if duly dispensed, cannot but have a real
effect from the very promise of Christ. (S. Jo. 20. 23.) Vid. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 5.
in Esaiam.


4. This Penitence our Church makes not a new Sacrament (as does the Church of
Rome) but a means of returning to the Grace of God bestowed in Baptism: They
which in act or deed sin after Baptism (says our Homily) when they turn to God
unfeignedly, they are likewise washed by this Sacrifice from their Sins.
Poenitentia nihil aliud est quam reditus ad promissionem gratiae Baptismi.
Chemn. exam. de paenit. p. 199.


The rare temper and proportion, which the Church of England uses in
Commensurating the Forms of Absolution to the degrees of Preparation and
Necessity, is to be observed, That at the beginning of Morning and Evening
Prayer after a general Confession, the Form of Absolution is in general
Declarative, and by way of Proposition: In the Office of Communion, it is by
way of Intercession. In the Visitation of the Sick, when it is supposed and
enjoined that the Penitent shall disburthen himself of the clamorous loads on
his Conscience, the Church prescribes a Medicinal Form by way of delegate
Authority: Therefore says the Bishop of Down, It is the excellent Temper of
the Church, so to prescribe her Forms of Absolution, as to show them to be the
results of the whole Priestly Office. All which Forms V. Bishop Sparrow's
Rationale. p. 23.
in Sense and Virtue are the same.

5. For Visitation of the Sick, such is the care of our Church that by its
Canon, When any Person is dangerously Sick Can. 67. 1603.
in any Parish, the Minister or Curate (having knowledge thereof) shall resort
unto him or her (if the Disease be not known, or probably suspected to be
Infectious) to instruct and comfort them in their Distress, according to the
Order of the Common Prayer Book (if he be no Preacher); or if he be a Preacher,
then as he shall think most needful and convenient. And so in the Rubric it is
said, The Minister may use that, or the like Exhortation. From both which
passages (although we are not greedy of Liberty) yet for good Reasons and the
occasional Necessity of accommodating our addresses in that kind to the
particular cases of Persons, we observe the Moderation of our Church, in
complying accurately with all the Necessities of her People. And further we
note from that Canon,

That although in Prudence, and Kindness, and Christian Duty, the Minister may and
ought in many cases to go of his own accord to visit his Charge especially; yet
we cannot say that the Church does bind always her Minister thereunto, till he
be certified: According to the words of St. James (Chap. 5 ver. 14.) Is any
sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, etc. Yet because in
a matter of such concern the Church would not have its Ministers use such a
Capricio, as to stand upon their Niceties in so serious and momentous a Matter,
nor the People so forgetful of their own Interest as to neglect their part
therein, therefore (so punctual is our Church, and moderate according to
Reason) the Canon only says, The Minister having knowledge thereof, shall
resort, etc.

Excellent was the Injunction of King Edward the 6th, 1547. and Q. Elizabeth,.
17. 1559. That the damnable vice of Despair may clearly be taken away, and firm
belief and steadfast hope surely conceived of all their Parishioners being in
any danger, the Parsons, Vicars, and Curats, shall learn, and have in
readiness, such comfortable places and sentences of Scripture, as do set forth
the Mercy and Goodness of Almighty God toward all penitent and believing
Persons, that they may at all times (when necessity requires) promptly comfort
their Flock with the lively Word of God, which is the only stay of Man's
Conscience. Wherefore certainly it ought to be the special study of every
Minister of God to provide himself, that he may be ready and dexterous to
assist such as desire a Spiritual Guide and Counselor at so needful a time.

. 2. The Order of the Church for the Visitation of the Sick, and preparing
those of her Communion for Death, is the same with that of the Church ever
since the Primitive Times, which was Prayer and Absolution, and the Holy
Viaticum of the Body and Blood of Christ, which we retain: And I pray C. 8.. 5.
(says Spalatensis) what proper and peculiar effect can Extreme Unction have
on any faithful Man for the occasion of passing from this Mortal Life to a
glorious Immortality, which may not be entirely obtained by Faith and
Repentance, and the Holy Eucharist, and Alms, and Prayer, especially the public
Prayer and Absolution of the Church? These and no other the Ancient Fathers and
Councils mention, as having the common and abiding Promise of God, which
extreme Unction has not; and as it was used in and about the time that S.
James speaks of Anointing the Sick with Oil in the Name of the Lord, was a
miraculous Gift of healing, the Effect of which was their recovery, as it
follows; and the Lord shall raise him up. Different from which also is the
practice of the Church of Rome, never or rarely aneling any with exorces'd Oil
on the five Organs of their Senses, till they are past all hopes of recovery.

From which practice the People of this Nation was brought off by degrees: For
in the first Book of King Edward the 6th, the Rubric was thus; If the sick
Person desire to be Anointed, then shall the Priest anoint them on the
Forehead or Breast, only making the sign of the Cross, saying, As with this
visible Oil thy Body outwardly is Anointed, so God grant that thy Soul, etc. V.
Alliance of D. Offices* p. 182.


Unto which Ceremonies of Crism in Baptism and Extreme Unction (as it was then
here in Use) those repeated words of Calvin may appear particularly to refer,
and not generally to other Constitutions among us: In the English Liturgy
(says he) I see there has been many tolerable trifles In Anglic. Liturgia
qualem describitis multas video fuisse tolerabiles in eptias-his duobus verbis
experimo non fuisse eam puritatem, etc. Ep. 200. Anglis Francofur.
: Which two words, as conscious that they were very brigose and severe (if too
generally taken, therefore) he softens them in the next immediate words by an
Apology; By which (says he) I mean, there has not been that Purity which
might be wished. What he particularly meant, I suppose is expressed in another
Epistle to the English Protector: There are other things (says he Sunt and
alia non proinde damnanda fortasse, sed tamen ejusmodi ut excusari non possunt,
viz. Crisma and Vnctionis Ceremonia. Prot. Angl. Ep. 8^.
) perhaps not presently to be condemned, but yet of that sort. as cannot be
excused, viz Crism in Baptism, and the Ceremony of Unction: Which only if he
referred to, How often have his severer Followers been mistaken?

. 3. In reference to the Burial of the Dead, the Moderation of the Church is
such, it concerns it self but as far as Christian Religion does.

Can. 48. 1603. De Donatistis qui Catholicorum corpora sepel^ri verabant. V.
Optat. Mile^. l. 6.
1. Confirming all Natural and Civil Law herein: Providing that Christian
Scpulture be Decent, Honorable, and Religious, as Quibus constat quod semel in
anno non susce^erint Sacramenta confessionis Eccles. Scpultura negatur. Rit.
Romans de Exeq.
becomes a Church in which the Resurrection of the Body is asserted: Our Church
well remembering that the Christian Religion did obtain by no means more than by
the care the Primitive Christians had of the Burial of their Dead.

Wherefore Julian (...). Juliani Imp. ad Arsaicum Pontif. Ep. 49.
, who was a great Bigot to Gentilism, in an Epistle to his Gentile High Priest,
recommends the practice of the same things amongst them, by which the Christian
Religion got so much ground: Which was by the gravity of the Christians
Deportment, by their kindness to Strangers, and by their care of Burial. And
tho indeed the Ecclesiastical Solemnity by the use of the Liturgy is forbid at
the Burial of such as die Unbaptized V. Rubric.
, or Excommunicated, or have laid violent Hands on themselves, the same is but
in pursuance of the chief design of the Burial Office, viz. The benefit of the
Living Vt hoc pacto a peccato retrahantur. Grot. de jure b. c. 19.
, that all may avoid whatsoever may deprive them of such an honorable sign of
being esteemed to have died in Communion with the Church.

In our Church Christian Burial is not such a dumb show, as is the practice of
a shameful company of People in this Realm, who have Excommunicated themselves
while they live, and therefore it is the less matter tho they keep by
themselves when they are Dead. In our Burial Office, Christian People may be at
once Comforted and Admonished. And because the whole Church, Militant and
Triumphant, is united in one Society, under one Supreme Head; Because also at
Death the happiness of the best is but incomplete: Therefore in our Church, we
beseech God of his great Goodness shortly to accomplish the number of his
Elect, and to hasten his Kingdom, that we with all those, etc. may have our
perfect Consummation and Bliss, etc. Here the Moderation of our Church stops,
and leaves the Romanists in their extremes. Although the Bodies of the Dead are
often laid up in our Churches according to the Custom of the Country, it is
without any Superstition required, or allowed: The Bodies and Coffins of the
Dead are not sprinkled with Holy Water Parochus antequam Calaver efferatur
illud aspergit aq ^ benedicta. Rit. To. de exeq.
(as if it was to keep the evil Spirits from interrupting the Worms). We
attribute no effect to the Garments we are buried in, which those Friars do,
who persuade People to die and be buried in their Habits, for the redemption of
their Souls out of Purgatory. There are not among us any Masses for the Dead,
Vigils, Trentals, adoring the Bones of Saints, worshipping their Relics:
Which (with the like) the Articles of K. Edward 6. call Blind Devotion: There
is not consecrating and reconciling Churchyards with so many Ceremonies and
opinion of Efficacy and Necessity (as in the Church of Rome. V Form of
Consecration of Churches. Bishop Sparr. Collect. 1675.
)

The Bells which sound at Funerals among us, are not appointed for any
Superstition Centum gravam. 50.
, or to drive away Spirits from the Grave: And because by Death all are made
equal, therefore all have the same Office for Burial, All amongst us are
deposited in the same general place of the Earth Redditur Terrae Corpus and ita
locatum quasi operimento Matris obdusitur. Cic. de leg. l. 2.
: In other Circumstances Respect and Distinction is permitted, according to the
Custom of the Country, and the condition of the Person deceased.

The Moderation of our Church is the same with that of the Christian Religion,
as it also leaves all Nations to their proper Usages, and does not oppose any
Civil Laws, or indifferent Customs of this, or of any other Kingdom.

As it is observable, That God himself (tho he forbid the People of Israel Lev.
19. 28. Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
to cut themselves, or make any baldness upon themselves for the Dead, or
printing any Marks upon themselves, which were the practices of that Idolatrous
Nation: Yet) in such ancient Customs they had those which were Innocent,
referring to the manner of their Burial, were permitted the same,
notwithstanding they had them from the Egyptians and other Heathen Nations:
Whereunto even also the Burial of our Blessed Lord Jesus was Conformable, of
which it is Recorded, John 19 4^.
They took the Body of Jesus and wound it in Linen with the Spices, as the
manner of the Jews is to Bury: Among whom (as has been noted Bishop ^earson on
the Creed, notes on Expos. Art. 4.
) there was a kind of Law, that they should use no other Grave-clothes.
Notwithstanding it is all one -- Tabesne Cadavera solvat, Aut rogus aut refert.
-- Capit omnia tellus Quae genuit, coelo tegitur qui non habit urnam.
to our Bodies, whether they are deposited in Linen or in Woollen, with
Spices, or without, in the Earth, or in any other Element; whether we lie in S.
Innocent's Churchyard, where the Bodies soon consume, or in the Sands of
Egypt, where they last longer, or under the Moles of Adrianus. And if the Minds
of some seem uneasy in relation to one way of Burial more than another, it
convinces us how great Tyrants Custom and Imagination are; and perhaps in no
Instance can it be confirmed more, than in the late alteration referring to
Burial: Concerning which, St. Austin's Comment might be of use: S. Aug. de
Doct. Chr. l. 3. V. de civita. Dei. l. 1. c. 13.
The Evangelist (says he) does seem to me not in vain to have said, [As the
manner of the Jews is to Bury] for so (unless I am deceived) he admonishes in
such offices of Piety which are exhibited to the Dead, The Custom of every
Nation is to be observed.

Wherefore our Church of England always leaves the Government of the Kingdom to
have its Reasons to it self in what it appoints: Instructing her Sons also how
little soever the Matters are, from thence to receive the greater honor of
Obedience.

And because at so solemn a Providence as is the death of our Friends, if some
well-disposed Persons finding their Minds then more lifted up to the desires of
Heaven, and become more mortified to the World, would take an opportunity of
seriously commemorating the Death of our Lord, who by Death overcame Death, and
opened the Gate of Heaven unto all Believers.

Therefore there is a brief peculiar appointment for the Celebration of the
Holy Supper of the Lord at Funerals Peculiaria quaedam in funeribus, etc. R.
Eliz. V. Bishop Sparows Collections.
appointed 1560, with a Collect, Epistle and Gospel, which bears a part of the
Reformed Liturgy, which here is taken notice of, as a proof how refined every
part thereof is from Romish Superstition.

The like Instance of Inoffensive Moderation, may be the public Office
appointed by Q. Elizabeth, for the Commemoration of Benefactors, which is used
in our Colleges and Universities, which does testify what worthy care we have
of the memory of the deserving, tho deceased; and also does show how much
purged these honorable Offices are from Superstition.

CHAP. XII. Of the Moderation of our Church, in what concerns the Power of the
Church.
. 1. The Moderation of our Church, owns the Power of the Church to be only
Spiritual.. 2. All other Power which Ecclesiastical Persons receive, is readily
acknowledged entirely depending on the favor of our Kings.. 3. The Interests
of the Kingdom and the Church, are excellently accommodated in our
Constitutions, which is not done in other Models.. 4. The pious Moderation of
our King's preserving their own rightful Supremacy, and leaving to the Church
the exercise of their Spiritual Power, acknowledged by our Church.. 5. The just
Right of Kings shamefully invaded by other Sects pretending Divine Right:
Concerning which Claim, the Moderation of our Church observed.. 6. The dutiful
Moderation of our Church in asserting Monarchy: The first Canon, 1640.
justified.. 7. All Interests of Humane Society, especially of Subjects
Allegiance in our Church abundantly secured, which is not done by those in
separation from her.. 8. The Ordinances of our Church, are framed with great
Mildness and Moderation.. 9. The same compared with the mild Obligation which
Cardinal Bellarmine pretends the Church of Rome lays upon those of her
Communion.. 10. Sundry Instances of our Church's great regard to Equity,

. 1. THe Church of England always has confessed, That the Power of the Church
is only Spiritual, and Ministerial (for the Head, the Authority, the
Conversation of the Church is in Heaven): Hence it is that the Appointments of
the Church are not called Laws, but Canons, or Rules; by which the Moderation
of the Church rather leads than compels: Yea, In matter of Canons, the Bishops
and Clergy do but propound such Constitutions as they think useful, and when
they have done, send them to his Majesty, who perusing and approving them, puts
Life into them, and of dead Propositions makes them Canons; so are they the
King's Canons, not the Clergies Bishop Hall's Remains. p. 430.
. And the Inflictions Ecclesiastical, the Church her self does not call
Punishments but Censures; for Temporal Punishments are for Vengeance, Spiritual
for Discipline Bishop Lany, on 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
: The Temporal Judge (except he be Supreme) in many things cannot pardon, the
Ecclesiastical Judge cannot but pardon upon Repentance; as our Church does
express it self in the Canons, if the Offender revoke that his wicked Error. To
this purpose St. Chrysostom St. Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in Isaiam.
speaks, The King remits the guilt of Bodies, the Bishop remits the guilt of
Sins; the Prince compels, the Bishop exhorts; he governs by Necessity, but we
by Counsel. So it is in the Injunction of King Edward the 6th, 1547. unto those
who have the Cure of Souls: They ever gently and charitably Exhorting, -- and
in his Majesty's Name strictly charging and Commanding, etc. So in the 3 d.
Canon, 1640. the sacred Synod earnestly entreats and exhorts the Reverend
Judges, etc.

. 2. As our Church does lawfully assert her own Spiritual Power entire and
inherent in the Church, so she has always exercised her power in all
Subordination to the Right of Princes V. Institution of a Christian Man. p. 49.
V. Homily of Obedience.
: And constantly acknowledging, that whatsoever Power beside Spiritual, the
Church or its Churchmen have, she receives the same entirely from the favor
of our Kings, wherefore our Bishops have exercised no Jurisdiction (in foro
Externo) within this Realm, but such as has been granted unto them by the
Successive Kings of England; Neither have challenged Non enim dominandi
cupidine imperant sed Officio consulendi nec principandi superbia sed
providendi misericerdia. S. Aug. de Civ. D. c. 14.
any such Jurisdiction belonging to them by any inherent right or title in
their Persons, or Callings, but only by emanation and derivation from the Royal
Authority: Now the regular exercise of a derived Power is so far from
destroying, or any way diminishing that Original Power from whence it is
derived, as that it rather confirms and establishes the same Bishop
Sanderson of Episc. not prejudic. to Regal Power.
: Wherefore (the Institution of a Christian Man) calls The Power of Orders a
Moderate Power, subject, determined and restrained.

. 3. As the Interests of the Kingdom and Church are excellently accommodated in
our Constitution (of Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws) under one Supreme
Governor; so the Moderation of the Church has tempered her self very justly
between those pretenses on one hand, who have insisted on their Pleas of
Spiritual Right to the real diminution of Sovereign Power: And those on the
other hand, who resolve the exercise of all the inward Power of the Church into
the sole will and arbitrary power of the Civil Magistrates, according to
Erastus, and the Leviathan-Author, who thus delivers himself: The Monarch has
authority not only to Preach Page 297.
(which perhaps no Man will deny) but also to Baptize and Administer the
Sacraments of the Lord's Supper, and to consecrate both Temples and Pastors to
God's Service. Wherefore our 37 Article declares: We give not our Princes V.
Canon 1. 2, 36. V. Q Eliz. Admonition.
the Ministering either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments (which thing the
Injunctions set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly testify) but
that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all godly
Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they rule all Estates
and Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal. Which Article of our Church is agreeable also to the judgment of some
Bishops concerning the King's Supremacy, in the Reign of King Henry the 8th.
Other places of Scripture declare the highness and excellency of Christian
Princes Authority and Power: The which of a truth is most high, for he has
Power and Charge generally over all, as well Bishops, as Priests, as other: The
Bishops and Priests have charge over Souls within their own Cures; power to
minister Sacraments, and to teach the Word of God: To the which Word of God
Christian Princes knowledge themselves subject; and in case the Bishops be
negligent, it is the Christian Princes office to see them do their duty. Which
shows Ex MSS. Dr. Stilling-fleet V. Collect. of Rec. Hist. of Reform. l. 3.
p. 177.
that Objection against the Oath of Supremacy is groundless, which supposes
that the King is therein made not more a Political than a Spiritual Head of the
Church V. Camdens Eliz. p. 26. 39. Bishop Bramhal to M. Militier. p. 37. V.
Instit. of Chri. Man. p. 50.
: Which the Kings of England have constantly and openly disavowed to the whole
World, renouncing all claim to such Power and Authority: Tho the regulating and
ordering that Power in sundry Circumstances concerning the outward exercise
thereof (in foro externo) the godly Kings of England have thought to belong to
them as in the right of their Crown, and have accordingly made Laws concerning
the same, even as they have done also concerning other Matters appertaining to
the Religion and Worship of God.

. 4. Which being well considered, we have great reason to observe and extol the
excellent and pious Moderation of our Kings of England, who never challenged to
themselves the exercise of the pure Spiritual Power of the Church, but left it
entirely to the Bishops, as the lawful Successors of the Apostles. Which more
fully appears from the Proclamation, in the 13th Year of King Charles the First
of blessed Memory, according to the Certificate of the Right Reverend Judges
under their Hands, July 1. 1637. Wherein it was declared, That, Processes may
issue out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the name of the Bishops, etc. (The
Censures also of the Church are confirmed by the Law of the Kingdom. 1 R. Ellz.
c. 2.
)

And the behavior of the Church to the King, shows the same Exemplary
Moderation: For the Ecclesiastical Censures are with all due subordination to
the Supreme Power secular used: Because all external jurisdiction coercive is
by Law declared, and by the Clergy acknowledged to be wholly and entirely
derived from the King, as the sole fountain of all Authority of external
jurisdiction, whether Spiritual, or Temporal, within this Realm: In other
Matters, tho the substance of the Power it self be immediately from God, and
not from the King, (as those of Preaching, Ordaining, Absolving, etc.) Yet are
they so subject to be inhibited, limited, or otherwise regulated in the outward
exercises of that Power by the Laws and Customs of the Land, as that the whole
execution thereof still depends on the Regal Authority. Bishop Sanderson l.
praedict. p. 32, 33.
Although then the Church knows it self to be a Society in its own nature
distinct, (unto which the 19 Article most properly refers) yet (as very often
now it is the unspeakable happiness of the Church to be entertained within the
Protection of Supreme Powers secular, so) however the Church of England very
justly declares for the Right of Kings to be preserved Inviolable, as well as
the just Power of the Church, and the real Interest of the People: Yea, all
these Interests with that of Religion in the first place, our Church with great
Moderation and Wisdom preserves entire and distinct: All which among the
Romanists and other Modellers, are miserably confounded or destroyed.

. 5. Other Sects among us do some way or other deny the King's Supremacy in
Matters Ecclesiastical: either claiming a power of Jurisdiction over him, or
pleading a privilege of Exemption from under him: The Papists do it both ways
in their several Doctrines of the Pope's Supremacy, and of the exemption of the
Clergy: The Presbyterians claiming to Ibid. p. 42, 43.
their Consistories as full and absolute Spiritual Jurisdiction over Princes
(with power even to Excommunicate them, if they shall see cause for it) as the
Papists challenge to belong to the Pope: And the Independents exempting their
Congregations from all Ecclesiastical subjection to them, in as ample a manner
as the Papists do their Clergy: whereas the English Protestant Bishops and
Regular Clergy, as becomes good Christians and good Subjects, do neither
pretend to any Jurisdiction over the Kings of England, nor withdraw their
subjection from them, but acknowledge them to have Sovereign power over Can. 1.
1640.
them, as well as over their other Subjects, and in all matters Ecclesiastical
as well as Temporal: Which considerations verify what has been often formerly
declared: Namely, That whereas now we are governed by Canon and Civil Laws,
dispensed here by 26 Ordinaries, easily responsible for any deviation from the
Rule of Laws; conceive, should we be exposed to the mere Arbitrary Government
of a numerous Presbytery, who together with their Ruling Elders, will arise to
near forty thousand Church-Governors among us, they with their adherents must
needs bear so great a sway, that they will not easily be reducible, and not
consistent with Monarchy.

And for the Title of Divine Right, those of the Episcopacy rather purposely
decline the mentioning of it, as a term subject to mis-construction: Or else so
interpret it, as not of necessity to import any more than an Apostolical
Institution: and is pleaded by them with more calmness and moderation, and with
less derogation from Regal Dignity, than by any other of the three.

. 6. As the most excellent form of Government in our Kingdom most graciously
and bountifully protects the Church, so the Church does all she can to
acknowledge the favor by asserting our Monarchy; which is but truly performed
in Canon 1. 1640. if we thoroughly consider the same. Since then there has been
spread abroad an Insinuation, that the said Canon did immoderately extol the
Divine Right of Kings, as if no other Form but Monarchy could in other States
be lawful, or of God's Ordinance, because the Canon says, The most High and
sacred Order of Kings is of Divine Right: I may have leave to vindicate the
same with all submission where it is due.

Where I conceive the words, the most High and sacred Order of Kings, may be
justly and reasonably interpreted, First, and especially of Monarchies, and
also of All those Supreme Powers under what Form or Name soever they are
called, in such places as they are lawfully Constituted; Which, doubtless are,
as the Canon proceeds, The Ordinance of God founded in the Primitive Laws of
Nature; which Supreme Rulers are often expressed by the general Name of Kings:
And because of the Pre-eminence and Excellence of Monarchy, above all other
Forms, the Denomination of the Order of Supreme Powers may not improperly
follow the more noble and excellent part: Especially in a Kingdom where that is
our only lawful Form, it is properly and truly so affirmed, that the High and
sacred Order of Kings is of Divine Right: as being ordained of God Himself;
which just interpretation of the Canon, is according to our Homily V. Homily of
Obedience.
: Take away Kings, Princes, Rulers and Magistrates, Judges, and such Estates of
God's Order, and no Man shall ride or go by the way unrobbed: -- Blessed be God
that we in this Realm of England feel not the horrible Calamities which they
undoubtedly suffer that lack this godly Order, etc. Which the same Homily
expresses by the Name of Kings or other Supreme Officers, that is, the Higher
Powers, as ordained of God: And that the Canon means no other by the
Denominations of Kings, may be fairly gathered out of the following words of
the Canon wherein V. 39 Articles 37.
(with excellent Moderation in opposition to the Usurpations of the Church of
Rome, and other Sectaries) what is there set down is most true of all Rightful
Supreme Powers secular.

. 7. The Moderation of our Church does not favor any Doctrines or Practices
which are prejudicial to the safety of Humane Society in general, or this or
any other Rightful State or Kingdom in particular: It does no where pretend to
remit the Divine Laws, or dispense with Oaths, or transfer the Right of
Kingdoms, but leaves them without any imminution or change as it finds them
Apol. Eccl. Anglic.. 67.
: But Homily of wilful Rebellion. 5 part. p. 374.
after that ambition and desire of Dominion entered once into Ecclesiastical
Ministers, and that the Bishop of Rome (being by the Order of God's Word, none
other than the Bishop of that one See and Diocese, and never yet well able to
govern the same) did by intolerable ambition challenge, not only to be the
Head of all the Church dispersed through the World, but also to be Lord of all
the Kingdoms of the World, he became at once the Spoiler and Destroyer both of
the Church, and of the Christian Empire, and all Christian Kingdoms, as an
Universal Tyrant over all. In so much that Page 380.
There is no Country in Christendom which has not been over-sprinkled with the
blood of Subjects by rebellion against their natural Sovereigns, stirred up by
the same Bishops of Rome: Page 383.
Would to God we might only read and hear out of the Histories of old, and not
also see and feel these new and present Oppressions of Christians, rebellion of
Subjects, etc. being procured in these our Days, as in times past, by the
Bishop of Rome and its Ministers: Page 382.
by the ministry of his disguised Chaplains creeping into Houses, etc. Page
361.
What a Religion is this that such Men by such means would restore, may easily
be judged.

Contrariwise, our Church of England requires all of its Communion, to give the
King such security of their Allegiance and Fealty, as may be a sufficient
security to his Government: Which security V. Homily of Obed. part 2.
is with great Moderation exacted in our Realm.

Nevertheless, Pope Urban 8, in the Year 1626, by his Bull bearing date May 30.
forbad all Roman Catholics to take the Oath of Allegiance: And since the happy
Restoration of his Majesty, when several of his Subjects of the Papal
profession, offered by Oaths (wherein the Supremacy is wholly waved) to assure
their Duty and Obedience: the Pope and his Agents looked upon this Overture as
an Apostasy from him, that is, from the Christian Faith, and persecuted all
those who were concerned in the Proposal Diff. between the Church and Court of
Rome. p. 30.
, of which see the Controversial Letters, and the late History of the Irish
Affairs. Which most remarkable Story is a strange proof of the dangerous
influence on Kingdoms, which is to be expected from the propagation of the
Roman Faith: and is also a great Instance of the Moderation of our Governments,
and how ineffectual the same is on such.

. 8. The Rules and Orders of our Church are mildly and moderately framed: Our
Church being ever most removed from the guilt or humor of Domineering over the
Consciences of any: She teaches and enforces the Divine Commands, and uses
her Liberty in those things which are left undetermined, and are within her own
just Compass; The Precepts of the Church, which are very few, are justly
affirmed to bind by virtue of the Command of God; yet their Obligation (which
is declared not to be Universal, only to her Sons, and that but so long as she
judges expedient) is intended or remitted, as just reason of the Case requires.

No Councils Evangelical are any where made into Laws in our Church; or set up
as a Fund for Merit and Supererogation, but are left free for our further
exercise and endeavor after Christian Perfection: Which because it cannot be
thoroughly attained in this imperfect state, therefore the Moderation of our
Church no where pretends to this perfection either of Knowledge or of Grace: So
K. James affirmed to the Cardinal; He never should boast of this Church as
being perfectly without spot or wrinkle.

. 9. For Illustration sake, if we would compare the moderation of our Laws,
with the Laws of the Roman Church, we cannot better do it than by taking into
Consideration a Chapter of Card. Bellarmine's C. Bellarm. l. de Pontif. To.
cap. de comparatione Legum.
, wherein he uses very neat Sleights to elevate the heaviness and number of
the Pontifical Laws, and to make them fewer and lighter than were the
Ordinances among the Jews: For (says he) the Laws absolutely imposed upon all
Christians by our Church, are scarce found any more than four: viz. To observe
the Feasts of the Church: And the Fasts: and to Confess once a Year: and to
Communicate at Easter. Indeed the Men of that generation are so wise, that
until any be a through Proselyte, there is all show of Moderation that may be
to entice them into their Communion: But first, what Bondage was there ever
among the Jews comparable to that one Obligation among the Romanists, to
believe the Church and Pope of Rome infallible? with the Consequences of that
in practice, which are heavier than all the Jewish Observances set together.
2ly. On the Supposition that there were only those four general Precepts of the
Church, we may consider how great Burdens any one of them singly do contain: 1.
In that their Feasts are so excessive in their number, and the observation of
them have so many Superstitions, (V. Chapter 9.). The same 2. is to be said of
their Fasts. 3. In that Auricular Confession of all Mortal Sins, with all their
Circumstances, is enjoined as by Divine Right (V. Chapter 11.). 4. The slightest
Precept of the four is the last, of Communicating at Easter: But considering
therewith the round belief of Transubstantiation, which all are required to
have, we may truly say with our Bishop Hall, Remains. p. 30.
The Pope's little Finger is heavier than Moses 's Loins.

But perhaps one reason why the Cardinal says, there are so few Precepts of
the Church, is because he will say that many of the rest are Divine Commands,
as Extreme Unction, etc.

The rest (says he) of which the Tomes of Councils and Books of Canon Law are
so full, are not Laws, but Admonitions only, or pious Institutions without
obligation to Fault. However, there are great store of them, of a great Bulk:
But it is strange that so many Canons of Councils, and other Laws enforced with
Anathema, should have no intended obligation to a Fault in case of
Transgression: Why were such Laws made, or why were such Anathemaes annexed? Or
(says he) They are Conditional Laws, as of Celibacy, in case any enter into
sacred Orders, which are not to be accounted burdensome, because the Law leaves
them to their choice; as also in case of Vows.

How many and how strict observances are contained under such conditional
Obligations, is too well known to be largely insisted on. The Purifications,
the choice of Meats among the Jews, had not all of them comparably so many
Rites, and Orders, and Laws, as the Pontifical Economy has. But to make the
Precepts of the Church show very light and easy indeed, The four Laws of the
Church (says Bellarmin) are rather a determination of the Divine Law, than any
new Law; for by the Divine Law, we are bound to dedicate some time to the
Worship of God; sometimes to Fast, to Confess, to Communicate. True indeed: But
then the general Rules of Scripture, the edification of Christian People, the
practice of the Primitive Church, the ends of Religious Actions themselves,
ought to give measure to Laws, (as in the Church of England is practiced) and
not to let their Commands run out into such lavish extremity, where God has
left us at so large and safe freedom. Lastly, he says, The Commands of the
Church have a most moderate Obligation: for in their Fasts those who are Sick
and Aged are accepted: And for Festivals, their observation also is dispensed
with upon a just Cause.

So that in conclusion the Church of Rome is the most moderate Governor that
ever was, for there it is the easiest matter to get off from the strictest
Precepts that are, if you have Money, but the Poor cannot be comforted Nota
diligenter quod hujusmodi gratia and dispensationes non conceduntur pauperibus,
quia non sunt, and ideo non possunt consolari. Taxa. Cancel. Apostol.
: So great is the moderation of the Church of Rome, so large are her
Indulgences, whether for Commission of Sin, or for Omission of Duty.

. 10. Having mentioned the mildness of the Church's Power, It is meet for the
further showing her Moderation, to note, That our Church in the Government of
her Ecclesiastical Courts, in their manner of Process, Sentence, Appeals, does
make use of the Law of Equity: moderating even the practice of that also with
all due Subordination to other Superior Laws: According to Equity, our Church
desires all its Laws may be interpreted Benignius leges interpretandae sunt quo
voluntas earum conservetur. Capienda est occasio quae praebet benignius
responsum.
: She admits of a mitigation of a rigid Sentence: She does sometimes dispense
with her General Rules upon the exception of a particular Case: Just reason
requiring, she admits a commutation of her Censures. When there is sufficient
Cause, she is ready to abrogate any such Laws as are found inexpedient and
inconvenient: The reason of her Laws ceasing, they are made to cease also: And
to take cognizance of their desires who ask a relaxation of strict or rigid
Law, there is a Court of Faculties constituted on purpose, to grant in many
Cases (not repugnant to the Law of God Camden. Britan. p. 110.
) a Dispensation of some Canons: And if the Ecclesiastical Senate among the
Disciplinarians, might for the greater good of the Church dispense with a Rigid
Law, why Altar Damasc. p. 85.
may not the same be done in a Christian Kingdom by such Authority as the King
and the Laws have constituted? And we count it a great Moderation in our
Establishment, that there is amongst us a right of Appeal allowed in case of
unjust Censure. And the Moderation of our Public Government has been such,
that Permissions which have been sometime known upon occasion, were never
allowed to make void the Laws of the Kingdom or the Church.

It may be added that in the separation and division of Causes, which is made
between our Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts, as excellent Proportions and
Measures are observable, so instead of all is, that the Rules of Ecclesiastical
Practice are with all reserve and subordination to the Laws of the Kingdom. For
our Church uses no other voluntary Jurisdiction than what is established or
confirmed and limited by the Statute or Municipal Law: For the execution of
which, and to correct the Excesses and Defects which shall be found among the
Ministers or People; and to promote Piety, Righteousness, and Sobriety of Life
and Conversation, there are among us frequent Visitations appointed and
practiced by the Bishops and Archdeacons.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Moderation of the Church and Kingdom, referring to the
Administration of Public Laws toward Offenders.
. 1. The occasion of that Mistake which is concerning the unlawfulness of
Coercion in cases which concern Religion.. 2. It may be very well consistent
with the Moderation of the Church (besides her own Censures) to approve and
sometimes desire such Coercion.. 3. The Use thereof in many Cases relating to
Religion, the undeniable Right of the Christian Magistrate.. 4. Some of the
chief Objections hereunto Answered.. 5. Sundry proper Instances of the great
Gentleness and most indulgent Care of our Church toward all its Members.. 6.
The Moderation of the Church and Kingdom not without their requisite and just
Bounds.. 7. The Recourse which our Church desires may be made to the Secular
Arm, is not but upon urgent and good Occasion.. 8. Our Government defended from
unjust Clamours of Persecution, of the Romanists on one side, and the
Separatists on the other.. 9. The Kings of England since the Reformation, and
especially his present Majesty, Glorious Examples of this Moderation. The
effect of this Moderation yet much desired and wanted.

. 1. AS the nature of Moderation has been Explained. (Chapter 1.) The most proper
Instances thereof are such, as show the Gentleness and Mildness of the Church,
with reference to such Censures and Punishments as are used and approved by
Her: Which is most necessary to be observed, because the most general (but
groundless) Objection against the Moderation of our Church has been upon this
Occasion: Which if we truly consider, arises either from a mistake in
Judgment, that all Coercion in matter of Religion is unlawful, or else from an
Impression, which (on the Fancy and Affection of easy and soft Dispositions)
has been made, from the Complaints of several; to whom whatever looks like
Penalty, is commonly irksome and very unpleasing, (especially if it happens
that they are guilty of the same) wherefore they seem in haste to fly unto
Religion as their Sanctuary against Punishment; as if God's Religion, and His
Church had different Altars among us; therefore I doubt not but when the
Prejudice against the former Mistake is taken off, Religion and the Church will
appear to have the same Interest, and the Moderation of the Church may be
fairly acknowledged.

. 2. For the distinct understanding what is right in this Case, we may first
Consider how far toward this Coercion, the Church can move of it self.

1. We cannot but acknowledge the Church as a Society established by our Lord
Christ, and (which was necessary to the being of a Church) had Rulers therein
appointed, with Authority and Power to effect the necessary Ends of Government:
Which could not be without a power of Discipline, to Rebuke and agreeable to
what was practiced among the Jews in their Synagogues; the common Reasons of
which are perpetually the same: Namely, that such a Community and Fellowship as
the Church is, be maintained in Unity, Peace, and Purity (since without these
no such Society can subsist) and that such Offenders may (if possible) be
reduced and amended; who are bound to submit to such Censures, by virtue of
their own first Consent; which was the Condition of being admitted to partake
of the Privileges of such a Communion. But in that general Contempt which is
cast on Sacred things (through the grievous Corruption of the Age) since many
are insensible of their Duty and Relation to the Church as Members; and also
are apt to despise the Church and her Spiritual Discipline: Therefore the
Church in a Christian Kingdom being in other Circumstances than considered
alone by it self, receiving thereby Defense in the exercise of its Power, so
far, that many times the Christian Magistrate is pleased to add (to the
Spiritual Censures of the Church, if need be) such outward and sensible
Punishments, as may touch the Bodies, or Goods, or Temporal Interests of such
Delinquents: In such a case the Church has reason to accept of such Defense,
and to approve also and defend the same civil Animadversions on Offenders,
since they are very lawful and useful, and worthy a Christian Magistrate.

. 3. He being appointed of God for the punishment of Evildoers, and to execute
Wrath on them: Since they on whom the Church rightly inflicts her Censures are
Evildoers, therefore such also the more they undervalue the Censures of the
Church, the more justly are they the subjects of the Civil Magistrates
Punishment.

And since Offenses which affront the Majesty of Heaven are of the highest
Nature, the more Religious a Magistrate is, the more care he will take to see
such Punished. And since Christian Magistrates owe that duty to God (from whom
alone they receive their Power and Sovereignty) they are therefore especially
to take care of Religion; and Common Reason and Experience instructs us, This
cannot be done unless such Laws are guarded with Sanctions of Punishments; that
so They may be indeed a Terror to those who will break the Peace and Order of
the Church: Especially when the Peace of the Church has so great an Influence
on the Peace of the Public State, or Kingdom: Which, when it is Christian, the
Religion of the Kingdom is the chief part of its Laws.

This is the use of no other Power than what the Kings of Israel and Judah had:
And in Christian Kingdoms Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1.
has been used, ever since any Kings have become Christian, for the real good
of the Church, whose Members with all thankful acknowledgment have approved the
same: As has often appeared from sundry Testimonies of the Ancients, which
need not be repeated, since the several Sects which oppose our Church, in this
Matter make use of the same Power to the utmost, when they can come to it: As,
Thorndike. Forbear. of Penal. chapter 29.
The Independent Congregations in New England, have not only Banished the
Antinomians, and put Quakers to Death, but have imposed a Penalty of Five
Shillings a day upon all that come not to hear their Sermons.

And as the Synod of Dort said, There is no Order, no Peace in the Church,
where it may not be lawful to the Church to judge of its own Members, and retain
within due bounds their Licentious Humors. Vt vaga ingenia coerceat intra
debitos limits.


We know God commended Abraham, because he would command his Children and his
Household after him, to keep the Way of the Lord, (Genesis 18. 19.)

And People of different Persuasions, do not question but it is reasonable for
Parents to correct their Children when they absent themselves from such
Teaching as they order them, and when they refuse to read, or hear what
concerns Divine Matters, in the way they judge fitting: And shall not the Power
of the Supreme Magistrate have the like effect for the good Order of the Church?

. 4. But many Object. First, Nothing ought to be so voluntary as Religion: And
indeed Religion ought to be most free, even the choice of our Mind, otherwise
it cannot be our reasonable and acceptable Service: But Penalties (say they)
make that to be Servile, which ought to be most Free: To which may be Answered.
That all Acts of Virtue are to be free likewise, and it is indeed more Noble to
observe good Laws for the love of Goodness, than the fear of Punishment; But
sometime Fear is the beginning of Wisdom, and if Men will not willingly observe
such good Laws, the suffering Punishment is a less bondage than the slavery of
Sin.

All Christian Duty ought to be free and voluntary, but if Men are voluntarily
Vicious, Heretical, and Schismatical, the Christian Magistrate may Act
religiously voluntarily to Punish them, even because they wilfully do what is
evil, when they might have freely Acted what was good: Which offense is the
more aggravated in Matters of Religion, therefore for any to make Religion
their excuse for irregular practices, is to turn Religion and the Church into a
Sanctuary of Wickedness: Irreligion and Heresies have their sensual baits and
temptations, which fear of punishment wholsomely prevents, and usefully takes
away.

2. Others Object, That no Man can be compelled to believe; for Belief must
follow the evidence of things to the Understanding.

It Is true, The Rules of the Christian Church do not allow Force as a means to
bring any to believe Sed nec Religionis est cogere Religionem, quaeisuscipi
spon^e debet non us. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
: But those who have professed that they do believe, and thereby have become
Members of the Christian Society within a Christian Kingdom, and so ought to be
Obedient to the Laws and Orders thereof: If such by their speeches and
behavior say and do what tends to destroy that Society, and disturb its Peace
and Order, when by the execution of good Laws, the pravity of their Minds, as
it betrays it self by disorderly speeches and actions, is corrected; it may be
a proper means to reduce such to a better Mind, which may be the more thereby
prepared to entertain a sound belief: When speculative Errors become voluntary,
they become sinful, and are springs of Vice; and therefore as the interest of
the Public may be concerned, so they properly may come under the animadversion
of Laws. Yet we may take notice that the case is quite different between either
Infidels or weak Christians, and those who have been taught the Christian
Religion:

Who call themselves Christians, and profess themselves of the Society of
Believers: Who presume of themselves, that they are far above the rank of
Ignorant or weak People: When these disturb the common Peace of the Church, and
are in danger to infect others: When the same disorder in the Church has a
dangerous influence on the Peace of the Kingdom: Such from the Nature and Laws
of Christian Society, deservedly come under the Censure of the Church, and the
Punishment of the Civil Laws, especially in a Christian Kingdom. And it is a
great Blessing if such can by any means be reduced: It is but what is
necessary, and what is a great work of Charity (as our Homily has it.)

3. Others pretend they ought not to be punished while they follow their
Conscience.

But (in answer) What if such a Conscience shall cast off all Subjection, must
therefore all Execution of Laws be unlawful? (And they may so do, if they will,
by the same Reason). Again, What if any call that, by the awful name of
Conscience, which is their Prejudice, their false Judgment of things, caused by
the irregular inclination of their wills? Shall that excuse them from their
manifest Christian Duty? When they ought to inform their Consciences right: And
also (as of necessity) be obedient for Conscience sake: The Conscience
therefore of any who are punished for their Disobedience, cannot render that
Punishment unjust, when the Laws themselves are good, and the execution of
those Punishments upon them, are according to those Laws.

4. Many will say, That Counsels and gentle Instructions, are a surer and
better way to prevail. And it is very true: and God forbid but they should be
in their due place used: But if they will not prevail, they are left the more
inexcusable, who notwithstanding are captious of exceptions against their
Governors, to justify their own Schism. Others frequently appeal to
experience of the inefficacy of Punishments to these ends; and that they rather
confirm than root out the persuasions they strike at. And this also may be very
true, when such Penalties are either executed very unconstantly, or in excess,
either to a degree of Injustice or Cruelty: And when the due ends and measures
of Punishments are not observed: whereas moderate and sober Punishments are
justly thought proper, to awaken the minds of Offenders into due consideration
and regard of their Duty: But none can ever reasonably think, that it will
conduce to the peace of the World for any to do as they list. And whereas it is
frequently objected: That the omissions of Forms and Ceremonies is more
severely punished than greater Faults. How greater? (said Bishop Lany before
the King.) Our Earthly Tribunals are not erected to anticipate the Day of
Judgment, to try Men according to the proper measure of their Guilt, but for a
particular End and Use; therefore in some cases such Omissions are pursued with
more care and strictness, because they destroy the very end for which the Power
is given the Church to punish, which is the preservation of Peace and Unity.

. 5. Wherefore now it remains for us to observe the excellent measures of the
Moderation of our Church, in that Gentleness and Benignity, which is showed in
the Administration of her Laws.

1. Religion is no where allowed or desired to be more voluntary than among us:
And no where are any more required by their own choice, and free use of their
own understandings, to take upon them the profession of their Religion.

2. None by our Church were ever compelled to the Faith: When did ever our
Church encourage any Christian King to send his Arms to compel any Pagans or
Infidels to the Faith?

3. Let it be remembered: None in our Church are punished only for their
Opinion: Even The Liberty of Prophesying, says, Opinion may accidentally
disturb Sect. 16. Number. 4.
the public Peace through the overactiveness of the Person, and the confidence
of their Belief, and the opinion of its appendant necessity, and therefore
Toleration of differing Persuasions in these cases is to be considered upon
Political Grounds, and is just to be admitted or denied as the Opinions or
Tolerations of them may consist with the public and necessary ends of
Government.

Let it also be remembered, that our Church and Laws do allow a Liberty of
Conscience, and which is more, a Liberty of Practice, to such a degree as the
Laws of the Kingdom and the Church judge safe for the Public Interest. It Is
evident that they already allow a large and real Toleration, within such bounds
as They have judged the Public Peace may be secured: which large Liberties all
are not sensible of, who enjoy them, because they compare not the effects of
that Spirit of Meekness in our Church, with the Cuts of those Rods (and Axes
too I may say) which have been prepared both by the Romish Communion, and by
other Disciplinarians.

And by the few things which our Church has determined, since there is so
great a liberty left for Mutual Toleration, It is evident that the Divine
Moderation of our Church considers the frame of Man; and the uncertainty,
difficulty, and imperfection of Humane Knowledge, the weakness and variety of
Humane Understandings: She allows much to the force of Prejudice, Education,
and the power and artifice of Seducers: Our Church makes a great reserve of
Dispensation to Persons of modest, humble, docible, and peaceful Spirits; and
proportions its Censures to the degrees of Malice, and the Unchristian Temper
which appears in Offenders; and chiefly designs securing Peace, and the true
ends of Government, and the common interest of her Communion.

4. All Christian care is used to inform and instruct the Ignorant, and those
who are in Error, with all Meekness and Patience: Blanda pietate portandi sunt,
qui increpari pro sua infirmitate non possunt. Prosper de vita Contempl. c. 5.
Counsels, Debates, Persuasions, Concessions, Indulgences, from time to time
have been used, sufficient to justify our Church, and leave her obstinate
Adversaries the more Inexcusable: The Infirm and Veluti pueris absinthia tetra
Cum dare conantur, pri^^ or as pocula circum. Lucret. l. 4.
Weak our Church receives with an Apostolic Care: and earnestly provides, they
be not led into doubtful Disputations. It does not only pray that all such as
have Erred and are Deceived, may be led into the Way of Truth, but requires her
Ministers to use all private Conferences and means that may be, to reduce the
Dissenting Brother: Which Method at large is prescribed in the 3 d Canon, 1640.
for the suppressing the growth of Popery, and is also provided for in the 66
Canon, 1603. It is not my purpose (said King James Confer. at Hampt. Court.
) and I dare say it is not the Bishops intent, presently and out of hand to
enforce these things without Fatherly Admonitions, Conferences, V. Refor. Leg.
Eccl. de jud. contr. har. c. 3.
and Persuasions.

Wherefore the Rules of our Church require in the exercise of her Authority,
great Gravity, Temper, and Wariness: There being no Earthly Providence so
likely to secure the Obedience of Children, as that of Parents not provoking
them, and the difference being not great (and the danger equal) whether that be
done by too great severity of Punishments, or levity of Commands, the one
abating the Love, the other the Reverence due to the Parents Dr. Ham. of
resolv. Controversies.
. Our Church therefore maintains the Reverence due to her, by laying greatest
stress on the weightest matters of the Law: and declares the keeping or
omitting of a Ceremony in it self considered, is but a small thing (setting
aside Wilfulness and Contempt) Pref. of Cerem.
, and which might (in reason) gain Love to our Church, her Punishments are as
mild as her Commands are reasonable.

5. The Punishments for any Errors, yea, Heresy it self, which by our Laws are
allowed, or by our Church are approved, are so moderate, as thereby may appear,
their design is not Destruction, but Amendment and Edification: As our Church
does earnestly commend Gentleness, so it practices the same, for as our Church
says, Homily of the state of Matrimony.
Honest Natures will sooner be retained in their Duties by gentle words than by
extremity and severity, and frowardness is not mended with frowardness, but
with softness: Wherefore the Institution of a Christian Man says, The Bishops
are not bound so precisely, but they may attemper and forbear the Execution of
their Jurisdiction, when by so doing the Cure of the Offenders, and the
Tranquillity of the Church, may be furthered: Our Church being of the same
Judgment with those Fathers of the Church, who when the Donatists were
intolerable, they consented to some lesser Penalty, but constantly condemned
taking away their Lives. Semper tamen Augustinus excipit supplicium Mortis, non
quod illos hoc non mereri putaret, sed tum quia hoc decere Ecclesiae
Mansuetudinem putaret. C. Bellarm. de Laicis, Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 21.
At other times our Church moderates her Censures in proportion to the Offense,
for the reducing the Transgressor; using a Medicinal Censure, before a
Precisive: a less, to prevent a greater Excommunication Canon 48. 88. 109. 115.
: This, she resorts to as the last Remedy Monitio omnes fere Censuras
Ecclesiasticas pracedit. De Polit. Eccl. Anglic. p. 315.
; and so also, that the Church has her Bosom open to any who return and repent
of their wicked Errors and Practices: and upon Repentance, our Church is more
ready to Absolve than otherwise to Bind; and delights to give her Sons to God,
but very unwillingly Form. Senten. Excommunic.
delivers them over to Satan Sic Episcopi affectus boni est -- postremo quod
sanari non potest, cum dolor abscindere. S. Ambros. Offic. l. 2. c. 27.
.

Wherefore those who in the execution of the Church Discipline, abuse the most
excellent Temper of the Church in the Constitution of her Laws, under the
pretense of Ecclesiastical Authority, verily, they most of all deserve the
Churches Rod, and the dire point of her Anathema: Let it be considered (said
Bishop Tailor Ductor Dub. l. 3. p. 259.
) how great a reproach it is to Ecclesiastical Discipline, if it be made to
minister to Covetousness, and to the need of Proctors and Advocates: The more
shame for the over-easie denouncers of that Censure, that inflict it for every
trivial commission, without consideration whether or no repented of; or that
use this sovereign Recipe unadvisedly, for any other end than reforming of the
Profane Doctor Hammond of the Keys c. 5.. 18.
. Where this Discipline is duly exercised, if it has not that effect as it
might, and ought, much may be imputed to the immoderate refractoriness of the
Recusants among us, who are so devoted to their Wills, that they have rendered
our Discipline more useless than it would be: Yet sundry abuses referring
hereunto, our Canons have endeavored to redress.

. 6. But there is a Moderation in Moderation it self -- Solerter cavendum, ne
dum moderatius custoditur virtus humilitatis, solvantur jura regiminis. S.
Greg. M. pastor, cur. par. 2. c. 6.
: Wherefore it is one great Commendation of the Moderation of the Church of
England, and her Supreme Governors, when the Case has required, their
Moderation has been necessarily and conveniently governed, because of the
danger thereof otherwise: For God used Samuel, as a Messenger against Eli, for
his excess of Indulgence to his Sons, 1 Samuel 3. 13. And yet Samuel himself
seems scarce free from the very same fault concerning his Sons, 1 Samuel 8. 3,
15. And this Indulgence occasioned the change of the Civil Government, as the
former was the loss of the Priesthood Iram benignitas mitiget, benignitatem
zelus exacuat, and ita alterum condiatur ex altero, ut nec immoderata ultio,
plasquam opert^t affligat; nec iterum frangat rectitudinem Disciplinae
remissio, Greg. M. l. 4. Epist. 55.
.

Moderation is confessed an excellent Virtue and much to be desired, but then
it is in a subject capable of it, wherein there are extremes and excesses to be
moderated, as certainly there is in all our passions, there it is proper; Only
this Caution Bishop Lany ^n 1 Thessalonians 4. 11.
is to be observed in Lenity, that it be such as may win Men into the Church,
not such as may secure and encourage them to stay without; Yet Lenity and
Gentleness is so good a Virtue, that I am loath to cast Water upon it, or seem
to temper it: But for Men of moderate Opinions, I am at a loss to know what
they should be; for Moderation there cannot be but between Extremes: Now what
extremes are there of Opinions in a settled Church, unless the Church be one
Extreme, and the Schismatic another? And then, the Man of moderate Opinions is
he that is part Churchman and part Schismatic.

-- Possibly they may bestow that good word Moderation upon such as care little
to observe the Law themselves, or to require it of others: But if the Law it
self be too rigorous, in God's Name let it be amended, and not left to the
arbitrary power of others to do it, for that is known to be a remedy ten times
worse than the disease.

Bishop Ward, Nov. 5. 1661. Praestat vivere ubi nihil licet, quam ubi omnia.
There is no Cruelty so great as that of Laxness of Government, nor any Tyranny
in the World like the rage of Subjects let loose; and the little finger of
Licentiousness is harder than the Loins of the severest Laws, and strictest
Government.

. 7. Yet our Church has not recourse to the Secular Arm, but upon urgent and
good occasion: When the Spiritual Power of the Church, cannot have all the
effect which it ought, to keep Men in order for their own good, and the common
peace of the Kingdom and the Church, the supreme political Governor has right
to restrain and animadvert on Heretics and Schismatics, that the Contagion
may not spread as does a Cancer, and that the disorder in the Church may not
influence the disturbance of the Kingdom: therefore when great Reason moves,
the Church is glad when the Civil Power will be friend it so far as to defend
and protect it in its Office, and sometime to render the same effectual, to
enforce a common and public Order even by the Laws of the Land:

For, Institu. of a Christian-man. p. 46.
It is out of all doubt that the Bishops and Priests never had any Authority by
the Gospel to punish any Man by Corporal Punishments, and therefore they were
oftentimes moved of necessity to require Christian Princes to interpose their
Authority, and by the same to reduce the Inobedient to the good Order of the
Church.

. 8. Wherefore it is not improper here to take notice of the wrong notion which
the Romanists and other Separatists have entertained, not only of Moderation
but of Persecution: As if every Spiritual Censure of the Church, or Punishment
of the Magistrate, for the greatest inconformity and disorder and breach of the
Peace of the Church, and the Ecclesiastical Orders of the Kingdom, was
Persecution: when indeed it is but defending the Faith, and the society of the
Faithful, that is, the Church: Which is the noblest Privilege of Christian
Princes, and the most worthy execution of their Power. Yet herein the
immoderate Calumnies of our Adversaries appear more grievous, that upon any
execution of this Power, the Offenders instead of accusing themselves, and
being reconciled to the Lenity of the Church, and the Preserver of its Laws,
They accuse at one blow the whole frame of Government, of direful Persecution,
as if they had erected some terrible Tribunal of Inquisitors, which our Church
does most of all abhor; and does declare against punishing even Heretics (as
such only) with Death, much less those who are falsely branded with that name
(which is the cruelty of the Romish Inquisition): And the Moderation of our
Church has no other Punishments but what are just and proper to convince such,
and reduce them, and secure their own; but indeed if Heretical and Erroneous
Persons cause a Schism and Division, and make a breach upon the Church's
Peace; If the Christian Magistrate restrain or punish such, they do but as in
the Ancient Church the Christian Emperors have done, as when St. Austin
Insectamur vipotestatis secularis Haereticos, non quia fidem deseruerunt, sed
quia illi Catholicos usque ad necem persequuntur. St. Aug. Ep. 50.
was forced to call upon the Imperial Arm for defense of the Church, against
those kind of Donatists called the Circumcelliones.

1. The Romanists set up this cry of Persecution, and the other Separatists
second the loud Clamor Quid juvant leges aequissimae, ubi dominantur Domini,
dixissem Tyranni, legum administri and executores? Altar. Damas. P. 579.
. Notwithstanding, Our Edicts and Statutes made for their restraint, are such
as serve only to awake them, and cause them to consider the innocence of that
Cause, for refusal of Communion in which they endure, as they suppose, great
Losses: Those who are sent over by them either for the retaining the already
perverted, or perverting others, are either returned by us back again to them
who dispatch them to us, or without any wrong unto their Persons, or danger to
their Lives, suffer an easy restraint, which only hinders them from dispersing
their Poison they brought, and had they not been stickling in our State
Businesses, and meddling with our Prince's Crown, there had not a drop of their
Blood fallen to the Ground T^t conjurationes and machinationes and rebelliores
publicae in illo Regno ortae sunt, ut illae non solum fuerint justae, sed etiam
Moderatae poenae delin quentium. Ad R. Eliz. Rex Jac. in Apologia. Quod me de
Catholicorum persecutione calumniantur, nunquam probari potest, quenquam
Conscientiae causa and Religionis ergo, me regnante, hactenus vel morte
mulctatum fuisse, vel in mortis periculo versari. Rex Jacobus. ibid.
.

Yet they traduce our Judiciary Proceedings against them for sanguinary and
violent, striving to persuade other Nations, that such as have suffered by
Course of public Justice, for Religion sake only, and not for Treason, have
Died M. Hales of dealing with erring Christians.
. -- And the less wonder that these Penal Laws are not taken away, until those
Principles be fully renounced which gave occasion to them: Yet this may be
noted of the Moderation of our Government, in not suffering the Course of our
Law to proceed, but when the apprehension of danger has been great.

2. As to most of our other Separatists: Who sees not their Hypocrisy, who
would make the World believe they are persecuted, when with too much Lenity
they are punished for their intolerable contempt of good Laws: It is to be
doubted what these Men will do when Persecution comes indeed, who make now so
much of nothing Archbishop Whitgift answer to Admon. 1572.
.

The Moderation of our Church in this matter, Bishop Sanderson Bishop
Sanderson's judgment in one View.
thus also defends: Our Church, it is well known, has not always used that
Rigor she might have done: Where she has been forced to proceed as far as
Deprivation, she has ordinarily by her fair, slow, and compassionate
proceeding therein, sufficiently manifested her unwillingness thereunto, and
declared her self a Mother every way indulgent enough to such ill nurtured
Children as will not be ruled by Her. 2. Those that are suspended or deprived,
suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt: For however they would
bear the World in hand that they are the only Persecuted ones, and that they
suffer for their Consciences, yet in truth they do but abuse the Credulity of
the simple therein: And herein (as in many other things) jump with the Papists,
whom they would seem above all others most abhorrent from: For as Seminary
Priests and Jesuits give it out they suffer for Religion, when the truth is,
they are justly executed for their prodigious Treasons, and felonious or
treacherous Practices against lawful Princes and States: So the Brethren
pretend they are persecuted for their Consciences, when they are indeed but
justly censured for their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of lawful
Authority.

It Is well known the Quakers were hanged in New England: Yet

To these, who so much cry out Persecution, says the Friendly Debate: Are Page
218. Part. 1.
you not allowed to worship God just as you please in your own Families? May
not some of your Neighbors join with you? For shame do not complain of
Persecution who are so kindly used Si ea quae per misericordissimam disciplinam
patiuntur, comparentur sactis quae furi^sa temeritate committunt, quis non
videat qui magis Persecutores vocandi sunt. S. Aug. Ep. 167.
, who endeavored in such a manner to oppose others: The Common Prayer was
never imposed with such Rigor as the Directory was.

M. Dryden's Ep. Ded. 1678.
We have already all the Liberty which Freeborn Subjects can enjoy, and all
beyond is but License: But if it be Liberty of Conscience which they pretend,
the Moderation of our Church is such that its Practice extends not to the
severity of Persecution, and its Discipline is withal so easy that it allows
more freedom to dissent then any of the Sects would allow it: In the mean while
what right can be pretended by these Men to attempt Innovations in Church or
State? Who made them Trustees, or to speak in their own Language, the Keepers
of the Liberties of England?

Wherefore if a perfect pattern of dealing with Erring Christians were to be
sought, there were not any like unto this of ours, which as it takes not to it
self liberty of Cruelty, so it leaves not any the liberty of destroying their
own Souls in the error of their Lives M. Hales of Erring Christians.
.

. 9. Here humble thankfulness and duty binds us to make mention of the most
glorious examples of Princely Moderation which the Christian World ever has
exhibited, namely the Moderation of our Kings which have been since the
Reformation: which gives a great Luster to the subject here treated of: Of whom
those have been most fortunate to whom belongs that Character, which was given
of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, (...). Mar. Anton. l. 1.. 16.
He had skill and knowledge when Rigor and Extremity, and when Remisness and
Moderation Neque multa asperitate exulcerentur subditi, nec nimia benignitate
solvantur. Gregor. M. de Cura Pastor.
was in season: (Or as King James's Phrase to the Parliament, 1622. was) when
the Spur and when the Bridle was to be used. The very Enemies of Q. Elizabeth,
among the Romish Faction, could not but confess, that Her Laws and Procedings
were very mild and merciful Watson's Quodlibets. p. 303. V. Fowlis Hist. of
Popish Treasons l. 7. c. 2. etc.
: And yet how very often did they Treasonably attempt against her Life? Neither
did her Indulgence sufficiently prevail with the other sort of Recusants to
conform, as the Queen by all means did desire. That wise King James (in his
Basilicon Page 31.
) earnestly from our dear-bought Experience, warned his Son, that his Mildness
and Lenity found (in Scotland) little effect: and the loss of his thanks was
all his reward. And in his Reign, of the Romanists in England, Isaac Casaubon
asked Fronto Ducaeus, An illa divina in negotio Religionis Moderatio quicqam
apud vestros profuit? p. 73.
Whether the King's Divine Moderation in business of Religion, had prevailed
one whit among them?

K. Charles the First was so great an example of Moderation in Judgment and
Practice, that (as his Character is in his Life) He pursued Moderation in spite
of the Malignity of the Times: Yet he was made a Royal Martyr, rather than he
would betray the Church to either of its Enemies on either extreme. The
Moderation and Clemency of his present Majesty has appeared to all the World
as the most radiant Luster of his Crown: And yet it may be an astonishment to
the most moderate Men to consider, how unaccountable the rage of the Jesuits,
and some other Romanists have been toward a Prince of such Divine Clemency and
wonderful Grace, even to those of their Communion: And how little the more
peaceable and orderly and complying the greatest part of our other Dissenters
have been, notwithstanding all that Forgiveness and Moderation and Favor,
wherewith he has crowned both sorts of Enemies, by heaping of Coals of Fire on
their Heads; Where do we see either of them generally the more melted down into
greater Humility and Observance? Or the more inflamed in a passionate sense of
the excellency of that Moderation which from the King and the Church they have
so much experienced Ne Regum quidem mansuetudine abuti consultum est, non
ignorant illi vires suas. Erasm. de amab. Eccl. Concord.
? What Re-condescention has been made by them for all the Indulgences of his
Majesty from first to last?

Julian the Apostate was honored as a wondrous Moderate Prince, because he
permitted the Sectaries then their Liberty in Religion: And Valentinian
Valentinianus hoc Moderamine principatus inclaruit, q^o^ inter Religionum
diversitates Medius ste^it: neque ut hoc coleretur imperavit aut illud. Am
Marcellinus.
the Emperor was in those days counted Moderate, because he stood middle and
indifferent (as we may say, between God and Baal, that is) to any sort of
Worship.

But the Christian Moderation of our Kings has been so well tempered, I cannot
express it but in some of their own words. To any number of our Loving Subjects
we very willingly Comply, with the advice of the Parliament, that some Law be
made for the exemption of tender Consciences. Provided that this Ease be
attempted and pursued with that Modesty, Temper, and Submission, that in the
mean time the peace and quiet of the Kingdom be not disturbed; The decency and
comeliness of God's Service discountenanced, nor the pious, sober, and devout
Actions of those Reverend Persons who were the first Laborers in the blessed
Reformation be scandal'd and defamed His Majest. Declaration, 1641.
.

So cool a Moderation methinks should have tempered and prevented the growing
Flame: Or since, it might have been extinguished by that Act of Grace, among
many others, which connived at their private Meetings to the number of Five,
etc. which if only Conscience rightly so called was the reason in the Case,
might have contented any sober Dissenters: But, in that, unhappy was Alexander
the Great, Aestuat Infelix angusto limite mundi.
He swelled the more for being Confined.

Nevertheless, what Thuanus said in his Epistle to K. Henry 4th of France, has
been much more true in our Case among us. You, Sir, have graciously restored
them to their Houses and Goods, and most of them you have adorned with Primary
Dignities, supposing that by degrees their Hatreds being assuaged, and that
Concord which you have decreed being more conveniently established among those
that were at Enmity, thereby cheerfulness being returned to their Minds, what
in Religion is best, and what is most ancient may be discerned, Vt ex eorum
quiet, aliorum adhuc in Schismate positorum Corda flectantur. Greg. M. l. 7.
Ep. 97.
etc. Yet notwithstanding all the Moderations which have been used, the
Romanists have gone on in their Serpentine way of Insidiousness: And the
Sectaries also have been like the deaf Adder which will not hear the voice of
the Charmer, charm he never so wisely: But we may not wonder if the favors and
bounties of Princes cannot make them be thought so much as Moderate, with some
sorts of Romanists such as are of Suarius's Praetered favores and beneficia
quae Catholic^s se contulisserefert, and parvi momenti sunt ad excusandam
Persecutionem: non enim Religionis causa illis fave^e, vel potius cum illis
dissimulare incepit, sed obrationes politicas ut in principio Regni sui omnes
sibi aliquo modo conciliaret. -- Et fortasse illis blanditiis and honoribus
eorum animos lu^rari cupiebat, -- Quod si ita est id non excusatio sed po^ius
pars and augmentum Persecutionis censenda est, Suarii Def. l. 6. c. 10. de
Persecutione Anglic.
mind; who treating of the English Persecution under King James, argues very
Scholastically; His pursuing them with Favors and Benefits to be even one
great part and aggravation of their Persecution: That being only a politic kind
of dissimulation, by blandishments and honors to gain upon their minds: O the
favors of good Princes sometimes ill-placed, thus to be commented on, and
requited!

CHAP. XIV. Of the general Moderation of our Church toward all that differ from
her, and are in error.
. 1. Our Church takes an universal care to satisfy and reconcile those who
differ from her: Particularly our Domestic Dissenters, to whom sundry
Concessions have been made.. 2. Our Church is not forward to denounce Curses
against those who are not of the same Judgment with her.. 3. Our Church does
not judge all according to the Consequences of their Doctrines.. 4. In refusing
an adverse Party, Our Church gives an excellent Example, not to use odious
Names.. 5. Our Church uses great care to preserve and restore peace.. 6. The
Moderation of the Church gives it a singular advantage to convince Dissenters
upon right and proper Principles.. 7. The Moderation of our Church does
incomparably qualify Her to arbitrate and reconcile the present differences of
the Christian Churches.. 8. A Supposition laid down of the most possible means
of Reconciling a Protestant, and such a Romanist as lays aside Infallibility:
and that the Church of England has done her part, in what was fit, toward any
just Reconciliation.. 9. An Answer to that common Calumny of the Separatists,
that our Governors in the Church of England have more peace and reconciliation
for Papists, than for the most moderate Protestant Dissenters.

. 1. ALthough the lenity and benignity of our Church, toward those who differ
from her, even toward Offenders, has sufficiently appeared from what has bin
already delivered: Yet moreover, in an universal care to satisfy all who differ
from Her, and to reconcile them to Truth, and to Her self; Our Church has been
always ready to give an Apology and Reason of Her Faith and Practice.

Particularly, Our Domestic Dissenters have less reason to except, because Our
Church has wisely and faithfully provided, whatever is necessary or expedient
for those who are, or ought to be within Her Communion; As becomes a good
Steward of the Family of Christ, there is in her House (the Church of the
Living God) whatsoever is requisite to promote the true Worship of God, the
Communion of Saints, the Kingdom of Christ, the Emendation and Edification of
all in brotherly Love, and Faith, and Godliness, as appears from the excellent
Monuments of the Churches Piety, Her Articles, Liturgy, Canons, and whatsoever
else belongs to Her Constitution: The Church Doors are open, we have the Holy
Scriptures in our Mother Tongue frequently read and expounded in Preaching and
Chatechism; We have the excellent Prayers generally accommodated to all public
Occasions, and the Holy Sacraments ritely administered, and all Spiritual Means
necessary to prevent Heresy and Schism; Over and above, we have Our Prince, the
professed Defender of our Faith; and the assistance of the Ministry of God for
all particular occasions, public and private, which humane foresight generally
can procure; (of these things we have a large Confession in the Morning
Exercise against Sermon. 9. p. 209.
Popery.) Our dissenting Friends should therefore consider that the Case is
quite different from the condition of the Church, when it was forced to
assemble together in Homily of Idol. 3 part.
low and poor Conventicles, simple Oratories, and Caves underground, called
Cryptae, for fear of persecution. Since these things are so, A wild humor
possesses too many who run into dangerous and forbidden Conventicles,
scandalously insinuating, that our Church and Kingdom, rather persecute than
encourage Christianity.

But because nothing in this World is so perfect, but may have its exceptions
framed against it, especially when fair Constructions are not allowed:
therefore for the sake of Peace, and in hope, by the Church's Condescension and
endeavor to remove even all suspicion of what is blameworthy, there have from
time to time bin many Concessions made, for the utmost satisfaction of all, in
what has been thought expedient: Our Church being of the mind of Father
Nazianzen (...).
; who in his Oration of Peace, said, Come, let us give way, that so we may
overcome; let us grant a little, that so we may gain a great deal, even Peace.
Not only in Queen Elizabeth's time some things were changed, (then being taken
into advice, many Learned and Moderate Divines Camdens Hist. of Q. Eliz.
) but even since our Reformation, there have bin Concessions made in
accommodation to Dissenters: Our Church still holding the mean, between too
much moroseness, and too much easiness in admitting Variations Pref. to the Lit.
. There are two sorts of Popularity, (said Calvin to Farellus) one, when with
Ambition and Lust to ingratiate our selves, we hawk after the popular Air; the
other, when by Moderation and Equity, we endeavor to engage the affection of
Men, only to render them more docible. This latter practice belongs to Our
Church: which has wisely accommodated Her self to all, to gain Submittendo nos
ad mensuram discentis, and manum dando and gradum nostrum minuendo. Quintil.
some. Our Church being of the temper of those whom Tully calls Courteous and
Sweet, who gently show those that err the way, which is the true Christian
disposition, different from what Juvenal Non monstrare vias eadem nisi Sacra
colenti.
described in the Jews. Yea, one of the great perfections of the Christian
Practice, (which is an Universal Charity to all, even Enemies) may be much
promoted by our Church's Prayers, where we pray for all Men, and for Enemies,
and for Persecutors and Slanderers: Yea, such is the Charity of Our Church,
that in it every one is presumed good, and orderly, and willing to be of Her
Communion, until it appear lawfully to the contrary.

. 2. Whereas of the Extremes of the Separation on either hand from Our Church,
it is too well known how generally they give out themselves as the only Children
of God's Church, the only Beloved of God, and scarce admit any else to have any
portion with their Saints: Nevertheless for such matters as they contend, Our
Church is not busy to send Men presently to Hell Quod eo consilio invectum ut
terrore mortis credulos in obsequium trahant. D. An. Sall. Votum pro Pace.
with an Anathema in their Ear, crying out against them, Go ye Cursed: Yea,
very moderate she is in her Judgment of the final condition of any without good
and sufficient grounds, because of the unsearchableness of the Divine
Providence in his Government of the World, and of particular Men: Yet the
Moderation of our Church is not of such a Latitude to hold, That every Man may
be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to
frame his life according to the Law and Light of Nature; for Holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved*:
39. Articl. 18.
Wherefore in giving account of the remission of such Punishments as are
declared by the Divine Laws, Our Church does not think fit any should be wiser
than those Laws themselves, and the Divine Revelation. The Church of England
(said Archbishop Laud) is not such a shrew to her Children, as to deny her
Blessing, or denounce an Anathema against them, if some peaceably dissent in
some particulars remoter from the foundation Dissentio de minimis and de
opinionibus non repugnat paci imperfectae quae est in via. D. Tho. 22. q. 29.
a. 3.
.

. 3. Neither is our Church so severe, as to judge of all Maxim cum sciat eos
fac^re quae nesciunt, nostros autem negligere quae credunt. Salvian. de gub.
Dei.
Erroneous Persons according to all the Consequences of their Doctrines: Which
we presume in many Cases are beyond the comprehension and knowledge of the Party
so erring: Much less is our Church at any time busy to exulcerate the minds of
any, by attributing to them such Consequences as their Assertions will not bear.

. 4. In refuting the Objections of an adverse Party, Our Church gives an
excellent Example to her Sons to abstain from odious Names. Most wholesome to
this purpose was the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth; That the Knot of all
Christian Inj.. 50. 1559.
Society (which is Charity) be not loosed, the Queen's Majesty straightly
commands all her Subjects to forbear all vain Contentions and Disputations in
Matters of Religion, and not to use, in despite or rebuke of any Persons, these
convitious words, Papist or Heretic, Schismatic or Sacramentary. So King James
said, He would not have Pulpits made Pasquils Confer. at Hamp. Court.
; and in his Aug. 4. 1623.
Letter to the Archbishop, requires, That no Preacher, of any denomination
whatsoever, presume to fall into indecent railings against the Persons of
Papists or Puritans. So in our Subscription for University Preachers, we
promise, We will preach without odious invectives, and indiscreet discourses by
name, or plain Circumstances; we will not defame any Man.

Much to this purpose is set forth in our Homilies, Homily against Contention.
That by being soft, meek, and gentle in answering, we may overcome our
Adversary with gentleness; especially in Matters of Religion and God's Word,
which should be used with all modesty, soberness, and chastity: For it is
better to give place meekly, than to win the Victory with breach of Charity: Of
such an Apostolical Spirit is our Church! ^ius and simplex affectus, interdum
tolerandu^ est, etiamsi cum aliquo conjunctus est Errore. Erasm. de amab. Eccl.
Concor.
So S. Austin called the Pelagians, and Optatus of Milevis, his Contempory,
called the Donatists Brethren: and before them S. Cyprian wishes and
persuadeth that none of the Brethren might perish: So our Church calls, and
treats the Dissenters as Brethren. In confuting Opinions, Our Church always
spares the Persons, how severe soever she is upon the Error: because in the
Divisions of hearts that are in the World, it is certain some good may dissent
Duct. Dub. l. 3. c. 4.
. So moderate also and just is our Church, she is far from deterring others
from her Communion, by branding any with the note of Heresy, unless upon just
reason and cause: distinguishing also between a Heretic, and those who are by
Heretics seduced (Quidam Schismatum Duces) caeteri tamen vel simplicitate
capti, vel errore inducti, vel aliqua fallentis astutiae calliditate decepti, a
fallaciae laqueis vos solvite. S. Cypr. de unit. Eccl.
. Yea, where there might be just cause, Our Church rather chooses to imitate
St. Paul 's demeanor at Athens, where finding the City full of Idols, or
wholly given to Idolatry; He does not fall foul upon Bishop Sanderson's Preface
to his Sermon.. 16.
them, nor exclaim against them in any reproachful manner; no nor so much as
call them Idolaters, though they were such, and that in a very high degree; but
tempering his speech with lenity and condescension, he tells them only of
their Superstition; and that in the calmest manner, ((...)) [ye are somewhat
Act. 17. 23
too superstitious,] (the comparative degree in such kind of speaking being
usually taken for a diminuent term.)

. 5. In reference to Peace and Charity, (which is the excellent Bond of
Ecclesiastical Society) the Moderation of the Church appears from its most
earnest and frequent Precepts, and Desires, and Declarations for Peace: It
being that quiet condition of Being, in which any thing may exercise its proper
and suitable Actions, in order to its good and perfection: Wherefore because
the proper Actions of the Church regularly tend to the perfection of Truth and
Goodness: and these most obtain, when Peace bestows upon them Ornament,
Strength, and Blessing; Therefore our Church has done so much to procure, to
keep, to restore this Peace every where, especially among the Churches See the
Questions in the Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. K Edw. 6. and Q.
Eliz. Injunc.. 21. Homily of Charity. Hom. against Contention.
.

. 6. The Moderation of our Church gives it a singular advantage to convince
Dissenters upon right and proper Principles: in defect of which, in disputation
with the Romanists, Bishop Sanderson and others have observed, many have
disserved their Cause, either mistaking the Question, or mingling some of their
own false Principles with their Argument; either over-shooting, or coming short
of the Mark: Wherefore those of our Separatists are very injurious to the
Protestant Cause, who take so much pains to elevate and depreciate the Labors
of our Conformable Clergy, which so sensibly have pressed the Romanists, because
they have managed those Controversies upon the only right Principles: Which
requires greater variety and depth of true Learning, than seems to be well
consisting with the Principles of a rigid Separation.

. 7. Because of the excellent Moderation of our Church, it has bin judged by
the most Learned, and the most equal Judges of things, so well pitched in Her
Principles, and of so rare a temper in her Constitution, that it is rightly
resolved to be the best and most proper for Accepi perniciosam esse in omni
art vel Doctrina assertionem audacem and extremam. Gerson. de vita Sp.
Arbitrating and reconciling the present Differences of Christendom. Wholesome
indeed was the Advice which King James gave his Divines which were to be at
Dort:

In case of main opposition between any overmuch addicted to their own
Opinions, your endeavors shall be, that certain Propositions be moderately
laid down, which may tend for the mitigation of heat on both sides. The same is
already performed in our Constitution for a general Accommodation of
Controversy: Neither will any, I hope, have the worse Opinion of our Church,
because Grotius thought the Church of England, a right Medium of V. Bp.
Bramhalls Vind. p. 23.
Reconciliation: Whose Pacificatory Design Mr. Baxter took to be one of the
most blessed noble Works that any Man Ib. p. 22.
can be employed in. And certainly Peace without the loss of Truth, is a most
valuable acquist: Yet Men's fingers do Via Media. Bp. Halls Remains. p. 387.
so itch after the maintenance of their Opinions, that they can hardly contain
themselves from flying upon the fairest Moderation of any Vmpire. Wherefore no
wonder if the Church of England has the fortune of other wise and good
Arbitrators, not to please both Parties; Hic accidit, quod usu veniri solet iis
qui contrarias Opiniones student reconciliare: ut utrique in Media Opinione
oppugnanda vires suas consocient, ipsi interim in opinione sua multo quam ante
obfirmatiores. In Hist. Council. Trid. l. 3. p. 239.
Therefore our Church has this left her, (as such have) to be satisfied in her
own integrity. But however in this Matter Our Church cannot (I conceive) so
properly be termed an Arbitrator or Umpire of the Differences of the Church
(how fitly soever she is qualified to be) as she has determined for her self,
(which she has right to do) according to the Word of God, and the practice of
the Universal Church: Yet in this Our Church has performed so much as might be
made use of, in order to a due Reconciliation.

For suppose a Kingdom or State well settled, (as was the Primitive Church by
Christ) and there happens a Rebellion or Division, the means of Reconciliation
are the Laws; to attempt a Reconciliation further, is in no hand of right but
theirs who have Power of the Law: Any design further is but a Speculation; and
so in the Church to speak of Reconciliation, otherwise than upon the foundation
of its establishment, is neither safe nor obtainable. What is removed from the
foundation, is the proper Matter of Charity and mutual forbearance: But as the
different Judgments and Interests of the divided World are now, a
Reconciliation is thought impossible, and generally impracticable; but because
the very speculation of Peace is delightful, we make in the Idea this
Supposition.

. 8. Admit (which is a case possible) some few Families of well-bred, and
better disposed Persons, but of as different Persuasions in the Extremes as any
are among us, were to settle together in some remote Island, and had a singular
inclination to compass a Communion with each other, in what they might in
Spiritual Matters: The means to bring this about, one would think, must be the
same which all wise Persons would take to convince another of a different
Persuasion; namely, by moving upon such Principles as both agree in; which
being improved to the utmost they are capable of, must be between them the
common foundation of a possibility of agreement: Suppose then upon this score a
Romanist, and an extreme Dissenter should yet agree in the most Fundamental
Articles of Faith, (contained in the received Creeds) and in acknowledging the
Holy Scriptures in their Original; or admitting the Vulgar Version (or the
like); and if they admit the four first General Councils so much the better:
Upon this Stock an accommodation must be negotiated amongst them.

1. Neither pretending to be Dictators one to the other, (for that will spoil
all) but to acquiesce as these Principles and their best Reasons shall govern
them to a fair intercourse in common. For Union in Practice, 2. No unjust
condition of Communion must be enjoined on either hand: Nor any thing but what
is very necessary and clear, (as well as they can) agreed on according to those
first Rules. 3. Both must sincerely bear with one another, in what they appear
to differ, and to forbear all occasions of giving mutual distaste that may be.
4. Sufficient security must be mutually given against such Principles, the
professing and pursuing of which necessarily destroys all Civil and Spiritual
Communion: As for Instance, That Faith is not to be kept with those whom one
part calls Heretics: Or that right of Dominion one over the other is founded
in Saint-ship, etc. 5. For accommodation in Peace-sake, if these and the like
Principles and Doctrines be publicly and sufficiently renounced, then they
must mutually take care, that the evil Consequence of either shall not be
imputed to those particular Persons who do detest them and acknowledge them most
impious.

This being the proper Foundation for Communion together in Doctrine,
Sacraments, and Discipline; the consequent business is to convince such as will
admit of the Debate, That those Doctrines and Practices which are received,
above and beside what are mutually agreed in; do really contradict the clear
Contents of the Scripture, or the Judgment of the Universal Church, and are not
of safe influence on the Christian Religion: It may do well to be shown by
Instances of Fact; and the light of concurrent Tradition, when the particular
Innovations entered in, by what occasions and degrees, and the evil Consequences
of them all: Which will more effectually be performed, if it can be
demonstrated, That most of this is acknowledged by the many of the sincere
amongst themselves, (at quiet Intervals.) And if they can, distinguish between
what might be of Original good intent, or had at least a plausible pretense;
and what is of manifest corruption.

So much of all this as was proper and belonging to the Church of England to
perform, that She may acquit her self from the Imputations of those who deny
her Communion, let the whole Church of God judge how carefully, and how
peaceably She has done her part. But those of the Church of Rome, who have
appeared desirous of Reconciliation, have done it either for civility of
Conversation, or out of Design, or without leave of their Superiors: For, admit
Protestants could open a Door to the Peace of Christendom, the Romanists Number
vero spem aliquam ostendunt (Pontificii) Moderationis le^ationis and
emendationis? nihil profecto minus, quin execrandum Anathema dicunt, etc.
Chemn. ex. Cone. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 13.
set a Bolt on their side by their Doctrine of Infallibility, (however they
place it) whereby they seem to think it unlawful to correct themselves of such
Errors as most grievously divide the Church: Therefore (as the case stands) the
Learned Thorndike Forbearance of Penalties. Chapter 8. p. 38.
professes himself freely, to be without any manner of hope, that ever the Sea
of Rome will abate any thing of their Rigor: tho the Reformation should
content themselves with these terms: for I find, by the proceeding of former
Times, that it is their Maxim, To stand to that which they have once done: And
to mark those Popes to posterity that have abated any thing from the rigor of
their Predecessors. For, being arrived at this greatness, by this rigor and
obstinacy in all pretenses, right or wrong, they will always think themselves
obliged in reason of State, not to yield so much as the Cup in the Eucharist:
Not considering all this while that this rigor is the cause of Division.

The Remedy therefore must begin from those Parties which have given cause of
the breach; if they shall remit of their undue height and rigor, and be
content with those moderate bounds, which God has set them, both for Doctrine
and Government, and yield themselves but capable of Error, there may be a
possibility of Union and Peace: but while they persist to challeng an
Infallibility of Judgment, and uncontroulableness of Practice, they do wilfully
block up the way to all Reconciliation and Concord, and stand guilty of all
that grievous Schism, under which the Church of God thus long and miserably
suffers Bp. Halls Remains, p. 410.
. Casaubon of Reformation, p. 147.
But This is the grand Mystery of Jesuitism and Politic Popery at this day, to
look upon all moderate Counsels as pernicious and destructive.

. 9. The design of Peace is generally applauded by all: and indeed it is so
excellent an undertaking, it seems a great pity that any endeavors for it
should at any time be blasted with suspicion, misconstruction, and ill success.
And whereas some have Objected against us, that we are ready to choose
Pacisication with the Romish rather than with the Protestant Dissenter. We
Answer, 1. in general, with respect to both: That true Christianity requires us
to be Enemies to no one; If any will be to us, and to Truth, the blame must lie
at their Door who give the just cause. If any require plainly sinful
conditions, indispensable to hold Communion with them, in such a case the
Command holds good, Come out from among them, and be ye separate. The reason
why, in Disputation, Reconciliation with the Romanists has upon such terms
mentioned, bin spoken of, is because; They are they who have laid the
Obstruction to all Union by their enormous Corruptions, and it lies upon them
to remove the Obstruction; and no wonder if they be called on so to do: And who
will not consent to that (however hopeless) desire; if they will lay aside
their Corruptions, we may be all one Sheepfold under one Shephard, Christ
Jesus? Concerning such Projects of Reconciliation with the Church of Rome,
which have been made long since by some of the most moderate of their own
Communion, and some other Learned Men amongst Protestants: Of which Cassander's
Consultation Ergo istipii and pacifici viri sunt omnes ficti and simulati. C.
Bellarm. Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 19.
, with Grotius's Annotations also thereon, are most common and famous: Of these
this may safely be said, (whether and to what degrees their Designs be approved
or condemned, however) they have given abundant Proofs, wherein the Church of
Rome at present appears the more irreconcilable, the more she is opposite to
all such terms of Reconciliation which they have discoursed. If some other
Discourses have bin at any time made by any of our Communion, referring to such
Reconciliation with some Romanists, they may be looked upon only as such
Suppositions as have bin among Learned Men generally discoursed, thereby the
more clearly to show the unreasonableness of the Romish Rigours. But whatever
may be proposed as a mere Speculation; the vanity of concluding upon any such
Union as likely may appear from the Principles of the Church of Rome; which are
such, if we take away her Corruptions, we take away Popery it self. Yet it must
be acknowledged, the Art of the Romanist, even in such seeming Concessions, is
very notorious, to gain such Points for themselves, as may serve their present
turns, and may make afterwarward for the confirmation of their own Rigours.
But, (whatsoever some few among them promise) what should be consented to by
them, is like an Agreement made by a Minor, which is void, as the Tutor and
Governor shall please: for we know, not only what the nature of their Gifts
are, but also how they receive and return Concessions and Indulgences:
Wherefore such Proposals from any of our Communion are the more needless;
because the Principles of our Reformation are already so prudent and moderate.

As to some who have suspected an inclination in those of our Communion, to
pacification rather with the Romanists than with them: We Answer,

1. This is the nature of Aemulous Parties to be always thus jealous of any
sorts of Communication with their Adversaries; but so long as the Romanists and
Sectaries have had the same kind of jealousy of the same sorts of Persons, it
is but a good proof of the real Moderation of our Church, and of those of her
Communion, in opposition to all undue extremes. Neither ought it to be
interpreted Indifference, Neutrality and Lukewarmness, but impartial constancy
to such Truth as is espoused for her own sake. Sometime that jealousy has bin
raised of design to make the indiscreet sort of Men among us, the more out of
charity with our Church: Notwithstanding it will be made out, (Chapter 17.. 7.)
that those who conform to the Church of England, do not agree with the Papists
so really as our Dissenters do. Our dissenting Brethren often forget what has
bin performed by our Church in opposition to the Romish Corruptions and Errors,
and also for the sake of themselves: They forget how often their Jealousies
have proved groundless and untrue: And it would do well, for the time to come,
if the sincere among them would set down, in some place by it self, such
jealousies of theirs; and in the next Column (over against) would remark their
own frequent mistakes. Such forget also, or seem never to have known, how our
Reformation has bin approved of by the best Protestants: And whereas they seem
to pity the first Reformers, as Men but half so much enlightened as themselves,
who look upon the Moderation of our Church, but proportionable to the first
crepuscular and duskish Light of those Times; in this Matter they speak like
those who have received some Traditions at second-hand from Cartwright, but
never compared his Writings with Archbishop Whitgift: and as they do not seem
to consider the full knowledge and consideration which our Reformers had of the
Principles and Abuses of Popery: and the diligent eye they had also to such
other Reformations, as before ours had their perfection; so they do not
consider that our present Establishment was constituted with respect to our
Protestants of the greatest aversation from Rome.

It is much to be feared, that those that clamor most of us for pacification
with the Romanists so little understand what they would have, that because the
Romanists hold (as Mr. Perkins shows) Reformed Catholic.
the same necessary Heads of Religion with us, they seem willing and contented
we should renounce sundry Articles of our Creed, that we may be sure not to
agree with them. And this is spoken upon good grounds, for many of our
Protestant Dissenters, as they are called, do (as it is too well known) not by
Consequence only, but in direct terms, deny many, (I may say of these few)
first Fundamental Verities of Common Christianity (as, it is a sad thing to say
it may be shown at large); and yet nevertheless, what kindness! what
friendship! what Correspondence is practiced and encouraged by them daily with
these Friends? who are less suspected or reviled, than the true and firm
Protestants of the Church of England.

And whereas they commonly say, That the Church of England, and the chief of
Her Communion, are unwilling to allow any Pacification with, or Concessions to
Protestant Dissenters, as may be reasonable for public Concord. We Answer;

1. They are utterly mistaken in saying so; for beside that, the conditions of
Communion with our Church are very equal and just. We may presume to say also,
from what our Church has done, and has declared She is willing to do; and
from the disposition of Her Communion, there is no doubt but our Church would
gladly (in such things as she might) remit of what she judges otherwise
expedient; for the ends of Peace and Universal Concord, if she could be assured
any reasonable Concessions should have that effect, as might suit with the true
Honor of God, and the real good of the Church.

Uniformity in Religious and Ecclesiastical Matters sure is so excellent and
desirable a gain, that certainly an establishment somewhat less perfect; with
being of the same mind so far as we have attained, and with a regular and
effectual observation of good Laws, is more expetible, than an appointment in
some Circumstances more perfect, without the same uniform order and peace
therewith: But how unequal is it, that they should be the only Arbiters and
Judges of Union, who not only are great Authors of our Dissension, but are at
such great disagreements among themselves, (V. Chapter 18.. 2. Rule 10.) and are so
imperious and tyrannical in their disobedience, as some of them are?

CHAP. XV. Of the Moderation of the Church toward other Churches and
Professions of Men.
. 1. In that Universal Concord which our Church has maintained with all, so
far as lawfully and usefully it may.. 2. Her protesting against unsufferable
Abuses, well consisting with her Moderation and Charity.. 3. Our Church leaves
other Churches to the use of their liberty, and vindicateth that use mutually..
4. Her especial Moderation and Charity toward the Greek Church.. 5. Our
Church's Modesty and wellbecoming Behavior toward other Churches; and their
mutual affection unto Ours.

. 1. THe excellent temper of our Church is abundantly justified in that
Universal Concord and Friendship it desires to maintain with all, so far as may
be done lawfully. Our Church separates indeed as far as is possible, from all
that is vile and impure, making her self (as is the Church) a Society distinct
from Jews and Gentiles; and by her Censures does separate from those that are
inordinate: and in her own defense keeps her self from complying with sinful
and unjust conditions of Communion: Yet with the whole Church throughout the
World, and every part thereof, (to whom her Communion is not displeasing) Our
Church in desire and endeavor, does maintain all inward and outward agreement
she can Odia restringi, favores convenit ampliari. Reg. juris.
; in affections and behavior also so approving her self, that it is manifest
she unwillingly differs from any, and no more than needs must. Thus the 30
Canon of our Church; Nay so far was it from the purpose of the Church of
England, to forsake and reject the Church of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, or
any suchlike Churches in all things which they held and practiced; that as the
Apology of the Church of England confesses, it does with reverence retain
those Ceremonies, which do neither endamage the Church of God, nor offend the
minds of sober Men; and only departed from them in those points wherein they
were fallen, both from themselves in their Ancient Integrity, and from the
Apostolical Churches, which were their first Founders.

Episcopal Divines (says Bishop Bramhall Vindication, p. 30.
) do not deny those to be true Churches where Salvation may be had.

. 2. Neither did our Church of England ever yet oppose it self to any lawful
Ecclesiastical Authority, which yet is inseparably of the Essence of Schism;
but on the contrary, according to a singular Moderation Ecclesia Britannica,
qua est perpetuo in omnes Christianos singulari moderatione and Christiana
dilectiene, etc. De Antiq. lib. Eccl. Brit. These. 4.
, and Charity, it does open its Bosom to every genuine Son of the true Catholic
Church, of what denomination soever. For it is one thing for any to frame to
themselves a diverse Congregation and Religion, separate from, and opposite to
the Universal Church, as anciently did the Donatists, and another thing not to
communicate with some particular Persons and Places in some unwarrantable
usages, and that under express protestation, (from whence was occasioned the
moderate and innocent Title of Protestants V. Cluverium, and Calvisii Chron. ad
An. 1529.
; for protesting against the Edict at Worms, which was for restoring all things
as they were without Reformation.) By which Protestation, all scandal of Schism
is taken away, and desire of reconciliation is publicly testified, not as of
absolute necessity, but for the sake of Catholic Unity: by which Protestation,
a right is vindicated from the usurpation of the Church of Rome, who fondly
calls her self, not only Catholic, but the Mother and Mistress of all other
Churches, by which she makes her self a public invader of common Ecclesiastical
Right.

. 3. In Matters of Ecclesiastical Freedom, The Church of England leaves always
other Churches to their liberty, and vindicates their right to the same V. D
Durell's View of the Reformed Churches.
: As other Reformed Churches leave us to our liberty, and vindicate the same.
(Article 34.) It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all
places one V. Homily of Fasting.
or utterly like; for at all times they have bin diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversities of Countries, Distant inter se linguae, sed
linguarum distantiae non sunt Schismata, omnes lingua ad u^am fidem. S. Aug. in
Joan.
Times, and Manners. -- Every particular National Church, has Authority to
ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies or Rites Pref. of of the Church. the
Cerem.
In these our doings, we condemn no other Nations, nor prescribe any thing but
to our own People only. According to the practice of S. Cyprian, (clearing
himself to the African Bishops) Judging none, nor removing any from the right
of Communion, if they think somewhat diverse from us. For which S. Austin Cujus
charitas non sol^nt illius temporis Christianis sed etiam posteris ad
medicinalem notitiam signatur. S. Aug. de bapt. l. 1. c. 18.
commends S. Cyprian: And as Tully Ita dissensi ab illo ut in disjunctione
sententiae, conjuncti tamen amicitia maneremus. Orat. pro provinc. Consul.
spoke of himself, with relation to Caesar; I so dissented from him, that in
the difference of our Opinion, however we remained entire in our Friendship.

Of this mind also was St. Austin, in matters of different Observances, as to
Times of Fasting, and Days of Communicating; All this (says he) is matter of
liberty; and no practice is more worthy a grave and prudent Christian, than to
act so as he sees the Church does, unto which it happens he comes; and as the
Society does in which he lives S. Aug. Ep. 118. and Ep. 86.
: And in these Matters, of which the Holy Scripture appoints nothing expressly;
the Custom of the People of God, and the Institutes of our Superiors are to be
held for a Law: Of which if we have a list to dispute, and to disprove others
for their different Custom, there will arise endless Contests. M. Amyrald Galli
-- Anglorum c^tibu^ libentissime intersunt and Eucharistiam ex eorum more
participant, and Episcopis sese subjiciunt. Angli pariter -- etc. Amyraldi
Irenicum, p. 351.
well observes the friendly moderation of the English and French Protestants,
when they are in each other Countries, they readily join themselves with the
Communion of the Churches they are in.

Yet such is the abundant Moderation of our Church, That to Merchants and
Strangers of other Churches, are permitmitted their several Congregations and
Churches: And all Aliens of the Reformation have, by Act of Uniformity, an
express provision made for their enjoyment of their own way of worship, at the
pleasure of his Majesty: which is real proof that Conformity does not prejudice
Trade V. Mod. Pleas for Comprehen. answered. p. 210.
. Omnibus notum est quam elementer patiantur peregrinorum Ecclesias Ceremoniis
and ritibus uti diversis ab Anglicana Ecclesia. Saravia. de div. grad. Min. c.
24.
And this tender care of other Churches Liberty, which the Church of England
with great Moderation does profess, other reformed Churches generally return to
us. Which the 30 Canon refers to, where it says, This Resolution and Practice
of our Church, namely, not to forsake and reject other Churches, (only as they
depart from the Apostolical Churches) particularly with relation to the use of
the Cross in Baptism, has bin allowed and approved by the Censure on the
Common Prayer Book in King Edw. 6. days, and by the Harmony of Confessions of
later years. And it was King James his advice to his Divines, to hold a good
correspendence with the Neighbor Reformed Churches: but, says the King, V. in
Apol. Ep. Lectori. Non est mihi ingenium in aliena Rep. curiosum.
I am resolved to leave other Churches to their liberty. And so also K. Charles
I. His Majesty's third Paper to Mr. Henderson.
As I am no Judge over the Reformed Churches, so neither do I censure them.

. 4. As a special note of our Church's Moderation, we must not forbear to
instance her excellent Behavior and Charity toward the afflicted Greek Church;
to whom, as she has opportunity, she has testified a great commiseration, a
most pious affection, and a great esteem: See the Homily against the peril of
Idolatry, wherein our Church does frequently deplore the thraldom of the noble
Empire of Greece to the Turk. I must needs profess (said Archbishop Laud) 9.
p. 26.] Vt videant hi qui facile de haeresi pronuntiant, quam facile etiam ipsi
errent; and intelligant, non esse tam leviter de haeresi pronuntiandum. Alph. a
Castro. Contr. Haer. l. 3. f. 93.
that I wish heartily, as well as others, that those distressed Men, had bin
more moderately dealt with, (tho they think diversely from us) than they have
bin by the Church of Rome. C. Bellarmine having delivered that three of their
Councils have declared her guilty of Heresy. Let the Church of Rome answer for
her self if she can, for her trampling upon the poor Greek Church, as she lies
in the Dust; and branding her with Heresy for her Doctrine of Procession, as
cruelly as her Turkish Masters burn their half Moons on the Bodies of those
whom they enslave: But our Church is not so uncharitable as to define it a
Heresy for any to maintain, That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the
Son, tho we maintain as great a Truth, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son; but this makes no breach of Communion among us, the
difference only arising from inadequation of Languages, which notwithstanding
we agree in the main of this Article Animadversions on Naked Truth. p. 7.
. Such lastly is the moderation of our Church toward the Greek Church, that
some of the Greek Bishops and Priests, are allowed among us the celebrating
Holy Mysteries according to their own Rites In una fide nihil officit Sanctae
Ecclesiae Consuetudo diversa. Greg. 1. Ep. 41.
.

. 5. Other Churches have not bin by the Church of England despised, if in
sundry Instances they have not arrived unto her perfection in purity of
Doctrine, and order of Discipline. With other Churches she does not contend for
Title, or understanding of Mysteries; nor boasts of the Spirit: nor calls her
self (in distinction from other true Churches) the Catholic Church (as of old
the Arians did). Lastly, The Guides of our Church never challenged to
themselves Infallibility.

Although our Church of England has had the peculiar happiness of a Monarchical
Reformation, and retains the blessing of Episcopal Government, yet such is the
Moderation of our Church, she imputes the want of the same, in other Reformed
Churches, not so much to any fault of those Churches themselves, but rather
attributes it to the Injury of the Times Non culpa vestra abesse Episcopatum
sed injuria temporum. Ep. Winton. Ep. 3. Molinaeo. Eos coegerit dura
necessitas. Saravia.
.

Our Church also thankfully commemorates those Acknowledgments which the
Reformed Churches have frequently made of our Moderation and happy Constitution.

And although we remember, when it was commonly objected to us, That the Pastors
of the Reformed Churches abroad, took our Conformity to be a Sin: Sure, the
useful labor of D. Jo. Durell, has for ever silenced that vain reproach: Who
to the whole World, in plain and open Testimonies has now long since 1662.
illustrated the Conformity of the Reformed Churches abroad, to our Church of
England: In matters of Ceremony; subordination of Pastors; use of set Forms and
Liturgy, Holy Days, set Times of Fasting, magnificent Churches, Organs,
Surplice, Church-Ornaments, Cross in Baptism, receiving the Communion kneeling,
etc.

Who has also proved by Testimonies, the practice of those of the Reformed
Churches joining with us, in our Public Worship, by the advice of their
Pastors; either when they come over into England, or in such of our
Congregations as are in their Countries.

If it happens that any Member of the Reformed Churches speak against the
Reformed Church of England, he is censured for it by their Synod.

The Ministers of the Reformed Churches abroad, blame those that refuse to
Conform to the Church of England, when occasion is offered, and hold them for
Schismatics, and are scandalized at them.

Those few Reformed Churches which want Subordination of Ministers, approve the
Episcopacy of the Church of England Certu^ est mihi (...) Anglicanam, item
morem imponendi adolescentibus in memoriam Baptismi, a^toritatem Episcoporum,
Presbyteria ex soles Pastoribus comp^si^a, mul^aque alia ejusmodi satis
congruere institutis ve^ust^oris Ecclesiae; a quibus in Gallia and Belgio
recessum negare non possumus. Grotius. E^. ad Bo^t.
; and wish they had the same, and would esteem it a singular felicity.

All which shows the amity and good correspondence and concord that is
between our Church of England, and other Protestant Churches: and also
justifies exceedingly the excellent Moderation of our Church.

Indeed our Church of England deserves better the name of Catholic, both for
her Catholic Charity, and especially for that she maintains her Communion upon
the Foundations and Principles of Christian Religion, both with the Western and
Eastern Churches; whom the Church of Rome excommunicates from the society of
the Mystical Body of Christ, limiting the Church to Rome, and such places as
depend upon it. As the Donatists did of old to Afric: -- separating her self
also from the Communion of the Churches of Graecia, Russia, Armenia, and all
the Protestant Churches -- Much greater is her Schism, for refusing to be a
fellow-Member with other Churches, in the Universal Church of Christ; and
challenging to be the Head, the Root, the Fountain of all other Churches Bishop
Bramhals Works, p. 990.
. Necessity of Reformation, p. 145:
Yet because they still keep to the main Fundamentals, we do not exclude them
from the Catholic Church, tho by their hard and rigid Censures, and
Excommunication of us and others, that do not hold with them, they do very much
hazard their right and title to the said Catholic Church, as much as by any
thing.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Moderation of the Church of England in her Reformation.
. 1. The Reformation of our Church, as it had just grounds, and was by just
Authority, so it was managed with due Moderation; the Idea of our Reformation
having bin impartial.. 2. The whole manner of it (so far as concerned our
Church) was with great temper.. 3. She separated from the Romish Errors, not
from their Persons any more than needs must.. 4. Our Charity exceeds that of
the Church of Rome, which denis Salvation to all who are not of her Communion..
5. The Preparation of our Church to submit to the Church Universal, saves us
from Schism.. 6. The Reformation of our Church was the more Christian, because
not fierce, but well governed.. 7. Albeit the Moderation of our Church seems to
have enraged her Adversaries; yet because of this Moderation, our Church is the
better prepared to survive Persecution.. 8. The Moderation of our Church in her
Reformation, was founded on Rules of absolute Justice, as in sundry great
Instances is made to appear.

. 1. THe moderate and orderly Reformation of the Church of England, Bishop
Bramhall well calls the Terror and Eyesore of Rome Answer to the Bp. of
Chalcedon, p. 244.
, because of 3 Conditions of a lawful Reformation well agreeing thereto; viz.
Just Grounds; Sufficient Authority; Due Moderation.

1. Just Grounds; Under which head I shall not take too large a compass to
illustrate the Moderation of our Reformation, either from the manifold
Usurpations and Corruptions of the Church of Rome at that time; nor from the
invidious task of looking into the extreme Rigors of any other Models of
Reformation: Neither is it here necessary to reflect more particularly on
Matters of Fact historically relating hereunto, which have bin copiously set
forth by a multitude of Writers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, which
abundantly justify this Reformation both in its Causes and Proceedings, clearly
manifesting how this Church was justified therein, from the unjust conditions
of Communion, which the Church of Rome peremptorily insisted upon.

2. That it might have Just Authority, the said Reformation was managed by the
Guides and Governors of the Church; and was confirmed by Supreme Authority, and
so in every particular was as legal as any Reformation could or ought to be; as
does sufficiently appear from Matter of Fact recounted in the Histories and
Monuments thereof; Wherein the Princes acted their parts, and the Clergy
theirs; they calling together the Bishops and others of the Clergy to consider
of what might seem worthy Reformation; and the Clergy did their part; for
being called together by Regal Power, they met in a National Synod of 62, and
the Articles were agreed on, and were afterward confirmed by Acts of State, and
Royal Assent Arch-Bp Laud,. 24.
.

Any Reformation otherwise than Regular, is as much against the Principles of
our Church as any one can wish; and had the Doctrine of our Homilies bin well
regarded, it might have prevented much mischief consequent on later
Reformations: Lest any Persons, upon color of destroying Images, make any stir
or disturbance in the Commonwealth, it must always be remembered, that the
redress of such public Enormities pertains to the Magistrates, and such as
are in Authority, and not to private Persons.

In the Homilies against wilful Rebellion, is set forth at large the sufficient
reason of our Church's Reformation, viz. the Intolerable Usurpations of the
Bishop of Rome. To the same purpose Angli, necessitate dira cogente,
secessionem fecerunt. Casaub. ad. C. Per.
the Apology of the Church of England, does express it self more largely than
need be repeated; We did nothing rashly or insolently, for the sake of any
worldly pleasure or advantage, but upon great advice and deliberation we shook
off a Yoke which we had no obligation to endure Postermo ab illo decessimus cui
obstrecti non eramus: ejusque jugum ac tyrannidem excussimus. Apol. Eccl.
Angl.. 150, 159, 160, etc.
. The Church of England did but behave her self as became a free Church,
enjoying the Rights of a Patriarchal See; according to the Rules of the
Universal Church it reformed it self, when it had high need: For as King Henry
the 8th said, in his last Letter to the Pope, Better is it in the middle way to
return, than always to run forth headlong and do ill.

3. The Due Moderation of our Reformation will appear, if we consider; 1. The
Idea or Form of our Reformatation, was neither taken from Luther nor Calvin (as
the Romanists love to speak of us Impia mysteria and instituta ad Cal^ini
praescriptum. Bulla Pii 5. contra R. Elizab. Calvinicas aliquot deprecationes
substituit. De Schism. Angl. p. 165. In illis Angliae legi^us, quae alios actus
Sacrilegos ut Participationem Calvinianae coenae, and similes Communicationes
in eorum ritibus praecipiunt. -- Suraii. Def. l. 6. c. 11.
) nor from any other, but from the Holy Scriptures, according to the use of the
Primitive Church; which were only its measures; according to which our Church
practiced the part of the Elective Philosopher, and chose what she thought most
agreeable: among the rest she seems to come nearest the Augustan Confession
and the Consultation of Herman Archbishop of Colon; which was also set forth
in English, 1548.

Among others that have reformed their Churches, I have often (says Saravia)
admired the wisdom of those who restored the true Worship of God to the Church
of England, who so tempered themselves, that they cannot be reproved for having
departed from the Ancient and Primitive Custom of the Church of God, and that
Moderation they have used, that by their Example they have invited others to
reform, and deterred none Sarav. Desins. Praef.
.

Ea omnia sublata sunt quae nimium onerosa and operosa sunt. Lud Capel. inter
These. Salmur. 6.
Between those who were loath to bid adieu to their Ceremonies, and others whose
Reformation had no bounds, our Godly Reformers compiled the excellent Model of
our Liturgy in so moderate and well-tempered a Mode, as neither part had
Alliance of D. off. c. 1.
just cause to think themselves agrieved.

So that the Church of England appears faithfully to have practiced the same
counsel which P. Gregory the Great gave unto Austin the Monk, when he was sent
over into England. From all Churches, choose whatsoever things are Pious and
Religious, whatsoever things are Right; and being gathered into one bundle,
commend them to the Minds of the English for their use B. Greg. Epistol. ex
registro. l. 12. indic. 7.
.

For having laid their Ground, that Holy Scripture contains all things
necessary to Salvation, (Artic. 6.) They do upon that Huic Basi Reformationem
Britannicam niti voluerit; ut Scripturis primae, deinde primorum soeculorum
Episcopis, Mart^ribus, Scriptoribus Ecclesiasti^is secundae deferrentur.
Dissert. cont. Blondel. c. 14. 13.
Basis establish the Doctrine of the three Creeds: V. Hist. of Reform. l. 3. p.
218. Twisden. Hist. Vind. c. 9.
and that the Romish Doctrine of Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration
of Relics, Invocation of Saints, etc. is not warranted by Scripture. (Artic.
22.) and then proceed to settle such other things as are of positive right,
with so just a Moderation, as is hardly elsewhere to be found; changing nothing
for the general, but where the practice of their own Ancestors did justify
their doings, without at all extending themselves to any thing where they had
not Antiquity their Warrant Quod si* me conjectura non fallit, totius
reformationis pars integerrima est in Anglia, ubi cum studio veritatis viget
studium antiquitatis. If Casaub. Ep ad Salmas. -- Anglicanam intelligo omnium
reformatorum reformatissimam. Forbes. Consid. Mod^st. Pref.


Can we choose (says Bishop Hall) but observe the blessing of Monarchical
Reformation amongst us, beyond that popular and tumultuous reformation amongst
our Neighbors? Our's a Counsel, their's an Vproar: Our's beginning from the
Head, their's from the Feet: Ours proceeding in due Order, theirs with
Confusion: Ours countenancing and encouraging the converted Governors of the
Church, theirs extremely overawed with averse Power, or totally overborn with
foul Sacrilege: in a word, Ours yielding what the true and happy condition of a
Church required, theirs hand-over-head taking what they could get for the
present Of Episcopacy.. 5. p. 21.
.

. 2. The manner of our Reformation was such, as might reasonably both justify
our Church, and leave the Church of Rome most inexcusable in the judgment of
the whole Catholic Church of Christ; our Church condemning those she left no
more than needs must: And (as Dr. More says) courting the Adverse Party to all
lawful accommodations, if by any means she may gain some.

Attempering her self to the occasion of the time Homily for Rogation W. 3.
part.
, (as our Church's Phrase is in her Homily.)

V. Cromwell's Letter to the Bishop of Landaff, directing him how to proceed in
the Reformation. Collect. of Records. Hist. of Ref. l. 3. p. 183.
From whence was manifest our Church's freedom from Prejudice and Passion, and
the humor of Innovation, or the Spirit of Contradiction; our Church not
dividing but upon necessity, and then using all lawful and good means to
procure such an agreement only, as might consist with the good Consciences of
her People: Wherefore that the Breach might seem no greater than indeed it is,
and that all probable pretenses of Offense (as they call it) might be taken
away, was omitted that Suffrage in the Litany, From the tyranny of the Bishop
of Rome, and all his detestible Enormities, good Lord deliver us. Which
Moderations in our Church, (and in other Reformed Churches the like V. D.
Durell's view of Ref. Chapter p. 180.
) have left the Romanists the more inexcusable in their dissent; especially
since, as Camden and others relate, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, for
about ten years, (for at least eighteen years says the Lord Cook) few of the
Popish Recusants absented themselves from our Churches, till Pope Pius the 5th,
by his Interdictory Bull, would have all Communion with us renounced: For as
long as Schismatics are not hardened into obstinacy, there is a prudential
Latitude allowed by the Church, delaying her Censures as long as possibly she
can, without wronging her Government, (as was, de facto, practiced in England
till the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth Schism guarded. p. 396.
). And admit that P. Paul. 4. in his private Letters to Q. Elizabeth, did offer
to confirm our Liturgy, if she would acknowledge his Primacy, and the
Reformation derived from him; and that the same Proposal was confirmed by his
Successor Pius 4. (tho it had caused sundry ignorant and peevish complaints) it
ought to be no imputation to us, since our Reformation, blessed be God, is so
good and justifiable: Insomuch that the Presbyterian Brethren acknowledged
Grand Debate. p. 3.
; Our first Reformers, in great wisdom, did at that time so compose the
Liturgy, as to win upon the Papists. What was reformed and composed in such
great wisdom then, is the same still. The Inference therefore which may be
made, is what Bishop Davenant resolved: The Papists are bound to be present at
the English Divine Service, because nothing occurs therein that can be by
themselves reproved. And if Papists, much more Protestants. And we rather
suppose it the great Glory and excellent Commendation of our Reformation, that
it is at once so complete, and also so moderate; considering how difficult a
thing it is, especially in matter of Reforming, to pare off the Excess, and not
to cut to the quick; to stay at the right point and not over-do, because of the
lyableness in such cases, in declining one extreme to fall into another (...).
S. Basil.
, which usually is the fault of the unwise, and the inconsiderate: For as the
Matters in Religion, in which our utmost Zeal is required, are unquestionably
evident to every Christian Man's notice, so the cases in which Moderation is to
be exercised, are almost infinite, and often very intricate: Wherefore the use
of this Virtue is so universal, that as the truest Fortitude is governed by
Temperance, so where there is most Moderation, there is the truest Zeal; and
(which is a better effect than usually is of sudden Calentures) by Moderation
the Mind is best prepared to find out and determine those Proportions and
Measures which are to be observed for the right conduct of our selves and
others, in our moral and religious Concerns: Such Operations suppose also a
peculiar power and ability of the understanding, and a most excellent prudence:
Wherefore the wise King said, A Man of Understanding is of an excellent Spirit,
Prove. 17. 27. where the Hebrew phrase is observed to signify also a cool Spirit
or temper, that being the most excellent disposition to Wisdom. Thus in the
Life of Pomponius Atticus, it was said of him, His Moderation gave him great
security in troublesome Times, procured him Friends, kept him considerate and
circumspect in all he did, that he never over-shot himself with folly, passion,
and precipitancy in Words and Action. The like Virtue has bin the great
happiness of our Church of England, especially conspicuous in her first
Reformation; and thus according to an excellent Moderation our Church does
express it self. And for this ought we greatly to praise God, for that such
superstitious and idolatrous Manners as were utterly naught, and defaced God's
Glory, are utterly abolished, as they most justly deserved; and yet those
things that either God was honored with, or his People edified by, are
decently retained, and in our Church comely practiced Homily of Place and Time
of Prayer, 2 Part.
.

And certainly were that Spirit of Charity stirring among them (the Romanists)
which ought to be, they would love and honor us for the resemblance of that
(Primitive) Church, the beauty of which they so much admire Mr. Hales Sermon of
Erring Christians.
.

. 3. It is evident that our Church has separated from their Errors, and not
from their Persons Noli propter hominem diligere vitia, nec propter vitium
odisse homines. S. Aug. Sermon. de temp.
, any more than needs must, (such Errors, I mean, the belief of which the
Church of Rome has made necessary to Salvation): In consideration of which Mr.
Hales (in his Sermon of dealing with Erring Christians) says, He may not pass
by that singular Moderation of this Church of ours, which she has most
christianly expressed toward her Adversaries of Rome, here at home in her Bosom,
above all the Reformed Churches I have read of, (and so forth at large). In
which Communication, what if the Protestants call the Romanists sometimes
Catholics, because they call themselves so? (for as it is in the answer to the
Bishop of Condom, These Gentlemen do herein like Princes, who always retain
the Title to Countries which they have lost several Ages past) since our
Savior called the Scribes and Pharisees Builders, upon the same Reason, when
he says, The Stone which the Builders refused. S. Matthew. 21. 42.

. 4. Such is the Moderation of those of our Communion, we think not our selves
obliged to deny a possibility of Salvation to such as are sincere, and
otherwise good of the Church of Rome: Notwithstanding they are so uncharitable
to deny Heaven to any of us who hold steadfast Communion with the Church of
England; for which we are accounted no others than damned Heretics; and
therefore once a year, every Maunday Thursday, the Pope curses all whom he
has denounced Heretics; and that his Christianity therein may be the more
known, the form by which we are Excommunicated, is known by the name of The
Bull of the Supper of the Lord. Even so Justin Martyr tells us the Jews (...).
Dial. cum Tryph.
used to curse in their Synagogues all Christians. Yea, the very from of the
Bishop's Oath at their Consecration in the Romish Church -- obliges them
expressly to persecute whom they account Heretics Haereticos, Schismaticos and
rebels eidem Domino nostro vel successoribus praedictis proposse persequar,
etc.
. Were there nothing else objected to Papists, but this one thing, their
uncharitable proscribing, and excommunicating all Christians, in all parts of
the World, who are not of their Communion; and obliging all that adhere unto
them to profess the same, I should think that one thing a just ground of
separation, or forsaking of their Communion Casaubon's Necess. of Reformation
p. 142.
. Nevertheless at the same time we pray most solemnly for all that persecute
and slander us, yea for all that have (...). Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
erred, and are deceived, that they may be led into the way of Truth. Yet such
is the Moderation of our Church, she does not in the Good Friday prayer join
the Papists with Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics: but prays for the whole
Family for whom Christ died; for all estates of God's Church every where; and
that we may be made one Fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our Lord. And
although the Romanists say we cannot be saved, we Protestants say, they may (for
we know not the possibility of their Repentance, or the extents of the Mercies
of God); but from thence to argue that theirs is the safest Religion, is so
slight an Argument (drawn only from the greater want of Charity in them) that I
wonder so many of our Protestant Writers of great Name, do it so much honor to
answer it: but only, that the slightest Arguments prevail most with those that
use most slight Consideration.

. 5. That which saves us from all danger of Schism, is, We profess such a
preparation of Mind, always to believe and do, whatever the true Catholic
Church of God believes, and judges requisite to be done by Christian Men: As
King James answered for the Church of England; That she has not departed from
the Faith of the Ancient Church, which she honors and embraces; Neither has
she divided so much as from the Faith of the Roman Church, so far forth as that
agrees with the Primitive Church. Thus the moderate and peaceable Bishop Hall
Remains p. 309. Ep. to Mr. Struthers.
professes; That since for order-sake we acknowledged the Primacy of the
Western Church, We never departed one inch from the Roman, save where she is
perfidiously gone from God and her self. And I doubt not but all sober Men of
the Church of England will profess as Zanchy Zanch. Confess. Art. 89.
did, (like a true Reformed Catholic); We have not divided from the Church of
Rome simply in all things, but in those things only, in which it has separated
from the Apostolical Church; and indeed from it self as it was ancient and
pure: Neither have we departed with any other purpose, than if she will return
amended to its Primitive Form, we also will return to her that we may have
communion with her in her Assemblies: which that once it may be with all our
hearts we beseech Christ Jesus.

I Hierom Zanchy, aged 70 years, with all my Family, have this testified to the
whole Church of Christ to all Eternity.

For we left them as one should leave his Fathers House when it is infected,
with a hearty desire to return again, so soon as it is cleansed; which Charity
is a great proof Schism guarded, fol. p. 399.
of our Moderation*.

Unto which I add the Reverend Hooker's words Eccl. Pol. l. 3.. 1.
; With Rome we do not communicate concerning sundry her gross and grievous
abominations; Yet touching those main parts of Christian Truths, wherein they
constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be of the Family of
Jesus Christ: And our hearty Prayer to Almighty God is, That being conjoined so
far forth with them, they may at length (if it be his Will) so yield and reform
themselves, that no distraction remain in any thing, but that we may all with
one heart and voice glorify God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Church we are.

Hear we once more King James S^ow's Chron. p. 84. Anno 1603.
;

I could wish from my Heart it would please God to make me one of the Members
of such a general Christian Union in Religion, as laying wilfulness aside on
both hands, we might meet in the midst, which is the center and perfection of
all things; For if they of the Roman Church, would leave and be ashamed of such
new and gross corruptions of theirs, as they themselves cannot maintain, nor
deny to be worthy Reformation, I would, for my own part, be content to meet
them in the midway, so that all Novelties might be renounced on either side.
Which passage I find cited by Cressie's Answer to Dr. Pierce, adding thus, See
the condescence of this great King. The want of such Moderation makes the
Church of Rome so irreconcilable as it is. (V. Chapter 13.. 7.)

. 6. It was the Speech of a wise Bishop, concerning too sudden a Convert, I do
not well like a Man, that tells me so presently, he has changed a whole
Religion at once: even so our Reformation was perfected by just degrees; and
being more moderate, it is hoped it is the more durable. Dr. Hammond has
largely vindicated the honest policy of the Church of England, for compliance
only so far as was innocent; I cannot imagine (says he) but Liturgy,
Moderation and Charity may be able to bring in as fair a shole of Proselytes,
to convert as many Papists to us, or at least confirm Protestants, as an
Ordinance for sequestration of all their Goods, and Halter, and Directory will
be able to do. I know what we justly call Moderation, there are some will style
a halting between God and Baal Altar Damas. P. 558.
; a Laodicean luke-warmness of Reformation, as has bin (they say) matter of
continual complaint to the Godly of this Nation Mr. Henderson to K. Chapter I.
. Whereas certainly a fierceness and extremity in Reformation is as great
reason of complaint; for as Dr. Pierce has it; The Tepida quaedam temperatura.
Parker de Pol. Eccl. l. 1. c. 25.
way to convince a Papist, is to accuse them in measure of their Corruptions,
(a Puritanical opposition confirms a Papist, and makes him conclude he is
Orthodox because he conquers). Thus Bishop Sanderson V. Pref. to his Sermons.
observed, that some promote the Interest of Rome, and betray the Protestant
Cause, by mistaking the Question. Wherefore let it be always remembered, that
our Church has admirably imitated our blessed Savior's Reformation, which was
a quiet, and peaceable, and orderly Reformation: He did not pull down before he
had another frame of Order instituted: He did not destroy all before him, as
some Reformers do, who love to run to the other extreme; sundry Instances are
often Dr. Ham. view of the Director.. 43.
given, that our Lord made no more alteration than was necessary; neither was
his Reformation wrought by force of Arms, with great noise and violence, but it
was gentle and according to great ((...)) Moderation, as became the Prince of
Peace, and the great Lawgiver of his Church.

Somewhat the like Apology was made at the beginning of the Reformation; It was
said, that as our Savior did not reveal all things to his Disciples, till they
were able to bear them; and as the Apostles did not of a sudden abolish all
the Rites of Judaism, but for some time to gain the Jews complied with them,
and went to the Temple and offered Sacrifices; So the People were not to be
driven in this change. The Clergy must be brought out of their Ignorance by
degrees; but to drive furiously, and to do all at once, might have spoiled the
whole Design -- Therefore these slow steps were thought the surer and better
Method Hist. of Reform. l. 3. p. 219
. But soon after the excellent frame of our Constitution was made more perfect:
considering which Doctor Cressy may be thought to owe a Penance for his
Exomologesis, where he says of the English Church -- By the just judgment of
God she had only power given her to destroy the Temple of God, but not so much
as to lay one stone toward the raising up another in the place of it C. 55.. ^.
.

. 7. This Moderation of our Church has made it the great envy of the Church of
Rome, and the chiefest Object of its despite -- But of all places (said a wise
Writer Europa Speculum. Quarto. p. 214, 215.
) their Desires and Attempts to recover England have bin always, and still are
the strongest; which although in their more sober Moods, sundry of them will
acknowledge to have bin the only Nation, that took the right way of justifiable
Reformation, in comparison of other who have run headlong rather to a
tumultuous Innovation, (so they conceive it); whereas that alteration which
has bin in England, was brought in with peaceable and orderly proceeding, by
general consent of the Realm representatively assembled in Parliament; a great
part of their own Clergy according and conforming themselves thereunto; no
Luther, no Calvin, the square of our Faith. The succession of Bishops, and
vocation of Ministers continued, the Dignity and State of the Clergy
preserved, the more ancient usages of the Church not cancelled: In sum, no
humor of affecting Contrariety, but a charitable endeavor rather of
Conformity with the Church of Rome, in whatsoever they might, not gainsaying
to the express Law of God, which is the only way of meet Reformations, thereby
the fitter to be an Vmpire to the rest. Of all places in the World, they desire
most to recover this, making full account that the rest would soon follow.

But to as high a Tide as they are risen in their desires thereof, to as low an
Ebb are they fallen in their Hopes, being less now, I perceive, than ever;
having seen her Majesty so often and miraculously preserved, their Treasons
discovered, their Excommunications vanished, their Armies defeated, their Books
answered, their chief Champions discouraged.

And we hope this Moderation of our Church may still, with God's wonderful
Providence, preserve her Vis consilii expers mole ruit sua. Vim temperatam Dii
provehunt in majus.
; and it has not bin thought improbable, that their immoderate asserting of
the Authority of the Pope, and their Severities to such as differ from them,
will some time or other awaken (if not themselves, yet) such an understanding
in others as may prove a truer Mother of Devotion, than the Ignorance they
cherish. Bishop Bramhall therefore had good reason to say of the Romanists;
They fear our Moderation more than the violent opposition of others Fol. p. 957.
.

. 8. This Moderation being the great praise of our Reformation, I cannot but
compare the effects of this Moderation in our Reformation by some of the Rules
and Measures of Justice, which a right Moderation always supposes: Which
Justice also is considered as due to God and his Truth; and has appeared in
the sincere endeavors of our Church for the advancing the true honor of
Almighty God, the suppression of Superstition Pref. to Injunctions.
, (yet) procuring of Reverence to God's Holy Mysteries and Sacraments Pref. to
the Liturgy.
: Avoiding diversities of Opinions, and establishing consent about true
Religion Title of the Articles.
. Preventing Factions and Schisms Act for Uniform. Preface.
. How much Primitive simplicity, and most discernable intent at the Glory of
God, and Edification of Men, and establishing Truth and Peace with all freedom
from prejudice and passion, has appeared throughout the whole frame of our
Liturgy, Articles, and Homilies, and Constitutions, and Versions we have of
Holy Scripture, any who are sincere themselves may easily acknowledge, if they
will truly consider the same. For (as our Homily of Holy Scripture says)
Without a single Eye, pure Intent, and good Mind, nothing is allowed before
God. And in the Homily of Prayer, earnest complaint is made of such as would
deface the plain and simple Religion of Christ.

In pursuance of these sincere designs of Piety, Truth, Peace, and Order, the
Moderation of our Church in her Reformation, will the more certainly appear
founded in Justice. If we consider;

1. Our Church has not made Truth to submit to her Authority, but has
cheerfully and sincerely submitted her self to Truth: She has not had a weight
and a weight, to buy the Truth by one, and to sell it by another; but has
judged of all Truth, and the degrees of its necessity, by the Standard which
God has given his Church, namely, the Holy Scriptures, the only Rule of her
Faith: So in rejection of Error, our Church has bin impartial to either
extreme.

2. Our Church holds no such Doctrines as necessarily or by consequence
overthrow a good Life, and the practice of Devotion: For this we must say for
the Constitution of our Church, The Vices among us are in no wise the
Consequences of our Doctrines: Neither have we any such Moderation among us, to
reconcile the pleasures and profits of Sin, with the hope of happiness
hereafter, subjecting the most divine things, to most vile purposes; which
tends to make the World believe, that Christian Religion is a cheat, and its
Priests the most vile Imposters of any. Whatever the scandalous opinions and
practices of the Adversaries of our Church have done, to the great hindrance of
the conversion of many, and the injury of Christianity; Our Church of England
gives no offense to Jew or Greek, Mahumetan or Heathen.

3. Our Church has not squared the frame of its Ecclesiastical Policy, by the
ends of Secular Grandeur, or external Pomp, as if she could put off
Christianity to put on worldly Glory: and as if we believed in such a Messiah
as the Jews expected, rather than in the crucified Jesus, whose Kingdom is not
of this World. And here, rather than stay the Reader too long, I commit to his
reflection, how the peculiar Doctrines of the Roman Church, tend to the
increase of their Power, or their Patrimony, Non est amplius Ecclesia, sed
Respublica quaedam humana, sub Papa Monarchia temporali. Spalatensis in.
profect. Consil.
rather than that Interest of the Christian Religion, which the whole
constitution of our Church is framed first to regard.

Here might properly be considered, the intolerable Charge which the Moderation
of our Church justly saves us, in that expense which unjustly follows Popery.
The one Doctrine of Purgatory, will cost any one very dear upon the belief of
it. How many Indulgences, Masses, Jubilees, etc. must be paid for? V. Fullers
Eccl. hist. ad an. H. 8. 27. V. Romish Horseleach. V. Brutum fulmen. Tanti
videlicet nobis constitit amicitia urbis Romae. Apol. Eccl. Angl. 160.


4. Our Church by its Moderation, has been far from driving on any corrupt
designs. Whereas the Moderation of the Romish Church, has been always noted
very artificial. Whence they have moderate explications for the doubtful
Indulgences, for the soft Austerities, for the sour Legends, for the credulous
Visions, for the Enthusiast, fair interpretations for what may seem harsh; a
mild sense for their turn, and a strict sense also to keep up the Authority of
their Church; fair and goodly Baits to entangle Proselytes, but when they are
engaged, they may find themselves caught with a bearded Hook. Even such
sometime is the seeming Moderation and Self-denial which is cherished in our
Sectaries, by those who actuate them: that so they may more effectually divide,
and propagate such Division. Whereas, those who are truly principled, according
to the Moderation of our Church, are made to be more constant and consistent to
themselves, and to Truth; not to turn to one hand of Popery, nor to the other
hand of Enthusiasm, in any sinful compliance; which rather than admit (if the
case requires) they can suffer Martyrdom, as did sundry of the first Compilers
of our Common Prayer Book, and many since (even in the late times), and all
kinds of Sufferings beside.

5. The Moderation also of our Church in its Reformation thus founded in
Justice, has caused her to avoid such Corruptions, as render the Sincerity of
others very doubtful. We have not by Arts and devised Subtilties, gone about to
palliate, nor by Power and Authority to uphold any Errors whatsoever; nor
promoted Ecclesiastical Policy, by gratifying the corrupt inclinations of Men:
Neither the Doctrines nor Policy of our Church are kept up by pious or impious
Frauds, equivocations of Oaths, false Miracles, pretended Revelations,
counterfeit Relics, Forgeries and Expurgation of Books, devotional Ignorance,
exquisite Arts of defaming our Adversaries, and sometime extreme Cruelty: This
Justice in which the Moderation of our Church is founded, makes those of our
Church careful to take, and heedful to keep our Oaths and Vows, whereas among
the Romanists easy dispensations dissolve those sacred Bands of Society. What
think we (says our Homily of good works) ^2 Part.
of those that vow Chastity, and yet (as is very moderately expressed) how
their Vows are kept, it is more honest to pass over in silence. They vow
Poverty, and yet their Possessions and Riches are equal to those of Princes;
under pretense of Obedience to their Fathers in Religion, by their Rules and
Canons they are made free from the Obedience of their natural Father and Mother.

According to the same principle of Justice governing our Church, the forms and
practices of our Church do not contradict our general Rules of Faith; because
we believe in the Holy Trinity, therefore we do not worship Saints and Angels;
because we believe the Holy Catholic Church, therefore we believe not in the
Church of Rome.

6. The same Moderation of the Church founded in Justice, has governed her
Reformation in using or rejecting things indifferent which have bin abused. The
Wisdom and Moderation of our Church, having bin far from judging that things
which have been abused to ill purposes can never be lawfully or profitably
used; which principle might lay waste all Ecclesiastical or Civil Societies, of
any good Orders and Appointments; for there is nothing so good, but either has
bin, or is capable to be abused (very grossly.) Wherefore our Church, does well
distinguish between what is abused by the fault of ill Men; Si quid vitil
access^t vitium tellatur, r^s vero restituat^r, and concordia ^latur. Wicelii
Meth. Concord. c. 5.
and what in the nature of the thing it self, tends to promote such an abuse,
as is evident from the Preface to the Liturgy concerning Ceremonies. Wherein
our Church gives account why some Ceremonies were put away, namely because, so
far abused by the Superstition of some, and Avarice of others; others were
retained which (our Church judged) were not like in time to come to be abused
as the others have bin. Preface concerning Ceremonies.
And as our 30 Canon has it: The abuse of a thing, does not take away the
lawful use of it: Wherefore the design of our Church in its excellent
Reformation, was sincerely to remove, what did in its own nature tend to
corruption, and to retain what might be useful, when corrected and reformed
from the abuse. Thus Zanchy did lay down, The true way of reforming, was not to
root out every thing that was found in the Church of Rome, but to reject what
was fit to be rejected, and to preserve what was fit to be preserved.

7. The same Justice governing our Moderation, shows it self to the Church of
Rome also, not denying what is true of Her; that she professes a true Faith in
the form of Baptism, and the three Creeds which she receives, and professes
to own the Holy Scriptures, and to hold to the four first general Councils, and
the ancient Fathers. Many things in Order and Government she has very
excellent, and likewise in some of their Devotions. But, how much she has in
her superfluous Additionals built upon good Foundations, Gold, Silver, Hay,
Stubble, and the like, is no where better distinguished, than in what our
Church of England has rejected, and in what she has retained; and how far the
peculiar Doctrines and Practices of the Roman Church do contradict the other
part of what they retain in common with us, and tend to destroy the same, has
bin frequently also showed, in such Writings, as are approved by our Church.

A signal instance of this Moderation of our Church of England is, V. Canon.
30. 1603.
it never denied that a true Church might be found in the Romish Communion
(however corrupted and unsound) which Moderation the learned Mede Mede. Ep. 77.
has noted peculiar to the Church of England; namely, To maintain that the
Roman Church, much more the Greek Church, erreth not in the Articles we account
Fundamental, because explicitly they profess them, however in their Assumenta
they implicitly and by consequent subvert them: for which (as Bishop Bramhal
says Answer to Bishop of Chalc. p. 364.
) our Charity frees us from Schism: (But a Church that holds the Foundation,
may grossly and dangerously err in their Exposition, which is the condition of
the Church of Rome Arch-B. Laud against Fisher. p. 320.
): Yet we do not declare, that we have any new Faith, or new Religion, but the
same only necessarily and well reformed from those superfluous Additions and
Luxuriances, which might have endangered our Religion, if they had not bin
corrected, which was performed wisely in our Reformation, without destroying
all root and branch; namely, by reserving such things as are good, and only
lopping off such excrescencies, as might, and ought to be spared: and in our
censures of them, our Church does wisely distinguish, between what was
appointed of sincere intention at first, and what has bin since of manifest
corruption: neither are we altogether ignorant, when most of those innovations
and corruptions were introduced, and (generally) by what degrees and occasions
they increased (tho we may very well judge of errors and corruptions, albeit we
could not fix the time of their creeping into the Church) which to speak more
particularly of, requires a very mature consideration. Yet notwithstanding,
Casaubon had good reason to say, The denying the Church of Rome Necessity of
Reformation. p. 145.
the being of a Church, (which some Protestants rashly and ignorantly, rigidly
and uncharitably have done) has been a great hinderance of Reformation: and I
verily believe the opinion most Papists are kept in, that the Religion of
Protestants is a new Religion, is not of little force to make them averse from
it to this day.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Moderation of our Church in avoiding all undue Compliances
with Popery, and other sorts of Phanaticism among us.
. 1. Notwithstanding our Reformation is the most of any opposite to Popery, how
it has bin the craft of the Roman Agents, to raise of it such a suspicion of
Popery, as has bin artificially made a very unhappy Instrument of the
Divisions which are from our Church.. 2. How the great Labors of our Bishops,
and our Clergy, remaining the most impregnable defense of the Reformation,
has stirred up the more earnest opposition of the Church of Rome to our
Church.. 3. The vain and ungrateful jealousies of our Separatists and
Enthusiasts, are the more unjust, because they have appeared really acted by
that Interest, (not in intention, but in event).. 4. Therefore it is a most
seasonable work at this time to cast open those Masquerades.. 5. Some Moderate
Cautions here inserted to prevent any unkind Mistakes.. 6. Some Objection to
such an undertaking here answered.. 7. That our Separatists and Enthusiasts
generally (more or less) do conspire (in fact, albeit not in intent) with the
Romanists; instanced as a Specimen, in twenty Particulars.. 8. Particularly how
the Quakers are one with the Papists (how ignorantly soever) in sundry
Instances.. 9. By what steps and degrees these Progresses commonly are made
toward Popery by such as separate from Communion with our Church.. 10. What
has bin said, confirmed by other rational Proofs.. 11. Some further Reasons
why the Clergy, and faithful Sons of our Church, cannot be thought thus
concerned, in so much as an Eventual Conspiracy.. 12. An easy Divination of the
Consequences of these things, if a due sense of these Matters be rejected, when
so fairly and often recommended to the common notice of all, with a sincere and
affectionate close to such as this Address most does concern.

. 1. NOtwithstanding our Church of England has bin by the most wise and
Learned Men, Foreign and Domestic, acknowledged the very excellent part of the
Reformation; yet how often has she bin reproached with most unjust Censures of
undue compliance with Popery? It being one of the known Policies of the Romish
Factors, to cause their Agents among our selves (whom they use for the
overthrow of our Church) to cry out Popery, at the same time they most of all
serve the Papal Interest themselves. Wherefore that the Romanists may use the
Separatists with the more unperceivable disguise and success, to undermine our
Constitution, these also have bin inspired to blast with the Name of Popery,
what is rightly established in our Church. Hence is it, that the Writings and
private Insinuations of Dissenters are full of this Charge, in a joint design
to disgrace our Communion, and to exasperate other Protestants against us: Some
of those Exceptors running to such an excess of Rigor, as to count Churches,
Bells, Godfathers, Churching of Women, Burial-Service, the Gloria Patri, to
come under the name of Popery: Although by no Instance was it ever made to appear,
That our Church agrees with the Romanist in any thing contrary to Scripture,
and the practice of the Primitive Church: As she is truly also most removed
from Fanaticism; neither using nor encouraging any Enthusiastic way of
Religion; nor allowing any resisting of Authority under any Religious Pretenses
whatsoever. Any one may be convinced, that no formed Church in the Christian
World is more truly Protestant than is the Church of England, nor any which
(all things compared) less compromiseth with Rome. If they will but consider in
our Articles, Liturgy, Canons, Constitutions, Practice, Oaths of Supremacy,
etc. how firmly our Church preserves and enforces the Reformation: Yea, the
Canons of 1640, did excellently take care for the suppressing the growth of
Popery, (Canon. 3. 6.) and also of Socinianism, Canon 4. Which Seeds of
Socinianism have bin scattered amongst our Sectaries, and have of late had
great growth amongst them: Yet nevertheless if such Friends as they should slip
into greater Heresy, so long as they are with them in the Schism, there is a
special respect due to them, rather than to the close adherents of the Church
of England; who because they run not into the madness of their extremes, and
are not outrageous too in that madness, they are forward to clamor against our
Church it self as Popish, and turn their own silly Surmises into powerful
Calumnies. Neither do those who reproach our Constitution, sufficiently call to
mind what has bin done all along since the Reformation, by our Kings of
England, and the great Councils of the Kingdom, and the Orders of the Church,
and the Industry of our Bishops, for the suppression of the growth of Popery.

. 2. But as a sufficient Evidence that our Church (according to its
establishment) does in no sort favor Popery; They must be very disingenuous
and wanting to Truth, who will not readily acknowledge that the Labors of our
Bishops, and our Conformable Clergy, remain the most impregnable defense of the
Reformation.

For who, I pray, have more strenuously and constantly opposed the Innovations
and immoderate Extravagancies of the Church of Rome than our Bishops, and the
Learned Men in firm Communion with our Church, even since Queen Mary's days,
(when some were Martyrs and Confessors) and whose Writings but theirs, who have
held firm Communion with our Church, remain as the constant Bullwark of our
Protestant Reformation? Wherefore the Romanists keenest displeasure Immortale
odium and nunquam sanabile vulnus Ardet adhuc Combos and Tentyra. Juven. Sat.
15.
and jealousy has bin always against the Church of England, because from Her
they have always received as forcible repulses as any. As nothing does more
stir up the anger of a Zealous Enemy, than the equal behavior of those they
malign, and a moderate carriage does sometime provoke their sharpest hatred: So
certainly nothing has more stirred up the jealousy of the Romanists, than the
excellent temper which is observed in our Church's Constitution. It Is for the
sake of this poor Church alone (said our most noble Lord Chancellor) that the
March 6. 1678.
State has bin so much disturbed: It is her Truth and Peace, her Decency and
Order, which they labor to undermine and pursue with so restless a malice: And
since they do so, it will be necessary for us to distinguish between Popish and
other Recusants; between them that would destroy the whole Flock, and them that
only wander from it.

As for those of our Separatists who have sometimes menaged Debates with the
Romanists, the cunning Adversary commonly lets them alone: for how seldom do we
see a Romanist write against or oppose a Nonconformist, and be in much earnest
against him? Not merely because he thinks such inconsiderable, but because
these are doing their Work for them as fast as they can Hoc Ithacu^ velit and
Magno mercentur Atrida.
; Whereas those Contests which have bin menaged upon the Principles of our
Church's Reformation, have given the Romanists greatest awe, and have always
exercised their utmost strength.

. 3. Wherefore those of the Separation who have bin concerned in these Clamours
and Surmises of our Church favoring Popery, have acted, therein as appears,
first, very falsely, and then very imprudently, in reproaching so excellent a
Reformation, and by joining, with them in their opposing our Church, they
strengthen the hands of the Romanists whom they pretend to oppose, to the great
scandal of the Christian Religion, and great mischief to the true Protestant
Interest: Which caused Bishop Morton (in his Epistle to the Nonconformists) to
tell them (Beside their notorious Scandals given to the Church of God it self)
of their breaking the Hedge of Peace, and opening the Gap for the wild Bore out
of the Romish Forest to enter in, and root out that goodly Vine which many
Paul's (industrious Bishops) many Apollo's (faithful Martyrs) have planted and
watered. Even as Josephus *notes the Divisions of the Jews laid Prol. ad bell.
Jud.
them open to their overthrow. And by their several Divisions which they help
to propagate among us, they join with the Romanists in endeavoring to
overthrow and destroy our Constitution; While they are crumbling into Factions,
biting and devouring one another, a vigilant Adversary, who is intent upon his
advantage and opportunities, may, when he spieth his time, over-master them
with much more ease, and less resistance Bishop Sanderson's Preface to his
Sermons. Ad rerum momenta cliens, seseque daturus Victori --
. And the more unreasonable and vehement they are in their clamours, the more
they help the Roman Engineer to confound and overturn. Therefore Archbishop
Whitgift Arch-Bp. Whitgift Answ. to the Admon. p. 55. See his Letter to Q.
Eliz. Fuller's Hist. l. 9.
, now above a hundred years since said, I am persuaded you and they do the Pope
great good Service, and he would not miss you for any thing; For what is his
desire, but to have this Church of England (which he has cursed) utterly
defaced, and discredited, to have it by any means over-thrown, if not by
Foreign Enemies, yet by Domestic Dissension; And what apter Instruments could
he have for that purpose than you, who under pretended Zeal, overthrow what
others have built, under color of Purity, seek to bring in Deformity, under
clo^e of Equality, would usurp as great Tyranny and Lofty lordliness over your
Parishes, as ever the Pope of Rome over the whole Church. Which also was the
judgment of the University of Oxford, 1603. Verily these Men are like Sampson
's Foxes, they have their heads severed indeed, the one sort looking toward the
Papacy, the other to the Presbytery; but they are tied together by the Tails
with Firebrarnds between them, to the injury of the Church.

Who would ever have thought (said Bishop Bancroft, 1588, in a Sermon at St.
Paul's) that we should ever have lived to have heard any Protestants reprove our
Religion: It must be confessed we have escaped the Lion's Mouth, but have
fallen into a Den of Dragons; our Enemies are those of our own house.

. 4. Wherefore according to a most sober Judgment, it may be thought a proper
means to awaken such to see their Error, in the evil Consequences of their
Separation, if some of the most earnest among them would please sincerely and
faithfully to consider now, how often they have bin made use of as mere Tools and
Instruments to Purposes, the utmost reaches of which they did not know, but may
now, if they will but reflect: And it might reasonably be hoped, that many
would repent of their vain and scandalous Jealousies, and may for the time to
come, refrain such false and foolish Accusations of our Church, if they please
but impartially to consider, how many Sectaries among us, which seem with
greatest Zeal, and least Knowledge, to run into the furthest extreme from
Popery, have not only served the Design of what they appear averse from, but
indeed have still a very great sympathy with them in their Principles and
Practices; and do but charge us with what they are most guilty of in Fact
themselves.

. 5. But before we enter upon this undertaking, to show how those who are in
separation from our Church do really conspire with the Romanists. To prevent
any mistake, let it be remembered;

First, That we do not deny that most of our Dissenters do openly demonstrate a
very zealous and undoubted abhorrence of Popery; their real purpose in which is
not here questioned, but believed: Sunt alii qui etiamsi non spiritu Aegyptiaco
and dolo moliuntur reditum ad Papismum, at incuriae and latae culpae reatum
tamen incurrunt. Alt. Damasc. p. 558.
For such is our Charity for those who are generally seduced; we count it
indeed the unhappiness of their Error, that many of them do entertain such
Principles as are agreeing with Popery, but we do not charge upon them the
knowledge of, or consent to the Consequences of their own Principles; but
conclude they are sown in their minds (not by their own direct choice, so much
as) by the slight of Men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to
deceive.

2ly; Among the diversities of Sects thus influenced, we acknowledge it most
manifest, that some are more acted than others, by far: -- hac in re scilicet
una multum dissimiles: ad caetera pene gemelli. Horat. l. 1. Ep. 10.
Nevertheless all that are in separation from our Church, in that their very
division from us, do actually join with the Romanists, to strengthen their
hands, and weaken the Interest of our established Reformation, (more or less).

And I suppose it may be taken for granted, that generally they who raise most
clamor against our Church as guilty of Popery, they most of all others will
appear most actuated by the Roman interest.

3ly; And since of late especially some of the worst Principles of Popery, have
appeared among us most manifest, from such most notorious practices, as are the
very proper Consequences of their generally approved Doctrines; It may be
judged most seasonable, even at this time, that all sincere Persons be awakened
to see whither those Divisions naturally lead, in which so many have bin
engaged; whose interest they serve; whom they join with, and are acted by, (how
ignorant soever they are thereof).

Especially since of late there has bin so much discovery made, that the
overthrow of the Church of England has bin all along one of the principal aims
of the Conspiracies of our Adversaries; and that they have endeavored to
effect the same by what our Separatists call Liberty of Conscience, (tho God
preserve our Liberty and our Conscience from such Snares, so artificially laid
by the Romanists: who have made most use of the Dissatisfactions and
Oppositions of our Domestic Dissenters to compass their intended Designs). Thus
Thuanus, tho of the Roman Communion, declares, in his History of the Gunpowder
Treason here in England; Rejecto libello supplice pro Liberate Conscientiae
oblato.
The first design of their Conspiracy began, upon the Papists Petition for
Liberty of Conscience being rejected.

. 6. But (because many are huge concerned to shift off the conviction of this
great Truth) if any say, -- Oh, now is the time for Protestants to be united
against the Common Adversary: and why is such a distinction kept up between
Churchmen and Separatists? Very true; why is there? who has made and
continued the difference?

Wherefore the proper means for consolidation of such an Union among all true
Protestants among us, which is most earnestly desired by us, is for our
Separatists to come off from such their Divisions as are still designed for the
overthrow of our Church; especially since the Presbyterian Brethren well
observed, That a more firm union and consent of all Grand Debate. p. 3. 1661.
such, as well in Worship as in Doctrine, would greatly strengthen the
Protestant Interest against all those Dangers and Temptations which our
Intestine Divisions and Animosities do expose us unto from the Common Adversary.

2. For them also to forsake such Principles and Behaviors as serve the
Interest of the Roman Church; and peaceably to return into Communion with our
most moderate Church, which is ready to overlook what is past, if it may be
secure of their Communion for the time to come: But never let it be thought
that our Church will ever come into their Schism, or that we will go about to
sail to Rome by a side-wind of Separation.

. 7. And now to prove the forementioned Proposition: That our Separatists (I do
not say, all alike, nor that any sort agree in all these Instances following,
but) more or less do conspire in Fact (however not in intent) with the
Romanists; One single proof of the whole might be sufficient, namely, from
their separating and dividing from such a Church as ours is, (which Division is
the main Art, and Counsel, and Design of the Roman Engineer V^que facilius
Catholici Sectarios opprimere possint, variis obductis causis and artibus alios
ab aliis ut divellant occasiones captandae. Jo. Paul. Windeck de extirp.
Haeres. Antidoto.
;) and from their constant and common business, which is by Reproaches (much
alike) to vilify and deprave our Church in all its Constitutions and Offices:
and especially they jointly labor to vilify our Clergy, calling them Ministers
of Satan, Clero Anglicano nihil putidius. Campianus Jesuita.
and Baal's Priests, etc. Which beside that, it is a cursed, unjust, and
ungrateful practice; so a more acceptable Work our Separatists could never do
for the Church of Rome.

2. As they serve the Romanists now by their Practices, so may they more
hereafter by their Opinions; for so many Points as they are off from our See
the 8 and 9, Parag. of this Chap.
Church, so much the nearer are they coming to them, (sundry ways) as in
opposite Errors the Causes may be commonly the same. Thus Archbishop Laud
Pref. of the Conference.
against Fisher observed; The Rigid Professors on either side have quite leaped
over the Mean, and have bin rigid the other way, as Extremity it self -- and is
a very natural motion. For a Man is apt to think he can never run far enough
from that which he once begins to hate. Of which sort the several Factions and
Interests among us have bin continually like the Friars at the Council of
Trent, who were always watchful and zealous to maintain their peculiar
Doctrines: among which extremes, our Church (if she might be listened to) would
reduce all to a due temper, upon surer and more reasonable Foundations, than
the Bishops at that Council labored to do.

3. As our Laws by one name call both sorts of Separatists, Recusants; so our
Romanists and Sectaries behave themselves much alike: The one have their
private Masses, the other their Conventicles, both contrary to the Laws of our
Kingdom and our Church: Both the Romanists and the Separatists join in
requiring a License for the Exercise of their Religion in private Houses.

4. Both our Romanists and Sectaries by increasing our Divisions, help with
joint force to make a general Toleration necessary, which would give the
Romanists the greatest advantage they can desire.

They both supplicate with equal earnestness to be tolerated, whereas the
Principles of each lead them not to tolerate others.

5. Their pretenses to all mildness and gentleness, are equally supple and
assuring: but how mild they are when they are uppermost, odious experience
testifies, so that Instances of their extreme Rigors, which are most known,
need not be enumerated. We need not call on the Inquisition to testify to the
Rigors of the Romanists, nor look into all the Severities of the
Disciplinarians, who have bin known to inflict Censures for a suspicion of
Covetousness, a superfluity in Raiment, for dancing at a Wedding, for using
their Liberty in their Recreations; and have kept others (as well as
themselves) from the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper upon uncharitable Accounts.
It has bin observed, where the Discipline in Scotland was established, the
People had a high Commission in every Parish, and groaned under the Arbitrary
Decrees of Ignorant Governors: If there arose a private Jar between the Parent
and the Child, the Husband and the Wife, these Domestical Judges must know it.
Formerly and lately among some, they have bin scarce allowed in Conscience to
marry without the consent of the Teacher: or when they have, it has bin matter
of complaint.

6. It has bin already observed at large, (Chap. 13.. 58.) how both the
Romanists and the Separatists agree in their groundless and unjust accusing the
Government of Persecution: like the Donatists of old, who cried out
Persecution, when they most of all had afflicted the Catholics.

The Romanists have their dire Anathema's and heavy Censures; the Separatists
their cruel Maranatha's; and preach Damnation most of all against them that
differ from them, especially if they be of the Church's side.

7. Nevertheless both sorts can very easily give out Indulgences to their own
Parties. God sees no sin in his Children, say some Sectaries: Which is a
greater Bribe to be of their Party, than any can be found in the Penitentiary
Tax, for Sins as they are sold at Rome.

8. When the Papists and the Separatists have bin at a loss, that they cannot
justify their Proceedings by the Laws of God or Man, then they meet in one
common Sanctuary, whereby they are bold to sanctify the most extravagant
Practices; pretending Providence for their Warrant. Thus Pope Pius 5. in his
Speech in the Consistory of Cardinals at Rome, after the murder of King Hen. 3.
of France, sundry times, in one Oration, he magnifies the Exploit of that
wretched Zealot, as brought about by the special Providence of God Non nisi Dei
opt. Max. particulari Providentia and dispositione perpetratum.
. The same impudence or ignorance others have used to defend such Practices as
no Laws, Divine or Humane, could justify, sheltring them under the wide
pretense of Providence; which has bin well called, Answer to Mr. Jenkins p.
16. Regiment politicum fundatur in extraordinaria Dei Providentia. Ibid. p. 15.
A fine pliable Principle, it will lap about your finger like Barbary Gold.

9. The Romanists enlarge their Creed in sundry Articles, (without belief of
which there is no Salvation) and very many Separatists deliver their peculiar
Doctrines as absolutely necessary to a state of Salvation, (tho among the
divided Sects many of them are contrary one to another.)

They both often stuff their Prayers and their Chatechisms with Matters of
doubtful Controversy; and in maintaining the same, they are alike too
dogmatical.

10. We need not here prove what is so well known, namely, the mean Opinion
which the Romanists have of Holy Scriptures, supposing they receive their
Authority from the Pope, yet receiving their own Traditions with equal
affection and reverence. The Separatists, by casting off (to another extreme)
the real Authority and Testimony of God's Church (which has bin all along the
Keeper, the Witness, the Defender, the Interpreter of Holy Scriptures) by
degrees many of our Separatists have come to throw off the Holy Scriptures as a
Rule of Faith and Manners. The Romanists they add their own Traditions to the
Word of God; and many Sectaries call their Teaching, and their Impulses, the
Word of God, which often is quite contrary thereunto.

The Romanists set up the Pope for an Infallible Interpreter; many of the
Separatists account the Private Spirit an Infallible Interpreter. V. Chapter 4.. 3.

11. The Romanists pretend that Miracles and extraordinary Gifts have not
ceased, but are still necessary Signs of a true Church. It is also the very
height of Enthusiam to hold as many of our Separatists do, That Immediate
Revelations from God, and extraordinary Illapses from the Holy Spirit, are
necessary and common among all the Faithful.

Which Pretenses lying obvious to an easy Confidence, cannot easily be wrested
from such as will hold them to their own destruction.

12. The Romanists assert an implicit Faith which is determinately resolved
into the authority of their Leaders: Whether the like is ever required by the
Leaders generally of Factions among us, I do not now enquire: But however that
the same is granted by their Followers appears most evident; For when many can
give no reason for what they hold, they keep close to their Ringleaders, and
move and change with them generally; and how much the Authority of the Persons
they have in admiration, governs them, more than any sway of Argument, is daily
experienced. And whereas a due regard on this side, the implicit Faith of the
Romanists is due to Governors, V. Chapter 6.. 9, 10. toward such, how scrupulous,
delicate, and wary are they, (not to say disregardful); but in following their
Masters of Factions, how prone are they, and sequacious.

13. Both the Romanists and Sectaries (to serve their turn upon occasion) cast
off the use of Reason, wherein God has made it a Guide: Therefore they both
reproach our Faith as a humane, probable, natural, fallible Faith; the one
because we will not receive Oral Tradition, and the like Uncertainties; the
other, because we do not think an immediate extraordinary testimony of the
Spirit necessary to assure us of the certainty we have of our Faith, of the
Truth of Holy Scriptures; to afford us also our words in Prayer, and the
assurance of our Salvation.

14. The Superstitions of the Papists are notorious, and also of our Sectaries;
and so many, they are not here to be numbered. If Superstition be going beyond
all measure, their humor is to keep no Measure nor order, but to heap one
superfluous thing upon another; and then they think God is pleased, because
they are: Many of them account it a sign of Grace, and the favor of God, and
matter of greatest Conscience, not to hear or use Common Prayers, nor any
decent Rite or Practice required by the Church.

The Romanists invoke Saints of uncertain Sanctity: Many of the Separatists
call those of their own Party the only Saints, and judge them to have the right
to judge the World, and in the mean time to rule it; if they cannot do that,
they must censure what is done by others.

15. The Romanists and our Enthusiasts are very much the same in their
Pharisaical Humor, (described at large, and reprehended by our Savior, Mat.
23. 4.) To name only, Their binding heavy Burdens and grievous to be born, and
laying them on Men's shoulders. As the Romanists add twelve Articles to their
Creed; a wondrous number of Ceremonies to their seven Sacraments: Not to
mention more of their loads of Injunctions; their Festivals; their Auricular
Confession; their Vows; their Scourgings, and Fastings, and Penances which they
lay upon the Poor; when the Imposers do not touch them with one of their
fingers, or with wetting the least of them, they can get themselves an easy
Dispensation. Does not the same Pharisaical Spirit possess many, who make the
Peace of the World, and the Church, depend upon their peculiar Doctrines? Who
make all they can, think it a sin to come to Common Prayer; to kneel at the
Sacrament; to be Baptized according to Order of the Church; to pray in a Form;
to wear a Surplice: Instead of making broad their Philacteries, and enlarging
the Fringes of their Garments, they have had another sort of Superstition, in
wearing their Hair in a precise cut, (somewhat like the tonsures of the
Romanists); some will not wear a Riband: Others not Starch in their Bands, nor
pull off their Hat.

16. The Council of Trent makes the Intention of the Priest necessary to the
Sacraments: Many of the Separation make the Spiritual Grace of the Minister
absolutely necessary for the Peoples receiving benefit from the same.

17. Both the Romanists and the Separatists use much the same kind of Arts to
blast their Adversaries: The Romanists have their Legends and Fables; just so
our Separatists love to pick up Stories of Bishops and the Clergy, and to patch
them together in enmity to our Church; with these they keep up the humor of
the People who entertain them with good things. I wish such would remember what
in Levit. 19. 16. the command is, Thou shall not go up and down a Talebearer
among thy People: which the Ghaldee Paraphrase interprets, (Non comedes
Placentas in Populo tuo) Thou shall not go up and down among the People
pacifying thy Appetite, eating of their Delicates, and to please them again,
tell tales of Governors Apud Anglos est simile genus Hominum quoscirculatores
Itali vocant, qui irrumpunt in Convivia, etc. Erasm. Eccles. l. 3.
.

18. Most of our Inepte nobis tribuis Catharorum nomen, cum Cathari suos
habuerint Episcopos, quos nos omnes sublatos ex omnibus Ecclesiis optamus.
Altar. Damasc. p. 367.
Separatists are highly against the Government in the Church by Bishops: and in
the Covenant the same is ranked with Superstition, Heresy and Schism: Even so
the Jesuits, who are the great Exalters of the Pope's Supremacy, declare
commonly against Bishops, as if the source of all Disorders came from Bishops
contending for their Jurisdiction; which (say they) makes so many small Popes,
(thus the Jesuits argue V. C. Palavicini Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 1. c. 25.
): Then it will follow that the Pope cannot dispose of things belonging to
their Jurisdictions; and then the Pope may be opposed by these Bishops, which
may be a ready way to overthrow the Papacy. So that the Controversy, who has
the Jurisdiction which belongs to Bishops in common, nay, who have such
Jurisdiction by Divine Right, is driven between the Court of Rome, who challeng
it to the Pope, and other Consistories among us in Division from our Church.

Wherefore in opposition to Bishops, the highest Papalins talk most of the
Sovereign Power of the People, because they hold the Interest of the Pope to be
upheld by their veneration. And by the Interest of the Jesuits for many years
of late, the Popish Faction in England have bin withheld from having any
Titular Bishops. And most of our Separatists would be glad there were no other;
thus in their opposition to Bishops they agree.

19. Both the Romanists and Separatists extremely agree in their Principles
against the Civil Magistrate. According to that of Bishop Lany Sermon. on 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
; The Papists and Presbyterians hunt in couples against the King's Power and
Supremacy. It Is admirable to see how the Commonwealths Men, in the times of
the late Rebellion, received their Principles from the Ancient and Modern
Writers of the Jesuits, and other Papists; and still agree with them in most of
the Republican Doctrines, and Tendencies of them to the like Practices. Both
the Papists and the others infringe the Authority of the King in Ecclesiastical
Matters within his own Dominions: Both deny the Right of Kings to call Synods
and Ecclesiastical Convocations: Both hold that Kings may be put out of all
Ecclesiastical Communion: Both deny the Supremacy of the King; one attributes
it to the Pope originally, the other to the People. And the same Arguments
which the Pope uses for his Supremacy over Kings; the Disciplinarians use for
establishing their Sovereignty: the one exempts all the Clergy from the
Jurisdiction of the Supreme Magistrate: and the other Disciplinarians in
Scotland have now a long time endeavored to have their Ministers exempted from
the Punishments of the Civil Governor. The pretense of the King's Authority
against his Person, was hatched under the Roman Territories, and was made use
of in the Holy League of France Chr. Loyalty, l. 2. c. 1. V. Fowlis of Pop.
Treason^ etc.
. The Rules for making a King become a Tyrant, and then ceasing to be a King,
that it may be lawful to attempt any thing against his Person and Life, are so
much the same that they cannot be more: if we compare Lessius, Suarez,
Bellarmine, and many other Jesuits, and Mr. White of Obedience and Government,
with Knox and Buchanan, and many other Republicans since; wherein both sorts,
as Rivals, seem to deal with the People, as some Gallants do by foolish Women,
flatter them so long into a pride and conceit of themselves so great, that at
length they become intolerable and ungovernable: Of this sort were the
Discourses in the Council of Basil, related by Aeneas Sylvius, (afterward Pope)
who could not contain from highly commending Quem Sermonem sic docte, sie
verifice, sic suaviter disputarit. Commentar. de gestis Council. Bas. in Fascic.
rer. expe^. fol 4.
the Bishop of Burgen for his admirably vilifying the Power of Kings. Thus the
worst of our Enthusiasts, and of the Romanists, agree in that Character of the
Pharisees; They mightily employed their Powers to oppose Kings Jos. Antiq. l
17. c. 3.
. So true is the observation of King Charles the First, (...).. 15.
of some Protestants; They seem to have learned, and to practice the worst
Principles of the Papists. And of both, the Lord Bishop of Salisbury; The Bigot
and Jesuited Romanist, the frighted and transported Reformist, have bin Authors
of the most horrible Treasons and Rebellions.

20. I need not here particularly relate how many Doctrines of the Romanists
tend to dissolve the very Bonds of Relative Duty one toward another; as in
their Monastical Vows; absolving People from their Oaths and Allegiance, and
Faith with Heretics, etc. How do many Principles of our Enthusiasts and
Separatists, tend to destroy the Relation of King and Subject, Bishop and
People? Their very Divisions, how do they alienate the minds of Christians one
from another? Tho they ought to belong to the same moderate Church, are
Subjects of the same most Gracious King, are of the same Protestant and
Reformed Interest, beside the danger they bring to themselves and their
Families, by their pernicious and destructive Separation, so many and more
might be the Instances of their loosing the Bonds of Relative Duty.

. 8. Among other Sects, it would grieve any one to behold so many seduced into
the silly Herd of Quakers; a Sect into which the very dregs of Heresy and
Schism seem to have bin drein'd, as it were, into one Common Shore: In the
inventing and propagating which, even Satan and the Jesuit seem to have club'd
their utmost Art; possessing them with an evil Spirit of Delusion, which they
call the Light within them; according to which, what is most contrary to Holy
Scriptures, and Right Reason; and the testimony and judgment of the whole
Church, and the prudent command of Governors, and the sense and custom of wise
and pious Men, must pass for an extraordinary illumination from God, merely on
the credit of their own saying so.

This one Enthusiastical Conceit of the Light within, and Opinion of such
Revelation from God, is the most unhappy contrivance and suggestion that can
be, to lift up silly People above a possibility of being contradicted, by any
sober Principles of Scripture, or Reason, or regular Authority; fitted to
possess such with a lusty pride, and bewitched conceit of themselves; an
incorrigible moroseness, and obstinacy; an intolerable censoriousness, a sordid
scorn of whatever is in just place above them: and wonderfully disposes such
for Popery; for when once they are sufficiently divided from our Church, the
Work is sufficiently done. Then if any arch-Emissary from Rome, will come with
Visions and Revelations, and a show of extreme Authority; and humor this People
still in their outrageous clamours against our Church: especially if they will
fall a quaking and groaning intolerably, and appear in the Streets, as some
have done, soundly be-dunged with Calumny and Filth, such may make some People
believe any Romish Tenets as Revelations from God.

That they have bin wrought and acted unto this by the common Authors of our
Divisions, is such plain attested matter of Fact, that I suppose few
considering Persons question it. Some long since took notice, that in the
Northern Parts (where there abounded most Popish Priests and Recusants) there
this upstart Sect of Quakers first sprung up; sending thence their Emissaries
two by two into other quarters of the Kingdom, (as the unclean Beasts entered
the Ark by Couples): beside which, many Reasons confirm the same.

1. The effect in that Spirit of Division and Delusion, which so succesfully
obtains among them; to break in pieces the Peace and Order of the Church, unto
which of all Sects these are the most Antipodes to.

2. There are none whose Tenets more tend to destroy the Holy Scripture as a
perfect Rule of Faith and Manners: instead of which, and in opposition to the
same, they set up the Suggestions of their Light within them, which they call
the Word, the only Guide unto Perfection Perfectos se appellantes and semina
electionis. De Valentinianis. Iren. l. 1.
; which they and the Romanists pretend: the one even unto supererogation of
Merits; the other to be above all need of confession of sin.

3. None come so near the Papists in the matter of an infallible Judge of
Doctrines.

4. The Light within them is very much like the Enthusiasms of the Romanists;
as Dean Stillingfleet has set them forth in the Fanaticism of the Church of
Rome.

5. They join with the severest Romanists, in their reproaching the Offices and
Orders of our Church, and especially villfying her Clergy; whom they would have
by all means to vow wilful Poverty.

6. By refusing all Oaths, their Allegiance is left uncertain to the King,
which is the main thing such Papists would have.

7. The King's Supremacy is left unacknowledged, which is another principal
preparation for the owning of the Pope's Supremacy.

8. In that they refuse to assist their Prince in his Wars, and pretend they
hold it unlawful for any to fight: By that Principle they not only take away
the Power and Sword of the Magistrate, and leave the King and Country
undefended, that none can live in peace and safety, and consequently that
Opinion leads to overthrow the very being of the whole Kingdom.

But the Pope also serves his Design by them, being sure that so many as there
are of that Sect, so many will never oppose him by Arms: Whereas they who bind,
can also loose; and the same Agent can be able to stir up their Spirit of Zeal
also, (which the longer it has bin contained, will be the more furious) a
Specimen and taste of which fury, we experience in the keen violence of their
Tongues, which are as a very sharp Sword, upon sundry slight occasions.

And when once they shall be assured that the Lord has delivered a People to
slaughter, then Down Dagon; then they will pretend they must be the Sampsons;
and like Pope Pius 5. (in his Bull against Queen Elizabeth) they will cry out,
God has set them over all Princes and Nations, to pluck up, and destroy, and
to scatter, to plant and to build: They will presently be for binding Kings in
Chains, and our Nobles in Fetters of Iron; that the Saints may rule, and that
the mountain of his Holiness may be exalted.

9. In the mean while they have among them such a political and artificial
dependence on their principal Leaders, and the administration of their Body is
cast into such a method for communication of News, and Tantum vaferrimi
veteratores ex sola correspondentia utilitatem ad unio^em tuendam sentiunt --
Hospin. de Jesuitis. l. 4.
intelligence of their Affairs and Interests, as we may be sure is contrived
and menaged, and directed by more subtle Wits than their own; being so very
like the same method which the Agents of Rome use themselves for the
propagation and disposition of their Matters. To mention nothing now further of
their Agreements with the severest Emissaries of Rome in their pretenses to all
mortification of Spirit and mildness. In their pretenses to extraordinary and
miraculous Gifts; in their many kinds of Superstitions, and Pharisaicalness; in
their clamours also of Persecution; in their grievous Anathema's and Curses
they use against us, too like the Roman Curses, by Bell, Book, and Candle;
which shows what is the Light within them.

. 9. It might be no difficult thing to show some of those steps and degrees by
which some commonly advance to Popery, who separate from Communion with our
Church.

The first step to Division is, When what is amiss in Government and
Governors, (in Church or State) is set forth to the full advantage of
dissatisfaction, as may make withal the most lamentable outcry that may be:
unto which there shall never be wanting arch and cunning Instruments, who by
all plausible means shall stir up the humor, and Passions, and Zeal of the
People under such pretenses, as shall most inflame and excite them.

Then in the next place are made such immoderate pretenses to Purity, and
profession of Saintship, as when poor simple People experience upon trial the
same to be false, and not to answer their expectation, they run and seek from
one Sect to another, till they come to be Quakers, and so (as we see) in the
next preparation to Popery.

3. Having thus cast off all Forms as dangerous and unlawful, being raised to
expect everywhere the effects of a Spirit extraordinary, they are made so
Enthusiastical, it is hard to contain them within ordinary bounds, till they
arrive at the perfection of Enthusiasm, the Light within.

4. By the way we must note, there is no one Principle which has bin the
Original of all this Enthusiasm and Division, more than that, Nothing is lawful
to be done, but for which there is an express Example or Precept in the
Scripture.

Which attributing to the Holy Scriptures that Perfection which is beside the
end of them, does tend, by consequence, to take away the true perfection of
them which they have, (which has bin considered in the 4th Chapter) which has
bin found true: for all these sub-divisions of Sects, have tended in the
conclusion to cast off Holy Scripture as a Rule. By the consequences of this
Principle, is come to pass what Archbishop Whitgift, and Hooker, and others
foretold; If Puritanism should prevail, it would soon draw in Anabaptism. From
them we have had Quakers and Seekers, and other Sects, which divide us, and are
ready to destroy us, and to bring in Popery, as it were, at the back door: I
may not dissemble my own fears, (says Bishop Sanderson Pref. to his Sermon V.
Arch. Bp. Laud's dying Speech.
) if things still go on as they have hitherto proceeded, the application that
some have made of that passage, John 11. 48. The Romans will come and take away
both our Place and Nation; will prove but a true Prophecy, and Popery will
overrun all at the last.

5. But when they are run out of all possibility of pretending any Scripture to
justify their Actions, they then warrant them by Providence, and such a
necessity as God has called them unto by extraordinary Revelations, and
Impulses, which in the next remove comes to be Light within them.

6. And when once they are off from our legal Establishments, what can stop the
Divisions of several Sects from ending in confusion, and being made a prey of
by designing Men, whose business is, when the Public is on fire, to make out
their Spoils? And who think we are most cunning and industrious to make the
advantage by all this, but they whose greatest Business, and industrious
Design, is to have our Church ruined? Who make use of our Divisions to cry up
also the necessity of an Infallible Judge of Controversy.

The Infallible private Spirit, is a fair preparation thereunto: and when they
have broken and discredited the Authority of our Church, they have that taken
away, which gives them most hinderance and opposition.

. 10. What has bin in so many Instances proved, is most agreeable;

1. To the Art, Industry, and Design of the Romanists, to make use of the
Prejudices and Passions, the divided Principles and Interests of Men, to serve
their purposes; which are, by any means whatsoever to multiply Proselytes, and
enlarge their Party: Wherefore the Thesis of Bishop Bramhall out of Nilus, was
worthy such an Assertor; That the Papacy as it was challenged and usurped in
many places, and as it has bin usurped in our Native Country, was either the
Procreant or Conservant Cause, or both Procreant and Conservant of all the
Ecclesiastical Controversies in the Christian World Bp. Br. Gro. Rel. p. 74.
.

2. This is no more than what is agreeable to most common experience since the
Reformation, and has bin noted with great authority and remark. In the
Preamble of the Act of Parliament, 27. Hen. 8. 1536. The Public Authority of
the Kingdom took notice, how many of the Pope's Emissaries were practicing up
and down the Kingdom, and persuading the People to acknowledge his pretended
Authority.

In the Homily against Rebellion, it is observed, That the Bishops of Rome, by
the Ministry of their disguised Chaplains creep into Houses in Laymens Apparel,
and raise Rebellion. The same Comenius relates was practiced by them in the
Bohemian Church Admiscebant se personati quidam, qui Papa causam promoturi
dissentines mutuas promovebant. Histor.. 36.
.

Our English History tells us of sundry seditious Motions, soon after and about
the time of the Reformation, which received their Impressions and Continuance
from the influence of Romish Agents, as V. Acts and Monuments. p. 1086. 1087,
1306.
in the Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire, and Devonshire Commotions and Rebellions,
which were actuated by Monks, Priests, and Papists. And how the like Game has
bin played ever since (especially from the beginning of our Troubles) in
England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. Mr. Fowlis gives sundry proofs in his History
of Pretended Saints, (Chapter 3.) which other observable Testimonies notoriously do
verify. Archbishop Whitgift frequently traced their footsteps in the dust they
themselves raised; I am persuaded (says he Def. of Answ. to the Admon. p 349
) that Antichrist works effectually at this day, by your Stirs and
Contentions, whereby he has and will more prevail against this Church of
England, than by any other means whatsoever.

These Divisions (the Character of a Carnal and Unspiritual Temper) the Learned
Mede V. Medes Life.. 44. p. 30.
rightly judged, At once weaken and dishonor the Protestant Cause, and
occasion the grand Enemy to triumph; who seeing much of his Work done for him,
by those who would seem most averse from him, while they bite and devour one
another, claps his hands, saying, Aha, Aha, our Eye has seen it, so would we
have it.

The Lord Keeper Puckering spoke of the unquiet Puritans in Queen Elizabeth's
time, who pretended to be at War with the Jesuits; yet by their separation they
did join and concur with the Jesuits, in opening the door, and preparing the
way to the Spanish Invasion. King James in his Letter to the Assembly of Perth
Dat. Aug. 25. 1617.
, took notice how many of the Discipline shook hands with the upholders of
Popery. King Charles I. of blessed memory, declared truly, It is possible that
a Papacy in a multitude, may be as dangerous as in one.

Bishop Sanderson, in his excellent Preface to his Sermons, says, It has bin
observed, that where the Jesuits have bin most busy, other Factions have bin
most Insolent; and that those who have lived in those Countries where there are
the most rigid Presbyterians, there are the most zealous Romanists; for (says
he) they help together to pull down the same form of Government.

Our present Lord Bishop of Lincoln Popish Principles, etc. p. 78.
takes notice of the favor the Papists had under Oliver Cromwell, and the
freedom from the punishment of the Penal Laws, more than ever they had before,
(under King Charles the Martyr). No Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy was
pressed upon them; our Liturgy and Common Prayer were taken away, so that
there was no way then to discover or legally convict a Popish Recusant.
Notwithstanding the same Oliver (in a Speech to one of his Parliaments, 1654.
Sept. 4. V. Mr. Fowlis Hist. of pretended Saints. p. 13.
) professed that he could prove by witness, that they had a Consistory and
Council that ruled all the Affairs in England. And in the Year 1647, when the
King's Cause was at the lowest ebb, then the Romanists, by approbation of the
Sorbon Doctors, were ready to give such full satisfaction and assurances of
their fidelity to the Civil and Political Government in the Kingdom, whatsoever
it shall be P. Walsh. p. 522.
: Which they refused to do, when by the Moderation of the Government, they had
a Convocation permitted them for that purpose at Dublin since the rereturn of
his Majesty. Then the Roman Leviathan had a fine time to play his Game, and to
sport among the People, which are like many Waters: Then they laid their
fruitful Spawn of Divisions in the Church, as well as Dissension in our
Kingdom: As Archbishop Laud most truly on the Scaffold declared; The Pope
never had such an Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon
the Sects and Divisions that are amongst us.

3. The same experience which our Church and Nation has had of the Conspiracy
of the Sectaries and the Romanists (at least) in event; other Churches and
Nations have also observed V. Lib. Ecclesiast. p. 10, 11.
:

As in Switzerland the Anabaptists were animated by the Papists: And in Bohemia
some furious Divines carried on the Pope's Interest. A Jesuit who suffered at
Strasburg, confessed that he was one of the thirty Jesuits who was employed to be
Agents for the Roman Cause in the late German Wars V. Mr. Fowlis Hist. of our
pretended Saints. p. 12.
.

And Crucius De Doctr. Jesuit. l. 4
in his Speech, as we have it in Hospinian, says, We are sent into Germany,
not only or chiefly that we might be Teachers, and Preachers, and Schoolmasters
in the Schools and Churches, but that we use all means that the Protestants do
not increase; that we may join our mutual Endeavors, Strength, and Arms, that
more easily we may root them out. And for our overthrow, if they are our
Incendiaries, as it is believed, we may say with reference to them, what Pliny
in his Natural Philosophy speaks of the nature of things; considering their
Principles, and the Fires which break forth out of the Caverns of the Earth; It
is the greatest wonder of all, that every day, All things are not in a
conflagration Excedit profecto omnia miracula ullum diem fuisse, in quo non
cuncta conflagrarent Plin. Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 107.
.

4. That sundry of our Separation have bin thus acted, has bin often among us
in fact deprehended, together with the Confessions of those who have bin both
Actors, and acted by them: Which is matter of such known discovery, that it
needs no repetition here: Yea, of this sometime they have suspected one
another; for one of the Independent P. Sterry, 5 Nov. 1650.
Brethren said,

The same Spirit, says he, which dwells in the Papacy, when it enters into the
purer form of Presbytery, as fuller of Mystery, so is fuller of despite and
danger. Inter finitimos vetus atque antiqua simultas. Juven. Satyr. 15.
.

In the late Morning Exercise against Popery, one says Sermon. 4. p. 103.
, The Papacy, together with their Religion, have had a Party, and kept up an
Interest among the Protestant Churches. But because the Dissenters love to have
it thought, that those of our Church are more guilty herein; as there seems to
be insinuated: Therefore,

. 11. Unto all this, if any object, and tell us of the Advice of Cardinal Allen
to the Persons who undertook to reduce Ireland again to Popery: -- Among other
things they should apply themselves to the Conformists, and possess them with
the Factiousness, Disobedience, and Disorders of the Nonconformists, that so
they might be provoked to spend their fury on each other to their mutual ruin.

We answer; We hope that the Church of England, and her right conformable
Clergy, have bin so settled by the establishment of our Church, as not to have
had their Principles corrupted by Popish Influence:

As appears, 1. from the constant and stout opposition which Popery has had
from the Fathers and Sons of our Church.

And, 2. in that the many surmises of the contrary, have proved, upon the test,
very notoriously foolish and false. Let any of them prove our Principles and
Practices such, as we are able to do theirs, to serve the real Interest of Rome.

3. Let them know, that those who have bin most violently slandred as favorers
of Popery, are known to have done more real and faithful service to the
Protestant Cause, than all those that have entertained and promoted that
rumor, have bin able to do. I will at present only mention Archbishop Laud,
(whose Labors against Popery, and the other Separation were equally vigilant).

Of whom the Letter of Discovery (of the Treason against the King and Kingdom,
and the Protestant Religion, October. 1640.) thus speaks; Yet notwithstanding
there remained on the King's part a knot hard to be untied; for the Lord
Archbishop by his constancy, interposed himself as a hard Rock. And yet it was
a lamentable hard case, that at the very same time the Reproaches and Seditions
of the People were inflamed against King Charles I. of blessed memory, and
Archbishop Laud, under suspicions of their favoring Popery; at the very same
time the Jesuits were conspiring the killing of King Charles I. and also
Archbishop Laud, and the Convulsion of the Kingdom, and the Ruin of the
Protestant Religion, and introducing of Popery, (as appears by the Discovery to
Sir William Boswell at the Hague, 1640, and sent over by him to the King and
the Archbishop).

Even thus has bin the practice of the Romanists, to slander Princes also for
being Papists, and then to assassinate them for being too zealous Protestants
The Lord Chancellors speech March 6. 1678.
.

4. Whereas our Enthusiastical Friends are ready to object unto us, That the
Church of England is either Popish, or in some degree prepared to be so,
namely, because she has Bishops, a Liturgy, and Ceremonies.

Such might know, if they rightly understood things, even what they object,
that these things do most of all oppose Popery; and help to secure us from it.

For, 1. Episcopacy asserted in our Church, is the greatest opposition to
Popery that is; for the very formality of Popery, is the Pope's Jurisdiction
over all other Bishops and Churches; which Authority of the Pope is no where so
much contradicted, as by our Episcopacy. To say nothing what our Bishops
undeniably and unanswerably have performed against Popery; It is very well
known what rejoicing that Vote for pulling down Episcopacy brought to the
Romish Party; how in Rome it self they sang their Io Paeans upon the tidings
thereof, and said, triumphantly, The day is ours Bp. San derson's Pre^ace.. 17.
.

2. A Reformed Liturgy as ours is, (separated from all Popish Soil and
Corruption) must needs be it self the greatest security from Popery; since the
want of it tends to bring in the worst part of Popery, which is Enthusiasm, and
Phanatical pretenses to Revelation, and an Infallible Spirit, (as has bin
abundantly experienced).

3. Our Ceremonies reformed from all Popish Reasons and Ends of their
Institution, are useful to defend Christianity from Superstition; using People
to apprehend, that Christian Religion consists, neither in their necessary use,
nor in their being necessarily refused; either of which is an equal infringing
of Christian Liberty.

Much more might be added in defense of what is appointed in our Church, as the
Marks and Bounds of a moderate Reformation; and do afford a better Apology and
Defense against the Romanists, in the Judgment of the General Church, than they
can have who fix upon false Principles, and therefore may the more easily be
turned unto the opposite extreme: Whereas the true Moderation of our Church
gives her establishment against each opposite Errors. Yea, it is manifest that
our Church of England thus reteining Episcopal Government, and a well-reformed
Liturgy, and while it observes Christian Festivals, and a moderate outward
decency in the Church of God, (as did the Churches of Christ in the Primitive
Times) has a fairer Plea and foundation of Argument, to invite and persuade
any from Romish Corruption, than a Dissenter who will tell such a one, That all
that is Popery: which account of things may presently beat him back, and make
him conclude, that Protestants call that Popery, which in the purest and most
Primitive Times, was practiced in all Christian Churches in the World. Whereas
how easy a thing is it for a Popish Priest to turn himself into a Gifted
Brother: And what Opinion is there of the Romanists, which may not come forth
as a New Light? So that it was no ill Character of a Schismatic, He is a Papist
turned wrong side outward.

. 12. Wherefore an easy Prudence (which is a perpetual kind of Divination)
(...) Proverbialis senarius, qui sic apud Ciceronem redditur, Been qui
conjici^, hunc vatem perhibeto optimum.
may readily foresee how soon, if occasion present, those Parties so seemingly
opposite will close, even more certainly than they themselves are aware of: for
Men of wrong Principles know not where to find themselves after a while,
especially in changeable Times, because they know not where their Principles
will lead them: In the mean while such as hold a steadfast Communion with our
Church, must needs be the most firm Protestants of any; because they follow the
Moderation of the Church it self: For Truth is ever found among the modest, who
never affect utmost extremes, which the Vulgar (of which our Dissenters
consist) so passionately and hastily run into. Wherefore among the
Considerations touching the true way to suppress Popery in this Kingdom*, it
was well laid down, The best way P. 132.
for the suppressing of Popery in this Kingdom, is to get our Church to be
better understood. And indeed if all who call themselves Protestants, of what
denomination soever, understood their own Interest, they must needs be for
upholding our Church of England. For if it be overthrown, it must either be by
Divisions, (and certainly the watchful Adversaries of Rome will chiefly make
their Game by them, whose business is to promote them) If our Divisions
prevail, the Romanists will prevail also Thorndike. Forb. of Pen. p. 37.
.

Or, 2ly, by Toleration; by which the same Romanists will obtain but an
opportunity openly, and, as it were, by Authority to divide and work their
Wills, which without a Toleration they only dare attempt secretly.

Or, 3ly, by setting one of the Dissenting Parties uppermost.

But they all have given such proof of their Rigor already, that all other
Parties will think themselves equally grieved then; and the cry for Toleration
will continue to be as loud: and they can never expect from any Constitution,
more Moderation than what our present Establishment affords.

Therefore all that love Moderation, and are afraid of Popery, ought to be
solicitous for the welfare of the Church of England, as it is now settled.

And now I have said thus much, (and more may be said on this Head, if this be
not enough, to convince any who are sincerely dispassionate) I may appeal to
all the World of the truth of what has bin said, with no design to reproach
any ones Persons, or incense any one's Spirit, but in the real Spirit of
Meekness, and most affectionate regard to such who are wrought upon to be of
another mind; most heartily wishing and praying, That all who are sincere in
this Nation, would at length be awakened, to see from whence our Divisions
generally proceed; who they are who have nourished, and cherished, and
increased our Flames, and cast their Wild-fires among us: By whom our
Dissenters have bin acted, and menaged, and chiefly made to be what they are:
That thus far may suffice them to have bin gulled to other purposes than they
themselves have known; that those who are honest-hearted, may be truly ashamed
and convinced, and see their Error, and may repent and return into
Reconciliation to an excellent Church, whom they have forsaken, and
endeavored, with common Enemies, to destroy. Oh that at length they may see
their folly, and their imprudence, and may make some amends, by continuing
hereafter more steadfast to our Communion, for the sake of no less than the
Christian Religion; unto which has bin given so great a scandal; and for the
honor of our excellent Reformation; which, because of its Moderation, and
excellent Temper, is really the Terror of the Roman Church: and God grant it
may long, long so continue!

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Moderation of our Church, as it may influence Christian
Practice, and especially our Union.
. 1. Some proper Inferences from what has bin insisted on at large.. 2. Sundry
general Rules agreeable to Reason and Christianity; by which the Moderation of
private Persons may be measured and directed, particularly of our Dissenting
Brethren.. 3. Some proper means to reduce Dissenters into Union with the
Church, with all Moderation proposed.. 4. The hearty Profession of the moderate
and sincere purposes of the Writer.. 5. One or two Caveats entered, to prevent
mistake; and for the Caution of such as will attempt to disprove the main
Proposition here designed to be evinced.. 6. Some good Wishes to the
Adversaries of our Church on both sides, such as are fit to conclude a Treatise
of the Moderation of our Church.

. 1. AS from the very being of Moderation and Equity, we are certain that the
nature of absolute Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, does not depend upon the
Arbitrary Power of any, but is founded in the nature of Things and
Circumstances, (or else the Assertion of Equity would be very ridiculous); so
we are sure, from what has bin largely declared, (especially by comparing
other Extremes) That our Church of England is far from designing to use or
encourage any arbitrary or rigorous way of Administration, which is contrary to
the measures of natural Justice or Christianity.

2. As from the nature of Moderation it has appeared, that Benevolence is the
true Fountain of Equity, and answers the most general Law of Nature, giving the
best end and measure to all Actions, (especially which have any influence on
the Public); which causes Laws themselves to bend, by all gentleness and
benignity, to the general design of all public and private Endeavors, which
ought to be the Glory of God, and peace and good will to Men: So we hope from
the foregoing Instances, it appears also, that a benevolous inclination is
implanted into the very frame and temper of our Church's Constitution: and that
from such a Principle it persues the excellent ends mentioned; not only
according to the Rules of Natural Justice, but the most fair and equal Measures
of Gentleness also and Benignity. Wherefore it concerns us all, who live where
the Laws of the Kingdom and the Church are framed and interpreted according to
this equity, to acknowledge so great a Blessing. The same Consideration
aggravates the unreasonableness of those who pursue their own Prejudices,
contrary to what is appointed even so equitably and moderately. And it is
heartily to be wished, that the Opposers of our Church could give any such
testimonies of their Moderation as our Church has done. Let any if they can,
Romanist or Separatist, (of any particular denomination whatsoever, as they are
generally known among us) show as much proof and instance of their Moderation,
as I have done of our Church.

. 2. But as in our first Chapter we laid down some general Rules, which are
agreeable to natural Justice and Goodness, and also unto Christianity, by which
we are directed to judge the more truly of the Moderation Nihil est tam
praeclarum aut tam magnificum quod non Moderatione temperari desideret. Valor
Max. de animi Mother. l. 4. c. 1.
of our Church: So I conceive there are some such Rules also alike agreeable to
the same Principles, by which the Moderation of private Persons may very
equitably be judged.

1. It may be supposed very agreeable to the Rule of Moderation, not to expect
or require of an Establishment, what is utterly impossible in this World;
namely, Absolute Perfection: And for any to withhold their Obedience, so long
as they conceive some things may be better, cannot but be concluded very
unreasonable.

Here it is but just to note of our Church: 1. That she never pretended of her
self (nor any I know of, for her) that she was, or is, so perfect as to be
without spot or Vltra etiam progreditur eorum morositas and fastus, quia
Ecclesiam non agnoscunt nisi minimis quibusque naevis puram. Calv. Inst. l. 4.
c. 1.
wrinkle; as the Brethren in their Morning Lecture against Popery deliver:
There is no Church under Heaven perfectly beautiful; that remains for glory
Sermon. 25. p. 870.
. Although we say our Church has a most excellent temper, it is not necessary we
attribute to her what some call (Temperamentum ad pondus) such a Temperament,
that no Scruple, one way or other, can alter her poise. 2. I hope from what
has bin showed, it may appear that the possible Imperfections are in no wise
so great as sundry would suppose. 3. However, not in Matters of any principal
Moment or Concern to Religion.

2. It is but very agreeable to the Rules of Moderation, that such as require
Moderation so desirously, should give very good example of their own Moderation
themselves: and should also lay aside their own Rigours, in unjust and severe
Thoughts, harsh Words, and immoderate Actings; and not make those Rules the
measure of their Moderation, which are just proofs of their Rigor: For I
suppose the Observation of King Charles I. is a famous Truth; I see no Men so
prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous Exacters upon others to conform
to their illegal Novelties, than such, whose Pride was formerly least disposed
to the obedience of lawful Constitutions (...). Med. 16.
. And even in the Liberty of Prophesying, the Libertines themselves are most
truly described; Sect. 17.
They who were perpetually clamorous, that the severity of the Laws should
slacken as to their particular, and in matter adiaphorous (in which if the
Church have any Authority, she has power to make such Laws) to indulge a leave
to them to do as they list: Yet, were the most imperious among Men, most
decretory in their Sentences, and most impatient of any disagreeing from them,
tho in the least minute and particular.

3. If any do conceive the Church defective in some particular, (especially
when few will deny but the principal and substantial Things are not wanting)
Christian Moderation requires all to supply any such supposed Defects as much
as they can by such a Christian Charity Pii and placidi homines misericorditer
corripiant quod possunt; quod non possunt patienter ferant, and cum dilectione
gemant atque lugeant, donec aut emendet Deus, aut in mess eradicet zizania. S.
Aug. l. 3. contr. Parm. c. 1.
as thinks, hops, believes the best: especially of their Governors, and
renders all Persons suspicious of their own Judgments, and docible and humble
in disposition and behavior.

And while they charge the Church with being in some things deficient, in
others superfluous; they ought to have the more care not to add thereunto their
own faults in the same kind, as being deficient in their Duty, or superfluous
in such exceptions as generally are so frivolous.

4. It is most agreeable to the Rules of Moderation, that those who are so
earnest to have still more Moderation allowed them, should first acknowledge
such Moderation and Indulgence as they have received; and also should take care
that the same miss not of its desired and promised Effects from them. Wherefore
what the Bishops told the Presbyterian Brethren, was but a very moderate
admonition; We conceive the most real expression of their thankfulness for his
Majesty's most Princely Condescension, had bin a hearty compliance with his
Majesty's most earnest and passionate request for the use of the present
Liturgy, at least so much of it as they acknowledge by these Papers to be
lawful.

Such also should readily and thankfully own whatsoever is good in the
establishment which is over them, and the real benefits and blessings which all
do and may enjoy.

And since there are such Instances and Proofs of the Moderation of our Church,
Christian Moderation will also govern any, who are concerned in this Matter,
well to understand and consider such Proofs, and acknowledge what is true in
them.

5. It is but according to Christian Moderation, that a special respect and
regard be had to a reformed settled Establishment as Ours is, which is in
possession In pari causa possessor potior haberi debet. Reg. jur.
of its Authority.

(1.) Christian Moderation will dispose such well to consider how far they
ought to bear against their own Inclination, before they offer at the Violation
of the Sacred Peace of God's Church.

(2.) Christian Moderation will instruct any one, that exemption from Obedience
ought to be as clear as the Command to Obey Infirmae prorsus voluntatis est
indicium Statuta Seniorum studiosius disquirere, haerere ad singula quae
injunguntur, exigere de quibusque rationem, and male suspicari de omni
praecepto, cujus causa latuerit, nec unquam libenter obedire. S. Bern. de
praec. and dispens.
.

(3.) Such ought moderately to consider of the danger they threaten all
Government, (Civil and Ecclesiastical) and also the Interest especially of the
Reformation, who are so industrious to overthrow such an Establishment as ours
is, upon these kind of Dissatisfactions.

6. Christian Moderation does certainly govern all to use the same measures of
practice for themselves and others, (that is, to do as they would be done by
Non debet alteri per alterum iniquae conditio inferri. Reg. juris.
): Suppose therefore that any Platform, the Exceptors against our Church
propose, was settled according to their own fancy; They ought to consider,
whether they would endure to be reproached, resisted, disobeyed after such an
establishment was made. They who have used sundry significant Ceremonies
themselves, (as were used in taking the Covenant) should not be so violent
against all Ceremony. They who are against all Jewish Usages, ought to have a
care of Judaizing. They who are zealous against Popery, ought to have a care
themselves both lest they run into Popery, and lest they be carried thereinto,
(however imprudently and unwarily). They who could be forward to appoint
Fasting-days, and days of Thanksgiving, upon accounts not so justifiable, ought
not to be against all our lawful and appointed Fasts and Festivals. They who
have made it the chief of their Exception against our Monarchy formerly, that
it made void Acts of Parliament by Prerogative (when it did not) should not be
so earnest, that the same be done for the sake of Papists and themselves. They
who would not have the miscarriages of some particular Brethren charged on
their Party, or themselves; ought, by the same Rule, to have a care that they
never charge our Church with the Faults of some particular Persons of our
Communion; making those the Vices of our Constitution, which are only the
Faults of some Persons, which will be in the World so long as there are Men;
happy is it, where there are fewest. The same equity also which our Church
shows unto others, she may justly expect to receive: Namely; To be allowed
such just and favorable Construction, as in Preface to the Liturgy.
common equity ought to be allowed to all humane Writings, especially such as
are set forth by Authority.

7. Christian Moderation will govern any, when they have experienced an Evil,
not to run into the same again; They therefore who have seen that the
Consequences of their own Principles have proved worse than before they
apprehended; and that such immoderate Zeal as their own, has bin made use of
to other purposes than they were aware, and have seen and felt the horrid
Effects of Confusion, occasioned from such Exceptions as these, which are so
busy now against our Church; by the Rules of true Moderation, ought to
acknowledge the same constantly, and to have a diligent care lest they split
again upon the same Rocks. This Christian Moderation will help any for avoiding
one extreme from running unto another: because they detest In vitium ducit
culpae fuga, si caret art. Horat.
Papal Tyranny, they will not therefore reject Episcopacy; because of some
defect in Discipline, they will not therefore run into a culpable Separation:
because some are careless in their Prayers, they will not therefore reject all
Forms as unlawful: Because of the Imperfection of all Forms of Government,
therefore they will not conclude Monarchy sinful: Because some set up the
Doctrine of Merit, they will not therefore think good Works needless to
Salvation: Because too many neglect the Vow they made in their Baptism,
therefore they will not deny Infant Baptism: Because in Popery there are such
heaps of Fopperies, therefore what was really good among them, must not for
their sakes be condemned: Because what was typical of Christ under the Old
Testament is abolished by our Christianity, therefore other moral and useful
Usages which were among the Jews are not to be thought unlawful.

For many are forward to cry out of sundry Appointments among us as Jewish: As
the use of Churches; Music, separate Persons, Places, and Things for the Holy
Service of God; Churching of Women; Tithes; Holy Days and Times; decent
Vestments, etc. wherein our Church uses its Christian Liberty to take or leave
such Institutions as are free for us, the Reason remaining generally the same
to us, and them, and others.

Yet (which is contrary to the Rule of right Reason and due Moderation) the
very same Persons (where the Reason remains not the same to Jews and
Christians, but quite contrary) are apt to Judaise in practice properly
Mosaical, and which were shadows of good things to come V. Compassionate
enquiry. p. 69.
.

8. Because the Precepts we meet with in the New Testament concerning
Moderation, Condescension, bearing Infirmities, are plainly given to private
Persons, and many times in relation to their own Passions, and with a clear
reference to their having not as yet time or opportunity of being sufficiently
instructed. Therefore all good Christians are to have a care lest any
indisposition or ill-temper of Mind or Fancy prevail with them against a
positive and certain Duty; which is a Rule of true Moderation.

9. As Christian Moderation guides and inclines us, with all compassion and
affection, to pity the Seduced, whose Education and Company, and the Authority
of those they admire (too blameably notwithstanding) governs their weakness,
into dislike of what is publicly ordered: however with meekness we desire to
instruct such who oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to acknowledgment of the Truth.

So for such who are driven aside by Interest, Love of Faction, or other
corrupt Designs: Albeit we grieve for them, and pray for their better mind: Yet
it is no breach of Christian Moderation, if (for the Peace of the Church, for
the Honor of the Laws, for the Safety of Others, and that all their Souls may
be saved in the Day of the Lord) we do wish the Gensures of the Church in full
force and vigor, for their seasonable reducement and emendation.

10. True Moderation which governs it self according to Truth, will not suffer
any to pretend to that Union among themselves, which really they know they have
not: I think nothing might help some to a sense of their unreasonable
opposition to the Church of England, and their unadvisedness therein, more than
if they themselves would please to reflect on the Variety and Contradiction
which is among themselves one to another Inde furor vulgo, quod numina
vicinorum Odit uterque locus, quum solos credat habendos Esse Deos, quos ipse
colit -- Juven. Sat. 15.
: However all Dissenters would seem to be united in the great numbers every
Party boasts of.

But because it is impossible to comprehend the variety of all Sects; look we
for Instance but upon the Presbyterian Brethren; and see among them the mild
and the rigid; and the subdivision of these into sundry Classes and Forms of
them.

Some have professed they adhere to the Scripture, and the Catholic consent of
Antiquity, Grand Debate, p. 61.
as described by Vincentius Lirinensis. Whether others prefer the judgment of
one of the Masters of their Assemblies equal to most of the Ancient Fathers, I
should not offend many of them to declare. Some take it for granted there is a
firm agreement between us in 1. Paper to his Majesty.
Doctrinal Truths of the Reformed Religion expressed in the Articles and
Homilies. Others contend for a necessity of Reformation, even of the Doctrine
of the Church of England. Some among them hold our Liturgy Unlawful; others
only Inexpedient: Some not inexpedient in some Offices, but in others. Others
can join with all our Forms of Liturgy, but cannot use them. Some could use
them, if Grand Debate, p. 61.
there was a convenient conjunction of the Liturgy mixed with their own
Conceptions interposed, which they have thought would be a well-tempered means,
to the common constitution of most. Some can use them, but not subscribe them;
others can subscribe to the use, but not assent and consent to the use of them.
Some who will not themselves consent, are content their Sons should be brought
up to be wiser. Others when they advise or give leave to any to conform,
gravely desire them to do it as their Burden. Some Brethren of the same
denomination among themselves, disapprove of those very Offices and
Constitutions which others of them allow, and yet like others better. In so
much that we may count those who are satisfied, to oppose the dissatisfied (in
many things) among themselves.

So concerning Ceremonies, the Presbyterian Brethren, (while they do not deny
their practice to be lawful) they declare of others, Some think them flatly 2.
Paper to his Majesty.
unlawful, some inconvenient; some think them unlawful in themselves, and
others but inconvenient. Thus in the Nosotrophium of the old Philosopher, who
undertook to ^ure all Calentures, by bathing Patients under Water; some were up
to the Chin, some to the Middle, some to the Knees. So it is amongst the
Enemies of the Sacred Order of Episcopacy; some endure not the Name, and they
indeed deserve to be over head and ears. Some will have them all one in Office
with Presbyters, as they first were in Name, and they had need bath up to the
Chin: but some stand shallower, and grant a little distinction, a precedence
perhaps for Order-sake, but no pre-eminence in Regiment, no superiority of
Jurisdiction. Others by all means would be thought to be quite through in
behalf of Bishops Order, and Power, such as it is, but call for a reduction to
the Primitive State, and would have all Bishops like the Primitive; but because
by this means they think to impair their Power, they may endure to be up to the
Ankles. Their Error indeed is less, and their Pretense fairer, but the use they
make of it of very ill consequence. Thus those who are for Parity in the
Church, have great disparities, and very disproportionate Measures in their own
immoderations, in many other Matters as well as these mentioned. You may as
Grand Debate, p. 91.
well think to make a Coat for the Moon, (as was the Phrase of the Presbyterian
Brethren) as reconcile most of them one to another. Who since they are so
inconsistent among themselves, are less to be credited against the Church. And
here it might also be proved at large, how the most of the Dissenting Brethren
of the same denomination, often change many of their Principles within a few
years: especially the Dissenters of the former times seemed to have a greater
sense of the Moderation of our Church, and used a fairer compliance, than many
have done since under greater Indulgence, for they came generally to our
Common Prayers, and Holy Sacraments. To say nothing of other Differences, which
will not please our Brethren to mention, as well as they love the old
Nonconformists. As to those among us who are most moderate, it may be wished
they will afford their own Example in what they allow in Discourse; and that
they would labor as effectually to prevail on those who depend on their
Judgments and Example.

. 3. Whereas many of our Dissenting Brethren profess they desire the Interest
of Jesus Christ may be promoted, and that sanctity of Life, and the pure
Worship of God, and the Communion of Saints, and the Edification of the Church,
and the Reformed Protestant Religion may be maintained and increased; and in
all Debates they appeal to the Holy Scriptures; and many of them say, they are
desirous to rectify Mistakes, and to lay aside all prejudice, and passion, and
partiality, and profess they desire their Judgments and Practices may be guided
in the ways of Truth and Peace. Supposing all this, if we meet with such as
will admit what follows into fair consideration, I should think it the most
proper means by some such degrees as follow to bring them, if it be possible,
to understand the good Constitution of things among us.

1. By letting such, by clear Instances, see how unmoveably we hold the Faith
and Doctrine of Christ delivered in Holy Scripture; which together with the
whole Church of God, the Church of England does keep inviolably, witness unto
them faithfully, and so constantly appeal to, as the only perfect Rule of Faith
and Manners. (V. Chapter 4.)

2. Since the best and most useful sort of Moderation, is that which governs us
as we ought, in the real Practice of Virtue and Goodness, whereunto tend all
the Moderation of the Laws, and the Doctrine and Discipline of God's Church;
yet (which is a lamentable thing to consider) this is most silently past over,
and scarce known by the Name at that same time, that a huge clamor is raised
among us for Moderation in Religion: in which, all that are concerned may know
and understand, that the great Design and Desire of our Church is to promote
holiness of Life. Among us, all may not only be as holy as they will, but that
they may be so, they are assisted and encouraged most earnestly, by the Laws,
and Constitutions, and Offices, and Councils of our Church, (which if they were
rightly understood, would be known uniformly to tend to no less).

3. Such may consider that all the appointed means of Grace and Salvation, are
by our Church publicly and amply taken care of, as duly and effectually as may
be.

4. In a Church where substantial Piety is so truly procured throughout the
whole Constitution; it might at least mitigate the great offense taken to
consider (what is more largely showed Chapter 8.) That our Church never did own her
very few Ceremonies, any other than accidental and mutable Circumstances, for
Order and Comeliness-sake; but never asserted them any essential or necessary
part of God's Worship. Such may also consider the Rules of reasonable behavior
and submission to the Church; as are moderately laid down Chap. 6.. 10.

5. Because our Dissenters, by their dividing from us, seem to endanger very
much the Interest of the Reformed Religion, which they appear so zealous to
uphold; Let them be pleased to consider the real danger of their being acted by
Romish Agents and Incendiaries, while they take the second direct course to
destroy this reformed Establishment among us; as is more particularly
considered in Chap. 17.

6. Such may do well to consider truly, those easy and proper Consequences
which follow the Consideration of the Church being a Society, with relation to
a Christian Kingdom as ours is; from whence sundry special Obligations may be
inferred, to bind every one who calls himself Christian, to maintain the Peace
and union of such a Society; especially if we look on the Church as a Society,
formed by God himself; and therefore common Christians are not to look upon
themselves as Spiritual Governors; as if they had any power in themselves to
constitute new Bounds, or new Extents, to its Being or Authority; but are to
think they have an easier and safer task, quietly to accept and obey that which
is constituted by lawful Authority, in all things not repugnant to the revealed
Will of God.

And since every one's being of the Church does suppose their duty to
communicate in those Sacraments and Holy Offices, which are appointed as a
public Sign before God and Man, that we do confess Christ Jesus; and is an
evidence of our holding communion with God's Church, and that we are obedient
to the Laws of this Society, and the Government thereof, in that fixed part of
the Church we live in; it follows that we are obliged unto the Peace of this
Church by the intent of our Baptismal Vow, when we were incorporated as Members
of Christ's Body, the Church: And we are bound to maintain the same Peace of
this Society of the Church, as we live in a Christian Kingdom, where the
Religion of the Kingdom is so great a part of its Laws. Upon which account
Schism renders the safety of Kingdoms very hazardous: beside that it loses
the Bands of all Friendship, Sacred and Civil, and breeds enmity among nearest
Relations and Neighbors: It tends exceedingly to the dishonor of the Public
Laws, and opens a gap to the most dissolute, making void the exercise and
effect of the Discipline of the Church upon the scandalous; which otherwise to
the profane World would prove terrible, as an Army with Banners: It is the
only way any can take, to destroy all being of a Visible Church; to corrupt her
Doctrine, and destroy her Power, and is so great a sin as Martyrdom it self
cannot expiate it: Such do as much as they can, make void the Design of our
Blessed Savior; Who died, that be might gather into one the Children of God
that are scattered abroad, 11 S. John 52. the night before our Lord was
betrayed, when he instituted the Sacrament of Unity; How fervently did he pray
for the Peace of the Church! 17 S. John 11. Holy Father, keep through thy own
Name, those whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as I am one. (V.
21.) That they also may be one in us, that the World may believe that thou have
sent me. Whereas these Schisms which we have, tend to weaken or take away the
greatest outward Witness we have of the truth of Holy Scriptures, and of our
very Christianity; namely, the Testimony of God's Church from the beginning;
and do expose our most excellent Religion, to the contempt and entertainment of
Atheists. The sad account for which let them beware of, who make it their idle
business, to defame the Church in her Holy Offices, and alienate all whom they
can from her Communion.

Let them pretend what they will in the mean time to intimate Communion with
God, they indeed take away the Unity of the Church as much as in them lies, but
in effect they take it away from themselves; and they cut themselves off from
Communion with the rest of the Body; and by being dissevered from the Body, how
it is possible they should retain Communion with the Head of that Body, God
only knows, to whose infinite Mercy we leave them.

It is seriously and heartily to be wished, that the Duty and Benefits of
Communion with the Church, were duly considered by all: and the many more
grievous Mischiefs of Schism than have bin here mentioned: and in reference to
our Church of England in particular, as certainly her Moderation is a great
aggravation of the Schisms which are; so I suppose it a most true observation,
and deserves the common consent of all, That the only Reason why our Church is
not more generally embraced and admired, is, because the Purity of its
Doctrine, the Sobriety of its Devotion, the Moderation of its Discipline, the
largeness of its Charity, are not impartially and calmly examined, and more
generally understood.

Wherefore we wish that by God's Grace working love in all the hearts of those
who do not understand and consider so much: they would yet consent to what the
Peaceful and Holy Nazianzen declares in one of his Orations of Peace; Thus
(says he) I resolve, it is not good to be more indifferent than is meet, nor
too hot; either through levity to be carried about with every one, nor by
disorder to separate from all: when the manifest things of wickedness require
our compliance, then we are to contest with Fire and Sword, rather than partake
of their Leven: But when only a suspicion of evil seizes on our minds, then
Moderation and Condescension are more advisable, rather than make a separation
from others we relate unto as Members. Wherefore let us embrace each other, and
be sincerely one, and imitate our Blessed Mediator, who by his Blood has
reconciled all things, and made peace: Let us say to our Common Father, Behold
thy Sons gathered into One. Unto which I must add what the same Father from
those Dissentions which were in the Church did conceive, namely, a great dread,
lest thereby Antichrist (...) --
should come upon them on sudden, taking advantages of their Discord.

It would be well if modest and quiet Persons could at length be convinced of
the happiness of having and holding to a Rule Pulchrum est tenere mensuram
officii. S Ambros. offic. l. 1. c. 10.
: And what a blessing it is, to have every thing for their Spiritual use so
readily, and so well prepared to their hand: and admit (which we are in no wise
forced here to affirm) that sundry Orders might be much better; Nevertheless
whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind
the same Thing. (3 Phil. 13.) In Matters of Indifferency, the best way of
cementing the Fracturam vero ligamen astringit, cum culpam disciplina deprimit:
sed gravius scissuram sentiat, si hanc immoderatius ligamenta constringant:
inter haec solicit a circumspectione providendum, ne aut districtio rigida, aut
pietas sit remissa. Greg. Mag. de cura past. in part. 2. c. 5.
Fractions, is, unite the Parts in the Authority; for then the Question is but
one, namely, Whether the Authority shall be obeyed or not Lib. of Prophec.. 17.
?

Me thinks the Interest of the Christian Religion, (to free it from so great a
scandal) the Honor of the Kingdom, and their Native Country, and the Laws, and
the private Interest of themselves and their Families (where greater Interest
and Engagement with a Party and Prejudices do not hinder) should prevail at
length with more to embrace the Reconciliation of the Church: which the best
and wisest everywhere have done, (convinced of the Moderation of our Church)
and the rest remain so divided and shattered among themselves, only united by
their common prejudice against the Church; having had their mouths over and
over stopped by solid Arguments, and a palpable demonstration of their falsities
and incongruities, (which have bin posted up to the World to their unanswerable
conviction); or else they have bin laughed out of their ridiculous follies, by
them who have had a laudable art in so doing Ingenuo culpam defigere ludo.
Persius. Sat. 5.
.

. 4. And indeed since the Church of England suffers so exceedingly, between
such extreme Adversaries, (which has bin a great proof of her great
Moderation) no wonder if such as desire to maintain the even tenor of uniform
Principles, partake of the same hard measure with our Church (...). Thucyd.
: Wherefore for our calmly defending what is real Moderation, we may surely
expect to be accused as immoderate, and to be suspected by either extreme of
the number of their opposite Adversaries, against which chance perhaps there is
no Remedy: Wherefore the sincerity of our Purpose, and the goodness of our
Cause, we hope will support us; For it is enough for the Disciple, that he be
as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: Blessed be God we have yet the
advantage of so excellent a Reformed Church on our side. So the worthy
Translators of the English Bible, in their Epistle to King James, comforted
themselves; If on the one side we shall be traduced by Popish Persons, or if on
the other side we shall be maligned by self-conceited Brethren, who run their
own ways, and give liking unto nothing but what is framed by themselves, and
hammered on their Anvil, we may rest secure, supported by the truth and
innocence of a good Conscience.

For my own part, I profess my self a lover and admirer of true Moderation; and
I hope I have observed the due measures of it Moderatus sum Ipse mihi, quant^^^
lic^it, and non quod Ip^^ de ^o^is ^erue^in^, sed quid nostros Homines deced^,
spectavi. Su^liv. pref. de Monach.
, in what I have writ, with relation to either extreme. And h^re I crave leave
to repeat the dying words of the right Reverend Bishop Sanderson, and to use
them solemnly as my own; As I do profess that I have lived, so I desire, and by
the Grace of God, resolve to die, in the Communion of the Catholic Church of
Christ, and a true Son of the Church of England, which as it stands by Law
established, to be both in Doctrine and Worship agreeable to the Word of God;
and in the most material Points of both, conformable to the Faith and Practice
of the Godly Church of Christ in the Primitive and purer times, I do firmly
believe: Led so to do, not so much from the force of Custom and Education, (to
which the greatest part of Mankind owe their particular different Persuasions
in Religion) as upon the clear evidence of Truth and Reason, after a serious
and unpartial examination of the Grounds, as well of Popery as Puritanism,
according to that measure of understanding, and those opportunities which God
has afforded me; and herein I am abundantly satisfied, that the Schism which
the Papists on one hand, and V. Bishop Sanderson's last Will. Walton in his
Life.
the Superstition which the Puritan on the other hand lay to our charge, are
very justly chargeable on themselves respectively.

It is the Church of England in its legal Constitution, which I defend, and not
the Assertions and Practices of particular Persons: Neither have I undertaken
to commend the Church in all her equal Constitutions, nor shown all the
Proportions and Instances of her Moderation; neither have I illustrated the
same from all the extremes and immoderate extravagances of other Professions in
Religion, which would have bin a boundless and an infinite task: But if I have
made out this excellent Virtue to be truly conspicuous in our Church: If I have
fairly wrested out of our Adversary's hands that glorious Calumny, in which so
many have cheared and vaunted themselves, in their fond Hopes, strange Demands,
and very dismantled Confidences, That our Church is devoy'd of all true
Moderation; I am sure I have done reason to our most indulgent Mother to defend
her from the imputation of unjust Rigor; which our Church justly disdains, as
in her 8th Canon; Whosoever shall affirm that their pretended (Schismatical)
Church has a long time groaned under the burden of certain Grievances imposed
upon them by the Church of England, let them be Excommunicate. --

. 5. But whereas some forward to censure, will be apt to judge of our justifying
the Moderation of the Church as an endeavor to prevent any Reformation or
Union; such may consider, That admit our Superiors should think fit to remit,
or at any time change any thing in our present Order; The so doing does not
necessarily infer that our Constitution is not very moderate as it is: For
Concessions which are for the future, ought not to be an accusation of the
Church in what is past. But may our sins never bring upon us such a wretched
condition of the Church, when every one shall judge he has a right to think and
speak in Religion what he pleases In libera Repub. unicuique and sentire quae
velit and quae sentiat libere dicere. Tractat. Theologo. Pol.
. Unto this state of things, or unto Popery, those hasten us, (whether they
know it or no) who are in no wise satisfied with the Moderation of our Church.
How far our present establishment may be any way moderated to compass a more
general and lasting uniformity, we hope if ever there should be occasion, God
will guide our Governors to determine; but I am sure, as the present Moderation
of the Church is most justifiable, so I suppose the change may more easily be
allowed, when ever the generality of Dissenters shall be agreed and resolved of
their own Reasons among themselves.

In the mean while if any will undertake to disprove the Proposition which this
Treatise principally does ovince, Namely,

That the great Moderation of the Church of England does rightly argue those
who are in separation from the same, to be the more unjust and guilty in their
Schism.

Et refellere sine pert^nac^a, and refelli sine iracun^ia para^i sumus. Tuscul.
9. l. 2.
I hope such will menage their Exceptions with respect to the Rules of
Moderation, (especially as they have bin laid down in the second paragraph of
this Chapter).

Neither I conceive is it enough to excuse their Schism, nor to render our
Church so immoderate, as not to be communicated with, for any to give some
Instances, which according to some Judgments they would have otherwise; since
it is most impossible to have any constitution of things free from all manner
of exception; and also against the most perfect things, great enmities may be
raised, for want of equally considering the Principles, Rules, and Ends for
which those things were established. Neither is it enough to except against
what is faulty in particular Persons, when the same is no vice of the public
Constitution. Sure then it may be judged a very unreasonable manner of sundry
sorts of Men answering such Discourses as pinch them, namely by catching at
some little scattered parts, of the Skirts and Margent of the Cause: Or when
they cannot by unbiassed Reasons have victory in their Contest, then they
readily fall off to Personal Matters, which in no sort tend to the Merits of
any Cause: and by these methods they hope to buoy up the Party, which is the
main thing they generally aim at.

. 6. Such was the Moderation of our Church when she had any hopes to reduce any
of the Romish Profession unto our Communion, she left out of the Public Litany
that Clause; From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestible
Enormities, Good Lord deliver us.

Yet it may be very proper now to make the same our Petition (here); adjoining
thereunto another seasonable Prayer of Isaac Casaubon's; O Lord Jesu preserve
this Church of England, and give a sound mind to those Nonconformists who
deride the Rites and Ceremonies of it Faxit Deus ut ad san^orem mentem redeant,
Amen. Lud. Capellus. These. 51. Salmur. de moresis in Anglia.
.

And since I have named the Learned Casaubon, it is most suitable here also to
add some of his words to King James Exercit. in Baron. Ep. D^d.
; Sir, You have a Church in these Kingdoms, partly so framed of old, and partly
by great labors of late so restored, that now no Church whatsoever comes
nearer than yours to the form of the Primitive flourishing Church, having taken
just the middle way between those that offended in excess and defect: In which
Moderation the Church of England has obtein'd this first of all, that those
very Persons who envyed her happiness, yet by comparing one with the other,
have bin compelled to praise Her.

As for any of those who think it their Interest to decry the Moderation of our
Church: We wish first that the Roman Church would once take advice of her own
Cassander De nimio ^^origore aliquid rem^^^ant, and Ecclesiae paci aliquid
concedant. Consult. ad Artic. 7.
; To remit of their immoderate rigor; and harkening to the Admonitions of
Pious Men, would set themselves to correct manifest abuses, according to the
Rule of Divine Scripture, and of the Primitive Church, from which they have
swerved.

And that those of the other extreme would practice the Counsel which Vt vos
ultra modum rigidos esse nolim, ita rursus altos monitos esse cupio, ne sibi in
sua inscitia nimis placeant. Ep. 200.
Calvin gave the English Brethren at Frank fort; As I would not (says he) have
you beyond measure rigid, so again, the rest I desire, they will be advised not
to please themselves too excessively in their own ignorance Off^^sions suae
modum statuere nesciunt; nam ubi Dominus clementiam exigit, omissa illa, totos
se immoderatae severitati tradunt. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 1.
.

For I suppose, that according to the best Reason it may be made out very
probable; that as the overthrow of Popery may as probably be wrought by the
growth of its own rigor and immoderate claims, as any way we can imagine Inde
exitium imminere Pontifici^ imperio. A. Sall. votum pr^pace.
; so if any thing in the mean while endanger the Protestant Reformed Interest,
it will be the immoderate behavior of those of the Separation in their Schism
against our Church. Between both taking auspicious hopes from the Moderation of
our Church: We trust its Constitution being most Primitive, will be also most
lasting E^ demum tuta est potentia quae viribus suis modum impon^t. Val. Max.
de Animi Mother. l. 4. c. 1.
in the esteem of the Church Universal, and in the approbation of wise and good
Christians.

And while our Church continues thus moderate, it must needs argue the
Separation which is from it, to be the more unequal and sinful: For the same
Moderation which exonerates the Church of England from the guilt of Schism,
with respect to the Romanists, does aggravate also the Schism of other
Separatists; and however some dissenting Brethren (while they remain drencht in
their Tinctures) will not be forward to acknowledge the Moderation of our
Church, yet we are assured that nothing would more tend to bring People in love
with happy Peace and blessed Order; nothing would contribute more to the
quieting Men's Minds, to reconcile all Parties, and to accommodate the most and
greatest differences which are among us, than a right and full persuasion of
the excellent Temper and Constitution of our Church.

I cannot close a Treatise of the Moderation of the Church of England more
properly than with some of the mild and pathetical Soliloquies of our late
Blessed Martyr King Charles I. Most merciful God, stir up all Parties pious
(...).. 19. and 16.
Ambitions, to overcome each other with Reason, Moderation, and such
self-denial as becomes those who consider, that our mutual Divisions are our
common Distractions, and the Union of all is every Man's chiefest Interest.

Keep Men in a pious Moderation of their Judgments in Matters of Religion.

Give us wisdom to amend what is amiss within us, and there will be less to
mend without us.

Evermore defend and deliver thy Church from the Effects of blind Zeal, and
over-bold Devotion.

Glory to God in the highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men. FINIS.

