Scotlands holy War.

A DISCOURSE Truly, and plainly remonstrating, How the SCOTS out of a corrupt
pretended zeal to the COVENANT have made the same scandalous, and odious to all
good men: and How by religious pretexts of saving the Peace of Great Britain
they have irreligiously involved us all in a most pernicious War.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.
Cursed man, what can Thou hope for, what desire?
To Thee Christ brings a sword, his Gospel fire.
Be man no more, abjure thy wretched kind:
Lest Mannah poizen, Sunbeams strike thee blind:
By H. P. Esquire.

LONDON: Printed by Fran: Neile, in Aldersgate Street. 1651.

READER,
I Have lately seen in Print an Apology for such Ministers, and people, as out
of conscience did not observe the Thanksgiving-day dedicated by the Parliament
to Almighty God, for giving us victory against the Scots: and the Apologist had
prefixed this Title in his Front: Sad and serious Political Considerations
touching the Invasive War against our Presbyterian Protestant Brethren in
Scotland, their late great overthrow, and the probable dangerous consequences
thereof to both Nations, and the Protestant Religion.

As soon as I had read it over; I saw heavy, and bitter charges in it against
the Power now Governing, and by consequence against our Nation, and Religion,
but all was built upon such premises, as were left utterly unproved. I doubt
not therefore but all Scholars will deride the Author, as void of wit and
ingenuity: and will think that Pamphlet unworthy of an Answer, which can
challenge nothing besides a flat denial. But when I consider the multitude,
who scarce discern betwixt Arguments and Invectives, or points that require
solid proofs, and such as sometimes are not worth prooving: when I consider
this multitude may be dangerously imposed upon by confident writers indeed,
such as have effrontery enough to grant themselves any thing under dispute: I
dare not be wanting to a distressed Cause, and vitiated Truth. What the
Apologist though affirmant has left unproved, viz: that the Parliament has
broken Covenant with the Scots, and made an Invasive war upon the
Presbyterians: the same I though respondent shall endeavor to leave disproved.
And I hope I shall remonstrate by something more then Averments, my Antagonists
best arguments: 1* that the Covenant was first violated by the Scot^, and 2ly,
that this war of great Britain was raised by the Presbyterians.

Of the Covenant.
ABout 11. or 12. years since, the late King began to take Arms against the
Scotch Nation upon Ecclesiastical quarrels, but his success was so ill
therein, that He could neither hopefully pursue, nor yet handsomely compose
those broils. The reason was, because his Popish Subjects could not, and his
Protestant Subjects in England would not support him with their effectual
assistance in that causless war. So this Parliament was then convened to
extricate the said King out of those difficulties: and had ^here been any other
remedy that possibly could have releasd him (so entangled, as He then was)
either by pacifying the Scots without force, or forcing them without
pacification, this remedy had never been thought on: for there was nothing in
the world more adverse to his Tyrannical ends; then the freedom, and
controuling authority of that high Court. Long it was not therefore after the
sitting of our great Council, before the said King gave open testimonies, how
odious it was to Him to see his boundles Prerogative so checked: nay many months
had not elapsed before disgusts had hacht and ripend bloody and dangerous plots
against the whole representative body of our State, 2. Armies were now in the
North out of all military employment, and this put the King in some hopes, that
either one of them or both might be woone to his party; and so help to rid him
of his loathed rivality. Strong endeavors were used accordingly: but God
blasted them all: the Scotch Army thought it too horrid a thing to attempt the
ruin of that Court which was so true to their preservation, and so assured to
the ends of their late Declaration: and the English Army durst not attemp^ any
thing, having the power of London to mate them before, and the Scots behind,
yet the Parliament truly apprehending danger from these, and other like
machinations to for^ifie themselves the better, frame a Protestation for all
the people to take, and whosoever should refuse the same, He was voted unfit to
bear Office either in Church, or Commonwealth. This Protestation was taken in
1641. and the Protesters did thereby in the presence of Almighty God bind
themselves to defend Religion, the King, the Parliament, public Liberty, the
Union, and peace of the three Kingdoms, with a clause to be assisting to all
that adhered to this Protestation, and to be at enmity with all its opposers.
The King stomacht much this new way of imbodying the people in leagues, and
parties, and knew well that the contrivers of it intended it for a combination
against his unlimited pretensions: but seeing his interests were here as
specially provided for as any other, without any insinuated subordination, and
that it left his pretensions as unprejudiced as they were before: he smothered
much of his distaste against it. Ordinary affronts, and misadventures did
rather quicken then quash this Kings resolutions, wherefore upon this Account
He made the more haste into Scotland upon some concealed reasons of State: and
his hope was, that by his passing through both the Armies in the North, He
should find an opportunity to be his own negotiater with all the chief
Commanders. All these royal arts nevertheless miscarried, and were not able
to debosh the Armies, for either the Commanders were jealous of the soulderies
integrity, or the Soldiery of one Army suspected the sincerity of the other,
or else the Parliaments solicitations proved as efficacious, as the Kings:
something there was that concurred to the abortion of that mischief. The King
therefore speeds away to Scotland with super^etations of further plots in his
unquiet head; but his old fate still accompanied him, for there He was soon
disburthened of some of his monstrous conceptions, to the great detriment of
other men: but He scarce ever prospered in any one design for the advancement
of himself. Some Noblemen that were invited to a bloody supper, got timely
advertisement of the royal assassinators, and so by flying privily out of
Edinburgh secured themselves: but that ever to be execrated insurrection in
Ireland, by the Irish Papists against the British Protestants, came to effect
at that time; and it is known well enough that the chief actors in that tragedy
alleged a Commission from the King under the great Seal of Scotland, to
justify all that they then perpetrated. Here was an issue of blood spent, that
is not stanched to this day: little less then 500000 Christians were
sacrificed, and devoted to slaughter by that Commission (and the King himself
never took any effectual course to wipe off that stain) but what prosperity
has that dismal deluge of blood brought at last to the Kings cause?

Hitherto the King keeps from open defiance with the Parliament of England: but
now Gods flaming Minister of war begins to brandish his sword against this
Nation: now the King is returned from Scotland: and now begins the year 1642.
wherein Arms are openly taken up, and avowed on both sides. Scotland for two or
three years before had seen war, but without slaughter* Ireland had been
miserably the year before imbrued with slaughter, yet saw no war: but England
must now prepare her self both for war, and slaughter. At the first harnessing,
and making ready for the field both sides pretended to be on the defense: and
both pretended to stand for the defense of the same persons, and rights; the
Parliament declares for the Kings rights as well as the subjects Liberties: and
the King for the Subjects Liberties, as well as his own rights: the matter of
the Protestation is the cause they both ^ight for; insomuch that by their
professions it might be thought the Protestation were equally favored by both.
Neither were their successes much unanswerable to their professions: for after
a bloody battle fought near Keinton in October: and another hot encounter at
Brainford, and after diverse other conflicts in several other places of the
Northern, Western, and middle Counties of England either side got blows, but
neither side carried away any great advantage, or conquest: only the Kings
secret correspondence with the Irish began now to grow more evident, as well by
their declaring for the Kings pretenses, as by his diver^ing the preparations
made here against them. At this time the thread of the Kings Councels was
exceeding finely spun, the more zealous He seemed against the I^^sh openly, the
more zeal He attested to them privately, and they themselves could not but see
by the Kings seizing our Irish provisions here, and assuring himself of our
Forces sent thither, that the more we exhausted our selves in sending supplies
against them, the more unable we should be in the end either to resist the King
here, or to reduce them there. Howsoever as was noted before, though the most
subtle threeds of the King, were strong enough sometimes to fabricate toils
and nets for his subjects, yet they never could be twisted into ladders for the
mounting of him to his aspired grandour.

About the beginning of the year 1643. another black desperate design against
the City of London was discovered, scarce inferior to any of those former
impregnations of the Kings enraged brain: whereupon the Parliament again had
recourse to this new religious guard of Vowing, and Covenanting. And herein
after the Covenanters had humbled themselves before God for the Nations sins,
and judgments, and promised by Gods grace to endeavor for the future, an
amendment of their ways, they the second time engaged themselves by Vow, and
Covenant, in the presence of Almighty God, to be adhering faithfully to the
Forces raised by the Parliament for defense of Religion, and liberty. etc. But
notwithstanding the virtue of both these holy remedies against the Kings
uncessant stratagems: about the latter end of the same Summer the Parliaments
affairs came to a great declination, and till they obtained aid from the Scotch
Nation, their condition was thought very tottering. In August the English
Commissioners began to treat at Edinburgh: and about the depth of Winter the
Scots advanced with a complete, well appointed Army. Yet this may not be wholly
pre^ermitted, that the Scots were long deliberating about their march, and
though they saw their ruin involved in ours, and their faith no less
pre-ingaged to us for mutual assistance, then ours was to them: yet they
advanced not at last but upon these strict conditions: 1. That we being then
but a wasted part of England, yet should presently imburse them out of our
afflicted affairs with a great sum of ready money: 2ly, That they should be
paid as mercenaries, and yet have a share in government here, as if they were
our joyntenants. And 3ly, that we should enter with them into a new solemn
League and Covenant upon Oath, as it was by them composed, and conceived. So
disproportionable, and unsuitable is their amity to their enmity: for when they
had a pretense of a quarrel contrary to former Treaties with England, in 1648.
it was in their power to invade England readily without assurance of present
Advance-money, or established pay afterward: and such able Enemies we found
them in all ages: but when they were to be ayding to part of England, in
observance of former Treaties, in 1643. there is no moving in such a work
without ample Covenants: so much more difficult amongst them is the enterprise
of helping, then is the enterprise of undoing.

It is manifest now, by that which has been hitherto premised, that the first
occasion of flying to such conscientious ties and expedients as these, was that
the late Kings plots, and conspiracies might be thereby the better
disappointed, and that the people might be thereby the better confirmed in
their opposition against Him. And this makes it now seem the more strange to
us, that the Scots at present should make their Covenant so main an engine for
the King against us, which at first was certainly excogitated as a main engine
for us against the King. 2ly, it is hereby as manifest that the Scotch Covenant
which is now insisted on by that Nation, and was pressed on us at first with so
much rigor, did add no new obligation at all to the English: Religion, Liberty,
Monarchy, and the peace of the Nations were as much secured before, and as
sanctimoniously by the Protestation in 1641. and by the vow, and Covenant in
1643. as they were afterward by the solemn League and Covenant, when the
Scotch Army was to enter England. 3ly. We cannot observe by any remarkable
blessing from Heaven, that the hand of God did ever give any gracious testimony
in behalf of these new sacramental obligations. The protestation was thought
ineffectuall till the vow, and Covenant came in with a greater supply of
religion: the vow, and Covenant was not able to break the Kings Armies till the
solemn League of Scotland had superinduced its further sanctity: and when that
was superinduced and came accompanied with 20000 armed men from Scotland, the
King subsisted, yea and thrived a long time after: and without doubt those
Oaths which he imposed within his quarters did as much service against us, as
ours did for us in our quarters. We all know that it was not a new Oath but a new
modeld Army that by Gods most gracious hand first gave check to the Kings
prosperity: and it is not so visible that ever we trampled on the Royalists
formerly by observance of the Covenant, as that we are now miserably engaged in
blood against the Scots, by misprisions, and false glosses of the same. The
Lord of his boundles mercy grant at last that we may return to our old ways of
humiliation, seek to appease that Majesty by fasting, and praying, which is to
be feared we have provoked by superstitious vowing, and swearing. 4ly, We
cannot find that ever the people was rightly fitted, or at all benefited by
these new sacramental Leagues, or rather political Sacraments: for in England
we had too many that would take the Kings Oaths when He was prevalent, and the
Parliaments also when they were prevalent: and in Scotland Montrosses victory
left lamentable spectacles of humane treachery and impiety as to the
Covenant: No sooner had he in 1644. won one pitched Field but the Nation
generally flowed in to Him, to submit unto his new royal bonds, with curses
upon them that had forcibly clogd their consciences by contrary ones before;
and no sooner had D: Lesly routed Him, but the same people again shifted
Montrosses bonds with detestations as high, and bitter, as they had the
Parliaments before. This is a prodigious example, exceedingly to be deplored
not only by the Scots, but by all mankind.

But to proceed: The breaches, and hostilities which at this day are sprung out
of the Covenant betwixt the Covenanters of both Nations are too visible: the
question is therefore, whether we shall charge these mischiefs upon the ill
composure of the Covenant it self, or upon the malice of the Covenanters: and
if upon the Covenanters, whether are more guilty the English, or the Scotch?
And first as to the Covenant it self, it seems to me that even that was not
compiled so briefly, so clearly, and so impartially as it might have been, and
that has given some occasion of stumbling to some: but certainly blood had
never been drawn by brethren so leagued together, as we are, had it not been
for the ignorance, arrogance, and high injustice of the Covenanters. Antiquity
which was famous for ingenuity, had not any use to charge their humane
contracts, much less divine, with so various and heterogeneous branches, as
this Covenant is charged withal: some points of it arc divine, some moral,
some civil: some are of higher, some of meaner concernment: and all of them
thus odly compacted together swell it up into too rude a lump. Moreover, since
variety of parts made it more gross, and by consequence more obnoxious to
doubts, and intricacies, there ought to have been more care to distinguish
betwixt those parts which were coordinate, and those which were subordinate:
and in case some provisoes proved inconsistent with others, it should have been
predetermined which should supersede, and which should be superseded. The King
by one clause, as He is King, is to be maintained equally with Religion, etc.
yet by another clause, as He is a professed enemy to the Covenant, is to be
pursued by arms, and brought to condign punishment. The safety of Religion
may possibly be irreconcilable with the safety of the King: and the safety of
the King confessedly owes a subordination to the safety of Religion: yet it is
left dubious by the Covenant how far the inferior here shall give way to the
superior. The unity, and peace of the Nations is the scope of one Article in
the Covenant, and that Article had a high place in the intent of those which
indighted the Covenant: yet neither does this Article condemn all war as
unlawful betwixt the Nations, nor yet prescribe when it may be judged Lawful,
nor by whom. The Scots by one interpretation of the Covenant are more strictly
imbodied with us then formerly, and so to be assisting in our Reformation: yet
by another interpretation, they are to maintain to us our National rights, and
not at all to interpose in judging of our English affairs: and how can they
reform where they may not judge, or how can they judge where they have no
propriety? or how can they challenge more by virtue of this Covenant-union in
England, then we do in Scotland? or how can confusion of interests be
introduced, where there remains a coordination so equally, and justly preserved?

In the next place, there is a palpable partiality in the Covenant whereby is
easy to be perceived in which Nation it received its being: for the Church of
England, and Ireland are to be reformed, but the Church of Scotland is to be
preserved in its perfection of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government.
In sum, all three Nations are to purge away whatsoever is contrary to sound
doctrine, and the power of Godliness: and the only true standart for such
purgation is the book of God, and forasmuch as that is as truly a standart to
the Scots as to the English, they, though the Covenant prejudges and presumes
them perfect, are to be tried by this Book as well as we are, and as that which
is defective in them must be rectified by this standart: so that which is not
defective in us must be justified by the same. We conclude therefore justly,
that either the Article it self pre-judges us, or is by them ill prejudged when
they assume, that we are to conform to them, more then they are to conform to
us: for so much as there is but one only book to which we are bound equally
both of us to conform* and of that Book they are no more authentical
interpreters then we are. These exceptions, and perhaps more, might be taken
against the Covenant it self, and the manner of obtruding it: but we fix not
hereupon, nor will we mention it, as to the genuine intent of it, without
reverence: the main offense that has been given to the world, has been given by
the Takers of it in a false sense, not by it self. The inquiry therefore at
this time is, whether the English, or Scots, whether the Presbyterians, or
Independents are most blameable before God, and Men, for the scandal which has
been given by occasion of this Solemn League, and Covenant. For the better
discussion hereof, we shall do well to observe, first, which of the parties has
been most clamorous against the other* ^ly, What the principal matter of those
clamors has been* 3ly, What may be most probably aimed at by the raisers of
those clamors: 4ly, What the issue has been*

As to the first it is apparent, that the Scoch Presbyterians, were the first
compilers of the Covenant, and that they still continue to set a sacred value
upon it, even unto a great degree of superstition: and it is as apparent, that
they had not been so strangely transported with rage against us, but for our
attributing less then they do to it. The Covenant is their Word in the day of
battle; the Covenant in specie is carried along by their Priests, when they
march into the Field, as if it were held oraculous, and had the same presence
of God engaged to it, as the Ark had amongst the Jews: The Covenant in Law is
made transcendent to an Act of Parliament; nay if both Nations should agree in
one Act of Parliament, that Act could neither make more intense, nor more
remiss the obliging force of this Covenant. This Covenant is sometimes called
Gods Covenant, and inscribed by the Scots in the same table with Gods Covenant
of mercy to his Church, and therefore when they will animate the people against
us in war, they tell them that God cannot deliver up his Turtle dove, and his
Covenant into the hands of such Enemies. Now because we come not up to this
hight of adoration, we seem despisers of the Covenant in the Scots eyes; and
because we seem despisers of so holy a thing (accounted by them the very soul
of Religion, and policy) their gall flows out most violently against us. They
tell us* we have brought great scandal, and reproach upon the Name of God, the
Name of his people, and the study of piety* that we have not only broken the
Solemn League and Covenant betwixt God and these Nations, but have in effect
rejected it, and trampled upon it, are become enemies to all the ends of it,
yea persecuters of the servants, and people of God for their adherence to it.
This in effect has been their burden against us for diverse years, though it be
as void of truth, as it is of charity: and though we (who may more justly
instance in this, and diverse other things as breaches of the Covenant on their
parts) have never made the Covenant any ground of quarrel, or reproach against
them. It Is far from us to under-value the Covenant: we hold it a religious tie
of mutual assistance betwixt the Nations against the common Enemies of
Religion, Liberty, and Union, and so we think honorably of it: only we make it
no spell, nor idol: nor can we believe that it ties us to any duty, which our
Pretestation, and Vow, tied us not to before, nor did our Protestation, and Vow
create any new duties to us when we first entered into them.

In the next place, though there be many heavy breaches of Covenant ubrayded to
us: yet all of them resolve into these two, That we make not good what we have
covenanted for either to God, or to the King. They could never say till this
last Summer (nor can they truly say so of us last Summer) that we ever entered
their Country to disturb their peace, to claim, or usurp any share in their
Government, to lay taxes, seize Towns, waste Villages, and destroy Natives
amongst them, as they have done amongst us: all that they can object to us is,
concerning injuries done to other parties, within our own territories, where by
the Covenant they have no jurisdiction at all. In the behalf of God, they
complain, that our professed Faith is nothing else but a mixture of Arrianisme,
Socinianisme, Antinomianisme* Familisme, Antiscripturisme, Anabaptisme,
Erastianisme, and Independency: but they know well that for matter of Doctrine,
we still retain the old Articles of our Church, without any staggering at all
in the least: and for matter of Discipline, we are willing to comply with them
so far as they comply with Gods Word: but in this we have our eyes in our heads
as well as they, and it is no Law for us to damn the opinion of Erastus, or the
person of any Independent, because they by them are dishonorably spoken of. The
truth is, the Independent departs not so far from Erastus, as the Presbyterian:
and Erastus is no Friend to the supreme power of Synods, nor the uncontrollable
dominion of Priests; and this makes the Independent so injurious to God,
otherwise called the Kirk, otherwise called Kirkmen; were it not alone for this
sin in the Independent, Arrainisme, Socinianisme, etc. (though we were
therewith more infected then the Scots, as we are not) would make no breach of
Covenant at all amongst us.

In behalf of the King, they complain, that we have treated him not only as an
Enemy to the Covenant, but also irreconcilable to the very being of our State:
and hereupon they take upon them to bewail the hard condition of the English,
that they are loaded with so many, and so great taxes, and subjected so
rigorous, and obdurate Laws: which shall receive Answers in due place. But in
the mean time, it is neither the Kings, nor the peoples sufferings that stirs
such a deal of compassion, and zeal in the bowels of our fellow-Covenanters;
it is the change of our Government, by which they perceive at last, they
themselves are very great loosers. The truth is, the difference betwixt the
King and us heretofore was of great advantage to them: and this advantage
(though it was no property, or right of theirs, but a wrong, and damage of
ours) is now fallen away from them. The King shall now have no more occasion to
give them pensions in Scotland, nor gratifications here to do us dis-service in
behalf of his Prerogative: nor shall we be any more bound to hire their service
against the Crown: and we must know, that these double offices, or ambidextrous
versatile arts of doing services, and dis-services was as great a revenue to
them (especially since these last troubles) as the intra does of all Scotland.

Now this therefore in the third place, may save us our labor of further
inquiry about the ends, and aims of the Scots in their exclamations, and
expostulations against us, when they contest in behalf of the Covenant. We see
what the Clergy in Scotland, and here, are so thirsty of, they would fain
have Consistories in every Parish, where they might have a free power to
dispense the Ordinances of Christ to such as prove observant of them, and to
cast out all that are not submissive enough: and for fear Lay Judges should
balance too much there, they would have Classes above better defecated of such
secular persons: and for fear lest those Classes should be controuled by
Parliaments: they would have Assemblies above all to act for Christ in all
matters whatsoever military, or judicial, wherein Christ's Throne, that is the
Kirk may be concerned. No Protestant Bishops ever aspired to so sollid a power
on earth: nay except in the Popes own Patrimony, where He is a Prince, no
Bishops in Europe under any other Lay Princes are allowed to sit and act so
independently, upon a Commission so large, as the Scotch Assemblies do: and
therefore we cannot wonder if such a new Hierachy, as this of the Presbyterians
be so desirable amongst our Kirk-men. Furthermore, when such impetuous
appetites of all the Clergy in Scotland, backs with some thousands of ours in
England, shall also fall in at the same time with the interests of so many of
the Nobility, Gentry, and Soldiery in Scotland, as drove a very thriving trade
heretofore by siding sometimes with the King against us, at other times with us
against the King: and these things can be no other way compast, or pretended to
but by the ambiguous sense of the Covenant: we cannot wonder, if the Covenant
be held so venerable a thing as it is in Scotland, and made the price of blood
and war, as to every puntilio in it. More then this needs not be said of the
Scotch Presbyterians, if as much could be said of the English Independents, and
that they may have as fair hopes, and probable ends against the Scots by
suppressing the Covenant unduly, as the Scots have against us by enforcing it
immoderately: I would willingly quit this as a nugatory, weightles presumption.
The last thing that may deserve to stay and take up our thoughts a little is,
the issue, and event that both sides have met with, and this may justly sway
our censures in such a question, as this is. The King being driven to
extremities in Oxford, and being privy to the differences betwikt both Nations
about some constructions of the Covenant, chose rather to cast himself into
theirs then our hands* and we cannot imagine that the King which so hated and
feared the true intent of the Covenant, would rather entrust his life to those
which He thought more true, then those whom he thought more false to the
Covenant* But what success had that trust of his? it cost him his ruin in the
end; for they which interpreted the Covenant for his purpose whilst he was to
put ^ great prize into their custody, soon found out a contrary
interpretation, when the Parliaments money out-weigh'd that prise. This end
their animating him diverse times against our Propositions tendered, when the
King was thereby, and by other secret correspondencies rendered more dangerous
to us, and more uncouncellable to Himself was fatal to Him. But now since in
favor of his Son the former interpretation is resumed the second time: how has
the case been altered? The case in truth is even thus, the young King has
repented of his coming amongst them, the Kirk begins to repent of his admission
amongst them: the hand of God has been heavy upon both: and it is almost come to
this, that the most conscientious Presbyterians in Scotland must read the
Covenant in a new sense amongst us: whilst all the rest must lay afide the
Covenant wholly amongst the ancient, professed Enemies of it. I will not strain
this argument of success too high: but this is to be remarked, that the
success here put, is not ordinary, or mere success: forasmuch as it has been
sent from Heaven after solemn appeals thither made by two religious parties,
and as the honor of God was much concerned in it, so the manner of sending it
was more then ordinary.

We draw nearer now to the Covenant it self, and shall consider it first in the
whole, and then in its parts. The first clashing we had with the Scots was
about the right which each Nation had past to the other merely by joining in
such a mutual, sanctimonious stipulation: for when we objected to them upon
several occasions, that they interposed too far in the Affairs, and Councels
of England, they as often gave us this Answer, that we were not since our
conjunction with them in the Covenant and Treaties to look upon them as
strangers, or so far distanced, in the interest of England, as they were
before. This was at large refuted, and silenced by the Parliament, and
therefore little need to be said in it: and indeed Leagues, and Pacts are
common amongst all other Nations, yet no man ever argued such a State is united
to such a State as to such a particular war, or as to the attaining of some
other particular purposes, therefore they are incorporated into one State, and
united as to all other purposes whatsoever. This is ridiculous: sense, and
experience is sufficient to explode it. And if the Scots plead further, that
there is something extraordinary in this bond of the Covenant, which knits
faster, and closer then all other bonds: proof will fail them herein: and yet
if proof were not failing: their equality of interest with ours in England
would not follow notwithstanding. For either the Covenant has reduced our two
States and Dominions into one, or not. If it has not; then the English man's
interest is as entire, and remains as distinct from the Scochmans as it was
before: confusion of properties is a thing as abhorred in policy, as a vacuity
is in nature. But if both the governments by our Covenant adunation be
compacted into one, and the same: then where is that one and the same supreme
Tribunal, which is equally to determine all National disputes, and may
legally challenge submission from all aggrieved parties? Should an Army be
committed to 2. Generals, and the Commission specify nothing concerning the
partition of their Commands, and prevention of their rivalities, nothing but
ruin could be expected. Therefore the very letter of the Covenant was so far
from intending to take away all severality from us, that it clearly puts each
Nations Liberties and rights amongst those other things, which it proposes to
it self to save by this promised assistance of each Nation: ordring likewise
this assistance, that no man should yield the same otherwise then in his
several place, and calling, and according to all our several places, and
interests. It Is the more immodesty also in the Scots to arrogate to themselves
an equal share in the rich Commonwealth of England, which the English never
made any pretense to in the like barrener soil of Scotland. But if a moity of
our English government in all cases whatsoever be not due to the Scots, as they
are our brethren in Covenant with us, and equal parties in the same
stipulation: yet in the next place we cannot deny them an equal share in the
judgment of the Covenant, and all disputes about the same. If they be
contractors with us, and by virtue of the same Contract are as well enabled to
require performances of conditions from us, as they are obliged to perform
conditions to us, it stands with all manner of equity and reason that they
should have as great a latitude and freedom, as we, in determining what is to
be performed on either part. We deny not to the Scots the same extent of
judging in England, as to Covenant differences, which we claim in Scotland:
this only is denied by us: that either they are as properly Judges of matters
in England, as they are in Scotland, or we in Scotland, as in England. This was
the fallacy that should have blinded us, but there is no such great depth of
sophistry in it. The States of England and Scotland are equally independent*
and the Covenant cannot grant to one equal a jurisdiction over another. So
long as both Nations stand upon equality, and confess no superiority to be in
either: so long it is vain, injurious, and against the ends of the Covenant for
one to pass sentence upon the other. It Is vain, because the sentence has no
operation at all, the party sentenced protests justly against it, and all third
indifferent parties look indifferently upon the sentence and protestation. It Is
injurious; because he that condemns his equal, does that to another, which he
would not have another do to himself: and if there be no other superior Judge
on earth, He intrud^ into the chair of God himself. Lastly, it is against the
Covenant, because the intent of the Covenant is to settle peace, and amity by
offices of justice and humanity betwixt the Nations: whereas there can be no
end of controversies and hostilities, when sentences shall be spoken against
parties that are no inferiors, and that by parties that are no superiors. The
Scots therefore in this have been exceedingly too blame, and there is no doubt
but the ruin of the King, and all the late miseries of their own wasted
Country have been derived from this strange insufferable arrogance of theirs.
It Is frequent with them to protest against the Parliament of England as no
lawful Authority; to denounce against all the Souldery of England as
Sectaries, Rebels, and regicides; to upbraid all the Gentry, and Comminalty of
England submitting to the present Government, as men that prostitute their
consciences to a sinful shameful thraldom: to incite all the Presbyterians,
and discontented persons in England to the kindling of new flames amongst us.
And this is more then to invade a moity of the Legislative power of England,
this is to seize all: this is more then to claim a jurisdiction in Covenant
affairs, this is to in vas^ all us totally in all cases whatsoever: this is
more then to pronounce judgment against us at home in civil cases, this is to
pursue us with fire, and sword, as well foreign, as domestic. Should our
Nation now descend to the like outrageous recriminations, or rather feminine
altercations* being first provoked, and having juster grounds, what an odious
noise would this trouble all Europe with? Well: but still there is something to
be said for the Scots: if they may not call us to their own bar, as they are
our fellow Covenanters, and as they are equally parties in so religious a
League with us, yet there is another Bar to which they may cite us, there is
still here upon earth a bar of common equity and reason; and at this Bar^e
the English are accountable for all their delinquencies against the Covenant.
To this we agree, and shall appear a^ is required by the citation.

The late King some years before the eruption of these troubles had made many
dangerous attempts against the purity of the Protestant Religion, and the
Liberties of the Subjects in all the three Nations. Now in 1643. when Arms were
taken up on all hands either for assisting, or opposing the King in those his
designs against Religion, and Liberty: the Covenant was formed by that party
which rose up against the King, and the main, primary use, it was formed, and
intended for was to protect Religion, and Liberty against Him, and his
adherents: The formers of it also at the same time took notice, that the cases
of Religion, and Liberty could not be well separated, forasmuch as the King if
He prevailed against the one, would more easily prevail against, the other.
Religion was the richer Freehold, but Liberty had the stronger fence to
preserve it from the violence of intruders. It was likewise visible that
Religion would make the people more zealous for Liberty, and Liberty would
empower the people the better to defend Religion. besides, suppose the taking
away of the people, and you suppose with all the taking away of Religion, and
suppose the taking away of Liberty, and you do in a manner suppose the taking
away of the people; for the life of a body politic consists not in living,
but in living free. The Covenant therefore primarily, and ultimately proposes
to it self the safety and prosperity of the true Protestant Religion in the
safety and Liberty of the three Nations, and the safety and Liberty of the
three Nations in the safety and prosperity of the true Protestant Religion. All
other Articles in the Covenant are but secondary, and subordinate hereunto: and
they are to have respect from us not as they stand higher, or lower in order,
but as they are more, or less serviceable to those higher purposes, for which
they were at first ordained. Upon this ground, that branch in the Covenant
which obliges us, to seek God in this sacred Engagement by a special amendment
of our lives, and reformation of our own private ways: at such a time as this,
merits the honor of the first place. And next hereunto worthily may succeed
those 2. branches by which the Nations are so strictly confederated in peace,
and amity: and by which all parties to this confederation have past their
solemn Pacts to be assisting to each other, and bringing all opposites to
condign punishment. That branch which was inserted in favor of the King (at
that time the principal Enemy of the Covenant) and for saving of his
Prerogatives (so desperately at that time disputed by the sword) if it could
challenge any place at all, could certainly challenge none but the last and
lowest, how soever the Scots had ranged it, and do still propugn it. Nothing
surely could more cloud the meaning of each part in the Covenant, or more
pester, and perturbe the whole frame of it, then this insertion. The same Oath
to God now binds us in one clause to pursue with fire, and sword all that are
enemies to this Oath, and yet the grand enemy of this Oath by another clause in
the same Oath, is preserved inviolable: nay that clause which preserves one
Enemy, has a local preference before, that which pursues all. Hereupon if a
Commission be taken from the King to destroy this Solemn League, He that takes
it dies ignominously as a Traitor, but he that gives it, has that indemnity
given by the Covenant, which his kingly office could not have given him. The
very penning also of this Article leaves us very dubious, and perplexed, how far
the Kings royalty is saved to Him: for the saving is not absolute; but refers
to some thing in order above it: and that is the saving of Religion and
Liberty* Here therefore two new doubts meet with us to entangle us: 1. In what
degree the King may be proceeded against, when in such a degree He indangers
Religion, and Liberty: 2ly, how we shall exactly judge of these degrees, when
our judgments are wholly left at liberty, without any limits, or marks set by
the Covenant. The Scots have proceeded so far as to imprison the Kings person,
and to sequester all his royal power, which is a temporary dethroning, and
deposing* because they suppose Religion, and Liberty was so far impugned by
Him: but they suppose that from an imprisoned, sequestered King no further
offense, or danger can arise: and therefore He ought not further to suffer. This
is sufficiently erroneous: but this is not all yet, for they will not only thus
expose Religion and Liberty to greater hazards in their own Country, but they
will overruled us with their errors, and enforce us to run the same hazards in
our Country likewise: and this is more, we are sure, then the Covenant
enforces us unto. And doubtless this is very hard. For besides that there is no
Nation, nor scarce any individual person in any Nation, who is not Judge of
his own danger: in this case our judgment is wrested out of our hands, and
resigned into theirs, who are the creators of our dangers, and have declared
for, and thereby diverse times exasperated our greatest Enemy against us.

In Novem. 1643. before the Covenant was consummated, the Lord General Essex
moved in Parliament for the shortning of our war, that the King (who perchance
was then encouraged to prolong the same out of hope of impunity at last, in
case his arms should miscarry) might have a peremptory day set Him to come in,
or else to know his danger: and this was consented to by both Houses, but
obstructed by the Scoch Commissioners: what service was done to the King by
this obstruction of the Scots, and diverse other the like ambidextrous dealings,
since that time, and how much longer the war was protracted by it, and how much
mischief the same has at last drawn upon the Scots, as well as us, time has
clearly enough demonstrated. And yet still, upon this the meanest, and most
intricate article of the Covenant, they think they may break the unity, and
peace of great Britain against one of the most indisputable, fundamental ties
of the Covenant, and that only to show their zeal to an Anti-covenanter: which
is a breach as indisputable, and fundamental, as the former. The intrinsecall
form of the Covenant binds one party to assist the other against a common
enemy: it binds not one party to be assistent against the other: for how can
that be called assistence, which is direct opposition? Besides, it binds
specially to assist against such an enemy, as is injurious to the others right,
freedom, and property: and can the Scots perform this bond to us, when that
which they call assistance to us, is opposition against us, even by taking away
our right, freedom, and property? for what right can remain to us, whilst we
are subjected to their forces, what freedom, whilst we are to be judged by
their discretion? What property, when we have lost the independency of equals?
Certainly if we covenanted with the Scots as equal parties, we did not
covenant with them, as superior Judges; and if we had so covenanted with them,
our covenanting by Oath with God had been superfluous, but we hope that will
not be held superflous: and therefore we will not endeavor to assoil our
selves before the Scots, we will only in charity let them know, how we have
hopes, to be assoiled before God. The change of Government in England, which
could not be without the execution of the late King, and rejection of his
posterity (more then they could be without change of Government) was urged upon
us (and God, before whom we plead, knows we had not long premeditated it
before, nor embraced it willingly at last) by two unanswerable, irresistible
arguments. The first was drawn from our duty to God: the second from the
natural, necessary care of our own preservation. The first argument pressed us
hard, that what God had commanded could not be reversed by any act, or pact of
man: that God had commanded us, to punish blood with blood in all persons
whatsoever under the power, and force of our Laws: and therefore our Covenant
could not exempt the King himself* If it be said, that the King of England was
above all Law; that has been disputed by the sword these many years, and
decided for us by signal victories: and the Scots have appeared as far upon
that Trial, as we have done; and after that trial, it is unequal for us to
descend now, to any other. We prescribe nothing to other Nations, whose Kings
have a Legislative power, and thereupon are solati Legibus, and have their very
wills interpreted, and observed as Laws: nor do we censure such States as have
Princes subject to Laws, yet use not rigor in all cases whatsoever. We are
willing that every one should stand, or fall to his own Master. Only, when
immuring, sequestring, deposing, impoysoning of Princes has been very frequent
in the world, that no Nation can be excused thereof at some time or other: this
seems beyond admiration, that our judicial, public execution upon the late
Charles should undergo an harsher censure then all these, merely because it
wanted not the due solemnities of Law, and Justice to attend it. May a Prince
be reduced from his public capacity, and when He is made a private person
shall he be treated so, as no private person may be treated? Shall he be
subjected to clandestine, unlawful proceedings, below the right of a common
person, because He was once more then a common person? and shall either
Jurists, or Statists that have any insight into the Laws of God, and Nations,
stand for a secreted veiled justice, such as blushes, and dares not show her
face in open Court, yet pass neglects upon that justice, which as far abhors
darkness? and disdains the use of masks?

Our next argument was drawn from the hard necessity that was incumbent upon us
for saving our selves from utter ruin. Diverse times we had made humble
addresses to the King for a cordial pacification, the Lord knows our sincerity
therein: and the Scots that are now our accusers were for diverse years our
witnesses in that behalf: but before 1646. the K: had too much confidence in
his English, and Irish abettors, and so would not hearken. In the year, 1646.
the Kings English Forces in England failing, we made new addresses at
Newcastle, where the King was in the nature of a Prisoner: but we soon found at
Newcastle that the Kings confidence was still supported there also by something
that had been infused unto Him by the Scots, and so that hope prooved frustrate
likewise. The dealing of the Scots herein was very close, the English that were
in Commission with the Scots for governing the affairs of that Army in the
Scotch Quarters, knew nothing by what invitation the King was drawn from Oxford
thither, nor to what purpose Montreil the French Agent was there solicititing;
but when our Propositions were rejected, and that the Scots (who joined with us
in tendering them) began to dispute the Kings interests, and their own against
us in other things: and that their learned mouth Louden professed against the
rigor of our capitulations, in the same elaborate Oration to the King, wherein
He so zealously laid open the necessity of them, we could not but discern a
halting in that Nation: and that that halting had as strange an operation upon
the King. The King thought now He had gotten as great a strength of Scots in
the North, the same being likewise fain away from our strength, as He had lost
of the English at Nasby, and in the West: and for our parts, had the Scots been
gold-proof, we should have thought so too. The disposing of the King was the
matter in question: the Scots were not desirous to take him into Scotland, nor
would leave him in England: but being under our pay within our own territories,
where we had public persons in Commission with them: without the Parliaments
or their Commissioners consents, they would be a guard to Him in England, till
their Parliament at home were further satisfied. In the mean time after a long
consuming war ended, England was constrained still to pay and maintain two
Armies: the Scotch to prevent a new war if that were possible, the English to
sustain a new war, if prevention proved unpossible: so that every moment was
irksome to us, whilst the Kings pretentions was an occasion to draw so much
treasure from our coffers, and it was as irksome to the King to see the Scotch
arrears, or any thing else besides his pretentions brought into debate, but at
last the Scotch arrears took place, and justled out the Kings matters; for
after a great sum agreed upon, the Scots quite contrary to the high
expostulations of some of their Papers, thought it honorable to leave the King
in England, and the English thought it as profitable to buy the Scots out of
England. This probably might prepare the King for new Pacificatory addresses,
partly by damping his hopes in the Scots, and partly by defeating the next
privy applications of the Scots to Him: and partly by giving a better relish
of the English whose prisoner then He was, and yet had been treated very
honorably; but this would not do, new Propofitions were once and again sent,
and denied, and new assurances from the Scots were admitted, which procured
thosy denyalls. Nay, after that Hamilton in 1648. Commissioned by the
Parliament and Presbyterians in Scotland, had invaded us with 20000 men, and
was beaten, and a new party of Kirkmen of a contrary party to Hamilton, had
gotten the sway of the State into their hands, by the help of our forces who
pursued the Hamiltonians beyond the Tweed; the English still received further
repulses. So vowedly inflexible was the King against all that could be tenderd
by the English, though even when his condition was grown lowest, and the
Parliaments Propositions not at all raysd higher, and so vowedly obstinate were
the Scots, and all parties, and factions among them upon all changes of affairs
whatsoever, to make all agreements of the English with the King,
disadvantageous to their fellow Covenanters. Their voluminous Papers yet show
what they pretended to in disposing of the Kings person in England: what a
negative voice in the Parliament of England they would assign to Him: what
revenues, and signiorys out of the Court of Wards and elsewhere they would
secure to Him: what power military, and judicial they would entrust him with
in England: and how all should be managed by the joint advice and consent of
Scotland.

In sum, the King must again be more humbly sought to then ever: He must be
discharged of imprisonment, received in pomp at London, to treat about what we
had to propose: and his freedom must be such that He must sent for, and advice
with what Delinquents He pleased: if we granted the Scots this, we left our
selves nothing: if we denied, All Ireland was at the Kings devotion, all
Ormonds, all Oneals adherents, all the old Irish, all the English Irish: all
the Protestants, all the Papists were against us: we had then scarce three
considerable Towns left in that Country: In Scotland all that Montrosse, all
that Huntly, all that Hamilton, all that Arguile the Kirks Champion had any
power in, even Jo: Cheesly himself to get a dubbing at the last hand was for
the royal Cause: In England the Clergy had imbitterd the City, and the City
had sharpened the Country against the Army, and against all that had not
forgotten the first quarrel with the King. The Parliament it self had some
leading men in it that had secretly capitulated with the King, and those false
Leaders had many other ignorant followers that would believe no such matter. At
such a time as this, when all foreign States desired, and contributed something
to our ruin besides; and the King had as free scope to solicit and treat them
as ever, and did make use of his time, especially to conclude with the Irish:
what should the Army do? to execute the King, and eradicate Monarchy, was to
expose themselves to a thousand hazards, and extremities: to spare the King,
and Monarchy, and submit to the Scoch Presbyterian faction, was to perish
inevitably: to treat with the King brought them upon this perplexity: either
they must propose things safe for the State, and then they had no hopes of
prevailing: or they must propose things unsafe, which would be sinful,
dishonorable, and ruinous to them, as well as others in the end. I am confident
England never travailed with such sharp throes, or strugled through such
gasping agonies since She was first a mother: and none but God could have given
her such a deliverance. When the King was retrograde to his Trust, and with the
swinge of his Train had swept all the chief luminaries out of our firmament:
when the Clergy was generally disaffected, and with their doctrines had almost
poisoned all the City, and almost half the Country, when the remaining part of
the Parliament that had stoodout the brunt so long, and wetherd so many gusts
became recreant at last, then did an Army inspirde with strange courage but
stranger counsel from above, step in to save their sinking Country,
over-powring all the winds, and waves that raged against them. The wonderful
dispensations of God bringing great matters to pass by such cross means must
be observed, and adored by all that are not aliens from Religion: and I doubt
not but future Parliaments in future ages will be amazedly affected with them:
but of all men we that now live, and see the effects of that critical time, and
what a prospering posture we are now in, within so short a space, in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and round about by the seconding mercies of God since, must
needs most gratfully recent these things, except we have sold our selves to
Atheism and rebellion against Heaven. The Chiliasts from hence and from the
race ordering of all our commotions, since, 1640. and something before may
assure themselves that Christ is to reign upon Earth, and that he has already
taken the Scepter out of the greater Warriors and Counselors hands of the
earth into his own: For the hills are now plained, and the valleys are raised,
and yet there is no humane hand appearing in it.

Some men think all success unworthy of all regard, as if there were no
difference between the administrations of God in his Church in times of
distress, and his disposing of other men's ordinary affairs at other times: or
as if Alexander, Hector, Caesar, had foiled their enemy by the same inward
promptings as Joshua, David, and Judas Machabeus did: but this certainly is an
irreligious error: for as there is a general providence of God by which the
course of all natural things is steered: so there uses to be a special
interposition of God in some things and is to be acknowledged, when his own
honor and interest is specially concerned: and this special interposition is
sometimes of the finger of God, when the effects are less supernatural; but
when the effects are more stupendous, and beyond reason; the Scripture it
self styles this the making bare, and the stretching forth of Gods arm.

They which are disaffected to the late egregious proceedings of God in the
world will not, but they shall see, and own this truth. But let us return to
the procedure of our affairs; when the Army saw it self surrounded with so
many dangers, and insulting enemies; it began by some faintnesses, and carnal
doubts to grow dangerous, and an enemy to it self; it began to receive
suggestions that the removing of a King and Kingly power was like to prove more
unfeaseable, then to treat a King into reason. And this was likely to have
proved the more banefull, because the King by special graces was as ready to
draw them into this ambuscado as they were prone by their irresolutions, and
diffidencies to run into it themselves; for it is thought all agreements with
the King would have been short lived, but if any had been made with the Army,
that would have bin but as Samsons withs, and ropes, which was the reason, That
the King, upon whom Five Addresses of the Parliament had wrought nothing,
seemed to lay the Armies Proposals, though little differing in substance,
exceedingly to heart: Howsoever it pleased God at this low ebb of things, when
the Army was weakest, and most apt to be inveagled, and when the King was
securest, and had most hopes to inveagle, to break off that Treaty, and then
was brought on the last with the Parliament in the Isle of Wight; which when it
was likely to overturne all by accepting of the Kings Concessions; then also
did God make the Army his Instrument, in preventing that sad conclusion. The
debate in Parliament after the return of the Commissioners, was; Whether the
Kings Concessions at that Treaty had been such, as might make further
applications hopeful, or no: and after a very long time* spent, the
affirmative was Voted. This Vote struck a true apprehension of an universal
imminent danger into the Army; for, now an accord with the King by the sense of
the Parliament was to be hoped for, whereas in truth any accord (besides an
absolute submission of the King) was sufficient to take away all hope; for
since the King unsubmitting, had no visible obstacle betwixt him, and his long,
eagerly pursued ends, but the Army: and any accord was certain to discard, or
new form that Army, the security of all our Laws, and rights; yea, and lives
was solely to depend upon the Kings Honor: and what was honor in his sense,
who was so principled, and who had now for diverse years waded through so much
blood, and exposed himself, and posterity to so certain a disinherison, only to
be true to his principles, any ordinary man may determine; Immediately therefore
after this Vote past, the Army saw no other remedy to prevent their eminent
overthrow but to lay a hand of force upon the affirmative Voters in Parliament,
and to bring the King to a trial, which were done accordingly, and so both
they prevailed and we were preserved as to this day.

Some say it was more Noble to trust the King too much, then too little: but
these consider not that Trust is not always alike free; in this case distrust
could ruin but a few, and that by a legal course; but Trust was likely to have
ruined Millions, and the Laws to boot. Some of the Scotts say; God was able to
save Religion and Liberty in despite of the King: had he proved perfidious,
and therefore if the King was not to be trusted, yet God was. These consider
not that God holds himself tempted, not trusted, when we leave the use of
ordinary hopeful means on Earth, and rely upon unprovmist succor from Heaven.

Some say if the King was not to be trusted, yet the Army had no lawful
warrant to judge of him, and the Parliament, but these consider not that
extreme, eminent, and otherwise insuperable dangers give private persons; yea,
single private persons, an extraordinary warrant to defend themselves, and
others: and this Warrant will be avowed by necessity, the exception, that all
Law admits to be within the reach of no Law; and the danger was here extreme,
because it concerned Life, Religion, Liberty, and all that could be endeared to
man: it was likewise eminent, because another day might have prevented them by
disbanding, or some other way. Lastly, it was otherwise insuperable; for that
there was no other Judge, or hand on Earth that could hear and relieve them.
Others say still, the danger was not so existent or manifest to other men, as
to the Army. Let it be considered by these;

1 That Nature has entrusted to every man a special custody of his own
safety; and there is none of us all, but would be loath that the same should be
transferred to another man's care, viz. in cases extraordinary, where legal
remedy cannot be had in a common way.

2 In matters of fact, where no full proof can be had, every man's judgment is
to be less peremptory, and to take in as much of Charity as is possible.
Whether the King would indeed have broken his Trust, or no: and whether the
Army did falsely pretend such a fear, or no: neither of these is matter of Law,
nor liable to any infallible proof, as to the fact: wherefore I may sin against
charity if I pass my judgment against either, but I cannot sin, if I leave
the judgment of both to God, and to wait for his determination.

Some in favor of the King frame conjectures that He was probably very firm in
performing because He was so slow, and circumspect in engaging: and that if He
had been lubricous or profuse of his faith, He would not have refused an accord
with the Parliament so long upon what terms soever. Others make use of
contrary conjectures to a contrary purpose; alleging that 'twas but art in
the King to dally, and to trifle away some time with the English, to set the
higher esteem upon his constancy, and make them the more assured of his
performance: that He was absolutely secure of the Englishmens facility, and
plain-dealing, and never made any doubt to be received at his own pleasure:
that he was never to his last day void of other confidences, or destitute of
other plots to compass his design by force, that for his fidelity, and the
value he set upon promises* and oaths, and the infinite subtilty he had to
evade any engagement whatsoever, scarce any foreign State or Prince in Europe
was ignorant in that point. That scarce ever any just, or innocent man fell
under the weight of such transcendent, unparraleld calamities. But I list not
to lean upon such Reeds, as conjectures are* it is enough for me to know that
whatsoever man intends, or acts wickedly and perversely, God orders, and
disposes rightly, and profitably; may he so do for England, Scotland and
Ireland, in all these late mutations.

It remains now, that we clear our selves in point of Church-Reformation: for
having covenanted to reform in Doctrine, Discipline, etc. according to the word
of God, and the patterns of the best Reformed Churches, we are bound (as the
Scots maintain) to take our pattern from them, and that, we, as yet refuse to
do. This is the grand, and most heinous charge the Scots have against us: and
because we follow not the model of Scotland, which they hold the best Reformed
Church in Christendom, they seek to overwhelm us with a thousand calumnies, and
labor to possess the world that we are nothing else but a Lerna of Heresies,
and a sinck of all uncleanness.

To this we answer,

1. When we are bound to reform according to the word of God, and the examples
of the best Churches; we conceive the word of God signifies all, and the
examples of other Churches signify nothing at all; for those are the best
Churches that reform nearest to the word of God, and what Churches have nearest
Reformed cannot be known but by the word of God it self, so that that instance
might have been spared.

2. If it come to trial by the word of God, whether the Scots Reformation be
the best or no, the Scots therein can challenge no more privilege of judging,
then we or any other Church. When we were governed by Bishops, the Gospel of
Christ was as purely delivered in England, and as heartily embraced by the
English (any being Judges besides the Scots) as ever it was in Scotland: and
shall it be said, that because we have cast off Bishops, and thereby come some
steps nearer to the Scots, our Doctrine remaining still the same without all
innovation, shall it be said that our very approaches have ^^st us backward? It
will be required at their hands who are entrusted with the government of
Christ's Church, that his word and Ordinances be piously and duly dispensed: and
it will be required at their hands who are governed, that the dispensation of
Christ's words and Ordinances be faithfully and sincerely entertained: but if
the Governors rightly discharge their duty, and the governed fail of theirs,
the Governors shall not answer for what they cannot help; it is God that gives
the increase, and does the saving, inward work: the Minister cannot go beyond
planting, watering, and doing that which is the outward work. It Is one thing
therefore for the Scots to upbraid the Flock, and another thing to upbraid the
Overseers of the Flock, and yet the Scots constantly take an advantage against
us by confounding these two things.

For the people of England, we must confess they have been of late too much
tainted with Heresies, and monstrous opinions: pudet hae^ opprobria nobis, and
dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli: I hope all good men are grieved and
humbled for it; but let the Scots consider,

1. That growing of Tares in Gods Field, does not always show that the
Husbandman sowed ill grain, the contrary rather is true: inasmuch as the more
busy the good Husbandman is culturing and improving the Earth, the more
sollicitous ever the Enemy is in casting in his malignant seeds, and the more
readily eager he is to debosh and mar the crop. It was so with the Church of
Christ in it is Infancy; it was so under Constantine in it is maturity; it was so
in Luthers days, when it began to recover out of a long lethargy: and we must
expect the like now, when our aces are set upon the last, and greatest
calcination as ever the Church saw: as Reformation now in the ends of the
world, when the chief mysteries of iniquity begin to be revealed, will most
annoy Satan, so Satan will double his rage to annoy us accordingly. Hornius
the Dutchman, a great friend of the Scots, and who in favor of the Scotch
Presbytery, has written a bitter Tract in Latin, to defame us in Germany;
after he has represented us as the most leprous, contaminated Nation in the
world; yet confesses withal, that to the prodigious revoltings of some amongst
us, there is an answerable improvement of others in burning zeal, and shining
sanctity. In Religion beauty and deformity are not inconsistent: those times
often which have been most glorious for divine dispensations of knowledge and
grace, have been likewise most deplorable for persecutions and apostacies; and
this has ever been a great stumbling block to carnal minds. If therefore the
great Lion range and roar, and ramp less in Scotland then in England, let not
our Brethren boast of it, or think themselves the more safe.

2. Let not partiality blind the Scots; Strangers think Scotland has as great
cause of humiliation as England, if not greater. Iliacos intra muros peceatur,
and extra; It were more Christian-like in them, and less Pharisaicall, to
aggravate their own sins, and extenuate other men's, then to extenuate their own
sins, and aggravate other men's: and if they will remit nothing at all of their
rigor against us, yet let them not stuff their long catalogues of
Pseudodoxies with such wandering terms as Familisme, Erastianisme,
Independentisme, etc. which taken improperly, may reach the best Saints of God,
and are seldom used properly by any. It Is a sad thing to offend Gods little
ones, it is a more sad thing to deprave many congregations of Gods most precious
ones.

3. Whatsoever judgment the Scots will take upon them to pass against the
people in England, yet let them not always set upon the Magistrates, or
Ministers account what they find reprovable in the people; let them not call us
fedifragous for not redressing things beyond us, and such as none can redress
besides God; but this has been touched upon already.

Let us therefore see what is peculiarly objected to the present governing
power in England. The Magistrate in England is charged to be an Enemy to
Magistracy, a strange charge certainly. The very last answers we had this last
Summer to our Declarations upon the march of our Army into Scotland, tell us
from the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of the Assembly, that our
expedition into Scotland is to overturn Religion, and government Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and to set up amongst them the same vast toleration of
Religion, as we have done in England. Now if this were true, the sins of the
People would become the sins of the Magistrate, but what credit can this
obtain in the world. As for the overturning of civil power, that is answered
already; we confess a change of the Form, but we deny any overturning of the
thing called Government in England; and we hope our actions here, and in
Ireland, and in other Foreign parts, yea, and our War in Scotland also will
quit and essoyn us of anarchy and ere long make the Scots swalow down their
own untruths with open shame. As for the overturning Ecclesiastical also, that
may be as resolutely and justly denied as the other; for that lawful power
which was in Bishops before, is still in being; and though we have not
committed it so entirely unto Presbyteries and Assemblies, as the Scots would
have us, to the dishonouring of our Common wealth; yet we have preserved it
from abolition and utter dissolution. The truth is, in pursuance of our
Covenant, we have consulted with a Synod of Divines about the best method of
Discipline: and they are not able to satisfy us, that the word of God (the
rule limited by the Covenant for our Reformation) does invest any convention of
Clergymen, who claim to be the only due Representants of the Church, and
immediate Vicegerents of Christ, with supremacy of independent power in all
causes Ecclesiastical. The Pope claims no more in the pale of the Italian
Church; the Popish Cardinals and Bishops in Spain, France, etc. claim less;
and the Protestant Prelates, whom we lately ejected for Usurpers, never claimed
half so much. Now the word of God is so far from holding forth to us any
such vast power in persons Ecclesiastical; that it is information is contrary,
viz. That the Apostles and Disciples of our Savior for many years after his
death assumed no more Authority on earth then he assumed: that our Savior
plainly disclaimed all jurisdiction and dominion in this world: that by
pract^se as well as precept, he quasht all rivality about power, or precedence
amongst his own dearest followers. Besides, if any such spiritual supremacy
were vested by divine right in any such Representants of the Church, and vicars
of Christ: it were necessary that exact obedience in all things should bepayd
them by all Inferiors: and if such obedience were due, it would be
consequently necessary, that they should be free from error, else the
alleged supremacy would serve to no great purpose: and we know God and nature
produce not great matters, but for purposes as great. This made the Romish
Hierarchists rationally assert an infallible spirit, when they had once
asserted an u^limitable power in the Church; for where the Scripture is clear,
there needs no sovereign Judge, every man is a sufficient Interpreter to
himself: and where the Scripture is doubtful, the doubt is to be cleared by
something else of the same indisputable authority, or else that defect is not
supplied, no^ can the same submission be demanded. Wherefore upon this account
we say, that unless our supreme Church Lords (when they take us off from our
own judgments, and cannot convince us by divine authority of clear Scripture)
will not convince us of some other divine authority in themselves of the same
alloy as Scripture is for the enforcing of our acquiescence: they deal worse
with us then the Pope does with his Vassals. Moreover that power in the Church,
which Eclipses, and perturbes civil power cannot be supposed to be of Christ's
institution: but such is the power of the Clergy in Scotland many ways; Ergo,

For first clashings may be about what is purely a Civil case, and what is
purely Ecclesiastical, and all such clashings are exceeding dangerous.

2 Since there are very few cases that are not mixed, and as few mixed cases that
are not unequally mixed: great questions may arise, to whether Tribunal the
case shall be first referred when it is equally mixed; and how the Tribunalls
shall agree upon executing their decrees, where the case is unequally mixed,
especially if the decrees be contrary, as they may be. In the year 1648. the
Representative State of Scotland, Voted a war with England necessary: the
Representative Kirk Voted the same unlawful; which contrary Votings might have
confounded both, for if the war was necessary, the State might suffer much by
the Churches seditious malediction: and if the war was unlawful, yet the
people having no more warrant to obey the Ecclesiastical then Civil power in
matters of that nature must needs be in a strange distraction, and that
distraction at that time might have created ethquakes in the whole Nation. It
should seem want of force in the party adhering to the Kirk preserved them at
that time from a bloody engagement against the contrary party, which might
have devoured, and swallowed up all. For as soon as Hamilton was defeated in
England, the Kirk party got help from the English Army, and by force wrested
the Government out of Lannericks hands: and then again had not Lannericks side
been too weak, another flame might have been kindled, and perhaps have
continued unquenched to this day. Now if the temporal sword be in part
spiritual, and the cases of war be held so equally mixed in Scotland, that
both the supreme independent Councels claim an equal judgment in them, and do
sometimes judge contrarily: and there can be yet no certain rule given for the
reconciling of those contrarieties: it is manifest, that these two coordinate
powers may be destructive to the people: and it is as manifest that no
destructive institution can derive it self from God. Much more might be said of
the encroachments of the Clergy upon the Laity in cases mixed, by pretending
sometimes to an equality of interest in some cases, where the Laities ought to
be greater: and pretending to all at other times, where the Laities interest
ought to be equal: the Popish Clergy scarce ever used more juggling and
trumperie in these affairs, then the Presbyterian Ministry now uses. In the
stating of the present war in Scotland, the Kirkmen go hand in hand with the
Committee of Estates, and in their Answers to our English Declarations they
interpose in all points whatsoever, whether religious, politic, juridicall, or
military: and whether they be points of Law, or matters of fact. But if a
Minister preach sedition in a Pulpit, this appertains not to the secular
Magistrate; for though sedition be a secular business, and sedition may be
preached by a Minister in a Pulpit, yet a Ministers Pulpit sedition is no matter
for secular cognizance. Was the Laity ever worse bridled, when it was the Popes
Ass? But of this no more, I will only touch briefly upon the end of all this
spiritual coordination, and so shut up this point.

The Clergy of Scotland have spoken great, and magnificent things of the use
of their spiritual sword: and the principal allegation for it was, that
without such a sword in the hands of the Kirk secular Princes, and Grandees
could not be awed, and restrained in many enterprises, and crimes very
dangerous to the Church. But who can imagine they ever believed themselves
herein? when in the process of all our late wars, that very Kirk it self which
told the King He was guilty of a deluge of blood, and had made himself, and his
throne, and his posterity obnoxious to Gods high indignation thereby, yet never
offered to strike with the weapon of excommunication all that while? if there
was any correcting, restraining, healing, recovering virtue in that weapon, why
did they uncharitably forbear to use it? why did they not pity those
multitudes of Innocents that perished daily under his fury? why did they suffer
the King himself to run on, and die in his persecutions? And if their pretended
weapon had really no such virtue in it, why do they brandish it so ludicrously
only to dazzle our weak eyes?

The next Objection of the Scots is, that we have not only sequestered a great
part of Christ's spiritual power, and detained it in Lay hands, but have also
abused the same power; tolerating thereby, and countenancing all manner of
heresies, which is directly contrary to our covenanted Reformation.

Our Answer is, that we are neither intensively, nor extensively liable indeed
to this objection. For, 1. all sects, and scandals are not permitted by us:
nothing is more distant from truth, then this suggestion. All gross sins, and
seducers are suppressed with as quick severity as ever: nay since the Norman
Conquest there have not been so many sharp Laws made against Adultery,
Swearing, blaspheming, Sabbath-breaking, and open profanation, as have been
made within these few years. All the remission, and relaxation that our
Parliament has indulged of late is only toward tender Consciences, where men
comport themselves civilly, and inoffensively toward their neighbors, and
attempt to innovate nothing in the Church for perturbing of Religion; and even
in this also we havenot extended our indulgence so far as the united States of
the Netherlands have, and diverse other Protestant Princes in Germany. The truth
is, we do not find such danger in Erastianisme, Independentisme, Anabaptisme,
Roundheadisme, etc. as our rigid Presbyterians suspect: and this would not
dislike the Presbyterians themselves, if they were men willing to do to others,
as they are willing others should do to them* for they themselves are sensible,
that we can never desire more gentleness from them to us, then is now showed
by us to them. 2ly, That toleration which we are accused of, is but a non
persecution in its most intensive degree: for we use all Christian means,
besides force, to reduce such as wander, and divide from us: and we are far
from cherishing schisms and broyls either in Church, or State. Our Saviors
own parable allows us where weeds have gotten head, and are as numerous as the
standing corn, rather to spare the weeds for the corns sake, then to endanger
the corn for the weeds sake. Howsoever, it would be some charity in our
traducers, if they would advisedly consider how the growth of our weeds came at
first to be so rank amongst us: and thereupon join with us in humiliation for
it, not exult over us in scorn, and derision.

Upon the first defiance given by the King to the Parliament, half the Clergy
at least fell away from this cause: and before that rent could be sowde up,
there happened a second distance betwixt us, and the Scots partly upon a royal,
and partly an Ecclesiastical account, and that distance drew on as great a
revolt of the Clergy as the former. And how can any man imagine, but that
strange disorders must needs follow and abound in a Church so deserted? When
the dressers of the Vineyard do not only quit their charge, but throw down the
mounds, how can it be expected but that Bores and Foxes should break in? And
indeed the Parliament is still ill beset, for either they must deny preaching
to the people, to three parts of four, or else they must yield the Pulpits to
their seditious Enemies: and to such as shall seek to wound the Magistrate
through the souls of the people. This being the Parliaments hard case, it may
better become the Scots, to whom may be attributed a great part of these
disturbances, to afford some pity, and help, then to add misery to our
misery.

This is sufficient to plead for our indulgence, let us only advise the
Presbyterians not to take unjust offense thereat, or to stumble into the
contrary extreme. It Is woeful to see how rigidly the Ministers carry themselves
toward the poor people in many places, and what an absolute discretionarie
power they challenge in many places over the ordinances of God. There are many
Parishes in England where the people have not been admitted to the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, nor some Infants to the Sacrament of Baptism for a long
time. This deserves much bewailing; for certainly God gave these rich Legacies
to the diffusive body of his Church, for the spiritual comfort of the meanest
servants of his, and not to that which calls it self his representative body, to
be a trade, and monopoly for their advantage in this world. But I have done:
if the world now find cause to condemn us of dealing treacherously with the
Covenant, and our fellow-Covenanters, in that we have not submitted to the
Scots, and for their sakes disclaimed our own judgments and interests to
gratify the King, and the Presbyterian Clergy, with our perpetual servility:
let us fall under their condemnation. Or if the world can justify the Scots as
pursuers of that union, freedom, and fidelity which was aimed at in the
Covenant, when they made themselves our Lords to give us Laws in our own
Dominions, and when they did not only raise sedition here in our own bowels,
but came in with an Army of 20000. men to devour us: let them stand upright
here, and enjoy their wished Triumph. Our final assurance, and comfort is,
there sits a Judge in heaven, who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, a Judge
that hears all appeals, made above, and does right at last to all that groan
under oppression, and injustice below.

Of the Scoch War.
We have seen how the Covenants waxen nose has been turned and molded into
many forms: we see now cause to suspect, that 'twas made so large at first,
and compacted of such materials, that like the Grecian wooden Horse, it might
tear our walls the wider upon its entrance, and discharge the more discords,
and dissentions amongst us after its entrance was procured. We see it was
intended by the honest party in England for cement to unite the Nations in a
more arct, faithful confederation, then ever our Ancestors knew: but the
couching of it was obscure, and left liable to so many false glosses, that it
soon became (...). Our brotherly offices of Assistance soon degenerated into
harsh expostulations: harsh expostulations begat secreet feudes, and secreet
feudes heightened themselves into open hostilities.

The question is only, when open war commenced betwixt these Nations, Whether
the Scots first invaded us by their Duke Hamilton, above two years since, or
whether the English first invaded Scotland this last summer under the command
of the Lord Genesis Cromwell. For a year or two after reception of the Covenant in
England, a good correspondence was kept betwixt us: the Scotch Commissioners
sat in our Committee of Lords and Commons at Darby house, whereby they were
admitted into the knowledge of our highest and secretest affairs, and had
opportunity to frame parties amongst us for promoting of their own Interests.
Out of these kindnesses sprung our first unkindnesses, for the more honor was
given to the Scots, the more still they thought was due, and the more they
thought was due, the worse use they made of all that was or could be given
them. So all jealousies could not long be suppressed, for in time some of our
Lords and Commons saw cause to conceal some things concerning this State from
them, and this was extremely ill taken, and indeed no otherwise then if it had
been a real piece of injustice to the Kingdom of Scotland; but moderation as
yet kept both within reasonable bounds. Mr. A. Henderson was then living, and
conversant in those businesses, and surely he was a man of an Apostolical
spirit, and though a great lover of his Country, yet He knowingly durst not
interpose in an ill action, for his Countries advantage: and I am persuaded He
did very good offices and kept us from further jars during his life: and if He
had lived longer, would have prevented much of what has happened since,* Besides,
Presbytery the Scotch Clergies darling seemd plausible at first to the English,
and soon grew indeared to our Synod, and for a good space it got such footing
in England, that the Scots had no cause of dissatisfaction in that behalf. The
King also the other darling of the Scotch Nation, till about the latter end of
Summer 1645. prosperd so that He more slighted the Scots then He did us, and so
about him, there was no great cause of animosities: and if any did appear, they
were more easily to be digested; But when the English Army under the Lord Genesis
Fairfax had in one Summer defeated, and utterly broken two very great Armies of
the Kings, and taken in diverse other considerable Cities, and strengths without
any help at all from the Scots, many emulous considerations began to breed
strange alienations in the hearts of our brethren. The easy warfare of the
Scots all this while had afforded them, besides good store of pay and plunder,
an absolute signiory over the Northern Counties (our Northern men tell us
woeful stories till this day) and now they saw that rich service, or rather
absolute dominion was likely to come to an end, they thought sit to strengthen
themselves in Berwick and Newcastle, and they got Carlisle also by very foul
play in spite of our Commissioners, as if they were resolved and certain to
have a dispute with us. Likewise in 1646. when Oxford grew straightened, and
unsafe to the King, and when it was visible also that Presbytery after so many
years experience, did not altogether relish with the English, the Scots
presently resolved (as was related before) to expound the Covenant in favor of
the King, at least for settling and securing their arrears, and making a
commodious retreat out of England. Accordingly that Article which provided for
the Kings interest, served their interest well enough, and war so well commented
upon by them, that it held us at a bay, till their contract was perfected, and
then after a long dispute very chargeable to our Nation at the instance of an
Army, and 200000 li. they delivered up Newcastle, Barwick and Carlisle, and took
time to study the Kings Article a little longer.

In the year 1647. there was no notable business for the Soldier, England
took a little breath, having nothing to do but to squench the few remainders of
war, and Scotland kept at home to share the late gotten spoils of England; yet
this year there past some new cajoleries betwixt the Scots and the King, and
some contests betwixt the Scots, and us about the King: and no doubt, the next
years action was now in forging, and all preparatory hammers were on working.

And now enters the memorable year of 1648. a year never to be forgotten by the
English, in regard of the unparralleld dangers that then overspread it, and the
unspeakable mercies of God that then protected it. All the enemies of this
poor Commonwealth were now in a solemn conjuration against it. In Ireland all
was held past recovery: Ormond the Parliaments revolted servitor, was complying
with the bloody Irish, and betraying his own Religion into the bargain to get
some of their forces into England: in Wales, in Kent, in Essex, in Surrey,
great bodies of men rose up, some upon the old Royal account, some upon a new,
whilst many also of the Navy fell away from the Parliament to make the case the
more desperate. No less then 40000 English did their endeavors this Summer to
make way for Hamilton, from whom (by good intelligence doubtless) they expected
20000 Scots. Great was the goodness of God that all these confederates could
not be in a readiness at one and the same time, and that all the Foreign
Princes round about us which favored them, could not be assistent to them that
year: God had so ordained it, that the Welsh should be reduced before the Scots
entered, or else our condition had been altogether hopeless in the eye of
reason. But to the Scoch business. The Solemn League, and Covenant was now
brought under a new debate in the Parliament of Scotland: and the main matter
in question was, how they could be absolved of that holy stipulation, if they
did not employ all their power to reform Religion, and to restore the King in
England: and for the fuller agitation, and ventilation of this matter, several
grave harangues by persons affected severally were dressed, and we may well
imagine to what effect. Agent: of the Kirks party seeing the Parliament filled
with so great a party of the Hamiltonians is supposed to begin.

My Lords and Gentlemen: The Covenant presses us all to endeavor the
reformation of Religion, and the restoration of the King in England by a
brotherly way of Assistance in our several places, and callings: and so, as
that these ends of the Covenant, may stand, and agree with all the rest. But
withal, it behooves us to use a great deal of caution* and circumspection in a
matter of so high importance, wherein the honor of God, and good of the
Nations is so religiously involved, not to be mistaken either in the mark we
all shoot at, or in the arrows we are to shoot. As for the point of Religion I
am persuaded, it wants reformation in England, and I believe I dissent not
therein from any here: but this scruple sticks by me: I doubt whether I am so
properly a Judge in England of Religion, as I am in Scotland, and if I am not;
then I fear I step out of my place, and calling, whilst I take upon me there
to reform by force, which sure the Covenant requires not, but excludes in
express terms. The account of my scruples I give thus: first, if we are now
judges of matters Ecclesiastical in England. we are so constituted by the
Covenant, for before the Covenant we pretended to no uch thing and in the
Covenan^ it self, I find no such constituting words. 2ly. if the Covenant
creates us Judges in cases Eccles: it creates us the same in all other things
civil, military, and judicial: for all the interests of the King, and Subjects
in Parliament: and out of Parliament: are enclosed within the verge of the
Covenant: and yet no man here supposes himself bound by any words of the
Covenant to look after the whole administration of justice, and the whole
managery of the government in England or else to stand answerable for all abuses
whatsoever, that are not there redressed. 3ly. If the Covenant give us a power
so large in England, it must by the same reason give the Eng: the same in
Scotland: for the bonds are equal, and reciprocal: and so here are discords
raised betwixt us, contrary to the principal drift of the Covenant, such as
never can be pacified: the sword it self can never give any decision in the
business: victory may take away equallity betwixt. 2. brethren: but mere victory
can never take away the true right of equallity. 4ly. The Covenant injoynes us
precisely to assist one another in reforming, now the word assistence intimates
a concurrence with the party covenanting against some joint opposer, it cannot
be forced to intimate any violence against the party covenanting. 5ly, Not
only the tenor of the whole Covenant, but also the particular clear purport of
the fifth Article in the Covenant mainly intends to tie a firmer, closer knot
of union, and conjunction betwixt the Nations, then ever was before: and
therefore to rescinde a knot so manifest upon expositions, and glosses of
things not manifest seems to me to be a wilful violation of the Covenant. As
to the other point about the Kings enlargement: much may be resumed of what I
said before against our judging in England: but I forbear that: the scruples
that here suggest themselves to me are these. 1. If the Kings liberty may not
be restrained, then neither any other of his royal prerogatives, honors, and
powers: and yet we our selves hold all these here under sequestration, and for
diverse years of late, we have entered upon, and administered the whole royal^
Office ourselves: shall we then maintain, that the K: has a right to that in
England, to which He has no right in Scotland. 2ly, If the K: has a right now
to his Liberty being amongst the English: it will follow upon the same reason
that He had a right to the same, two years since when he was in our Quarters at
New^rk, and Newcastle: yet all men will s^^: amongst us He had no command at
all, but was under such a guard, as had a strict charge of his person, and were
as rigorously answerable for the same, as any Jaolers whatsoever. Besides, all
men know He was by us delivered up to the English against his will: and that
upon contract* and valuable considerations: and that we could not have
justified, if we had thought he was at full liberty, and could not be thereof
abridged.

Thirdly. A speciall^ Article in our Covenant obliges us to bring all enemies
of the Covenant to condign punishment: and we do punish daily capitally such
of the Kings adherents as have offended against us by his Commissions, and
shall we think that death is due to the Actor, and instrument, when
imprisonment is not due to the Author and principal?

Fourthly. If we dispute not about the Kings imprisonment, but as it is such;
that is, as he is imprisoned by the Soldiery in England without consent of the
Parliament there: then do we take upon us to vindicate the consent of that
Parliament, without consent of that Parliament: And since we hear not that
there is any change of the Kings restraint, save only of the persons under
whom he is restrained, nor do the Parliament in England think fit to use force,
nor to desire our assistance therein, I doubt if we should obtrude our force
therein without any call, we should offend against another proviso in the
Covenant, by intrenching upon the Parliaments privilege there, and by invading
the Subjects property likewise, which the charge of this war must necessarily
draw after it. These things deserve a sober deliberation before we resolve upon
the justice of this war: but then the justice being cleared, yet I conceave we
are bound to all mankind, much more Christians and brethren in Covenant, to
give what evidence we can of the justice of our cause, that if possible they
may be convinced, and do right before blood be shed. And since the Parliament
of England, upon reports of our preparations has dispatched Commissioners
hither to treat about all points in difference, and we specially by Treaty were
held to send the like to them, and after all to give three months previous
warning, before we could have recourse to the Sword: I hope no man here will
offer any thing against a Treaty with the English Commissioners, that
satisfaction before blood may be either given, or taken: and if not, yet the
due space of warning may be observed; if we should fail herein, I fear we
should proclaim our selves to the world abusive simulatory pretenders of the
Covenant, only to profane the high Gods Name to whom we have all lifted up our
false hands. Next, since the English in observance of their faith to us,
engaged freely for our better assurance in them, have left their Frontire Towns
Berwick and Carlisle ungarrison'd, notwithstanding the notice they have of our
present posture: I hope we shall scorn to make their plain dealing with us a
^nare to themselves; and think to chastise their fidelity with our infidelity,
at such a time as this is, when we wage war with holy thoughts, and only for
religious purposes.

And lastly, since we are to engage out of pure conscience to the ends of the
Covenant, one whereof is to bring all enemies of the same Covenant to a legal
trial, I hope we shall not rceive Langdale, and the rest of the English
Fugitives, whose Swords have drawn much blood of Covenanters to fight under
our Covenanters banners. This will convince us of insincerity before men, this
will provoke the eyes of Gods jealousy against us in the day of Battle; God
must be served justly, as well as in just actions, and when blood is the mean,
and holiness the end, God uses to be more jealous, and expects more exactness
then ordina^ily: Oh let not any occasion be given by a Parliament of Scotland
to lay stumbling blocks before others; let not the world say we wrest the
Covenant to what sense we please, and use it as the Papist do the word of God:
the case is of grand consequence, it may concern us and our posterity for
ever, I pray let it be thoroughly scand and sifted.

Hereunto a Gentleman of Hamiltons party may be supposed to answer:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOu have heard it granted, that Religion in England wants Reformation, and
that the King ought to be set free from his forced durance under the Soldier:
you have heard likewise granted, that our Solemn League and Covenant requires
these things to be done: but diverse scruples have been cast in withal, about
the manner of doing these things, in regard that a just is required, as well
as a justum. The main thing is, that we are not qualified by the Covenant to do
these honorable things in England: Alas, if the Covenant does not add any new
qualification to us to serve Religion, and our King: I hope no man will suspect
that it takes away any such qualification from us as we had before: And I hope
there is no man here but thinks before any Covenant taken he had a warrant and
capacity good enough to do honorable service to his Religion, and his native
Prince: Let me speak plainly, and bluntly, I doubt these scruples do not arise
against us, as we are Scotch men, and so have no power of judging in England,
but rather as we are of such a party in Scotland, that the Kirk dares not
conside in us: and this is lamentable halting before God. Let us not therefore
be driven into any unmanly irresolution by logical niciti^s, and
School-puntilioes: let us believe that such just ends as we aim at
inservingour God and Prince have just avenues belonging to them, and that God
has not hedgd in, or inscons'd goodness from the approaches of men, as he did
once the Tree of Life. My Lord, and Gentlemen: shall pure reformed Religion
want an Advocate in this presence? no: it were labor lost here to recommend
the excellencies of her; you all are confident you cannot, but be certain that
God has rather sent a Cherubim to invite and wast you to her assistance in
England, then to affright you and drive you from her embraces with a flaming
Sword. Then, as for the King, you have a greater interest in him then the
English have, and he ought to have a greater interest in you, then he has in
the English: Let me tell you if you should prove oblivious of his favors, he
might upraid diverse of you with your Fields and Vineyards, as Saul did once his
Benjamites. Do we not all know, that his graces toward us has made him the
less acceptable to the English? and does not the whole world tax us of our
ill requital at Newcastle? I speak of that in your ears: what can be said
then, either we must requite him better, and acquit our selves better now, or
all generations to come will call us ungrateful and unjust; and for my part I
cannot ever construe the Covenant as that it intends to render us ungrateful
or unjust. It Is true the enterprise we go upon must cost blood, and fall heavy
upon some of our fellow Covenanters in England: it were else impossible almost,
it should be great and honorable: let this be our comfort: the work is great,
and honorable, and being so it must be acceptable to God: and that which God
accepts cannot but be fea^able: for Qui dat finem, dat media* Let the justice
of this war fix our resolutions upon the pursuance of it, and when we are upon
its pursuance, let us pursue it wisely, and strenuously as becomes Soldiers:
let no scruples defraud us of the opportunities and advantages that attendit,
for such in war are irrecoverable and precious: to be brief, let us not be held
up with Treaties by the English Commissioners, let us not wave Langdale, nor
leave Berwick and Carlisle to the Enemy: when we are in peace let the laws of
peace order us when we are in war, let the Maxims of war sway etc. the rather
for that advantage lost in peace may be regained, but an error committed in war
can never be redeemed.

The next Gentleman was of a different opinion from either of these, and you
may suppose his Oratory was as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen.
YOu have heard how much may be said for a present war with England, and how
much may be said against it: you have heard in what extremes the arguments both
of a mere Soldier, and a mere Scholar run, and now having heard both, and
compared both, you may the better extract out of both that which is truly
counsellable at this present, and that doubtless, teaches warily to decline
both extremes: The Gentleman that spoke last maintained well the justice and
necessity of the work that is to be done: such a service to God and the King
cannot but be just and necessary; and our Covenant cannot obstruct any thing
that is of it self just and necessary; therefore to oppose our Covenant against
this war, is to undervalue our Covenant, and to entangle our selves in such
nicities as are more fit for the Schools, then this Senate.

On the other side the Gentleman that spoke first interposed some necessary
advertisements about the manner of our prosecuting this high undertaking, not
fit to be neglected, for doubtless it concerns Gods honor, the safety of the
King, and the perpetual peace and safety of these Nations, that this affair be
wisely managed, as well as it is religiously intended. We all know that the
taking of some advantages in war, if they be at too far a distance with
Religion, may prove our disadvantages: and so the parting with some
opportunities in some cases, may be a gayn of better to us; have has
overthrown some undertakings, as well as delay others. Wherefore I desire
leave to counterpoise with a little moderation, that which has been pressed by
both the Gentlemen that spoke before me.

And First it is my humble motion, that the Kirk here may have all possible
satisfaction given them in the forming, and heading of this Army, and in the
conduct, and steering of the great design; forasmuch as without this
condiscention we cannot expect their concurrence, and without their
concurrence, we cannot expect that readiness, or confidence in our Friends at
home, nor that stupidity and consternation in our enemies abroad, as is to be
desired.

Secondly, That if we admit not the English Commissioners to treat, and then
allow three months warning after the end of that Treaty: yet we may instantly
dispatch away an Express to the Parliament of England with particular demands,
and a clear denunciation of war within a month, if those particulars be not
instantly agreed to.

Thirdly, That some reasonable space before we march a Declaration may be
emitted to satisfy our Friends in England with our sincere intentions toward
them: and that the buisines of the Kirk being settled, and the King
reinthroned, we have no intention to entrench upon the privileges of the
Parliament there, or to break that bond of confederation and union that was
intended to be confirmed by the Covenant.

Fourthly, That Langdale may be countenanced at a distance, and with much
reservation, and that no other use may be openly made of Him, then of a
Forlorn Hope to seize the English frontire Garrisons for our use, and to
engage upon other the like hazardous services. How well these things are
calculated for the Meridian of Edinburgh, I leave every man to guess freely:
but this is certain, there were few in the Scotch Parliament, who gave their
judgments the first way: many went the second way: and all went the third way,
except only in complying with the Kirk: and if there be any credit to be
given to Hamilton, who affirmed it religiously at the time of his arraignment
in England, the Kirkes party refused to comply with Him, and his party, more
out of emulations, and particular State-animosities, then out of any dislike of
the cause, or condemnation of the undertaking. And time has since made this
more manifest, for even the Commissioners of the Kirk in their Declarations
since, and by their engaging against us with their young declared King, have
even by the Covenant, and the same constructions of it, owned every part of the
quarrel against us, which they condemned in Hamilton, setting only aside his
entering upon us without three months previous warning, well: The Scotch
Parliament having sufficiently Commissioned Hamilton for his March into
England, rose without any audience, or intercourse granted to our Commissioners.

Hamilton being so Commissioned, makes present use of Langdale, and his Train,
speeds away with 20000. men for England, seizes Barwick and Carlisle, commits
infinite barbarous cruelties, and destructions in the four Northern Counties,
before previous warning given according to our Treaties, but within some few
weeks fights with the Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell in Lancashire, is taken
prisoner, se^s his Army defeated, and the remainders of it chased back into
Scotland.

Out of this matter of fact so stated, a dispute now arises, whether this
hostile action of Hamilton, that was then chargeable upon the Parliament of
Scotland, be still justly to be answered and accounted for to the State of
England, by the present State of Scotland.

The Scots deny it upon these grounds. For their first evasion, they say, the
good party that now governs is not the same, as the party was, that then
governed. Whereby they would have us understand, that the State of Scotland is
changed since, 1648. and does not remain the same as it was at that time, and
therefore ought not to be responsal for what was then done.

After the Committee of Estates, and the Kirk-Commissioners have condemned
Hamiltons invasion without antecedent warning, and his other miscarriages in
taking Barwick and Carlisle, etc. and confessed that nothing can be offered in
excuse thereof: they yet add, that never any people in the world in a time of
defection did more evidence their freedom from guilt; then They (they mean
the party now governing) did. Here is a defection confessed in a Parliament
lawfully chosen, and in the major part of the people adhaering to that
Parliament: but there was a remnant of good people which at that time evidenced
their freedom from that guilt, and that remnant since by force, and assistance
of the English Army, has gotten power into their hands, and therefore the
Magistrate that is now, is not guilty of that defection, nor consequently the
State of Scotland liable to make any reparation. This evasion must be thus
stopped up.

1. In all States where there is a Representative, the public act of that
Representative, or of its major part, binds all, and every person. And though
the next Representative may repeal Laws formerly made, and recede at pleasure
from what its predecess^rs acted erroneously, or temporarily: and these new
repeals, and recessions shall be binding to all persons therein represented:
yet even these alterations also must be without fraud, Salv^ semper jure
Tertij: they must be without any prejudice to ^orrein States, and persons there
not represented. Nay, if the State of England pass an Interest in Land to a
Subject of England upon a good consideration and contract, that act shall be
binding perpetually, and may not under favor be avoided by a New
Representative, because that avoydance will appear fraudulent in the State:
and because such avoydance is to the damage of one that is as it were a third
person, and contracts with the State upon equal terms; and it seems, that a
special consent is necessary in such a case of his disinherison, and that his
general consent given by his Representatiues ought not to divest him. And if
it be here objected, that the constitution of the State of Scotland is
different from other States, inasmuch, as it consists of two Representatives,
one civil and the other ecclesiastical; and in this engagement of Hamilton the
ecclesiastical Representative did not act, nor concur, but dissent, and
protest against it, and so made the civil act the less authoritative. We
answer; First, the ecclesiastical Representative of Scotland has no power but
in cases merely ecclesiastical, such as this was in 1648. was not. Secondly,
if the Scots will tell us, that Hamiltons action, and case was in ordine ad
spiritualia: we must not suffer such collusion to be turned to our prejudice.
The State of Scotland must not think it sufficient to stroke us in their
spiritual capacity, whilst they strike us in their temporal capacity: the
duplicity of their Powers must not justify, or excuse duplicity in their
dealings: when we sustain public injuries, whether it be from a jurisdiction
Parliamentary, or Synodical, the whole State of Scotland must be answerable for
satisfaction. Thirdly, if the Engagement of Hamilton was the less valid in Law
(if we did grant this, as we do not) because all that feared the Lord in the
Land did petition, and pray against it, and expose themselves to some
persecution for not complying with it, yet this does not render the same
engagement the less mischievous to us. There was not one drop of English blood
the less shed then, nor is there one drop the less to be accounted for now.
Fourthly, we are not without some strong presumptions, that the small number
of the religious party in Scotland, which were enemies to the Engagement then,
were not so much enemies to it as it was mischievous to us, or unjust in it
self, as because it promoted Hamiltons ^action too high, and had an ill aspect
upon their own particular interest in Scotland. Else, what makes them so
zealous against our receiving of right now, which pretend they were so zealous
against our receiving of wrong then? It seems strange to us, that the English
which had never a Friend in Scotland two years since to ward one blow from
their throats, or to do any real act of resistance to Hamilton, should now
find never an Enemy in Scotland, obnoxious to their challenge of satisfaction:
and that the same men should be the most forward to debar us of reparation
now, which were then most forward to protest against our sufferings. Secondly,
where two Representatives have been legally chosen, if it be not honorable for
the later to anull the formers act in prejudice of a third person that has
right: much less honorable is it for a Representative brought in by the sword
to derogate from the acts of a former Representative, that had a fair, and
free election from the people. Wherefore, let the present power in Scotland
apply this to themselves: and the rather for that they complain of forcible
alterations amongst us, only upon pretended discommodities to our selves,
whilst they themselves make use of forcible alterations amongst themselves, to
the defrauding of their neighbors. Thirdly, Admit the Parliament, by which
Hamilton was Commissioned, was an unjust Parliament; admit it was no Parliament
at all; and admit that Hamilton with a less party, and without any Commission
at all had broke in upon us in a hostile manner: yet even this would not leave
the English altogether remediles; for in this case upon a just demand of
satisfaction made by the English, the Scots must disowne the act, and see the
outrage legally expiated upon the actors; or else they own it themselves, and
so become as obnoxious as the actors. That which was the sin of one Town in
Benjamin at first, became the sin of the whole Tribe of Benjamin afterward;
and doubtless, that which was the sin of one Tribe in Israel at first, had
become the sin of all Israel at last, if justice had not been lawfully
executed; Let the Scots look upon this with sad eyes, for that blood of the
English shed by Hamilton, which is now the guilt of a party only in Scotland,
upon the denial of just ice, may be made the guilt of all Scotland.

The second evasion of the Scots is this; They say, if they were persons
challengeable of satisfaction, yet they that sit now in the Parliament of
England, are not persons, that can duly challenge, or require satisfaction: It
should seem as Scotland before was not to be found in Scotland; so England is
now not to be found in England: so hard a matter it is to get right from them
that can thus easily transform, and deforme whole National bodies. The
meaning is, Government in England has been of late changed; two of the Estates
in Parliament are removed by force, and the third Estate usurpes, what was due
to all: wherefore as they cannot treat with us about satisfaction, but they
must acknowledge us a lawful authority; so conscience forbids them to
acknowledge our authority lawful.

To this we answer. 1. The change of rule in a Nation, does not change the
Nation; forasmuch as the manner of rule is changeable, and accidental, and so
does not give being, or support the essence of a State. If we in England
being a Monarchy owe three Millions to the Hollander, the change of Monarchy
in England will not exempt us from, our obligation: and if we in England,
being a Democracy, have three Millions due from the Hollander, our return to
Monarchy will not denude us of our remedy. The devastations and hostilities of
Hamilton were suffered by the English Nation, and the Parliament of England
demands justice, and restitution for the same in behalf of the English Nation:
now it is not agreeable to justice, or reason, that a slight exception taken
against the substitute, should disable the Principal, or any incapacity of the
demandant redound to the prejudice of him which is the true Interessent.

Secondly, If the usurpation of the Parliament of England shall bar the State
of England from its due course of justice, yet how does it appear to the
Scots, that the power of our Parliament is an usurped power? If God or Man has
given them any warrant to judge of our actions, and affairs in England, let
them show it: for without some such warrant they are but our Equals: and one
equal has no power of judging another. If they plead any undeniable principle
in nature which condemns all alteration of Government as unlawful: and all
extrusion of Governors as usurpation, and of this Maxim, they say, all men
are equally Judges; then how will they justisie their extrusion of Lannerick,
and their new moulding of their Committee of Estates after the defeature of
Hamilton, which without arms, and our assistance they could not have compast?
Is that a natural, indispensible principle in England, which is not so in
Scotland? Away with such partial shifts; let the Scots show us that Nation
under Heaven that has not several times been driven to mutations of
Governments, and Governors, and been at last justified therein by the plea of
necessity, and common safety: and we shall confess their Lordly power over us.

Thirdly, If the Scots be our Lords, and will give judgment against us in this
case, yet they must know, that we are now upon our appeal before almighty God,
and have accordingly taken Arms into our hands for the prosecution of that
appeal. And does not one of the primary Laws of War teach them what a hazard
it is to deny right to him that bears his ^aked sword in his hand? Arma
Tenenti -- Omnia dat qui justa negat. Will the Scots lay an incapacity of
Treating upon us first, and then of fighting afterward. The difference now
betwixt us is, whether we have justly enterd Scotland, or no, to seek
redress of many injuries, and depredations by trial of battle, which was
denide us by debate in a friendly intercourse: and do the Scots think now to
argue us out of our arms? do they think, that the same condemnations of our
usurped power, by which they insulted over us, when we sought a Treaty, will
be seasonable now, when the cause is preferred to a higher Court? This were to
cut us off from all remedy whatsoever; this were to detrude us below the
miserablest of men; this is beyond all ordinary strains of Tyranny: There is no
Client, nor Subject, nor slave whatsoever, but by way of his last appeal, may
repel force with force, when his case is beyond all other decision: and this
is held no more then a making an humble address to Heaven, or laying the cause
before the Lord of Hosts his Footstool: Will the Scots then which have droven
us their equals to this, last resort, prejudge and foreclude us in this also,
and so make us worse them the worst of inferiors? Certainly, if we may not
treat before we confess our selves usurpers, we may fight till God declares
us to be so; or that our enemies have usup't over us.

The third advantage or exception of the Scots against our demands of
satisfaction* is taken from the space of time that interlapsed betwixt the
overthrow of Hamilton, and our solemn denouncing against them for that
hostility: as also from some reciprocal kindnesses, and testimonies of accord
and pacification, which past betwixt the Nations in the mean while. Of both
these I shall now give this faithful account. The victory of of L: G: Cromwell
against the Scots was about the latter end of Summer, 1648: and our Forces
following that chase stayed in Scotland till about Mid-winter following. During
the stay of our Army in Scotland a good understanding was betwixt us, and the
Kirk party there, for we had both the same ends against the Hamiltonians, and
so whilst we extorted the sword out of Lannericks hands, and put it into
Arguiles, we did our own business and the Kirks too, and the Kirks more
immediately then our own. Howbeit a Treaty was now begun in the Isle of Wight
with the King, where the Scoch Commissioners appeared great sticklers for the
King to our Nations great dis-service, and this gave us some glimpse, that even
in the Kirk party, restored so lately to power by our means, all was not so
sound, and sincere, as it ought to be. The Treaty not succeeding about the last
of Januar: the King was brought to the block: and then the insolences of the
Scoch Commissioners, and their haughty intrusions into the managery of our
English State affairs, and their despicable subjecting of our Parliament to
their overruling wills, grew so intolerable, that upon the 17. of Febr: the
Parliament declared publicly against them. This begat another Paper from the
Commissioners dated the 24. following more imperious, and controuling then
formerly, and this was presently after voted a design in the contrivers of it
to raise sedition, that so under specious pretenses they might gain advantage
to second their late perfidious invasion. The 6. of March following, the State
of Scotland wrote a Letter to us (as they now inform us) to avow their
Commissioners last Paper, and withal disallowing our construction of it, for
that they judged it no incroachment upon our Government, nor any endeavor to
raise sedition. They likewise signified in the same, that if any prevalent
party in either Kingdom had, or might break the bonds of Union, yet those
sacred ties ought not to be laid aside or cancelled, but preserved for the
benefit of such as were innocent in both Nations. The Scoch Commissioners to
whom this Letter was sent for delivery of it were now upon their return for
Scotland, and so the same never came to our hands, though the Scots untruly tax
us of suppressing it. But why should they suspect any design in us of
suppressing this Letter? The Letter, if we had received it, would not have
healed our grievances, it would rather have made the wounds wider: for the
Scots Commissioners had charged us of Treason, perjury, usurpation, etc. for
doing those things within our own government, which were required at our hands
by justice, and Reason of State: now their principals in Scotland tell us that
this charge is true: but being true: it molests not, it shakes not, it justles
not us out of any part of our power, nor stirs the people at all against us.
What is this but to tell us; that they are more truly Judges in England of
Treason, perjurie, usurpation, etc. then we? that 'twas not injurious in them
to condemn us, nor seditious in the people to rise up against us in observance
of their commands? Sometimes they pretend they aim at nothing beyond a simple
protesting against us, and that a freedom of Protesting is due to all men: but
this is merely to delude, and infect the people the more: for it is evident to
all men, that such Protestations as their Papers have exhibited, have ever been
fraighted with the worst of calumnies, the severest of sentences, and have been
received by the people, as warlike defiances.

In this case therefore when so many insurrections, and broils have been
actually bred against us in our own bowels, and so dangerously seconded by
foreign Forces, we call in all men to be Judges betwixt us, whether we may not
more justly cast out Protestations when they do but palliate seditious
conspiracies, then to submit to seditious conspiracies, because they cover
themselves with the names of Protestations. This Letter miscarrying, and our
Parliament having waited awhile for some other return by some Express, or
other, in May following, about nine months after the Scoch Rout, a complanatory
Letter was sent from hence about diverse grievances in general, and
satisfaction was therein desired by Treaty in a peaceable way. An Answer
hereunto came in June following, recomplaining that the Scots justly found
themselves aggrieved at the late proceedings in England, in reference to
Religion, taking away the Kings life, and change of fundamental Government,
which they had protested against. That in case the English would disclaim their
late proceedings against Covenant and Treaties, they were contented to
authorize Commissioners for a Treaty. Otherwise they were resolved to keep
themselves free from all compliance with malignants on the one hand, and the
Enemies of Kingly Government, on the other. That in regard of the Covenant, the
Treaties, and many Declarations of both Kingdoms, they could not acknowledge
that to be a Parliament, from whom the last Proposition came to them about a
Treaty to be appointed. Here was a flat denial of any satisfaction, by
declining all means of treating about the same: Here was a reason given of that
denial, as full of enmity and hostility as could be: instead of making any
compensation due to the State of England for the bloodshed, and rapine of
Hamilton, here was a strange coacervation and accumulation of new ^landers, and
defamations upon the Parliament of England. Letters from the Parliament are now
as it were interdicted, no such subscription is to be admitted, hereupon in
July following, our Parliament issued forth a Declaration for the better
stating of these matters* the endeavor of that Declaration was to remove yet
all National misunderstanding i^ possible: and to demonstrate that the English
yet had not laid aside all thoughts of peace: but concluding that if still they
were diverted out of the ways of peace unwillingly, the fault was not theirs.
This Declaration was made as public, as ever any was in England, and we have
thousands here of the Scotch Nation disaffected enough to us* and ten thousands
of English Presbyterians besides more imbittered then the Scoch, and all these
can attestate the evulgation of this Declaration, yet the Scots call it a
Dormant Declaration, and most dis-ingenuously would infuse it into the people
that they had never, nor could have any notice of it. A Letter of theirs to us
in the hands of a single Messenger could not be intercepted: but a Manifest of
ours Printed, and entitled to the whole world must needs miscarry, and that by
our collusion. Some reply was expected by us to the matter of this Declaration,
and some months past away hanging our expectation: but none came: the first
news we heard was that about the middle of March following there was a Treaty
agreed on to be at Bredah betwixt the Scots, and their young declared King: and
that the principal Subject of that Treaty, was about the pretensions of the
young King to England, and the quarrels of the Scots against England. This to
us, that had so little hopes of reconcilement before, was a sufficient alarm,
and upon this our L: General Cromwell was sent for out of Ireland, all warlick
preparations were made ready, and our Army this last Summer, (as soon as we got
notice of the agreement made at Bredah, and how far it concerned the life of
this Commonwealth) made its entrance into Scotland.

This relation gives the true procedure of all memorable matters betwixt Summer
1648. and Summer 1650. with the reasons of the slow motions of the English: and
amongst them all whether there was any composure made betwixt the Nations for
Hamiltons ^aedifradous irruption, either by satisfaction given, on the one
side, and taken, or confessed by the other, it is left to judgment. But the Scots
allege still, that immediately after the breaking of Hamilton in England, and
the dis-arming of his brother in Scotland, there were given diverse clear
demonstrations of amity, and good accord betwixt the Nations: Letters will yet
testify, that the godly party in Scotland satisfied the English in their
innocence, and that the English did accept of the same, as good satisfaction.
For example: in September: and October: the L: General Cromwell wrote in behalf of
the Kirk patty, by Him then seated at the stern, and his letters did recommend
them to the Parliament as men careful of the unity of the Nations, and the
interest of England. On the other side the Scots remitted hither an honorable
Testimony of the fair comportment of our Soldiery there, together with a
thankful acknowledgment of the benefit, and advantage which our seasonable
assistance had afforded them. Likewise from the Parliament here it was written
back, that the religious, and well affected people in Scotland were excused
from those impious, and unwarrantable actions, and that there was no willingness
in the English to impute those evils to the Nation in general. As for the L:
Generals Letters, questionless they contained his true, plain, meaning: He did
believe at that time, that the interest of England, and the unity of the
Nations was valued by the Kirk, and the Arguilians in Scotland: but what
discharge was this to the rest of the Nation? nay what discharge is this to any
of that Nation? His Commission extended not to compound for the damages
sustained by us: nor did He ever treat about the same: nor did He at last find
his loving recommendations justly answered by that Godly parties actions.

Out of this therefore there follows nothing but that our L: General was more
charitable, then the Scots were grateful. As for the Scotch Letters, they
serve well to show the single dealing of our L: General toward them, and
their double dealing toward Him: but they serve not at all to show any act of
oblivion, or any other pacificatory conclusion that was consented to by both
Nations. Therefore the good that they then bore witness to in our Soldiery,
we hold it to be just, and according to merit: but when they publish retracting
contradicting Papers after the intermission of two years, and therein complain
(as they did this last Summer) tha^ the L: General came in un-invited, that
the manner of his entrance was not guided by their Instructions, and that the
proceedings of his Army were very unsatisfying in many other things: this is an
argument of their profound dissimulation. As for the Parliaments Letters:
although the Parliament at that time was too full of Kirkmen, yet if they had
any full words of release in them, we should no^ prolong our contestation
hereupon: but the utmost that can be extracted out of them, is a charitable
exemption of some that had the testimony of wishing well to the unity of the
Nations, and interest of England from the pen of the L: General. The
Parliament was unwilling, that the Scotch Nation in general should be charged
with the guilt, and blood of the Hamiltonians, and therefore it did acquit, and
hold exonerated thereof all the religious, and well-affected people of
Scotland. Without question the religious, and well-affected people here
excused, are understood to be no other then such as had been adverse to
Hamiltons exposition of the Covenant upon sincere grounds, and not for any
factious, or particular respects. But how few such there were in Scotland at
that time is now manifest, by the general adhering of that Nation to their new
King against us. For there is not one man in Scotland that assists this young
King against us now, but He expounds the Covenant in the same manner as
Hamilton did then: and He might have as safely complied with Hamilton in that
Engagement, as He may with the young King in this: as will be further
demonstrated in due place. These are the main subterfuges which the Scots fly
unto, when we tax them of that cruel, barbarous Engagement against us in 1648.
The rest of their pleas whereby they seek not to shelter themselves from the
whole guilt, but only to extenuate it, or rather to qualify our demanded
satisfaction are scarce worth the mention.

They say, they have received some damage in Scotland by the ^^ish, and have
demanded satisfaction of us, but as yet received none. A strange objection,
have not the Irish been prosecuted by us these nine years as Enemies? And
though they owe allegiance de jure to England: yet are they not as mortal
Enemies de facto to us, as to the Scots? Do we any way abet, justify, or spare
them? to vouchsafe more to this, were to disparage right.

They say moreover, that some satisfaction has been made us by the booty, and
pillage which Hamiltons Army lost in England. Some few Scoch Arms, and Horses,
which falling amongst the Soldiers as due prize were like water spilt upon the
ground, neither received in satisfaction by the State of England, nor so given
by the State of Scotland, must come in upon the Account of the English to
satisfy them for all the plunders, murders, and wastes which a Scoch Army
perpetrated contrary to Treaties, and sworn Covenants. No more of this, here
ends the first part of the Scoch War, whose Scene was laid in England: we
come now to its second part* where our Scene by Gods abundant grace, and
goodness is removed into Scotland. And in this transition from past, to
present, imminent hostilities we doubt not but to evidence the necessity of our
War in Scotland, a part post, as well as we have done the justice of it a
part ante.

THe Treaty at Bredah in March last, betwixt the Scots and their declared King:
both being upon terms of Hostility with us: had little business to be debated,
that was peculiar to Scotland: the main thing to be proposed by both parties,
was the removing some mis-understandings amongst themselves, that they might
thereupon the better double their powers, and twist their pretensions against
England. The Kings interest was Monarchy, the Scots was Monarchy and
Presbytery: the English were held to be advers to both these interests: and the
Covenant therefore to favor both the Treators, against the English: so
mis-understandings amongst the Treators could no^ be hard to be removed, or at
least their slight jars could not be hard to be laid asleep for a while, when
they had so little to loose to each other, and yet so much to gain from a third
party. All that the Scots desired of the King as humble suitors was but this,
that He would take the Covenant (if that were but swallowed down in its
literal sense, they thought all their further aims sufficiently provided for)
and this could not be much more bitter to Him, then the Mass was formerly to
his French Grandfather in the like case: and if it were, yet diverse
dulcifications might be added, and accordingly diverse mixtures were used, to
qualify, and make more potable that draught. Advertisements had been sent from
the young Kings devout Mother in France, and from her most Holy Father at Rome,
that in such an extremity the Oath was compulsory, that the matter of the Oath
was subject to many several, yea contrary interpretations: that He should
therefore be either left to be his own Interpreter at last in case He
prevailed, or if not* yet He should be discharged of any contrary strained
interpretation. The truth was, the present Power in Scotland had condemned
Hamilton for invading England in behalf of an Anti-covenanting King, and so it
would be now too gross for them to do the same thing till they had a
Covenanting King: whereupon it became impossible to them to relax the King of
this condition. The young King, it may be, might demand why they should more
scruple fighting for an Anti-covenanting King, then to fight against a
Covenanting brother, since the Covenant lost no more credit by the one, then by
the other: and perhaps He might further demand* why their conditions to Him
were so rigorous; since his to them pressed nothing but what was pleasing, viz:
a joint concurrence against a Common enemy. But his Mothers Counselors thought
not fit to clog the debate with such intricacies. All Scoch punctilioes being
at last waved (for the young King was so far from capitulating about his
reception in Scotland, that He was more forward to capitulate against his
trusting himself there) it came to the question, what He should obtain at their
hands in relation to England. For satisfaction herein, it was assured, that the
Scots had already proclaimed him King of Great Britain, that they had already
Protested against the governing party in England, as guilty of Usurpation: that
they did now engage to contribute their utmost endeavors, by all necessary,
and lawful means, according to the Covenant, and duties of loyal Subjects, to
restore him to the peaceable possession of his other Dominions, according to
his undoubled right of succession. This was the tenor in brief of that Parlee:
here is an inthroning promised to the young King by all necessary and lawful
means according to the Covenant: and here force of arms is not openly
professed, as a necessary, and lawful means according to the Covenant, that the
English might be ^u^d in the more security: but ^is ambiguously employed, and
secretly so explained to the young King and his Counsel, that He might proceed
with the more vigor and confidence. Hereupon now rises the contest, whether
this ambiguity of expression, and mental, equivocall reservation in the
agreement be such as ought to delude the English, or not. The Scots still say,
no force of Arms is threatened against us, and that if we fly unto force of
Arms against them either upon this, or former hostilities, we do cau^l^sly
invade them.

They solemnly invoke God as a witness, and Judge, that they have denied us no
right, that they have done us no wrong: that in this preventing war, we are
mere invaders and returners of evil for good. Yet we must understand to make
this good before the Bar of Almighty God himself, they waver, and d^llie, and
double, and seek to collude in their own plea: for they do not simply deny
their engaging to use force against us, but unlawful force, nor yet are they
willing to confess their force intended, and justify it openly as lawful by
the Covenant. Surely in an appeal to Almighty God, the case need not be
presented with so much art, and under the cover of such dubious reservations.

Let us take a little notice; first, how far they deny; secondly, how far they
justify their forcible assisting the young King against us. After the King was
well satisfied with their meaning by private insinuations, and had adventured
his person into Scotland; then further craft was thought fit to be used to
blind the English, and retard their preparations: and therefore the Committee
of Estates in Scotland published, that the Article in the Treaty of Bredah
concerning restoring the young King to his Crown of England was not to bind,
till the Parliament and Kirk of Scotland had taken a previous consideration,
and given their determination concerning the lawfullnesse, and necessity
thereof. Behold the ingenuity of the Scots, They conclude a war, and no
war; To all the enemies of England it is a declared war against England: To
the English themselves it is no war till the Scotch Parliament and Kirk have
further declared in it. The enemies of England have hereupon just warning and
timely summons to arm, and colleague for Englands offense: but in the presence
of God they speak it, the English themselves have no just ^a^^^* no^
provocation to provide for any defense at all* Though this agreement was made
by the Enemies of England, with the Enemies of England, and ref^rres to the
Covenant which has always been expounded to the justifying of a war with
England upon this quarrel: and though this agreement must signify a full
defiance against England to all others, yet to the English it must signify
nothing, God himself being admitted Judge. The English had been once before
invaded by the Parliament of Scotland upon the same pretex^s of the Covenant
without any warning given, when both the Nations were not only in professed
amity* but also under the religious ties of a solemn League: and yet now when
the Parliament of Scotland has per^idiously violated that amity, and those
ties, and i^ moreover f^stned in a new Agreement and Covenant with the most
active foe, that England has, in the world by Sea, and Land, and by the words
of that Agreement and Covenant, has obliged it self to recover the Throne of
England to Him: yet now, it is expected that the English should sit still, and
attend till the Parliament and Ki^ke of Scotland had further deside them. Alas,
the prevention of a wound that is likely to be mortal, is as necessary, when
it is possible, as the warding of it: and some strokes are of that nature that
they cannot be repelled by the buckler, if they be not anteverted by the sword.
Therefore the fictions of the Cockatrices eyes want no ground in policy,
whatsoever they do in Nature: and it is often seen in wars* and seditions,
that the party which surprises not is sure to be surpised. This caused the
Parliament of England this last Summer to send a preventing Army into Scotland,
yet with an intension of defense, not offense, for it was manifest to us, if
we did not pitch the war there, and there draw the first blood, we did
necessarily expose our selves to the first charge, and impression of our
enemies here, and choose to erect the theater of war within our own
Dominions. Moreover, had we been mere Assaylants, or had we been defend^nts
in an equal cause, against Enemies that had observed Feciall rites with us by
giving us antecedent warning, we would not have been wanting in the due
formalities of defiance toward them. Nay, had there been any real doubt how
the Parliament and Kirk of Scotland would have determined of the justice, and
necessity of a war with England, or had there been any certain time prefixed
when that determination should have been given: or had we been assured of any
just time to prepare our selves afterward for a complete defense, we had not
been so forward in seeking out the hardships of that cold, and sterill soil,
but as our case was, we were great sufferers, we were sufferers by perfidious
Enemies, we were delusorily referd fine die, to Judges that were bound to no
meetings, for the resolution of a case that was before resolved against us: and
in the mean time whilst we were brutishly thus to wait upon such Judges, all
our conjured foes were contriving our ruin, and were certain to prepossesse
irrecoverable advantages against us.

But now we shall see in the next place, the same Scots that before the
Judgment Seat of God charged us hitherto for entering upon them when we were
in no danger, nor under any provocation, seeing all their transactions at
Bredah more fully come to light, betake themselves from denying to confessing
and avoiding. Such is their faultring, such is their doubling: if their denial
could be maintained, they needed not descend to any confession: and if their
confession were avowable, they needed not to fly to denyalls: but the truth is,
they can neither absolutely deny, nor absolutely justify their hostile
machinations, and combinations against us, and therefore they shufle, and
trifle, and play fast, and lose betwixt both.

In August last, when the Scots saw the English would not yield themselves to
be deluded, or disappointed, or forecluded of any advantages in war by the
false pretexts of peace, they stated the case of their war in a Declaration,
which they forced the young King to publish in his Name at Dunferlin, and
according to the case there stated, they resolved to join upon the issue of a
Battle, and in the Field to expect Gods own decision from Heaven. The Battle
was fought, and the decision of Heaven dissavoured the Scots: but the success
of a pitched Field is not now held an Argument weighty enough to sink a cause so
stated. Let us therefore more narrowly look into the particulars of that
Declaration, and examine upon what sure rules of equity and piety the cause of
the Scots, as it is there drawn up, stands founded. At first the march of our
Army was held merely invasive, and causlesly* offensive: the Scots denied any
hostile intentions against us at all: now it is granted there was an intention of
force, but it was no other then what was justifiable by the Covenant, inasmuch
as it threatened none but such as were Enemies to the Covenant. This seems to
mean, that the Parliament of England with all their Armies and Adherents, had
had just cause to prevent an invasion from the Scots, if they had been true to
the Covenant, that is, if they had interpreted the Covenant in the Scotch
sense: but since they are judged to have dealt treacherously with the Covenant,
they are not worthy of any defense, they ought not to claim so much privilege,
as to prevent any danger, or enmity; For if the Scotch design had been merely
to plunder and inslave us, then we might have stood upon our guards, or used
means of prevention lawfully: but since the design was merely to reform us,
and reclaim us to our loyalty, and to reconcile us to our Covenant: 'twas
arrogance in us to think any resistance at all reasonable: Is not this a
candid honest meaning? does not this high pitch of prejudice become a fair
noble enemy? but to the effect, and purport of our Scotch Declaration: by that
Declaration we are satisfied in two things.

First, What conditions were proposed by the Scots to the King both in behalf
of Scotland and England, and

Secondly, What Laws were agreed upon by them both to be imposed upon the
English.

Of the Kings conditions little need be said: by taking the Covenant
explicitly, he did implicitly bind himself to admit the Scots to be his
interpreters of it, and by admitting them to be his interpreters, He did engage
to follow the advice of a Parliament in all Civil cases, and of an Assembly in
all businesses of the Church: and it is to be understood that the same advice was
to sway him as well when he was to consult about his affairs in England, as
about his Scotch affairs.

For a proof hereof, we see when this very Declaration, so nearly concerning
the government of England, was to be issued in the young Kings ^ame, and he to
avoid the same was withdrawn to Dunferlin: Commissioners were sent after him
from the Kirk and States, to let him know, that by the Covenant he was bound to
sign, and own this their Act, and that by his refusal if he separated his
interest from Gods, and the Churches, they would endeavor the preservation of
both without his.

But let us pass to the ^aws imposed upon us by the accord ^t Bredah, and let
us view sadly those heavy iron yoak^ that are there ^^eathed for the neck of
England. After that the young King ^^ obliged to stand to the advice of the
Scots in the supreme counsels and concernments of England. Let us consider ^ow
^ar that advice is converted to our confusion. The first thing that we are to
submit to is, we are here to yield up the Crown of England to be disposed of by
the Scots* we must suppose there lies a duty, and is conferd a power by the
Covenant upon them to see to our line of succession, and to take order that in
all questions betwixt the people, and any pretendor, the Throne may be duly
filled, and possessed. If a Traitor (that has been) an enemy in Arms (that is)
claim by inheritance the Sovereignty of England, the Scots may justify force
to invest him here, and it is breach of Coven: in us to oppose* 2. Though the
same K. may ^e under* Sequestration in Sco^^: til he has given public
satisfaction there; yet there is no satisfaction due in Engl* of which the
English are to be Judges, for the English are to rest satisfied in this, that
the Scots rest satisfied: and if the Scots rest satisfied* the English
sequestration becomes vac^ted: Nay, though that which the Scots ^all
satisfaction, be apparently extorted by force, and almost confessed to be mee^
^imulation; yet the English in spite of their understandings and senses must
accept of it.

The Scots say, their young King is truly humbled for his Fathers Tyranny, and
his Mothers Idolatry, the young King abhors there hypocrisy therein* and for
diverse days together puts all his hopes in this world upon eminent hazard,
rather then he will subscribe their dictates, yet the English must neither
question his, nor their sincerity. Thirdly* All these rigo^s, and impositions
of the Scots our backs must bow^, and crouch under for the Covenants sake, and
that we may prove true to the most high God, to whom we have lifted up our
trembling hands. Though we have discovered the Covenant to be a f^la^^ous,
lubricous, ambiguous contract (as others besides the Contractors themselves now
wrack it) so that in the Scotch sense it makes us enemies to them, in our sense
it makes the Scots enemies to us, in a third sense it serves the Papists
against us both: and though we are thoroughly informed, that the young King is
not only licensed but enjoined to take it by all his Popish Patrons and
Allies, and to make use of it as a s^are to both Nations: yet we must take no
exception against it. Hamilton, in 1648. expounded the Covenant in behalf of
the King, and Kirk to the raising of a war against us; yet the same powers in
Scotland that condemned that war in him, raise the same against us now upon the
same exposition. All the difference is this; Hamilton fought for a King that
had not taken the Covenant, because He was never so far necessitated, whereas
the present powers in Scotl: ^ight for a King that has Covenanted against his
will, choosing rather to perjure then ^o perish: But let us ask the Scots
seriously, Whether is the greater enemy of the Covenant before God, he that
refuses to take it because it is against his conscience, or he that takes it
against his conscience, because he dares not refuse it? Well, Gods judgments
herein is by us both implord, and we cannot doubt but God in his due time will
judge, and make his judgment undeniable. Fourthly* Though we indeed are not
enemies to the Covenant, but can justly plead for our selves, that we are
zealous for a true Reformation, even whilst we dislike the Scotch pattern, and
that we are well-wishers to Monarchy elsewhere, even whilst we make choice of
Democracy in England upon diverse urgent emergent considerations: yet all our
pleas are rejected* the very last plea of Arms, from which no necessitated men
besides are barred, is in us most imperiously condemned as well after open
trial, as before. Nay when we know our selves condemned by the Scots as
Enemies to the Covenant, and that the young King (to be brought in by force over
us) is particularly sworn against us, in that he is generally sworn against
all enemies of the Covenant, we must take it as a sufficient answer to all our
complaints* that the King has no power to annoy any, but enemies to the
Covenant. This is to heap Scorns upon the rest of our endurances; for this
all one, as if they should insolently tell us, that no man can hold any thing
but by the Covenant, and the Covenant can have neither enemies nor friends, but
such only as they declare to be such. To pursue these Scorns also and improve
them the higher against us, they make their young King in his Declaration at
Dunferlin, revoke all his Commissions granted against us by Sea, and Land, to
any of his Instruments that adhere not to the Covenant. Do not we know, that
such a revocation is merely ^udic^ous, and jocular? Could the Scots imagine
that either Rupert at Sea, or the Irish Papists by Land would obey such a
revocation so signed at Dunferlin? And if Ante-Covenanters should lay down
their Commissions, would it be more ease for us to be spoiled and destroyed by
the hands of false Covenanters, then by the hands of Ante-Covenanters? May not
this King do what Hamilton did? May he not prevail over a faction of
Covenanters, and by them assail us, as Hamilton did? and if not so* may he not
be empowered; nay is he not already bound by all the Covenanters in Scotland,
nemine con^radicente, to treat us as enemies?

Will not God in earnest look down upon the makers of such jests?

Fifthly. As we must prostrate our selves to a King, to such a King exercised
many years in bloody feats against us before his pretensions to the Crown,
obtruded upon us by such Faedifragrous neighbors; and further hardened against
us by such religious incentives: so we must also stoop and kneel to him upon
the most servile, odious conditions that can be.

For first, we must come to a new change of Government for his sake. By the
present, settled form; Government is now devolved, and as it were naturally
resolved into the hands of the people: and as Monarchy cost us a vast effusion
of blood, before it necessitated its own ejection, so it is likely to cost as
much now, before it can be reestablisht. Lions, and Elephants do not teeme,
and propagate so often, and easily as mice, and ferrets do: nor can we
expect, that such great alterations in great States as these are should be
compast without much sore travail, and long continude throws. The Scots do
know well enough, that our sectarian Party in England, which they charge of
usurpation, has a great Army in Scotland, ready to cope with all their Levies,
another as great in Ireland, a Militia not unequal to both in England, besides
a puissant Armado at Sea: and can they imagine that the suppressing of this
sectarian party, and reinvesting of Monarchy is likely to prove an unbloudy
business?

Secondly, As we must be forced from the Government that now is, so we must be
forced into a new Module of Government, that never was before in England
known, or heard of. The supreme Power of England must now suffer a partition,
and have its residence in two several Counsels; the one Ecclesiastical, the
other Civil, and so whilst in imitation of Scotland, it transforms it self
into an Amphisbaena, and submits to the motions of two Heads, it can hardly
avoid dangerous disputes, and dissentions. In cases of the Kirk, the King must
hearken to Divines, in matters politic the King must be observant of his
Parliamen^s: but if there happen a difference in mixed matters, it is left to the
peoples discretion to side, and adhere, as they see cause. Surely twill be an
uncooth innovation in England to see Kirkmen sit in an Assembly, and publish
Declarations concerning peace, and wars, as they do now in Scotland; and
whether such an innovation may be conducing to a good accord, and understanding
in the State, or no, we leave to conjecture. 3ly, As we must subject our selves
to these grand innovations, so they must also be purchased by us with the price
of some of our best blood: some few of our principal Patriots heads must be
paid down in hand for them. It should seem, their Idol the Covenant requires
some sacrifice to make an atonement for the indignities, and prophanations it
has lately suffered in England, and so four or five men's lives are demanded,
as a just oblation. But the Scots might understand that we are not yet so tame,
and that the demand of such an oblation from us, is all one, as the demand of
many Hecatombes: and therefore perhaps it is not parsimony of blood that makes
them so parsimonious in their demands of blood. 4ly, As our pretiousest Friends
must lie under this discretionary danger, so the most fatal of our Enemies
must be secured from all danger of our Laws: for in the close of all, an Act of
Oblivion is to overwhelme all things* and all men whatsoever, Royallists,
Presbyterians, Independents, Papists, Protestants are to be put into an equal
condition. What is this less then to spoil us of all advantages, and exempt
our Enemies from all disadvantages that the event of these late wars have cast
upon us both? especially when the Act is to pass as a Grace from our Masters
in Scotland, and not of reconcilement from us?

By this state of the cause so formed, and owned by the Scots themselves, it is
now apparent, that if the English had yielded stupedly to all the conditions,
and Laws that are here imposed upon them, they had left nothing remaining to
themselves: the whole English Nation had been given up to vassalage under a
foreign Power. Those very Royalists, and Presbyterians which should have
survived the Independents, and could have severd themselves from the ruin of
the Parliament: (as was very difficult to do) yet should have seen the old
Government of England overturned, and have served a Master, that should have
served other Masters. The Scots nevertheless in the Declaration before
mentioned recommend these impositions of their young K: as his gracious
condiscentions, and they expect that hereby he offers satisfaction to the just,
and necessary desires of his good Subjects in England, and Ireland. And because
they see there are many thousands in England, who have utterly forgotten that
ever they were born on this side the Twied: They use many Arguments of
Conscience and Honor to Arm all such against the Parliament: and to in amor
them with that Freedom, and happiness that this Declaration promises under
them. So wondrous a thing it is, that any liberty under a Parliament of
England should be thought worse by Englishmen then any servitude under the
Kirk* and state of Scotland; but here are the true grounds of our expedition
into Scotland: the Justice whereof looked backward to the incursion of Hamilton
in 1648. whilst its necessity looked forward to the Treaty at Breda, and to the
accord that was there made in March last. There is a Justice of war sometimes
that derives it self only from necessity: but in the War that is now waged by
our Parliament in Scotland, we may truly avow, that our Arms are just because
they were necessary, and we as truly avow, that they became necessary by being
so egregiously just: inasmuch as the Magistrate often is restrained from
dispensing with the Subjects right. Now it appears by what has been here
related, that the Scots unprovoked powered in upon us 20000. men in a manner most
perfidious, and at a time most disadvantagious; that after satisfaction
peaceably sought they rejected us as unworthy of any Treaty with them: that at
Breda they have since conspired with ^^r open Enemy against us, making their
cause his, and his theirs: and therefore directly contrary to the Scots
Declarations emitted the last Summer, we draw this conclusion, that we have
received wrongs insufferable, that we have been denied rights indispensible,
and that we have been forced into a War unavoydable. For we hope, since no
place, nor time secures us from the offensive Arms of their young King, and his
Commissions Officers, whose cause they have espoused by taking him into a
forced Covenant; No time, nor place ought to secure him from our defensive
prosecution. Let the Scots flatter themselves as they please with fond
umbrages, that they observe their Covenant whilst they fight against us that
are parties to it, and whilst in the young K. they abet P. Rupert, and the
Irish, that are parties engaged against it; God is not mocked, He sees
thoroughly the ill temper of that mortar, wherewith their ruinous cause is
daubed. The same God knows likewise how unwillingly we drew our swords in this
quarrel, and how far all aims of ambition, domination, revenge, or spoil were
distant from these our undertakings. The same words which were once used by our
Army after the great defeat given to Hamilton in England, the same do we still
resume after as great a success near Dunbar in Scotland. We believe God has
permitted his Enemies at several times to Tyrannize over his people, that we
might see a necessity of Union amongst them. We likewise hope and pray that his
glorious dispensations of success against our Common Enemies may be the
foundation of Union amongst Gods people in love and amity. To this end (God
assisting, before whom we make this profession) to the utmost of our power, we
shall endeavor to perform, what is behind on our parts: and when we shall
through wilfulness fail herein, let this Hypocritical profession rise up in
Judgment against us, before him who is and has ever appeared the severe
avenger of Hypocrisy. This we direct now to all the mislead, yet well meaning
people of Scotland as cordially after a second signal victory, as we did then
after the first.

Reader, I here often mention the Scots, and seem to intend the whole Nation;
but I pray thee make no such interpretations: for I doubt not but there are
many good people there, that either know not their Magistrates Hypocrisy, or
bewail it in secret. I my self know many excellent men of that Nation, and
these to me are as dear as if they were English. Sit Tros, sit Tyrius, nullo
discrimine habebo.
Of the ENGAGEMENT.
THere was lately Printed a sheet of Considerations against our common
Engagement of Allegiance, to this Commonwealth: the Author seems to be a
Presbyterian of the Scoch Faction, by some thought able and learned: his
Arguments are very brief, and I will answer him, as briefly as may be: The
Arguments by which our Engagement is impugned, and as it were on every hand
beleaguerd are eleven, as I take it.

The first is against the Engagements inconsistency with former Obligations.

2. Its partiality toward Malignants. 3. Its obscurity, and ambiguity. 4. Its
illegal penalties. 5. Its inefficacie. 6. Its want of charity. 7. Its rigor to
harmless, conscientious men. 8. Its enmity to Reconciliation. 9. Its diffidence
in God. 10. Its excess, and extremity in punishing. 11. Its opposition to
Christian Liberty. The raising of this seige, I hope will not prove very
difficult.

Considerator.
This Engagement, to some that have already taken six or seven Oaths, may
possibly seem contrary to some of those former Obligations: and such Ingagers
must now suffer, or sin against their doubting consciences.

Answ:
1. No State can enact, or ordain any thing, but the same may be liable to some
men's doubts; (In Christian Religion it self all men's scruples are not
prevented) those Acts, and Orders therefore which are not liable to just doubts,
are sufficient, and ought to bind. Now the Engagement, which in truth is not
repugnant to any of our former Oaths, or Obligations, is liable to no just
doubts. For our former Oaths, and Engagements, if we rightly understand them,
did not so intentionally oblige us to the form of Government, as to Government
it self; nor to this or that changable medium of governing, as to the fixed,
perpetual end of government. Forms, and Means are sometimes very expedient,
and so long they are necessarily to be observed: but the question is how far
they ought to be observed, when they clash, and by some emergent alteration in
the State are put out of Tune, and so jar, as it were, with substances, and
Ends: and all wise men know: Subordinata non pugnant: the matter of less
moment gives way to the greater. The Law of the Sabbath was strict in all its
rites, and required an exact obedience in all its duties which were suitable to
its end: but when man's being which was the end of the Sabbath came in question,
all its subordinate offices, and solemnities submitted. The Jews thought man
must rather perish, then the Sabbath be broken by any labor to save him: and
if man had been created for the celebration of that day, they had judged
rightly: but since that days rest was ordained for man, our Savior gives a
contrary judgment. The same reason reaches our case. Our allegiance has been
formerly engaged to the State of England governed in such a form: that form is
now changed* and now our allegiance to the State cannot be continued in the old
form, without danger to the substance, without ruin to the end, for which
allegiance was so engaged. In this case, if we grant, that the form of
government is but a mean, and that it was ordained for the convenience of
government, not government for the forms: we have nothing to do, but to
conclude with our Savior, that necessity makes the change lawful, and the
violation of the form no violation: forasmuch as there is no repugnance in
subordinate things. Dunkirk was yesterday under the Spaniard, it is to day under
the French: the loyalty which the Dunkirkers paid yesterday to the Spaniard is
now due to the French: That Dunkirker which now keeps his loyalty to the
Spaniard breaks it, and may justly suffer for Treason: but that Dunkirker which
departs from his former loyalty, keeps it, and the truth of his loyalty will be
justified by the end of all Loyalty.

Consider:
Known Malignants whose Consciences are too hard for such scruples, readily
take the Engagement, and so get Trust and employment, whilst the tenderness of
Conscience shuts honest men out.

Answ:
2. This Objection has no more Force against the Engagement, then it has
against preaching the Word, administering the Sacraments, and all the best
Ordinances that ever were past by God, or man: for there was never any duty so
holy, nor injunction so equitable but some scrupulous men perplexed, and
entangled themselves with fears about it, and some men of ill conversation
would rush, and intrude rudely into it. It Is impossible for the Magistrate
either to ease tender Consciences, or to discriminate hard hearts in all cases:
wherefore let us not require impossible things of our Magistrates.

Consider:
This Engagement is so pressed, that scruples arising none is permitted to
clear them to himself, nor can the tendrers of it prescribe the sense wherein
it is to be taken: so it must be subscribed blindly in the implicit meaning of
the Imposers. This agre^s not with the nature of a solemn Obligation.

Answ:
3. The Engagement is most injuriously accused of any obscurity; no art of man
could pen any thing more clearly, or succinctly: nay I am verily persuaded,
that the same men that cavil at the Engagement for ambiguity: can scarce
produce one Law or rule in all the book of God, which might not be made as
subject to cavillations as this bond of allegiance. By our subscriptions, we
only bind our selves to be true, and faithful to the Commonwealth of
England, as its now governed without King, or Lords. To ask, what the
Commonwealth of England is, is ridiculous; it is the same now under this form of
Regiment, as it was before under Monarchy. To ask, how it can be governed
without King or Lords, is more ridiculous, our senses discover to us, that we
have a government; that we have a government without King or Lords: and if we
please we may further inform our selves, that there have been other such
governments in all ages, amongst all Nations. To ask how we may be true, and
faithful to this Government, is most ridiculous of all: for Truth, and
fidelity in England, is the same as Gods Law commands every where. No Law of
Gods is more perspicuous, then that which enjoins obedience, and subjection to
Powers and Magistrates; and yet the same Law of God which injoyns obedience,
and subjection, intends true obedience, and faithful subjection: they cannot
be divided: false obedience is no obedience, unfaithful subjection is no
subjection. Therefore let our Considerator cavil at God, and his Word, to which
our Engagement refers him, let him not cavil at those which refer him.

Consider.
The Subjects Liberty is saved to Him by diverse Laws, and Oaths: yet the not
subscribing of this Engagement hercaves any man now of the benefit of Law, the
greatest of all Liberties, and rights.

Answ.
4. Liberty is the due birthright, of every Englishman: but Liberty has its
bounds, and rules; and the liberty of every member must be subordinate to the
liberty of the whole body. By the Laws of Liberty every man is to enjoy, that
which is his own: but since one man has far greater, and better things to
enjoy, then another, the liberties of one may extend further, then the
Liberties of another. Likewise, when our Liberties are equal extensive, one
man may voluntarily renounce, or maliciously forfeit, that which another does
not. Therefore we must not suppose, that any man in England by the Protestation,
or Covenant, or any Law else, has such an estate, or inheritance in his
Liberty, as is altogether indefeasible, and unreleasible, whatsoever He does,
or says. But in the last place, there is a Liberty of the whole State, as well
as of any particular subject: and that Liberty of the whole State must
supersede the Liberty of every particular subject, whenever both accord not:
the lesser, to avoid repugnance, must always give place to the greater. The
Con^iderator is very erroneous, when He thinks, the Law allows him any right,
or freedom to disturb the Law, or to oppose any constitution, upon which
public right, and freedom is founded.

Consider.
These kind of ties have commonly prooved uneffectuall: nay they have often
proved mischievous, like artillery turned against the first planters, and
devisers of them. Witness the Bishops Canonical Oath: witness the late
Covenant, etc.

Answ:
5. Religious ties, and pacts are not unlawful in themselves, but we hold the
use of them unlawful when they are enforced without sincerity, without
necessity, and without due authority. As for the Bishops canonical Oaths; we
are not satisfied that there was a sincere meaning in them, or any clear Law
for them: and we are certain there can be no necessity pretended to uphold
them: wherefore it is no marvel, if they proved fatal. As for the Covenant
also, it was rigorously obtruded upon the English by the Scots, without any
pretext of authority: and as we have found since a want of ingenuity in the
obtruders, so we are sensible the pleas of its necessity were mistaken:
forasmuch as it has wrought contrary effects, and produced hostility, instead
of amity. Wherefore if this miscarried also it is no great wonder. Neither does
the line, that runs betwixt our Engagement, and those obligations prove a true
parallel: for those were Religious, so is not this: and those were utterly
unnecessary, to say no worse of them, so is not this. God has required us to be
loyal, and true in our obedience to the higher powers: to obey God in this is
necessary: and therefore to promise obedience in this, even when our promise is
a necessary part of our obedience: and is moreover a medium so aptly disposed
to reach the end of all obedience, the securance of public peace: we cannot
but conclude it necessary. Besides, the Considerator might take notice, that
his objection here is general against all stipulations, as such: so that by
the force of his objection, the very bonds of matrimony; the military
Sacraments of soldiers: all the obligations almost betwixt man, and man, by
which humane society is preserved, find themselves struck at, and shaken.
There was scarce ever any Nation yet so barbarous, as wholly to neglect ties of
allegiance; and amongst all ties of public allegiance; there scarce will be
any found so modest, brief, clear, easy as our English Engagement: the
obligation is no more then civil, and the extent of it scarce equals the petie
homages, and fealties which we pay in Leets, and in our Courts Baron.

Consider.
If we raised trouble, or sedition under the present Government, these
proceedings against us might be justified: but we are now punished because we
dare not offend God by subscribing. What is our case now was the subscribers
ease, when they were formerly over-ballanced in the Government by men of
another judgment: let them therefore do as they would be done to, for we desire
now, what they desired then, that Conscience may not be forced.

Answ:
6. The case of the Non-ingagers is not the same now, as ours was formerly: nor
are we so uncharitable as to violent men's consciences, or to exact that from
others which we would not have exacted from our selves: these charges are void
of truth, and ingenuity. Necessary Oaths, and natural stipulations properly
tending to the preservation of humane society, we never were Enemies to: nor
ought any good man's conscience check at them: and if the non-ingagers can show,
that we require now in this promise any fidelity or obedience to the State,
besides what God himself requires: and the natural usage of all Nations
justifies, we will acknowledge our error, and harshnes to them at present. Or
on the other side, if the Considerator will show, that the Oaths which we
formerly were scandalized at in the Bishops and other oppressors were of such
necessity, and so tenderly moderated, as this Engagement is, we will
acknowledge our refracto^ines in former times: but if neither of these things
can be showed, the Considerator cannot say we deal unequally or partially with
other men's Consciences, it is want of charity in Him, that charges this want of
charity on us.

Consider.
The Non-ingagers can have no other ends of refusing, and becoming obnoxious to
the sharp censure of the Act, besides Conscience: because they are few, and
cannot compass any alteration: and they further see, it could not be compast
without a great effusion of blood, if they were more, and stronger. Again: if
men offend by disturbance of the Government, under which they live: let them
receive severe punishment, let them not be punished before offense given. Again,
This Engagement involves many conscientious men* fearful to subscribe, who yet
verily believe they must stand, or fall with the present Government: and are
wholly for them in their judgment.

Answ:
7. We must by no means grant, that there is truth in these suggestions. For:
1. we know there are diverse, which refuse this Engagement out of mere
dis-affection to the present Government. 2. There are diverse neutral minded
men which do subscribes* his Engagement not without some unwillingnesse, which
nevertheless will the rather be true, and faithful because they have so
engaged. Fear of penalty will be as potent to keep some men from breaking, as
it has been to keep others from refusing the Engagement. 3. It Is impossible for
us to believe that pure conscience restrains any man at all from subscribing:
it must be peevishnes, of humor, and opinion, it cannot be conscience. Our
reason is: because there is no third thing betwixt being a Friend, and an
Enemy: betwixt being true, and false: betwixt being obedient, and disobedient.
Can we possibly admit, that they are wholly for us in their judgments; that
they expect to stand, and fall with us, that they are conscientiously bound up
from attempting against us: which think it a sin to promise any truth, or
fidelity to us? Either it is a sin to be true, and faithful to this
Commonwealth, or it is not. If it be a sin: in the judgment of our
Non-ingagers; to be true, and faithful; then are our Non-ingagers worse then
Enemies: for enemies themselves may without sin pass pacts of truth, and
^idelity to each other: and if our Non-ingagers be worse then enemies, it is
treacherous in them to pretend they are less. Pure conscience cannot permit
them to say, they are wholly of our judgment, their safety is involved in
ours, they are no way disaffected to the present Government: whilst at the
same time it suggests to them that they sin if they prove true, and faithful
to us. On the other side, if they allow there is no sin in being true, and
faithful to us: then they must allow withal, that there is no sin in
promising truth, and faithfulness. Nay without doubt, the thing being lawful,
the promise of the thing becomes lawful, if not necessary when it is required by
the Magistrate for securance of the public peace. It Is a strange thing to
imagine, what now predicament the Non-ingagers must find out for themselves.
Protest enemies they abhor to be, their judgments, their safeties, their own
interests force them to disclaim that Name: Professed Friends nevertheless they
dare not be; some scruples of conscience deter them from any such obligation.
Neuters they cannot be, because they are Natives, and members of this State,
and owe allegiance to Government, howsoever they may except against this, or
that form of Government. Forreiners that have no dependence upon us, nor owe
allegiance to us, may profess neutrality, and if they be not against us, we
repute them as if they were for us: but it is otherwise with the English
subjects. Ambidexters they will disdain to be: for of such the contrary rule is
true: if they be not with us, they be against us: a seeming, simulatory, Friend
to two contrary parties is a real, assured enemy to both: our Saviors mouth
has left it unquestionable, that No man can serve two Masters. It will
therefore well become our Non-ingagers, to be plain dealing with us in this,
though they may not be true to us, and let us know under what notion they would
be looked upon. If they be neither Friends, nor Enemies, nor Neuters, nor
Ambidexters, let them give themselves some fifth Name, only let it be such a
Name, as may fall under some definition.

Consider.
The Covenant, we see, is a great hindrance of reconciliation with Scotland,
which shows the pernicious consequences of laying obligations upon the people.
For to oblige the people, and not interpret, nor limit those obligations, is a
way to perpetuate strife, to multiply disputes, and conscientious entanglements.

Answ:
8. How ill our plain, necessary Engagement, that comes recommended to us by
good wholesome precedents from all ages, and Nations is compared to the many
intricacies, and inconsonancies, of the Scoch Covenant has been already showed.
The various interpretations of the Covenant might perhaps beget, and perpetuate
strifes betwixt two emulous Nations: but our Engagement is so liquid, facile,
and concise a tie of truth, and fidelity from English men to their common
Mother: that even they which have most tortured their brains to raise quaeres,
and scruples about it, at last, know not how to style themselves, nor where to
place themselves: nor can they teach us how we should understand their
Chimeraes or resolve their fond aenigmas. Let not that therefore be ado^sed of
creating quarrels, which is so hard to be quarreled it.

Consider.
It were more for the glory of God, if Magistrates would trust God with their
Government, not thinking themselves the safer by tying man to them, especially
by means that have so often failed. Oh beware of unbelief.

Answ:
9. To use honest, well proportioned means allowed, and appointed by God, with
a Trust that God will bless the same to us, is rather to honor, then distrust
God: and it is not a trusting, but rather a tempting of God, when we sit still,
and let slip opportunities upon a vain expectation that God will supply us with
extraordinary, unpromis'd helps. Constant experience instructs us, that
Promises and other sacramental obligations have been ever honorably, and
profitably made use of for religious, and civil purposes: they have been
sanctified by God himself both giving, and accepting of them: they have not
only bound man to man, but man to God, and God to man. Therefore to argue
against such expedients in this case, upon the strength of such propositions as
are general, and as concludent against all humane expedients in all cases
whatsoever, must needs savor of a spirit too litigious, and acrimonious.

Consider:
By this Engagement persecution of godly men is grown higher in diverse respects
then it was in the times of Prelaticall power: in regard that non-Ingagers are
now more in number then non* conformists were formerly: and whereas
imprisonment was formerly the penalty of Puritans, non-subscribers now are put
^ut of the Laws protection as to their estates: if 10000 li. be owing them,
they are at the Debtors courtesy, whether He will pay one penny, or not.

Answ:
10. The Commonwealth of England denies no protection to any, that will
promise truth and fidelity in their reciprocal subjection: nor does it deprive
any of the benefit of Law, that engage to be Friends to the Law. Wherefore
since the Commonwealth is in the place of a Mother, and every particular man
is but in the place of a Son: it is not fit the Son which first rejects his
Mother, should complain afterward that He is rejected by his Mother. Away with
such stupid gross^^ partialities: He which out-la^^ himself, cannot complain of
an outlaws hard condition: and He that joins not with the people in all
necessary expedients to uphold the Law, outlaws himself. It Is double injustice
for a Subject undutifully to forfeit the States favor first, and then to
expostulate against its dis-favour: as it is double ingratitude in a Son to
deny filial duty first, and then to cry out against paternall severity after.
The Subject here is his own persecuter, and the Son his own true dis-inheritor:
forasmuch as both withold that which was due absolutely, and naturally, yet
have nothing withheld from them, but what was due conditionally, and
secondarily.

Consider.
We deny not that the Magistrate may require security for the obedience of men,
that give occasion of suspicion: but we deny the Magistrates power, and rule
over men's consciences. For Christ has redeemed us to himself, that we might
serve him without fear, and not suffer our selves to be brought in bondage to
the wills of men. So Calvin: Insti: l: 3. c: 19. S: 14. The Conclusion is: what
a Christian may not lawfully act, He may not be lawfully constrained to act by
the Magistrate: but a Christian may not lawfully act against his conscience
though erring: therefore He may not lawfully be constrained thereunto.

Answ:
11. It Is confessed there are high prerogatives of Liberty (to use Calvin's own
words) which Christ has purchased with his blood for faithful consciences, to
exempt them from the power of men: and that these prerogatives are lost to such
consciences, as yield themselves to be snared with bonds of Laws, and
Ordinances at the will of men. But we must understand with all, that no
exemption from the bonds of the Law moral, or any Civil ordinances not crossing
the Law moral, is here intended, or reckoned amongst Christ's purchased
Prerogatives: for Christ himself was obedient to the Higher Powers: and did
profess that He came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law. We must therefore
restrain Calvin's meaning to a freedom from Leviticall ceremonies, or humane,
unnecessary impositions in matters Ecclesiastical: or to commands evidently
sinful. Inasmuch as the Consciences of faithful Christians cannot be properly
said to be snared with any other Laws, and Ordinances. For that we are to be
subject to government, and Governors for conscience sake: and that a faithful,
pure conscience is a thing very different from the ignorant fears, or rash
presumptions of a mis-guided mind, is very clear by the Scripture. Therefore
when the Considerator argues that a man may neither act, nor be enforced to act
against an erring Conscience. He seems to me to utter mere nonsense, forasmuch
as that opinion which may be false, and erroneous, is so far from being a man's
conscience, that it is inconsistent with conscience. Shall we call the Papists
blind zeal which makes him thirst after Protestant blood an erroneous
conscience? and shall the Magistrate forbear all force, and restraint toward
Him, because He only follows the dictates of an erroneous conscience? We may
as well call that conscience which leads the Ranter into uncleanness: which
urges the Arrian to blaspheme Christ, and which induces the poor Indian to
offer humane blood in sacrifice to the Divill. No: Conscience in St. Paul's
sense (whom Calvin follows) is that Agent of God in the soul which holds forth
to us the lamp of Nature (or rather of God creating us) improved further with
the oil of grace (or rather of God redeeming us) to show us the uglines of ^in,
and the beauty of righteousness: and as this Agent of God never mis-instructs
us, so neither are its instances with us ever to be rejected under pretense of
any humane ordinances and powers whatsoever contradicting. Whatsoever is not of
faith is sin: and that cannot be of faith, which is not clearly warranted ^y
the Word of God: therefore to follow an erroneous persuasion, under the name of
Conscience, is sinful, unfaithful, and unwarranted by the word of God. The
Considerator pleads his doubts, and scruples, and fears, as the dictates of his
conscience against the Engagement: alas conscience, i^ i^ be unde^iled, pure,
and faithful (such as Calvin out of St. Paul intimates) is above all doubts*
fears, and scruples, at least it is far predominant over them. And let the
Considerator deal ingenuously with himself, and search strictly into the
darkest retirements of that, which He calls conscience: and He shall find, that
doubts, fears, and scruples assail him on the one hand, as well as on the
other. If the Considerat^n be not fully satisfied in this, that He may be true,
and faithful to the present Government; I dare tell him, and that from his own
mouth too, He is as ill satisfied in this, that He may disobey the Magistrate
under whose protection He lives, in denying an assurance of his truth and
loyalty, when it is not only a command, but a command so necessary for
securance of the public peace. Can we then imagine, that Conscience Gods
resident in the Soul is divided against it self? or can we imagine, that that
trumpet which sounds points of war so contrary is to be obeyed, above all Laws,
and Ordinances? and revered as Gods resident? The Considerator will say: if I
have my dissatisfactions both ways, how shall I extricate my self either way?
how shall I engage, or not engage without sin, since neither engaging, nor
refusing is of faith with me? is it not in this case my safest course to obey
that instinct, or prompting of my conscience which is most powerful, and least
opposite to faith? I answer, God has not left thee without an issue, and a way
to escape out of the midst of these perplexities. For all cases are either
certain, or dubious; and in all cases certain God has made every man a Judge:
and has left in every man that which we call Conscience to negotiate in his
behalf; and the judgment which Conscience passes herein, is beyond all other
Laws, and Jurisdictions. But i^ dubious cases, God has not left every man a
Judge; private men against their own opinions are to conform to the sentences
of their Commissioned Magistrates; and in so doing they violate not their
consciences, they rather do that for which they have a sure warrant, such a
warrant as faith may rest upon, and Conscience be quieted by. By this warrant,
the Apostles, and their followers did pay due allegiance to the Caesar's, the
worst of men, and most injurious of usurpers: though it was more then probable
in those days, that their Titles were gotten, and maintained by force, fraud,
and bloody rapine. Who knows not, that in that infancy of the Church Herod had
newly usurpt over the Jews, that the Romans usurpt over him, and were in like
manner presently after usurpt over by the Caesar's: yea that even in the family
of the Caesar's, there were almost continual usurpations?

But the Considerator will still say: can Conscience permit me to dispense with
Oaths formerly taken by submitting now to contrary, inconsistent Engagements?
is not this a thing evidently, and indubitably evil? and is not Conscience a
sufficient Judge of things so evident, and indubitable? I answer. 1. Where man
is hemmed in, with two unavoidable evils, the less is to be chosen: and the
choice of the less, is no sin, but a duty. When man cannot preserve himself,
or some other living Creature without transgressing a Sabbath duty, the
transgressing of that duty becomes an office of charity: because the means by
its subordination was necessarily to give way to the end. 2ly, To submit to a
new obligation which is conducent to the public good, and to wave a former
contrary obligation, when it is become opposite to its first end is no evident,
indubitable evil. The Law by Oath bound the King, and all under him to maintain
the ancient rights, usages, and Statutes of the Land: yet when any change of
those rights, usages, and Statutes became necessary for the public good, we
are all satisfied that the King and all under him gave way to that change
without perjury. So if we have been sworn to maintain Monarchy, the form of
government being but subordinate to an higher end, when Monarchy becomes
destructive to that end, the force of our Oath ceases: for Laws create forms,
and Laws uphold forms by Oaths; but neither forms, nor oaths bind longer then
the Laws: and we see, there is a subordination even amongst Laws themselves,
and by the rules of that subordination, temporary Laws are to yield to
perpetual Laws, conditional to absolute; mediate, to final. When Nature
permits heavy bodies contrary to the Law of heavy bodies to ascend, for the
prevention of some greater breach of some Law that concerns all the Elements,
and the peace of the universe: it teaches us, what we are to do in politics. I
leave these things to the Considerators own application. The Magistrate which
is now girt with Gods sword, requires an assurance from him of his allegiance
for the better preventing of future broils, and disturbances. His private
phancie tells him that assurance is due to some other Magistrate, which if He
may judge of secret reasons of State, and things above Him, has more right to
the Sword: yet in the mean time doubts, whether God has entrusted him with any
such judgment, or no: and He sees his example keeps the public Peace the more
unsettled, and He forfeits the protection of Law to Himself, by denying his
obedience to the same: I say no more: the Considerator here is hedged in with
two inevitable evils, let him consider, whether is the greater.

Errata. Page 29. line ^2. for dishonouring, read dischotomizing.

FINIS.

