AN ANSWER TO A PAPER ENTITLED THE CASE Of the Protestant DISSENTERS Of
IRELAND, In Reference to a BILL of Indulgence, Represented and Argued.
THERE being a Paper lately Published, Intitul'd, The Case of the Protestant
Dissenters of Ireland, in Reference to a Bill of Indulgence, Represented, and
Argued. I shall endeavor to show, that tho, the Author has truly Represented
the Desires of the Dissenting Protestants among us, yet he has weakly Argued
for the granting of them.

The Desires of the Dissenting Protestants, he Comprises in these Two
Propositions; First, that by a Bill of Indulgence a full Security for the free
Exercise of Religion according to their Consciences may be given them.
Secondly, That there be no such Clauses annex't to it, as may Disable 'em from
Serving their King, and their Country.

As to the first of these Desires, I believe there are few or none but will
agree to secure to 'em by Law, the Free Exercise of their Religion, tho it is
plain, the Authors Arguments do not evince the necessity of it, as may appear
by a distinct Consideration of 'em. The first of which is this, That since our
Security consists in the Number and Union of Protestants, this Bill will
promote both, by drawing Protestant Dissenters from abroad, and by Uniting
those at home, and by securing their Affections to the Government, that grants
'em this Indulgence. Now to this, I answer:

First, That this Indulgence will tend rather to the multiplicity of Sects,
than to the increase of the Number of Protestants, and will most successfully
promote those very Designs, which our Author vainly imagins it the best
Expedient to obstruct; For a general Indulgence has always proved instrumental
to the advancing the Popish Interest among us, and has therefore been
vigorously promoted by Popish Emissaries in England, and that by express Orders
from their Superiors abroad, who have Experimentally found it to be the most
effectual method of Introducing Popery into a Country, and have expended very
Considerable sums of Money, for the purchase of Tolerations to Dissenters.

Before I reply to what is said, concerning drawing over Protestant Dissenters
from abroad, by this Bill of Indulgence; I shall propose this Question, whether
the Granting Liberty of Conscience, with the Sacramental Test, will not be as
effectual to the Peopling of this Kingdom with English Conformists, as a
general Toleration, without restrictive Clauses to the planting of it with
Scotch Dissenters? But to return, I presume by what the Author says, concerning
drawing over Protestant Dissenters from abroad; he cannot mean Foreigners,
because he acknowledges them to be provided for, by an Act past the last
Parliament in their Favor. He must therefore wholly, or more especially design
the Dissenting Protestants of Scotland: Now in Reference to these, I leave it
to the serious Consideration of every judicious, and impartial Reader, First,
whether that Sect among 'em, whose violent Principles have unqualified 'em for
Indulgence there should be Tolerated here? Can we Reasonably expect, that those
who are so Turbulent in their own Country, should be quiet in ours? Or that by
their being Transplanted into another Soil, and by a kind and Indulgent
Cultivation of them, we may gather Figs off this sharpest sort of Thistles?
Secondly, whether the Free and Public exercise of Religion should be Indulged
to others of them, who have publicly Declared our Church Government to be
Antichristian, and have solemnly sworn to Extirpate Prelacy? Thirdly, whether
those that are the most moderate among 'em, can with Reason expect, but that
with the same measure they have Meted to their Brethren, the Episcopal Clergy
in their own Country, it should be measured to them again, when they come to
settle in this Kingdom? So that if any Indulgence be granted, it is purely the
Result of our own Charitable Inclinations, and a plain Evidence to the World,
that our just Resentments of their Severity to others, has not Alienated our
affections from them.

Neither will this Indulgence probably tend to the Uniting of Protestants at
home, as is too fully proved by Experience in England; where the present
Toleration has not had that good effect; neither can we in Reason expect it
should be more Successful here; for if it equally extend to all Parties and
Denominations of Protestant Dissenters, their mutual jealousies of one another,
and their Respective endeavors to propagate their Opinions, and to promote
their Temporal Interests, will naturally create great Heats and Animosities;
but if the benefit of the Indulgence be unequally distributed, it will be so
far from being a means of supporting, that it will considerably weaken the
Government by disobliging all, but those that are particularly Encouraged, and
Caressed by it.

But Secondly, as this Indulgence is not Necessary for the common Protestant
Interest in this Kingdom; so neither is it so highly reasonable, as the Author
pretends, as may appear, by a particular Consideration of the Arguments he
makes use of to prove it. For first, as the early Zeal of the Dissenters, in
behalf of this Government, may Entitle 'em to its Protection, so it cannot be
denied but that they have enjoyed it ever since the Revolution, and have
Received more than ordinary marks of Royal Favor, partly by the free Liberty
that is granted 'em throughout the Kingdom, for the public Exercise of their
Religion, and for the Building of Meeting Houses, even in Corporate Towns; as
also by his Majesty's bounty, in allowing Yearly hitherto a considerable Sum
for the maintenance of their Ministers.

Secondly, there seems to be more than ordinary Reason to make an Act in behalf
of Foreign Protestants, because they are found by experience to have more
favorable Thoughts of; and more forward Inclinations to our Church Government
and Worship, than others have. And besides, it is Observable, that the free
Exercise of Religion, which was granted 'em by the late Act, was to continue
but for seven Years, in which time it was supposed they might Learn our
Language, and be Instructed in the Principles and Worship of the Established
Church, and 'twas with good Reason hoped that after the Expiration of that
Term. ^^ey would declare themselves Members of our Communion. And I Am credibly
Informed, that of Eleven Congregations of Foreign Protestants in London, there
are Nine Conformists.

Thirdly, The Papists are not in equal circumstances of public Favor with our
Dissenting Brethren; for as the Liberty they have in the Exercise of their
Religion, was extorted from the Government, by the pressing necessity of
public Affairs, so it is not confirmed to them by any Act of Parliament, as
this Indulgence is expected, and I suppose, designed to be to the Dissenters.

And Fourthly, the experience that our Dissenting Brethren have had of our
Tenderness toward them heretofore, is a sufficient Argument and Security to
'em of our future Kindness; for we consider our mutual Agreement in the same
Articles of Faith, and are glad this Author is pleased to declare, That the
suppressing of Protestant Dissenters, by the strict execution of Penal Laws, is
a Practice that has a just Odium left upon it; but are sorry, That the just
Odium left upon it among us, should be wholly confined to us, and that this
Practice should have no Censure, nor Reflection cast upon it among our
Neighbors: And it is strange, that the Author should say, that there is so
apparent a contrariety in it, to the mild and merciful Genius of our Holy
Religion, seeing he cannot but know the time when it was an avowed Doctrine, and
a General Practice among the Presbyterians and Independants, to bar the Members
of the Church of England from the Free Exercise of Divine Worship according to
their Consciences: And it is as strange, that this Practice should be so
apparently contrary to our Holy Religion, and have so mischievous Effects upon
the public Peace here in this Kingdom, and yet be thought so great an Evidence
of a truly Christian Zeal, and so effectual an Instrument of public Good in
Scotland; and how possibly can our Author hope, That all Protestants are in
this Point come to a better Temper, than to gratify their Enemies by Ruining
their Brethren, when there is so plain a Demonstration of the contrary; unless
he be of Opinion, that what is accounted a Warm and Sanguine Temper of Religion
there, is to be esteemed the raging Heat of a malignant Feavor here.

Fourthly, as concerning the establishing Toleration by a Law; the Reason why
some may be against it, is not (as our Author does invidiously insinuate) that
they wait for a more favorable opportunity of Reviving the former Severities,
but that they may still have it in their Power to show their Tenderness to
their Dissenting Brethren, and may prevent, or repress the misdemeanors that
some Nonconformists may possibly be Guilty of, if they had a Legal Toleration;
as also, that they may secure the Established Religion they profess, against
the Dangerous Consequences they fear from a General Indulgence.

And Lastly, as to what he says concerning His Majesty's Declaration, I desire
this Author to consider more seriously, whether there be not some others in the
Three Kingdoms besides the Protestant Dissenters of Ireland, to whom One great
end of His Majesty's Declaration is yet unaccomplish'd) and whether there be a
Law made to cover the Protestant Episcopal Clergy in Scotland, from Persecution
on the Account of Religion.

By all which it may plainly be perceived, That it is not by force of the
Authors Arguments for the Necessity, or Reasonableness of Toleration, but
purely in compliance to the importunate Desires of our Dissenting Brethren,
that the Members of the Established Church are inclined to grant 'em a General
and Legal Indulgence, as Parents do often humor their Children, in giving 'em
those things they eagerly desire, which though pleasant to their Pallates, are
yet many times prejudicial to their Health,

And now, I proceed to the Second Desire of the Protestant Dissenters, which
is, That there may be no such Clauses annexed to this Bill, as would disable 'em
from serving their King and their Country; which in plain terms is no more than
this; That whereas the Ease to Tender Consciences was the only thing they
formerly desired; they now Claim it as their due, to be admitted also into all
Honorable and Profitable Employments, and without these, whatever Ease may be
given to their Consciences, it is to be feared they will have no quiet in their
Minds.

But let us hear our Authors Auguments for granting this Bill of Indulgence,
without a Sacramental Test annexed. First he tells us, That the Sacrament Test
in England was chiefly designed against Papists, but it is also plain, it was
intended against Protestant Dissenters too; for though none but the former be
mentioned in the Title, yet the latter are included in the Body of the Act; and
if the Zeal of the English Dissenters against Popery in the late times has not
exempted them from a Sacramental Test; our Dissenting Brethren in this Kingdom,
cannot with Modesty expect, that their late Services should Entitle them to any
such Immunities.

Secondly, He tells us such a Test for disabling Protestant Dissenters for any
public Service, is against the common Protestant Interest of Ireland. Our
Circumstances indeed vastly differ, as he says, from those of England, for here
the Established Church is more in Danger than there, by the Protestant
Dissenters, as well as by the common Enemy: In England one unmixt People does
compose the main body of the Nation, which continues still the same; but here
we are made up of several Nations, and there is a daily Accession of great
Numbers from a Neighboring Country, of whom the meaner sort, are generally of
a different Communion from the Established Church. Though the Nobility and
Gentry, (to their great praise be it spoken) are generaly Conformists. It Is
possible inded, as he Observes That the Irish may be more Numerous, if there
should be a General Peace, and I may add, That it is highly probable, that the
Papists will grow much more Numerous, if there should be a General Indulgence;
and therefore, notwithstanding our Authors Opinion, we cannot think it
Reasonable to give the Protestant Interest a wider Bassis here, than it has in
Holland (which is a Place of greatest Liberty in Matters of Religion) where all
Protestants are not equally capable of Employments without Religious Tests. As
to what he says, concerning the Danger of a future Rebellion, we hope, that by
the late Acts of Parliament made against the Papists, and the diligence of the
Magistrates in putting them in Execution, the Irish may be disabled for any New
Insurrections; or if we should fall into the same unhappy Circumstances that we
have been lately in, we have Reason to believe, Notwithstanding the Authors
disadvantagious Representation of the Temper of the Dissenters (wherein he
intimates, that the excluding them from public Offices, would incline 'em in
future Dangers to desert the public Service (the foreboding of which seems
equivalent to an Advice to them, and a Menace to us) Notwithstanding this, I
say, we have Reason to believe, that the Consideration of the common Safety,
and their Gratitude for their Indulgence, which they now expect, would engage
'em to show an equal Zeal to what they did before, though they should not be
wholly on equal Terms with us, since they could not reasonably hope for so kind
a Treatment from the Papists, as they have had from us,

Thirdly, To what the Author says, to prove, That it does not seem agreeable to
the Judgment of the Parliament of England, that any such Test should be imposed
here; I answer, That as the Substituting the New Oaths, and the Declaration or
Test against Popery instead of the Oath of Supremacy did not Repeal the Statute
that enjoins the Sacrament Test in England; so neither can it with the least
shadow of Reason be alleged, That the English Act for the Abrogating the Oath
of Supremacy in Ireland, etc. ought to be construed as intended, to prevent the
imposing of it here, in case a General Indulgence should be Granted to the
Protestant Dissenters in this Kingdom.

Fourthly, To the first Argument produced by the Author, to prove a Sacrament
Test to be as unreasonable as it is dangerous; Viz. That it will put the
Protestant Dissenters into worse Circumstances, than they are in at present; I
may with great Justice and Reason, Reply, that whatever hardships the
Dissenters may pretend, they should be under by those Restrictions; I am sure
the Members of the Established Church would be in far worse Circumstances than
they now are in, if an Indulgence should be Granted without those Clauses.

First, It Is too Notorious to be denied, That the Conformists at Sligo, and
Crum, at Inniskillen and Derry, did appear at least as early, and Act as
Zealously for this Government as the Dissenters; and consequently the
Conformists will have Reason to think themselves severely dealt with, if no
other way can be found of Rewarding the Services of the former, without the
apparent hazarding the most valuable Rights of the latter, by Granting the
Dissenters such an Indulgence, and by admitting them into such Offices as may
give 'em Power and Opportunity to alter the whole Frame of the present Church
Government.

Secondly, As to what is said concerning the Sacraments not being a fit Test of
Admission into Offices; I observe, First, that the Arguments he makes use of in
this matter, are much the same with those that were urged in the late Reign,
for the taking off the Penal Laws and Test. Secondly, I answer more distinctly.
That by this Sacramental Test, we do not prostitute that Holy Institution to
mean and worldly Purposes, as our Author insinuates; but Religion being the
great Band of Humane Society, it is highly Reasonable, that those Persons should
be Rewarded, as well as Entrusted with Employments in the State that give the
greatest Evidences of their Piety to Almighty God; And if this Argument of our
Authors be valid, 'twill not only conclude against this but all other Religious
Tests; and then the most Scandalous Neglects of Holy Duties, must not be
accounted a sufficient Bar to an Admission into the most considerable Offices,
for fear of Prostituting the Ordinances of Divine Worship, and of Driving
Unworthy Persons to a participation of those Sacred Mysteries; And if, as our
Author says, the Interest of Religion is very little concerned in the Posture
of Receiving the Holy Sacrament; why should any Person separate from the
Communion of the Established Church, on Account of that which our Author is
pleased to call a Trivial Matter, and a Trifle: But if any Man refuse to give
the State so Trivial and inconsiderable a Mark of his Compliance to its Orders
and Injunctions: There is no Reason why such an one should be entrusted with
the Management of the Civil and Military Offices, or that they should be
esteemed such Useful Persons, that it should be thought the Interest of the
Government to comprehend 'em.

The Case that our Author puts of a Man endued with Eminent Wisdom; Integrity,
etc. is scarcely to be be supposed; for no Man surely, that deserves that
Character, will unqualifie himself to serve his King, his Country, and his
Temporal Interest too, by refusing to Receive the Holy Sacrament in such a
Posture, which our Author acknowledges, is more expressive of our Reverence to
our Savior, than that which is in Use among the Dissenters.

However, as a Reward to those that have been more than ordinarily Remarkable
for their Services to His Majesty, and are now in any Civil, or Military
Employment, it may perhaps be thought convenient, that Persons so Qualified,
may be excepted as Nominees, and hold their Offices, notwithstanding their
Refusal of the Sacramental Test.

Lastly, whereas our Author says, that the Established Church will be no way
endangered by the Indulgence he is pleading for, I answer that though the Honors
and Revenues of the Clergy are now secured to 'em, yet we cannot foresee the
Difficulties the Conforming Clergy may possibly contest with, in asserting the
Rites of the Church, if Nonconformists were Qualified for Civil Offices; and
besides, we are far less concerned for the security of our Temporal Interest,
than for the Establishment of our Ancient, Holy and Peaceable Religion.

I am far from detracting from the good Services which the Dissenters did the
King and the Nation, in being joint Instruments with the Conformists in the
Preservation of Derry and Inniskillin; nor would I exclude 'em from a Capacity
of concurring to preserve their Country again. But as in the late Troubles
common Safety, and the public Interest of the Nation did oblige 'em to take up
Arms, so if a like juncture should happen, (which God forbid) they may be in
the same Circumstances to serve their King and Country as before, though they be
not Legally qualified for Offices, by a General and Unlimited Indulgence.

As to the Authors Commendations of the Peaceable Temper of the Dissenters of
this Kingdom, it is to be Observed, That they have not had the same
opportunities of discovering their unpeaceable Turbulency toward their
Neighbors, as their Brethren in Scotland at present have, or of expressing
their Dissatisfaction to the Government, as both they and the Dissenters in
England have formerly had; but if ever they should be in the like Circumstances
here, we have no great Reason to expect much more favorable Usage, nor the
Government a more Dutiful Obedience from them.

Good Nature and common Prudence will indeed direct us to provide for our own
Security, by condescending to all the Reasonable Requests of our Dissenting
Friends; but no Motives ought to prevail on us, to make such Large Concessions
to them, as will in all probability shake the very Foundations of the
Established Church.

DUBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray at the 3 Nags-Heads in Essex-street, 1695.


