A Short, Legal, Medicinal, Useful, Safe, Easy PRESCRIPTION

To recover Our Kingdom, Church, Nation from their present dangerous,
distractive, destructive CONFUSION And worse than Bedlam Madness;

SERIOUSLY Recommended to all English Freemen who desire Peace, Safety,
Liberty, Settlement.

By William Prynne, Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns. Inn.

Judges 19. 30. Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. Prove. 12,
19, 20. Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the
counselors of peace is joy: There shall no evil happen to the just, but the
wicked shall be filled with mischief. LONDON: Printed in the Year of General
Monck's Invasion, 1659.

A short, legal, medicinal, useful, safe, easy, Prescription, etc.
THe Ambition, Treachery, Turbulency, Avarice, and late infused Jesuiticall
Principles of some swaying Officers in the Parliaments Army, aspiring after the
Supreme Authority, Government, and public Revenues of our three Kingdoms,
having so far corrupted their Judgments, seared their Consciences, depraved
their Wills, and hardened their Hearts, as openly, frequently to violate all
sacred Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Obligations, Trusts, Commissions, Engagements,
to the late King, his Heirs and S^^cessors; the old Parliament, Kingdom,
Nation; (for whose defense, they were originally raised, Commissioned) and to
their own new-created Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes, Conventions, Protectors, and
Conventicies, which they have all successively subverted, engrossing the
Sovereign Royal, and Parliamental Power into their own hands, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. 4.
opposing and advancing themselves (by mere Treachery, Perjury, Violence, and
other desperate ways of unrighteousness) like that man of sin, and Mystery of
Iniquity, above all that is worshipped and called God; making no less then
three public Revolutions of our Government, and forcibly dissolving two
Parliaments (as they deemed them) of their own modelling, See their
Declaration, May 6. 1659.
convening, within six Months space, last past; and thereby made our formerly
renowned Nations, the scorn, reproach, wonder, derision of all the world;
themselves the Monsters of Men, the shame of Christianity, Chivalry; exposed
our three Nations to the uttermost extremity of danger, by new unpresidented
Ataxies, Divisions, Encroachments upon their Hereditary Rights, Liberties,
Properties, caused a total decay of all sorts of Trade, Justice, Legal
proceedings at home, and occasioned a speedy, much feared Ivasion from our
potent combined Popish adversaries abroad, when thus miserably distracted,
discontented, impoverished, and totally disabled to repulse them: It is high
time for every publick-spirited Elishman, in this strange, distracting
Confusion, (which has almost as much divided, discontented all conscientious
Officers, Soldiers in the Army, Navy, as the people of all Callings,
Conditions) to contribute their best advice, by all just, legal, hopeful,
speedy ways, agreeable with the Laws of God, and the Land, and those Rights,
Liberties of the people, (the defense whereof all Officers, Soldiers in the
Army, have so See their Collection of Engagements, Remonstrances, etc. for
settling the Subjects in their just Liberties and Freedoms, London, 1657.
frequently, constantly avowed they were principally raised, and Resolved to
defend, though they have hitherto failed in their promises) to recover us ou^
of the Labyrinth of our almost inexetricable ^mazing Confusions, settle o^
pernicious distractions, and prevent that visible, imm^nent, universal
desolation, else likely to fall upon our Church, State, Nation, Religion,
beyond all possibil^ty of escape, through the Army Officers rash destructive
Counsels, and violations of their Trusts, Oaths, Engagements, both as
Soldiers, Christians, and Members of the K^ngdome.

The only just, legal, probable means now left that I can prescribe, both for
our Nation, Churches, Armies present and future safety too (if they will
cordially and Christianly submit thereto, as they oug^ht in Conscience,
Justice, prudence) is,

1. For all the ancient Nobility of the Kingdom (the Sea my Plea for the
Lords, p. 43. 51, to 60.
Hereditary Great Counsel and Counselors of the Nation in all Actual
Interregnums, and public Confusions, (as our Historians, Law Books, and the
Commons themselves in ^he long Parliament Resolved) both by Custom, Law,
Right) to assemble themselves by Common consent at Westminster, or so many of
them at least, or their Heirs if dead, who constantly adhered to the long
Parliament; and there to issue out Writs according to the Statute of 16 Ca^o^^
cap. 1. on the third Monday of Nov^mber next, under 12 or more of their hands
and Seals, for a free and legal Election of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses,
Barons, in every City, County, Borough, Port, according to former usage, to
appear at the Parl^ament-house in Westminster, the third Monday in January next
^^^suing, at a Parliament then and there to be held, in such manner and form as
this Act prescribes; wherein such Proposalls and Counsels may by common
consent be pursued, as may through Gods blessing, soon restore our pristine
Peace, Trade, Honor, Wealth, Prosperity, Felicity, Settlement, and secure us
from all future changes.

2ly. For all Freeholders in every County of the Kingdom, at the next County
Court in November, to meet together, and make choice of the ablest, honestest,
^^^est, stoutest Gentlemen for their Sheriffs, to keep the Peace of the County,
command the Militio, suppress all Insurrections, elect, return Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, to serve in Parliament, and execute the Office of a
Sheriff; it being their ancient legal Right and Privilege, by special Grants
of our Kings, both in and out of Parliament, which none in late, or present
power ought to encroach upon, or deprive them of, and they are all now bound to
exercise and maintain for their own preservation and safety. This their right I
shall clearly evidence beyond contradiction.

1 By the peoples ancient Right Edward the Confessors time, or before, in their
Folkmo^^ to choose an He^etoke (a Baron or person of quality) in every County,
in nature of a Ca^^^in, who had the power of the County and Militia in every
shire (...) et Uicec^mites Provinciatum et Cemitatuum ^ligi beb^nt per singu^os
Cemitatus in pleno Folkmoto: as Sheriffs of Provinces and Counties ought to be
chosen in every County; as you may read at large in Mr. Lambards Arckaion, ^.
135 de Hetetochiis; in Sir Henry Spelmans Glossarium, Dux and Heretochius, p.
232, 348 349. My Sovereign power of Parliaments, part 2. p. 24, 25. Cooks 2
Institutes, p. 174, 175.

2 By Rot Claus. Anno 16 Johannis Regis, part 2. m. 2. dorso. Dominus Rex
concessit Baro^ibus suis, Militibus and liber e tenentibus de Cornubia, qued
habeant Vicecomitem de aliquo ipsorum ad Electionem eorum. Idem vero Barons,
Mi^ites, and ^ibere ten^ntes conce^sserunt Willielmo (...), quod h^beat
Hund^edum de Estweneleser ad feodi firmam, sibi and haeredibus suis
imperpetuum, per dimidium marci Argenti, ad ^estum Sancti Michaelis reddendum.

3ly. By Rot. Pat. An. 5 H. 3. memb. 6. H. Dei gratia etc. Archiepiscopis, De
Com. Cornub.
Episco i^, C^mitibus B^ronibus, Militibus, libere tenentibus and al^is omnibus
de Com. Corn^b. salut^m. (...) quod concessimus Vobis quod l^beram (...)
electionem el^gend vobis in Vicecomi^em nostrum unum de Com. (...). Et ideo
veb^s mandamus quod ^ligatis tres ^ideles and discr^tes de Com Cornu^. and
illos nobis praesentari fac. apud London in Octab. Clausi Pasche, and nos (...)
ex illis t^ibus prout nob^s placuerit. Vobis dabimus ad (...). Et interi^s
commissimus Com. tatum illum Cornub. cum emnibus illis (...) ad (...) dilecto
and fideli nost^o Reginaldo de Valle^orta (...). (...) que mind ^mus qualinus
eidem Reginaldo usque ad piaedictum (...) and respondentes in omnibus, tanquam
Vic. nostro and (...) nostro, (...) in (...), etc. T. (...). de Bu^go, etc.
(...) Westminster. x^viij d^e (...) 5 0.

4y. By B^t. 10. H. 3. memb. 4. R^x (...), (...), De V^Wct. electo in Com. Su^.
and D^rset.
Prio^ibus, Comitibus Baronibus, Militibus, (...) and omnibus aliis de
communibus (...) and (...) (...). (...) q^od (...) de. Willo: sil Henr. ad V^c
nost^um (...). (...). (...) and (...) (...) nost^um (...). Et ideo vobis
mandamu^ quo^ (...) Vic nostro (...) nobis (...) i^tendentes fitis and (...).
In (...) etc. Test Rege apud W^nton x^vij die Jan.

5ly. By Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster, Daniel, and others, who record, That in
the 45 year of King Henry the 3d, the King placed new Sher^ff^ in every County,
displacing the Sheriffs the Barons and people had made; whereupon the people in
every County, manfully resisted the Sheriffs, and would not obey, nor regard
nor answer them in any thing, whereat the King was much troubled. Much less
then ought they now to ob^y any Sheriffs obtruded on them by the Army Officers,
or any other illegal us^rped power.

6ly. By the Statute of Articuli super chartas, Anno 28 E. 1. chap. 8. The King
has granted to his people, that they shall have the Election of Sheriffs in
every Shire (where the Shrivalty is not of fee) if they w^^^ And chap. 13. For
as much as the King has granted the Election of S^eriffs to the Commons of the
Shire, the King wills, that they shall choose such Sheriffs as shall not
charge them, and that they shall not put in any Officer for rewards or bribes.
And that they shall not lodge too often in one place, nor with poor persons, nor
with men of Religion. By which Statutes, (being but confirmations of the
peoples former rights by custom, or Kings g^an^s (...) which some of them
encroached, which was the occasion of these acts) all Counties used to elect
their Sheriffs: And if they elected any mean or unfitting person, as they
sometimes did, He then commanded them by his Writs to choose another who was fit
to discharge that Office; witness this memorable Record ensuing.

Cl. 31 E. 2. m. 13. dur^^. Rex Coronatoribus and toti communitati Comitatum
Salop. and Stafford. salutem. Cum nuper pro communi utilitate regni nostri De
Vic. elig.
inter alia concesserimus populo ejusdem regni, quod habeat si voluerit
electionem Vic. in singulis comitatibus dicti regni cum opus suerit Vicecom.
praedict. in eisdem, ubi videlicet Vicecomes de feodo non existit. Ac Rieus: de
Harleigh p^r vos in Vic. comitatuum praed^ctorum nuper electus, ad officium
illud faciendum minus sufficiens est, sicut ex testimonio fidedigno accepimus:
Vobis manda^^^ quod aliquem qui melius sciat and possit officio Vic. dictorum
comitatum intendere and utilior fuerit ad idem of fictum exequendum in Vic.
corundem comitatuum pro vobis, si volueritis, eligatis, and ipsum sic electum
per aliquem legalem and circumspectum hominem ex part vestra cum literis,
vestris patentibus sub sig^^is sex de discretioribus and probioribus Mil.
eorund^m comitatuum These. and Baronib. nostris de Scaccario in erastino Sancti
Michaelis prox suturi sine dilatione praesente^is, ut ipse tunc ibidem
praestito sicut mo^is est sacrament^, extunc ea faciat and exerceat, que ad of
sicium Vicecomitis peatinent in com. prudictis. Et habeat^s ^bi tunc hoc breve.
Scituri, quod si talem per vos electum modo praedicto non praesentaveritis
coram prafatis These. and Baronibus nostris in crastin^ pradicto, praedicti
These. and Barons extunc nobis de ali^ Vicecomite Vobis praeficiendo in defectu
vestri providebunt. Test Rege apud Sarum. wi. die April.

8ly. By Claus. 12 E. 3. pars 2. m. 15. Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 3. dors. 16.
Claus. 14 E. 3. pars 2. m. 3. De Uicecemitibus Eligendis per totam Angliani:
wherein are several Writs issued authorizing and commanding the people to elect
their Sheriffs in every County throughout England, with other Records to the
like effect over-tedious to recite at large.

9ly. By Mr. Lambards Archaion. f. 135. and Sir Edward Cooks 2. Institutes on
Magna Charta, p. 174, 175, 558, 559, 566. who resolve, That Sheriffs in ancient
times were and often to be chosen by the Freeholders, of the County in the County
Court, as Conservators of the Peace, Coroners, Verderers, Constables, Petty
Constables, were then and since Elected likewise by the People; as well by the
Kings Writs, as without them, in cases of necessity.

Xly. By the constant custom of all Corporations which are Counties within
themselves, having power Annually to choose Sheriffs only by the Kings Charters,
without any special Writ, as London, Bristol, Gloucester, York, Canterbury
Coventry, etc. use to do. Therefore every County in England and Wales, may do
the like without any special Writs, being a necessary annual, ancient
standing Office, especially in these confused times, when none have any legal
Authority to issue out Writs or Commissions to elect or swear Sheriffs, by
virtue of the premised Statutes: And the Army Officers, with other self-created
Usurping Powers, may as lawfully obtrude Mayors, Sheriffs, and other Officers
on every Corporation of England without their Election, and deprive them of
their freedom to elect them; as thrust Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Coroners, or other eligible Officers upon Counties; and rob them of this their
just ancient right and privilege; now strenuously to be revived, asserted for
their common safety, against all encroachments thereon. The Statute of
Westminster 1. chapter 5. enacting, declaring, That all Elections ought to be free,
and not disturbed by force of Arms under great forfeitu^es by no Great men nor
others.

3ly. Let all Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports, make choice of the wisest,
ablest, stout^st, discreetest Persons, such as are best affected to Peace,
Settlement, and the Nations publi^e Interest, for their Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses; not of raw, unexperienced, timorous, or time-serving, unstable,
selfseeking, turbulent men.

4ly. Let all Counties, Cities, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Clergymen, and
Freemen of the Nation, unanimously resolve, to obey no new, illegal,
tyrannical, upstart Powers, Officers, Conventicles, Committees or Counc^ls of
men whatsoever forcibly obtruded on them; nor to execute any of their Orders or
Commands; but only to obey such legal Officers as themselves shall legally
elect, or a Free Parliament duly elected by them: nor pay any Taxes, Customs,
Imposts, Excises, Contributions whatsoever, to any Officers, Soldiers,
Collectors, but such as shall be imposed by common consent in a Free and
Lawful Parliament, it being their ancient Birthright (for defense whereof the
Army was first raised) ratified not only by sundry ancient Statutes, and the
late Petition of Right, but several Acts, Votes, Declarations, Judgments of the
last long Parliament of King Charles, acknowledged in the Instrument of
Government it self, the late Petition and Advice, the Armies own former
Declarations, and the late dissolved Juncto in their very last Knack of the 12.
of this instant October, their Plea and Papers since.

5ly. If any Officers, and Soldiers of the Army, out of faction, ambition,
self ends, or Jesuitical seduction, shall obstinately, traitorously,
maliciously, or tyrannically oppose the People in their Elections of Sheriffs,
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or levy any Taxes, Excises upon them by armed
violence, contrary to all their former-forfeited, now-expired Commissions,
Declarations, Engagements; let them unanimously declare and proceed against
them as professed public Enemies, Traitors to their Native Country; who by
their former and late Treacheries, Rebellions, and unwarrantable proceedings
against all their Superiors, (transcending all Presidents in profane or sacred
Stories) have actually in Law, Justice, forfeited not only all their
Commissions, Commands, and Arrears of pay, but their very lives, Lands,
Estates; and that our whole 3. Nations by their Solemn League and Covenant, for
their own future preservation, are obliged to bring them to public Justice, as
themselves have proceeded against hundreds, nay thousands of other Delinquents
not half so criminal as themselves: and thereupon entreat all other Officers,
Soldiers in the Army, who have any fear of God, or love to themselves, their
posterities, or Native Country remaining in their breasts, as Moses did the
Congregation of Israel in the Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, who
mutinied the People against him and Aaron, Numb. 16. Depart I pray ye from the
Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in
all their sins. So they gat up from the Tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram
on every side. And as many Officers, Soldiers, as shall thereupon desert the
Tents of their Rebellious Commanders, and contribute their assistance ^or the
speedy calling and safe (...) of a F^ee, Lawful Parliament, without any ^uture
mutinies, to interrupt o^ d^ssolve it when convened according to the premised
Statute of 16 (...), c. 1. let them be assured of their full Arrears, and
indempn^ty for what is past, which none else b^t a Free and Lawful Parliam^nt
can grant them; all ^ther Indempn^ties being vo^d in Law. And if this will not
satisfi^, let them b^ware, lest the earth cleave osunde^ that is under them;
and (...) swallow them up (...), with their houses, men, goods, and all
appertaining to them, and they perish from among the (...), as Korah, (...) and
(...), with their families and adherents ^id, by this or some other exemplary
Judgments, and a universal Insurrection of our three whole discontented,
oppressed, rained Nations against them, which they may justly fear and expect,
if they believe there is a righteous God that judges in the earth, a Lord of
hosts able to scatter, puni^h, execute vengeance on them here, and cast them
into hell for ever hereafter, for their manifold unlamented, reiterated,
transcendent Reb^llions: or repute these Texts Canonical, which I shall
recommend to their saddest Meditations. Prove. 29. 10. He that being often
rep^oved hard^eth his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy, (as the late Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes, and Protectors have been)
Prove. 11. 21. Though hand go in hand, yet the wicked shall not go unpunished.
Psalm. 68. 21. God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of
such a one as goes on still in his Trespasses. Ezech. 24. 14. I the lord h^ve
spoken it, it shall come to pass, I will do it; I will not go back, neither
will I spare, neither will I repent; but according to thy ways and accordings
I will recompense, and they shall judge thee, says the Lord. Col. 3. 25. He
that does wrong, shall receive according to the wrong done, and there is no
respect of persons with God; ^ho can in a moment as easily destroy an whole
Army, and great host of men (as he did 2 Kings 13. 35. 2 Ch^on. 13. 16, 17.
Sennacheribs, (...), and other Armies) as any one single person.

October the (...) 1659. the day of King-condemning John (...) death, and
translation to his proper place and arraignment in the Highest Court of (...).
FINIS.

