THE HISTORY OF Popedom, Containing the RISE, PROGRESS, AND DECAY Thereof, etc.

Written in High Dutch BY SAMUEL PUFFENDORFF.

Translated into English by J. C.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the
Royal Exchange, 1691.

Imprimatur,

C. Alston.
October 2 d. 1690.
To the Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, Dean of the
Chapel Royal, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
This TREATISE is most humbly Dedicated By John Chamberlayne.

CONTENTS.
Paragraph 1. POlitic Reflections on the Spiritual Monarchy of the Pope.

Par. 2. Of the Blindness of the Heathens in Matters of Divinity; what they
proposed to themselves, by choosing the Paths of Virtue; wherein their Religion
consisted.

Par. 3. Of the Jewish Religion; why other Nations did not embrace the Religion
of the Jews.

Par. 4. That the Christian Religion is adapted to the humors of all People;
that it admits no Respect of Persons; that it is not contrary to Civil
Government; that there is no other sort of Religion or Philosophy that can
equal it; why many of our Christians live like Heathens.

Par. 5. Of the External Government of Religion; what is here to be understood
by the External Government of the Christian Religion; of the Ministry of the
Church; of the calling of the Apostles.

Par. 6. The Division of this Question, that this necessity does not proceed
from the nature of every Religion in general; how the External Government of
Religion was transmitted from the Fathers of the Family to the Sovereigns of
each State.

Par. 7. That it is not inconsistent with the Christian Religion for the
Sovereign to have the direction of it as to its External Government.

Par. 8. The First Progress of the Christian Religion; the Divine Conduct in
the Establishment of this Religion; how the Jesuits Preach the Gospel to the
Chinese; why God called the Ignorant rather than the Wise and Learned Men.

Par. 9. The Persecution of the Primitive Church; the New Christians Slandered
and Calumniated; the Romans upon Reasons of State oppose their Religion; the
Roman Persecution condemned.

Par. 10. Of the Ancient Government of the Christian Religion; Differences
arising about Religion Terminated by Assemblies; why the Authority of these
Assemblies ought to be permitted under Heathen Emperors.

Par. 11. That the External Government of the Church by being lodged in the
hands of the Primitive Christians has produced strange disorders; that from
hence some have supposed two Powers in the State; that Ecclesiastics ought to
receive their Call from the Sovereign of each State.

Par. 12. That it was not in Constantin's Power wholly to change the State of
the Church; how the Bishops and other the Ecclesiastics came to Vsurp the
Sovereign Power; that the Sovereign may preside in the Assemblies where
Controversies are treated of; the abuse of Councils.

Par. 13. The Jurisdiction of Bishops abused; other Abuses concerning
Marriages; Ecclesiastical Discipline abused; the Popes misuse the Power of
Excommunication.

Par. 14. The Rise of the Popes Authority; that Ignorance and the Barbarity of
the Age contributed much thereto; the causes of this Ignorance; that ignorance
helped much to the Establishing of the Popedom; the Introduction of Pedantry
into the Schools; that the Politiques of the Greeks and Romans were contrary to
Monarchy; two dangerous effects of the ignorance of Politiques.

Par. 15. Why the Monarch of the Romish Church has chosen Rome for the place of
his Residence; how the Pope Established his Hierarchy; of the Metropolitan
Bishops; how the Bishops of Rome Usurped the Pre-eminence; Reflections on the
Popes Power.

Par. 16. How the Pope came to Domineer over all the Western Part of the World;
of the Confirmation of Bishops by the Pope; Decisions of the Pope;
Dispensations; of the Popes Vicar in France; of the Monk Winifred; the Pope
makes him his Vicar, he advances the Grandeur of the Popes; of the Annates; the
Popes annul the Decisions of Provincial Synods; they force the Bishops to swear
Fidelity to them.

Par. 17. The Riches of the Church, and how first gotten; the Avarice of the
Churchmen, and diverse effects thereof; the Institution of the Crusado a
stratagem of Popes.

Par. 18. Of the great number of Ecclesiastics; the Original of Monks and other
Religious Orders; of the Multitude of Monasteries; of the Order of Begging
Friars; why they chose that sort of Life; the Reasons that induce men now adays
to choose a Monastic Life; that Monks have been very prejudicial to other
Churchmen; that they alone hinder the Bishops from opposing the Pope 's
Authority; that a great many Bishops would be glad to shake off the Yoke of
Rome; that it is the Interest of Bishops to submit to the Pope.

Par. 19. How the Church has shaken off all Temporal Jurisdiction; how the
Bishops of Rome slipped their Neck out of the Emperors Collar.

Par. 20. The Pope implores the French Kings Protection against the Lumbards;
the French enter Italy; they bestow the Exarchat on the Pope; that the Popes
did heretofore hold those Countries under them of the Emperor.

Par. 21. The Popes Establish an Ecclesiastical Sovereignty; Pope Gregory
Excommunicates the Emperor Henry the Fourth; the Pope endeavors to Domineer
over the Emperor; a quarrel between the King of England and his Bishops; that
succeeding Emperors have in vain endeavored to regain their lost Authority.

Par 22. The Pope exalts himself above all Temporal Powers; the use he made of
his Excommunicating Power; how the Pope colored his usurpations; the Pope
takes upon him the cognizance of Matrimonial Affairs; that the Pope allured the
most knowing Men into his service; the unbounded Ambition of Pope Boniface the
Eighth.

Par. 23. The Popes find their Authority opposed; that the great Schisms in the
Church have much weakened their Authority; the first Schism; the second Schism;
the third Schism; the fourth and last Schism; that the Pope has not been able
to Lord it over Councils; the Confession of several Popes concerning the
Authority of Councils; that Popes have been Deposed by Councils.

Par. 24. The removal of the Popes Seat from Rome to Avignon; that it was
prejudicial to the Pope 's Authority; the Pope reduces to his Obedience the
City of Rome; the History of Caesar Borgia natural Son of Alexander the Sixth;
the Ecclesiastical State reunited to the Popedom.

Par. 25. That the Papal Authority received a terrible blow by the Doctrine of
Luther; the Virtues and Vices of Leon the Tenth; of Indulgences; Luther
Preaches against them, and against the Power of the Pope.

Par. 26. That Luther's opposition met with a seasonable juncture of the times;
the miserable State of Christendom at that time; the ignorance of Luther's
adversaries; Erasmus favors Luther; that his silence alone was very
prejudicial to Luther's adversaries; that the Princes of Germany were
unsatisfied with the Pope; why Charles the Fifth was willing that Luther's
Doctrine should make some progress; the Popes ill conduct in the Business of
Luther; the imprudence of Cardinal Cajetan, the effects thereof; Luther appeals
to a Council.

Par 27. Why Luther's Doctrine did not make greater advances; a Schism among
the Protestants; the Protestants abuse the liberty of the Gospel; of the
Academy of Paris; of Zwinglius and Calvin; that Luther took a great many of the
Romish Ceremonies; that the riches of the Church have been one cause of the
progress of Protestant Religion.

Par. 28. The Pope recovers from the fright which Luther had put him into; that
he now acts more cautiously than heretofore; that Priests and Monks live more
regularly at present; of the reestablishing of Learning in the Church of Rome;
the ways of enticing Protestants to that Church; that the House of Austria has
mightily contributed to the Papal Grandeur.

Par. 29. Of the Temporal Dominions of the Pope; of the Countries that are
under his Jurisdiction; of the Popes Militia; of the Popes Interest in relation
to Germany, France, and Spain; that the Pope need not fear the Power of the
other States in Italy.

Par. 30. Of the Popes Spiritual Dominions; that the Pope has different
Interests from those of other Princes; the Foundation of the Papal Monarchy;
that the absolute Power of Popes cannot be proved from Scripture, nor from the
example of the Apostles in General, nor from that of St. Peter in particular;
how the Papists Answer these Objections.

Par. 31. Why the Sovereignty of the Roman Church could not well admit of any
other Form than a Monarchical; that there could not be invented a more regular
Monarchy than that of the Popes; why this Monarchy ought to be Elective; why
the Popes don't Marry; of the Conclave; why the Popes are generally Italians;
why they usually choose an old Man for Pope; why they don't choose one of kin to
the last Pope, nor one that is too much devoted to the French, or Spanish
Interest; of the College of Cardinals; of the Dignity of Cardinals; of their
Number; of their Election; that the Popes always endeavor to enrich their
Kindred with the spoils of the Church; of the Cardinal Patroon; why the chief
Ministers of the Pope are his Nephews.

Par. 32. Of the Celibacy of the Ecclesiastics; of their great number; the
several sorts of Ecclesiastics.

Par. 33. That the Doctrine of the Church of Rome does very well square with
the Popes Interests; that it prohibits the reading the Holy Scriptures; of
Traditions; of Venial and Mortal Sins; of the Remission of Sins; of Works of
satisfaction; of the merit of good Works; of Works of Superrogation; of
Ceremonies and Feasts; of forbidding the Cup; of the Sacrament of Marriage; of
the forbidden Degrees; of extreme Unction; of Purgatory; of the Adoration of
Relics; of the Invocations of Saints and of Canonisation; other means that the
Clergy uses to drain the Purses of ignorant People.

Par. 34. That Universities have been no small means of supporting the Papal
Authority; that the Professors were the Popes Creatures; that the Philosophers
were his Slaves; of the Scholastic Divinity and Philosophy; that the same
Pedantry is yet in vogue.

Par. 35. Why Jesuits intrude themselves into the Government of Schools and
Colleges; the service they render thereby to the Sea of Rome; that they have
insinuated themselves into the Courts of Princes; of the Censuring Books; that
the Romish Priests inspire their auditors with an ill opinion against
Protestants; of the false rumors they spread to their own advantage.

Par. 36. That the Excommunication of the Popes is not so terrible as it used
to be.

Par. 37. The Reasons that oblige these People to stick to the Romish Religion;
that a great many of them do it for Interest, others through ignorance; why
some of them are guilty of Atheism; that there is Preferment in the Roman
Church for all sort of People; why the Princes of the Roman Religion do not
abandon it.

Par. 38. Of those States whose Interest it is to maintain the Authority of the Sea of Rome, of Italy, of Poland, of Portugal, of Germany; that Charles the
Fifth neglected the occasion of making a Reformation in Germany; what had
probably happened if Charles had turned Protestant; of Spain, of France, of the
Formalities that the Nuncioes are obliged to observe in France; a project of
making a Patriarch in France; that the Pope has an aversion for the French
Monarchy; of the principal support of the Popes; of their conduct heretofore in
respect of the Spaniards, and also in respect of the French.

Par. 39. How the Popes stand disposed toward Protestants; why they have
favored them upon certain occasions.

Par. 40. If there are any hopes of an accommodation between the Pope and
Protestants; the Reasons of the Impossibility; that such propositions are
chimerical and dangerous; of the strength of Protestants and Catholics; of the
Protestant States; Divisions between the Protestants; other inconvenients; of
the Jealousy that reigns between the Protestant States; of the Huguenots of
France, of Poland; how strong the Protestants are in Germany, if they are able
alone to defend themselves without the aid of France and Swedeland; that the
security of the Protestant States does not depend on Treaties of the Sovereign
States of the Protestant Religion; of the means of maintaining the Protestant
Religion; whether the Lutherans and Reformed may be brought to any
accommodation; of the Socinians and Anabaptists.

THE HISTORY OF Popedom.
THE POPEDOM may be considered Two ways; First, As it is Doctrine, which is
singular, and different from that of other Christians, does fall in with the
Holy Scripture, and does either impede or promote the means of our Salvation;
the consideration thereof, as it is taken in this Sense, we leave to the
Divines. And Secondly, As the Pope does not only make a very considerable
Figure amongst the rest of the Italian Princes, but does also pretend to the
Sovereignty of Christendom, at least in all Spiritual Affairs; and does in
effect, Exercise such a Supreme Authority over all the States of Europe, that
have the same Sentiments in Religion, with him. It Is this second Consideration,
which particularly and immediately belongs to the Politicians, since such a
spiritual Sovereignty does not only bridle the Supreme Power of every State,
but is altogether absurd, and inconsistent with the nature of such a Power.
Hence is it, That Religion is so confounded and entangled with the politic
Interests of Rome, that he who will understand the latter, must be perfectly
informed of the Rise of that spiritual Monarchy, and by what means it is
Arrived to so prodigious a Growth, and what Intrigues are used to preserve its
usurped Greatness. For thereby, will likewise appear, what relation it has with
the Controversies so rife at present among the Western Christians; and how far
one may attribute those disagreeing Sentiments of Religion, either to different
Interpretations of the Scriptures, or to the prospect of Temporal Interests:
After a strict Examination of which, we will leave it to the Judgment of Wise
and Impartial Men to determine, whether there can be any hopes of a
Reconciliation.

Sect. 2. If we will ascend to the first causes of the thing, we shall find
that before our Savior's Birth, the whole World, excepting the Jewish Nation,
was benighted in the darkest Ignorance of Divine Affairs: For what they did
hold forth in general, concerning the Nature of their Gods, etc. consisted
mostly in improbable and impudent Fables. It Is true, some of the most Learned
among the Heathens, could Discourse more rationally of the Divinity, and State
of the Soul; but it was so dubious, imperfect and illgrounded a Description
they made thereof, that they themselves scarce knew what they meant. The most
of them, were well enough convinced, that they were obliged to the Exercise and
Practice of Virtue, but they knew no farther Effects thereof, than that
Advantage and Honor which they enjoyed thereby in civil Conversation; for as
for what the Poets held forth concerning the Rewards which the just, and the
Torments which the unjust, were to expect after this Life; those that would
pass for the wisest Men, laughed at it, esteeming it nothing more than a witty
Fable, and Bug-bears, invented to frighten the unthinking Mobile, into their
Devoirs. The rest of the People, lived, without proposing to themselves any
other ends, and in that which the Heathens named Religion, there was not to be
found any Rules or Formularies, including the principal Matters of Divinity.
The greatest part of their Divine Worship, consisted in Sacrifices, Ceremonies,
and certain Holy Days, which were more spent in Plays, and Debauches, than any
inquiry into Divine things; so that from such a Heathenish Religion, one could
neither receive any Edification in this Life, nor any hopes of a future
Happiness in the next.

Sect. 3. In those times, the Jews were the only People to whom God vouchsafed
to reveal the True Religion, and means of Eternal Salvation. But betwixt that
and the Christian Religion, the difference is very considerable, not only in
that the Redeemer of the World, and the Fountain of Salvation was represented
to the Jews by Types and Figures, whereas the Christian Religion comprehends
the reality, and accomplishment thereof; but forasmuch as the Religion of the
Jews was dressed up with abundance of tedious Ceremonies, whereof the greatest
part had respect to the Policy, and natural Inclinations of that People, which
were great obstacles to the growth of their Religion, and rendered it morally
impossible to become Universal, and serve for all the World. It Is true, the
other Nations were not so totally excluded, that through Faith in Jesus Christ,
they could not likewise be saved; to which end, there were among the Jews, some
godly and zealous men, that made it their business to convert the Heathens,
especially, those with whom they had to do; but it did not yet please the
Allwise God to send out his Ambassadors or Apostles, honored with especial and
extraordinary Gifts over all the Earth, to turn all Nations to the Jewish
Faith; and the pains that some particulars took in the Conversion of the
Infidels, could not produce any great effects, in relation to the whole World.
And forasmuch as the Jews in those times, being the Select People of God, had
the advantage above all others, and that the only Temple of the True God was
amongst them, they valued themselves highly therefore, and despised all the
rest of the World in comparison with themselves. Besides, They were obliged,
upon the Account of their Ceremonies, to abstain from a too free and familiar
Conversation with other Nations, which produced an implacable and reciprocal
hate betwixt them; so that they were set against all the World, and all the
World against them; and consequently, destroyed all hopes of the propagation of
their Religion: Again, the Heathens could not easily be persuaded, that when
they would Solemnly pay their Adorations to God Almighty, they must make a long
Journey to Jerusalem, as if they themselves could not build a Temple in their
own Country, which should enjoy the same privilege, as that of the Jews. To
which prejudice we may add, that those who were converted to the Jewish
Religion, were not so much esteemed as the Natives of the Country, so that a
very few could resolve for Religion's sake, to expose themselves to that
contempt, which is usually the fate of strangers to endure.

Sect. 4. But the Christian Religion has not only a much purer and clearer
Light, and other Advantages above the Jewish, which we leave to be considered
by the Divines; but it is also freed from those streightning Circumstances,
which rendered the Jewish Religion so particular, and it has all the Qualities
that are requisite to the composition of an Universal Religion, upon which
Account, all men are obliged to embrace the same, which ought especially to be
observed by one that will enquire into the Nature and Genius of the Christian
Religion; for in this, God has not set apart any particular Land or Country,
where he will more peculiarly be Adored, nor endu'd any with a privileged
Holiness above the rest; so that, the inconvenience and great distance of God's
Temple, can now no longer be a pretext to this or that People; for in all
Nations, the offering of an humble and contrite heart, is equally agreeable to
the common Savior of the whole World; nor is there any one Temple, where God
is more present, or our Prayers sooner accepted, than in another. No Nation
professing the Christian Religion has such Advantages above the rest, whereupon
to value its self, and undervalue its Neighbor. There is no distinction of Jew
or Greek, Bondsman, or Free, but we are all in Jesus Christ; there is no
particular Race or Family selected by God for the performing Divine Service, as
among the Jews; but all other abilities concurring, one has as much right
thereto, as another. There is nothing in the Christian Religion that hinders us
from maintaining a good Union and Correspondence with all men, or to render one
another those mutual good Offices which the Law of Nature requires from us. The
Christian Religion simply considered, and in its natural Purity, dispoil'd of
all Worldly views and interests, has not the least jarring or discord with the
Laws and Civil Society, in as much as they agree with the Dictates of right
Reason, but rather contributes much to the cementing and corroborating of the
same, though that is not its principal end or design. There is nothing that does
clash with the ends of Civil Government, or that should hinder us from living
honorably, quietly and securely under the Protection of our Rulers; so that
every Christian may yield an exact and perfect obedience to every command of
the Secular Power, as long as such commands do not recede from the Law of
Nature, right Reason, and the Necessities of the State; as likewise, he may
fill every charge and employ, that is necessary in a well governed
Commonwealth: On the contrary, the Christian Religion is most fit thereto, for
it does require in us, a strict observation of all the Precepts of the Law of
Nature, and especially, those the breach whereof is not obnoxious to the
punishment of any Civil Laws, and does recommend to every one, the performance
of his charge, as far as it concurs with the Laws of Nature and Honor, with
the greatest Zeal and Fidelity imaginable; so that there is no sort of
Philosophy in the World, nor any other Religion whatsoever, that can compare
with the Christian in those points; as may be seen at first sight, by any one
that will take the pains to make a parallel of them together; so that, it is
not only the obligation of every particular man, in as much as he is one day to
give an account to God for his Soul, to embrace the Christian Religion; but all
those whom God has entrusted with the Supreme Power, are particularly bound,
for reasons before mentioned, to introduce and maintain it in their States, and
that by an obligation, which does necessarily follow the exercise of their
Office. Now though these effects are not every where equally visible among
Christians, and that there are found some, who lead as irregular and disorderly
lives, as the worst of Turks and Infidels; the blame is not to be laid upon the
Christian Religion, but is to be imputed to the malice and perverseness of
mankind, who only hide their impiety under that Sacred Veil, and do little
trouble themselves to put in practice the most excellent Lessons, which the
bestof Religions does continually suggest to 'em.

Sect. 5. But as all these things cannot be doubted of by the more Learned sort
of Men, so there occurs here a very considerable question, namely, Whether the
Christian Religion does indispensibly require, that the external Direction of
it, should depend of any other than those who have the Supreme Power and
Administration of Affairs in every State? Or, (which is the same in effect)
Whether the external Government thereof, should reside conjointly in the
Priests and Clergy, or in any one of them, without any dependence on the
Supreme Secular Powers? Or else, Whether there must be but one Sovereign
Director of the Christian Religion, whom all other Christian States shall
blindly obey? All which Quaeries, as some think, do finally terminate in this:
Whether each State ought to regulate its self according to its own Interest and
Advantage? Or, Whether all other States ought to make themselves Slaves to one,
and seek to render it great and flourishing by their own Loss and Destruction?

By the external Government, or Direction of the Christian Religion, we
understand such a Power which exerts it self in the choice it makes of certain
Persons to be employed in the public exercise of Divine Service, reserving to
its self the Jurisdiction, and free Liberty of enquiring into the Carriage and
Demeanor of those Persons: The Administration and Disposal of all such Goods
as shall be Consecrated to Religion and Pious Uses; by Enacting such Laws as
shall be thought necessary for the Support and Maintaining of Religion, in
deciding all Differences and Disputes that upon any occasion may arise among
the Clergy, and other things of the like nature.

And we distinguish this external Direction from the Minister of the Church,
which consists in Teaching, Preaching and Administering the Holy Sacraments,
which beyond all dispute does alone belong to the Clergy: but this question is
to be understood, de Ecclesia jam plantata, and constituta, non de adhuc
constituenda and plantanda, of the Church which is already Established, and not
of that which is yet to be founded. For the Christian Doctrine, originally
proceeding from the Divine Revelation, and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, no
Human Power can be admitted to the Direction thereof, before that it be
manifested and laid open by those that are immediately Authorized by God for
that purpose. So likewise, when our Savior after his Resurrection, sent out
his Disciples as his Apostles and Ambassadors over all the World, to promulge,
and introduce the Doctrine of the Holy Gospel, they did not receive this
Commission and Plenipotential right of Preaching here and there from the
Supreme Magistrate, but from God alone; to which therefore the King was as much
obliged to submit, as the meanest of his Subjects, they being the immediate
Messengers of God, and to receive their Doctrine with all humility and
obedience: Besides, it would be very unreasonable and ridiculous to aspire to
the Direction of Affairs, whereof they had not the least Cognizance.

From whence it does also necessarily follow, that this question is to be
understood of those Supreme Powers, which themselves do profess the Christian
Religion, and not of Infidels or Heretics for to commit the Care and Direction
of our Religion to such, were to set the Wolf to keep the Sheep.

Sect. 6. This question may be considered three several ways. 1. Whether such a
Necessity does arise from the Nature of each Religion in general? Or, 2.
Whether it be a peculiar Effect of the Christian Religion? And Lastly, Whether
it is grounded on any positive Command and Order of God? That such should
proceed from the common and universal Nature of every Religion we can in no
wise perceive. Nor can a sensible man be easily brought to believe, That to
serve God rightly, he must of necessity, make a Schism in the State, and
introduce two jarring Powers independent of each other: Such a Division or
Composition of the Sovereign Power in the same Republic, is the ready means of
fomenting an unquenchable Fire of Distrusts, Fears, and internal Jealousies;
whereas on the contrary, there is no absurdity or contradiction in serving God,
and committing the external Direction of Divine Service to the Sovereign
Powers, with this restriction that the Sovereign will not undertake to impose
any False or Heretical Opinions on us.

In like manner, as every one is naturally obliged to serve God, so he likewise
has the Power of Instituting such external Signs of his Adoration, as he is
persuaded to be most pleasing and agreeable to God. But so soon as Mankind set
themselves to the forming and composing of civil Societies, they abandoned all
their right and power to those to whom belong the direction and management of
the whole Society.

The ancient Patres-Familias or Fathers of the Family, before the construction
of any Republic, have this right solely seated in themselves, and which from
them was wont to descend to the first born of the Family, as Haereditas Eximia,
the more Excellent and Eminent Part of their Inheritance: But so soon as men
with one common accord, united themselves into civil Societies and
Common-weals, this Power was transferred from the Head of each Family, to the
Head of the Republic; and this was done upon very weighty reasons, for if it
had been left to every man's fancy and pleasure, what sort of Ceremonies he
would observe in the external Adoration of God, the strange and contrary
varieties of serving God, would have produced nothing but Hate, Contempt, and
irreconcilable Dissentions amongst the Subjects of the same State. And although
among Gods People, the Jews, the public Administration of Divine Service, was
become hereditary, and tied to one certain Family; yet the Sovereign inspection
and care of the Priests, did only belong to them who had the Sovereign
Authority in the Civil Government. The same thing has likewise been observed by
almost all the other Nations.

Sect. 7. Nor can we perceive, that such a Direction must necessarily belong to
any other than the Sovereign of each State, or the necessity thereof be proved
from any Identity or particular quality of the Christian Religion as far as it
does comprehend in its self something more than is suggested to us by the Light
of Nature, concerning the Divine Worship: Whilst we always take it for
granted, That the Sovereign, by Virtue of that external Direction, neither can,
nor will introduce any thing contrary to God's Holy Word, nor hinder the
Ministers from the performance of their Office, according to the Divine
Precepts.

Besides, There can no reason be given, why the Supreme Powers should be
incapable of ever attaining those Qualifications which are required to this
external Care and Direction of the Church; or at least, that they should not be
able to commit this Direction to some of their Subjects, that are beyond
exception qualified for such an employ: After the same manner as other parts of
the Sovereignty are often Administered by the Subjects. So no body presumes to
deprive the Sovereign of his Legislative Faculty, or pretends a better Right,
though it is certain, that every Doctor and Professor of Law, ought to be
infinitely better versed therein, than any King can be; who, as in all other
Important Affairs, ought also herein, to make use of their Counsel, and profit
himself of the Fruits of their long Study and Experience. For a Brave and Wise
King, far from making it his Interest, that his Subjects should acquit
themselves ill of those Offices he has entrusted 'em with, may rather
(conformably to his Duty) extract incredible Advantages from the good and
faithful management of what he has committed to them. For the more Diligent and
Zealous he is in the Maintenance and Support of the Christian Religion, the
more capable his Subjects are of serving him, and the more assured is he of
God's Help and Assistance. Besides, caeteris paribus, it is impossible to give
any Reason, why God Almighty should not grant his Grace and Assistance to an
Orthodox Christian King, as well as to any other, in the good and laudable
Administration of such a Direction. Lastly, Whilst the Christian Religion in
no other point does encroach upon the Civil Laws and Ordinances, so far as they
fall in with the Law of Nature, we ought not to believe, that it breaks its
bounds in this, unless we had a formal and positive assurance thereof, from God
himself. Those therefore that will persist in the Defense of such an Absurdity,
are obliged to demonstrate, where the Holy Scripture in express Terms, deprives
the Supreme Civil Magistrate of this Direction, to bestow it on another
independent, and not acknowledging any Earthly Superior. In the mean while, we
will proceed to examine, how, and by what steps, such a Spiritual Sovereignty,
has attained to so monstrous a Degree in the Western Churches.

Sect. 8. When the Apostles, after our Savior's Ascension, had begun to Preach
the Holy Gospel to all People, being appointed thereto, by their Master's
immediate Commands; they did, in a short time, gain an incredible number of
Proselytes, as well amongst the Jews as Gentiles, and especially of the common
People, then oppressed with a miserable Ignorance, and leading a wretched and
beastly Life. They therefore embraced this Doctrine with a great deal of Joy,
wherein they found unspeakable Comforts against the inconveniences, and
desperate Sorrows of this temporary Life.

Besides, The Apostles being themselves of low Birth, and as to outward
appearance, making a very inconsiderable figure, found an easier Access, and
could better insinuate their Opinions into the minds of their equals. Whereas
the great Men, and the most Learned, slighted this upstart Religion in the
beginning, nor thought it worth their while to make any exact inquiry into the
Mysteries thereof.

If men may presume to examine the Reasons of the Divine Wisdom, and why it was
pleased to make use of such means in the first Introduction of the Christian
Religion; the most probable seems to be, that God forbore to make use of Power,
or the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate, lest the Purity of the Gospel might
be mistaken for a Politic Device, or a Philosophical Speculation. Whereas if a
man compares the inconsiderable beginning with the wonderful Progress, he will
easily observe, that there is something more than Humane in it; especially,
considering that the most Learned among the Heathens, with all their
Subtilties, with all their Helps of Art and Nature, could but slightly and
superficially penetrate into the Reason and Causes of Divine Things; and that
the Great Socrates amongst the rest, though he clearly discovered the blind
Superstition and Ignorance of his Age, yet had not Power enough to introduce a
better; but as a Reward for his good Design, suffered Death as an Heretic and
Innovator of the Established Religion: Whereby we are given to understand, That
the Wisdom of the World is but Folly with God, who could perfect a work, by the
means of poor ignorant Fishermen, which all the united Wits of the greatest
Philosophers, were not able to set on foot. Besides, The Apostles manner of
acting, seemed very odd to the more rational sort of People; they thought it
strange to hear a Crucified Jesus, the greatest Subject of their Sermons; and
that they should name him the Son of God, and Savior of the World, who was
born among a People derided and despised as the scum of the Earth, and the
abject of all Nations; nor was this Jesus in any great Repute in the World, nor
had he signalized himself by any Famous Heroical Actions; or by a great many
Years Preaching and Teaching, spread his Name abroad among the People; but on
the contrary, was cut off in the Flower of his Age, by a most scandalous and
shameful Death.

Wherefore, the Jesuits in their endeavors of planting the Gospel amongst the
cunning Chinese, do not begin it from the Passions of Christ, but do first
Reason and Discourse upon Natural Religion, and then after a long round about,
fall upon the Articles of the Christian Faith, which whether they can by these
devices and politic Methods, better insinuate into those unbelievers, than the
Apostles, I shall not now examine. One may also add, That it seemed good to
God, to deliver first the most simple, and the meanest of the People out of
that Heathenish Blindness, since they were maintained and kept under in a
continual Superstition by the great ones, who, though they easily perceived the
cheat and vanity of Paganism, yet, withheld by their Interest and Worldly
Considerations, did not think it worth while to seek after a better. Thus God
by his withdrawing the Mobile from their Heathenish manner of serving him
loosned the very Foundations of this Grand Machine, and thereby destroyed the
Form and Superstructure thereof. For the Ignorance and Credulity of the common
People was the great Basis by which Paganism was alone sustained.

Sect. 9. After that, the Christian Religion was communicated first to the
common People, as we have before showed; the greatest Opposition it met withal,
was from the Roman Emperors, for as in their Dominions, it had taken the
deepest Root, and made the greatest Progress, so was it there most cruelly
Persecuted and Oppressed; to which did not a little Contribute their Ignorance
of this New Religion, what its Principles, and what its Design was; to which
Cause we may add the great Number of Proselytes daily gained by the Publishers
of the Gospel, who all of 'em, openly contemned the Heathenish Rites and
Ceremonies. Besides, The Emperors thought it much below 'em, and a derogation
from their Dignities, to enter into a more particular examination of this
Doctrine. The first Christians also, being for the most part, very unlearned,
were not able to reduce their Religion into any Method or Form, wherein to
present it to those that were in Authority, which was the occasion that the
most malicious Lies and Calumnies of their Enemies were taken up for great
Truths, even, by those that cast an indifferent Eye on that Religion. They were
accused of practicing all sorts of Debauchery and Immodesty, in their secret
Nocturnal Assemblies; nay, they did not stick to traduce them of holding
private Cabals and Conspiracies against the State. There were a great many,
that had an Aversion for all Innovations, whose Argument was, That since the
Roman Commonwealth had so bravely subsisted with its Old Religion for so many
Hundred Years, Why could it not make the same shift still? And 'twas
particularly, against all Rules of Policy, to suffer the Mobile, to begin so
great a Revolution, as if they were wiser than their Lords and Rulers: And that
which looked most suspicious, was, That the Christians had constituted among
themselves, a sort of Ecclesiastical Government, which they considered as a
Schism or Faction; as if the Christians had designed to erect a New
Commonwealth, upon the ruins of the Old one, and by dividing the Forces of the
Empire, at last, make themselves Masters of the whole. Lastly, Whilst the
Heathen Temples began to be less frequented, proportionably as the number of
the Christians increased, and that in the mean time, the Grandeur of the Roman
Empire, was sensibly decayed, and weakened by the cruel shocks it had received
from the Germans, Farthians, etc. a great many of the People possessed with
Bigottry and Superstition, could attribute it to nothing else, but the contempt
and neglect of their Gods, by whose favorable Assistance, Rome had seen its
self Mistress of the World. They fell therefore upon the Christians, as wicked
Atheistical Men, and sworn Enemies to all Religions; and because they refused
to obey the Emperors Commands concerning the Adoration of Images, and underwent
all the Torments inflicted on them, and Death it self, with an amazing
Tranquillity and Sedateness of mind; they interpreted that, as a malicious
stubborness, and hardness of heart, and therefore raged more Tyrannically
against them, endeavoring by all sorts of Cruelties to maintain their
Authority over these wretched People: But what Reasons soever can be alleged
in Justification of those bloody Persecutions exercised against the Christians
by several Roman Emperors, none can be sufficient to excuse them from the Title
of unrighteous Tyrants, and shameful Abusers of that High Power, which God
Almighty has entrusted them with. For their Subjects had embraced this Religion
by the express Commands of God, which can neither be withstood or suspended by
the Orders of any Earthly Sovereign, since the Sovereigns as well as their
Subjects, are obliged to embrace this Religion; the omission whereof, is an
high Sin against the Divine Majesty. Besides, They could not excuse themselves
with the pretext of Ignorance; for since it was a New Religion, they were
obliged with greater Care and Exactness to inform themselves of the Nature
thereof, and not so blindly to sentence poor innocent People, for not obeying
those commands which were not in the least Obligatory. For I ought not to
condemn any one to Death, before I am fully informed of the Crimes, whereof he
stands accused.

Sect. 10. But since the Christian Religion did not owe its beginning to the
Consent and Authority of the Soveraign^ the Professors thereof, found
themselves obliged on their own Heads, to establish their Religion and its
external Administration after the best manner they could; as it usually happens
in all Societies, that are founded in any State without the knowledge or
permission of the Civil Magistrate, where the Members of the same are
necessitated to find out all the means that can best conduce to the advantage
of their fellowship, by choosing such Officers, and making such Laws as are
requisite to attain the ends they propose themselves. It Is true, according to
the Rules of the best Policy, founded upon the Law of Nature, the
Administration and External Direction of Divine Worship, (as we had often
repeated before) does belong to the Sovereign; but since he then neglected to
perform that Function, the Primitive Christians were forced to constitute
Church-Ministers, and to maintain them by the Alms of charitable People. And
when any Difference or Controversy arose amongst them, which could not be
determined by one Assembly alone, they imparted it to another Assembly, with
which they kept Correspondence, or else it was decided in a Convocation of the
Neighboring Ministers. Now although it be against the Rules of Policy of all
States, to permit the erecting of Fellowships (especially such as consist of
any considerable Number of Persons) to Subjects and Particulars; yet it does
not follow from thence, that the Assemblies of the ancient Christians and their
Synods, were to be Interpreted seditious and unlawful Conventicles, since they
had no other prospect, than the free Exercise of that Religion which God had
imparted to 'em, and against which, no humane Constitutions were of any
Efficacy. For if the Sovereign, does neglect his Duty and Care of his own
Salvation, it is not necessary that his Subjects should imitate him, and reject
the great Benefit that Heaven does offer to 'em; because, it is not accepted by
their Sovereign, nor can his Authority extend so far as to oblige them thereto.
And as each particular may take up Arms, and defend himself, when the Sovereign
either cannot, or will not afford him his Assistance and Protection; so if he
will not take care for my Soul, I am so much the more obliged to watch over it
my self, as the Soul is of greater Consequence and Value than the Body; and
that another is less prejudiced by my Religion, than by a violent, though
self-Defence; since no man by submitting himself to any Civil Government, does
renounce the Care of his Body and Soul. For otherwise, if it had pleased God to
have begun the propagation of his Religion from the Conversion of Kings and
Emperors; without doubt, they would have seconded by their Edicts the Preaching
of the Apostles, abolished the Temples of their Heathenish Gods, prohibited the
Exercise of Paganism; and by the Apostles Advice, they would have assumed and
managed the external Direction of Religious Affairs, and forever afterward,
have reserved it in their own hands; as we find it put in practice in some
Countries where the Christian Religion was first embraced by the Princes
thereof.

Sect. 11. In the mean while, the external Government and Disposition of Holy
Things, by the negligence of the Civil Magistrate, being devolved upon the
Primitive Christians, was found too late, to be of a very dangerous
Consequence; for from hence, some have pretended to infer, that the Election of
fit Ministers, and the Management of Church Affairs, does naturally and
originally belong to the common People, as they are understood in opposition to
their Sovereign or Rulers. It Is true, one ought not to force upon the vulgar, a
Minister whom they extremely dislike, especially, if they have any probable
reason of their aversion against him; for such a man, with all the Preaching in
the World, can never Edify his unwilling Auditors; yet it does not follow from
hence, that the Mob have any original right thereto, because they once enjoyed
it by provision, whilst the Sovereign omitted the performance of his Duty and
Function herein: For otherwise, it would have been as little in their Power, to
call and appoint Ministers in their Churches, as it ever was to dispose of
Civil Offices and Employs in the State. Therefore, if it happens, that in this
Country or another, the common People have any Right or Privilege therein, it is
to be understood, that they enjoy it by the permission and connivence of their
Sovereign, whom we presuppose to be an Orthodox Christian. There are some also,
who would from hence conclude, That the external Government of the Church, must
necessarily be considered as something separate and distinct from the Supreme
Civil Government, and therefore ought to be Soveraignly Administered by the
united Body of the Clergy, or by some one chose from amongst them; and that so
in every Christian State, there must needs be two Different and Independent
Bodies, of which, one was be named, the Body Politic, and the other the Body
Ecclesiastic, and both Sovereign and Independent of each other. But this is
absolutely false, and it is most certain, that that Power and Authority, which
was provisionally usurped by the People, when that negligence of the Prince, by
which it was forfeited, ceases, does justly devolve again upon the lawful
Sovereign; nor does it follow that the Power which the Apostles had in the
establishing the Church, can be challenged by the Ministers of the Church now
established; for the Apostolary Function was something particular, and
different from the ordinary Church-Ministery, as this is from the external
Direction of the Church, and therefore as one that is chosen for a Minister, is
not strait an Apostle; so neither does a King in assuming the Government and
Protection of the Church, immediately become a Priest thereof.

Now, though the Christian Religion is originally Divine, and therefore not to be
comprehended by weak, Humane Intellects; yet that does not hinder the King, or
whosoever is Supreme, from the Direction and Administration thereof, provided,
that he make use of the Counsel and Assistance of those men who are best versed
in such Affairs. From what has been now said, we may likewise draw this
conclusion, that we are not obliged precisely to follow the Praxis of the
Primitive Churches, in relation to the external Direction of the Church, or to
observe it as a general Rule for Church Government in those States where the
Sovereign is an Orthodox Christian. For that Praxis is wholly founded on the
Circumstances of those times, which can have no place in those States where
both the Supreme Magistrates and the Common People, are united in one Faith;
Why therefore should we make a Schism in the State, when there is none in the
Religion?

Sect. 12. Now, though by the conversion of Constantine the Great, to the
Christian Religion, the Church assumed a New Form; for as much as the Sovereign
was then capable of Administering the Function of external Governor of the
Church, yet this could not be done so easily or commodiously, as if the
Sovereign had always from the beginning been Head of the Christian Church, but
there remained so many Relics of the preceding Provisional-Government, that
they afterward occasioned innumerable errors and abuses in the Western or
Latin Churches. Besides, the People could not be brought to consent, that the
Emperors, whom they as then, looked upon to be mere Novices in Matters of
Religion, should immediately acquire the Supreme Direction of Ecclesiastic
Affairs, in prejudice of the Bishops and Clergy, who could not see themselves,
without a great deal of unwillingness and regret, dispoil'd of so considerable
an Authority: Whereas the Emperors on the contrary (their Subjects being
mostly Christians) were forced to depend on their Priests, and caress them
continually, if they desired to have their Throne settled, and themselves
secure from falling. To which Reason we may add, That the first Christian
Emperors having as yet in their Service a great many Heathenish Officers, it
was not reasonable that the Government of the Church, and the Affairs thereof
should be taken into consideration, or deliberated of, in the Imperial
Councils, where Pagans were always present. From thence it came, that in the
Institution of Bishops and other Ecclesiastics, the customs and manners
introduced in the times of the Heathen Emperors were generally observed, and
that not only the decision of Controversies in Matters of Faith, but also all
Laws serving to the external Direction and Government of the Church; as also
all other Differences arising amongst the Chiefest of the Clergy were
deliberated of in Synods and General Assemblies, where the Prelates pretended
that they alone had right to Preside and give their Suffrages. Whereas the
right of calling Synods or other Assemblies together, was the Prerogative of
Sovereigns alone, and in all other times did indisputably belong to them;
besides that, that it was but reasonable that they should preside and have the
Direction of such Assemblies, let the matter be what it would that was there
Treated of, where their Consent was absolutely necessary to the ratification
and passing into a Law of what was there determined. It Is true, in those
Conventions, neither the Sovereign, nor the whole Body of the Clergy have any
Power or Right to form new Articles of our Belief, or to interpret the
Scriptures after their own Fancy; but since the whole Duty of a Christian, what
he ought to do, and what he ought to believe, is contained in the Holy Bible,
which God has equally given to all men, and not as the Oracles of the Sybils,
committed only to the Care of the Priests, and that all other men, as well as
the Ecclesiastics, can understand as much thereof, as is necessary for
Salvation; it does not therefore in the least, seem unreasonable, that the
Sovereign should preside in all such Conventions where they debate and dispute
about the apparent Contradictions and different Interpretations of the Holy
Scriptures, where the Presence and Authority of the Prince, might serve to
moderate those Heats and Passions which usually arise from disagreeing Opinions
in things of that nature, where he might hinder all Calumnies and Reflections
upon Persons, spightful and malicious Interpretation of Words, and finally awe
them from pronouncing Anathema's without a very just reason against innocent
and well meaning Persons. But whilst the first Christian Emperors neglected
this their right, or could not conveniently maintain it, from hence it came,
that things were very confusedly deliberated of, and determined by Councils;
and that afterward the Popes usurping a Power above all the other Western
Bishops; and Councils themselves pretended a right of determining in all
Matters of Faith, and of introducing Canons or Ecclesiastical Laws wherein
their own Profit and Advantage was their chiefest prospect, and have at last
assumed the Supreme Jurisdiction in all Spiritual Matters, and thereby have
withdrawn themselves from that obedience which they owed to their lawful
Sovereigns the Roman Emperors.

Sect. 13. Besides, It was the Custom in the ancient Churches, that the
Primitive Christians, according to the Advice of St. Paul, would very rarely
plead their causes before the Gentile Tribunals; but when any Controversy arose
amongst them, they referred it to the decision of the Bishop, least the
Heathens should be scandalized thereat, and take occasion to revile the Name of
Christ. Besides, it would have a very ill grace to see them so greedily plead
for temporal things which they pretended so much to slight and contemn. Now
this in it self, and at that time was a very laudable and useful design; but at
last, whilst the Christian Emperors, far from abolishing this Custom,
confirmed it more and more, and the Tribunals were filled with Christian
Judges, the Bishops usurped a formal Jurisdiction, which did not alone encroach
upon the rights of the Civil Magistrates, but did also distract the Bishops
themselves from the exercise of that Charge, which did peculiarly belong to
them.

'Twas likewise the Custom of the Primitive Christians, when in their Marriages
any scruple arose concerning the Proximity or nearness of Blood, to refer
themselves to the Priest, and acquiesce in his Sentiments, who also in all
quarrels between Man and Wife, interposed his Authority, to which we may add
his Assisting always in the Celebration of Marriages, with his Prayers and
Blessings; from all which Customs (though as we said before, naturally innocent
and good in themselves) very pernicious Errors and Abuses have been derived,
since the Pope has from hence taken occasion to draw all Affairs of Matrimony,
which occur, circa statum hominum, Divortia, nullitates Matrimoniorum,
Sucessiones, Haereditates, and all others of the like Importance into his Forum
or Tribunal, and to color his abuses the better, he has made a New Sacrament
of Matrimony.

The Primitive Christians by the Innocence and Holiness of their Lives,
endeavored to stir up a desire in the Heathens of embracing so laudable a
Religion, and therefore they very severely punished those Calumnies and
Slanders which the Civil Laws of the Gentiles did not reach; so that in their
Churches when any, by a notorious ill Life, had given Scandal and a bad Example
to the Brethren, there was some public Ecclesiastical Penance or other
enjoined him, which never exceeded a temporal or total Exclusion from the
Congregation; which Custom, could not but be very profitable in the present
Christian States, provided that the Direction thereof resided wholly in the
Sovereign's hands, whose Duty it would be to prevent that such Ecclesiastical
Censures be not the effects of malice, private passions, and self-interests;
especially when such Censures operate so effectually in foro and vita civ. li,
as in the Eighth Century, when no man would converse with an excommunicated
Person. Now the Sovereign Exercise of such a Power, can reasonably belong to
none but the Supreme Magistrate in every State, without making a division in
the Government. But how the Popes in following times have abused, and how far
they have extended these Censures, is plainly enough laid open by all
Historians; when they neither spared Emperors, Kings or Commonwealths that
refused to Dance after their Pipes, but in excommunicating them, they forbid
them to assist at Divine Service, dispensed their Subjects of their due
Allegiance, gave away their Kingdoms to others, and finally, obliged them to
consent to the most disadvantageous and unreasonable things in the World.

In the mean while, these Abuses have not spread themselves so wide in the
Eastern Churches, whilst the Emperors of Constantinople did at least keep up
their Authority so far, that the Clergy there durst never incroach upon it, nor
had any of the Eastern Bishops that opportunity of lifting himself above his
Colleagues, and assuming the Title of Head of the Church; for the Bishop of
Constantinople himself had only the first place, and privilege of preceding all
those that were not of his Diocese, but had no Jurisdiction over them.

Sect. 14. But in the Western Churches, the different circumstances of things
altered quite the Scene, whilst the Bishops of Rome had projected and begun to
exercise a peculiar sort of Government and Supremacy, and which at the last
they have brought to its highest point and perfection: A Sovereignty that in
all the World cannot finds its parallel, being built upon quite different
Foundations, and maintained by ways extremely disagreeing from the policy of
all other States: Therefore after having made an exact enquiry into its rise
and constitution, we will lay open its Intrigues, and describe the influences
it has had, the Power it has usurped and maintained for so many Ages in all the
Affairs of Europe, and with what zeal and fierceness this up start Sovereignty
has been attacked by some, and defended by others; to which, we will add the
reasons of that cruel blow was given to it in the last Age, and how it has
recovered its almost lost credit in this Age, and is like to keep up it self in
a very good posture.

From which, the Wise may judge what hopes there remain of any accommodation or
union of the Protestants with the Papists. One of the Causes (though something
remote) which has not a little contributed to the monstrous growth of a Power
so pernicious to all the other Sovereigns of Europe, was the Barbarity and
Ignorance of Sciences, after the decay of the Western Empire; for counterfeit
Wares are best sold and put off by dim, weak Lights, and an ignorant man is
easier imposed on with bagatelles and improbabilities, than one that has a
better insight into the nature of things, and a freer exercise of his Reason.
This ignorance accompanied afterward with so insupportable a Pedantry (whereas
the preceding Age was more Learned) was promoted by different Causes: One of
the Chiefest whereof, was the Invasion of a no less Warlike, than ignorant
People, in the Western Provinces of the Roman Empire, which for some Ages
during an unsettled and inconstant Government, felt nothing but cruel Wars,
terrible Disorders, spoiling, ravaging and laying waste of whole Countries; and
in a Word, all the miseries that are the necessary consequences of a Barbarous
Government. Whereas the Muses and Liberal Sciences are the Daughters of Peace
and Prosperity; but in the Hurly-burlies and Tumults of War, Books are a dead
Ware, and shall lie long enough on the hands of those that have 'em; Schools
and Academies are then like Wildernesses, either quite empty, or haunted by
none but wild Beasts; and the Gentlemen of the long Robe, will rather choose to
shoulder a Musket, than trudge to Westminster Hall, with a green Bag under
their Arms, so that in such times, the poor Professors, Schoolmasters, etc.
have nothing to do but shut up their Shops, pack up their Goods and begone,
especially when the Victorious Enemy has no knowledge of Letters, and as little
esteem or kindness for them.

There are some that will maintain, that the Churchmen themselves did not a
little Contribute to these dark times of Ignorance, for because the
Philosophers had given them no small trouble under the Pagan Emperors, and that
still under the Christian Emperors, there were found who opposed their
Doctrine; the Clergy upon that account, conceived an irreconcilable hatred and
aversion against the Philosophers and against their Opinions, and inspired the
same Sentiments into all their Auditors, and in all places where they had any
Authority or Direction of the Schools, they forbad the use of all the Heathen
Authors, under pretense, that the youth might not be Debauched and Corrupted
with the Errors of the Gentiles, and that it was a sin for them to Study in
Books filled with the Fables and Names of the Heathen Gods, which no good
Christian ought so much as to mention. 'Twas a very common Story too, which
they spread abroad, that St. Jerome was whipped with Rods in a Dream by the Devil,
because he read Cicero with too great an Application. And about the Year Four
Hundred, the Council of Carthage strictly prohibited the Bishops the reading of
any Heathen Book; and as in those miserable times, few applied themselves to
the Study of Letters, except those that were destined to Divinity, so that the
few relics of Learning were wholly engrossed by the Clergy, the Schools
already ruined, were only used to attain the ends which they proposed to
themselves, that is, the propagation of Ignorance; and the Students were very
well satisfied with the remission and neglect of their usual Studies, as being
mightily afraid of becoming too Learned. That such a Barbarity did not a
little contribute to the introduction of Popery, we may learn from hence, that
it would have been impossible in any but such ignorant times to have made the
Epistolae Decretales (ascribed to the first Popes) pass for lawful, wherein
they made the World believe, that it was always the right of the Bishop of Rome
to give Laws, at least in Spiritual Matters, to all that bare the Name of
Christians: But afterward, when the Light of Knowledge began to glimmer a
little in Europe, and that it was impossible any longer to contain the European
Nations, now their Eyes were opened, in a slavery, a gross and blind Ignorance
had given birth to; the Pope who had usurped the Care and Inspection of the
Schools and Nurseries of Learning, introduced therein the most miserable
Pedantry that ever could be imagined; and which even to this day, his Creatures
teach and maintain with a great deal of zeal in all their Schools. But that
which does chiefly seem to have powerfully contributed to this Greatness and
Dominion of the Popes, was the Ignorance of the true Fundamental Politics,
wherein is contained the Cause, Nature, and Perfection of the Right and Might
of Sovereigns, and wherein amongst other things is demonstrated that to the
perfection of any State it is absolutely necessary that the Supreme Authority,
be neither lessened nor divided: And particularly, we find that even the Greek
and Latin Politicians, did teach very pernicious Lessons concerning the mixture
and division of the Sovereign Power, inspiring the common People with
Sentiments of Love and Kindness for a Democratical or Aristocratical State, but
an inveterate hatred against Monarchy, and that they were persuaded, that the
more they could bind their Princes Hands, the more happy would be the condition
of the Republic. Now, these dangerous Maxims were not a little confirmed by
the violent and tyrannical Government of the Emperors, who were mortally hated
by the most part of their Subjects: so that it is no wonder, that this Science
was quite overwhelmed and lost in an universal Ignorance, especially whilst
the Clergy were of an Opinion that it was quite contrary to their Profession:
From hence it came, that upon the first laying the Foundations of a Spiritual
Sovereignty, the World so little considered or understood the consequences of
such a Work, and how prejudicial it was like to be to the Supreme Secular
Power, which if they had done, they would undoubtedly have opposed themselves
to its first growth, and have quashed an Egg that should produce so terrible a
Scorpion.

And we see even at this Day, That in all Schools where Popish Priests bear
sway, they do entirely stifle the Science of the Politics, or at least they do
so turn and wrest the principles thereof, that it does not only not choke the
Papal Authority, but does rather serve to establish and confirm it.

Sect. 15. The reasons that induced the pretended Sovereign of the Church to
make Rome the Seat of his Government, were chiefly the Authority of that City,
which as it had been before the Metropolis of the Roman Empire, so was it
afterward the Residence of the first Christian Emperors; for as for what the
Papists tell of St. Peter's Chair, that is a pure Fiction, and Story invented by
them, to color the usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, which is manifest enough
from hence, that the Bishop of Constantinople (when that City became the
Capital of the new Eastern Empire) enjoyed the second place after the Bishop of
Rome; and that after the decay of the Western Empire, the Priority of the Sea
of Rome has often been disputed by the succeeding Bishops of Constantinople.
After that the Persecutions of the Heathen Emperors were quite ceased, and that
the Christian Religion began to breath Liberty, and the Free Exercise of their
Religion was confirmed by the Statutes and Ordinances of the Empire; the Clergy
endeavored insensibly to introduce an Hierarchy or Church Government into the
Republic, under the pretext of establishing the Affairs of the Church, and
setting them in good order; to which end, the Bishops began to Lord it over the
ordinary Priests, and to observe even a kind of Subordination amongst
themselves, and to such as were Bishops of the Capital Cities in each Province,
they appointed the Care and Inspection over the rest of the same Province, and
named them Metropolitans, who about Eight Ages afterward, took upon themselves
the Name and Title of Archbishops; amongst these there were four that had the
pre-eminence above all the rest; namely, the Bishop of Rome, Constantinople,
Antioch, and Alexandria, those being the most considerable Cities of the Roman
Empire, to which we may add, Jerusalem Famous for its ancient Holiness. And
although the Emperor Phocas, out of the hatred he bore to the Bishop of
Constantinople (who had refused to approve of the Murder of the Emperor
Maurice) had given the pre-eminence to Boniface the Third, Bishop of Rome, who
thereupon took the Name of Ecumenical or Universal Bishop; yet this
Prerogative did only consist in a simple preference, and did not carry along
with it any Power or Jurisdiction, which none of the other Patriarchs would
ever yield to him: And we read that the Bishops in Africa, when he of Rome
would have obliged them to truckle to his Power, alleging to that intent, a
falsifi'd Canon of the Nicene Council, did very vigorously resist and baffle
that his design. Besides, in the whole frame of the Papal Supremacy, we find
nothing Divine, but all built upon Humane Institutions, and there is no more
reason to be given, why the Bishop of Rome has the first place, than he of
Antioch the third. And forasmuch as one State has no power to prescribe Laws to
another wholly independent of it; therefore those privileges which have been
granted to the Popes by the Roman Emperors, and the ancient Councils which were
nothing else but a Congregation of the Clergy of the Roman Empire, cannot
oblige any other State to obedience, nor extend themselves farther than the
bounds of the ancient Empire. And if perhaps in succeeding times, some few
Christian States have given the Pope any Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters
within their Dominions, they did it without doubt, either because they knew
upon what grounds that pretended Power was founded, or else they were surpised
and cheated into obedience.

If it be the first, there is no other probable reason to be given for it, than
that it originally proceeding from some Covenant or Agreement made betwixt
those States and the Bishops of Rome, whilst the former imagined that their
Churches could not be well governed, till they abandoned the Care and Direction
of 'em to the latter. Now such an Agreement primarily depending on the free
will and consent of any Republic, according to the nature of all other
obligations, is ipso facto, void and of no effect, when it turns to the extreme
disadvantage of the Republic, or when the Popes abuse that Power which is
granted to them. But if this Papal Supremacy be introduced dolo malo, by the
tricks and cheats of the knavish Priests, then the abused and miss-led States
as soon as they can discover how they have been imposed on, may lawfully cast
off so unjust a yoke, and have right to pursue the cheater, and oblige him to
refund all the Damages they have sustained by his usurpations.

Sect. 16. But it was not all at once, that the Bishop of Rome was able to lay
so heavy a yoke on all the Western Churches; on the contrary, he found himself
obliged to insinuate this his usurped Authority by little and little, and steal
it insensibly by diverse Slights and Artifices; and where once he happened to
fasten his Claws, 'twas impossible to make him lose his hold, till he had
carried away a good share of the prey. Besides, the Bishops of Rome never were
wanting to serve themselves very advantageously of a good occasion, of which
the most advantageous to 'em (in my opinion) was the Emperors leaving Rome,
and choosing other Cities for their Residence; whereas if they had always
continued to have maintained their Authority in that place, the Bishops thereof
would have never had the confidence to have erected themselves into Sovereigns,
as we see that the Bishop of Constantinople (who perhaps had no less vanity and
itching after Gevernment, than he of Rome) was never able to raise his
Authority to so high a flight.

The division of the Roman Empire into several new Kingdoms founded by the
Heathen and unlearned People did no less contribute to the aggrandizing the
Bishop of Rome, for these People being all converted by the Prelates of the
Romish Church, thought themselves therefore very much obliged to honor and
respect them, and paid a deference to them, as the most ancient and most
considerable Christians of the West. It is not our design here to deduce all
circumstances at length, it is enough, that we represent the most remarkable in
haste as it were, and en-passant; but one thing we cannot let slip unobserved,
that the Bishops beyond the Alps after the Fifth Century, were used to go in
Pilgrimage to Rome to visit there the Graves of St. Peter and St. Paul, either
out of Superstition and Biggottry, or else in sign of their approving and
following those Apostles Doctrine; which voluntary piece of Devotion, was
afterward changed into an act of necessity, so that as many as afterward
neglected that Voyage, were excommunicated; from which Custom, without doubt,
the Popes have pretended to oblige all Bishops to receive their Confirmation
from Rome.

The other Bishops too, and Churches had often recourse to that of Rome, as
Novices to their Superiors, in all weighty Affairs consulting their advice in
the use and explication of the Canons; now when the Bishops of Rome perceived
that their answers were received as absolute Decisions, they began to make
Decrees and Orders before ever they were desired to do it, under the pretense
that Rome, being the first and chiefest Seat of Christendom, it was the Right
and Office of the Bishop thereof, to see that the Canons and Ecclesiastical
Laws were put in execution; thereupon they constituted immediate Judges of the
Differences amongst the other Bishops, encroached upon the Jurisdiction of the
Metropolitans, deposed the Bishops, which were either not rightly Ordained, or
that were accused of any great Crime, and forced them to come to Rome to plead
their cause in person; after which, all such as desired to enjoy any
prerogative or exemption from the ordinary Canons, went to Rome, where they
were always well received, and gratified in their request, that so the Popes
might there erect a general Office of all sort of Dispensations.

Those also that had lost their Cause before the ordinary Magistrates, were
wont, out of spite, to appeal to Rome, where they were always welcome, and
seldom failed of a good exit: Thus the French Historians tell us, that when the
Emperor Honorius had erected the City of Arles into a Metropolis over seven
Provinces, the Pope made the Archbishop thereof his Vicar General in France,
out of fear that the said Bishop might take an occasion to make himself
Patriarch of the whole Kingdom, and he was very well contented to enjoy such a
precarious Power over the seventeen Provinces, into which France was at that
time divided, rather than have the right in himself, and an independent
Authority over seven Provinces alone: And to render the charge committed to him
more awful and respected, he omitted no opportunity of enlarging and extending
the Papal Jurisdiction.

Afterward in the eighth Century, when the Ecclesiastics and Monks were
become very infamous for their exorbitant and irregular Lives, one Winefred an
English Monk (afterward named Boniface) being moved with an extraordinary
zeal, took upon him to reform the manners of the Clergy, as also the
introduction and plantation of the Christian Religion in some parts of Germany,
and more especially in Turinge and Freezland: this man, to give a greater
luster and credit to his Work, devoted himself entirely to the Seat of Rome,
from whence he first received a Bishop's Mantle, and afterward was qualified
with the Title of Archbishop of Mentz, and by Gregory the Third, was
constituted his Vicar, who gave him a plenary Authority of assembling Councils,
and making Bishops in those Countries which he had converted, with
Recommendations to the People, and to Charles Martel Great Master of France,
that they should take him under their protection, which they did with a very
good will.

And when Charlemain his Son signified to Boniface, that he was very desirous
of establishing the Church Discipline, he readily took that employ upon him, to
the no small advantage of the Romish Chair; to gratify the same Charlemain, he
held a Council in Germany, and several Synods in France at the request of King
Pepin, and presided in all those Assemblies tanquam Legatus Sedis Romanae: And
in the first Council, the Clergy signed a Confession of Faith, whereby they
obliged themselves not only to persist in the Catholic Faith, but they joined
themselves as Members to the Church of Rome, and vowed an eternal respect and
obedience to St. Peter's Successors. 'Twas this same Boniface too, that
persuaded the Bishops of Germany to accept of the Pallium from the Pope, who
afterward sent the same into France to bind them thereby the faster to his
Interests; and so soon as he had once accustomed them to serve themselves of
that sort of Robe, he afterward made it a necessary obligation, and forbad
them the exercise of any Episcopal Function before they should receive that
Garment from Rome.

The Popes likewise pretended, That they only had the Power of removing a
Bishop from one See to another, and obliged all the Western Bishops to receive
their Confirmation from them, for which they must pay some little
Gratification, that was afterward converted into the Annates: Besides this,
they took away the Authority of the Provincial Synods, and annulled their
Decrees, which at last was the occasion that no more were called, when they
perceived that it was all in vain, whilst the Pope abrogated all their
constitutions, according to his fancy, without hearing their Reasons and
Justifications. At last, Gregory the Seventh forced all the Bishops to swear
Allegiance and Fidelity to the Romish Chair, and made a Decree, that no Prince
or Sovereign should presume to condemn any man that made his Appeal to the
Pope. They forgot not likewise to send their Nuncio's or Legates in all
Countries, who exercised in the Pope's Name that Power and Authority which they
had ravished from the Archbishops, and Provincial Synods, and were double
diligent in the advancement of their Master's Interests.

Sect. 17. This Ecclesiastical Supremacy daily increasing, was extremely
prejudicial to the Civil Powers, whilst the Clergy by their tricks and devices
attracted infinite Riches, and by their Riches a great number of idle Priests
and lazy Monks.

It Is true, the Church owed the greatest part of its Riches to the Charity and
pious Intentions of Kings, Princes and others who were wheedled into a belief,
That to bestow great Largises and Donations on the Church, was a most pleasing
and acceptable Sacrifice to God; and this their liberality was afterward much
more promoted when the people were persuaded, That by good Works (amongst which
the Donationes ad pias Causas, held the first rank) Heaven and Happiness were
to be purchased: And whereas the Avarice of the Clergy increasing with their
Riches, could not be satiated by the free and generous liberality of the
people; they practiced all sort of inventions, to squeeze Money out of 'em;
upon which account, they instituted a great number of Fopperies and unnecessary
Ceremonies, for which the Laity must dearly pay. 'Twas this their cursed
Avarice, that was the occasion of Masses without number to be said and sung as
well for the living as the dead, of Purgatory, Indulgences, Dispensations,
Pilgrimages, Jubilees, and a thousand other Bagatelles. Besides, they took a
special care to insinuate themselves into the good wills of dying persons, who
were so much the less sollicitous how they disposed of their temporal Goods,
the desire of which did oftentimes make their Heirs think them too long lived,
and -- ante diem Patrios inquirere in Annos. And at last, if all means failed,
they were not ashamed to fall to downright begging.

Amongst other devices to get Money, the Popes served themselves very
advantageously in the eleventh and twelfth Century of the Crusado, when the
People, moved with a godly itch of reconquering the Holy Land, let themselves
be marked with a Holy Cross; for the Popes challenged to themselves the
management and oversight of such sort of Ghostly expeditions, and received into
their more peculiar protection the Goods and Persons of all those Zealots that
took the Cross upon them, so that they could not be proceeded against neither
Civilly nor Criminally until their return from the Holy Land; whereby they had
an occasion of promoting the commerce of their Indulgences and Dispensations
more than ever: Their Legates had the administration of all the Alms,
Collections and Legacies which were given to that end, and from hence they took
a pretext of obliging all the Clergy to pay them Tenths; nay, they very
imperiously forced Kings, Princes and great Lords to take upon them the
Crusado, which Arms they afterward turned against all such as they accused and
condemned for Schism, and Heresy, declaring their Goods confiscated and void of
all lawful Possessors, distributing and dividing them to such as had rendered
them any considerable Service, and this Authority they exercised without asking
the leave of Princes and States, under whose Civil Jurisdiction they were, who
werel likewise awed into so slavish an obedience, that they durst not oppose
themselves against these Investitures, though they easily perceived the injustice
of 'em.

Sect. 18. The Riches of the Church increasing, the number of the
Ecclesiastics was likewise proportionably augmented, whilst there were not a
few that were glad to be fed by a fat Kitchen, and make good cheer, without
taking any care for the provision thereof: and it was not enough that each
Church had its ordained Priests, Chaplains, and other necessary Servants; but
the most considerable must have an addition of Canons and Prebends, which
places consisting of so great profit and so little pains, were soon filled by
men of all sorts and sizes; and thus the inconveniences of a single life, which
the Popes, not without a great deal of pains and opposition, had introduced in
the eleventh and following Centuries, were sweetened by the Honors, and large
Revenues of these Charges which they so quietly enjoyed.

Besides, all Christendom swarmed with a prodigious number of Monks and Nuns,
which springing up in the times of Persecution in the fourth and fifth
Centuries, have afterward strangely increased. These sort of people at the
first, were content to get their living by their own Industry: many of 'em gave
all their goods to the poor without being in the least obliged thereto, and
lived under the care and inspection of the Bishops, according to the Discipline
that was prescribed them in the Canons. In the seventh Century, through all the
Western Empire, was the Monastical way of living extremely in fashion, and all
places were filled with Cloisters, in the founding of which, the Princes and
Great Men did seem to vie with each other; but after that, their Liberality
was, as it were, quite exhausted by the Endowments and Gifts made to so many
old Monasteries, and that there was not place enough for such as desired to be
received into those Orders: There was at length in the thirteenth Century
formed an Order of Mendicants or Begging Monks, which made a greater show of
Holiness, forasmuch as they would not be thought to go into a Cloister in hopes
of a plentiful and lazy Life; but renouncing all the pleasures of the World,
they would live by Alms and the Beggars-Basket.

The Fancy of a singular Merit and Supererrogative Holiness, induced the People
to this Austerity and Hardship of living, or rather an unbounded Ambition and
Pride so natural to all mankind, that not contented to live up to the
Commandments of God, and barely to fulfill what he prescribes, they had rather
deserve Heaven than accept it as a pure Gift of their Creator, or purchased for
them by the Merits of their Redeemer; and the desire they have of Superiority,
and Preference above the rest, does even extend it self to the other life. To
the embracing of this single and solitary Life, some are carried by despair,
others out of a prospect of ease and laziness; others are thrust into Cloisters
by their Parents and Relations, either out of a motive of Religion or Poverty,
or else for fear of ruining their Family by the division of their Goods amongst
a great many Children. From these Monks has the Pope formed his Pretorian Band
or Regiment of Guards, whom he has not alone quartered as troublesome
Companions upon the Laity, but does make use of 'em also as spies over the
actions of the Bishops, and rest of the Clergy: Therefore it is that the Popes
have with so much zeal maintained the privileges of the Monks, especially when
in the thirteenth Century they would have forced themselves from the Bishops
Jurisdiction, and subjected themselves immediately to the Pope, and the Pope
has found out the way to carry himself so evenly with them, that although there
are great Jealousies betwixt their Orders, as for example, betwixt the
Franciscans and Dominicans, yet he holds the Balance always so even, and
dispenses his Favors so impartially, that one Order cannot be oppressed by the
other, nor has reason to complain of the Pope's injustice. These Monks are very
prejudicial to the ordinary Priests, insomuch as they attract to themselves the
greatest part of the Alms, Legacies, and Gains proceeding from the Burials of
the Rich, besides the Direction of Consciences, and Administration of the
Sacraments, which has drawn upon them the immortal hatred of the Bishops and
Secular Priests, which those other don't much value, whilst they are under the
care and protection of the Pope; and besides, when a Bishop at any time opposed
the Pope, the Monks like so many Blood Hounds were immediately after his heels,
and by their bawlings and exclamations, soon made him lose his Credit with the
People, by whom their Hypocrisy and pretended Sanctity made them much
respected; so that the Bishops were forced to truckle to the Pope's Authority,
because the People would afford them no Support or Assistance; thus the Monks
were set as so many spies over the Conduct of the Bishops, which when they
found blamable, they did not fail immediately to signify to the Generals that
resided always at Rome, so that the Pope might make a timely opposition against
their practices. In short, these Monks were not the least cause of the Bishops
not resisting the growing Power of the Pope; for finding it always in vain,
they were forced with the rest to yield to the mighty Torrent. Though there were
a great many of 'em likewise, that were well enough contented to submit to this
slavery, in hopes of sharing the Prey with their Chief, and because they were
thereby freed from the Jurisdiction of their Temporal Princes, whose power they
more dreaded, than that of a distant Tribunal, the Judges whereof being of the
same Trade as they, were not so terrible to them, for one Crow will not pick
out its fellow's Eyes. In the mean while, it is most certain, that a great many
Bishops, especially of this side the Alps, do with a great deal of impatience
groan under the yoke of Rome; which did appear sufficiently in the Council of
Trent, where the French and Spanish Bishops did with great earnestness
endeavor, that it might be declared, quod Residentia Episcoporum sit Juris
Divini, or, that by the Divine Appointment each Bishop is obliged to reside in
his own Church, as all the Jansenists of France and the Low Countries do
maintain. Now the wisest could easily penetrate what lay hid under this
specious Doctrine; for if God has commanded that, it must necessarily follow,
that he would afford the way and means of putting it in practice, qui dat jus
ad finem, dat jus ad media; and then by consequence it is no longer needful to
run to Rome, and buy the permission of exercising their charge. And it cost the
Pope a great deal of pains and a great deal of fears, before he could oblige
the Council of Trent to desist from a design which extremely shook his usurped
Authority, and therefore we may be assured that that shall be the last General
Council, nor will the Pope ever more venture his Authority in such like
Assemblies, which besides will be but very useless things as long as the
Jesuits and others, teach, That the Pope is above the Councils, and, That he
cannot err, and, That the Councils themselves must receive their vim obligandi
a confirmatione Papae. In the mean while, let a man say what he will, it is
certainly the Interests of the Bishops to truckle to that power which they at
first permitted the Pope to exercise over them, for it is certain that if they
should withdraw themselves from his obedience, they would fall into the hands
of the Secular Power; especially since they could never be able to make good
their party against the Pope, without the Protection of their Sovereign, who
must be a very powerful Prince to afford it them, therefore of two evils, it is
best that they choose the least.

Sect. 19. But although the Church had been never so rich and populous, yet to
the erecting of a Spiritual Monarchy, it was absolutely necessary that the Pope
should in no wise be subject to any temporal Jurisdictions, and that he should
hold his Residence in such a place, which being free from obedience to all
other Potentates, should depend on, and own no other Master but him, as also to
be possessed of such Revenues as might enable him to live honorably and
splendidly, and not be ruined by the dismembring of his State, and where his
Partisans, when at any time pursued by their offended Sovereigns, might find a
secure and certain Refuge; but before he could compass all these advantages it
has cost him a world of pains, time, and a powerful Resistance, besides a
thousand secret Practices and Intrigues. It Is true, the Bishops of Rome whilst
the Empire of the West flourished, and as long as the Kingdom of the Goths
lasted in Italy, had no opportunity to think of, much less to put in Execution
these their ambitious designs; but after that the Goths were driven out of
Italy by the Emperor Justinian, and Italy with Rome reduced to a Province of
the Grecian Empire, the Pope could not let slip so fair an opportunity of
freeing himself from the Jurisdiction of the Emperors, to which did not a
little contribute the contempt of the Imperial Authority in Italy, partly
caused by the ill Government of the Exarchate or Viceroy of Ravenna, and
partly by their weakness, whilst the Lumbards were much more powerful in Italy
by the continual quarrels of the Emperors about the time of Justinian the
second; to which reasons we may very well add the Eastern Emperors prohibiting
the adoration of Images; for Leo Isaurus threw them out of all the Churches,
whilst the respect that was paid 'em did degenerate into open Idolatry, and
the People began to be persuaded that a greater Reverence was due to their
Saints, than to God himself. Against this Reformation, Pope Gregory the second,
violently opposed himself, and defended the Image Worship with a great deal of
zeal, partly because it was one of the chiefest Heads of the Romish
Superstition, and did bring in no small gain to the Pope's Coffers; and partly
because it vexed him extremely, that the Emperors should meddle with
Ecclesiastical Affairs without his knowledge, and against his consent, whilst
he was employed in the Introduction of his Spiritual Monarchy: And besides,
this seemed a very fit time for him to shake off the Authority of the Grecian
Emperors. In short, it was by his Instigation that the Romans and Italians,
who, till then, had been very faithful to the Emperor, refused to pay Tribute
to him any longer; and there happening about that time a tumult at Ravenna,
which was the Seat of the Exarch, he himself, defending the rights of the
Emperors, was killed in the Tumult. And thus ended the Rule of the Grecian
Emperors in that part of Italy, which ever since has been free, and in
subjection to none.

Sect. 20. 'Twas thus the Popes shook off the Jurisdiction of the Grecian
Emperors, but were in danger of falling into the clutches of a new Lord, whose
yoke would have been much more insupportable, than that of the far distant
Emperors, for the Kings of the Lumbards endeavored to possess themselves of
those Lands which were fallen off from the Emperor, and consequently to render
themselves Masters of all Italy; and in effect, they seized upon Ravenna, and
several other places, so that there was no body in Italy, that could withstand
their usurpations; thereupon, the Pope knew not to what refuge he should betake
himself, unless to the Kings of France, who endeavored first to adjust the
differences amicably and by fair means, and because the Lumbards refused to
hearken to any accommodation, they resolved to oblige them thereto by force; and
they took upon them the Protection of Italy the more willingly, not only
because the Pope Zacharias had approved of Pepins's deposing his lawful
Sovereign; and from Great Master, making himself to be declared King of France;
but also because they found thereby so good an opportunity of making New
Conquests in Italy, a Country which had often made the French Mouths water. Now
whilst Pepin, and after him Charlemain made War very successfully against the
Lumbards, and had reconquer'd the whole Kingdom of Italy, they presented the
Pope with all that part of it, which was comprehended under the Exarchate;
which fat Donation, That they might more peaceably retain, the Popes in after
Ages gave out, that it was the gift of Constantine the Great; which sham, past
very easily upon the ignorance of those barbarous times. In short, the French
Kings were much obliged to the Pope for the Reasons already mentioned, and
therefore by this gift they sought to express their Gratitude, especially
whilst by a present of what was none of their own, they could acquire a great
reputation of Charity and Holiness; which in these times, was valued according
to the Liberalities and Donations made to the Clergy; insomuch, that the Kings
themselves endeavored to free their Foundations and Settlements on the Church,
from all sort of Subjection or Homage, and to assure to the Clergy the free
possession of what they had given 'em. Now these too extravagant Donations have
not been the least reason, why the Clergy has taken so much pains to shake off
the Royal Supremacy, whilst they justly apprehended, that the Successors of
those that had been so liberal to them, coming to see their Error should
recall all that had been given to them; and from hence it is, that the
Politics have made this remark: That Kings by the Concession of too great
Privileges and immunities have made themselves more Enemies than Friends,
whilst the Receivers live in a continual fear and suspicion of the Givers least
they should one day recall or retrench their immoderate Liberalities; and
therefore to prevent that Inconvenience, they are never quiet till they have
tied them so fast, that it shall not be in the King's Power, if it were in his
will, to deprive them of 'em. The most Impartial of the learned are of the
opinion that the Popes did heretofore design to erect into a Sovereignty, those
Lands which were thus bestowed on them, but that their people opposed it,
desiring rather to be free: especially whilst it seemed very strange to them
that the Pope (who was a Clergyman) should likewise be a Temporal Prince;
'twas upon this Account that Rome took up Arms, and drove out of their City
Pope Leo the third, who betaking himself to Charlemain, was by him
Reestablish'd in his Popedom. But on the other side, the Pope conjointly with
the People of Rome declared Charlemain Emperor, whereby he became Sovereign
over the Exarchate of Ravenna, and other places of Italy which had raised
themselves into free States out of the Ruins of the Western Empire, so that
afterward the Pope himself held those Lands, dependently. of the Emperor who
was likewise named Advocatus et Defensor Ecclesiae, which lasted till the time
of the Emperor Henry the fourth.

Sect. 21. But at last this Advocacy or Protection of the Emperor began to seem
tedious to the Popes, because they could not be elected without the Emperors
consent and confirmation, who used likewise to curb them, when they grew
insolent; and proceeded even sometimes to the deposal of them. Now to shake off
this heavy Yoke of the Emperor, the Popes left no stone unturned, and took a
wonderful deal of pains before they could attain to their desire. 'Twas
therefore they labored so earnestly to give the Emperors their hands full of
work, sometimes in Germany, sometimes in Italy, thereby to weaken their power
and authority. To which the German Bishops did not a little concur, who were
not well pleased to be under the Subjection of the Emperor, and receive their
Bishoprics at his hands. Therefore they conspired with the Pope to establish
an absolute Sovereignty in the Church. And to put this their design in
Execution they found no time more convenient or proper than the Reign of Henry
the fourth, who by reason of his dissolute life and Government was in perpetual
dissension with his States of Germany. Therefore when Gregory the seventh, who
was before named Hildebrand, ascended the Papal Chair, being a proud,
ambitious, and resolute man, he began to exclaim against the Emperor, giving
out that the distribution of Ecclesiastical Benefices did not belong to him,
because he made a scandalous Traffic of them, selling them to people of an ill
repute, and installing them therein before they had taken Holy orders; and
because the Emperor undertook to defend his just Rights, the Pope thundered out
an Excommunication, and animated the Bishops and the other Sates of Germany
against him, and gave him so much trouble and vexation, that at last, he was
fain to abandon his Right of bestowing the Bishoprics, and leave them wholly
in the Pope's disposal. But the Pope's main aim was not so much to free the
Bishops from the Emperor's jurisdiction, as to make himself Supreme in Italy,
and to bring all the Princes in Subjection to the Papal Chair: And some are of
opinion that he might at last have effected, what he had begun, whilst Europe
at that time was divided into so many little Lordships, and most of 'em had
weak, and inconsiderable Princes, and a great many of them, either out of
devotion, or else for fear of being swallowed up by the Great Ones, chose
freely to submit themselves to the Papal Chair, and to pay him Tribute. So that
if there had but succeeded three or four Popes, as Courageous and cunning as
Gregory, covering their design with the veil of Religion, and taking the
specious pretext of Defending the peoples interest against the oppression of
their Princes, they had made themselves temporal, as well as Spiritual
Monarchs. And the Pope did not only pretend to slip his neck out of the collar,
and free himself from the Emperor's power, but he did likewise endeavor to
make him take his turn, and to submit him to his own Authority; for he made
himself Judge of the Emperor's Actions, summoned him to appear before his
Tribunal, and answer to the Complaints which his Subjects made against him, and
by reason of his Nonappearance, he declared him Excommunicated, and fallen
from the Empire; and although his Son Henry the fifth, endeavored to recover
what the Popes had squeezed out of his Father, and seizing upon Pope Paschal,
obliged him to restore to him his right of investing the Bishops; yet the
Clergy of Europe were so discontented therewith, and teas'd him continually
till they had forced him (in the Year 1122.) to resign (for ever) that Right to
the Pope. Not long before, the same dispute arose in England, which at last (in
the Year 1107.) was thus adjusted: The King should no longer insist upon his
Right of investing the Bishops; and they in acknowledgment of that Favor
should do him Homage, which Article was not very pleasing to the Pope, who had
been better contented if they had refused to pay any sort of submission to
their King, as he did effectually forbid the Bishops of France to do; but Lewis
the sixth and his Successors stood up so stoutly in defense of this their
Right, that the Pope was forced with shame to quit his pretensions: Besides,
fearing to draw upon his Head two Powerful Monarchs of Germany and France, he
thought it better to keep in with one, whom he in time of need might oppose
against the other, especially whilst it was not so much his interest to weaken
the French King, with whom he had not so many Feathers to pluck, as to humble
the Emperor, who was then very Powerful in Italy, and endeavored to bring into
subjection the City of Rome; besides, he knew that Germany was not so
straightly United as France, and whilst the other Princes were jealous and
apprehensive of the Emperor's Greatness, they easily agreed with the Pope to
humble him a little, which design they palliated with the pretense of
Protecting the Papal Chair and the Church's Authority. It Is true, Frederick the
first and the second used all their efforts to re-establish the Imperial Power
over the Pope, but ineffectually, whilst Italy was divided into the two
Factions of the Guelphs and Gihelines; the former of which held with the Pope,
the latter with the Emperor, and caused so obstinate and implacable quarrels,
that it was impossible for the Emperor to reduce Italy to a perfect Obedience.
And after the death of Frederick the second, whilst all things were in a
strange confusion by reason of the long Interregnum that then Succeeded, the
following Emperors thanked God that they could maintain themselves Peaceably in
Germany, without troubling their Heads any more with the affairs of Italy; so
that the Popes have quietly exercised their Sovereignty as well personally, as
in respect of the Goods of the Romish Church.

Sect. 22. But this Greatness could not terminate the Pope's Ambition, but was
the occasion of his starting another Doctrine, which served to extend his power
far beyond that of all other Princes; for it maintained a sort of an indirect
Authority, right of examining and animadverting on the actions of all the
temporal Sovereigns; and though it was not said in downright terms, that the
Princes did depend on his Holiness in mere Worldly Affairs, yet he thought that
that absolute power which he had acquired in Ecclesiastical Matters, did
sufficiently Authorize him to judge of their Actions, whether they were good or
bad, to advise, and correct them; and in fine, to forbid what he thought unfit,
and to command what he approved of.

Thus when at any time the Princes were in War with one another, the Pope made
use of his Authority to command a Cessation of Arms, and that they should bring
their Quarrel before him, and expect his decision thereof, threatening the
obstinate, not only to Excommunicate their persons, but likewise to Suspend
through their whole Kingdom the exercise of Divine Worship, and use of the Holy
Sacraments, whilst he imagined that it belonged to him only to remove all
occasions of Scandal in Christendom, to succor the oppressed, and in short to
administer Judgment and Justice to the whole World; therefore he willingly
hearkened to, and took upon him to redress the injuries of all such as made
their complaints to him; nay, he proceeded farther, taking cognizance of those
injustices which Princes did to their own Subjects, as also of the new
impositions that were laid on them, and forbad sometimes their proceeding any
farther, under pain of Excommunication: Sometimes the Pope declared confiscated
the Goods of such as he had excommunicated, and lawful prize for the next that
should lay hands on them, exposing thereby their lives to very eminent Dangers,
and dispensing their Subjects from all Oaths of Allegiance, under the pretense,
that it was not fit to leave the Government of Christian People to Princes that
should rebel against the Church; and such Hellish Maxims several Popes have
dared to maintain and put in execution against Crowned Heads; and to render
more plausible these their execrable Designs amongst the ignorant people, they
served themselves of a forged Decretal, whereon they began to found a new Jus
Canonicum, which ascribed to the Pope an unlimitted Power over all Christians,
and empowered him as common Father to command or forbid the Faithful the
exercise of whatsoever had any relation to their Salvation and good of the
Religion, and to punish such as refused to obey. And the reason why the
Predecessors of Gregory the seventh, did not exercise such a power over the
Emperors, was (say they) either because the Emperors lived so well, that there
was no need of it, or that the Popes lead so bad a life, that they ought rather
to be corrected by others, than think of correcting others.

And to give the more Authority to the Pope's pretensions, the did not fail to
quote what St. Ambrose had done against the Emperor Theodosius, and that the
Bishops of Spain, had obliged their King Wamba to submit to so extraordinary a
Penance, as the renouncing of his Kingdom; as also, That the French Bishops
had deposed Lewis surnamed the Godly, who afterward durst not reassume the
Crown, without the Consent of another Assembly of the Bishops: That Fulk,
Archbishop of Rhemes had threatened Charles the Simple, to Dispense his
Subjects of that obedience they owed unto him, in case he proceeded to make any
Alliance with the Normans, who at that time were Heathens. Now, no body could
doubt, but that the Pope's Authority extends it self farther than all the
Bishops, since it had no other bounds than what the Canons of the Councils and
Decrees of the Popes themselves prescribed it; which had never forbid them to
depose Kings; but their Predecessors could not prevent that which they could
not foresee, nor did they ever dream, that they should arrive to such a height
of impudence. And since the Popes had taken upon 'em to bestow the Royal Title,
and that there were found Princes, who either out of a motive of Ambition or
Superstition, did seek their Confirmation from Rome, they imagined they had no
less a right to deprive those of their Crowns, whom they esteemed unworthy to
bear them. They could not a little incommode the Princes likewise by their
forbidding all Marriages within the seventh Degree of Consanguinity, and the
fourth of Affinity, for whilst among great People, there can seldom any Match
be proposed, where one of those Degrees will not occur, they were in continual
fear of the Pope's troubling their Negotiation, if they did not humbly crouch
to him, and implore his Dispensation; so that let it happen how it would, they
found themselves obliged to dance after his Pipe.

Lastly, The Popes by the great number of Affairs, to be dispatched in their
Courts, allured the greatest and most learned Men of Europe to them, who came
with a design either of procuring themselves some employ, or else to accomplish
themselves in this great School, to be able to serve their Countries at home.
Now as most of these expected their Fortune from the Pope, they devoted
themselves entirely to his will, as well as all the Clergy who unanimously
owned him their Head and General. And this Pope Boniface the eighth, did very
evidently demonstrate by the Jubilee which he published in the year 1300. where
he appeared first in the Habit of an Emperor, then in his Pontificial Robes,
ordering two Swords to be carried before him as Marks of his Authority in all
Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Sect. 23. In the mean while the Popes could not long enjoy this usurped, and
intolerable power without a great deal of opposition; so that they were forced
more than once to change their Notes, and to manage their pretensions more
slyly and cautiously. It Is true, in the Quarrels which they had with the
Emperors Henry, and Frederick, they often got the better; yet sometimes they
met with cruel rubs, and were forced to hear things which were not much to
their credit; and from which the impartial may judge, That it was not the Glory
of God, but Worldly Honor and Advantage, that were the ends of all their
Designs.

But when Boniface the eighth would have played some of his tricks with Philip
the Fair of France, he opposed himself so seasonably against the Popes
encroachments, and defended his rights so courageously, that that dispute
turned wholly to the shame and confusion of the Pope. And Philip, that he might
not give any occasion of scandal by his prosecuting and revenging himself on
Boniface, gave out, that he did not attack him as the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
but as a wicked Prelate, who by unlawful ways had usurped the Papal Chair, and
therefore desired the calling together of a General Council to deliver the
Church of so unjust an oppressor.

But the Schisms which afterward followed, made a much greater breach in the
Popes Authority, when by the division of the Cardinals, two Popes were at the
same time elected, who excommunicated and anathematized one another; and, the
better to maintain themselves in the Papal Chair, they were forced to flatter
and caress the Kings, and tacitly own thereby, that they could not subsist
without their Support; and such a Schism was a very evident Mark that it was
not the Holy Ghost, but devilish Intrigues that presided in those Elections;
and therefore the most prudent of the Clergy were of opinion, that neither of
'em ought to be admitted to the Papal Authority, but that they should proceed
to a new Election, which afterward was practiced by the Council of Constance.
The first Schism as I take it, happened in the year 1134; or as others reckon,
1130. when after the Death of Henry the fifth, two Popes, Innocent the second,
and Anacletus, were chosen both together; and though the first had gained the
most partisans, yet the latter was vigorously maintained against him by the
King of Sicily and the Duke of Aquitain: But he dying, his Friends chose a
third in his place, named Victor, whom Innocent brought to an Accommodation, so
that he at last ceased from his pretensions, and freely submitted himself to
Innocent. But after the Death of Adrian the fourth, there were again two Popes
elected, Alexander the third, and Victor the fourth; with the first held
England France, and Sicily; with the latter, Frederick the first, all Germany,
and most of the Clergy of Rome; and after his Death, his followers chose three
others successively in his place, who were all outlived by Alexander; now all
these cursed, and excommunicated one another after the most infamous manner in
the World, and each of 'em were forced to show more Obedience than Authority to
their Protectors.

But the greatest and most scandalous Schism was that which arose after the
death of Gregory the eleventh, when in like manner two Popes were chosen, one
of which kept his Residence at Rome, and the other at Avignon, and this lasted
amongst their Successors at least Forty years, whilst both Parties vomited out
all the injuries imaginable against one another: The Pope of Avignon was
maintained by France, Scotland, Castile, Savoy and Naples, but the rest of the
Christian States held with the Pope of Rome; both of 'em bragged of the Great
and Holy Persons they had of their side, as likewise the Revelations, and
Miracles which Heaven in their Favor had produced, and so many reasons were
brought in the Favor of each of 'em, that there was no other way to be found
than to Cite them both before the Council of Constance, where they were forced
to Renounce their Popedoms, and a new Pope was elected. The last Schism
happened in the Year 1433, when the Council of Basil deposed Eugenius the
fourth, and chose in his place Pope Foelix the fifth. But the first refused to
submit to their Authority, and the Dissension lasted till after the death of
Eugenius, when Nicholas the fifth being chosen, Foelix desirous of Peace,
yielded all his pretensions to him on very good Conditions, about the Year
1438. Now it is easy to imagine how much these Schisms and Quarrels exposed the
Pudenda Paparum, whilst the Councils were obliged on these occasions to
interpose their Authority, and Bridle the Irregularities of the Pope, to which
people began to appeal from the Pope, as to the Higher Powers; so that when the
Popes began at any time to be unruly, there was no such Bug-bears as to
threaten them with a Council. It Is plain that the Popes could not lord it over
the Councils, since Gregory the seventh himself, when he had renewed the old
quarrel betwixt him and the Emperor Henry the fourth, declared that he would
call a Council, in a place of Security, where both the Friends and Enemies,
Ecclesiastic as well as Secular, might come without any danger, and judge
whether he or the Emperor had violated the Peace, and to propose means for the
re-establishing of it. The same Protestation was made by Pope Gelasius the
second, in his quarrel with Henry the fifth; to which he added that he was
contented to stand to the Decision of his Brethren the Bishops, whom God
himself had made his Judges in the Church, and without whom he durst not take
in hand an affair of so Great Importance. Innocent the third declared also,
that he durst not undertake to judge of the Marriage betwixt Philip August, and
Ingeburg of Denmark, without asking the Opinion of a General Council; and if he
should presume to do it, he should be in danger of losing his Charge and
Dignity, whereby he seemed to own, that a Pope, by the abuse of his Office,
might Lawfully be deprived of the same. But when the Princes in following times
insisted upon those Confessions of the Popes, all the answer and satisfaction
they could have, was, that truly their Predecessors had used such sort of
Expressions, but they were only Complements, and bare Ceremonious words, and
that the Modesty which they had shown in that matter, ought not to be
prejudicial to them.

Thus in the Year 1409. The Council of Pisa deposed the two Antipopes, Benedict
the twelfth, and Gregory the twelfth, and in their place chose Alexander the
fifth; but the Council of Constance did not only confirm the Election of the
said two Popes, but also deposed John the twenty fourth who succeeded Alexander
the fifth.

The Council of Basil proceeded in like manner against Eugenius the fourth, and
made a Decree beside, That neither at Rome, nor in any other place, should
there be any Expedition-Money given for Ecclesiastical Matters. All which
Proceedings struck at the very Foundations of Papal Government; and therefore
it is no wonder that the Popes were afterward so shy in calling the Council of
Trent, and that they then used so many Artifices to impede its decreeing any
thing prejudicial to their Authority, and that, since that time they have
bidden an Eternal adieu to all Councils.

Sect. 24. Amongst all these Schisms the Translation of the Papal Chair from
Rome to Avignon, did not a little weaken their Authority; the First that began
it, (if I am not deceived,) was Clement the fifth at the persuasion of Philip
the Fair, King of France, who had quarreled with Boniface the eighth, and was
Excommunicated by him; the effects of which he designed to prevent if he could
but once oblige the Popes to reside in France, especially whilst thereby most
of the Cardinals should be chosen out of the French Nation; and indeed the
Pope, did reside in that City more than seventy year, without reckoning the
time of the Anti-popes, which became very prejudicial to the Papal Sovereignty;
for till then, amongst other pretenses on which the Popedom was founded, one of
the Chiefest was, That St. Peter having been Bishop of Rome, by his personal
Residence there, had communicated a particular Advantage and Holiness to that
City, which, whether the Popes could transport to Avignon, was very much
doubted of; so that from thence, the Pope found himself very often obliged to
dance after the French-man's Pipes, and to be wholly at his Devotion; though the
French, who did then much brag of the prize they had got, do now complain, that
by the Residence of the Court of Rome in France, they had gained nothing,
unless it be the Art of Chicaning, Simony, and another abominable Crime, which
it is hardly lawful to pronounce; to which we may add, that the Papal Court
being thus translated from its natural Seat into a Foreign Country, its
imperfections were the more easily exposed, and consequently the Popes became
more despicable. This absence of the Popes was no less prejudicial to the
Ecclesiastical Lands in Italy, for after that the Emperor had lost all his
Authority there, every petty Prince was for erecting himself into a Sovereign,
and by the divisions of the Guelphs and Gibelines, all things were brought into
confusion. The neighboring Princes, without any scruple, pillaged the Church's
Patrimony, whilst the absence of the Pope had made them forget all the respect
they owed him; the most of his Cities at the persuasion of the Florentines,
drove out his Legates, and either erected themselves into Free States, or chose
them a Prince of their own City; to which we may add, that the Emperor Lewis of
Bavaria, having quarreled with the Pope, and gained the Subjects of the
Ecclesiastical State, to his Interests, made himself Master of most of the
Country, as being a Feoff of the Empire, and invested therewith such as took
his part against the Pope; so that St. Peter's Patrimony was at that time in a
very bad condition; nor have the Popes been since able to reduce the better
part of what was thus taken from them, into their power, but are forced to
leave the possessors thereof in a free enjoyment of what they have gotten.

In the mean time, the City of Rome was at last obliged to submit to the Pope's
Sovereignty, which it had so long opposed; after that, Pope Boniface the ninth,
in the year 1393. had fortified the Castle of St. Angelo, which served to
bridle the City, and keep it in subjection. Alexander the sixth, was chiefly
the cause that the Patrimony of the Church fell again into the hands of the
Pope: he had a natural Son, named Caesar Borgia, who, upon the account of the
Dukedom of Valence, brought to him as Dowry by his Wife Charlotte d'Albret, was
commonly called il Duca Valentino. Now whilst the Pope used all his
endeavors, to make his Son a powerful Prince in Italy, to attain to his ends,
he bethought himself of this expedient: He drove out those little Signiori that
were possessed of small parcels of the Church's Territory, making himself
Master of those places which they held, and then gave his Son the Propriety
thereof. This his design succeeded very happily, and he made a shift to reduce
either by force or treachery, most of those little Lordships into his
subjection, and though Borgia used a great deal of temerity in the management of
this affair; yet he said, he knew well enough what he did, since his Father,
who was inspired by the Holy Ghost, approved of all his actions.

But when he wanted Money to pay his Soldiers, he plotted with his Father to
poison several of the richest Cardinals at a Banquet designed for that purpose,
and thereby, not only to put himself in possession of their goods, but likewise
to be rid of hateful persons, who, he feared, might oppose themselves to his
design; but in the mean time, the Servant he had employed in this his devilish
design, by mistake, gave the Pope and his Son the empoison'd drink, so that the
Pope died immediately thereof, and the Duke very hardly escaped, at the expense
of a terrible sickness; nor could he afterward with all his Authority oblige
the Cardinals to choose a Pope that should be in his Interests.

Thus Borgia's vast ambitious projects dwindled into nothing, for after the
Death of Pius the third, who held the Chair a very few Weeks, came Julius the
second, the sworn implacable enemy of Borgia, to succeed him, who reduced all
that he had taken, and drove him at last out of the Country; and this Pope
prevailed so far by his Bribes, and Artifices, that he regained all that the
Church had had before in its possession, except the Duchy of Ferrara, which
likewise, at the latter end of the last Age, the legitimate Race of all the
Princes of Est being ended, fell into the Popes hands again; he also hindered
the French from making themselves Masters of all Italy.

Sect. 25. But now whilst the Popedom seemed to be in its greatest Splendour,
and at as high a point of perfection as it could ever aspire to, all the West
having joined it self to the Communion and Fellowship of the Roman Church,
excepting some few relics of the Vaudois in France, and the Hussites in
Bohemia, which were altogether inconsiderable; and the quarrel betwixt Pope
Julius the second, and Lewis the twelfth of France, which had easily occasioned
a new Schism, being happily composed after that Pope's death by Leon the Tenth;
and the old complaints that were used to be made against the ambition of the
Court of Rome, being almost all laid asleep; there happened upon a very slight
occasion, so terrible an Insurrection against the Papal Chair, that a great
part of Europe did withdraw its self from the Tyranny thereof, and did run the
risque of an irrecoverable destruction. In which Affair, as in all other, we
will only observe, how much humane prudence and designs contributed thereto,
and will rather adore with an humble respect and admiration the Counsel and
Work of God Almighty, than presumptuously penetrate into his Holy Mysteries;
and here we may not unfitly quote that expression which Tacitus uses in his
History; Abditos Numinis sensus exquirere illicitum, nec ideo assequare. Now
Leon the tenth, was a peaceable, magnificent and very liberal Prince to Wise
and Learned Men, and might have passed for a good Pope, had he had but an
indifferent knowledge of Religion, and inclination to Piety, for both which (on
the contrary) he was very insensible: He living very splendidly, and having
exhausted his Treasures by the extravagant Pomp and Magnificence of his Court,
did not understand the Art of making Gold, but was forced in his necessities to
have recourse to the Cardinal Laurentius Puccius, who finding all the other
means of getting Money quite exhausted, bethought himself of Indulgences, which
the Pope dispersed for Money through all Christendom, in the most ample form,
for the service as well of the dead as of the living, with permission to eat
Eggs, and Milk-Victuals on Fast-days, with several such like privileges; and
the Money which he hoped to collect by this infamous commerce, was already
disposed of, and that especially, which was to be gathered in Saxony, and in
all that Country to the Sea, was destined for Magdalen the Pope's Sister; and
that they might extract greater gains from this sort of Merchandice, a
Commission of collecting such Money was given to one Arcimboldus a Bishop in
name and habit only, but a man that was incomparably well versed in the tricks
of the Genoa Merchants, and that would only deal out Commissions to such as bad
most for them, and whose only prospect was the advantage and gain that could be
made of 'em. Now 'twas anciently the Custom in Saxony for the St. Austin's
Hermets to preach the Indulgences, but Arcimboldus his Commissioners knowing
the great Experience they had in that sort of work, durst not trust them for
fear of being outwitted by 'em, therefore they made choice of the Dominicans;
this procedure touched the Austin Monks to the quick, whilst they saw it
reflected on their reputation, and infringed their rights and privileges.

But the Dominicans to show their diligence in their new employ, preached up
their Merchandice extremely to the great scandal of their Auditors, whilst the
Commissaries spent in riotous Debauches what the poor peasants had scraped
together, to redeem their sins withal. Thereupon Luther, a Monk of St. Austin's
Order, took occasion to preach against this impudent and scandalous commerce;
and after that, he had thoroughly examined the whole contrivance, he proposed
Ninety Five Theses upon that Matter at Wittenburg, in the year 1517. against
which, John Tetsel a Dominican Friar of Frankford on the other, proposed as
many quite contrary; the dispute being thus commenced, they began both to write
at large in defense of their propositions; but whilst Luther had the
Scriptures and Reason on his side, his Adversary could not defend his Opinion
by any stronger Arguments than the Church and Pope's Authority; this obliged
Luther to go farther, and to search into the ground and foundation of the
Pope's Authority, and to examine in what condition the Church then was, whereby
he more and more discovered the errors and abuses thereof, and sharply
reprehended the scandalous Lives of the Popes and Monks, and proved that the
Sovereign powers were obliged to reform such abuses; and to the end that he
might be supported by them, he very advantageously represented their condition,
power and grandeur, whereof the Priests had before given little and
contemptible Idea's, and vilifi'd them extremely, by which means his Doctrine
was received by a great number of persons, and spread it self mightily in a
small time.

Sect. 26. But that we may the better understand how a poor inconsiderable Monk
could give so terrible a blow to the Pope's Authority, we must observe that
next to the Divine Direction and Concurrence, the fit juncture of time did not
a little contribute to the so strange success of this mighty Work, as likewise
the Dispositions of the people's minds at that very time.

For first the Cause of Luther, concerning the Indulgences, was so just and
reasonable, that several Famous Divines ranged themselves on his side, (though
they afterward fell off from him) as well as some Cardinals, and George Duke
of Saxony himself: And his Adversaries were such persons, that all honest men
were scandalized at their ignorance and malice: Besides, there was no body at
first that could have been persuaded, the business would have gone so far.
Luther himself did not then dream of his revolting from the Pope. Maximilian
the Emperor was not averse to Luther's Doctrine; and when he heard of him, he
is reported to have said, They should keep that Monk for him; there were only a
few Monks, and the Commissaries of the Indulgences, whose Trade was like to go
to wrack, that opposed themselves; and they made such a-do, that by their folly
and imprudence they raised a little spark of fire into a mighty and dangerous
combustion.

Now Christendom at that time was in a very miserable condition, the whole
World was plunged into unnecessary Ceremonies, the malicious Monks ruled
uncontrouledly over the minds and consciences of the Laity, which they had
fettered in undissoluble bands. The Divinity of those times, was degenerated
into mere Sophistry and Bantering. The Priests defined their opinions, and laid
down their propositions without ever putting themselves to the trouble of
proving them; and the way of living of the then Clergy from the highest to the
lowest, did contract the Odium and contempt of all the World; the two preceding
Popes, Alexander the sixth, and Julius the second, had made their Memory stink,
and left a very bad name behind 'em upon the account of their vices, their
quarrelsomness infidelity, ambition and other such qualifications very much
disagreeing with the requisites of a Clergyman; the Bishops if they were any
thing worth, were nevertheless deeply embroiled in worldly Affairs, and most of
'em lead a very scandalous life, being better versed in the hunting of Beasts,
than in the Apostolic way of catching Men; the Priests and Monks were plunged
over head and ears in ignorance, and gave a great Scandal to the common People
by their Debauches and irregular Lives, as they were become unsupportable to
all the World by their insatiable Avarice and Thirst after Riches.

Besides, those that opposed themselves first against Luther, were miserably
ignorant, and for the most part infamous Monks, who not being used to his way
of disputing, were at the first bout confounded, and could not tell where to
lay hold on him; and though in the preceding times the Clergy were as bad as
then, yet the universal ignorance of those barbarous Ages did not let it
appear; but afterward, when Europe began to be enlightened by the blooming
dawn and restoration of Letters, their Spots and Deformities were exposed to
every man's naked Eye: And therefore it was, that the Priests and Monks, whose
Eyes were offended and dazzled by the new-appearing Light, were so much incensed
against those Instauratores literarum, and sought all ways to suppress 'em; and
because they would do it with good grounds, they made a Work of Religion of it;
which obliged the Men of Learning to ridicule their simplicity, and to labor
more and more to discover their shameful ignorance.

Thus the Monks began an impudent Quarrel against Johannes Reuchlinus, and,
right or wrong, would prove him a Heretic; where they shamefully confounded
themselves, and gave occasion to that learned Gentleman Ulrich van Hutten (as I
take it) to rally them most strangely in his Epistolis obscurorum virorum.

Now whilst the War was carried on with a great deal of heat and bitterness,
between the Champions and Persecutors of Learning, the business of Luther very
opportunely fell out at the same time; therefore the Monks used all their Arts
and Persuasions to engage the Learned to oppose Luther, thereby to suppress
both Parties with their own Arms: Which was the occasion that most of the
Cultores bonarum literarum ranged themselves on Luther's side; as in effect, no
man can deny, but that the learned Erasmus of Roterdam had a great share in
this Reformation, by discovering and publicly reprehending a great number of
their Errors and Abuses; by rejecting their Scholastic Divinity; by exciting
the People to the reading of the Bible and the Ancient Fathers; by turning into
Ridicule the Barbarity and Ignorance both of the Priests and Monks; and in
short, by favoring in general the Cause of Luther at the first, though his hot
and violent way of writing was not altogether approved by him.

Now the bare silence of Erasmus was extremely disadvantageous to Luther's
Opposers; for whilst Erasmus at that time was looked upon to be one of the most
learned Divines of Europe, it was universally believed, that he would engage
himself in this Quarrel against Luther, had he not perceived, that he had
reason of his side; for when he afterward put forth his Book de Libero
Arbitrio, it did not meet with many Partisans; whilst it was very remarkable,
that he writ it more at the Solicitations of others, than as his own real
Belief and Persuasion: Besides, it was a thing which had but little reference
to the matter in hand: And moreover, it was very solidly and pertinently
answered by Luther.

Then again, the German Princes and States were very much disgusted with the
Court of Rome, upon the account of the manifold unreasonable Exactions laid on
them; for they saw well, that the design was only to fool them out of their
Money, and thereby to support the Pope's extravagant Pomp and Magnificence. The
imminent danger of War with the Turks did not a little contribute to the good
success of Luther's Affairs: And the Divisions and Quarrels happening between
Charles the Fifth, Francis the First, and Harry the Eight, made so great a
bustle in the World, that no body was at leisure to mind the petty Disputes of
the Clergy. Some are of opinion, that Charles the Fifth was not sorry to see
the Doctrine of Luther make so great a Progress in Germany, for thereby the
Empire being divided into Parties, he might the more easily oppress the States,
and build an absolute Monarchy upon their Ruins; for otherwise he could not
have found the least difficulty or opposition, had he undertaken to stifle the
upstart Doctrine in its infancy, and in the year 1521, had seized upon Luther
at Worms, which might have past for an excellent Coup d'etat. But for all that,
I cannot believe that this Doctrine had been so easily suppressed, though Luther
had been put to death against the Imperial Promise and safe Conduct which was
given him. But it is much more probable, that the Emperor being then a young
Prince, could not penetrate into the consequence of the Affair, and besides,
did not think it convenient to oppose the Elector of Saxony, who was then in
great credit; and the Wars with the Turk and French King hindered him from
attempting any thing against the Princes of Germany, whilst Francis began to
make Leagues and confederate himself with 'em. Though it is most certain, that
he served himself afterward of the Pretext of Religion, to make War upon the
Protestant States, that by their fall he might make himself a way to universal
Monarchy. But though Fortune smiled on him at the Battle of Smal-kald. he could
not perfect the so-luckily begun design, whilst the assistance of the German
Princes was so necessary to him both against the Turk and French, and whilst he
designed to place the Imperial Crown on his Son Philip's Head. In short, the
Pope himself (Paul the Third) did so much dread the Fortune of the Emperor,
that he excited the French to oppose his growing Greatness, and to hinder the
total ruin of the Protestant Party: Nor did he scruple to use the Turkish help
thereto, so mightily was he afraid of a Reformation in his Court. In fine, the
Pope had prejudiced himself and his own Affairs by his ill Conduct; for it was
a great oversight in Leon the Tenth, so violently to support the Cause of the
Indulgence-sellers, as also his Decision by a Bull in the Month of November
1518. of the questions which were begun to be disputed on, whereby he cut off
all means of an Accommodation, and deprived Luther of his hopes of Pardon or
Reconciliation: Whereas he had done much more prudently, had he declared
himself Neuter, and imposed in the mean time Silence on both Parties, till he
could have found out some expedient to appease Luther. So likewise the Cardinal
Cajetan acted very imprudently at Ausburg, in the following year 1519, in
handling Luther so roughly, and not embracing his reasonable Proposition of
Silence, on condition that the Cardinal would oblige his Adversaries to do the
same; for he forced him thereby to Extremities which perhaps he had never
otherwise thought of, and to fly into an open Rebellion against the Papal
Authority: But nothing would satisfy, unless he retracted all his Writings;
whereas they might have easily granted him, That there was a great Corruption
of Manners, that he might desist from the Reformation of their Doctrine.

Besides, whilst the Pope was very instant with the Elector of Saxony, that he
would deliver up Luther, he found himself more and more engaged into a Proof of
the Pope's Injustice, as also to show upon what grounds his Cause was founded,
that so he might induce the Elector to shut his Ears to the Pope's Request. But
when Luther afterward appealed to a Council, the Pope rendered himself very
much suspected, whilst he temporiz'd and spun out the Affair into a great many
delays; for it was very visible, that he could never be able to defend his
Cause, if it came once to be examined by impartial and uninterested men. It
happened likewise very unluckily, that the Pope embroiled himself not long
after with Harry the Eight, who to revenge himself of the Pope, opened the Door
to the English Reformation: As also the House of Navarr did mightily contribute
to the introducing and establishing of the same Religion in France, out of
hate, as some think, to the Pope, who had excited Ferdinand the Catholic, to
seize upon and possess himself of that Kingdom.

To all which we may add, That there were a great many honest men among the
Papists, who were not sorry to see the Pope a little curbed and checked, as
Luther used him. Thus all things wonderfully concurred to the executing the
Divine Will and Decree of the Almighty.

Sect. 27. But why Luther's Doctrine has not made a greater progress nor
overthrown the whole Popedom, there may be several strong and weighty Reasons
given thereof: For, first you must take notice, That so soon as several States
had renounced the Pope's Authority, the chief direction of Ecclesiastic
Affairs must necessarily devolve on the Supreme Magistrate: For though some of
them would have assumed the Authority over the rest, that were of the same
Belief and Persuasion, the others that thought themselves quite as good, and as
fit thereto, would never give their consent; which did much weaken their Union,
and hindered them from acting so unanimously against the Pope as he could do
against them. Besides, at the first they did not proceed deliberately to a
Reformation, as if they would after a mature consideration form a new state,
but they fell into this Change insensibly and unexpectedly, and the business
was carried underhand, and went on very slowly; and though Luther was the
Bell-weather of the Flock, yet his Followers would not conform themselves in
every point to his Sentiments, but pretended that they had likewise something
to say for themselves. Hence did arise several Differences and Disputes among
them, which whilst there was no body whose Authority was sufficient to decide
'em, and each one obstinately persisted in his Opinion, quickly occasioned
Schisms amongst them, and made them, forgetting their Common Enemy, to fall
foul upon one another. This gave the Papists a very fair occasion to say, The
Heretics were confounded amongst themselves, not knowing what they should
believe; and were wandering in an inextricable Labyrinth, since their falling
away from the Romish Church. Hereto did not a little contribute those, who
abusing the Name of the Holy Gospel, led an impious and scandalous life; as if
the Gospel-Freedom consisted in the abandoning themselves to all sorts of
Debauchery. This their ill Conduct gave occasion to the Pope's Followers to
blacken the Doctrine of Luther, because he had so severely reprehended the
scandalous Lives of their Clergy, and thereby had gained himself a strong
Party. And it was likewise a great misfortune, that a very little after the
preaching of Luther, there sprung up great swarms of Phanaticks, as the
Anabaptists, and suchlike; and that the Bores in Germany made a dangerous
Insurrection; all which Disturbances were by the Pope's Creatures attributed to
Luther's Doctrine; so that a great many Princes began to suspect it, as if it
were the Introducer of all sorts of License and Irregular Liberties amongst the
Mobile, which they esteemed a greater Evil than the Oppression of the Clergy:
So that they opposed themselves with all their might against this new and
seemingly seditious Doctrine of Luther. Some are of opinion, That the Academy
of Paris had a great share herein; for Luther imagining that the French Clergy
were discontented with Leon the Tenth, upon the account of the Pragmatick
Sanction, concerning the Election of their Bishops, and therefore would not let
slip so fair an occasion of revenging themselves on him. 'Twas in these
Thoughts that Luther was so willing to submit to their decision his Disputes
with Eckius; but unfortunately for him, for they condemned his Opinions in very
rude and jocquant terms. Spain too found it to be her Interest to take into her
protection the Chair of Rome, and therefore violently opposed the Protestant
Religion, and so vigorously supported the solemn League in France, that Henry
the Fourth, to gain the Crown, was absolutely forced to abjure his Religion.
Some have likewise observed, that the advancement of the Protestant Religion
was not a little retarded first by Zuinglius, and afterward by Calvin, who
introducing a too great and hasty Reformation, as well in things relating to
the external form of the Church, as in the essential points of Faith, fell from
one extreme into the other. Now Luther had changed very few of those things to
which the People had been accustomed; for he left in the Church the Ornaments,
Bells, Organs, and Candlesticks, and retained likewise the greatest part of the
Mass, excepting that he added thereto several Prayers in the Vulgar Tongue; so
that he was looked upon by the greatest part as a Reformer only of some Abuses
that had slipped into their Religion. But just as it appeared that this
Revolution was like to be universal, Zuinglius intervened in Switzerland, and
Calvin in France, who, instead of observing Luther's method, began immediately
to preach against the Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, abolisht
entirely all sort of Ornaments and Ceremonies, broke in pieces the Altars and
Images, extirpated all sort of Order in the Hierarchy, or Government of the
Church, and despoiled the Religion of all that which might serve to attract the
Eyes and the external Senses: Whereupon the common People conceived a great
aversion against them, and cleav'd with much more zeal and attachment to the
Religion which they received from their Ancestors.

The Riches of the Church did also not a little contribute to the progress of
Luther's Doctrine, whilst several laid hold on the opportunity of appropriating
them to themselves, and perhaps did no less hinder it, whilst most of the
great Prelates stuck fast to the Church of Rome, who perhaps would have
ventured to have shaken off the yoke, if the fear of losing their fat
Benefices, had not kept them faithful to their Masters Interests; as we see
that it happened in France, where the Prelates themselves, as well as the
common People before the Reformation did mightily despise the Pope's Authority,
but afterward were great sticklers for the Chair of Rome, and stirred up the
peoples hatred against the new Doctrine, as soon as they perceived that if that
prevailed, they must out.

Sect. 28. But after that, the Pope and his Creatures were a little recovered
out of the terrible consternation so puissant an opposition had put them in,
and that his Adversaries began to fall out among themselves, he established his
Affairs in a much better condition than at first, and stood so vigilantly upon
his Guard, that the Protestants are not only incapable of doing him any more
mischief; but he does proceed every day to get signal advantages over them; for
that which Luther took an occasion to hurt him most by, is now quite taken
away; or at least, is more prudently and modestly practiced by him, si non
cast, saltem caute: And the Weapons which Luther used against the Pope, are
now by the same advantageously turned against their Master; for the Popes do no
longer so impudently insult over Sovereign Princes as they were wont to do, but
use them with much more civility and moderation; it is true, in the last
Century, Paul the fourth did handle the Spaniards something roughly, as Paul
the fifth in the Age wherein we live, did deal with the Venetians much after
the same rate; but their differences were quickly termined by a prudent
mediation, before the business came to be too high; and the Popes have been
since convinced, that such heats are very prejudicial to their States; as in
effect, Paul the fifth was immediately brought to reason, when the French
Ambassador made him believe, that the Venetians had sent for Ministers from
Geneva, and that he should shortly hear they were all turned Protestants.
Besides, the Papal Chair has no more been filled by such notorious Debauchees
as Alexander the sixth, or by any of so Martial and fighting an humor as Julius
the second; but on the contrary, they endeavor to put their plots in execution
with less noise, and more cunning, and by appearing outwardly very zealous for
the peace and quiet of Christendom.

The scandalous Merchandising of Indulgences, and a too gross Simony is by them
suspended, whilst they endeavor to drain the Peoples purses by more
honorable and plausible means; the Bishops likewise in general, are much
mended, and comport themselves with more modesty and gravity than they did
before Luther's time, and there is now to be found amongst their Clergy, very
Wise and Learned Men. They have likewise in the Romish Church, made a great
Reformation amongst the ordinary Priests and Friars, and that brutality and
ignorance which heretofore was so common amongst them, is now no more to be
seen. The brave and learned Sermons of Luther was that which at first procured
him and his Disciples so great a concourse of people; they edified a great many
by the excellent Books which they put out in their Mother tongue, to excite
them to Meditation, Piety, Prayer, and Spiritual Exercises; both which the
Papists have since imitated; and there are found amongst them a great many good
Preachers, and wholesome Books of Prayer and Meditation; so that at present,
the Protestant Clergy have no longer reason to reproach the Romish with their
want of that modesty and excellent conduct which they observe in the external
Service of God. They are also well versed in all Controversies, and are ready
with whole dozens of distinctions for every objection made against them; for
example, whereas there is nothing can be more ridiculously invented, than the
Pope's distributing out Indulgences for twenty or thirty Thousand Years, they
give it a color with the distinction of intensive and extensive, potentialiter
and actualiter, wherein the young Students take a great deal of pleasure, and
the ignorant imagine some great Mysteries to be invelopt therein; whereas also
in Luther's time, the ignorance of the Clergy, and their hatred to Learned Men
was so prejudicial to the Popedom; those of that Communion, and especially, the
Jesuits have since found remedies for that inconvenience; for the Jesuits have
not only taken upon them the Information and Instruction of the youth, but in
the Countries where they are established, they have as 'twere made a Monopoly
thereof, so that learning is now so far from being any longer prejudicial to
'em, that it procures them great advantages: Lastly, They desisted from the
propagation of their Religion with Fire and Sword, and endeavored to allure
the chiefest of the Protestants, with good Words, great Promises, and effectual
Preferments.

Those that will go over to 'em, if they have any parts and capacities, are
sure to make their Fortunes; to which, upon the account of their Church's
Riches they have the best opportunity in the World: Whereas on the contrary, if
any one of them would turn Protestant, and does not bring means along with him,
or is not of a more than ordinary understanding, he has nothing but
contemptible poverty to expect.

Lastly, The House of Austria has much contributed to the raising up and
restoring of the Popedom, by driving out the Protestants, not only out of its
hereditary Lands, but likewise from Bohemia, and the depending Provinces, and
lately out of all Hungary, or else by obliging them to embrace the Romish
Religion.

Sect. 29. From what has been said before, may easily be understood, how, and
by what means this Spiritual Monarchy has insinuated it self in the Western
part of Christendom, but that you may the better conceive the structure and all
the resorts of this Machine; 'twould not be amiss, if we considered the Pope
two ways, first, as he is one of the Princes of Italy, and secondly, as the
Ghostly Sovereign of the Occidental Churches.

As to the first, we say, That the Pope may very well pass for one of the
greatest Lords in Italy, but under this consideration, must he yield to most of
the Potentates of Europe; his Territories are the City of Rome with its
Dependances on both the sides the Tyber, the Duchy of Benevento in the Kingdom
of Naples, of Spoletto, Urbin and Ferrara, the Marquisate of Ancona, several
places in Hetruria, as also the Romaniola or Flaminia, containing the Cities of
Bolonia and Ravenna; in France he has the County of Avignon; Parma is a Fee of
the Church, which Paul the third invested his Son Peter Lewis Farnesse with,
though since that time, it has been resolved, that for the future, it shall not
be in the Pope's power to alienate the vacant Fees, nor invest any one with the
Church Lands, for fear of weakening the Papal State; and to the end that the
Pope might have wherewithal to maintain his Court, if it should happen that any
part of his Foreign Revenues should fail or come short. The Kingdom of Naples
is likewise a Fee or Copyhold of the Church, in acknowledgment of which the
King of Spain does yearly present the Pope with a white Hackney, and five
Thousand Ducats. As for the Pope's Pretensions upon other Lands, they are now
no longer passable. All these Countries are peopled, and fertile enough, and do
comprehend a great many considerable Towns and Cities, from whence the Pope
does yearly draw about two millions of Gold; and his Officers are very careful
that the People may not grow too rich.

Though there are good Soldiers enough to be found in the Pope's Dominions,
yet his Militia is not very considerable, whilst the means he uses to maintain
his Countries are quite contrary to those of other Princes. He keeps ready
equipped about Twenty Galleys, which usually lie at Civita Vecchia.

The politic Maxims of the Pope, which he, as temporal Prince, puts in
practice, do mostly consist in the maintaining of the Peace in Italy, and
retaining it in the same posture and condition as it is at present, and
especially in suppressing any upstart Power that may give Laws to all the rest.
Besides, it is his peculiar Interest to hinder the Turk from getting footing in
Italy, and in case of any Invasion, to unite not only all the Italian Princes,
but likewise all Christendom against him, who likewise ought not to suffer that
this noble Country fall into the hands of those Barbarians. The Pope has now no
reason to be alarmed by Germany, as long as it does continue in its present
form of Government: But if it should happen to fall under an Absolute Monarchy,
it might easily revive its old pretensions. Spain and France are those which
can only give the Pope his hand full of business, and therefore in respect of
those it is the Pope's Interest to foment a continual Division betwixt them; or
to balance them so equally, that neither may be able to trample upon the other.
I don't doubt but the Pope wishes with all his Heart that the Spaniard were not
so near a Neighbor to him in Italy, and would not be sorry to see him driven
out of Naples; but there is no probability that he could effect that himself;
and to call in the French to drive out the Spanish, were to leap out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire. Therefore the Pope must be contented to hinder the
Spanish from making any greater Progress in Italy; and if at any time Spain
should attempt it, France and the rest of the Italian Princes would soon be
upon their backs. Nor is it less the Pope's Interest to hinder France from
getting so sure footing there, as to be able to sway the Affairs of that
Country, according to its own will and pleasure. The Pope has nothing to fear
from the other States of Italy; for though they cherish a secret hatred against
him, whilst a spiritual power is become very formidable to them, and some of
them have been shrewdly handled by him, yet they are forced to respect him
outwardly, and dare not undertake any thing against him openly: But on the
contrary, they will never suffer him to aggrandize himself by the Ruins of any
one of them; whilst that crafty Nation is very jealous of keeping the balance
equal amongst them.

Sect. 30. But if we consider the Pope the second way, that is, as the
spiritual Monarch of Christendom, and Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth, we
shall find the whole basis of that Government so artificially and ingeniously
contrived, that a man may well say, there was never a more subtle Machine
invented whilst the World stood, than is the POPEDOM, the which to support and
maintain does require so much the more Cunning and Intrigues, as its Interests
are different from those of all the World beside, and the Title to such a
pretended Sovereignty more weak and impertinent. The Prospect of other States
is, to secure to themselves an external as well as internal Peace and
Tranquillity: It Is to this end that each Member of the Commonwealth does
contribute as much as in him lies, not sparing Limb nor Life to put themselves
into a condition of resisting the Injuries and Violences of Strangers; as also
each particular ought to procure to himself a competent Subsistence by his
proper Labor and Industry: But the aims and designs of the Papal Government
is, that the Pope and his Clergy endeavor to make themselves rich, powerful,
and considered in the World, and to provide for their own ease and security by
the Sweats of other men's Brows, which they effect by all sort of allurements
and plausible persuasions. And whereas other States are at excessive charges in
the maintaining of standing Armies and a number of Garrisons; the Pope on the
contrary makes his Militia subsist, how great soever it be, at the Expenses of
others, and yet does serve himself thereof much more advantageously than all
others.

Besides, other Princes find it to be their Interest not to neglect the Maxim
de imperio intra terminos coercendo; or of not extending too far the limits of
their Territories: But the Pope has no reason to observe the same measures, for
'twould be neither dangerous nor troublesome to him, though his Empire should
reach both to the East and West Indies.

The Right of Sovereignty is grounded upon clear and uncontrollable Reason, and
on the Institution of God himself; so that without it, it were impossible for
men to lead an honorable, safe, and orderly Life; but I am sure, it is
impossible to find so plain and well-grounded a Title of the Papal Power; or to
prove, That a Spiritual Sovereignty is as necessary to the Welfare of
Christendom, as Temporal Powers are to the Peace and Tranquillity of Mankind:
And he that will not believe this Position, let him only bring one solid
Argument to the contrary, and we will yield with admiration to the Subtleness
of his Wit. But if the Popish Doctors will appeal to an express and positive
order of God, they are obliged to bring clear and indisputable proofs from the
Holy Scripture to demonstrate, that our Savior, when he sent forth his
Apostles into all Countries to preach the Gospel, gave them power not only to
teach all Nations, preferrably to all humane prohibition, (which is not
doubted) but also without the Sovereign's Consent, though he should profess the
same Christian Religion, to establish in the public Ministry, who, and how
many they themselves thought fit, and afterward to resign to them the right of
augmenting their Order without number, and without measure, whilst no body must
contradict them, no, not so much as he whose Right they so boldly usurped; and
that in consequence of these their Proceedings, since those they had thus
established, cannot live by the Air, like Camelions, to empower them to scrape
together by all sort of Tricks and Inventions, not only what may be necessary
for the preservation of Life, but likewise to subministrate to Luxury and
Superfluity; and that besides all such as were resolved to embrace this
Profession, should be freed from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Magistrate; as
also their Goods, howsoever acquired, nay, though they immediately proceeded
from the Revenue of the Republic, and were protected thereby, were yet to be
independent of the Higher Powers: Nor might it be permitted them to lay any
Taxes thereon, to limit their immoderate Bounds, or to convert them to any
other use in the greatest case of necessity: And that the Supreme Direction of
the Affairs of this Order, as well in the administration of all Offices, as of
their Revenues, should belong to one of the same Order, on whom they should
absolutely depend; whilst their lawful Sovereign might not pretend to a more
prevalent Right, although the Multitude, or the Rebellion of such a Spiritual
Order, should tend to the ruin of the State; or that it could not be saved,
but by the communication of their Goods, unless the Director of the Order gave
his Consent to it.

Besides all this, there remains clearly to be proved another Hypothesis, which
consists in Matter of Fact; as for example: That Jesus Christ conferred on St.
Peter alone the spiritual Sovereignty over the Church, without the admission of
any of the other Apostles into the Government, and that such a Prerogative was
not confined only to his person, but that by an equal right it should eternally
belong to such as should succeed him in the place whereof he was Bishop: As
also that St. Peter was actually Bishop of Rome, did there exercise such a
Sovereignty, and that he did irrevocably communicate it to this place alone
excluding all others where he afterward preached. Now, as the proof of these
Propositions is extremely difficult, the Doctors of the Romish Church ought to
take care, that they do not form them too accurately before their Auditors, but
only in general terms, and to cover 'em with the Foxes Tail; for it is much more
their Interest to buzz into the Peoples Ears a number of Reasons, which are but
little to the purpose; as for example, the Promises made in Scripture, that the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church; of the Greatness and
flourishing estate of the Church; of its Antiquity; of the Succession of the
Popes; of the Fathers, Councils; of the Authority of so many Nations and times;
of Wonders, and suchlike stuff, very proper for a noisy Declamation. It Is an
Expedient likewise which they have found very profitable, without much Debate,
to brand those with the Title of Heretics that dare to begin any Dispute with
them; for it is just as much as if they should term them ignorant and
impertinent Novices, that have not yet learned their Trade, that don't know how
to speak with Honor before their Masters, but deserve to be burned.

Sect. 31. In the mean while it is very plain, that this Spiritual Sovereignty
was absolutely obliged to assume the form of Monarchy, and that it is
altogether inconsistent with either Aristocracy or Democracy, as well upon the
account of several other inconveniences, as because it would be morally
impossible to erect any sort of Democracy or Aristocracy (where so many
different opinions always occurr) that could be so well modeled by the most
exact and severest Laws, as not be plagued with a thousand Divisions, Schisms
and Factions, whereby the whole structure built upon so weak Foundations, would
soon fall to ruin; but amongst the several sorts of Monarchy, they have pitched
upon so good a one, that it is impossible to find any other more agreeing with
their Interests, than that they have chosen; and it is certain, that all the
most subtle Speculations of politic Writers, is nothing in comparison of what
we see here actually performed; it is true, there have been Kings who have made
themselves and their Countriesvery Famous, for as much as they have given out
that they were descended from Divine origin, or that their States were founded
either by the special command of the Gods, or confirmed by Miracles wrought in
their favor, or else they have by their Heroic Actions procured their
Deification, and made their Subjects adore them after their Death; but the Pope
has been able to persuade the people, that he is the true State-holder, and
Vicegerent of Jesus Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and on Earth, and that
too, to be understood in a much higher Sense, than when it is sometimes said of
the Supreme Powers, that they are Earthly Gods; for he gives out, that he is
the Dispenser of that Grace which is procured us by the Merits of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and that he who does not acknowledge his Power, can have no hopes
or pretense to Salvation. Now there is nothing in the world that can more
attract the most profound respect and veneration of men, than the Divine
Majesty; and consequently, nothing more prevalent in the obliging them to
obedience, and a blind submission to all sort of trouble and charges, than the
fear of God's wrath, and the damnation of their Souls; and when once the Pope
can insinuate the belief thereof into the Peoples minds, there needs no other
demonstration of all the other Articles of Faith, as (...), the Pope has said
it.

Besides, though most other Nations look upon hereditary Kingdoms to be the best
and most secure; yet this sort of Government does not square with the Pope's
Interests; for where the Crown descends from Father to Son, it is impossible but
that sometimes the minorities of Kings must happen, which would sound very
absurd, that God's Vicar upon Earth should sometimes ride upon a Hobbyhorse,
and that the Monarch of all Christendom, should stand in need of a Tutor.
Besides, 'twould be very difficult for a young Prince to assume such a Gravity
as is absolutely necessary in the acting of that personage, nor was it to be
hoped that all the Successors and Posterity of the Pope could have equal
inclinations to such an employ. In a word, the hereditary Right would have
turned it into a bare temporal Kingdom, which could not have been long
supported by so weak and unnatural a Title; not to add, that the Ministers of
State, and those that enjoyed the chiefest Employs, would have endeavored to
turn out their Master, and put themselves in his place, whereas they now
contain themselves in a very exact obedience, in hopes that they or theirs, may
also by Election one day ascend to this Supreme Dignity; to which, force can
never give them any right. Lastly, If this Monarchy had been made hereditary,
the extinction of the reigning Family would have caused horrible Debates about
the Succession, and perhaps at last, have over-turn'd the whole Machine.

They have farther found it to be the Interest of the Popedom, that this
Monarch should lead a single Life, which does very well agree with the Gravity
of that Court, especially whilst a gaudy Attendance of young and airy
Court-Ladies would have made an odd figure, and have been an ill example of a
more than ordinary Piety and Devotion; 'twas likewise a piece of politic
Hypocrisy, to seem to have so great an attachment to Heaven as to be quite
insensible to all fleshly motions and desires; nor was it easily to hoped, that
a Man who had Wife and Children could defend himself from being debauched by
them, and become more addicted to their particular Interests than to the
public good, since there is no consideration or prospect that can come in
competition with that a man has for the welfare and prosperity of his Family,
whereof one may find a very remarkable example in the natural Children of
Alexander the sixth, and Paul the third, to which we may add, that perhaps it
was feared, lest a Secular Prince becoming Master of the Ecclesiastic States
should make it hereditary in his Family, which, by obliging them to celibacy,
can never happen.

The Conclave is likewise a good expedient to bridle the immoderate ambition of
any Pope, and prevent those Schisms which heretofore did mightily weaken the
Papal Authority, and to hinder the long interregnum's. And it is much more easy
by the way of Election to find a person fit to exercise all the Cheats, Slights
and Intrigues required in such a Government, and whom they may better persuade
the ignorant Vulgar, Strangers to the Arts of the Conclave, to be, by an
especial Order of God, as the best and most capable, called to be his locum
tenens, or Vicar on Earth. At least by such an Election they are able to find
one that understands the Affairs of the World, and the Art of Governing, and
who having laid aside the Heats and Extravagancies of Youth by his Age and
Experience, may render himself venerable. It Is also very politickly provided in
the Election of the Pope, that two third parts of the Voices must concur to
the admission of any one to this Dignity, to the end that the Choice may not be
displeasing to a too great number of Cardinals.

In the Election of a Pope, the greatest caution at present is, that he be not
a Transalpine, that is, a Foreigner of any Country beyond the Alps, but a
Native of Italy, which does not alone happen upon the account of their being
more favorable and desirous of transferring so great Honor and Profit on one
of their own Countrymen, rather than on a stranger; but chiefly, because their
preservation and surety, depends on the keeping the balance equal betwixt
France and Spain, which equilibrium a French or Spanish Pope would quickly
ruin, and by a too great partiality to his own Nation, render himself hateful
to the other. They usually choose an old man rather than young, that others may
have some hopes of quickly attaining to the same Dignity, and that the Pope who
governs, may not by a too long sitting at the Helm, change the Maxims of State,
nor transferr too much Power or Riches on his own Family, nor make so many
Creatures as to render the Popedom hereditary thereto. As to the rest, the
Vigor of youth is not in the least necessary to the exercising all the
Functions of this charge, for they are not required to head an Army, or make
any Campaigns, but only to set a grave and starched face on the matter.

The Conclave in the Election of the Pope, does likewise take care to choose
such a Successor, that is not too nearly allied to him that preceded him, for
fear that all the Ecclesiastical Benefices should fall into one Family; and to
the end, that the succeeding Pope may more earnestly redress those abuses and
grievances that have crept into the Government in his Predecessor's time.
Lastly, They willingly make choice of such a one as is not too much in the
French or Spanish Interests, nor that is hated by either of those Nations, as
in effect, both those Crowns do usually propose him that they most desire to be
excluded from the Papal Dignity; but it often happens, that he who was least
thought on arrives to this Honor when the Cardinals are weary of disputing and
intriguing, and are glad with all their Heart to get out of the Conclave.

It often happens also, that they find the same person, when possessed of the
Papal Chair, much different from what he was whilst Cardinal. Nevertheless,
they do not prescribe him any Conditions before he enters upon his Government,
since it would not be handsome to tie up his Hands with Humane Laws and
Ordinances, who is supposed to have so extraordinary a measure of the Holy
Ghost always residing in scrinio pectoris: Yet the College of Cardinals is
like a perpetual Senate of the Ecclesiastical state, whom the Pope consults in
all important Affairs, though he and his Nephews don't always follow their
Counsel, but do what seems best in their own Eyes.

The chiefest Privilege of the Cardinals is the power of choosing a Pope, who
must be one of them, and one that has lived long and is well versed in all the
Affairs of the Court of Rome; their usual number is Seventy, though seldom
complete: Urban the Eight first gave them the Title of Eminentissimi, being
only named before Illustrissimi, which Title grew very mean and common in
Italy; but since the Cardinals have augmented their Titles, the Princes of
Italy would ape them, and instead of being contented with Excellenza's, as they
were ordinarily styled, they must now be called Altezza's, or Their Highnesses.
The Election of the Cardinals is wholly in the power of the Pope, who has
usually regard therein to the Recommendations of France, Spain, and other
Potentates. The Flatterers of the Papal Chair are not ashamed to maintain, That
the Dignity of a Cardinal is equal to that of a King; at least, they challenge
the Precedence of the German Electors.

Since the time of Sixtus the Fourth, in the year 1471, the Popes have
particularly endeavored to enrich their Friends and Relations at the expense
of the Church. As for example; Sixtus the Fifth, in five years, left to his
Family more than three millions of Ducats. Gregory the Fifteenth, in 27 Months
time, more than three millions of Crowns in Goods, besides ready Money. The
Barbarini, after the Death of Urban the Eighth, were left in possession of 227
Charges and Benefices, each amounting from three to five, eight and ten
thousand Crowns. So that the Riches of that Family were valued at about thirty
millions of Crowns. And though a great many were scandalized at this way of
proceeding, yet if we rightly consider it, it is not so blameworthy; for since
the whole Popedom is founded on the Riches and Authority of the Clergy, 'twould
be great Imprudence in the Pope to stifle that natural Inclination he has to
his own Family, and not to promote the Grandeur thereof, as long as it is in
his power to do it; and nothing is more common, than to see Favorites, and
such as Fortune smiles on, envied by those who are only desirous of the same
condition. But for the rest, it is certain that the Popes would not know what to
do with their Money, without that way of bestowing it, since the Charges of
their Militia is very inconsiderable. Since the time of Urban the Eighth it has
always been the Custom to make one of the Pope's Nephews chief Minister of
State under the Title of Cardinal Patroon. Amongst the Motives that induced the
Pope to entrust his Nephew with the sole Management of his Affairs, these are
the most weighty: First, because nothing is more natural than to seek the
Advantage and Preferment of ours, before that of any other; and secondly,
because the Person of the Pope is thereby much more secure, which is otherwise
exposed to far greater dangers than that of Hereditary Princes is, whose death
their Successors are wont to revenge; and we may from hence guess how much the
Popes stand in fear of being poisoned, forasmuch as the Chaplain, whenever the
Pope communicates, must taste both of the Bread and Wine, before he gives it
his Master.

The Government of the Pope's Nephews has yet this farther advantage, That the
other Governors and Ministers of State, who were used to heap up great Riches
by an impudent and scandalous Sale of Offices, and by the supplanting of each
other, were thereby kept in greater awe and modesty: Besides, the Nephews being
inconsiderable as to their number, are therefore the more easily satisfied. Nor
will they let the other Officers squeeze and oppress the Subject, whilst all
the Hate must fall upon them. They are also more necessary to the Pope, because
by them he is more truly and exactly informed of the Interests of the Princes,
than he is by his ordinary Ministers, who are not so much devoted to the Pope's
Service as are his Nephews, whose Interest it is likewise to take good care for
the Government, for fear lest they should be one day called to an account: And
it is upon that account that they more particularly endeavor to oblige one
Prince, who in case of need may yield them a secure Refuge. In a word, by their
means the Pope's Secrets are better kept; and it is most certain, that without
them he must be obliged to depend on the Cardinals, who are mostly partial,
receiving Pensions and Benefices at the hands of other Princes.

Sect. 32. The Subjects of this Spiritual Monarchy may be divided into two
Classes: Under the first we comprehend the Clergy; under the second all other
Christians that make Profession of the Romish Religion, whom they commonly name
the Laity. The first of these we may compare to the standing Forces of any
Princes, who having made great Conquests, does thereby maintain them, and keep
the conquered from shaking off their Yoke. The others are poor Tributary
Slaves, doomed to maintain so great a Militia at their own Expenses. The first
are singular in this, That they are obliged to abstain from Marriage, which
they pretend is upon the account of a more particular Holiness, and that they
may uninterruptedly addict themselves to the exercise of the Charge: But the
true reason is, That they may not be embarassed with the care of Wife and
Children, to the prejudice of the Church's Interest, or obliged to side with
the Prince under whose Dominion they live; nor cheat the Church of its Income,
to supply the necessities of their Families; but that they may devote
themselves wholly to the Pope, and yield him a blind Obedience, and execute his
Orders against all, but more especially against the Princes whose Subjects they
are, whose Anger they dread the less, because they are not joined or united to
the Republic by so straight Bands as the rest are, and have but one body to
take care for; whereas a Wife and Children are looked upon to be the greatest
and dearest Pawns of our Fidelity; but a single man can easily get his Bread in
any Country. In fine, the Pope endeavors by all sort of ways to free them
from the Dependence and Jurisdiction of their lawful Sovereigns, to subject
them entirely to his own.

The Clergy also could never have satisfied their Avarice with so rich a
Harvest, had they been obliged to have scraped up for their Wives and Children;
nor so fair a Pretext of begging for the Church, and not for themselves: But in
the mean while those that first introduced Coelibacy or a single Life among the
Romish Clergy, were wonderfully overseen, in not finding out at the same time a
fit Receipt for the Gift of Continency, which had been very seasonable. We may
guess at the multitude of the Clergy, by the computation which Paul the Fourth
is said to make thereof, viz. That he had under his Jurisdiction Two hundred
and eighty eight thousand Parishes, and forty four thousand Cloisters,
especially if that of the Convents be just.

We may again divide the Clergy into those that are simply Priests, and those
that have made particular vows, as the Monks and Jesuits, which may pass for
the Pope's Life Guard: The pay of these Troops consists in honorable Charges,
great Revenues, an easy Labor, idle days, and a constant Kitchen; but those
that are kept more strict, have their Heads filled with a particular Holiness
and Merits and Advantages above the rest.

Sect. 33. The means which the Pope makes use of to keep the Laity in
subjection, are the accustoming them to a belief, that he and his Ghostly
Militia are the Promoters of their Salvation, and the Lords of their
Consciences, which is the strongest Argument in the World to lead them into a
perpetual Slavery and Submission to their Wills; but that it may be more
serviceable to their Spiritual Monarchy, they have accommodated thereto some of
the Articles of the Christian Religion, and since made some additions of others
tending to the same end. So that if you take good notice of the Disputes and
Contestations which they of the Romish Religion have with their Adversaries,
you will always find some Interest mingled therewith, concerning the
Authority, Power, or Revenues of the Clergy: The chiefest of these Doctrines is
concerning the Power and Authority of the Pope, of his Superiority over the
Councils, and of his Infallibility; which last point the Jesuits have
stretched as far as possible; for that being once granted, all the rest is an
easy and natural consequence thereof. But the Sentiments of the Ancient
Christians, with whom (if I am not mistaken) the Sorbon at present holds; viz.
That the Councils are at least equal if not above the Popes, are directly
opposite to the grounds of the Papal State; for this Opinion once stiffly
maintained, would destroy the Monarchy, and on its Ruins erect a Democracy; and
in effect, to grant the Pope such almighty Prerogatives, and yet subject him to
his Creatures and Vassals, are things incompatible, and inconsistent with one
another: For that which the Holy Writings of the Fathers have attributed to the
Church, must be only understood of the Pope, just as in ordinary Discourse we
ascribe that to a whole Kingdom, which is done by the King alone.

The reading of the Holy Scriptures is forbid the Laity, and only permitted to
the Clergy; which does not alone contribute to the Grandeur of the Priests, as
if they were the only persons worthy to approach the Divine Oracles, but does
also more particularly hinder the Laity from finding any thing contrary to the
Interests of the Clergy, and becoming too wise, and refusing any longer blindly
to receive the Fables of their lying Priests. So that the Laity not being
permitted to search into Matters of Divinity, nor to examine them seriously, are
obliged to referr themselves wholly to their Priests. Hence is it that they
appropriate to the Pope the Right of interpreting the Scriptures, and of giving
an absolute decision of all controverted points, to the end that none may be
alleged that are prejudicial to his Interests.

They give out too, That the Scriptures are imperfect, and therefore to be
supplied by Traditions, to the end, that when they would preach up any Doctrine
advantageous to the Holy Chair, of which there is not the least tittle to be
found in the Scripture, they may appeal to Tradition, and so spare themselves
any farther demonstration.

In the Doctrine of sins they have a distinction betwixt venial and mortal
sins, as also of particular cases and exceptions, all which does only tend to
the profit and advantage of the Priests; and all that infinite number of Books
of Confession, enough to lade a whole East-India-Fleet, are not writ for the
amendment of sins; but to the end, that by the Taxes therein contained the
Dominion of the Clergy may be confirmed, and their avarice satiated.

The comfortable Doctrine of the Remission of Sins, is entirely accommodated to
their Interest; for whilst it is no advantage to the Clergy, that a truly
penitent sinner should obtain remission of his sins by the confidence he has in
the merits of Christ alone; therefore they teach, that to the attainment of a
full and perfect forgiveness of sins, a man must reveal even the least
particulars of all and every sin to the Priest, whereby they do not only make
the people to be at their Devotion, and give them such impressions as are most
conformable to their Interests, but they do more particularly thereby, discover
all the secrets and designs of Families, and the humor and inclinations of the
people, and by that means, have the best intelligence of all that is done, though
they are forbid to reveal what is imparted to them at Confessions; for without
that caution of secresy, they could never have been able to have established a
thing so contrary, and so ungrateful to humane nature.

They promote also the works of Satisfaction according as the Father-Confessor
shall find convenient to impose them; now these bring no small profit to them;
for though the imposed penance mostly consists in Prayers, Pilgrimages,
Fastings, Whippings and such like; yet the rich are always condemned to some
pecuniary mulct, which must be converted to the Benefit of the Convents,
Churches, and the Poor, under which they comprehend the Begging Friars, who
therefore them themselves minimos Fratrum, according to the fifteenth of St.
Matthew, that their bag might be the better filled: Now this interpretation of
the Scripture, has burdened Christendom with more than an hundred thousand
idle Bellies.

Besides, The first sort of Penitence may easily be redeemed by Money, if they
on whom it is imposed, should find it too grievous; and in effect, What rich man
is there, that would not show himself respectful and liberal to his Holy
Father, that he may be merciful to him, and make his penance more light and
easy? It Is no hard matter to guess, why good works are reckoned amongst the
means of obtaining Salvation, for as soon as they proceeded to give the
definition of good works, they placed in the first rank, all Gifts and
Liberalities bestowed on the Clergy, Churches and Convents, and other acts
introduced by the Pope and his Creatures out of a principle of Hypocrisy, and
Superstition; to which they added this Doctrine, That the Monks and Friars
could not only satisfy for their own sins, but that they had also an
inexhaustible stock of Supererrogatory Merits remaining to be bestowed for the
use and service of the sinful Laity; from which Superfluity they have erected a
Magazine of an extremely profitable Merchandice, which cost them nothing either
to stow, or keep, which neither grows moldy nor musty by length of time, which
never diminishes; and which in a word, cannot be restored by the buyer, though he
should afterward chance to discover the insignificancy and unprofitableness
thereof. They have likewise burdened the exercise of Religion with so many
unnecessary Ceremonies, Holy Days, and superfluous Processions, built so many
useless Churches, Chapels and Altars, only that the swarming drones of the
Clergy may have just something to do, and not seem to be always and wholly
idle, and to the end, that they may still get a little by these and the like
Fopperies.

This is likewise the reason of their multiplying the Sacraments to the number
of seven, since the administration of each one brings in grist to the Priest's
Mill: They have introduced the Mass without Communicants, baptizing it a
Sacrifice for the Living and for the Dead; to the end, that the Dead as well as
the Living, may be put under Contributions: Besides, nothing of Importance is
taken in hand by a pious Catholic, till he has made a Mass be said for his
good success. There is no Man of Quality, that dies without ordering a good
number of Masses to be said for his Soul, for which the Priest must be well
greased in the Fist. It happened once by chance or forgetfulness, that the Cup
was not administered to the Laity, afterward it became a Law; and though the
Institutions of Christ and the practice of the Church for several hundred Years
together, was directly contrary to this encroachment; yet they obstinately
persisted therein, lest it might be said, the Church has erred, and that the
Clergy might enjoy a Prerogative above the Laity; nay, so far their impudence
proceeded, that as if they designed to mock both GOD and Man, they give the
Laity the unblest Cup, which in a scornful manner they name the Washing Cup, as
if they had eaten some unclean thing, and must wash their Mouths after it.
Marriage must be turned into a Sacrament, though it seem never so absurd and
ridiculous, that the Clergy alone may take cognizance of all Affairs thereunto
belonging, which being almost innumerable, are very profitable to them; and of
no less consequence, for thereon depend the Estates, Inheritances, and
Successions not only of private Persons, but many times of Kingdoms also; hence
it was that Mary the first, Queen of England, found herself obliged to
re-establish Popery in her Kingdom, whilst without the Pope's Authority, she
could never have past for Legitimate; thus Philip the third, King of Spain, saw
himself indispensably engaged to espouse the Pope's Interest, because amongst
other obligations, it was not the least that he permitted him to be born of his
Father's Sister's Daughter, which could hardly have received a Dispensation
amongst other Christians.

Now the same Religion that scruples not to dispense with the nearest Bonds of
Consanguinity, has introduced an endless Roll of forbidden Degrees, and
likewise forged a new sort of spiritual Affinity. Why? To afford the Priests a
more frequent occasion of Dispensations, which brings in an inestimable
Revenue. In the extreme Unctions, the Clergy have found out a very proper
expedient of giving the dying person a friendly admonition to make some pious
Legacies, all which tends to their profit.

Nor is there any other design in the Fiction of Purgatory, than to wheedle
those that are just departing (and who then little value the goods they must
leave to others) to give a good part thereof to the Clergy, to the end that by
their Prayers and Masses they may the sooner get out of a place so terribly hot
and thirsty. The adoration likewise of Relics, does not make the least part of
the Clergy's Revenue, for with an old rotten knuckle-bone, they will reward the
greatest Services that the Pope's most faithful Creatures shall have rendered to
him. The Invocation of Saints has furnished them with a very fair and specious
pretext of building so many the more Churches, of Instituting more Holy Days,
of providing more Priests to officiate, and of extorting more Money from the
Laity to maintain them. Besides, the Canonization of Saints which depends on
the Pope's breath, does contract a greater respect and admiration of his power,
as if he could dispose of Charges and Offices in Heaven, and that God Almighty
were obliged to receive all the Candidates the Pope should present him, by
which means he can dispose of the wills of other Princes Subjects offering so
considerable a Reward to their Ambition and Credulity, on condition that they
will maintain his Interests to the very last. To which we may add, That since
Superstition has got the upper hand, none but Ecclesiastics have been admitted
into the number of Saints, and especially such of them, who by some rare
Masterpiece of Hypocrisy, and a false and affected Devotion, have rendered
themselves Famous over the World. And if this Honor has at any time been
granted to a Secular Person, either he, or those that solicited it for him,
must have merited it by no common Services.

As to the rest, I shall not trouble my self to particularize how the Clergy
have cheated poor simple people of their Money, by the invention of Miracles,
Images, Apparitions, Exorcisms, Indulgences, Jubilee-Years, forbidden Meats,
and a thousand such like Tricks and Devices.

Sect. 34. After these means the Universities have not a little Contributed to
the establishment of the Pope's Authority, which have been sounded partly by
the Pope, and partly by other Princes; yet after such a manner, that most of
'em must receive their Confirmation from Rome; and the Pope has arrogated to
himself the chief management of them, and the consequences of such a Polity are
plain enough, whilst the Professors, who are all the Pope's Creatures do not
only establish the opinions of Rome during their Life, but do likewise
perpetuate them, by leaving such Successors as are debauched and corrupted,
with the same Doctrine.

Hence is it, that the Academies and the Studies exercised therein have been
accommodated, as much as possible, to the Pope's Interests: So that the
Professors of Divinity (who challenge the first rank in the University) were
not alone the Pope's Creatures, but the Professors also of the Canon Law were
very zealous in defense of the Pope's Authority, and mingled his Decrees that
he had forced upon Christendom, with the Chicane of ordinary Processes; for
it is the Canon Law that has caused that tediousness of Lawsuits, since the
Clergy have usurped so great a Jurisdiction, the better to satiate their
eternal Avarice with the Bribes and Presents which both Parties fee their
Advocates with. The most part of the Philosophers were also the Pope's
Partisans, so that no one of 'em durst examine the business seriously for fear
of being opposed by the others: Besides, the Divinity and Philosophy which was
taught in the Schools, was not taught with the design of rendering the Auditors
more knowing and learned, but that they might amuse and blunt the more
penetrating Wits with a parcel of silly, non-sensical terms, and by that means
be hindered from acquiring a fundamental knowledge of those things which might
enable them clearly to discover the Papal Cheats. Their School Divinity did not
consist in the search and interpretation of the Holy Scriptures, but mostly in
the decision of unprofitable questions proposed by Peter Lombard, Thomas
Aquinas, Scotus, and other such Patriarchs of fulsom Pedantry. That likewise
which they name Philosophy, is nothing else but ridiculous Chymerical
Propositions consisting of barbarous Latin, and inexplicable terms, the
understanding of which was more prejudicial than profitable to the young
Students: So that all knowledge consisted in knowing nothing rightly.

And they have had the confidence to teach these Bagatels and idle Speculations
not only in barbarous ignorant times, but even at this present, that all Arts
and Sciences are in their Meridian, is that leaven spread abroad, and
propagated with all the industry and cunning imaginable: On the contrary, good
and solid Sciences are oppressed, and especially such as serve to open our Eyes
in humane affairs, as chiefly the so necessary Doctrine of Morals, which is
quite spoiled by them, and turned into a Labyrinth, out of which it is
impossible to disentangle ones self, which they make use of to ensnare People,
and load their Consciences with so many doubts and uncertainties, that being no
longer able to regulate their Actions by clear and evident Principles, they
must let themselves be guided by the Will of an interested Confessor.

Sect. 35. But because it was observed, that in Luther's time the study of
Letters did not a little diminish the Pope's Authority, the Jesuits being the
faithful Guards of the Papal Chair, did afterward take upon them the
management of all Schools and Colleges; but not content therewith, usurped
likewise the Instruction of little Children, to the end that they might so form
their Studies, as not only not to prejudice the Kingdom of Darkness, but rather
to promote and advance the Interest thereof. And indeed the Education of
Children has not only enriched their Society, and brought it into great credit,
but is also a mighty prop to the Papal Authority, to which they are more
devoted than all the other Orders, for thereby they inspire the tender and
flexible Youth with Sentiments of an extraordinary respect and veneration for
the Pope, as also with any other Inclinations that may render them serviceable
to their Interests, and therefore accustom them from their Youth to an
obstinate persistance in the Opinions which they have once embraced, and a
resolution of never yielding to contrary Reasons, so that they are incapable of
ever attaining to the knowledge of the Truth. The Jesuits also learn from
thence the Constancy and Affections of their Scholars, of which knowledge they
serve themselves very efficaciously, when these come to be employed in State
affairs; but those that are dear to them either on the account of their Wit or
Riches, they most industriously endeavor to draw into their own Order, by
which means the famous Discipline of their Schools only tends to the supporting
of the Pope's Authority; and though they are famed for an excellent method of
teaching Children Latin, yet they are very cautious of rendering their Scholars
too learned, unless they are destined to their Order.

Besides that, as the Jesuits, by the Government of Colleges have had occasion
to draw into their Society a great many learned men, and that in their
Conversation and way of living they are extremely civil and polite, differing
much from the courseness and rebutting Pedantry of the other Monks; under the
pretense of Confessors, they have insinuated themselves into most of the Courts
of Europe, and by cunningly arrogating to themselves Intrigues of State, they
sway the Councils of Princes, and direct them to their own advantages, which as
they are inseparably annexed to the Pope's, so is his never forgot by them. Yet
nevertheless, in some places they have made themselves extremely odious, by
their insatiable Avarice, and earnestness of interposing in all sort of
matters. And they are no less envied by the old Orders of Monks, as having much
encroach'd on their Rights and Authority. One of the means which are also used
to maintain the Grandeur of the Chair of Rome, is the Power which the Pope and
his Creatures have attributed to themselves, of censuring all Books, so that
nothing may appear in print that is contrary to their Interests; which Censure
they use with so much rashness and impudence, that they do not only retrench
what they dislike in old Authors when they are reprinted, but they have the
confidence to insert whole passages, which may be serviceable to their designs.

If any new piece happen to be written and printed in the Pope's Territories,
it is presently taken into a strict examination, and whatsoever has slipped in
that is contrary to their Interests, it is put into the Index expurgatorius,
that in the second Edition it may be quite omitted: But the Books that are
written by their Adversaries, are absolutely forbid to be introduced into their
Country: Nor may any man read them without a special permission, or such alone
as are so much prejudiced against them that they do not fear will be debauched.
So that by this means they may brand their Adversaries, and blacken them as
they please, since it is not allowed their people to read either their Writings
or Refutations. Besides, some have observed, that the scandalous Lives of the
Popes having been extremely prejudicial to the Romish Religion, because they
were exposed to all the World by the Writings of the Protestants, they do now
endeavor to retort the same Reproaches on the Protestants, not only by
declaring the Faults and Oversights of some few particulars, but by charging
them with the most scandalous Vices, and desiring them afterward to prove the
contrary; whereby they prepossess their Followers with notions extremely
disadvantageous to the Protestant Religion.

They have likewise Impudence enough to cry up the Miracles and Exploits of
their Martyrs, done in very remote Countries, by which they acquire a great
credit, at least with the more simple sort of people: Which Trick of theirs,
amongst many others, is exactly remarked by Edwin Sands an English Gentleman,
in his View of the Religions of Europe.

Sect. 36. But there are yet more violent ways which the Pope uses to support
the Majesty of his Character, amongst which the chiefest was that terrible Ban
or Excommunication, whereby whole Countries have been forbidden the exercise of
their Religion, and Kings and Emperors have been forced to truckle to the
Mitre; but now adays these Arms are no longer so dreadful as they were
heretofore, unless it be to some of the petty Princes in Italy: But in Spain
and Italy they have erected a singular Tribunal, which they christen Officium
Sanctae Inquisitionis, wherein they enquire and proceed against such as are any
ways suspected of Heresy; the worst of which is that which destroys the
Credit, Doctrine, and Decrees of the Pope: By which means the people are kept
in an intolerable Slavery: And the Pest is not so dreadful to the Inhabitants
of those Countries, as is this sort of Justice, which is so rigorously put in
execution, that he who falls into the Inquisitor's hands, shall not escape
without the loss of a great many Feathers.

Sect. 37. Now, though the Direction and Administration of the Popish Religion,
together with other means which we have already shown, are sufficient to keep
the People in the Bounds of their Duty, especially since the Romish Clergy do
so well manage the business, that they can content every one; and that most of
those that live under the Pope's Jurisdiction, credulously swallow for great
Truths all that their Priests tell them; nor have they any opportunity of
knowing the contrary: Yet I really believe, that the most politic and learned
among them plainly see how matters go, and would never continue under so
ridiculous and intolerable a Yoke, without a great many worldly Prospects; and
if I may pronounce my Judgment in the case, I fancy, that most of 'em are kept
back from declaring against it, because they are unable to oppose it alone; nor
are they willing to ruin a good Fortune, which they enjoy amongst the Papists,
and to go over to the Protestants, where they are to expect nothing but Poverty
and Contempt, which is too sharp a trial of their Faith, and therefore they
think it is enough if they believe in Jesus Christ and his Merits, and that
thereby alone they shall be saved. And as for the other Opinions which are the
additamenta religionis, they yield an external compliance to them, but think
they may believe as much of them as they please: Whether the common people and
Women, who are usually delighted with strange and incredible things, believe
them in good earnest, or not, is of no great importance: Besides, there are,
without doubt, a great many that are not able to distinguish what there is of
Divine in their Religion, and what the Clergy for their own Interests have
added; therefore if they happen to discover the Impostures of the last, they
look upon all the rest as a mere Fable, but are forced to conceal their Atheism
from the World, for fear of bringing themselves into trouble. And let any wise
man judge how easily an Italian or Spaniard, that has never read the Bible, nor
any good Protestant Book, may fall into such impious Thoughts so soon as he
begins to discover the Cheats of his Clergy. It Is likewise certain, that since
Luther's time, the Popedom has put on another face, and does proceed much more
cautiously than heretofore.

Besides, there are a great number of People, of all Conditions, that find
their Advantage in the Romish Communion, either by entering into several Orders
of Knights, or but putting themselves into Convents, which is oftentimes a
great ease, and sometimes the aggrandizing of a whole Family; and at the least,
the superstitious Parents are very well contented therewith, and think they
merit not a little, by an early dedication of their Children to God. In fine,
such as cannot make their Fortune in the World, have no more to do, than to cast
themselves into a Cloister, and there they are provided for all their life;
which Advantage they could not enjoy, if the Papacy should be exterminated, and
the Ecclesiastical Goods confiscated to the State. The Popish Doctrine is also
so deeply rooted in those Countries where it does at present reign, that if any
should undertake to abolish it, he could never attain his ends, whilst the
Priests would not fail to move Heaven and Earth against him, or find a Clement
or Ravaillac to shorten his days; but most of the Princes find it their
Interest to maintain the established Religion; or at least, they find no
profit, but rather a great deal of danger in beginning a change.

Sect. 38. But Italy especially, has no small Advantage in maintaining the
Papal Dignity, because that Land is become very considerable by the continual
Residence of the Pope, and by that Prerogative it has, that the Pope must
always be an Italian, and because there is no Noble Family in all Italy that
does not receive some profit from the Pope.

As in Poland, the Bishoprics and richest Prebendaries, are possessed by the
Nobility of that Country, who there enjoy likewise the Sovereign Power; they
have great Interest in the Popedom, since the Bishops as Senators of the
Kingdom, are there in great Credit. In Portugal, the Clergy is also very
Powerful, and would easily embrace the Spanish Faction, if their Prince should
go about to make any Innovation in the Religion; and therefore we have seen in
this last Age, that the Portugueze have not dared to mutter against the Pope,
though he in favor of Spain has used 'em very scurvily about the Collation of
New Bishoprics, and given them reason enough to slip their Necks out of so
uneasy a collar. In Germany, several of the States of the Empire stick close to
the exercise of the Popish Religion; and amongst the Imperial Cities, Collen,
as well as some other of less Importance, swarms with idle Priests and Monks;
and amongst the Counts, and Orders of Knighthood, all such as have any prospect
of attaining to Ecclesiastical Charges and Benefices; among the temporal
Princes the Elector of Bavaria, has always persisted obstinately in his
Religion, in hopes of aspiring one day to the Imperial Dignity, of which he
would be totally frustrated, if he should abandon the Pope's Interest; and why
some Protestant Princes have returned unto the Romish Yoke is, I think, very
well known. That the Bishops and Prelates of Germany, are so good Catholics is
no wonder, because it is a much sweeter and agreeable Life, to be a rich Prince,
than a poor Preacher. Besides, they are deterred from any thoughts of change by
the example of two Electors of Collen, whose designs were very unhappy and
fatal to them.

In Charles the fifth's time, Spain by its Intrigues, impeded the progress of
the Reformation, and since the loss of so fair an opportunity, the Emperor par
raison d'etat, cannot abandon the Pope's Interests, though he should desire to do
it; and the Ecclesiastical Princes are forced to hold with him, that they may
have a support against the temporal ones; but if the Emperor should really
design to leave the Pope, it is most certain, that he would first have all the
Clergy upon his back, nor could he be assured, that the Temporal Princes would
stand by him, especially, whilst the Princes of the most Ancient and Noble
Families, whose Religion is the only Bar of their Pretenses to the Empire,
might then with as much right aspire to it as any, and openly rival the House
of Austria; the Pope too, would move Heaven and Earth against the
accomplishment of a design so terrible and pernicious to his Dignity; nor would
the French King let slip so good an occasion of advancing himself to the
Imperial Dignity, to which in such a juncture the Clergy would not fail to
invite him.

The Spaniards would pass for the most zealous Defenders of the Holy Chair, but
the true reason is, because the Pope's Favor and Protection is absolutely
necessary to the peaceable maintenance of their Kingdom of Naples and Duchy of
Milan; and thus we see them usually cloak their enterprises with the pretext of
defending and propagating the Catholic Religion, but unsuccessfully for the
most part; I will not speak here of the intolerable Greatness of the Spanish
Clergy, nor of the strange things which they make the people believe, are
contained in the Doctrine of the Protestants. France does not outwardly appear
so passionately to espouse the Interests of Rome, nor have the Popes been able
to persuade the French Church to so absolute and slavish a submission as most
other Churches have yielded them, so that when they endeavored to infringe or
encroach upon their privileges; the Parliament of Paris did presently take
Cognizance of the Affair, and the Sorbon has likewise often rejected several
unreasonable Propositions advanced by the Flatterers and Sycophants of the
Pope; they likewise spy the Nuncio's Conduct, and will not allow him too great
a liberty, who when he comes out of Rome, bears his Crosier erected, but so
soon as he Arrives on the French Frontiers, he carries it Reversed, till he
obtains leave from the King to exercise his Function, and then too, they are
forced to promise him, that they will use it no longer, nor no otherwise than
he shall think fit. Besides, they are obliged to make use of French
Secretaries, and when they go away, to leave a Roll of their Negotiations, and
their Seal behind them, and to use several other such Formalities, without
which all their Proceedings would be null and void of effect; so that the
French say, the Pope's Nuncio receives his Commission as well from the King as
the Pope, and that it is Precaria and ad Nutum Regis revocabilis; hence it is,
that the Nuncio lays aside his Crosier, if he happens to come where the King
is, as if his Jurisdiction were dissolved by the Presence of the King. Nay, in
Richlieu's time 'twas debated of, whether or no they should make a Patriarch in
France; which design though, in my opinion, could not have been very advantageous
for France, for the Clergy would never have been brought to consent thereto,
having reason enough to fear, lest the King upon such an occasion should
considerably retrench their fat Revenues. Besides, if the French King should
ever have any thoughts of aspiring to the Empire, his separation from Rome
would be very disserviceable to him; for should so powerful a Prince as the
French King is, become Master of the Empire, he would not only revive the
pretenses of the ancient Emperors which are now, as 'twere, buried in oblivion,
of which most depend on Rome, but also the Defense of the Romish Church would
be a very specious pretext of claiming several rights and privileges which the
Popes have suffered to be lost. On the contrary, the Pope has a terrible
aversion and fear of the French Monarchy; since it is not to be doubted, but
upon such an occasion, France would make a great Reformation in the Court of
Rome, and bridle the Pope's Authority so much, that he would signify no more
than a simple Patriarch; and he must attend the same fate if Spain should
aspire to the Universal Monarchy; in the mean while, it would go very ill with
the Protestants; and from hence we may conclude, that the greatest Support of
the Papal Chair is the Jealousy and Aequilibrium which Rome wisely maintains
between the two Crowns of France and Spain, and therefore it is the nearest and
dearest of the Pope's Interest to hinder any one of those Kingdoms from
trampling on the other, or aspiring to the universal Monarchy of Europe; which
also is easy to be observed from the Pope's Conduct for several Ages; for when
France was extremely low and weakened after the Death of Henry the second, the
Pope was forced to declare himself for the Spanish Interests, to which the
Spaniards were resolved to oblige him, both by fair means and by foul. They
gained the Pope's Nephews, who were glad to enrich themselves during the short
Life of their Uncle, and willingly devoted themselves to Spain, whilst they
could receive large Pensions, Benefices, and considerable Charges; and in case
they did not render themselves very serviceable to those from whom they
received pay, they were sure to be cruelly persecuted after their Unckle's
Death; they also used all their efforts to exclude from the Succession, any
Cardinal that they suspected to be enclining to their Adversaries Interests:
but so soon as France began to lift up its head again, the Popes resumed their
former Indifference and Liberty, and would show themselves no more favorable
to either party, than as they were serviceable and addicted to the Papal
Interest; and therefore Guichard declared publicly in a Sermon at Paris, in
the Month of July, 1637. that the War which France made then against Spain, was
a Holy War, and in Defense of the Religion; for had not the French King made
use of that means to bring Spain to reason, the King of Spain would certainly
have placed his Almoner in the Holy Chair.

Sect. 39. As for those that have revolted from the Pope, though he would not be
sorry to find them reduced again under his Jurisdiction, yet he does not
desire, that by their ruins any Prince should become so great as to render
himself formidable to all Europe, for it is better to give my Enemy his Life,
than to seek to deprive him of it at the cost of my own; thus we see how great
fears and jealousies the Victorious Progress of Charles the fifth's Arms
against the Protestants, occasioned at Rome, since it obliged Pope Paul the
third to recall those Troops which he had destined to the Emperor's Service;
and had Philip the second subdued England, Sixtus the fifth would too late have
repented his rash promoting that Catholic Design. So Gregory the fifteenth in
the War of the Valteline, sided with the Grisons against the Spaniards, though
the first were of the Reformed Religion; nor was Urban the eighth, displeased
to see the House of Austria mortified by Gustavus Adolphus King of Suedeland,
because the Emperor in the business of Mantua, had shown as little mercy to the
Catholics, as before to the Protestants; and it is said, that when Ferdinand
the second desired a sum of Money, which the same Pope had promised him,
instead thereof, he sent him and his Army a plenary Indulgence at the hour of
Death, that they might with greater confidence expose themselves to all dangers.

Nor was the Court of Rome less apprehensive some years ago, when the French
King made so great Progresses in the United Provinces, that the ruin of the
Republic, seemed inevitable. But though the Pope does not desire the weakening of
the Protestant party by which rough means, yet it cannot be denied that he uses
all sort of slights and devices to allure them from their Religion; amongst
which, the principal are, to maintain a discord amongst the Protestants, to
flatter the Princes of that persuasion, and by giving them Popish Wives, to
place a Serpent in their bosom, to entice the cadets or younger Brothers of
great Families by Spiritual Dignities and fat Benefices, by making all those
extremely welcome that go over to 'em, and instead of amusing themselves
unsuccessfully to write Books against the Protestant Divines, to cherish those
disputes and quarrels that are amongst them; and it is visibly certain, that
the Romish Clergy have made very great progresses in this last Age, and are in
a condition of making greater, comforting themselves with a malicious joy, to
see that their Adversaries, by internal Schisms, weaken and destroy each other.

Sect. 40. From what has been here said, may easily be judged, Whether ever any
Accommodation can be expected between the Protestants and Papists, whilst each
Party abandoning some of their Tenants, shall make such Advances, as at last to
agree in one common Confession of their Faith, and leave the rest, as obscure
and useless, to be disputed of in the Schools; or else, that both might keep
their Opinions, and that notwithstanding the difference of Religions, they
might live with one another as Brethren in Christ, and Members of one and the
same Communion. Yet if we rightly examine the state of affairs, and the
Principles of the Popish Religion, we must own, that all such Accommodations
are morally impossible; for we do not only discover an extreme jarring and
contradiction of Doctrines, but the Interests of each are quite opposite and
contrary one to another: For, first, the Pope would willingly re-enter into the
possession of the Church-Goods, but he will find it hard to get so sweet a
Morsel out of the Protestants Clutches.

Then again, the Pope would fain be acknowledged the Head of Christendom, but
the Protestants will never part with the jus circa sacra, the choicest Jewel of
their Sovereignty; and it is a contradictio in adjecto to live in good
intelligence and friendship with the Pope, and not own him at the same time the
supreme Monarch of the Church: Just as if any Stranger should desire to be
naturalized, and made a free Denison of England, and yet refuse to acknowledge
the King his Sovereign Lord.

The Infallibility of the Pope is likewise the Cornerstone of the Popedom,
which if once taken away, the whole Structure will fall to the Ground; and
therefore the Pope par raison d'etat, cannot yield the least of those points
which occasion the Division betwixt the Protestants and Papists; for if the
Pope should own that any the least part of that Doctrine, which he has hitherto
maintained, is false, he must grant at the same time that he is not infallible:
Can he therefore err in one point? He may easily err in another: But if the
Protestants grant that one Article of the Pope's Infallibility, they must also
give him all the other controverted points. Now it is nonsense to imagine that
the Protestants will ever retract all that they have written against the Pope;
and should the Laity be brought to do it, what will the Clergy do? Where will
they dispose of their Wives and Children, etc.?

Therefore how good and how pious soever their Intention may have been, who
have proposed any means of an Accommodation, between the Protestants and
Papists, which they call by the name of Syncretism, yet they are in reality
nothing but pure Whimsies, and serve only to furnish matter of Raillery, and
Diversion to the Papists, who are also very well contented, that the Protestant
Divines should amuse themselves with such Chimaera's, since they are sure to
get by it, but never lose any thing, forasmuch as the Protestants do not only
fall foul upon one another, on the account of this pretended Syncretism, but
the common and united zeal which they heretofore bare against the Papists, is
thereby extremely weakened; for any one that does not understand the matter to
the botom, when he hears them talk of an Accommodation, will easily be
persuaded, that the Difference betwixt us is not so great or capital as has
been represented. Now he that admits such thoughts, will at the same time be
apt to revolve in his mind the benefits and advantages he may find in the Roman
Communion, and then he will make no great scruple to bid adieu to the Protestant
Religion; for it is with their Religion as with a Maidenhead, or Town besieged,
which run a great risque of being lost, when once they begin to parley.

Sect. 41. It Is a quaere whether the Pope, with the united help of all of his
Persuasion, can bring the Protestants by force under his Jurisdiction? We
answer, That the Papists do considerably excel the Protestants in number; for
on the Pope's side is all Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, and the greatest part
of Poland, as well as the weakest Cantons of Switzerland. In Germany are all
the Austrian Provinces, the Kingdom of Bohemia, almost all Upper Hungary, the
Bishops and Prelates, the House of Bavaria and Newburg, the Marquesate of
Baden, and some other Princes of less consideration; a great number of Counts,
Lords, Free Knighthoods, and Imperial Cities, besides a great many in
Protestant Countries, which all together, according to my Estimate, will amount
to two thirds of Germany. In Holland we find a great many Papists, and there
were a great many of the same leaven in England, though (God be thanked) since
the Happy Coming of Their Present Majesty's to the Crown, the Land is pretty
well scowr'd of them.

On the other side, we reckon among the Protestants the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, with all their dependences, Suedeland, Denmark, Holland,
the most of the Temporal Electors and Princes, together with the Imperial
Cities of Germany. The Protestants of France are at present disarmed; those of
Poland are not in a condition to undertake any thing; the Cities of Prussia and
Curland have enough to do to maintain the free exercise of their Religion;
Transylvania can do but little: And the Papists have besides, this advantage
above the Protestants, That they all of 'em own the Pope for Supreme Head of
their Church, and do, at least with their Mouth, and externally, profess one
and the same Faith. But on the contrary, the Protestants have no visible
Spiritual Head, but are miserably divided amongst themselves; for, not to
mention those little Sects of Arminians, Socinians, Anabaptists, and the rest,
their Body is divided into almost two equal parts of Lutherans and Calvinists,
amongst which a great many are as much embittered against one another, as they
are against the Common Enemy, the Papists: Besides, there is no general Policy
or Government in the Religion amongst them, but in every state the particular
Sovereign regulates the Affairs thereof according to his own will and pleasure:
Nor can it be denied that (commonly speaking) the Papists do with more Zeal,
Labor and Industry promote the advancement and propagation of their Religion,
than do the Protestants, who have mostly in view how they may conveniently
subsist by their Benefices, as the chiefest prospect of Handicrafts-men is, how
to get their Living by the Trade to which they apply themselves: So that the
search of the Kingdom of God is as the reserve, and the last thing they take
care for. Whereas the Monks and Jesuits, on the contrary, have brought
themselves into great repute by their Missions, both into the East and West
Indies; and though in the relations they give us thereof, they intermit a
thousand fabulous reports, yet the thing in it self is extremely laudable.

In fine, there is such an irreconcilable Jealousy among the chiefest of the
Protestant States, that it is morally impossible ever to persuade them to
submit to one Head: As for example; Betwixt England and Holland, Suedeland and
Denmark, not to mention the rest. Though again it must be owned too, that there
are no less Jealousies between France and Spain, which will scarcely permit
them to act unanimously against the Protestants. So that notwithstanding the
great inequality in strength that there is between the Protestants and Papists,
the former need never apprehend the Oppression of the latter.

In the mean while there is a great difference between the Protestants that
form an Independent State, and those that are under the Yoke of Popish Lords,
for these are not half so well assured of the maintenance of their Religion as
are the others.

Thus the Security of the French Protestants depends on the bare word of the
King, and the Edict of Nantes; so that they would be in a sad condition, if the
French King should at any time be possessed with a Spanish or Austrian Zeal: Yet
I don't believe he will ever undertake to force them in the matter of Religion,
as long as they live peaceably and contented with that Liberty he allows them;
especially if he considers the good Service they rendered to his Grandfather
Henry the Fourth, and that he himself, without their assistance, had never
arrived to the Crown of France.

Nor can Poland easily suppress the exercise of the Protestant Religion in
Curland and Prussia, as long as Dantzick enjoys its Liberty. In Germany the
Protestants are strong enough: So that if they were united under one Head, they
would make a formidable Kingdom; but the great number of their Chiefs, the
diversity of their Interests, and their distance from one another, diminishes
their Strength very considerably; so that the Emperor, in the space of an
hundred years, had twice reduced them to such a condition, that their Religion
and Liberty, (which are so inseparably annexed, that the loss of one would have
been a necessary consequence of the other's loss) had both been ruined without
the assistance of France and Suedeland.

It Is true, of late years some have pretended to hold forth this new Maxim,
That the Protestants in Germany are able to subsist and maintain their
Liberties without the help of those two Crowns, and that Brandenburg is very
fit to have the management and direction in Chief of all their Affairs. And
it is indeed the real Interest of the House of Austria, that such an Opinion
should prevail among the Protestants. It Is with this Pretext that the
Brandenburger and the House of Lunenburg cover the desire they have of putting
themselves in possession of those Lands which the King of Suedeland has in
Germany; whilst they give out, They are as well able to maintain them in the
enjoyment of their Liberty and Religion, as the other Protestant States. Yet it
is most certain, that if these two Houses should attain their ends, their
additional Grandeur would render them less formidable to the Emperor, than they
are at present, whilst backed and supported by the King of Suedeland. And they
are no less deceived, if they think to find as sure a Support from Denmark or
Holland, as they have received from France and Suedeland. And thirdly, Should
the Emperor once attain to his desire, and dispossessing those two Crowns of
what they have at present in Germany, introduce again the Spanish Faction, and
mortify the States by the maintenance of a standing Army, and other
Inconveniences of War, who at such a time could oblige the Emperor to disband
his Victorious Troops? And if, for example, the Emperor could find no Pretext
to keep his Army together, and to oblige the Protestants to maintain it at
their cost, will Brandenburg and Lunenburg make head against him? And fourthly,
If in case the Protestant States should not find themselves equal to so vast a
Work, Whether those two Crowns would at their Call come and help them? And
whether their own Affairs would permit them to undertake so important a design?
Or, lastly, Whether there would fall down from Heaven another Gustavus
Adolphus, to redeem them from the very brink of Destruction, and make as great
a progress as that mighty Conqueror once did?

And as for such as believe, that the Security of the Protestant Religion can
consist alone in Parchment and Seals; or that the Emperor will not attempt the
Sovereignty of Germany, if ever a fair occasion presents it self; whilst he can
pretext so specious Causes as is the restoration of the Catholic Religion,
and Goods of the Ecclesiastics, they must have quite lost all knowledge of
preceding times; besides, the Treaty of Nimmigen has shown how vain and
fruitless all such Projects are.

The Independent Protestant States need not fear being obliged to abandon their
Religion by any violent means; for as the uniformity of Religion cannot remove
the Jealousies of State, which is notoriously evident from France and Spain,
England and Holland; so neither can the difference of Religion produce this
effect, that in case any potent State of the Romish Persuasion should undertake
to oppress a neighboring Protestant, all the Papists should forsake the one,
and immediately join with the other, especially if they had any Interest in the
preservation of the State, that should be in danger of ruin.

The lastingness and conservation of the Protestant Religion in those States
where it is professed, does chiefly consist in the care that is taken to
maintain it within the Country; whereto they have no need of such subtle and
artificial Devices, as are used in the support of the Popedom, but the most
simple and ordinary means are sufficient; for it mostly consists herein, That
the Schools and Churches be provided of learned and pious Teachers; That the
Clergy, by a sound Doctrine and virtuous Life, give a good Example to their
Flocks; That every one be easily grounded in the true Fundamentals of their
Religion, and especially such as are to be employed in Affairs of State, that
they may be able to defend themselves against the Artifices of the Papists,
chiefly when they happen to travel in Popish Countries. And lastly, That the
Clergy qualify themselves so as to be able to baffle their Adversaries, and
refute all their Quirks and Sophistical Arguments.

Some are of opinion, that it would be no small advantage to us, if the two
head Parties of the Protestants (which only differ in some particular opinions,
whilst the Interests of their Religions is one and the same) could be brought
to an accommodation and union under one head; the which they imagine to be very
feasible, if we would lay aside all Hate, Animosities, Self-Love, Pride,
Opiniatrety, and unreasonable Preventions.

But if we examine well the Genius and Humor of most of the World, we shall
find this postulatum to be extravagant; for if a man should consider the
Controversies written on the subject of Religion impartially, and unprevented,
he would stand amazed to see how the writers turn and wind themselves on all
sides, to maintain the opinion they have once laid down, without having the
least regard to its Agreement or Repugnance to the Scriptures; And how often
they renew Disputes and Questions which have been refuted a thousand times.
Besides, It can never happen that one opinion should be thought as good as the
other; for such an indifference in any one point, would show that they did not
much matter all the rest. Furthermore, 'twould be very dangerous to make those
Articles, wherein we cannot agree, problematick; nor can I tell by what
Authority we presume of our own Heads to make any Article Fundamental or
Problematick. Some are likewise of the mind, that we should draw up a Scheme of
all the points, in which both parties agree, and try if from thence may be
formed a perfect System of Divinity, which from the beginning to the end,
should be composed, ad formam justae Artis. So that if this project could
succeed, although there should remain some different opinions, yet if they did
not dissolve the union and continuity of the whole body, we should in the main,
agree concerning the means of attaining Eternal Happiness; and all the rest
would not be sufficient to hinder us from uniting in one Church. But to judge
rightly of this opinion, one ought first to see a model of such a projected
System. For my part, I know no better means, than to commit the matter wholly
to Divine Providence, which in its own time, will perhaps furnish expedients,
that the Wit of Man could not have imagined. For it is certain, that
unseasonable means will only serve to create new Schisms and Divisions: In the
mean while, both parties, notwithstanding the diversity of their Sentiments,
ought to unite against the common Enemies, and to be really persuaded, that the
Pope is no better a Friend to the Lutheran, than to the Calvinist. As for what
belongs to those little Sects of Socinians, Anabaptist, and such like, it is
impossible to hope for any reconciliation with them, whilst those believe that
the Christian Religion is nothing but a Philosophy purely Moral, and these know
not what to believe themselves; to which we may add, That these last, have
filled their Heads with a sort of a new Polity, which would render them very
dangerous to a State where they had the upper hand; but whether the Socinians
have the same Sentiments, I cannot well determine, since they are not as yet
become so powerful in any Republic, as to be able to occasion any Troubles or
Revolutions.

THE END.
Laus Deo.

