A Full and Clear EXPOSITION OF THE PROTESTANT Rule of Faith, With An Excellent
DIALOGUE Laying forth the large Extent of True Protestant Charity against the
Uncharitable Papists.
I Having made it a prime part of my Study these several years, to seek into
the Principles of Religion, and upon account that I judged the saving of my
Soul, the greatest concern I had to deal in this World, I was resolved, maugre
all the Principles of Education, Interest, or Passion, there to fix, where I
truly was convinced between God and my own Soul, that the surest footing was,
and securest way to Salvation. Which to my unspeakable comfort, being satisfied
that I have found: I cannot conceal the desire I have of directing others to
endeavor the same, that they may partake of the like happiness which I my self
enjoy. To accomplish this the more compendiously, I conceive nothing more
efficacious, than to search as I have done, into the different grounds of each
Church. The Roman Catholics, though they allow any sober Person may read (with
leave) the Holy Scriptures, yet they permit none to interpret the same in
points of Faith, unless they take along with them the Judgment of the whole
Church, either diffusive, or assembled by her Representatives in a General
Council Lawfully called, under their chief head his Holiness of Rome, and to
such Definitions alone do they believe themselves bound to subscribe. Now our
Protestant Churches deal more liberally, and allow every sound Member a power
of reading Holy Scripture, and judging of Controversies in Faith, according to
the measure of light imparted, so that no body is Bound to submit either to
Fathers or Councils, unless he judge they speak conformably to his private
sense of Scripture.

Now, having lately touched upon this point in my Answer to Dr. Tennison's
Remarks, and having framed an argument of no small force, to invalidate the
Protestant Rule of Faith as by him delivered, to which the Dr. in his fifteen
Sheets has not returned one Syllable, I thought it might prove very beneficial
to the Public, if that point were thoroughly handled, the whole weight of all
Controversy turning upon this Hinge, viz. whether there be any Power upon
Earth, to which all Men are bound to submit in matters of Faith, as the
Catholics teach; or whether every sound Man be left free to judge for himself,
as the Protestants assert.

Methinks I see the Protestant Reader in a Zealous fret, for having bought the
Paper of an Author against whom he has conceived a notable prejudice, borrowed
from the Writings of Dr. Tennison, which he has been pleased to inter-line with
many very Injurious and Scandalous reflections upon Me and My Religion, nothing
provoked thereto, as appears from the modest account I gave of the Conference;
nor do my Remarks contain any more than a Vindication void of Passion, to which
Truth and Justice did oblige me. And although the Dr. continue in his fifteen
Sheets called, Pulton Considered, his Reviling, Defaming, and Bantering Style:
yet (ever willing to yield to the Dr. in this) the Answer I will shorly publish
thereto, as it shall be very short, so it shall contain nothing that may
disedify the Reader.

The Dr. having assigned the Holy Scriptures, as understood by every sound
Judgment, for the Rule of Faith; and consequently having given to every such
Person authority to Judge of Controversies in Faith, at least as far as
concerns his own salvation, I framed the following Discourse, the Dr. has not
been pleased to return an Answer, though it was the chief Querie put to him.

We must allow, if to any, a soundness of Judgment to Luther, Calvin,
Carolostadius, Zwinglius, Beza, Castalio, etc. who were the principal Heads of
the Reformed Churches, and consequently received more of the Divine Influence,
used more industry in acquiring Authentic Copies, comparing of Texts,
Imploring the Divine Assistance, than any of their Followers.

To begin therefore with Luther, Zwinglius says of him, That he was a foul
Corrupter, and horrible Falsifier of God's Word: One, who followed the
Marcionists and Arians, that razed out such places of Holy Writ as were against
him. Thou do, says he to Luther, corrupt the word of God; Thou art seen to be
a manifest and common Corrupter and Perverter of the Holy Scriptures. How much
are we ashamed of thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee? With how great reason
Zwinglius objected this to him, those are Judges, who have noted above a
thousand places, changed by him in the New Testament alone; Vide Bell. Ser. de
Pentec.
and that he set forth the Gospels seven times, every Edition very much
differing from the precedent. Now, I desire to know, whether, and when Martin
Luther had the assistance of the H. Ghost?

Luther on the other side affirms of the Zwinglian Translators, That they are
Fools, Asses, Antichrists, Deceivers, and of an Asslike understanding. Beza
says of the Basilian Translation, That it is in many places Wicked, and
altogether differing from the mind of the Holy Ghost. Of Beza's Translation,
Castalio observes, That to note all his Errors, would require a great Volume.
Beza again pronounces of Gastalio's Edition, that, It is False, Foolish,
Unskillful, Bold, Blasphemous, Vicious, Ridiculous, Cursed, Erroneous, Wicked,
Perverse. In the first English Bible, set forth in the Reign of Henry VIII. by
Tindal the chief Apostle of the pretended Reformation, Bishop Tunstal has noted
no less than two thousand Corruptions in the Translation of the New Testament
alone.

Give me leave here to argue, as follows: I have a Soul to save, which is the
Concern of Concerns; and which, being once lost, is irrecoverably lost, and for
all Eternity, never to be redeemed from an Abyss of inexplicable Woe. For the
saving of this most precious Soul, I ask of our pretended Reformers, What I am
to do? Take this Scripture, say the Zwinglians, and here you shall find the
word of Life. Hearken not to them, says Luther, they are Fools, Antichrists,
Deceivers. I turn to Luther, Take heed, says Zwinglius, He is a Marcionist, an
Arian, a manifest and common Corruper and Perverter of the Holy Scriptures. I
leave them both, and go to Beza: He offers me a Volume, which he calls the Word
of GOD, when Castalio, crying out, bids me beware, and tells me, it is a Volume
of Errors, Beza defends himself by defaming Castalio, as False, Bold,
Blasphemous, Cursed, Erroneous.

Alarmed at the clashing of this Cadmean Race of Reformers, I leave Germany,
and come into England, a Wise and Polite Nation, which, having considered at a
distance these mutual Dissentions of our Heavenly gifted Gospellers, takes
doubtless better measures. Tindal her prime Apostle, offers me the Book of
Life, when Tunstal warns me of two thousand Corruptions in the lesser half of
it. I hang in suspense. The Parliament declares it to be a Crafty, False, and
Relig. and Gover. p. 306. and 318.
untrue Translation: Yet Cranmer is allowed to present me it again little
changed, besides the Marginal Notes and Preface. However through the esteem, I
have for that august Assembly, I submit my self, and am willing to depend on
its prudent determination.

To the end therefore, that amidst so much confusion, this weighty matter may
be more Cautiously and Piously decided, Martin Bucer, once a Dominican,
Bernardin Ochin, a quondam Friar, and some others, qualified in the same
nature, are called into England by my Lord Protector and Bishop Cranmer, to
frame a new Model of Religion, and fix the Standard of the English pretended
Reformation.

Let me here desire my Reader to weigh these following lines with that
indifference of Judgment, and unprejudicateness of mind, which an Affair of
this importance requires, and as I write them, with the most sincere Zeal, and
Uprightness of intention; so I most earnestly beg, they may be accordingly
considered by the discreet Christian Reader.

Bucer therefore, styled by Archbishop Whitgift, a Reverend, Learned, Painful,
Sound Father; and of whom Sir John Cheek In his Defense, page 522.
said, The World scarce had his Fellow, first became a Lutheran, then a
Zwinglian, after that a Lutheran again, as may be seen in the Acts of the
Synod, held at Luthers House in Wittemberg, in the year 1589, And Bucer himself
in his Commentary on the 6th. of St. John, and Epist. ad Norimb. and Esseing.
26th. of St. Matthew, asks pardon of GOD for having deceived so many with the
Errors of Zwinglius and the Sacramentarians; yet after this open Repentance,
he returns to the same Zwinglianism in England; and at his Death, as those, who
were present testify, Schlussem. nn Theol. Calv. l. 2. f. 70. Pratcol. page
107.
embraces Judaism, having long before declared to Dudley Duke of
Northumberland, that he doubted, whether all was true, which the Evangelists
relate of CHRIST; which if it were, none, who believed CHRIST to be GOD, and to
have spoken these words, This is my Body, could deny the Real Presence.

Ochin, whose Opinions were Oracles to the Composers of the Nine and Thirty
Articles, and whom Bishop Bale terms a Light of Relig. and Gover. p. 62. 3.
the Church; saying, That England was happy whilst It had him, miserable when
it lost him; after many changes in Religion turned Jew, taught Circumcision,
and wrote a Book in defense of Polygamy.

Cranmer in Henry VIII's days, wrote a Book in defense of the Sea his Letters
in Fox. 1279 and Stow, p. 1036.
Real Presence: and another in Edward VI's against it. Many such Remarks might
be made of Peter Martyr, Coverdale, and others, the grand Masters of the
Reformed Church of England.

Now I desire to know, whether these Men were in all these Opinions true
Protestants. If my Reason is not quite lost, I conceive, you must answer in the
Affirmative: for he (according to your Doctrine) is a true Protestant, who
guides himself by the HoIy Scripture, taken in such sense, as appears true to
his own reason, which he is not obliged to submit to the Judgment of any Church
whatsoever. Why so? Because every sound Judgment is a sufficient Judge in
Controversy. If those Men therefore were of sound judgment, and judging
according to Scripture, as they for the present understood it, were now of one
Opinion, then of another: now condemned, what they once believed; then again
believed the Tenet, they had so lately Anathematized: lived Christians; died
Jews: They were notwithstanding, in all these Opinions, true Protestants. If
you say, they judged right, when they were Zwinglians; wrong, when they were
Lutherans: This is said merely gratis, and is a perfect begging of the
Question. The Lutherans will rise up, and assert, that they were then truly
inspired from above, when they judged the Zwinglians an abominable Sect: And
the Jews will challenge them, because in their latter days, when they were not
only more experienced, but also more grave and serious upon the approach of
death, they pronounced Christ to be no Messiah, and all the Christian Religion
to be nothing, but a mere Delusion and Cheat.

If being ashamed of such Patriarchs, you disown them, and say, They were
deceived in this or the other Opinion, that they were of weak judgment, wanted
Sincerity, Humility, Modesty: It then follows, that the Basis of your pretended
Church totters, and how shall any one be assured, that the Fabric, built on
such a Foundation, is firm, solid, and warrantable?

If you say, you have only taken from them, what was true; and agreeable to the
right meaning of GOD's Holy Word, without the mixture of their various and
unchristian Errors, I desire you to give me a Rule, by which I may be assured
of this your certain Choice of only true Doctrine. These Men always spoke
conformably to their present Judgment of Scripture, which as you Universally
teach, is clear and evident in all points necessary to Salvation: what
certainty have I, that this Perspicuity and Evidence was better discerned by
them, when they taught this Doctrine, than when they delivered the Opposite? If
you tell me, you are sure of it, because it is conformable to your own Judgment
of Scripture; the opposite Party will as confidently affirm, they are certain
of the contrary, because they Judge contrary to the Doctrines, which, they are
assured, are true, and only conformable to GOD's Holy Word.

The Zwinglian according to his sense of Scripure, says, He is sure Bucer was
deluded, when he taught Lutheranism; The Lutheran from his Judgment of
Scripture, avers the same assurance of his having Erred, when he taught
Zwinglianism; The Jew is as certain that he was deceived in both, and was then
only in the right, when he embraced Judaism. Where does the Scripture say,
Luther, you understand me right? you Zwinglius Err, or the contrary?

But methinks, I hear you tell me, that I have forgot with whom I argue; that
yours is not a Religion of any one Man, but a Church Established by Law, that
it is not only imprudence, but even impudence, to question the Certainty and
Truth of a Religion, prescribed by so Wise, Sincere, and Learned an Assembly,
as that of an English Parliament. Very good; but am I not still free to examine
according to my own Sense and Judgment, whether this Assembly speak conformably
to the sense of the Holy Ghost? You reply, that I am, every Man of sound
Judgment being judge of Controversies of Faith. What therefore, if according to
the conviction of my Understanding, I am in my Conscience persuaded, that they
have all Erred, Holy Scripture seeming clear to me in the contrary sense, Am I
still a true Protestant, while I Judge the Church of England to be a Spurious
and False Church? If so, then I am at the same time a Protestant, and no
Protestant; if not, then a Man of sound judgment, may cease to be a complete
judge in Controversy. If you Preach to me submission of Judgment and implicit
Faith, you have left your Principles, and are become a Papist. O, but though I
may securely judge Ten whole Ages, and Twelve General Councels to have handed
down to me a false sense of Holy Scripture; yet I must by no means question,
but that now at last, an English Parliament has hit upon the right: You may as
rationally oblige a Man, his eyes being wide open, not to see at midday; but I
must believe, or away to Prison, and undergo the severe Penalties of the Law;
This goes hard. I would fain Conform, if it stood with my Conscience: Let us
therefore try for once, whether I cannot in Prudence and Christian Sincerity,
secure my Soul by a Conformity to so advantageous a Judgment.

I find therefore in Henry VIII's time, an English Parliament crying down the
Pope, and placing his Majesty of England in his room; and yet I see the same
Men persecute as Heretics, those, who in other Points joined with the
Transmarin Innovators. In Edward VI's days, I find the same Men declare that
Doctrine to be most damnable Heresy, which themselves had all along during the
Reign of Henry VIII. professed as Catholic. Queen Mary being seated on the
Throne, I find them Recanting, and Condemning themselves, and censuring all the
Points of Protestancy as Wicked and Heretical: and within six years after, I
see them again pass the same Censure on the Roman Catholic Doctrine, to which
they had so lately and solemnly been reconciled.

Now, give me leave (Christian Reader) to ask you; can I with a safe
Conscience, leave a Church whose General Councils, Lawfully Assembled, and
approved (by which I govern my self) have not in 1600 years produced, (as I can
find) any one contradiction in matters of Faith, to depend upon Parliamentary
Creeds, four times wholly inverted in sixteen years? Can I in Prudence and
Conscience renounce the former, to embrace the latter? Give me but one pregnant
Reason for this, and I engage to become your Proselite.

If you tell me, one Parliament was guided by Passion, another by Interest; but
that 'twas Queen Elizabeth's Parliament, which consisted of Men according to the
Spirit of GOD: Is not this again a manifest begging of the Question? Where does
the Bible (for at present, as a good Protestant, I admit of no other Rule)
where, I say, does the Bible tell me, that the Parliament of Queen Elizabeth
should be guided by the Holy Spirit, and not that of King Henry VIII. etc. If
you shall return to your old Evasion, that you are sure on it, because you find
that Parliament agree with your own Judgment; those, who lived in King Henry's
days, will on the same ground of pure Scripture tell me quite another story:
How then can I be satisfied, which of your Judgments is true? You will answer
me, I must judge for my self. What therefore, if according to my sense of Holy
Scripture, I judge in my Conscience (as in the presence of Almighty GOD I truly
do) that King Henry VIII's Parliament was Schismatical, Queen Elizabeth's
Heretical, and this (as indeed it falls out) after a serious, long, calm,
dis-interess'd Examen, am I still a True Protestant? You must grant me to be
one, because I follow the Protestant Rule, which is (as you say) Holy
Scripture, as every one after the use of due means, does in his own proper
judgment understand it. What can be more ridiculous than this? I am a True
Protestant, at least in my Principles, though by those very Principles, I judge
the Protestant Church to be Schismatical and Heretical

The Great Extent of Protestant Charity; Or, a Dialogue between Eudoxius and
Philautus, concerning the Protestant Rule of Faith; showing it to be an inlet,
not only to all Heresy, but even to Turcism, Judaism, and Atheism it self.
Eudoxius. I Shall not, Sir, I hope, offend you by proposing you a few Doubts
concerning your Protestant Rule of Faith: which is holy Scripture, as
understood by every sound judgment.


Philautus, So far from it, Sir, that on the contrary, you will very much
oblige me.


Eu. Reading lately, Sir, the Works, published by the first Lights of your
pretended Reformation, who all give us the same Rule of Faith, I discovered in
them a wonderful Spirit of Contradiction; and found, that they not only
differed the one from the other in matters of Faith, but that the same Men
dissented from themselves; now teaching one Doctrine, then another.


Phil. When you shall have proved your Assertion, I will return you a
satisfactory Answer.


Eu. Luther in his Book De Potestate Papae, teaches, that there are seven
Sacraments; De Captivitate Babylonica, that there are only three; ad Waldenses,
only two; and again de Captivitate Babylonica, that according to Holy Scripture
there is but one. In his Sermon of the Eucharist, he tells us, that in the
Sacrament of the Altar, there is neither Bread nor Wine, but only the Species
or appearance of them; yet in his Book against the King of England he asserts,
That he is wicked and a Blasphemer, who says, The Bread is changed into the
substance of CHRIST's Body. Concerning the Popes Power he affirms in his Book
de Potestate Papae, That, if it were not Jure Divino, and from GOD, it could
never have subsisted so long; and yet in his Treatise de Captivitate
Babylonica, he often repeats, That he is certain, the Power of the Pope is the
Kingdom of Babylon. In Disputatione Lipsiensi, he says, I do not only believe,
but certainly know, that there is a Purgatory; and yet de Abroganda Missa, he
tells us, It Is more secure to deny Purgatory. I have Sir, to the number of
threescore such Contradictions out of this one Author, the first and greatest
Light of the Reformation; and near as many out of Calvin, Beza, etc. Now I
desire to know, how I may be assured, which part of the Contradiction is
conformable to Divine Revelation, which otherwise.


Phil. Of contradictory Doctrines, you may safely hold that to be true, which
after a serious and due examine, appears to you agreeable to holy Scripture.


Eu. But what, if another be convinced of the opposite?


Phil. He is bound to believe, as he comprehends it, however different his
belief may be from yours.


Eu. And shall each of us be assured, he has Divine Faith, relating to such a
Mystery, though we evidently contradict one another?


Phil. I do not say, you shall each of you have Divine Faith concerning that
particular point, in which you differ; but that each of you may safely hold
that side of the Contradiction, which he verily believes to be true, provided
you both proceed with sincerity, and are neither of you blinded with Passion:
For the Article may perhaps be of such a Nature, that there will be no
necessity for either of you to believe it with Divine Faith.


Eu. What then say you of a Quaker, who, grounding himself on his own sense of
Holy Scripture, believes Baptism as impertinent and superstitious, as you do
the use of Holy Water?


Phil. I say, the Quaker, so believing, proceeds not with Sincerity and without
Passion.


Eu. How will you make it appear, that you are the only Men, who proceed
sincerly; and that all, which contradict you, are misled and blinded by
Passion, or the like.


Phil. I don't say, all, who contradict me, are so misled.


Eu. They may then contradict you, and not be misled?


Phil. Herein our Charity is greater than yours: for, as we arrogate not to our
selves Infallibility, so consequently we condemn not all, that are of a
contrary persuasion to our selves; but allow Salvation to any, who reading the
Holy Scripture, shall believe so much, so far, and in that sense, they humbly
conceive, it ought to have.


Eu. So that, if to day I understood the Bible in one sense, to morrow in
another; using always equal Diligence and Sincerity, I shall always be in the
right.


Phil. I say not, that you will always be in the right; but that you will not
be accountable to GOD for any Error, as long as you judge according to
Conscience.


Eu. But what, if I govern my Conscience by a false Principle? what, if
Almighty GOD has laid upon all Christians an obligation of submitting their
private Judgment to the Universal determination of the Church?


Phil. What, if the Sky should fall? There is nothing so evident, as that every
Man of a sincere will and sound judgment, using due endeavor, will clearly see
in Scripture, whatsoever is necessary for him to believe, or do, that he may
obtain eternal life.


Eu. Notwithstanding this your Evidence of Scripture, many (for ought we can
discern) of equal Probity, Learning, and Diligence, have delivered
contradictory Doctrines from the same Text of Holy Writ.


Phil. Not in material Points, or in the Fundamentals or Essentials of Faith.


Eu. Sir, I can make it appear, that there is no one Point of Faith, which has
not been denied by such, as have constantly pretended to follow the Guidance of
Holy Scripture. Apollinaris taught, That our Savior had no Soul distinct from
his Divinity; Manichaeus, That there were from all Eternity two Principles or
Deities; The Anti-trinitarians, Oppugned the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity;
the Origenists and Millenaries denied Everlasting Life and Death; Eutyches,
affirmed, There were not two Natures in CHRIST; Nestorius, That the Divine and
Humane Nature were not truly united, but only in a moral or eminential manner;
the Arians made the second Person inferior to the first, and a Creature. All
these, I hope, are material Points of Faith; yet were they all opugned by Men,
who (for any thing, can be made out to the contrary) Read and Studied the Holy
Scriptures with as much Sincerity, Diligence, Learning and Piety, as any of the
late Reformers. I desire therefore to know, whether these Men were part of the
true Chatholick Church?


Phil. If it could be credibly made out, that they proceeded with Sincerity,
and Piety, I should be unwilling to exclude them the Church.


Eu. The contrary cannot be proved against them without begging the Question. If
you say, they wanted Sincerity, Learning, Piety, Diligence, etc. they will
disown the Charge, and return it upon your self. Give me therefore one
convincing Reason, why I may not believe them as well as you.


Phil. So you believe according to conscience, I shall not judge, nor condemn
you.


Eu. At least, what you just now asserted, is false, viz. that one, who acts
Sincerly, cannot err in things, necessary to Salvation, by reason of the
Clearness and Evidence, they have from Holy Scripture.


Phil. I will not be possitive concerning those, that lived in former Ages, of
whom we have but a dubious and slender knowledge; at least it is manifest by the
experience of the present Times, that the Scripture is clear in all things,
necessary to Salvation, and of this, all Protestants are agreed.


Eu. There are then among Protestants no Heretics and Unbelievers?


Phil. Not amongst true ones.


Eu. Amongst those, who carefully, diligently, and sincerely read the Scripture?


Phill. No.


Eu. How comes it then to pass, that Luther calls the Hereticos serio censemus,
and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei. 1. con. Sacr.
Zwinglians, and Sacramentarians, who denied the Real Presence, Heretics,
poisoned by the Devil, separate from the Church of CHRIST, Aurif. vit. de Heret.
possessed, repossest, through possessed, and over and again possessed with the
Devil, Diabolatos, perdiabolatos, transdiabolatos, superdiabolatos; and that he
says, I protest before GOD and the World, that I Epist. ad Harmogin. To 7. Wit.
fol. 380.
agree not with them, (the Sacramentarians, which is our Religion of England)
nor ever will, while the World stands, but will have my hands clear from the
blood of those Sheep, which these Heretics drive from CHRIST, deceive, and
kill. Munster and Carolostadius, two great Pillars of the Reformation, he calls
furious Devils. Calvin on the contrary, speaking of the Lutherans, says, Ult.
adm Jo Cav. ad Joac. Westp. etc.
That they neither care for the Judgment of GOD nor Angels, that they are men
indu'd with a Devilish Pride, a Doggish wickedness, and blind Drunkenness;
that they are nothing but Mad Barkers, Giants, Cyclops, etc. In libell. edit.
in exil.
Heshusius pronounces of Melancthon, and the Wittembergians, that they are
entirely out of the Church. In Epist. ad Nob. Pol.
Beza proclaims of the Anabaptists, that they are Blasphemers of Almighty GOD,
and held three GODS. The Basilienses declare of Carolostadius, that he was the
Plague of the Church, and was killed by the Devil: In Collat. Doct. Aris and
Melanc.
Stancharus of Melancton, that he was an Arian, and the Antichrist of the
North, and Distuber of all Christianism. Vid. Cyechorit. passim in suis libris.
Castalio, speaking of the Calvinist, calls them Proud, Furious, Haughty
Heretics, saying that Geneva is Babylon, the Ministers Sorcerers, Conjurers,
Sons of Sodom and Gomorha.

Here Sir, I desire to ask one Question, viz. whether or no you receive into
the number of common Christianity, and Catholic Union, those, who (in the
Judgment of the prime Lights of the Gospel, and the first chosen by GOD to
Reform the North) are Heretics, possessed, and repossest by the Devil, Devils in
humane shape, without the fear of GOD, Blasphemers, Arians, Antichrists,
Corrupters of common Christianity, Furious, Haughty, Giants, Conjurers,
Sorcerers, Soddomites and Gomorrhaeans? It seems to me, you must, because all
these Men were true Protestants; and true Protestants, you say, make the true
Church. They were true Protestants, because they all adhear'd to the Holy
Scripture, in such sense, as they themselves understood it, refusing all other
Judges, and protesting against all other Power on Earth, which should pretend
to oblige a Christian to submit his own Judgment of Scripture, to a contrary
Interpretation of the Church, if the Church should seem to him not to teach
conformably to that sense of Scripture which he should verily believe to be
true.


Phil. I have already told you, that I Will Judge no Man: if they used the
Diligence, Sincerity, Piety, and Learning, we require, it is certain they could
not err damnably.


Eu. They will all not only say, but swear also, that they have omitted no
endeavors of Diligence or Pious means. They are all (in their own conceits)
sure they are in the right, and that those, who differ from them, are deluded,
blinded with Passion, byas'd by Interest, or the like. Give me, Sir, an
Infallible Rule, whereby I may know, which of them have the Spirit of Truth,
which the contrary?


Phil. I tell you once again, let GOD Judge them. I meddle with none of them:
it is not my Affair, I am certain, I am in the right.


Eu. Under favor, Sir, I think this a Demonstration, that every Protestant
Church is at the same time, according to your own Principles, both in the true
Church, and out of the true Church, and consequently neither in nor out, which
is a mere Chimera. I thus prove my Assertion. Every Protestant Church is a true
Church, because her Members of sound judgment are fit Judges in Controversies
of Faith by Scripture, which alone they follow, and which is clear in all
things, necessary to Salvation. Every Protestant Church is also a false Church,
because those Churches, which are by Members of sound judgment, governing
themselves by Scripture, judged Heretical, Blasphemers, Antichristian, and
Diabolical, must needs be false Churches: But, as I have shown above, there is
no particular Protestant Church, which has not by some other particular
Protestant Church been so called, represented, and believed: therefore every
Protestant Church is false. Thus is every Protestant Church both true and
false, and consequently Church and no Church; which, as I said before, is a
mere Chimera.


Phil. Hold, Sir, not so fast: I have let you ramble long enough; it is now time
to take you up. You have, Sir, I perceive, forgot what I told you in the
beginning of our Discourse; that the Point, concerning which the difference is,
may perhaps be of such a Nature, that there is no necessity of believing it
with Divine Faith; that is, it may perhaps be none of the Essentials or
Fundamentals of Faith.


Eu. There may therefore be Heretical, Blasphemous, Antichristian, and
Diabolical Doctrines, taught by sound Christians remaining in the Communion of
the H. Catholic Church; because all these Characters are consistent with the
Fundamentals of Christianity; oblige me therefore, so far, as to give me aList
of these all-saving Fundamentals.


Phil. That, Sir, is not so easy as you imagine: for by reason of Men's different
Capacities and Apprehension, that may be necessary to one Person, which is not
so to another: so that to require such a List of me, is to bid me shape a Coat
for the Moon, which (she being never at a stay, but always either increasing or
decreasing) is utterly impossible. This only you may rely on, as a certain
truth, that nothing can be a Fundamental or Essential Point of Faith, which is
not clearly delivered in Holy Writ. Nor can there be any greater Evidence of a
Points being clearly taught in Scripture, than that Learned and Pious Men after
a diligent search, and the use of due means, differ not about it.


Eu. I see then, Sir, by this your Doctrine, that a Man may without endangering
his Salvation, deny all these Articles, I have hitherto been taught to be the
principal Points of Christianity.


Phil. Sir, what you may have been taught, I know not: but since you press me
so close, give me leave to tell you with the Learned Mr. Chillingworth, that,
if you mean by Fundamental, what is necessary to be explicitly believed by
every one for the obtaining of Eternal Life; there is perhaps nothing so, but
that there is a GOD, and that JESUS CHRIST came to save finners; and that
whoever, holding this Foundation, shall be ready to submit his Belief to all,
that he shall find revealed in Scripture, taken in such sense, as he himself
shall after the use of due means Judge to be true, can never err damnably, nor
consequently cease to be a Member of that Church, out of which there is no
Salvation.


Eu. I must confess Sir, that your Charity is of a very vast extent: For by
this your Doctrine, all those, who were by the Fathers in the Primitive Church,
and the first General Councils condemned as notorious Heretics, ought not to
be excluded the Pale of the Church. But pray Sir, what would you say to one,
who having read the Holy Scripture with all possible Diligence, and considered
not only the many Contradictory Opinions, held by Men pretending to no other
Rule, but also the possitive Assertion of Protestants; that all visible
Churches for a thousand years have been Erroneous and False, and that all the
Signs, Prodigies, and Miracles, wrought by pretended Catholics, (as you are
pleased to call us,) were nothing but Imposters and Cheats,; that there was no
true Holiness in all our Saints, nor any Faith to be given to our Fathers. How
far, Sir, I say, would your Charity extend to one, who, after a through
Consideration of all this, should with the Turks remain persuaded, that as
Moses's Law was abolisht by the coming of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, so
the Christian Law was to have an end at the coming of Mahomet, who was
according to their Doctrine, a Prophet sent by God to that purpose, and as far
exceeded CHRIST, as CHRIST did Moses; and being thus persuaded, should follow
the Example of Adam Neuserus, a most Learned Protestant, and chief Pastor of
Heidelberg, Osiand. Cant. p. 16.
who became a Mohammedan, and was Circumcised at Constantinople with many of his
Flock.


Phil. Since I am, Sir, as I have already told you, to judge of my Neighbor
with Charity, I find no reason, why I may not allow Salvation to such a Man,
acting sincerely; especially seeing he holds the Foundation, that there is a
GOD, and that JESUS CHRIST came to save sinners.


Eu. I see then, Sir, that he was not altogether mistaken, who affirmed
Protestancy and Turcism to be very near of kin. What would you think of
another, who, believing the Alcoran to be (as indeed it is) nothing but the
Dreams of a Blasphemous Impostor, and hearing your Opinion of the Miracles,
wrought during the last ten Ages, should from thence, and from the many seeming
Contradictions, not easily reconciled, between the Old Testament and the New,
between Gospel and Gospel, really in his Conscience believe all Christianity to
be a Cheat, and the Four Evangelists Four Impostors; and should therefore, as
befell the Learned Protestant Allemannus, judge it his safest course to embrace
Judaism? This Man is of a sound Judgment, reads Scripture, examins diligently,
and Schlusselberg. de Theol. Call. fol. 9.
sincerely according to his Judgment of Scripture, believes all Christians
either Cheats or Fools, animated by your example, who believe the same of the
last Ten Ages.


Phil. If this case be possible, I see not how I can in Charity pronounce such
a Man condemned to Eternal Torments.


Eu, Once more, Sir, what would you say of another, that should, after all
private diligence possible in reading of Scripture, grounding himself on your
Assertion of the last Ten Ages, having produced nothing but Impostors, and
considering, that all the Arguments, you bring against Miracles in the Roman
Church, may equally be alleged against those of Moses, and our Savior, should
remain convinced, that the Creation of the World, the Wonders of Exodus, and
all the other surprising Stories, related in Holy Writ, are mere Fables, and
consequently that Religion is only a pure invention of Statesmen, Politickly
devised to keep Mankind in aw; and in fine, question the very Being of a Deity?


Phil. Sir, I have often told you, Judge no Man.


Eu. So that Heretieal, Blasphemous, Antichristian, Diabolical, Turkish,
Jewish, Heathenish, Atheistical Doctrines, undergo no censure from a true
Protestant than the which, what can be granted more destructive to Christianity?


Unheard of PARADOXES, following from the Protestant Rule of Faith.
1 Paradox. WHen Luther's Conscience checked him in the terms he expresses,
Lut. to. Ger. fol. 9 and to. 2. Wittem. 1562. and alibi.
How often did my trembling heart beat within me, and reprehending me, object
against me that most strong Argument, art thou only wife? Do so many Worlds
Err? Were so many Ages Ignorant? What if thou Errest, and drawest so many into
Error with thee to be damned Eternally. And again, Luth. to. 5. Wittem. in
Galat. fol. 290. and in Coll. Mensal. fol 273.
Do thou, O sole Man, and of no account take upon thee so great matters! What
if thou being but one, offendest! If God permit such, so many, and all to Err,
why may he not permit thee to Err. Luth. to. 7. Wittem. an 1558. and to. 6.
Ger. fol. 26. and aliis in Locis.
Hitherto appertain those strong Arguments the Church, the Fathers, the
Concils, the Customs, the Multitudes, and Greatness of Wise Men, (who have
taught the opposite Doctrine to mine.) In col. mensal. 158. and in prof. in to.
Ger. f. 9.
That I had never begun this business. [e] That my Writings were burnt, and
buried in Eternal Oblivion. A true Protestant believes, that Luther did
Prudently and Piously stifle all these remorses of his Conscience, and that he
was endu'd with the Spirit of God, when he said, Tom. 5. Wittem. an 1554. fol.
290. and in Ep.. ad Gal. c.
Be it that the Church, Austin, and other Doctors, also Peter and Paul, yea
that an Angel from Heaven teach otherwise, yet is my Doctrine such as sets
forth God's only Glory. Peter the chief of the Apostles, did live and teach
besides the word of God.

Now dear Christian what Judgment can be more rash, injurious and contrary to
Christian Charity, than to assert that so many Holy and Learned Doctors as have
been, and are confessed Papists (and even the whole visible Church for the
space of at least a thousand years) could either ignorantly mistake, or would
wilfully forsake the true sense of God's word so clearly shining in Scripture,
as every petty Protestant does pretend? what so repugnant to Christian modesty
and simplicity, as for a Man to prefer his own private Opinion to the
Decissions of General Councils, Torrents of Fathers, Clouds of Witnesses, and
the Universal Tradition of so many Ages.

2 Paradox. A true Protestant believes, that Almighty God having a Loc. com.
Class. 4. page 50.
a design to Reform his Church, made use of Luther, haunted by the Devil from a
Child; to avoid whose molestations, he became Religious, and was quiet till he
threw off his Habit, and held Sacrilegious commerse with a Nun; when again the
Devil returned really, not imaginarily to him. Of Calvin, Sclussel. Hier. Bols.
an. 1577. Defense of the censur, fol. 81. 8.
who besides the keeping a Gentleman of La-anna's Wife, was sentenced at Noyon
in France, to be publicly branded in the Shoulder, for sins not to be named,
as was Registered by Mr. Bertilier Secretary of the Council of Geneva, under a
sworn Notaries hand. Ibid. fol. 86. 87, etc.
Of Beza, who lived in wickedness with Andebertus a Boy; with Candida a Harlot,
who ran away with a Tailors Wife, that dwelt in Calenderstreet in Paris, and
kept another Woman called Claudia, whose Child he killed to cover the sin. Of
See the Stat. an. 28. Henic. 7. 1536.
Cranmer, who two several times at least, Married King Henry the Eighth, and as
often declared the said Marriage Null. Dr. Heyl. Fox, etc.
Besides his own marrying against his Oath when a Fellow at Cambridge, and
afterward, Schi. Angl. p. 216.
when Bishop, carried his Wench along with him in his Episcopal Visitations. Of
Poynet, who went to Law with a Butcher for his Wife, having then another Wife
living. Of Bale of hemself, Cent. 5. 245.
Bale, who was inspired to take a sweetheart called Doll.

All of them men without Mission, either Ordinary (as not being sent by any
Lawful Power upon Earth) or Extraordinary, that is particularly Delegated from
Heaven, as not having all of them together (as Erasmus well objected) power of
Miracles, even so far as to cure a Lame Horse. And that they had neither
command over Devils, Gift of Tongues, Spirit of Prophesy, or any Supernatural
Grace whatever. Yet these men are believed by a true Protestant, to have been
Vessels of Election, chosen by Almighty God, to Reform the World; men endu'd
with a Divine Spirit, and that Austin, Apostle of our Country, Boniface sent
hence with Twelve Companions, to the Conversion of Germany; Willebrord, sent
with as many to the Conversion of Brabant, Freez-land, Izeland, etc. Monks of
exquisite Learning, Irreproachable Behavior, Unspotted Innocence, Saint-like
Conversation, Gifted from above with all supernatural Graces, Power of
Miracles, and most of which sealed their irreprehensible lives with a Glorious
Martyrdom; were Impostors, or at least imposed upon, Deceivers, or deceived, to
have believed and taught a Doctrine to be Reformed by Martin Luther, Calvin,
etc. that Bucer, Peter Martin, etc. having sacreligiously broken their tripple
Vow made to God, and coming into England with their debauched Nuns, brought
along with them the purity of the Primitive Church; And that their Contemporary
Xaverius, leaving all his great Pretentions in Europe, and sailing into the
remotest parts of the East to Preach the Faith, Gifted from Heaven with Power
of curing all Diseases, raising the dead, casting out Devils, endued with a
high spirit of Prophesy, Gift of Tongues, and whom God prospered so far, that
he Converted from Paganism 12 Kingdoms by his Preaching, and still savours by
preserving his Innocent, Unspotted, and Chaste Body incorrupt at Goa; A true
Protestant I say, believes Bucer sent by God, Xaverius by the spirit of
Falsehood. If so, let Protestants object no more, that Catholics require we
deny our senses, since they exact that we lay aside our Reason.

3 Paradox. A true Protestant believes, that that Government would be the best
Constituted in the World (as being a perfect model of the best of Governments,
left by Christ in his Church) wherein every sound man should have Power to
cancel the Decisions of the highest Courts, and a full liberty of disobeying
and opposing the Sentence of the Supreme Judges in Law, unless it should agree
with his own private sense of the same Law. For, if in matters of Faith, the
object whereof is remote from our senses, and Essentially obscure to us in this
Life, every sound Sheep is left Judge over his Pastor, and the whole Church;
what more reasonable than in a Question of meum and tuum, which we feel with
our hands, and see with our eyes, and which is the ground of all Law and
Government, every sound man should be his own Judge, and Arraign, Judge, and
Condemn his Ruler, Governor, Prince, King, or Emperor, if in his private
Opinion, he Judges they proceed not according to Law, (as he understands it.)
This sequel is so natural and inevitable in our Protestant Principles, that it
has effectually in all Countries wherever Protestancy has spread it self,
Armed the Subjects against their Temporal Lords, as it first had done against
the Spiritual; and nothing was so ordinary, as to see them March to the Field
with a Bible under their arms, and a Text of Sripture in their Banner, to fight
the Battle of the Lord, against the Princes of the Earth; and hence perhaps it
was, that wise Prince King James the First, presaging as it were, the Fate of
his Royal Son, said of the Members of Parliament, then sitting, That they were
an Assembly of 300 Kings. That all the late Wars of Germany against the
Emperor and Lawful Sovereigns, happened upon their change of Religion is
witness, beside many others Dretserus, A Protestant writer in part 2.
Nullenarii 6. page 661. Of Basil. Geneva, Zuitzerland, Sweedland, Holland. see
Crispin. Chitreus, Flor. Rai. etc.

4 Paradox. A true Protestant must grant, that our Savior was much over-seen
in the method he took of Converting the World by Teachers and Preachers, and
laying a reiterated Command upon all men of believing them; since really no man
is bound to pin his Faith upon another sleeve. Now the Efficacious way would
have been, to Command his Life and Actions to be writ in all Languages, and
compiled with the Old Testament, to be sent into every part of the World; for
all things necessary to Salvation being clear and evident in Holy Scripture,
and no body being obliged to believe more than the comprehends, and as it were,
sees to be true out of the said Holy Scripture; all, by this means, would, or
at least might have presently discovered the nullity of their own false
Religions, and consequently embrace common Christianity; that is, believe so
much of Christ and his Doctrine as each one should draw under the Scheme of his
own Reason, nothing else being necessary to Salvation in our Protestant
Principles.

5 Paradox. Should a Gentleman make the delivery of his Estate, saying, Sir, I
deliver unto you a full and free Possession of this Inheritance, to dispose of
at Discretion in quality of true Owner and Lord; but if you touch it against my
will, or dispose of it in whole, or in part, otherwise than I shall judge
expedient, expect to be treated with all the Violence, Severity can invent.
Would not this be a most impertinent and self-destroying Settlement?
questionless it would. Yet this is the procedure of the Church of England:
Here, take says she to all sound Members of the whole Christian Church, this
Holy Bible, Read and Interpret it freely; you cannot but find out the Truth
therein contained, nor are you obliged to submit to any Authority under Heaven
against your own Dictamen: But if you presume to judge of matters therein
contained contrary to my Sentiment thereof (though you are as able and as free
to judge as my self) know, that no Severity of the Law shall be spared in
Chastizing you. Is not this an admirable Liberty? An unparalled Charity?
Millions who never were in themselves, or their Ancestors Members of her
Communion, must be obliged against Conscience to come over to her; and no body
must presume to question her Authority, because ipsa dicit, and she shall
inveigh against Roman Catholics most violently, for requiring that she return
to the Union of the Church, whose Member she had owned her self for upwards of
a thousand years: Is not this a Paradox of Paradox's? I must believe she had
just reason to separate from the Church of Rome, (though if I read Scripture
till Doomsday, I can find no ground for it) I must blindfoldly believe no
Subject in the Kingdom has just reason to remain out of her Communion. That is,
I must believe no body but an English Protestant can be a sound Member of the
Christian Church, or a fit Judge in Controversy: And that the Scripture has not
for these thousand years been clear to any at all, and at present is only so to
an English Protestant: Which if granted, (as granted it must be,) it evidently
follows that our English Protestant, is the most Uncharitable and
Unconscionable Christian in the World.

6. Paradox. The true Protestant believes that a Roman Catholic Prays to a
Crucifix as well as to Christ himself, and attributes as See Advice to the
Pulpits, the Repres. Misrepres.
much satisfaction to it, as to the Blood of his Redeemer: That the Roman
Catholic Saints were Canonized for Treasons, detestable Villainies, as a reward
of strife and every evil Work; That to be false and deceitful, is meritorious,
and worthy of Eternal Life: That with Money one may compound with Heaven for
unforsaken sins; and be absolved without being at all sorry for them: That
Indulgences serve instead of sanctification and good life; Confession to carry
on the Plots and projects of the Priests, with a hundred such detestable
Abominations. True Protestant Ministers have laid out the Catholic Tenets
under these foul colors for above these hundred years, while the whole Body of
Roman Catholics, and every Member of them disown, condemn, and execrate every
point thereof in particular. Now is it not a mysterious Paradox, that a
Minister of the Church of England should better understand our Catholic
Tenets, than the Council of Trent, and the whole Body of the Catholic Clergy?
I do most solemnly protest See the Catechism of the Coun. of Trent.
in the presence of Almighty God, that were these Doctrines, and the like
taught in the Roman Catholic Church, as Protestants say they are, I would not
remain one hour in her Communion: yet the Vulgar must believe it so; and why?
Because it is for the Interest of the Protestant Clergy that the People should
live in Apprehension and Horror of Popery, whether by false or true Reports,
it was always alike to the Protestant Teachers.

7 Paradox. Although it be evident, that King Henry the Eighth, never thought
of laying the first stone of the Reformation pretended, till he was refused by
his Holiness, the liberty of putting away his Lawful Queen, and that the
Protector of Edward the Sixth, who carried on the design, had always in his eye
the great Fortune he raised upon the Ruins of Abbys, Priorys, etc. And that
Queen Elizabeth had never perfected it, was it not that she found it the only
expedient for the making a Party to support the weakness, or rather defect and
nullity of her Title.

Although all the Promoters of this great Revolution were apparently invited, by
ample and rich Possessions of the Church, and the Protestant Clergy entered
into Possession of more than a Million of Catholic Revenues.

Although nothing be so clear, as that the necessity of a handsome maintenance for
Wife and Children, mixed with a fear of being defamed and ruined by the Party,
if they leave it; be the chief invitation of the Ministers of the Church of
England, to remain in her Communion, as many of them have owned to me, (some of
which I have reconciled.) Although experience hourly teaches, that no Catholic
ever calls for a Minister on his Deathbed, to be received into the Protestant
Communion. Though Protestants daily send for Roman Catholic Priests in that
Truth-discovering moment. Yet our true Protestant believes this whole work of
the Reformation to have been begun, and carried on without Interest, Prejudice,
or Passion, and that there is a finger of God in the whole: And that it is the
Roman Catholic (forsooth) who in matters of Religion, is guided by Interest,
while the Protestant is governed by pure Reason, and sole Principles of
Religion; which if so, our Reason is inverted, our Judgment without Rule, and
all of us destitute of common Sense.

Can it be possible that any Considering, Serious, Sober Christian Reading this
Paper with an unbiased Mind, and indifferent Reason should do otherwise than
doubt at least, whether the Protestant Rule of Faith may be followed in the
perilous journey of Eternity; and whether he may not have the same reason to
doubt, as an Eminent Doctor of the Church of England had, when giving me his
Hand, he said; Sir, you have by the Hand the Unhappiest Man living; I desired
to know the reason of his Dissatisfaction; I am, says he, a Member of a Church,
I know to be False, and a Guide to other, in a way I am sure will never Save
them. Why truly Dr. said I, things standing so, you have a great deal of reason
to style your self Unhappy, and ought in my judgment to provide a timely
remedy; he replied, That God was merciful, and that he would think on it in good
time: That there was one Impediment, viz. A Wife, which he must provide for;
that he had been Gentilely Educated, and was now very acceptable to the Gentry
(as indeed he was) and that to become a Catholic would ruin his Family: That
if he should quit his Benefice (one of the best in our Country) another might
succeed who would do more harm, and rail against the Truth more than he had
done: For his part, he said, he had never in his Life Preached against the
Papists but twice (which still lay upon his Conscience) and it was for that he
had been checked by his Bishop for not doing it. I replied, That all these
specious Arguments would not prove a sufficient Plea at the day of Judgment. He
shrunck up his shoulders, saying, He served a God, he hoped, would be as
merciful to him, as he had been to one of his Predecessors, who was reconciled
upon his Deathbed. I labored to show him the danger of that fallacious
Discourse, saying how he ought to call to mind, that although a Thief on the
right hand of our dying Savior had found mercy, yet another as near to his
Redeemer, had perished on the left; and much to that purpose. In the end, he
promised, that the Spring following, He would go to Rome, and do as his
Conscience obliged him, nor could I obtain any more of him; I returned soon
after into Flanders, and that very Winter the poor Gentleman died without any
assistance.

It was (as I take it) upon the same occasion, that he told me, How he thought
it impossible for any Scholar, who was not blinded by false Principles of
Education, Interest, Passion, or Sensuality, to read the Holy Scriptures, and
search into History, without being convinced of the Roman Catholic Churches
being the only way to Salvation, and consequently of the nullity of all the
pretended Reformations.

ADVERTISMENT.
I Have been obliged to prefix different Titles to this short Discourse, by
reason of the Endeavors I have Experienced to be used by Protestant Ministers
to keep out of the Peoples hands all Books and Papers, which might contribute
to the dis-abusing a Nation, the most imposed upon this day in Christendom.

FINIS.

