OF THE Nature and Qualification OF RELIGION, In Reference to Civil Society.

WRITTEN BY Samuel Puffendorff, Counselor of State to the Late King of Sweden.

Which may serve as an Appendix to the Author's Duty of Men.

Translated from the Original.

LONDON: Printed by D. E. for A. Roper, at the Black Boy, and A. Bosvile, at
the Dial, both over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. School.

THE Introductory Epistle, Presented to the RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, Lord
Craven, Baron Craven OF HAMSTEAD MARSH.
My LORD,
THE extraordinary Character you have acquir^d by the joint Consent of those
that have the Honor of your Acquaintance, Encourages me to deviate from the
common Road, used by our Modern Authors; being made sufficiently sensible, how
much a Mind endowed with Genorous and Modest Inclinations (the inseparable
Companions of a Great Soul) disdains the fulsome Praises, which those Gentlemen
make the Chief Subject of their Dedications, whenever they pretend to Court the
Patronage of Persons of Quality, in behalf of their Treatises. I must confess,
I should scarce have had so much Presumption thus to intrude my self into your
Lordship's Favor, if I had not been sufficiently persuaded, that the Renown
our Author has so deservedly gain^d both here and abroad (and that under the
Protection of some of the greatest Princ^s in Europe) would be prevailing
enough with your Lordship, to pardon an Undertaking, which, if in it self
justifiable in nothing else, might perhaps claim the benefit of a general
Custom from your Goodness. The Reputation of our Author being so universally
and unquestionably established among all such as have a true relish of
Learning, I might without the least Prejudice to him, supercede to enlarge here
upon this Treatise, if it were not rather out of a desire to satisfy the
Curiosity of some, who believe to have sufficient Reason for certain Objections
made against some Assertions contained in this Treatise, than with an Intention
to make the least Addition to a Piece, which, whether in regard of the nicety
of the Subject it Treats of, or of the Concatination and force of its
Arguments, deserves to be reckoned among the best now extant in Europe. Those,
who center the utmost Felicity of Civil Society in a Democratical form of
Government, have not been wanting to charge our Author with too much Passion
for that Doctrine, of Passive Obedience, which leaves Subjects to the absolute
Disposal of their Princes; But, besides that, the Appendix annexed to this
Treatise, written by our Author, in opposition to Mr. Hobbes's Monstrous
Principles concerning this unlimited Power, may sufficiently clear him from
this Imputation; If these Gentlemen would have taken the pains to make a due
comparison of the several Passages both in this, and other Treatises of our
Author, relating to this Subject, they might, without much difficulty, have
been convinc^d of their Error; As far as I am capable of penetrating into the
Matter, it is the word Princeps, or Prince, which sticks most closely in their
Stomachs, not considering, That the Words, Summi Imperantes, or Sovereigns; and
that of Princeps, or Prince, are Synoms to our Author; and that out of a great
many Passages in this Treatise, it is sufficiently apparent, that he attributes
the Sovereign Power not always to one single Person, but sometimes also to a
Council invested with the Supreme Administration of the Sovereign Authority in
the Commonwealth. If it were but only for that Advice given by our Author at
the very beginning of his Appendix to young Lawyers, to wit, to take care, that
under the Pretense of maintaining the Prerogatives of Princes, they should not
be prodigal of their Liberty and Property, and his asserting the Foundation of
Civil Societies to be built upon the Common Consent of mutual Defense against
Violences; This alone, I say, might be a convincing Argument to any unbiased
Person, that his Aim was very remote from maintaining an Arbitrary Power in the
State, The next thing laid to our Author's Charge is, that he so entirely
separates the Christian Religion from the State, as not to have the least
Interference with one another; whereas the contrary is now adays practiced in
most Christian Sta^^s, and in the Commonwealth of the Jews (instituted by God*s
peculiar Direction) this Union was inseparable. It cannot be denied, but that
the outward Form of Church Government, especially among the Protestants, is in
a great measure, and in most places adapted to that of the State; it being
evident, that most of the Monarchical States, Episcopacy, as most suitable with
that Constitution, was never abolished; as on the contrary, the same was quite
extirpated in the Protestant Commonwealths. This is most particularly
observable among the Lutherans, who, though all agreeing in Point of Doctrine,
are nevertheless, so far different from one another in the Ceremonial Point,
and outward Form of Church Government, that in outward Appearance, they seemed
to be so many several Churches. Thus in the two Northern Kingdoms of Sweden and
Denmark, the Episcopal Authority (though much diminished in its Revenues) is
retained to this day; whereas in some Commonwealths in Germany, where the same
Religion is Established, it is quite abolished, and not the least footsteps of
Subordination of Priests to be met with. But this Objection is easily cleared,
if we take into due Consideration, that it being the Intention of our Author to
represent in those places Reliligion in its genuine and native Constitution,
freed from all what is foreign to its true Genius, he did not think it
convenient, to clog it with any thing that was not an Essential part of it;
especially when his chief aim was to show the real difference betwixt the
Christian and Jewish Religion. There are also not a few, who prompted by a
preposterous Zeal, have imputed to our Author a certain kind of Libertinism in
Religion, for which, I can see no other Reason, than that they are dissatisfied
with his Assertions against any thing that has the least resemblance of
Persecution upon the score of Difference of Opinions. I am well satisfied, that
the Reasons alleged by him, are so solid in themselves, and so exactly applied
to this Purpose, that they cannot but be Convincing to all such, as are not
preposs^ssed either with By Interest, or a most stupid Ignorance, For, if the
Slavery of the Body be absolutely repugnant to the Inclinations of a generous
Soul, How much more insupportable must the Slavery of the Mind be to a sublime
Genius, elevated above the common Sphere of bigoted Zealots Ignorance, being
the Mother of perverted Zeal, and consequently of a persecuting Spirit, the
same ought to be looked upon as the common Enemy of all such as are guided by
the Light of true Reason? I cannot but take notice here, that our English
Modern Clergy has of late gained so peculiar a Character of following so
closely these footsteps of convincing such as differ from them in Opinion,
rather by strength of Argument, than any forcible Means, that I do not know
whether they are not preferrable in this Point, before any other in Europe. If
any one questions the Truth of it, I appeal to Mr. Toland's Case, concerning
his Treatise, Entitled, Christianity not Mysterious. It is both beyond my
scope, and the compass of a Letter, to enter upon the Merits of the Cause on
both Sides, it will be sufficient here to refer my self to what has been
Published against him lately here in England, and in other Places; All which,
if duly compared, will soon evince, how much the English Clergy ^as outdone
the rest, both by force of Argument, and a generous, gentle Behavior. But I am
afraid I have abused your Lordship's Patience; I will therefore conclude with
recommending both my Author and my Self, to your Lordship's Protection, begging
Leave to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Devoted Servant. J. Crull. M. D.

THE CONTENTS.
COncering Religion before Civil Societies were Instituted SECT. 1. Every Man
is accountable to God for his own Religion 2 How the same might be exercised in
the free State of Nature 3 Parent^ had originally the Care of Religious Worship
lodged in them. 4 Civil Societies were not constituted for Religions sake 5
Subjects did never submit their Opinions, as to Religious Worship, to the
Disposal of their Sovereigns 6 What Power properly, and according to the Laws
of Nature, belongs to Sovereigns in Ecclesiastical Affairs 7 Of the Nature of
Revealed Religion 8 Among the Jews there was a very strict Union betwixt the
Church and State 9 Who was the Supreme Head of the Jewish Church 10 The
Christian Religion is quite different from the Jewish 11 Some Reflections on
the Behavior of Moses, when he laid the Foundation of the Commonwealth of the
Jews 12 What on the other Hand our Savior did, when he Estalished his Church
here on Earth 13 Christ was not the Founder of a New Commonwealth or People 14
Neither had he any Territories belonging to him 15 Christ did not exercise any
Sovereign Power 16 But the Office of a Doctor or Teacher 17 The Apostles did
propagate the Doctrine of our Savior 18 The Apostles had received their
Authority of Teaching from God alone, independent from any Human Power 19 The
Apostles never assumed any Authority of Commanding others 20 Whether their
Authority of Teaching does indirectly imply any right of Commanding others 21
Whether the Power of Absolution does imply any Right of Sovereignty 22 What is
to be understood by absolving from Sins 23 Under whose Authority the Apostles
did exercise the Power of Absolution 24 Of what nature it was 25 Whether St.
Peter had any Prerogative granted above others 26 Whether the Power of
Excommunicating imply a Sovereignty 27 The Commission granted by Christ to his
Apostles contains nothing of Command 28 The Kingdom of Christ is no Temporal
Kingdom 29 Whether the Christian Church ought to be considered as a State or
Sovereignty 30 In the Primitive Church there was nothing like it. 31 There is a
great difference betwixt the Church and State 32 And the Doctors or Teachers in
the Church are quite different from those that exercises the Sovereignty in a
State 33 Whether the whole Christian Church ought to be considered as a State
34 It is not requisite to reduce the whole Christian Church under one
Independent Severeignty or Head 35 Whether there ought not to be one Supreme
Judge in the Church, to determine such Differences as may arise from time to
time 36 An Example of a Controversy composed in the Apostles Times 37 Some
Observations concerning the Nature and Usefulness of General Councils 38
Concerning the Condition of the Christian Church under the Pagan Princes 39
Concerning its Condition under the Christian Emperors 40 The Church has not
changed her Nature of being a College or Society 41 Neither are Sovereigns
thereby become Bishops 42 Christian Sovereigns are obliged to maintain and
defend the Church 43 Of the Prerogatives of Princes in Ecclesiastical Affairs
44 Of the Power of Sovereigns over the Church Ministers 45 Of the Power of
calling a Synod or Convention 46 Of their Power, as to Church Discipline 47 Of
their Power of making Laws and Ecclesiastical Constitutions 48 How far
Sovereigns are obliged to intermeddle in Religious Affairs, when the Public
Safety lies at stake 49 Concerning Toleration of several Religions 50 Princes
ought to be very careful not to be led away by false Suggestions 51 Sometimes
the Prerogatives of Sovereigns are impaired under a religious Pretext 52
Concerning the Power of setting up a Reformation. 53 Whether Subjects without
the concurrence of their Sovereigns can pretend to set up a Reformation 54


OF THE Nature and Qualification OF RELIGION, In REFERENCE to CIVIL SOCIETY,
etc.
AMong all those Questions, which have for many Ages past been Controverted
among Christians, this may be deemed one of the Chiefest, which Treats of the
Nature, Authority, and Power of the Church; and which of the several Christian
Sects ought most justly to claim the Title of the True Church. The Romanists
keep this for their last Reserve, when Engaged with the Protestants, That they
Attribute the Name of the True Church only to themselves, and boldly stigmatize
all such as are not of their Communion, with the Names of rebellious Deserters.
This is the main Bulwark they rely upon, thinking it sufficient to Allege in
their own behalf; That they are not obliged so strictly to Examine, and maintain
every Article of their Faith against the Protestants; since, whatever
Objections may be made out of the Holy Scripture, the same ought to be rejected
as Erroneous, if not agreeable with the Interpretations and Traditions of their
Church; Thus making themselves both Judges and Witnesses in their own Cause.
^esides this, it is to be looked upon as a Matter of the greatest Consequence,
both in regard of the Christian Church, and the Public Safety in a State, to
know exactly, what bounds ought to be prescribed to the Priestly Order in
Ecclesiastical Affairs; as likewise to determine, how far the Power of
Sovereigns extends it self in Ecclesiastical Matters: For, if either of them
transgress their Bounds, it must of necessity prove the Cause of great Abuses,
Disturbances and Oppressions, both in Church and State. I was the sooner
prevailed upon to Search into the very bottom of this Question, at this
juncture of Time, when not only the Romish Priests apply all their Cunning for
the rooting out of the Protestants, but also some of the greatest Princes in
Christendom (setting aside the Ancient way of Converting People by Reason and
force of Arguments) have now recourse to op^n Violence; and by Dragooning,
force their miserable Subjects to a Religion, which always appeared abominable
to them. But if we propose to our selves to examine this Point, according to its
own solid Principles (as we ought to do) without having recourse to Ambiguous
Terms and Tergiversations, it is absolutely requisite, that we trace the very
Original of Religion in General; and of the Christian Religion in Particular,
so as to Examine both their Natural Qualifications in reference to Civil
Society. For, if this, which is to be looked upon as the Foundation Stone, be
well Secured: And we afterward do look into the Scriptures, to investigate, in
what manner Christ himself has represented his Doctrine to us; it will be no
difficult Task to judge, whether, according to the Institution of our Savior,
there ought to be an Ecclesiastical Sovereignty exercised by Priests? Or,
whether Princes have a Right to make use of an Absolute Power? Or can Compel
their Subjects to Obedience by Force of Arms, in Matters of Religion?

. 1. That there is a Supreme Being, the Conce^^ing Religion before Civil
Societies w^r^ I^^^ituted
Author and Creator both of the Universe, and especially of Mankind, which
ought to be acknowledged and worshipped as such by Menkind, as they are
Rational Creatures, has been generally received, not only among Christians, but
also by most of the Pagan Philosophers, that to pretend to demonstrate it here,
would be Superfluous, and perhaps might be taken as done in prejudice of the
judicious Reader; since, scarce any body, that is not beyond his right Wits,
can be supposed, now a days, to make the least Doubt of the Verity of this
Assertion. The true Knowledge of Divine Worship arises from two several
Springs: For, we either by true Ratio^ination, deduc^d out of the Light of
Nature, may be Convinced of those Sentiments we ought to have of God, and what
Reverence is due to him from us Mortals: Or else, some Matters, being beyond
our Apprehension, by the bare Light of Nature, are by God's special Command
Revealed to Mankind. Both Kinds are to be the Subject of the following
Treatise; with this Restriction nevertheless, not to insist upon each
particular Head of either of them, any further, than they have relation to
Civil Society.

. 2. The first Thing which is to be considered, both in Natural and Revealed
Religion, Every Man is accountable for his Religion.
is, That every body is obliged to worship God in his own Person, Religious
Duty being not to be performed by a Deputy, but by himself, in Person, who
expects to reap the Benefit of religious Worship, promised by God Almighty. For
Man, being a rational Creature, owing its Offspring to God alone, is thereby
put under such an indispensible Obligation, that the Cosideration of
worshipping him, to the utmost of his Power, can never be entirely
exstinguished in a rational Soul. And here lies the main difference betwixt
that Care, which, we ought to have our Souls, and that of our Bodies; the
latter of which, may be committed to the Management of others, who being to be
Accountable for all Injuries, which may befall us under their Tuition, we are
thereby freed from any Guilt against our selves. So do we commit our selves,
when we pass the Seas, to the Management of the Master of a Ship, by whose sole
Care, without our own Assistance, we are conducted to the desired Port. But, no
body can so entirely t^ansfer the Care of his Soul, and the Exercise of
Religious Worship from himself to another Man, as to make him alone Accountable
for all Miscarriages, and to free himself from Punishment. Every one of us
shall give Romans 14. 12. Romans 9. 3.
Account of himself to God. And it is in vain for St. Paul to wish, to be
Accursed from Christ, for his Brethren, his Kinsmen, according to the Flesh.
And, though it is undeniable, That those who have been negligent in taking care
of other Peoples Souls, that were committed to their Charge, shall receive
Punishment; Nevertheless, these, whose Souls have been thus neglected, shall
perish with them, for having put too much Trust in others, and neglected their
own Salvation. As it is plainly expressed by the Prophet Ezekiel, 33. 7, 8. And
the Habak. 2. 4. Mark, 16. 16.
Just shall live by Faith. And the Evangelist St. Mark, speaks without any
Reservation. He that believed not, shall be damned; without distinction,
whether you were seduced by others, or whether you have renounced your Faith
for worldly Ends.

. 3. From whence it is evident, That, Religion How the same is to be exercised
in the free State of Nature.
having its relation to God, the same may be exercised without the Communion of
a great many; And, that a Man ought not to judge of the Soundness of his
Doctrine or Religion, by the Number of those that adhere to it. So, that it is
manifest, That, at the beginning of the World, our first Parents might, and did
really perform Religious Duties; And, that, if one alone, or a few together,
live in a solitary Place, they are therefore not to be deemed to live without
Religion, because, they do not make up a Congregation. For, God being the only
Judge, of what is best pleasing to him in his Worship, knows and searches the
very bottom of our Hearts; And, since we are not able, without his Assistance,
to perform religious Duties, the same cannot be esteemed properly our own
Invention. As those that live in the free State of Nature, are not Subject to
any Human Power, So, in the same State, their Religion, having only a relation
to God Almighty, unto whom alone they are bound to pay Reverence, it is free
from all Human Force or Power; which, in this State of Natural Freedom, they
may exercise, either according to the Dictates of Reason, or, according to
Divine Revelation; and, according to the best of their Knowledge, may dispose
the outward Form of their religious Worship, without being accountable to any
body, but God Almighty: Neither can they be Controuled, or forced, rather to
worship God according to another's, than their own Opinion. But, if any body
pretends to bring them over to his Side, he ought with suitable Arguments, to
Convince them, how far he is in the Right, and they in the Wrong. There may be,
besides this, another Reason be given, why no body, in what Condition soever,
ought to be forced to another Man's Religion; because the Knowledge of Truth
cannot be implanted in us, without proper and convincing Arguments, such as are
capable of preparing our Minds for the receiving of the True Doctrine of
Religion: And, as to the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, which transcend
our Reason, these must be acquired by the assistance of Divine Grace, which is
contrary to all Violence. It Is true, a Prince may force a Subject to make an
outward Confession by way of Mouth, to comply in his Behavior, with his
Commands, and to dissemble his Thoughts or to speak contrary to his Belief, but
he can force no body to believe contrary to his own Opinion. For we ought to
b^lieve with Act^, ^* 37.
all our Hearts; but, whatever is done in order to obtain any worldly
Advantage, or to avoid an imminent Evil of this kind, cannot be done with all
our Heart. But, Faith comes by Hearing, Romans 1^. 17.
and Hearing by the Word of God. Neither does our Savior force his Word upon
us; but by all gentle means, persuades us to a Compliance with his Will,
according to St. Paul's 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Saying: Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

. 4. It is an unquestionable Truth, and The first Care of religious Worship
lodged in Parents.
generally received among Mankind, That one is obliged to give a helping-hand
to another in several Respects: In the same manner it is with Religion; that
these who by nearest of Blood, are in Duty bound, to take Care of young Peoples
Education, ought at the same time to Instruct them in the true Knowledge of
God, and prepare their Minds for the receiving of the Christian Doctrine. It Is
upon this score, that this Care touches most nearly all Parents, in regard of
their Children, it being the principal Part of Paternal Duty, to take effectual
Care, that they may be thoroughly Instructed in all Matters, relating to God and
his holy Word; and to be encouraged in all manner of religious Exercises: For
i^ is too dangerous, to leave young People to their own Inclinations, till they
may be capable, by the Strength of their own Reason, to learn their Duty
toward God. And it would be much more dangerous, to defer it under pretense or
expectation of Revelations to be made upon that account, at this time, when the
Word of God is already planted and established among us: Besides, that Children
soon grow headstrong and refractory, if they are not in their tender Age,
accustomed to pious Exercises. Nevertheless, Parents ought not to exercise this
Paternal Office any otherwise, than in a manner suitable to the Genius of the
Christian Religion, which will have them not to act with Violence, but to be
diligent and assiduous in Teaching, Exhorting, Praying, and announcing God's
Wrath. Wherefore, the Priestly Office was originally joined with the Paternal,
in the ancient Fathers of Families; and Abraham is commended both for a good
Father, and a good Master of his House, because he instructed his Children in
all manner of Piety, and himself Administered Circumcision. Genesis 18. 19.
The like Commands were made to Parents, both in the Old and New Testament; and
the Patriarch Jacob, removed the Idols out Ge. 17. 20 Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 11. 19. Ephesians.
6. 4. Genesis 35. 1, 3, 4.
of his Family, not by Compulsion, but by Instructing those of his House in the
Knowledge of the true God, who thereupon, voluntarily surrendered those Idols to
his Disposal. This part of the Paternal Office, like all the rest, does cease
as soon as a Son, after leaving his Father's House, comes to set up for
himself, and consequently becomes the Father of a separate Family, and enjoys
the same Rights, which his Father had before over him. And, though perhaps in
such a Case a Father may still retain the privilege of giving some Paternal
Admonitions to his Sons, yet ought the same to be looked upon to resemble in
their Nature our last Will or Testament, which does not always imply properly a
Command; but ought to be observed for its good Intentions sake, and to show a
due Reverence to the Memory of a Father, never to be neglected by any, that
will not at the same time profess themselves guilty of Improbity.

. 5. Out of what has been said before, it Civil Societies were not Instituted
for Religions sake.
is most evident, That Civil Governments were not erected for Religions sake;
or that Man did not enter into Civil Societies, that they might with more
convenience establish, and exercise their Religion. For, since Religions
Exercises could be performed as well by a few, as by a great Number; and in a
small Congregation as well, as in a great one, it was unnecessary to erect
several great Societies on that account: Besides, that those who committed open
violences against others, which was the first motive that obliged Men to enter
into Societies for their mutual Defense, did not aim at the Religion of
Mankind; but, to robb these that were weaker than themselves of their Liberty,
Life, and Fortunes. Neither does a Man's Probity and Piety receive the least
addition, by the Number of People, which join in their Devotion; For every one
must be acceptable to God Almighty upon his own account; neither is a Man
always deemed the more pious, because he lives among such as are pious
themselves. Those Patriarchs that lived before Civil Societies were erected,
are no less Famous for their Piety, than those that lived afterward under a
settled Government. From whence it is evident, That Religion is not an
ingenious Invention of the first Founders of Commonwealths, but as ancient as
Humane Raceit self; it being sufficiently apparent, that Mankind did not enter
into Civil Societies, till long after, being enforced thereunto, by great and
weighty Reasons; though at the same time, it cannot be denied, but that some have
cunningly abused Religion, for obtaining their Ends in the State; But, Religion
in it self considered, is not made subordinate to the State; or to be deemed a
proper Instrument to serve a States Turn, and to keep the People in Obedience.
And, when Religion is called, Vinculum Societatis Civilis, The Cement of Civil
Society, it must be taken in this Sense; That if all Religion and Regard, which
ought to be had to God's displeasure, were abolished, there would be no Tie
left, strong enough to oblige Mankind to a compliance with those Laws and
fundamental Constitutions, which are the original Foundation of all
Commonwealths; And, that, without the fear of being accountable to God
Almighty, no Human Power alone would be prevailing enough to bridle the
Enormities of some stubborn and refractory Spirits.

. 6. It being therefore beyond question, Subjects did not submit their Opinions
in Matters of Religion to the Disposal of their Sovereigns
That Commonwealths were not erected for Religions sake, it is easy to be
understood, that the ancient Fathers of Families, when they first submitted
themselves under a Civil Government, were thereby, not obliged to surrender at
the same time, their Religion in the same manner, as they did their Lives and
Fortunes to their Sovereigns, for the obtaining the End of Civil Society, which
was their common Security. The more, because Religion was not instituted for
the obtaining of this mutual Security, and as such, does not contribute any
thing toward the maintaining of Civil Society. Religion arises from a much
more noble Spring, than Civil Government; and more strictly obliges Mankind,
than any Civil Power; and therefore is unalterable in its Nature. Thus it would
be not only useless, but imply a Contradiction; if a Man, who is to become a
Subject to a Civil Government, should be obliged to swear Allegiance to his
Sovereign, in these following Terms: I. N. N. Submit my Will entirely to your
Commands; I promise to love, honor, and trust in God, according to your
Pleasure; and to put more Confidence in you than in God Almighty; to set aside
all your Command, all Love, Respect and Duty, which I owe to God Almighty, and
to perform such things as I know to be contrary to him and his Commands. For,
here ought to be remembered, what the Apostles said: We ought to obey God rather
than Man. Acts 5. 29.
And, whenever Sovereigns pretend to extend thus far their Authority, they
transgress their Bounds; and if they inflict any Punishment on their Subjects,
for refusing to be obedient to their Commands, on this Account; such an Act
ought to be looked upon, as illegal, unjust, and tyrannical. God has verified
this by extraordinary Miracles: It was an absurd and illegal Proceeding, when
Darius, overpersuaded by his Courtiers, who intended to lay a Trap for Daniel,
issued out his Proclamation, That no body, for thirty Days should ask a
Petition Dan. 6. 7. 9.
of any God or Man. For, what concerns had the King with his Subjects; Prayers
(unlawful Prayers, being not accepted of by God Almighty) especially with those
made in private? For, if any one should have prayed in public against the
King, it would been a quite different Case; and such a one had deservedly
received Punishment, as an Enemy to his Sovereign. Wherefore, Daniel did very
well, in continuing his daily private Prayers, according to his former Custom;
notwithstanding the King's impious and foolish Command; and, was, for this
Reason, by an extraordinary Miracle, delivered out of the Lions Den. In the
same manner did God preserve Daniel's three Companions in the midst of the
Flames, because they refused to worship the Golden Image, according to the
King's Command: Though, at the same time, Dan. 3. 27, 28.
it is very probable, that this Image, set up by Nebuchadnezar, was not
intended to be worshipped as a God; but only as a Sign or Emblem of that
Eternal Being, which he would have to be Adored and Worshipped by his Subjects.
Certainly, Jeroboam, could not be so much besides himself, as to imagine, or to
pretend to persuade the Jews, That the Golden Calves, which he had caused to be
made, were the same God, by whose Power they were brought out of Egypt; But he
set them up as a Token, or Representative, whereby to put them in mind of the
Benefits received from God, the great Deliverer of Israel; and that they might
not want places where to pay their Devotions, and perform their religeous
Duties. So, that, though he did not fall off from God, but only, for Reasons of
State; and because he thought it belonging to his Royal Prerogative, made an
Joseph. Arch. 8. 3.
Alteration in the outward Form of Worship; Yet was he, with his whole Family,
rooted out of Israel, and the Jews, for having obeyed and followed their King,
in his Idolatry, 2 Reg. 19. 17, 16.
paid for it with the Loss of the Holy Land.

. 7. Sovereigns are nevertheless, not excluded What Power, according to the Law
of Nature belongs Sovereigns in Ecclesiastical Affairs?
from having a certain Power and Disposal in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as they
are the Supreme Heads and Governors of the Commonwealth; and are therefore
styled, the Public Fathers, and Fathers of their Native Country. And, as has
been said before, as it is one of the Principal parts of Paternal Duty, to
implant Piety into their Children; so Sovereigns ought to take care, that
Public Discipline (of which the Reverence due to God Almighty, is one main
Point) to be maintained among their Subjects. And, whereas the Fear of God is
the Foundation Stone of Probity, and other Moral Virtues; and it being the
Interest of Sovereigns, that the same be by all means encouraged in a State;
and that Religion is the strongest Knot for the maintaining a true Union
betwixt Sovereigns and their Subjects. (God being a God of Truth, who has
commanded, that Faith and Compacts should be sacred among Men:) It is therefore
a Duty incumbent upon Sovereigns, to take not only effectual Care, that Natural
Religion be maintained, and cultivated among their Subjects; But they have also
a sufficient Authority, to Enact such Laws as may enable them, to keep their
Subjects from committing any thing, which tends, either to the total
Destruction, or the Subversion, of the Capital Points of Religion: As if, for
instance, any one should attempt to deny publicly the Existency of a God, and
his Providence, to set up plurality of Gods; to worship fictitious Gods, or
Idols in Gods stead, to spread abroad Blasphemies, for to worship the Devil,
enter with him into a Compact, and such like Actions. For, if these are kept
within the compass of Peoples Thoughts, without breaking out into public or
outward Actions, they are not punishable by the Law, neither can any Humane
Power take Cognizance of what is contained only, and hidden in the Heart. And,
as to what concerns those Ceremonies which have been annexed to Religious
Worship, though it be undeniable, that one of the main Points, toward the
maintaining a good Order in the State is, that a due Uniformity, should be
observed in the same: Nevertheless, Sovereigns need not be so very anxious on
this Account, because these Differences do not Overturn Religion it self;
neither do they (as such considered) dispose Subjects to raise Disturbances,
and Dissension in the State. Neither can Sovereigns be any great Loosers by the
Bargain, if their Subjects differ in some Ceremonies, no more, than if they
were divided into several Opinions, concerning some Philosophical Doctrine.
But, this is beyond all doubt, that, if under a Religious Pretext, Subjects
pretend to raise Factions, which may prove dangerous to the State, or hatch
other secret Mischiefs; these are Punishable by the Supreme Magistrates,
notwithstanding their Religious Pretenses; for, as Religion (in its self
considered) is not the cause of Vices; so ought it not to serve for a Cloak,
wherewith to cover and protect such treacherous Designs. So, the Roman Senate
did acquit themselves very well in their Station, when they Abolished these
Debaucheries, which were crept into the State, with the Bachanals. But those
Sovereigns, who Le^. (...).
have transgressed these Bounds, by compelling their Subjects to a Religion of
their own Invention, have, without doubt, abused that Power, wherewith they
were entrusted. Neither have these Princes acquitted themselves much better in
their Station, who have Persecuted their Subjects, for no other Reason, but
because they Professed a Religion different from their own, without making a
due Enquiry, whether their Doctrine were Erroneous or not. Thus the Proceedings
of Pliny the Younger, (a Man otherwise of a very good Temper) against the
Christians in Bithynia, cannot in any wise be justified; For he confesses
himself, That he never was present Plin. 10. Ep. 97.
at the Trials of the Christians; and was therefore ignorant both of their
Crime, and consequently, of what Punishment they deserved. For these are his
Words: I only ask some of them several times, whether they were Christians;
which they having constantly Professed they were, I ordered them to be carried
to the Place of Execution; it being plain to me, That, of what Nature soever
their Confession might be, such an inflexible Humor, and obstinate Behavior,
ought not to go unpunished.

. 8. But the Condition of Mankind being Of the Nature of revealed Religion.
such, That it was impossible by the sole help of Natural Religion, to attain
to that Felicity which was proposed by the great Creator; it had pleased the
Great and All-wise God, to reveal unto us Mortals his Will; and to instruct us
by what means we may obtain his Favor, and how he expects to be Worshipped by
us. It is for this reason, that no body of a right Understanding ought to make
the least Scruple, but, that all such Matters as God has revealed to us, in a
manner surpassing our Natural Understanding, ought to be reverenced by Mankind,
and to be received with a general consent and submission. Among the several
Doctrines, thus revealed, the Article of Justification, or the Purging us from
Sins through the Merits of our Savior, was one of the Principal ones. And, I
am of Opinion, that these bloody Sacrifices, which from the very Beginning of
the World were Instituted by God's Command, were so many Emblems of this our
Redemption by the Blood of Christ; for, without this supposition, it would seem
scarce Rational, that a living Creature, sensible of Death and Pains, and which
cannot be killed without great Torments, should be destroyed for the Honor of
its Creator. As if Man should enter into the Workhouse of an Artificer, and by
destroying his Handiwork, pretend to do him an extraordinary Honor. This most
Ancient way of Sacrificing (the chief Badge of True Religion, before it was
Corrupted by Ignorance or Superstition) though it was no small addition to
Natural Religion; yet did it cause no alteration as to the Exercise of it. For,
in the State of Natural Freedom, every one had a right to Sacrifice, though at
the same time, every one was not obliged to Sacrifice for himself. For, this
Ceremony of Sacrificing being only an Emblem, representing the future
Redemption of Mankind, one and the same Sacrifice might answer that End, in
respect to all that were present at the time of the Sacrifice. From hence it
was become a Custom, that the Heads of each Family used to Sacrifice for the
rest; and if more Families were assembled in order to Sacrifice, it was to be
Administered by him that was chosen by the rest, for that purpose. And it is
observable, that the same Person that had the Right of Sacrificing, had also
the Power of prescribing time and place for that Sacrifice. Thus when
afterward God had Ordained the Ceremony or Sacrament of Circumcision; Abraham
did Administer the same in his House, as being the Father of his Family. What
we have alleged concerning the Right of Sacrificing, may be proved from
thence, that both Abel and Cain, after they had left their Fathers House, did
Sacrifice. And by several Passages in Genesis, we Genesis 4. 3, 4.
are informed, That the Ancient Patriarchs (being Fathers of their Families)
did erect Altars. So, Micha set up a House of Gods at home, during the Anarchy
in Israel, there being then neither King nor any other Man, that took care of
the Public Worship; thus attributing to himself (though unjustly) the same
Right, Jude 17. 5, 6.
which the Ancient Fathers of Families had been possessed of in more Ancient
Times.

. 9. It had pleased God, according to his Amongst the Jews there was a strict
v^ion betwixt the Church and State.
Wisdom, not to send our Savior, or the Messiah into the World soon after the
Creation, at a time when the whole World was not stockt with a sufficient
number of Inhabitants; lest his Sufferings might be obliterated by Oblivion, or
by a too long Tract of Time, turned into a Fabulous Relation: But he was to
appear amongst us, after the whole Earth was filled up every where with
Inhabitants, and Mankind was arrived, as it was, to its Age of Perfection. It
was also thought convenient, and almost necessary, that the Messiah should not
appear in this World all upon a sudden, but after his Coming had been long
foretold and expected, in order to raise a more ardent desire after him in us
Mortals; and that he might find the easier a Reception amongst us, when his
Deeds were found so agreeable to what was Prophesied concerning him, so many
Ages before. And, that these Predictions or Prophesies might not, through
length of time, come to decay, and be buried in Oblivion, God Almighty had in a
most peculiar manner, recommended them to the Care and Custody of the Jews,
amongst whom, he, as it may be said, kept his Records of Prophesies; it being
the most likely, that that same Nation, from whence the Messiah was one day to
have his Off spring as Man, upon Earth, would preserve them with their utmost
Care, to their great Honor and Advantage. It was questionless in a great
measure for this Reason, that God entered with them into so strict a League,
Circumcision being made the Bagde, whereby to distinguish them from other
Nations: And being afterward become a very numerous People, and freed from the
Egyptian Bondage, he himself established at once, both their Civil Government
and Religion, (which was not to cease, till the appearing of our Savior on
Earth;) and this in such a manner, that there was always to remain a strict
Union betwixt their Religion and State. Therefore the Administration of
Religious Worship was committed to one particular Tribe amongst them, unto
whom, according to God's special Command, no Lands were allotted, lest they
might thereby be enticed to mind Temporal Possessions and Riches, more than
God's Service; but were to be maintained out of the Tenths and other Revenues
belonging to the Altar, in which Sense God is called, The Portion of the
Levites. There was also a certain place assigned for the Public Exercise of
Divine Worship, with Exclusion of all others; and their whole Religion was thus
disposed by God's peculiar Order, that the same could not be put in practice,
unless it were in a free Nation, independent from any Foreign Power. This was
the true Reason why the Jews, unless they would overturn the Foundation of
their Religion, could not be entirely United with any Foreign State. And, as
the Jewish Religion and State were of the same Date, their Laws both
Exclesiastical and Civil having been Constituted at the same time, and
contained in one Book; so was the Union betwixt their Religion and State, so
entire, that the first could not remain standing, after the fall of the last;
and therefore the destruction of the Temple, and of the Commonwealth of the
J^ws, was an infallible Sign of the total abolishment of their Religion. They
were called God's People, and the Holy People, because the whole Jewish Nation
publicly professed the True Religion.

. 10. But, because God himself had Established Who was the Supreme Head of the
Jewish Church.
the Jewish Religion and Ceremonies and fortified them by very severe Laws, no
body upon Earth had Power to make the least alteration in them, or to add any
thing to, or to diminish from them. The Kings, Saul and Vsiah paid dearly for
it, because they attempted to interfere with the Levites in their Office. And
those of the Jews that introduced a Foreign Religious Service, are in the Holy
Scripture Branded with Infamy. So that their Kings had no further Power in
Religiou^ Con^erns, than the Supreme Inspection, that every one in his Station
(not excepting the High Priest himself) did Exercise his Office, according to
God's Commands; and that the Ecclesiastical Constitutions were kept inviolable.
Neither did the Tribe of Levi, or the Priestly Order make up a separate Body
independent from the State, but they were actually considered as part of the
Nation, and Subjects of their Kings; who, as we read, sometimes Deposed them
for several Crimes, and if negligent in their Office, used to give them severe
Rebukes. King David went further, for he, to maintain a decent Order in the
Church, disposed the several Ecclesiastical Functions among the Priests and
Levites, and ordered that the Singers and Door-waitors should take their places
by Lot, which nevertheless was not done without the Advice of the Chief Men
and Elders of the People, and the whole Tribe of Levi. In so doing, he did not
assume to himself the Power of Disposing or Altering any thing in their
Religion, but only over those that were Ordained by God Almighty for that
Function, viz. to Establish such an Order among them, the better to enable them
to 1 Chronicles. ^. 26. seq.
Exercise their Function without Confusion. For, when afterward, instead of
the Tabernacle, a Temple was to be Erected, that is to say, when instead of a
slight and decayed Building, a most noble and firm Structure was to be built,
the same was not undertaken without God's Advice. This Temple being the
Principal of all Public Structures, it was the King's Care to see it Repaired
in due time, who also might levy a Tax for that use, and provide for the
necessary Expenses of the Workmen; it is very remarkable, that we do not read
in the Scriptures, that any of those Kings that introduced Foreign Service
among the Jews, did ever attempt to force by Threats, or otherwise, their
Subjects to such a Worship, but rather by several Allurements enticed them to
follow their Example, and that such as were thus seduced, did, as well as their
King, receive Condign Punishment from God, accordingly; And that such among the
Jews as abhorred this Idolatry, ought not to be looked upon as Rebellious
Subjects upon that score, but as Persons that did bear this Public Calamity
with Patience. And, as those Kings, that Abolished Idolatry and Foreign Worship
amongst the Jews, are highly extolled in the Scriptures, so those Impious
Kings, that were the Authors of this Idolatry, were by the high Rank, they bore
in the State, exempted from the ordinary Punishment, which according to God's
Ordinance, was else to be inflicted upon all others, that should attempt to
introduce Idolatry. Lastly, another remarkable Observation may be made as to
the Jewish Religion; that, whereas there was so strict an Unity betwixt the
State and Religion, that the latter might justly be called the Foundation Stone
of the first, and God had expressly enjoined them an exact observance of it,
under forfeiture of the quiet Possession of that Country, where their
Commonwealth was Established; the Felicity of the State, depended absolutely
from the due observance of that Religion, and the Civil Magistrates were to
take cognizance of all such Matters, as might prove either dangerous or
destructive to it; as it may plainly appear by the Law of God, prescribed in
this behalf, in the Books of Moses.

. 11. The Christian Religion differs in many points from that of the Jews; not
only The Genius of the Christian Religion is quite different from that of the
Jews.
because it represents our Savior to us, as he has already appeared upon
Earth, and thereby has freed us from these many Ceremonies and Sacrifices,
which were so ^any Emblems of his future coming amongst us; but also, because
the Christian Religion is, by God's peculiar Providence, endowed with such
Qualifications, that it ought, and may be received by all Nations without
Prejudice, and consequently deserves the Name of an Universal Religion; whereas
the Divine Worship of the Jews, was so adapted to that State, as scarce to be
suitable to any other, being unaccessible to any other Nation but their own;
the Christian Religion on the other hand, is nowadays not tied up to a
certain Place or Temple, but every 1 Timothy 2. 8.
where Men may pray, lifting up holy hands. We need not appear before God with
sumptuous Sacrifices; but those Sacrifices which are acceptable to God, are to
be purchased without Gold or Silver. Neither is the Ministry of the Gospel
granted as a peculiar Privilege to one particular Nation or Family, but the
Christians in general are called Priests before God, and Apocal. 1. 6. 5. 10.
no body is excluded from that Ministry, provided he be endued with the
necessary Qualifications; except that St. Paul forbids Women 1 Timothy 11. 1^.
to Teach. Lastly, Each Nation has an equal share in the Christian Religion;
neither can any of them claim a peculiar Right or Prerogative before others,
every one having equal share in the Merits of Christ. Here is neither Jew nor
Greek; here is neither Bond nor Free, neither Male nor Female; for ye are all
one in Christ Jesus. There is neither Greek nor Jew, Gal. 3. 28. Coloss. 3. 11.
Vide 1 Timothy 11. ^^
Circumcision, or Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but
Christ is all, and in all. But because the Christian Religion is not like the
Jewish, adapted to one particular State, that had its rise at the same time
with this Religion, but was introduced after Civil Societies were erected
throughout the World. The main point now in question is, Whether after this
Religion has been introduced, it has altered the Nature of Civil Societies, or
the Rights of Sovereigns; and whether by its establishment a new sort of
Government, separate and independent from the Civil Power, has been introduced?
Or, which is the same in effect. Whether the Church is to be considered as a
State separate and independent from the Civil Covernment, which ought to be
Governed and Maintained by Human Force and Power? By the Word State, we
understand a considerable number of People, who being joined in one Society,
independent from another, are Governed by their own Laws and How Moses behaved
himself when he laid the Foundation of the Jewish Commonwealth.
Governors.

. 12. To trace the very Original of this point, the Behavior of Moses, the
Founder both of the Jewish Church and State, must be taken into due
consideration; and how far different Jesus Christ, the Savior of Mankind, and
Founder of the Christian Church, showed himself in his Behavior, from Moses.
Moses was commanded by God, to deliver the Posterity of the Patriarchs from the
Bondage of Egypt, and to lead them according to God's Govenant with them, into
Canaan, the Land of Promise; where he was to Erect a New Commonwealth, and to
Establish their Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws at the same time. The better
therefore to Establish his Authority not only amongst his Countrymen, (over
whom he had no other Lawful Jurisdiction) but also to gain Credit with the
Egyptians, that hitherto had kept the others under their Jurisdiction; he did,
by his Extraordinary and Miraculous Deeds, give them most evident
Demonstrations of his Divine Commission, and of a secret Correspondence with
God Almighty. These Miracles struck such a Terror into the Egyptian King, that
his Obstinacy was at last overcome; who else, in all likelihood, would not have
parted, upon easy terms, with so vast a number of his Subjects; Their number
being sufficient to make up a new and strong People: And the Jews moved by his
Miracles, and in acknowledgment of the Benefits received from his Hands, and
being sensible that God stood by him in all his Undertakings, willingly
received him for their Prince and General. As long as he lived he exercised
this Princely Authority in the highest degree; for, he did Constitute amongst
them both their Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws, and Ordained and Established
their whole Government. He used to Administer Justice, Inflict Punishents upon
those that were found Criminal, he had the Power of Constitating Magistrates
and others, that were to aid and assist him in his Office, and those that
attempted against his Authority, he made sensible of their Folly, by inflicting
most severe Punishments upon them There was all that time no occasion for the
levying of Taxes upon the People, except what was requisite for the
Maintenance and Ornament of their Public Religious Service. He was very
watchful for the Preservation of the People, and if they were Attacked by their
Enemies, used to defend them by Force of Arms. Lastly, when he knew that he was
shortly to depart this Life, he Constituted his Successor, who was to be their
General, and under whose Conduct they were to be put into Possession of the so
long desired Land of Promise; from whence it is very evident, that Moses, as
long as he lived, bore the Office of a Prince, and that he was the Founder of
the State or Commonwealth of the Jews.

. 13. But if we look upon our Savior What, on the other ^and our Savior did
when he established his Church.
Jesus Christ, he acted in a quite different manner; from whence it was very
evident, that his intention was not to Erect a new State here upon Earth. It Is
true, he gained to himself a great deal of Credit and Authority by his
Miracles; but these were no terrifying Miracles, or such as ever proved
injurious to any. So, when his Disciples would have persuaded him, to command
fire to come down from Heaven, and consume those that refused Luke 9. 54 ^5.
to receive him, they met with a severe Rebuke. The main Demonstrations he used
to give them of his Divini^y, always tend^d to the benefit of others, and the
Miracles performed by him, were of such a nature, as must needs attract the
love and favor of all Men; and at the same time were apparent and convincing
Proofs of his Divinity, not any thing less than a Divine Power being able to
cause a new Motion or Alteration in the course of Nature, without Natural
means. For he went about doing good, and he aling Acts 16. 38.
all that were oppressed of the Devil. All which had not the least Relation
toward the laying of the Foundation of a new State. He had some Disciples, but
these were few in number, unarmed, poor, of a mean Profession and Condition,
and of so little Authority, that it was impossible for them to make the least
pretension of setting up a State of their own, or of raising any Commotions or
Disturbances in another State. And when the multitude, in acknowledgment of the
benefits received by his Doctrine and Miracles, would at several times have
proclaimed him King, he absconded and made his escape. The principal Care he
took of his Followers, was to instruct them by his Doctrine, from whence they
were called Disciples, and they in return, used to give him the Name of Master
or Teacher. Neither did he Constitute any new Laws, (at least not any that
could be supposed to have any reference toward the Establishment of a new
State) but the Ancient Law, as far as it was given to Mankind in general, was
explained, and the People exhorted to a due observance of it. He did never
execute Luke 12. 13, 14.
the Office of a Judge, nay he refused to be an Arbitrator, to convince the
World that h^s Joh. 8 11.
coming was intended for no such purpose. Lastly, he did himself pay Taxes to
others; and, though it was in his Power to prevent it, suffered himself to be
Judged and Executed. All which is altogether inconsistent with the Nature and
Office of a Temporal Sovereign.

. 14. This will appear more clearly to us, if Christ did not Constitute a n^w
People.
we duly consider that Christ never acted according to the Rules of those that
intend to lay the Foundation of a new State. For, their principal and first
care is to Constitute a new People, that is, to bring over to their side such a
number of People, as are willing and sufficient to be joined under one Civil
Government. This Multitude of People is either Assembled at once, and drawn out
of another Commonwealth, as Moses did; or by degrees brought over out of other
Commonwealths, as Romulus gathered the People of Rome. But it is easy to be
seen, that our Savior's Intention was of a quite different Nature. His
Disciples were not so many in number, as to have the least resemblance with a
Nation or People, neither were they instructed in those matters, which have the
least relation to the Establishment of a new Commonwealth. Their dependence
from him was not near the same, which Subjects have of their Prince, having
never sworn Allegiance to him; but only as Disciples from their Master, being
influenced by the Love and Admiration they had both for his Person and
Doctrine. Sometimes John 6. ^6. ^^, 68.
a great Multitude of People would flock about him, but these only came to hear
him Preach, and to be Spectators of his Miracles, which being done, they
returned to their respective homes. And Christ never showed the least
inclination to command over, or to withdraw them from the Obedience due to
their Sovereigns. Lastly, when the time of his Death approached, his most
trusty and particular Friends and Followers absconded, and durst not as much as
make any public appearance. When we therefore speak of Christians, we do not
understand a certain Nation or People, subject to any particular Government,
but in general, all such, as make profession of a certain Doctrine or Religion.

. 15. One of the main points which those Christ had no Teritories belonging to
him.
that intend to Establish a new Commonwealth ought to take care of, is how to
acquire considerable Territories, where their new Subjects may settle
themselves and their Fortunes. So, Moses, when he saw it not fecible to set up
the Jewish Commonwealth within the bounds of Egypt, led them into the Desert,
and through such places as were not subject to any particular Government; till
such time, that they Conquered the Land of Canaan, and rooted out its Ancient
Inhabitants. Neither were the Jews, before they were put into Possession of
this Country, the less free, for they were then a Nation independent from any
Foreign Power; and though they sometimes marched upon the Borders of other
Princes, nevertheless were they not, during that time, subject to their
Jurisdiction; partly, because no body ever laid any particular claim to those
Territories, or if some of them did, they marched through them like Soldiers of
Fortune, ready to make good their Pretenses and Titles to these Lands, by the
edge of their Swords. But Christ did say, of himself, That he was so poor, as
he had not where to lay his head. He was always so far Mat. 8. 20.
from attempting to acquire any Possessions or Territories, or to encourage his
Followers to do it, that he rather chose to live during the whole course of his
life in other Territories and under Civil Jurisdiction.

. 16. There are a great many other remarkable Christ did not exircise the
Office of a Prince.
Circumstances from whence it may plainly be inferred, that Christ never did,
nor intended, to appear, as a Prince, here upon Earth. When the Mother of the
Sons of Zebedeus, begged of our Savior, that her Sons might be preferred to the
Chiefest Dignities in the Kingdom of Christ, he rebuked her for her ignorance,
and Prophesied to his Followers a very slender share of outward Splendour and
temporal Preferments, but abundance of Persecution; nay, he plainly told and
enjoined his Disciples, that they should not strive for Pre-eminency over one
another, as Temporal Princes do. It shall, says he, not be so amongst you, Vid.
Mat. 20. 20.
ordering them to live in an equal and Brotherlike degree with one another.
And, to remove, by his own Example, all remnants of Luke 20. 26.
Pride, he in their presence, did abase himself to that degree of Servitude, as
to wash the feet of St. Peter. Lastly, it is of great Consequence John 13. 9,
10.
at the first Establishment of a new Commonwealth, that its Founder be
longlived, that thereby he may be enabled, to lay a more solid Foundation of
the new Government. For this reason it was that David's Soldiers would not any
longer suffer him to expose his Person in Battle, lest the light of Israel
should 2 Samuel 21. 17.
be extinguished; the loss of his own Person being esteemed more than of a
great many thousands. But our Savior did surrender himself voluntarily to
death, after he had scarce four years appeared in Public, and that without
appointing a Successor, who was to exercise any Power or Authority over those,
that followed his Doctrine,

. 17. As now Christ, during his abode (...) of a Doctor or Teacher.
here upon Earth, did not make the least appearance or outward show, resembling
the greatness of Temporal Princes; and, as out of all his Actions there cannot
be gathered the least thing, which may prove his intention to have been to
erect a new State or Commonwealth; so it is sufficiently apparent, that, during
the whole course of his public Conversation on Earth, he employed all his Time
and Labor in publishing the Word of God. So that in the Quality of a Doctor or
Teacher, he appeared to the Eyes of all the World; John 1. 2^.
whereas his Office of being the Savior of Mankind, was at that time
understood, only by such, as were capable of applying the Ancient Oracles of
the Prophets to his Person. Furthermore, our Savior to establish and show his
Authority, made use of such Miracles, as might be evident proofs of his Divine
Power, partly, because the Ancient Ceremonies which were to be abolished, were
first ordained by God's special Command; partly, because the principal Heads of
his Doctrine were surpassing all Human Understanding. But, as for his way of
Teaching, it was plain, and free from Vanity, without all affectation, wherein
appeared nothing which justly might cause the least suspicion of fictitious
Worship. Notwithstanding his Doctrine appeared thus in her Native and Pure
Simplicity, yet, so powerful were its Charm^, that all what Human Art,
Dexterity, Eloquence has been able to invent of that kind, if compared to the
solid Expessions of our Savior, is only superficial and insipid. Neither do we
find, that he made use of any outward means to promote his Doctrine. He did not
call to his aid the Power and Authority of Civil Magistates, to force People to
receive his Words. The Word was Mat. 11. 15. 13. 9. 43. Luke 8. 8 14. 35
there, He that can take, let him take it. And how often do we read that he
exclaimed to them, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear. It was not God
Almighty's pleasure to pull People headlong into Heaven, or to make use of the
new French way of Converting them by Dragoons; But, he has laid open to us the
way of our Salvation, in such a manner, as not to have quite debarred us from
our own choice; so, that if we will be refractory, we may prove the cause of
our own Destruction. Neither, did it please Almighty God to inveigle Mankind by
the Allurements of Profit and Temporal Pleasures, but rather to foretell those,
that should follow his Doctrine, nothing but Adversities, Calamities,
Persecutions and all sorts of Afflictions; reserving the chiefest Reward till
after this Life, where also such as had neglected his Doctrine, were to receive
condign Punishment. This is the most evident Proof that can be given of the
intrinsic Value and extraordinary Worth of the Christian Doctrine; the natural
Constitution of Mankind in general, being such as to be chiefly moved with
those Objects that are present and affect our Senses; whereas those things that
are represented to our Minds at a distance, are but faintly received, and often
meet with dubious Interpretations. It is worth our Observation, what Method
Christ made use of in his Doctrine, viz. That he taught as one having
Authority, as it is expressed by Matthew. 7. ^9. not as the Scribes, that is; he
had no recourse to the Authority and Traditions of their Ancient Rabbi's so as
to s^t up for an Interpreter of their ancient Laws, but he spoke Lord-like, and
as a Legislator, who had a lawful Authority belonging to himself, to propose
his Doctrine. It is my Will and Command, who is it that dare gainsay me? And
in this one point only Christ exercised his Regal Power, as well as his Office
of Teaching, when he promised great and ample Rewards to all such, as should
receive his Doctrine, threatening with Eternal Damnation all those that should
refuse to hearken to it. He that believed not, is condemned John 3 18.
already, are his Words; quite contrary as it is with other speculative
Sciences, the Ignorance of which makes no body ^able to Punishments. And, in
this Sense is to be taken what is related of our Savior by St. John; The
reason why the Jews were so bent to the Destruction of 18. 37:
Christ, was, because they abominated his Doctrine; nor would they acknowledge
him for the same Messiah, which was promised so long before. But ba^ing at that
time no Criminal Jurisdiction belonging to themselves, they were (...) to forge
Treason and Rebellion against him, as it his design was to make himself King of
the Jews. Jesus therefore being examined by Pilate concerning this Accusation,
did not deny it, but witnessed a good Confession, viz. That his Kingdom was not
of this 1 Timothy 6. 13.
World, which is as much as to say; His Kingdom was not like those of Temporal
Princes, who exercise Acts of Sovereignty over their Subjects. For, if he had
pretended to the same Prerogatives, he might have commanded his Servants, not
his timorous Disciples, but those strong Legions of Angels, who always stand
ready to his Command, to protect their Lord from falling into the Hands of
Pilate. And when Pilate replied, That he then professed himself to be a King,
he answered, That he was Joh. 18. 37.
King, but a King of Truth, and that for this cause he came into the World,
that he should bear witness unto Truth. Pilate, by what Christ had professed,
soon understood that this matter did not fall under his Cognizance, and
therefore answered, What is Truth? As if he would have said, if nothing else
can be obj^cted against you, but that you make profession of Truth, I have no
further business with you; for Truth is not subject to any Temporal
Jurisdiction. Neither did the Laws of the Roman Empire, wherein so many Nations
were comprehended, take any Cognizance at that time, of the various Opinions of
their Subjects in matters of Religion, 16. 14, 15, 24, 29. 26, 31, ^2.
as it plainly appears out of the Acts, and out of the Apology of Athenagoras.
It was for this reason that Pilate would have discharged him, if he had not at
last thought it more convenient, to appease the rage of the Jews by Sacrificing
him, though Innocent, to their Fury. But after Christ had once made this open
Confession, he refused to make any further answer to Pilate, being sensible
that Pilate was not d^sirous to be instructed in this Truth. The Kingdom of
Christ therefore, is a Kingdom of Truth, where he, o^ the force of Truth,
brings over our So^ls to his Obedience; and this Truth has such powerful
Charms, that the Kingdom of Christ needs not to be maintained by the same
forcible means and Rules, by which Subjects must be kept in Obedience to the
Civil Powers. And for the same reason it is, that th^re need not be established
a particular State, in order to propagate and preserve Truth, no more, than it
is necessary, to set up a separate Commonwealth, where Philosophy and other
Sciences are to be taught. For, it is the true Genius of Truth, and such her
intrinsic virtue, as to be convincing in it self, provided she be but ^e,
presented in her genuine Shape; and the fruits, which she produces for the
benefit of Mankind, be dexterously proposed to the view of the World. But the
divine Truth has, beyond all others, this particular prerogative, that by
virtue, and with the assistance of God's Grace our Minds are insensibly drawn
into a Belief of those things, that otherwise seem to surpass human
Understanding.

. 18. Christ, after having withdrawn him^^^^ T^^ Apostles (...) of Christ.
from Human Conversation, did Substitute in this Kingdom of Truth his Apostles,
but not in the same Rank with himself; not as Kings, but as Ministers and
Heralds, to publish his Doctrine. As my Father, said he, had sent me, over so
send I you. But how Joh. 20. 21. ^a^ 61. 1. S. Luke 4. 18.
had the Father sent him? viz. To preach the Gospel to the Poor, to heal the
broken Hearted, to preach Deliverance to the Captives, as it is expressed by
Isaiah and St. Luke; So, that the Title of King, of Truth, was a peculiar
Title, appeartaining to Christ alone. He tells them, Mat 23. 10 Mat. 28. 20.
Be you not called Masters, for one is your Master, Christ. And their Calling
was, to Teach all Nations, to observe all things whatsoever Christ had
Commanded. St. Paul called his Function a Ministry which he had received of the
Lord J^su^, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God. The Apostles had the
first Rank among Christ's Followers, but the word Apostle (...) ^0. 2^ (...).
implies as much as a Missionary, or one that is sent by another. So, that they
had no other Power or Authority from themselves, to Teach their Doctrine, but
to Instruct others in what they had received from Christ. And, when, after the
Death of our Savior, they were quite dejected, and put into a panick Fear, He,
by sending the Holy Ghost did so comfort and strengthen them, that they
appeared in Public, and inspite of the Jews, and all the Danger that threatened
them, preached the Doctrine of the Gospel. But the diversity of Languages being
a main obstacle 1 Cor. 1^. ^
towar^^ the spreading abroad of any Doctrine, the Apostles were by the Folly
Ghost upon Whitsunday, Endowed with the Gift of speaking various Langua^es, to
enable them, to bring the Nations into on^ Union of Faith; It being otherwise a
Maxim of State received by those that intend to ^ay the Foundation of a new
Commonwealth, to take care, that no more than one Language b^ used among their
Subjects. It is also worth our taking Notice of, that among those Languages
which the Apostles spoke, there were Languages of some Nations, that were then
Subjects to the Parthian Empire, which was at that time in the same degree of
Enmity and Hatred with the Romans, as may now adays be observed betwixt the
Germans and Tu^ks. Notwithstanding this mortal Hatred betwixt these several
Nations, and the difficulties which were to be surmounted in keeping a
Correspondence betwixt them, which could not but be a main Obstacle to their
being ever united under one Head or Government, the Union of Faith was
introduced among them, under the Kingdom of Truth. The Apostl^s (...) their
Power of ^e^ching from God al^ne, with^^t any dependence from any T^mpor^l
Power.


. 19. The Apostles had nevertheless much more Authority for the exercising of
their Function, than others, who profess human Sciences or Doctrines; For,
these cannot pretend to any lawful Authority of Teaching, in public, unless
with Consent, or at least Connivance of the Higher Powers, who may put a stop
to them at Pleasure. But the Case is quite different with the Apostles, who
having received their Commission of Teaching from Christ, the same cannot be
annulled by any Civil Power, so, as to oblige them either to be silent, or to
alter their Doctrine, when commanded; neither can they be esteemed disobedient
or rebellious, if they refuse, in this Point, to follow the Commands of Civil
Magistrates. It is very remarkable what Christ spoke to his Apostles by way of
Preface, when he was just going to put them into Possession of their Office,
Th^se were his Words: All Power is given unto me in Heaven Mat. 28. 18.
and in Earth. And that this Power might not be mistaken for a Temporal
Authority, as exercised by Sovereigns over their Subjects, but to be understood
of the Power of leading Mankind, and showing them the true Way to Salvation,
plainly appears out of our Savior's Words, when he speaks thus concerning
himself to his heavenly Father: As thou have given S. Joh. 17. 2, 3.
him power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as many as thou
have given him. And this is eternal Life, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And in St. Luke: He that heared
you, heared me, and he that despised you, despised me; 10 16.
and he that despised me, despised him that sent me. The holy Apostles
therefore could not by any Civil Power on Earth be absolved from this Command
of Preaching the Doctrine of Christ throughout the World, and Baptizing such as
received this Doctrine. They were instructed with the Gift of doing Miracles,
as a Proof of their Authority, and Verity of their Doctrine, which being now
sufficiently propogated and received by so many, these Miriacles are become
useless: Like it is the Custom in some Countries, that new Laws are published,
under the Sound of Trumpets, which is never repeated after the first
Promulgation. They having then received their Authority from Christ, it was a
vain Expropration which was made to St. Paul by the Athenians, when they said:
What will this Babbler say? Neither Act. 17. 18.
could they be justly punished, because they went about to abolish the
anciently received Rites and Ceremonies; And when they were commanded to desist
from spreading their Doctrine, they might legally refuse to be obedient in this
Case; For, they ought to obey God Acts 4. 19. 5. 29.
rather than Men; Nay, they were rather to undergo corporal Punishment, than to
renounce the Doctrine of Christ. And those Princes, Mat. 10. 28, 32, 3^
that violently opposed the Christian Doctrine, are so far from having
exercised a legal Civil Authority, that they have rather made themselves guilty
of a most enormous Crime against the Divine Majesty, by violating his Legates or
Ministers, it being sufficiently known, that public Ministers, sent by
Temporal Princes, are esteemed inviolable. The Apostles never assumed a Power
to Command.


. 20. Besides this Power of Preaching the Gospel, (even in opposition to any
Civil Command) there is nothing to be met withal in the whole Apostolical
Doctrine, that has the least resemblance of Command or force. It Is not to be
denied, but that sometimes Teaching cannot so well be performed without
something of Force or Command, especially among young People; But this has its
offspring from the Paternal Authority, and is from ^h^nce derived unto others.
But the Apostles were to Teach whole Nations, such as were independent from
others, and past all School Discipline. And what could one single Body, or
perhaps two, and that without Weapons, pretend to do by Force against whole
Nations and Commonwealths? It was therefore; That the Apostle said: The Weapons
of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.
through God to the pulling down of Strongholds, casting down Imaginations,
and every high thing, that exalted it self against the Knowledge of God; and
bringing into captivity every Thought to the obedience of Christ. And these
Weapons are more plainly described in the foregoing 6 Chap. to be, Patience,
Tribulations, Necessities, Destresses, ^ Cor. 6. 4. seq.
Stripes, Imprisonments, Labors, Fastings, Watchings, Pureness, Knowledge,
Kindness, the Holy Ghost, unseigned Love; the Word of Truth, the Power of God,
the Armor of Righteousness, and such like, as may more at large appear out of
several places, especially out of the Epistle to the Ephesians. 6. 11, out of the 2
d. to the Corinth. 8. 8, 9, 7. to the Coloss. 1. 23, 25; and out of the 2 d. to
the Thessal. 3. 12, 14, 15. Luke 14. ^ 3.
It Is true, in the Parallel of the great Supper, the Master of the Feast orders
his Servants, to go out, and compel them to come into his House, which is as
much to say, as to oblige them to come in, but not by forcible Means or
Threatenings; or to pull them in by Head and Shoulders, but in such a manner as
was suitable to an invitation to so great a Feast, by Prayers and Exhortations,
and making them sensible of the Majesty and Greatness both of the Master and
the Feast. In the same manner as St. Paul expresses it: We are Ambassadors 2
Cor. 5. 20.
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God. And, what can be more evident,, than that Ambassadors
never pretend to any Authority over those, unto whom they are sent, but that
their Negotiations ought to be accomplished by force of Reason and Persuasions.
The word also of feeding, which is used by St. John implies nothing of Command,
Chap. 21.
but only the due Administration of Food; especially, since our Savior told
expressly to Peter, Feed my sheep, not thine; lest he should be apt to imagine
by the said words, he had liberty given him to use his Flock according to his
own Discretion; But, to make him sensible, he was bound up to the same Rules,
Genesis 31. 38, 39, 40. Mat. 10. 14, 23.
which the Patriarch Jacob had formerly prescribed to himself. Lastly, our
Savior is very plain in this Point, when he says: And whosoever shall not
receive you, nor hear your Words, when you depart out of that House or City,
shake off the Dust of your Feet, leaving them to receive condign Punishment for
this Contempt of the Gospel, at the Day of Judgment. This was actually
performed by St. Paul at Antiocha, and Acts 13. 50, 51. 18, 6.
Corinth. But those Rules which are prescribed in the 1 Epistle to the
Corinthians, Chap. 11. from v. 2, to 22, 23, 24; and 1 Corinthians. Chap. 14; as
also in Tim. 2. 8 Ver. Chap. 5. 9 Ver. and some other passages of the same
nature, do not imply any Command or Legislative Power, but are only Moral
Precepts, and Points of Doctrine.

. 21. But it may perhaps be objected, That Whether the power of Teaching does
indirectly imply any Command.
the Apostles and their Successors, might at least by indirect ways and means,
exercise an Authority over Christians, viz. by denying them the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which shows Men the way to Salvation, unless they would in other
Matters also submit themselves to their Authority. For, who would not rather
submit to any thing than to be deprived of that Doctrine, which leads us to
Heaven, and frees us from eternal Punishment? But it cannot in the least be
supposed, that such Extortions could ever enter into the Apostles Thoughts, who
joyfully gave for nothing, what they had received for nothing, and judged it a
heinous Offense in Simon, who pretended to make a Trade of the Gospel. St. Paul
says: Though 1 Cor. 9. 1^.
I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for Necessity is laid upon
me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. Neither do I see, which way
they could have made their market by the Gospel. For, what is not understood,
is not valued; if therefore they would raise in the People a desire to the
Gospel, it must of necessity be first taught them. Neither is there any Reason
to suppose, that the same Men, who rather would loose their Lives than neglect
their Divine Commission, should be guilty of so heinous a Crime. And the
Doctrine of the Gospel, being now adays sufficiently spread abroad, it would
be in vain for the Clergy of one Province or Commonwealth, to deny the Doctrine
of the Gospel to its Inhabitants, in case they would not comply with their
Demands; since, if they should persist in their Folly, there would not be
wanting such as would supply their Places without reluctance. Neither did
Christ absolutely commit his Doctrine to the sole Management of the Priests, in
such a manner, as by Tradition to be transplanted from one to another; but, he
ordered it to be put in Writing, not to be kept close up by any one certain
College or Society, who were invested with a particular Prerogative to lo^k
into it, like it was at Rome, with the Sybilline Oracles; and granted a general
Privilege for every Body to peruse it, and to instruct themselves in the
Christian Doctrine, and in such other Points as belonged to the Ministry of the
Gospel. But if a foreign Priest should attempt to forbid the exercise of
Religious Worship in another Commonwealth, scarce any body, unless quite
prepossed with Superstition, would make the least account of it. The Venetian
Commonwealth has given us a notable instance of this Nature in our Age; For,
though the Venetians are Roman Catholics, nevertheless did they oblige their
Priests to exercise the Ministerial Function, in Whether the power of
Absolution imply any right to a Sovereignty?
spite of the Pope's Commands to the contrary.

. 22. It seems to be a Matter of the greatest Consequence, and therefore the
more to be taken notice of, when it is said: That our Savior did give the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven to St. Peter, and the rest of his Apostles; so, that,
whatsoever they should bind on Mat. 16. 19. S. Joh. 20. 13.
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever they should loosen on Earth,
shall be loosened in Heaven. The whole Matter, duly examined, appears to be of
the highest moment, viz. to have the Power of excluding Sinners from the
Kingdom of Heaven, and of admiting such as are freed by their Absolution; For
what is it, that may not be obtained from a Sinner in this case, especially if
the Priest refuse him Absolution, unless he promises a blind Obedience to his
Demands? It ought therefore to be taken into serious consideration, what is the
true meaning of this Metaphorical Locution, viz. The Keys of the Kingdom of
H^aven; since What is to be understood by the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.
the same admits of diverse Explica^ions in the holy Scrip^ture. In the Rev. 1.
18. the Son of God says of himself, That he has the Keys of Hell and of Death,
which is explained by some, that he has the Power of inflicting Punishment, as
if he would say: I have power to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell; as it is
expressed in St. Matthew 10. 28. Though by this also might be understood, the
power of delivering from Death and Hell, and to destroy the force of Death and
Hell. It is also spoke of the Scribes, That they have the Key of Knowledge,
which is Luke 11. 52
by some applied to their Function of Teaching Wisdom to others. Though this may
also be understood from the holy Scripture it self, the true Spring of
Knowledge and Wisdom, the Interpretation of which did in a most peculiar manner
belong to their Function. In the Book of Revelation, the Son of God is said to
have the Key of David, that he opened, and no 3. 7, 9. 1. 20 1.
Man shuts, and shutted, and no man opened. And in the 22th Chapter of
Isaiah, it is said of ^. 22.
Eliakim, the Son of Hilkiah; That the Key of the House of David shall be laid
upon his Shoulder; so, that he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall
shut, and none shall open. Where the word, Key, cannot be taken for an absolute
or despotick Power, but for a Ministerial Function; like to that of a Steward,
such a one as St. Paul had prosessed himself, and his F^llow Apostles. Out of
these several places, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
if duly compared, this general Assertion may be made, that, to have the Keys
of a certain thing, is as much as to say, to have the means to attain, or to
come to it. But how far these Means are at our disposal, and what use ought to
be made of them, must be gathered out of other Circumstances.

. 23. Fu^thermore, it is to be considered, What is to understood by absolving
from Sins.
That the use of these Keys is appropriated to the binding and forgiving of
Sins: For as soon as our Sins are taken away, (or which is the same in effect)
if our Sins are forgiven, (other Means of Salvation being not neglected) the
Kingdom of Heaven is open to us. But as long as the Sins remain upon us, and
produce their pernicious Effects, the Kingdom of Heaven is shut up against us,
nothing of unclean being to enter there. If therefore a true Judgment is to be
given, of what share of Power the Apo^^les had in forgiving, and retaining of
Sins, a due enquiry must be made, of what is to be understood, by forgiving and
retaining of Sins? He, that does an unjust Act, commits an Offense both against
the Legislator, whose Authority is thereby voilated, and against him, who is
damnified by it. Besides this, there are some Offenses of such a Nature, as to
touch whole Societies, as far as their Reputation is thereby impaired, the
Crime committed by one of their Members, being oftentimes attributed to the
whole Body. It is therefore from the Damage, which the Legislator, a single
Person, or whole Society, receive by such an Offense, that an Action lies,
against the Offender; In the same manner as a Creditor has a right to sue his
Debtor for a Debt, contracted with him. In which respect it is, that Sins are
often called Debts in the holy Scripture. But, in this double, or sometimes,
threefold Action, which arises from one Offense committed against several
Persons, each is to be considered as separate from the other; so, that, though
one Action be taken off, the other remains notwithstanding this, in full force:
For, as God does not remit Sins, Mat. 5 23. 24.
without Satisfaction given from the Offender, to the offended Person; So, though
the Offender be reconciled to the offended, nevertheless is he obliged to seek
for Remission of his Sin by God; And, if the Offense be heinous, and of such a
Nature, as to be scandalous to a whole Society, he ought there, also to
endeavor his Reconcilation, by begging forgiveness of them. Therefore, to
remit a Sin, is the same Thing, ^^ to remit an Action, or to release one from
an Action, which the offended Party had against the Offender. And he, that has
an Action against another, by reason of some Offense committed against him, may
properly be said, to have Power to remit that Offense or Sin, as far as his
Action reaches. For, God himself does not make use of his uncontrouled Power of
remitting of Sins; so, as without any further Respect, and by his mere Pleasure
to remit their Sins to some, and to punish others. For, to pardon Offenses
promiscuously, without any further regard but bare Pleasure, is in effect to
render Laws ineffectual; and Laws are made to no purpose by him, who at the
same time grants a License of Trespassing against them. And, because it was
beyond all Human Power to give Satisfaction to God Almighty for our Offenses,
our Savior Jesus Christ has made use of a most wonderful Moderation betwixt
Justice and Mercy, in giving due Satisfaction in his own Person; So, that,
whoever by the Faith appropriates the same to himself, thereby obtains
Remission of his Sins from God. And, as to that part, which belongs to Men to
forgive, God has commanded them not to be rigorous, if the Offender beg
forgiveness, because every one of us must every day expect Forgiveness of his
Sins from God Almighty; and we all commit sometimes Offenses against our
Neighbors, who, if they would all act rigorously with us, our Condition would
be most deplorable. Wherefore we ought to forgive our Mat. 6. 12, 14 15. c. 5.
25, c. 18, 25. Luke 17. 3.
Debts, as we would have others forgive us their Debts. Neither are we to be
too rigorous against such Sinners, as have by their Offenses proved scandalous
to a whole Society, but if they seriously repent, we ought not to deny them our
Pardon. It is also worth our further Observation, That the following Words;
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven, and whatsoever you shall loosen on Earth, shall be loosened in Heaven,
are Mat. 18. 18.
spoken by Christ also of the Remission of an Offense by the Party offended;
Neither does the Sense of the preceding Words allow to apply them only to his
Disciples, they being spoken not only to the Apostles, but to the Believers in
general.

. 24. Supposing then that the Apostles were Under whose name and authority the
Apostles did exercise this power of Absolution.
to remit such Sins as were not committed against them, it must necessarily
follow, That they, when they remitted Sins, did it either in the name of such
particular Persons, against whom the said Sins were committed, or in the name
of a whole Society, or else in the name of some (Human or Divine) Legislator.
Now it is certain, that no body can remit another Man's lawful Action, without
his order or consent, no more than you can lawfully take away another's Right
or Property; and therefore it is absolutely necessary, first, to make our peace
with the Person offended; without which, we ought not to seek for Pardon from
God Almighty; at least, he, that has offended ought to take first, a firm
Resolution, to give Satisfaction, as far as is in his Power. Christ says; Mat.
5. 24. Luke 19. 8.
First, be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift. And St.
Paul offered to make Satisfaction to Philemon, for what Damage he had received
from Onesimus. From hence arises v. 18, 19.
that general and common Rule: That if Restitution be not made, there can be no
Remission of the Sin. For, it is ridiculous, and a contradiction in it self, to
profess to God Almighty a true Repentance for an unjust Act, and at the same
time enjoy the benefit of it. But, as for the Remission of such enormous Crimes
as were committed against a whole Society, the Apostles had their share in it,
as is evident out of the 1 Epistle to the Corin^h ^. 5. 4, 5. and 2 Corinthians. c.
2. 10. c. 11. 29. and will be more treated of hereafter. It will be sufficient
in this place to take notice, that what Authority was exercised by them in this
kind, was much inferior to that power which they had received of Retaining and
Forgiving of Sins. But to remit Sins in the name of those that had the
Sovereign and Legislative Power in the State, did not belong to the Apostles,
their Commission and Power being not to interfer with the Civil Jurisdiction,
or to diminish its Prerogatives; Wherefore Civil Magistrates justly may, and do
punish, Offenders according to the Laws of the Realm, notwithstanding they have
made their peace with God. The only way then for the Apostles was, to forgive
Sins in the Name of God, by whose Authority they had received their Commission,
as is evident out of these Words: Whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatsoever you shall loosen on Earth, shall be loosened in
Heaven.

. 25. But, if we propose to form to our Of what nature this Power was
selves a true Idea of the Power granted to the Apostles, when the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven were given unto them, and how far it extends it self, we must
take into serious Consideration, in what manner Christ himself did remit Sins,
whilst he lived among us upon Earth. This is sufficiently manifest out of
several Passages in St. Matthew, 9. 2. Mark, 2. 3. Luke, 5. 20. c. 7. 47, 48,
39, 50. where our Savior verifies his Power of forgiving of Sins, by a
Miracle, which could not but be the effect of a Divine Power. Besides this,
there was no Plaintiff or Defendant, there was no open or express Confession of
Sin; but as soon as Christ saw their Faith, he pronounced Remission of Sin.
And, if we peruse the whole New Testament, it will most evidently appear, that
neither Christ nor his Apostles did forgive Sins in a judicial way, where
Crimes are first examined; but where the Faith was, the forgiveness of Sins was
the immediate consequence of it. He that believed on him, says (...). 3. 1^.
St. John, is not condemned, but he that believed not, is condemned already.
Neither is that Confession (whether tacit or express) which ought to precede
the Remission of Sins, like to those Confessions, which in Judicial Courts are
required to be made by Offenders, and are sure to meet with deserved
Punishment; But it has Jos. 7 1^. ^ 20 21.
a resemblance to those Confessions, that are made to Physicians, by such of
their Patients as labor under a secret Distemper, hoping thereby for Relief in
their Diseases. As it is expressed in the 32 Psalm, v. 3, 4, 5. of David;
Neither can true Repentance be supposed without such a Confession; for, how can
we ask forgiveness either of God, or our Neighbor, whom we have offended,
unless we confess and acknowledge our Error. Lastly, it is to be Prove. 28.
observed, That Christ and his Apostles, during the time of Grace, here upon
Earth, did not intend to set up a judicial Court, but to preach, and to
announce repentance and forgiveness of Sins. But of the great Day of Judgment,
it is said, That God will proceed to Judgment in a solemn manner, there, the
Supreme Judge will sit upon the Throne of Judgment, there Seats are to be
prepared for the Assessours, Rev. 20. 12.
the Books are to be opened, and every one is to be judged according to his
Works; and that without Appeal: It ought also to be taken notice of, That, though
we have obtained pardon for an Offense from our Neighbor, this does not always
and necessarily imply a Pardon from God Almighty; for it, is possible, that,
notwithstanding a Pardon obtained from Men, God has not absolved us from that
Offense; as for instance, if the Offender be without true Faith, or an
Hypocrite: And, on the other hand, it is possible that our Offenses are
forgiven by God, when forgiveness has been denied us by Men; as in case, our
Neighbor refuses to pardon an Offense, though we beg Forgiveness, and profer
Satisfaction to be made; or, a Priest, being overcome by private Passion,
should deny us Absolution; When therefore the Priest says; Thy Sins are
forgiven unto thee, it is not always to be taken for granted, that Christ does
then make use of the same Words; For, God alone is the Judge of our Faith, and
even our Thoughts; But Men can only give their Judgment according to such
Circumstances, or outward Signs, as effect our Senses, which often prove
deceitful, and far different from what we keep concealed within us. And, though
in Civil Courts of Judicature it is sufficient, if Judgment be given in a Case,
according to what is proved by Evidence, notwithstanding the same may be
contrary to Truth; it is quite otherwise with God Almighty, who, searching into
the very bottom of our Hearts, cannot be deceived by Hypocrisy. And, though the
Priest should tell thee a hundred times over and over, thy Sins are forgiven
unto the, and thou art destitute of Faith, it can avail thee nothing. Lastly,
it ought not to be forgotten, that, when God did give unto the Apostles the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he did not thereby surrender all his Power of
forgiving Sins, or of receiving penitent Sinners into his Favor; or did debar
himself from making use of this Power, unless by the means of Priests, so as to
reserve only to himself the Supreme Prerogative of remitting of Sins, in case
of an unjust refusal of the Priest; No, by no means; for if this were granted,
it would be in vain for us to pray every day; Forgive us our Sins. All these
things duly considered, are evident Proofs, that, when it is said, that the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were given unto the Apostles, it is to be
understood from the Doctrine of the Gospel, which creats of the remission of
Sins through our Faith in Christ; when the Apostles taught this Doctrine to the
Believers, it was said of them, that they forgave Sins, in the same sense as
they are said to save others by Preaching the Gospel to the Believers. And on
the contrary, (...). 4. 16.
when they preach the Gospel to the Unbelieving, they are said to have bound
them, so, as that they shall be bound in Heaven. The Apostles Joh 3. 18.
therefore, when they announced to the Believing the Grace of God and
Forgiveness of Sins through Christ, did open the Gates of Heaven, and they shut
them against such, as, being unbelieving, refused to accept this Doctrine. So,
that, when a Minister of the Church applies this Doctrine of the Gospel to one
particular Person, he says thus much to him: If thou believe according to thy
Confession, I announce and confirm unto thee Remission of thy Sins, through the
Merits of Christ; so, that thou may be now assured, that the same are
forgiven by Christ in Heaven: But if thou not believe, thy Sins are not
forgiven. For, remission of Sins is the necessary consequence of Faith, even
before the Absolution is pronounced by the Priest; it being not left to the
arbitrary Pleasure of Men, whether to apply the gracious Doctrine of Remission
of Sins to a believing Person, or not; But, he that believes, is thereby
justified before God, notwithstanding he be prevented from receiving Absolution
from the Priest. Out of what has been said, it is evident, that, according to
the Intention of our Savior, these Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were not to
be made use of for the Establishment of a Temporal State, or to gain other
Temporal Advantages. For, Christ ordered the Apostles to preach Remission of
Sins, and give for nothing, what they had received for nothing; but not to
traffic with the Word of God. Neither did they, by preaching the Gospel, make
Men subject to themselves, but to Christ; Nay, St. Paul, could not understand
without Indignation, that some among the Corinthians would 1 Cor. 1. 12, 1^.
Whether St. Peter had any
be called from him, some from Apollo, etc.

. 26. But of what nature soever their Power or Function might be, the same was
granted Prerogative granted him before the rest of the Apostles? in an equal
degree to all the Apostles, so, that none of them cogld claim a particular
Prerogative, or, at least not any right of Commanding the rest. For, if we
peruse those several Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. c. 23. 8. S. Joh. 20. 21, 22, 23. c.
13. 14, 15, 16.
Passages in the holy Scripture, where the Apostolical Function was
established, and conferred upon them, there are not the least footsteps of
Inequality to be found among them. And that Passage St. Luke 22. 26, 27.
Epistle to the Galat. 2. 9, 14. By St. Matthew. 16. 18. which the Romanists make
such a stir about, contains nothing, that can give any legal Pretense
Superiority to St. Peter, and much less to the Roman Bishops over all the
Christian Churches. St. Peter had in the abovementioned place made his
Confession, That Jesus was the Son of the living God. This excellent Confession
did deserve a suitable answer from Christ, who said, thou art Peter, as if he
would say, persist in this thy Confession Peter; which does in no wise imply,
that Peter should thereby have deserved those Prerogatives over the other
Apostles, as the Romanists do pretend to. For, St. Peter did not make this
Confession for himself only, but in the Name of all those, unto whom Christ
spoke at that time. In the same manner as he spoke in the Name of the rest of
the Disciples by St. John 6. 69. We believe, and are sure, that thou art Christ
the Son of the living God. Joh. 1. 34, 36, 42, 45, 49. Mat. 10. 32, 33. John 11
27. Acts 4. 11.
Neither was Peter the first, that made this Confession; For, before him the
same had been made by John the Baptist, by St. Andrew, Philip and Nathanael.
And it is no difficult Task to prove out of several passages of the holy
Scripture, that none could be taken for a true Disciple of Christ, unless he
had made this ^. 8. ^^. ^. 9. ^0, 22.
Confession; And our Savior, to show, of what consequence this Confession was,
added these Words: Upon this Rock I will build my Church: Which is as much as
to say, this Doctrine, that Jesus is the Son of God, is the main Foundation
Stone, whereupon is to be built the mystical Edifice of the Christian Church.
So, that no further inference can be made from these Words, than what is
expressed to the same purpose by St. John, 20. 31. and in the 1 Epist. of John,
2. 22. c. 3. ^0. c. 4 2. viz That the fundamental Article of the Christian
Religion is: That Jesus of Nazareth is the true Messiah, and the Son of the
living God.

. 27. It also is worth our Consideration, Wh^th^r the Power of (...) any
Sov^reign Right of Juri^^cation.
whether the Power of Excommunication, which was used by the Apostles, and in
the Primitive Church, implies any Sovereign Authority, such as ought to be
exercised in a State? Unto this we answer in the Negative; provided the same be
taken according to the proper Use and End of its genuine and primitive
Institution. For, that this Power may with convenience enough, be made use of,
(if misapplied) to serve an ambitious Design, and to keep the poor People in
awe, is sufficiently proved by Experience. It seems to me, that there was a
remarkable Difference betwixt the Excommunication of the Jews, by virtue of
which they were excluded from their Synagogues, and the Excommunication used
among the Primitive Christians. For, among the Jews, where the Sovereigns and
the People professed one and the same Religion (which also was entirely united
with the State) it might easily happen, that the Exclusion from the Synagogue,
did carry along with it several Inconveniences in Civil Affairs, and might
therefore not unjustly be considered at the same time, as a Civil Punishment;
which, rendered the Offenders infamous in the Commonwealth; Especially, since,
according to the Fundamental Constitution of that Government, there were
several things belonging to Religion punishable by their civil Constitutions.
But, it being already put beyond Question, that neither our Savior, nor his
Apostles, did ever pretend to any Civil Power; and that besides this, the
Primitive Christians lived under the Jurisdiction of other Princes, how could
their Excommunication, Ban, or what other sort of Ecclesiastical Censine was
used among them, be supposed to have any influence upon the Civil State and
Condition of the Christians; or to have been of the same nature and force
(properly speaking) as Civil Punishments are? This will more plainly appear, if
we examine those Passages, where this Matter is completely treated of in the
New Testament: It is said in Matthew 18. 15. 16, 17. If thy Brother shall
trespass against thee, go, and tell him his Fault, between thee and him alone;
If he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. But, if he will not hear
thee, then take with thee One or Two more, that in the mouth of two or three
Witnesses every Word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as a Heathen Man and a Publican. Certainly out of this passage, nothing
can be inferred that has any relation to a Temporal Jurisdiction or
Sovereignty; but barely shows us, how differences ought to be composed among
Christians. So St. Paul ordains, 1 Cor. ^ 1. 2.
that we shall rather leave Differences to the Arbitration of a Brother, or
rather take wrong, than to go to Law with a Brother before the Unbelievers, to
the great shame of the Christian Name. So, that, though it is else required from
the Offender to beg the Pardon of, and Vid. Mat 5. 40.
offer Satisfaction to the Person offended; nevertheless, if he neglect his
Duty in this Point, Christ commanded, that the offended Party shall first offer
a Reconciliation, and try before he brings his Action against the Offender,
whether Satisfaction for the Injury received, and a Reconciliation may not be
obtained by a private Arbitration. If this prove fruitless, he says, he ought
to take along with him two or three Witnesses, to try whether they can prevail
with his Adversary to bring him to a more pliable Temper; and at the same time,
may testify, That the offended Party, did offer every thing which might tend
toward a Reconciliation betwixt them; But, if after all this, he remain
obstinate, the Difference ought to be referred to the whole Congregation of the
Believers, residing in that Place; (for I see no reason why by the word
Ecclesia or Church, the Presbyters only should be understood.) But, if they
also cannot prevail with their Authority over his Stubborness, let him then be
unto thee like a Heathen man and Publican, unto whom his Trespasses will not be
remitted, because he refuses to acknowledge his Offense, or to give
Satisfaction for it; which is as much as to say, fly his Conversation, like
that of a vile Person; which e^^ry one may freely do, without being thereu^^^
compelled by any Superior Power. For, that the Jews did not converse with the
Hea^^ns and Publicans, except in Civil (...) of no great force against us, it
being ce^^ain that the Heathens and Publicans were no^ so infamous in
themselves by any Civil Constitution, the Jews being at that time subject to
the Heathens, who mattered not their Conversation. Besides this, it is left to
every ones free Choice, whom he will admit into his familiar Conversation; and
always was a certain Rule among the wiser Sort, not to be familiar with People
of a perversed Humor, and an ill Life, whose Conversation every body may
avoid, as he finds it most convenient. So, the Apostle bids us, to reject a Man
that is a Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, lest we Tit. 3. 10.
These. 2. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Gal. 1. 8, 9.
should be infected with his false Doctrine, for which he is to expect due
Punishment from God Almighty. Neither does that passage, in the 1 Epistle to
the Corinthians, 5. 1. and following Verses, and in the 2 Epistle to the
Corinthians, 13. 2, 10. where St. Paul declares, that according to the Power
given him, he intends to deliver the incestuous Person to Satan, (take it in
what sense you please) involve any Civil Jurisdiction or Command; no more, than
those in the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, 6. 9. seq. in the 1 Timothy, 1. 20.
in the 2 Epist. of John, 5. 10. All which passages signify no more, than that
every body may freely decline the Conversation of such People, as he thinks may
be reproach, or hurtful to him, without implying a prejudice to their
Reputation in Civil Affairs. So, that, by avoiding the Conversation of ill
Livers, we are not obliged to retire from the World; that is, we need not be so
scrupulous in avoiding such Conversation, as to neglect our Duty, or other
necessary Business appertaining to Civil Society. And in this sense it is
appliable as well to Christians, as to Pagans, of an ill Conversation. The
Commission of the Apostles contains nothing resembling any Sovereign Power.


. 28. Lastly, if we cast our eyes upon those Instructions, which Christ gave to
his Apostles and Disciples, it will evidently appear, that their Commission had
not the least relation to the Establishment of a Sovereign State. A State
cannot be without a Supreme Head, who having Power to bestow Honors and
Dignities, this generally proves the occasion of ambitious Designs. A State
cannot be maintained without considerable Revenues, which entices Men to
Avarice. But, if we look upon our Savior, we shall find that his main
Endeavor is to keep his Disciples from ambitious Mat. 18 1, 2, 3, 4. c. 23 8.
Mark 9. 33. Luke 9. 46. Joh. 13. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Designs and Covetousness. The Instruction given by Christ to his Disciples in
S. Matthew 10. when, after having endowed them with the Gift of Miracles, he
sent them, as it was, to make their first Trial, among the Jews, deserves
particularly here to be taken notice of; though it is not to be questioned, but
that the same Instruction remained in force for the most part, after they were
sent among the Gentiles. The first Precept in this Instruction is, That they
shall take heed not to abuse the Christian Doctrine, and the Gift of Miracles
for the heaping up of Gold and Silver, which are otherwise accounted the Sinews
of a State. As you have received it for nothing, so you shall give it for
nothing, is the Command, which was very well observed by St. Peter, when he
said, Silver and Gold have I Act. 3. 6.
none. And, lest they should, under pretense of Subsistence and acquiring
Necessaries, be enticed to Avarice, Christ forbid them, even to provide two
Coats, Shoes, Staves, or a Purse; but that they should be contented with what
they received from their Auditors. It is not to be denied, but that this
Command may chiefly be applied to such Journeys, as were not to be too long, or
in far distant Countries, But on the other hand it ought to be taken into
consideration, that the Allowances, to be given to those that preached the
Gospel, are compared to the Wages of Workmen, which seldom amount to any more,
than is necessary for Subsistence; or, at the most, cannot exceed a private
Fortune, having not the least comparison with those vast Revenues, which are
required to maintain a State. As may be seen in Mat. 10. 10. Luke 10. 7. 1 Cor:
9. 11. And the passage in the 1 Epist. to Timothy ^. 18. chiefly relates to the
Priesthood, where it is expressly forbidden not to make a Trade of their Office,
and to sly Avarice, as the root of all Evil; and consequently of all those
Abuses and Superstitions, which have overwhelmed the Church of Rome, And, that
by their Number they might not appear terrible, Christ only sends them two and
two, with this express Mark 6. 7.
Command, not to force their Doctrine upon any Body, but to seek for reception
by a kind Salute, and, if they find them inclined to receive their Doctrine, to
abide there, but to leave those, whom they found unworthy, and not ready to
hear their Words, and even to shake off the Dust of their Feet. After these
Instructions given, Christ foretells them what Persecutions and Dangers they
must undergo, all which, he will have them to overcome, not by Force, but by
Patience, by showing their Innocence, Mat. 5. 10, 11.
or flying to another Place. The quite contrary is practiced in Temporal
Governments, whose Founders lay this down for a sure Maxim of State, Tu contra
audentior ito. Never shrink before your Enemy. After the Ascension of our
Savior, they dispersed into all Parts of the World, according as they were
inspired, without having appointed any certain place of Residence for their
Government, from whence they might receive their Instructions or Commissions,
and where they were to be accountable concerning their Negotiation, or where to
fix the Center of their Correspondency; at least, thus much is certain, that
nothing like it is recorded in the holy Scripture. Neither was it in their
Power to have acquired any great Territories, it being obvious, that they lived
always under another Jurisdiction, and in such Places, where the Government was
already Established. Nor had they any Authority to exact upon their Auditors,
except what they were pleased to allot them by voluntary Contribution; For, if
they should have attempted any thing beyond it, no doubt but those Magistrates,
under whose Jurisdiction they lived, might legally have stopped their
Proceedings, as done in prejudice of their Authority. For, in case the
generality, or the greatest part of the Christians should have attempted to
follow the Example of some of their Brethren at Jerusalem, who were for having
Acts 2. 44, 45. c. 4. 5.
all things in Common, it had been lawful for their Sovereigns to put a stop to
their inconsiderate Design, which needs must have tended to the great detriment
of the Commonwealth. Lastly, the Apostles did not oblige their Auditors to
leave their ancient Habitations, like Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt,
but left them in quiet Possession of their former Station and honest Functions,
not pretending to any Innovation, but that they should receive the Christian
Religion.

. 29. It is furthermore to be consicered, whether the Doctrine of Christ, which
unites The Kingdom of Christ's implies no Temporal Sovereignty
our Hearts under the Obedience of Christ by the Faith, does not, by virtue of
this Union, constitute a certain Sovereignty resembling the Sovereign Power of
our Civil Governments? To this we answer in the Negative; as it may plainly
appear, to those, that will duly consider the Nature and Qualifications, which
are in the holy Scripture attributed to the Kingdom of Christ, and the Kingdom
of Heaven here upon Earth. It is without question, that the Union of the
Believers under Christ, their King, ought to be considered as a Kingdom or
Empire, but such a one as is not of this World, and consequently of a quite
different nature from that Sovereign Power, which is exercised in a Civil
Government. Christ is there the King, who having withdrawn himself from our
sight, has as it may be said, settled his Court in Heaven. His subjects are
dispersed throughout all parts of the World, where the Christian Doctrine is
taught and received by the Believers, who, by the intrinlick, Virtue of this
Doctrine, are confirmed in their Faith, and made proof against all the
Temptations and Malice of this World. The Civil Power does not reach this
Kingdom; true Piety being not to be implanted by Human Force, which is
insufficient to procure God's Grace, or raise those inward Motions which are
chiefly acceptable to God Almighty; and without which, all our exterior
Actions, that may be enforced by a Civil Authority, are to be deemed vain and
fruitless. For, the Kingdom of Christ being a Kingdom of Truth, it requires no
Civil Power or Force; For, Truth, by the help of the Christian Doctrine, and
with the assistance of God's Grace, does gently insinuate it self into the
Hearts of Men, and the Rewards or Punishments, which those are to receive, that
either accept or despise this Doctrine, are reserved for the Life to come. He
that will be pleased to examine those several Passages, where mention is made
of the Kingdom of Christ, or the Kingdom of Heaven, may soon be convinced, that
not any thing is to be met withal there, which has the least resemblance to a
Civil Power or Sovereignty. Those that expect to enter into this Kingdom, Mat.
3. 2. c. 4. 1^ c. 4. 23. c. 9. 35.
must qualify themselves by Repentance. It is spoke of Christ himself, that he
went about Mat. 5. 1. seq.
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven. The Virtues and Qualifications
which Christ requires in those, that will enter into his Kingdom, and
consequently be blessed with eternal Salvation, have but little relation to the
Qualifications of a Subject in a Civil Government. Mat. 5. 19. c. 7. 21. c. 6.
33. c. 13. 21. 33. 44, 45, 52.
In that Kingdom every one is called great, or the least, according to his
Proficiency in the Christian Doctrine, and according to his Obedience or
disobedience to it. We are commanded first to seek the Righteousness of this
Kingdom. The great Mystery of this Kingdom is the powerful operation of the
Word of c. 24. 47.
God. In this Kingdom are not only suffered those that are Foreigners to it,
but also its Enemies, which is against the Maxims, of a Mat. 16. 19.
Civil Government. The Keys of this Kingdom are contained in the Doctrine of
Remission of Sins. And what is taught us concerning Mat. 18. 1. c. 10. 21. c.
23. 8. Mark 9. 33, 34. c. 10. 42.
Precedence in the Kingdom of Heaven, is quite contrary to what is practiced in
a Civil State. It is allowable by the Civil Constitutions, for every one to
pursue his Right, but, in the Kingdom of Christ, he is counted an ill Subject,
who will not remit a Trespass to Mat. 18. 23. c. 21. 14. Mark 10. 14.
his Brother. The Kingdom of Christ is also of the little Children. Those that
are employed in this Kingdom have different Tasks, and undergo different sorts
of Hardship, and yet their Reward is the same. This Kingdom is Mat. 20. 1. c.
21. 23
taken from those that refuse it; whereas it is a Maxim of Temporal Sovereigns,
to force such c. 2^. 2.
as are refractory to Obedience; and this was the reason, why, after the Jews
had despised it, it was offered to the Gentiles. He that will c. 25. 1.
enjoy the Benefit of this Kingdom must not be sloathful. The richest find
always the easiest Reception in a Civil State, but the rich Man shall hardly
enter into the Kingdom of Christ. Mat. 19. 23. Mark 10, 23. Luke 12, 32.
He is accounted a good Subject in a State, who is industrious, and gathers
Riches by all lawful ways and means; but this is reckoned as superfluous in the
Kingdom of Heaven. One of the chiefest Motives which induced Mankind to enter
into Civil Societies, was, to preserve themselves and their Possessions; But
Christ says: Whoever he be of you that forsaked not all that he has, he cannot
be my Disciple. Luke 1^. 33.
And lastly of all, he says: The Kingdom of God comes not with observation;
neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there, for behold, the Kingdom of God is
within you. It would be superfluous to c. 17. 21.
allege more for the proof of it, all the rest being most of them the same in
Substance.

. 30. Though it be evident that, the Union Whether the Church be a State?
of the Believers under Christ their King, and that Mystical Body, whose Head
is Christ, the Members of all the Believers in general, cannot be considered as
a Temporal State; nevertheless, it is worth our enquiry, whether not all those
in General, that profess the Christian Doctrine, may be considered as a Body
belonging under one Civil Government, or at least, have a near resemblance to a
Civil Commonwealth? Or, which is the same in effect, Whether the Church,
according to our Savior's Intention ought to be considered as a State or
Commonwealth? We take here the Word State, in its common Acceptance, viz. for
a certain Society of Men, which being independent from any Foreign
Jurisdiction, live under the Protection of their own Sovereigns. The main
intention of this Question is, that, after we shall have made it appear, That
the Church, according to the intention of Christ and his Apostles, neither was,
nor could be a State, it may from thence be concluded, whether that Church
which pretends to a Sovereignty, considered as such be Christ's Church? But, to
trace the very original of this Question, it ought first of all to be
considered, in what What is un^er^tood in the holy Scripture by the word (...)?
Sense the Word Ecclesia or Church, is taken in the holy Scripture. The word
Ecclesia has its offspring out of the Democracy's of the Greeks whereby they
understood a Convention, Meeting, or sometimes, a Concourse of the People, or
of a considerable Part of their Citizens, in order to receive Propositions, to
consult and make Decrees, concerning Matte belonging to the Commonwealth. It is
der^ved of ^vocare, or to Call-forth, not, that there by was always understood
an Assembly, summoned out of a greater Multitude, (for I ^^ see no reason why
not all the Citizens had Right to appear in those Assemblies;) but, because
they were called out of their private Dwelling-places,, and from their ordinar^
^usiness, to meet in a public Place. So, that the original Signification of
the Word, ^^clesia, implies not that of a State, but only a certain
Qualification of a Democratical Government; it being evident, that a great
number of (...) cannot conveniently give their ass^nt to a thing, unless they
be Convened in one Place. In the Translation the LXX Interpreters, this Word is
taken for a Convention, ot Meeting of a considerable number of People; met, not
only for the exercise of Divine Worship, but also for unlawful Ends. So the
Greek word (...), is taken for the Ps. 26 5 Luke 2^. 3. 4 c ^8. 24. Acts 19 32
3^. Number. 20. 8, 10 Jos 16. 1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. c. 34, ^8
Calling and Summoning an Assembly, about Matters concerning the Commonwealth.
But in the New Testament, the word Ecclesia. is, generally, taken, either, for
all the Christians in General, wherever dispersed, or for the Congregation of
the Believers in a certain Country, City, private House, or Family. In either
sense, if we duly weigh the Attributes and Actions properly belonging to the
Church (for by these we ought to judge of the Nature of a thing in Moral Cases)
we do not meet with any thing, which has a relation to What actions are
celebrated in Scripture as belonging to the Church.
a Civil State. The true ^ncomium most frequently given to the Members of the
Church is; that they are Brothers, holy and redeemed by the Blood of Christ.
Their chief Actions are said to be, to hear the Word of God, to pray unto and
praise God, to be Charitable, to walk in the fear of God, to Fast, and to
provide for the Poor. It is spoken of St. Paul and Barnabas, That Act, 1. 4. 23.
they did Constitute Elders in those Churches, which they had planted in Asia,
where the word (...), is made ^se of, which implies as much, as having made
them by Suffrages of the Congregation; in the same manner as the Decrees used
to pass in the ancient Democracies, by the plurality of Votes, by which it
appears, that they pretended to no Absolute Power of Constituting Elders over
them, but such as (...) approved of by the Congregation. And it i^ remarkable
that these, nevertheless are said to have been made Overseers over the Church
by the Holy Act. 20 ^8 2 Chronicles. 10. 5
Ghost. So were the Judges, that were set in the Land by Jehosaphat, styled
Judges for the Lord; because, whoever is fitly qualified for any Office or
Function, not contrary to the Word of God, and has obtained the same by lawful
ways and Means, may justly be said to have been Constituted in that same Office
by God Almighty. And though it belongs most properly to the Church to
constitute Teachers, this nevertheless does not imply any Act of Sovereignty,
it being evident, that a private College or Society, subject to another
Jurisdiction, may lawfully enjoy the same Power. A Diffension being arosen
concerning an Article of Faith in the Church of Antiocha, they determined, Act.
15. 2,
that some of them should go concerning this Question then in dispute, to the
Church of Jerusalem; And these Deputies were by the rest of the Brethren,
conducted out of the Town, in their way to Jerusalem; where this Question
having been debated, and determined, they sent Word thus, to their Brethren, It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and us, etc. where it is to be observed, that to
send Deputies, concerning such Matters, as are not intended in prejudice of the
Sovereign Power; for one Congregation to consult another, concerning any
Articles of Faith; and to determine any Differences about them, are to be
looked upon, as Actions of such a nature, which do not imply a Sovereign and
Absolute Power; but may legally belong to a private College, or sometimes a
private Person; provided the Business in hand be not imposed upon its Members,
but transacted and admitted by common consent. So the Church of Jerusalem,
chose certain Men, who were to be Overseers Act. 6. 1, 1.
of the Poor, which they had a Right to do, as being a Society or College. In
the same Sense ought to be taken, what is said in the 2 Epistle to the
Corinthians, c. 8. 19. That the Churches had chosen one to travel with St. Paul
The Church is called a Flock, which is to be ^ed by the Bishops, with the pure
Word of Acts 20 28.
God, who are to preserve it from the Wolves; That is to say, from Men speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, Against those Teachers of
the Church ought to be watchful, not ceasing to Admonish their Auditors to
avoid their Snares. What concerns that passage in the 1 Epistle to the
Corinthians, c. 6. 1. and following Verses, it is apparent enough, that there
is not any Sovereign Authority or Jurisdiction granted to the Christians,
(barely considered as Christians:) But the Apostle enjoins them, that in case
of any Differences in Civil Affairs among the Members of the Church, they
should rather refer it to the Arbitration of the Brethren, than to go to Law
before the Gentiles, and fall under the Censure of being Avaricious. In the
following Chapter, it is plainly expressed, that no body, by becoming a Member
of the Church, does change his Qualification or Function, which belonged to him
as a Subject; or that Christianity is inconsistent with the Subjection to a
Civil Government; a Servant therefore, by being a Christian, does not become a
Freeman; neither is a Subject thereby absolved from the Allegiance due to his
Sovereign; concerning the Union and Modesty, which ought to be practiced in the
Church, or the Christian Congregations, where the Word of God was Preached, and
the Sacraments Ep. Romans 13 1. 2 Timothy 5 8. 14 c. 6. 1, 2.
Administered, St. Paul speaks in the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 11. 18
and following Verses; and in the 14 Chap. 34, 40 Verse. And, what sort of
Religiou^ Exercises was to be used in these Congregations, is expressed in the
1 Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 14. viz. to be Vid Ephesians. 4. 2.
Hymns, Doctrines, Tongues, Prophesies, Revelations, Interpretations; all which
are to be applied to Edify the Congregation; and in the 12 Chapter, 28 Verse,
the several Degrees and Functions of the Members of the Church, are thus
enumerated: First, Apostles, secondarily, Prophets, thirdly, Teachers; after
that, Miracles, then Gifts of Healings, Helps, Governments, Diversities of
Tongues; All which are Requisites Ephesians. 4. 11
belonging to the propagating and establishing of the Gospel, and are Gifts of
that self same Spirit, who dispenses his Gifts to every Man, as he pleases; So,
that he, that has received more noble Endowments, can therefore not claim any
Prerogative, as being a more honorable Member of this Mystical Body, or pretend
to any Jurisdiction over such as are not endowed with these Qualifications in
the same Degree as himself. And charity, which is the inseparable Attribute of
all Christians, is more 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3, 8.
noble and excellent than ^^ other spiritual Gifts. Alms are the only Taxes
which belong to the Church, and these also cannot be exacted 1 Timothy 5. 16.
by the Sovereign Authority of the Church; Though it be undeniable, that every
Church is obliged Phil. 4. 1^. Cor 9. ^^. (...).
to maintain its Ministers. In the 2 Epist. to the Corinthians, c. 11. 28. St.
Paul professe^, That the Care of all the Churches lies upon him, to strengthen
those that were weak, and to ob^^ate Scandals. And in the next following
Chapter, he says, That the Church of Corinth is an no wise inferior to other
Churches, which were planted by others, who had exercised the Apostolical
Function before him. Neither is any thing to be met withal in the Holy
Scripture, which proves the Subordination of one Church to another; Nay, the
Congregations of small Towns, and even of private Families, are often styled
Churches, as those of vast Cities; and those particular Churches, which 1 Th^^.
2. 14. 2 Th^^ 1. 4.
were planted in Judea, are called the Churches of God. In the Epistle to the
Ephesians, c. 1. 22. c. 5. 23. and to the Colossian^, c. 1 18, 24. Christ is
called the Head of the Body of the Church, which he has presented to himself a
glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be Holy and without Blemish, sanctified by Christ's Redemption, and
Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
cleansed with the washing of Water, by the Word. What Qualifications are
required in a Bishop, or a Governor of a particular Church, is expressed in
the 1 Epistle to Timothy, c. 3. 2. and following Verses; in the 2 Epistle to
Timothy, c. 4. 2. in the Epistle to Titus, c. 1. 2, 8, 9, and c. 2. 7. All
which, if duly examined, have a relation merely to the Purity of his Doctrine,
and his being blameless in his Behavior; and do not in the least savor of any
thing properly belonging to the Supreme Governors of a State. For, it is said,
that he must be the Husband of one Wife, Vigilant, Sober, of a good Behavior,
given to Hospitality, apt to Teach; Not given to Wine, no Striker, not greedy
of Filthy Lucre; but patient, not a Bawler, not Covetous. One that ruled well
his own House, having his Children in Subjection, with all Gravity; Not a
Novice, not lifted up with Pride; All which are such Virtues as belong properly
to a Teacher, or a private Person. In the 1 Epistle to Timothy, c. 3. 15. the
Church is called, the House of God; (...), or, The Pillar and Ground of Truth;
like we are used to affix Proclamations to great Pillars, to the view of every
body. Though some ancient Manuscripts refer these words; The Pillar and Ground of
Truth, to the following Sentence; the Preceding ending with the words, The
Church of the living God. Then begins a new Sentence thus: The pillar and
ground of Truth, and without Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness.
God was manifest in the Flesh, etc. So, that, in this sense, this Passage is
parallel to what Christ told St. Peter by St. Matthew, c. 16. 18. and to that
of St. John, c. 20. 31. The Titles of Honor belonging to the Christian Church,
are recited in the Epistle to the Hebrews, c. 12. 22. where it is called, The
mount of Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the
innumerable Company of Angels; the General Assembly and Church of the first
Born, which are written in Heaven, where God is the Judge of all, and Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant, and the Sperit of just Men made perfect. And in
the Revelation, c. 2. 3. the Churches of Asia are praised for their good Deeds,
and their Vices exposed, with a severe Commination, that, if they did not
repent, their Candlestick (which is the Doctrine of the Gospel) should be taken
away from them; which is sufficient to show, that the Light of the Gospel may
be extinguished in particular Churches. All these passages, if duly compared
and examined, do not furnish us with any Matter, proving the Christian Church
to be a State, or to have any resemblance to a Temporal Sovereignty. The
Condition of the primitive Church was such, as not to permit a Sovereignty
within it self.


. 31. But; besides what has been said already, a great many Reasons may be
alleged, which sufficiently prove, that it was not in the power of the
Apostles, to plant a Church, resembling in Power, to a Temporal Sovereignty, if
they had entertained any Thoughts of attempting a Design both unnecessary and
illegal. The common Security is the main End of every Government, whereby Men
are enabled to defend themselves by their united strength against all Injuries;
which cannot be performed without a considerable number of stout and well
appointed Men. But the Name of the Church, is often given to the Congregations
of an indifferent Town, nay even of private Families; And does not our Savior
himself Mat. 1^. 20.
say? Where two or three are gathered in my Name, there am I in the midst of
them. Which moved Tertullian to say: Three make up a Church, as well as a
College. And where Christ is in the midst of a Congregation, certainly there
cannot be wanting sufficient Means to obtain Salvation, viz. the Word, the
Minister, and the Sacraments; so, that the end and scope of the Christian
Religion may be attained to, even in an indifferent numerous Congregation of
the Believers. Neither does the greater number of the Believers joined in one
Church (like a vast number of People is necessary for the erecting of a State)
in it self considered, add any thing, or is necessary for the obtaining the end
of the Christian Religion, it being indifferent, in regard of obtaining
Salvation; whether a Man worship God in a great or small Congregation. From
whence this inference may be made, That, in case, the greatest part of the
Church should separate it self from the others, the rest, notwithstanding all
this, may pursue and obtain the End of the Christian Faith; Quite otherwise as
it is with Temporal Commonweaths, where, if the greatest part of its
Inhabitants happen to be rooted out, the rest will be thereby disinabled to
maintain the State. These Qualifications belonging to Subjects; especially to
such of them as are to be preferred before others in a State, either for their
Usefulness, or the honor of the Commonwealth, are not esteemed the same in the
Church, so, that he, who does not excel in Riches, Strength or Wisdom, shall
therefore not be deemed a good Christian. Furthermore; 1 Cor. 20. 21, 22.
those that pretend to lay the Foundation of a new State, must have Territories
belonging to them, where their new Subjects may settle themselves and their
Fortunes. And, all such as live, or are seated in a Commonwealth, if they
pretend to set up a new State, must either transplant themselves into another
Country, or else overturn that Government, under which they then live. So, when
Moses delivered the Israelites from the Egyptian Bondage, he led them into the
Deserts of Arabia. And, when Romulus had resolved to erect a new Commonwealth,
he first withdrew himself from the Subjection of the Kings of Alba; and such of
the Neighboring Countries, as were for being Members of that new Commonwealth,
did leave their former Habitations, and settled themselves in Rome. But neither
Christ, nor his Apostles, did ever remove Christians from their Habitations to
other Places, but allowed every body to remain in the same Station, and under
the same Government, without the least prejudice to the former Rights of their
Sovereigns over them. From whence it is evident, that the Christians, though
never so numerous, could not be in a condition to settle themselves under any
one State of their own, For, since, according to the Rules of the Christian
Religion, the Rights of Sovevereigns over their Subjects Lives and Goods, are
not taken away or impaired, and no body can be subject to two Masters, there
could be no pretense of erecting a new Sovereignty; especially in the midst of
another Commonwealth, nay, it was beyond their Power, even to enter into such a
Society, as should be in the least prejudicial to the Rights of their present
Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 1^.
Sovereigns. Who can be so ignorant in civil Affairs, as not to understand,
what prodigious Sums of Money are required for the maintainig of a State. And,
tho the Rights of Sovereigns do not extend so far as to take away from Subjects
the private disposal of their Goods; nevertheless may they lawfully restrain
the Extravagancy of their Subjects, if they pretend to dispose of their Goods
in prejudice of the State. For; if this Liberty should be granted to the
Subjects without limitation, the State, if deprived o^ its nourishment would
quickly be reduced to a languishing condition, or else, private Men might be
enabled to erect a new State in the midst of the old one, or at least, to
impair, and endanger the Public Safety. And, since those Sovereigns, under
whose Jurisdiction the Apostles lived, had the same Right over the Fortunes of
their Subjects, as other Governments have; and the Rights of Sovereigns were
not taken away, by the Doctrine of Christ, there could be no other provision
made for the maintenance of those Congregations, (as such) but what was
consistent with the lawful Rights of their Sovereigns, and as much only as
might lawfully be given by private Persons; which could not exceed a private
Fortune, and were nothing more than Voluntary Contributions or Alms; And,
whatsoever of any real Estate was attributed to these Uses, was thereby not
exempted from paying of Taxes, no more than the Estates of other Subjects.

. 32. But if we take a full view of the The inward Structure of the Church is
quite different from that of a State.
whole Structure of Civil Societies, and by what means Subjects were united
under one Government; we shall find them to differ as Heaven and Earth from
that Union, which belongs properly to the Body of a Church. If we trace that
Original of Civil Societies or Commonwealths, it is evident, that Men having
found the Inconveniences and Dangers which attended a solitary Life in the
free natural State, did enter and unite themselves into Societies for their
common Security: And having agreed to a certain Form of Government, did
constitute one certain Person, or a Counsel, who were to be the supreme
Governors of that Society; unto whom they submitted themselves and their
fortunes, for the common Benefit of that Society. But Churches were erected
upon quite another Foundation. For here, Men, being made sensible of their
miserable condition, did not by their own accord and a general agreement, turn
themselves to God Almighty, but, being on the contrary overwhelmed with
Darkness and Ignorance, so, as to be over secure, and neglecting their own
Salvation, God did send his Messengers among them, commanding all men every
where to repent. Here is not the least Acts 1^ 30.
footstep of any general Agreement of Men to erect and submit themselves under
one Church; but each particular Person for himself, without any respect or
regard to others did follow Christ and his Doctrine. And, whereas in a Civil
State, the whole family has its dependency from their Master, and enjoys all
the Privileges belonging to them under his Protection; it is quite different in
the Church, where the Wife is not obliged to follow her Husband's Religion, nor
the Servant the Master. So, were in the family of 1 Cor. 7. 12. 21.
Nacissus (who himself was not a Christian several Christian Servants, who are
saluted as such by S. Paul. And in this sense is to be ^^m 16. ^^.
taken what is said by Christ, He that loved Father or Mother, Son or Daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me: As likewise Mat. 10. 3^ c 12 5^. Luke 1^. ^6.
what is mentioned concerning Divisions, Discords, Dissensions, which are to be
raised by the Doctrine of Christ among the nearest Friends, is to be understood
of the strict Union betwixt Christ and the Believers, which surpasses, and is
to be preferred before all the Ties of Consangninity among Men. So Mat. ^0. 34.
that, if a Father, Husband or Master should turn Apostate, the Son, Wife or
Servant are not obliged to follow their footsteps. Neither is it requisite to
be solicitous about any particular or certain Form of Government in the Church,
viz. whether the same ought to be Monarchical, Aristocratical or Democratical.
For, these seveveral Forms belonging only to a Civil Government are very
preposterously made use of in the behalf of the Church, which is far different
from a Temporal State. And as Churches and Commonwealths are erected for
different Ends: so the Offices belonging to both are altogether of a different
Nature. Who is so ignorant as not to know, that for the obtaining the Ends of
Civil Societies, it was requisite to constitute various Degrees of Dignities
appertaining to the Managers of the State; whereas the most plain and natural
Distinction betwixt Christians in reference to the Church, is only that of
Teachers and Auditors.

33. Besides all this, the Teachers in a 9 There is a great difference betwixt
Teachers in a Church and the Governors of a State.
Church, do not only differ from Temporal Governors in a State, in that these
are constituted for different Ends: But the main Difference is the very nature
of their Constitution. We will not insist here upon the Point of Succession, by
which a great many Sovereigns obtain their Sovereign Power, which is quite
otherwise in the Church: But we will only treat in this place concerning the
different Constitution betwixt Teachers, and such Sovereigns, as exercise the
Supreme Civil Power, by Virtue of Election. When therefore the Sovereign Power
is lodged in any Persons by Election, the rest who have thus chosen them their
Supreme Governor, do thereby submit themselves to the Disposal of those their
Sovereigns, in such a manner as to oblige themselves, that whatsoever they
think conducing for the public Welfare, shall be taken as such by the whole
Body; and that they will always be ready to execute their Commands: Wherefore
Sovereigns are always invested with a full Power to force their Subjects to a
compliance with their Commands, by inflicting Punishments upon them. But how is
it possible to imagine that any Church or Congregation of the Believers should
ever, or ought to submit themselves so entirely to the Pleasure and Disposal of
their Teachers; as to oblige themselves to acquiesce barely in, and to follow
blindly, whatever shall be proposed by them, as conducing and leading to the
way of Salvation; it being certain without contradiction, that none of the
Believers do entirely submit themselves and their Faith to any Body but to God
Almighty, whose Will and Commands ought to be interpreted by the Teachers of
the Church, and their Auditors to be exhorted to a due Compliance with them.
For, whoever it be, that proposes any Doctrine surpassing human Reason, if he
pretends to gain credit by his Auditors, must either claim it by Virtue of his
own Authority, or by Compulsion, or by Virtue of a more Superior Power. But
any Man that offers Matters not agreeable to Reason, does thereby expose
himself, and so looses his Authority, except he can by other more powerful
means maintain his Doctrine, and gain credit with his Auditors. It was for this
Reason, that, to the Greeks, who were Men that sought after Wisdom and Reason,
the Preaching of the Apostles was Foolishness. And S. Paul was for the same
Reason nicknamed 1 Cor. 1. 23.
a Babbler by the Athenian Philosophers. Neither is any human Power capable of
enforcing Acts 17. 18.
the Mysteries of Faith and the Christian Doctrine upon People; for which
reason Christ told his Apostles, Go and Teach, and Believe, and that with all
your hearts; to obtain which, all human means which imply any Temporal
Advantages, or are forcible in their own nature, are to be taken for Trifles
and insufficient. There is then no other Way left, but that such Doctrines must
be verified by a Superior Being or Principle, Mark 16. 20.
viz. the Grace of God, which always accompanies the Gospel, and those Miracles
wherewith the Apostles anciently authorized their Acts 14. ^. Heb. 2 4.
Doctrine; Though it is at the same time undeniable, that since the Gospel is
sufficiently spread abroad in the World, we do not now any more stand in need
of such Miracles: In the same manner as the Thunder and Lightning which were
heard at the Publishing of the Ten Commandments, were never repeated afterward
among the Jews. The Christians therefore have submitted their Faith and Reason
only to Christ, whose Authority is unquestionable, as being God himself, and
was testified by his Father's Voice from Heaven, when he said, This is my
beloved Son, in whom Mat. ^. 17. Luke 3. 22.
I am well pleased. And, as the People of Israel willingly submitted their
Faith to Moses, as soon as he had given them plain Demonstrations of his Divine
Commission; so were Exodus 20. 19.
they obliged to subimt their Faith to the Apostles, after they had once
verified their Divine Commission by their Miracles: Though it cannot be denied,
but that their Doctrine did sometimes produce good Effects without Miracles. It
is therefore very observable, that when they preached and taught their Doctrine
to such as were ^well versed in the Old Testament, they did not take it amiss,
if their Auditors examined their Words, whether they were consonant with the
Prophesies contained therein. From whence it is sufficently Acts 1^ ^^
apparent, that no body ought to engage himself unto a blind Obedience of such
Teachers, as cannot verify their immediate Divine Commission by Miracles, so
as to make his Faith absolutely dependant from their Doctrine without
Exception, but only so far, as their Doctrine is sound agreeable to the
Doctrine of those who had given manifest demonstrations of their divine
Authority. And for this Reason it is, (...) it ^^ not sufficient for a Teacher
in the Church to say, so it is, and so it shall and must ^^: But he lies under
an indispensible Obligation of ma^^ing it plain and apparent, that, what (...)
to his Auditor, is absolutely (...) to the Doctrine published by Christ and his
Apostles. Neither ought the Auditors p^^ their Faith upon the Authority of
their Teachers, but to refer themselves to the Authority of God and his Word,
which is the Touchstone by which the Teachers Doctrine into be examined and
approved. The Schools of Philosophers used to take their Names from their Chief
Teachers or Founders, as we may observe in the Schools of Plato, Aristoteles
and Zeno: But the Church ought to have no other Name, but that she is the
Church of God or Christ. It was upon that score when S. Paul rebuked the
Corinthians, because some of them said, they were of Paul, some of Apollo, some
of Cephas, and 1 Cor. 1 12
some of Christ. So that since the holy Scripture is now established among us,
Christians ought not to be like the Disciples of Pythagoras, who used for their
Motto, that old Saying (...), He himself has spoken it: But they have
sufficient Authority to look themselves into the Holy Scripture, and to examine
whether the Doctrine of their Teachers be agreeable to the Doctrine of our
Savior. For, Christ, when he said, search ^^e Scriptures, did not only speak
to his Disciples, but to his Auditors in general. And Joh. 5. 39. 1 These ^ 21.
1 John 4^
S. Paul bid us to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good. S.
John says, that we shall try the Spirits, whether they are of God. Neither can
I conceive how the Examination of our selves, which S. Paul so highly
recommends to all that intend to be 1 Cor 11. 28
Partakers of the Lords Supper, can be duly performed without meditating the
Scriptures. For, in this case, I take the condition of a Teacher and of a
Physician, to be quite different; it being only required in the latter to
understand the Art of Physic, and to apply the same to his Patients, which may
be done with good Success, though they be never so ignorant. But it is not
sufficient for a Teacher of a Church to be alone versed in the Articles of the
Christian Religion; that Church being to be deemed most excellent, where the
Auditors are not inferior to their Teachers in the Cognition of the Mysteries
of the Faith. For the Apostles did not shun to declare unto Mankind all the
Counsel Act. ^0. ^7.
of God, having not committed the Christian Doctrine to the care and custody of
one particular Person, who was to be the only Interpreter of it, as the
Sibyllin Oracles were anciently at Rome in the Custody of the Decemviri. And
because Christians do not build their Faith upon any Human Authority, but upon
the Word of God alone, they are Joh. 6. 1^. 1 These. 4^
said to be taught of God. For which Reason S. Paul utterly denied that they
had any Dominion over the Faith of the Corinthians; or, which is the same in
effect, that they could exercise any Dominion over them under the (...) of
Faith. For the rest, as Christians (...).
which are well versed in the Scriptures, may, without great difficulty, try
their Teacher's Doctrine by the Touchstone of the Holy Scripture: So the
Catechism and other compendious Instructions relating to the chiefest Articles
of the Christian Faith may be sufficient for those of a meaner Capacity,
wherein all Christians ought to be well instructed in their younger Years, both
by their Parents and Teachers of the Church, this being likely to prove more
useful to those of an indifferent Capacity than all the other Subtilities and
Controversies, which in themselves are not absolutely necessary, or requisite
to be understood by every Christian in particular. And if we duly consider
what is required by the Apostle for the obtaining of Romans 10. 9, 10. ^^m. 1. ^.
2 ^^m. 2. ^^
Salvation, we shall find that this Knowledge may be attained to without much
Difficulty; because the Confession that Jesus was Christ, the Son of God, is
the Foundation Stone, and, as it was, the Center of the Christian Religion, and
that this Article was chiefly (...). 20. 3.
opposed by the Gates of Hell in the time of the Primitive Christians, the
Apostle S. John prescribes this as a general Rule to be particularly taken
notice of by such as are of a mean Capacity: Hereby know you (said he) the
Spirit of God: Every Spirit that confesses, (...) 4 ^. ^.
that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God; and every Spirit that
confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God. Though
from hence no Inference ought to be made, as if Christian may neglect, or ought
not also to be well instructed concerning all the other Articles of Faith, or
that it is indifferent for any Christian to believe, what he please^,
concerning the rest of the Articles of the Christian Doctrine.

. 34. It being then evident, that there (...).
is a great difference betwixt the condition of particular Churches, and that
of a State or Commonwealth: It may further he enquired into, whether perhaps
those Churches united don't make up a Body like to that of a gr^^t State? For
it is certain, that the Word Church is in the Scriptures attributed to the
whole Body of the Believers wheresoever dispersed throughout the World; yet so,
that there is not the least appearance (if a du^ regard he had to our Savior's
Intention) of a Design to erect a State. Go you into all the World, and Mark.
16. ^^
Preach the Gospel to every Creature, are the Words of our Savior to his
Disciples. Here is no mention made of any Persons, who should be the supreme
Governors over the rest (as is usual, and absolutely necessary in a State) nor
any certain Place of Residence appointed for these Governors, from whence the
rest should receive their Orders. Neither is the least care taken by what means
they should maintain a Correspondency with their capital City: And truly,
considering the vast Extent of the World, and the prodigious Distance of those
Countries, where the Apostles Preached the Gospel: (besides, that there was a
mortal Enmity betwixt some of these States) these were unsurmountable Obstacles
for the settling and maintaining a Correspondency betwixt them. So that it does
not appear, by what means all the Christians could be united under one State.
It is not denied but that there is often mention made in the Scripture, of the
Union of the Christians; as in the 1 Cor. c. 12. 12, 13. As the body is one,
and had many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one
body: So also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit. Christ says in the 10. Chap. of S. John, ver.
16, My Sheep hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one shepherd. Which
shows, that all the Sheep are brought into one Flock by hearing the Voice of
their Pastor, who is Christ. So it is said in the Epistle to the Ephesians,
chapter 4. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Forbearing one another in love, endeavoring the
Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body and one Spirit,
even as you are called in one hope of your calling: One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all. And Christ, in his farewell Sermon, does
Joh. 13
chiefly recommend to his Disciples Charity and Unity, as the true Badges of
Christianity: And the Name of Brother which particularly Vid. 1 Cor. 13. Colos.
3. 14. Gal. 6. 10.
belongs to the Christians, seems to imply a general union betwixt them. But if
we consider the Nature of these holy Ties, we may easily observe them to have
been in no ways adapted to the Constitution of a temporal Government; but
properly belonging to the Establishment and Union of a mystical Body. For, as
none of them requires of implies any dependency from a Temporal Power, so they
may belong in common to all Christians, though living in far distant Countries,
and several Jurisdictions.

. 35. Neither does it appear, for what end (...) for Ch^^stians (...) united
under one State.
or purpose all the Christians in General should be reduced under one State.
For, each Congregation or Church may with more ^ase and convenience constitute
Teachers in their Churches, sitly qualified for the Ministry of the Gospel, and
have a more watchful Eye over those who are known, and near at hand, than can
be expected from one single Person, (though never so wise) living at a great
distance; who being besides this, ovewhelmed with multitude of Businesses, is
forced to see with other Peoples Eyes, and to hear with other Peoples Ears.
Neither is it a sufficient Reason, what is alleged, that for the composing and
determining of such Differences as may arise betwixt the Teachers of the
Church, or betwixt them and others, a General Court ought to be established in
the Christian Church, it being evident, that such Cases can be no where
determined with more convenience, than in the same Government where they live;
and that there cannot any sufficient reason be given, why they should not
acknowledge the same Jurisdiction with the rest of their fellow Subjects. There
is one objection which has something of color in it; for it is alleged, That
if all the Christian Churches throughout the World were united under one Head,
(whether under one Person, or a certain Assembly, matters not) the unity of
Faith might be better preserved, Controversies sooner composed, and Heresies
suppressed or quite extinguished; but if the whole matter be duly weighed, it
will appear, that such an Ecclesiastical Monarch may be very easily spared in
the Church. For, granting such Whether it be necessary to set up a general
Judge of all Controversies in the Church?
an universal Judge of all Controversies arising in the Church, he must be
supposed to be infallible, (and that beyond all contradiction) as well in point
of Matter of Fact, as to the lawfulness of the Case; for it may so happen, that
it be plain enough, whether a Doctrine be erroneous or not, when at the same
time, it may be disputable, whether the said Error ought to be laid to a
certain Man's Charge or not? For, if an Appeal be allowed from this Judge,
after Sentence pronounced, there will never be an end of the Process. It is
therefore absolutely requisite, that this infallible Authority should be so
manifestly proved, that it cannot reasonably be called in question. For, unless
this Authority be unquestionable for the decision of this Controversy, we must
run from this Judge to another, who must also be supposed to be Infallible, and
so in infinite; it being granted by all, without Exception, that no body ought
to be a Judge in his own Case. And, since this Privilege of being Infallible,
could not be granted by any body, but by God alone; (the whole Body of
Christians, being not invested with such a Power) it must plainly be proved out
of the Scriptures, that this particular Prerogative and Authority was granted
to one certain Person, for him and his Successors to decide all Controversies
concerning the Articles of Faith, without being liable to any Error. But, of
this there is not the least footstep in the holy Scripture; Nay, the Apostles,
when they were sent by Christ into all the World, were endued with the same
Spirit, and had an equal Authority. So, that there is but one way now left, for
the attaining to the true Knowledge of the Christian Religion, both for the
Teachers in the Church, and all Believers in general, which is, to study the
Scriptures devoutly, and without Intermission. And whoever pretends to
Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 14. 15.
or to a prophetical Spirit, ought by undeniable Demonstrations to justify his
Pretensions. These Qualifications, which the Apostle Paul describes in the 2
Epistle to Timothy, c. 2. 24, 25, ought to be applied to all Bishops and
Teachers in general: And the Servant of the Lord, he says, must not strive, but
be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach patiently. In meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth. Out of what has been said, it is apparent, that, if
any one now adays, does pretend to any Prerogative, or Infallibility in
deciding Controversies as to matter of Faith, he ought to be endued with such
extraordinary Qualifications, as are most requisite for the due Explaining and
Interpreting the Sense of the holy Scripture, and this in so high a degree, as
that the other Teachers in the Church are not able to stand in Competition with
him, nay, that even all their joint Endeavors, in this kind, are not to be
compared to his Judgment. Besides this, it must be supposed, that this
universal Judge (except he be to be looked upon as an useless Engine) must be
invested with a Power to execute his Decrees, and to oblige all Christians to
acquiesce in his Judgment; For, if it be supposed, that his Decrees have no
other force, than as far as they influence People by the force of Truth, they
would be either useless, or else this Judge in vain pretends thereby to any
further Prerogative, but what he has in common with other Christians that apply
themselves to the Study of the holy Scripture. Furthermore, this obliging Power
must either have been obtained by a peculiar Privilegde granted by God
Almighty, or by a general consent of the Christians, or by an inherent Right to
a Sovereignty over all the Christian Churches. As for a privilege granted by
God, or the general consent of the Christian Churches, there is not the least
Proof of it, as far as ever I could find; And as to the pretended Sovereign
Power, its legal Title ought to be proved by such Documents as are suitable to
so great a Pretension. For it is a very insignificant Proof, to allege in a
case of such Moment Tradition, and a long continued Usurpation, which adds
nothing to the right of a long continued illegal Possession, and cannot be
taken for a solid Foundation, whereupon to build a real Pretension to such a
Sovereignty; for it is possible, that, whereas something of a Prerogative was
intended in the primitive times, the same, in process of Time, has been abused,
and consequently degenerated into an insufferable Tyranny. We cannot therefore,
but look upon such a Tradition, a^^ a^ not the least foundation in the
Scriptures, as very suspicious; especially, when we consider, that such a
Sovereign Power is quite contrary to the true Genius of the Christian Religion.
It may perhaps be objected, that nothing else can be so powerful to put a stop
to all Controversies; but it ought to be considered also, that thereby the
worsest sort of Slavery must be introduced, worse than that whereof Tacitus
complains in his time: Adempto, per Inquisitiones, and loquendi audiendioque
(...), ^^ que ipsacum voce memoria perdatur, si tam in nostra potestate foret
oblivisci, quam tacere. By the Inquisition the benefit of our Tongue and Ears
is taken away at once; and if it was as easy to control Men's Memories, as it
is to bridle their Tongues, the very remembrance of things past, had been long
ago abolished among us. Truly, by such Methods, perhaps the Commonwealth may be
stocked with Hypocrites, and dissembling Heretics, but few will be brought
over to the Orthodox Christian Faith. As it is therefore absolutely requisite,
that a hidden Ulcer should be laid open, whereby it may the sooner be purged
from its Malignancy, and proper Remedies more immediately be applied to the
affected Part; So, is it much conducing in the Church, that such Scruples and
Erroneous Opinions as have seized our Minds should be brought to light, that by
applying timely Remedies, they may be removed before they are gone too far;
than by couching them over to let them run into a malignant Suppuration, which
at last may turn to an incurable Gangren. It is also to be taken notice of,
that if this Ecclesiastical Sovereignty be granted, there must of necessity be
a double headed Sovereign Power in one State; it being evident, that Subjects
would be obliged to acknowledge the Authority of this Ecclesiastical Judge in
point of Controversy, as well, and in the same measure, as they do the
Authority of their civil Governors in civil Actions. And, since this
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty has a different scope from that, for which Civil
Societies were erected, it must consequently be of a quite different nature,
and make up a particular Sovereignty. Wherefore, if both these should happen to
be joined in one Person, he becomes thereby at once master over our Lives and
Consciences: But, if this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction be lodged in another
Person, he must either at the same time be acknowledged to have a Power of
executing his Decrees, by his own Prerogative, or else to have only an
Authority of giving Sentence, leaving the Execution of it to the civil
Magistrates. If the first of these two be supposed, it is evident, that a
double headed Sovereignty must carry along with it great Inconveniences and
Distractions; and if the latter, those that exercise the Sovereignty in the
State, must be looked upon as Executioners only to this holy Judge. All these
Things duly considered, as they must needs occasion great Convulsions in the
State, so no man that is not beyond his Wits will be apt to imagine, (unless it
be made appear by most evident Proofs) that Christ intended to introduce, by
his Doctrine, such pernicious Diseases into civil Societies. For, though it is
impossible, that no Controversies should be raised in the Church, like Christ
himself has foretold it in the Parable by Matthew, c. 13. 24. And St. Paul in
the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, c. 11. 19. Nevertheless, if any Controversy
does arise, he that is the first Author of it must of necessity maintain his
Opinion, under a color at least of its being agreeable to the Scriptures. For,
if any one should pretend to introduce a new Article of Faith, without
endeavoring to prove it out of the holy Scripture, he would be looked upon as
a mad Man, though he should call to his aid all the Sophistications of the
Philosophers. And if he should insist upon the Authority of Traditions without
the Scriptures, this would only serve to disclose the weakness of that
Foundation whereupon he builds his Doctrine. But, if any one should make an
attempt against any Article of Faith, received already as such, in the Church,
he is scarce worth taking notice of, unless he should be able to allege at
least, some specious Reasons out of the holy Scripture for his Opinion. And, in
such a case (especially if his Endeavors seem to proceed from a real Love to
Truth) he ought not to be absolutely slighted, without being heard, and his
Reasons examined. So, that then the whole decision of the Matter must depend
from a right Interpretation of the several passages in the holy Scripture
relating to this Controversy; And to find out this Interpretation, I see not
any necessity, which obliges us to have recourse to a Sovereign Power, or any
infallible Authority, but only to such M^ans, as ^^ most proper for the
searching into, and find^ng out the genuine Sense of other Authors; viz. by a
true Knowledge of the Tongue, and a diligent search into the nature and whole
s^ame of the Christian Religion, and by duly comparing the Articles of Faith,
and observing their Annology and Connection; Whosoever besides this, has a
natural good Judgment, and is not propossessed with Prejudice, private
Interest, or Passion, it will o^ no such difficult Task for him, to find out
the genuine Sense of the Scriptures, and to demonstrate it so plainly, that
such as oppose him, will, by the consent of all Understanding People, be judged
to be in the wrong So did our Savior at several times convince the Pharis^es
and Saduceans out of the whole Scripture, and by the force of his Arguments
taken from thence, that they were not able to make any further reply. And why
should it not be reasonably supposed, that in each Christian Church, there may
be found a sufficient number of Teachers, capable of disproving such as pretend
to introduce among them Innovations, and false Doctrines. But, supposing that
these alone should prove insufficient, they may call to their aid those of the
Neighboring most famous Churches. From whence it appears, that there is no
absolute Necessity of acknowledging a Judge General of Controversies in the
Church. And, put the Case, that those that dissent from the Church, are so
numerous, as to have spread their Doctrine all over the State, this Judge will
prove useless in his Office; For, if he pretends to have recourse to violent
means to make them renounce their false Opinion, they will in all probability
oppose force to force; But, if he takes the other way, and endeavors to
convince them of their Earor by Arguments taken out of the holy Scripture; this
may be done as well by other Teachers sitly qualified for their Office, than by
such a Judge General in the Church. Neither ought we to be so over timorous as
to believe, that Errors should in so much prevail over Truth, as to domineer
always and every where over it, it being not to be questioned, but that by help
of the most clear-sighted Teachers in the Church, these Clouds may be soon
dispersed, and Truth again appear in its splendour. I appeal to Experience,
whether not a great many Heresies by the only help of prevailing Truth, without
the assistance of such a Judge, or any human Force have by degrees dwindled
away, and at last quite disappeared. It must be confessed, there are some
erroneous Opinions, which being nourished and maintained by a Temporal
Interest, and certain Reasons of State of some particular Churches, are not so
easy to be suppressed. Of this kind are those Controversies, wherein the
Protestants differ with the Papishes; All which, if duly considered, are so
deeply entangled with the Interest of the Popish Monarchy, that it is
impossible for the Roman Catholics to recede an Inch from the point of the
controverted Articles, without diminution of their Authority, and endangering
their great Revenues; so, that all hopes of an Union betwixt them and the
Protestants, are in vain, unless the latter can resolve to submit themselves
under the same Popish Yoke which they have shaken off so long ago. I cannot
sufficiently admire that gross way of Arguing, made use of by the Papishes,
when they talk of nothing else but the Authority of their Church, telling us,
that, if we would but once acknowledge the same, all the Differences and
Questions concerning the chief Articles of Faith would fall a-course, making
themselves both Party and Judge, and pretending to give Sentence in their own
Case according to their own Testimony. They always make use of this Sophism,
that they attribute only to themselves the glorious Name of the True Church,
excluding all orher Christians from it, but such as are of the same Communion
with them. And, to back this pretense, nothing is more common among them, than
to lay aside all manner of demonstrative Arguments founded in the Scriptures,
and in lien thereof, to find out new Methods (unknown to the Apostles) of
Converting People; and to endeavor to establish their Authority by all manner
of violence against those, that dare to maintain Truth in opposition to their
Doctrine. For which reason God has threatened in a most peculia manner to
destroy this Monster of a State. An Example of Controversy composed in the
times of the Apostles.


. 37. The true Method of composing Controversies arisen in the Church, is
taught us by what is set us as an Example of this kind in the Acts, c. 15.
where it deserves our most particular Observation, that the Controversy then in
question was concerning a main Point in the Christian Religion, viz. Whether a
man might be saved without being circumcised according to the Institution of
Moses. For S. Paul, in the Epistle to the Galatians, c. 5. 2. had positively
declared: If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. And it is
very remarkable, that this Question was started in the very Infancy of the
Church, when the Canon of the Church was not perfected, and there were not
wanting living Testimonies of such as had received the Doctrine of Christ from
his own mouth, and were endued with the Holy Ghost, and Instructed with an
Apostolical Authority. Neither is it to be doubted, but that Paul and Barnabas
were endued with a sufficient Share of Wisdom and Understanding of the Holy
Scripture, for the reducing of this Error; as plainy appears out of the 5.
verse of the above alleged Chapter, that they opposed Act. 1^.
such forcible Reasons against this erroneous Opinion, that those that were
come thither out of Judea, were not able to contradict them: So they appealed
to the Authority of the Church of Jerusalem, which being the V 2.
Spring from whence the Christian Religion was derived into other Parts of the
World, they hoped to be backed in this Opinion by such of the Members of that
Church, as did not without some Reluctance brook the Abolishing of the Jewish
Synagogue; and that they were not quite beyond their guess, but met with a
great many there that were addicted to the same Opinion, appears out of the 5th
Verse in the same 15th Chapter. To prevent therefore any further Disturbance,
which might be raised in the Antiochian Church by reason of this Controversy,
Paul and Barnabas, with some others, were deputed to go to the Church of
Jerusalem, to decide this Controversy. When they came thither a Convocation
was called, consisting not only of the Apostles and Presbyters, but also of the
other Members of that Church, not excepting those of the contrary side: After
their Reasons had been heard, the Case was in debate a considerable time; and
at last the whole matter having been sufficiently disputed on both sides, then
Peter rose up, not as an universal Judge, or who pretended to decide the
Controversy by Virtue of his Authority, but his Proceeding was by
demonstrative Arguments, telling them, what prodigious Effects had been wrought
among the Gentiles by his preaching the Gospel to them, after the Vision which
appeared to him at Joppe; Where Act. 11 9
he thus argues: That since the Holy Ghost had in the same measure purified the
Hearts of those Believers that were uncircumcised, it would be unreasonable to
put this Yoke upon the Neck of the Christians, the more, because they were not
to be saved by Circumcision, but through the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Paul and Barnabas, being of the same Opinion, did declare at the same time what
Miracles and Wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them, which would
not have been done, if they were to be taken for unsanctified, as being not
circumcised, or if Circumcision was an essential Part of the Christian Faith.
After all had held their Peace, that is to say, no body further appearing who
could contradict them or oppose their Arguments, James at last arose, declaring
that the Vision of Peter did agree to the Words of the Prophets, and that
therefore it was his Opinion that such among the Centiles as did turn to Christ
ought not to be troubled. But that they also in some measure might gratify
themselves, and to induce them not to fly the Conversation of such of the
Gentiles as received the Christian Faith, it was thought sit that these should
abstain from Pollution of Idols, from Fornication, from things strangled, and
from Blood, all which was forbidden by the Mosaic Law, and partly disagreeable
to the Law of Nature; as Fornication, which nevertheless was a common Vice
among the Gentiles; the rest being things indifferent in themselves, might
easily be let alone, rather than give Offense to a Brother. This having been
approved of by common Consent, and as it appears, even by those that were of a
contrary Sentiment before, a Synodical Epistle was writ to the Church at
Antioch, in the name not only of those Apostles and Elders, but also of the
Brethren of the Church of Jerusalem. Judas and Silas were deputed to carry this
Epistle, who being arrived at Antioch, did not publish it in the nature of a
Law, but, having delivered it to the Brethren, (from whom it met with a general
Approbation) they exhorted them with many words to a due Observance of it.

. 38. If the whole matter be duly weighed, Some Observations concerning the
natura and use of Councils.
it furnishes us with several Observations, which may not a little contribute
toward the Explaining the Nature of Ecclesiastical Councils. In the first
place, it is most apparent, that these Councils are not such Bodies whose
Authority is everlasting for the Government of the Church: But that they are
extraordinary Convocations or Conventions, composed out of some selected and
most eminent Men of the Church, who are called together for the composing
certain Controversies arisen in the Church. And, because those Councils were
very frequent in the Church from its Primitive times, this alone may serve as a
convincing argument, that the Church never acknowledged one infallible Judge
for the deciding of Controversies. For, to what purpose were so many Heads set
to work, if one single Person was sufficient and infallible in the Decision of
them? And (what is yet more) if the Decrees of the Councils had only their
obliging Force from his Confirmation. Furthermore, those that compose such a
Council are not to be considered as Members of an Assembly or College, who by
the Majority of Votes can so absolutely determine the Question in hand, as to
be obligatory to all Christians in general; Truth generally speaking, not
depending from the Plurality of Suffrages; much less, can they pretend to a
legislative Power vested in them so as to impose what Laws or Canons they
please upon the Church. But, they may be considered no otherwise than Men
deputed by the Churches for the examining the true Grounds of the Controversies
laid before them, and for searching for the Decision of them in the Holy
Scripture; So that these Churches are not obliged to acquiesce in this Decision
any further than they find it agreeable to the Word of God. For it may chance
to fall out so that a Controversy which appears at first sight very intricate
and difficult, afterward being well weighed and the Reasons thereof duly
examined on both sides, is very plain and easy to be determined. But if any
moral Decrees are made by a Council, the same are to be taken to have no
obliging Power, but what proceeds either from a preceding Commission and
Authority, or from the Approbation of these Churches; so that Chuncils have no
coercive Power over the Church. I cannot but touch, by the by, upon this Head,
viz. that this Assertion; The Council is above the Pope, is of such a Nature as
will easily gain credit with all that are guided by right Reason, or the
Scriptures. For, who can be so stupid as not to be sensible, that a great many
learned Men, who with joint labor apply themselves to the search after Truth,
are to be preferred before the Judgment of one single Person, and that
oftentimes of such a one, who has but a very indifferent insight into the Holy
Scriptures and Divinity. This seems to imply somewhat of a Contradiction, that
this Point is asserted by the self-same People, who make the Papal Chair the
Center of the Church, and the Pope the O^cumenick Bishop: For, the Romish
Church pretends to be a Monarchical State; but this Assertion of the
Superiority of the Councils, favors most of an Aristocracy. But this Riddle
may be unfolded in a few Words: The French Clergy allows the Pope to be the
Supreme Head of the Church, as far as they find it suitable with their
Interest. But whenever he attempts any thing against them, or the States Policy
of that Kingdom, the old Song of the Liberty of the Gallican Church, and the
ancient Doctrine of the Sorbone is revived, which serves the French Clergy now
and then for a Pretext, to persuade the vulgar sort of People, that the
Gallican Church has not been polluted with those gross and abominable Errors
as are introduced in the Church of Rome, The next thing to be considered is,
that it is most evident, that if a Controversy arises, which may be decided
within the Body of one Church, there is no Occasion for the Communicating in
such a Point with other Churches; And, that, in case one Church alone is not
stocked sufficiently with able Teachers for the composing of the Difference,
and therefore must call to its Aid those of other Churches, it is superfluous
to call together a greater number than may be sufficient for the accomplishment
of the Work. So did the Church of Antioch refer the whole Controversy to those
of Jerusalem, without giving the least Trouble to those of Phenice and Samaria,
though their Deputies passed in their Way thither through both these Places.
Besides this, the Deputies that are sent, ought to receive their Authority and
Instruction from their several Churches, whom they represent, because no Church
has without reserve submitted herself to the Determination of her Teachers, but
only as far as their Doctrine is agreeable to the Word of God. Neither are the
Words in the Epistle to the Hebr. c. 13. 17. to be understood any otherwise
than with this Limitation. Besides this, it is absolutely requisite that such
Persons as have raised a Controversy should be heard in the Council, that
their Reasons should be duly examined, weighed, and proceeded upon, according
to the Rules prescribed in the Holy Writ. And if the Controversy does not
barely concern a Point of Doctrine, but implies a Temporal Interest, those that
have any Share in it cannot pretend to a Power of deciding the Point in
Prejudice of the adverse Party. From whence it is evident, that the Points in
question betwixt the Protestant Church and the Papal Chair cannot be composed
by any Council, their Difference arising not barely from Point of Doctrine, but
about Domination, Temporal Dignities, and vast Revenues. Nor is there the least
Probability of any Composition betwixt these two Parties by way of Arbitration;
For who is it that can pretend to decide so great a Point? Who is likely to be
accepted of as an Arbitrator by both Parties? The Protestants, in all
likelihood, will not be so foolish as to submit themselves and their Case to
the Determination of any Assembly consisting all of Roman Catholics their
sworn Enemies; nor can they have the Imprudence as to ask it. And as for the
Pope, he likes his Station too well, to put it to the Hazard of an Arbitration.
But if an Assembly should be proposed to consist of an equal Number chosen by
each Party, this Expedient would scarce take, it being to be feared that they
would scarce keep within the bounds of Moderation, and that the Assembly would
appear sometimes not unlike the Feast of the Centaures.

. 39. It having been hitherto demonstrated In what condition the Churches were
under the Pagan Emperors.
at large, that the Church is no State, we must consider in the next place,
unto what kind of moral Bodies the Churches have the nearest relation, as they
were in primitive Times under the Pagan Princes. It is evident enough, That
they were of the nature of Colleges, or such Societies, where a great many are
joined for the carrying on a certain Business, under this limitation
nevertheless, as not to be independent from the Civil Jurisdiction. Concerning
the nature of the Colleges and Corporations, Jacobus Cujachus may be consulted
before all others, 7 Observe. 30, and 16; and Observe. 3, and 5. And it is here
very well worth our most particular Observation, that such Societies as were
erected for the exercise of Religion were by Public Authority allowed of in
the ancient Roman Empire. This is attested among a great many others, by
Athanagoras, in the beginning of his Apology for the Christians, when he says:
It is by your Command, you greatest of Princes, that several Nations live
according to their own Customs and Laws, and every one, without being
controuled by any Penal Statutes, freely exercise the same Religion in which he
was educated. And thus he proceeds immediately after: All Mankind offer their
Sacrifices, and use other Religious Ceremonies, according to the Custom of
their Native Country. This Liberty of Conscience was, among others, the true
cause, why the Christian Religion in so short a time did spread it self all
over so vast an Empire, and why in the beginning, very few opposed its
Progress, the Magistrates not thinking it belonging to their Province to
intermeddle with it, And this is one Reason, why we never read of the Apostles
having desired leave from the Civil Magistrates to preach the Gospel, or to
plant a Church. Though another Reason may be given, why the Apostles were not
obliged to ask leave from the Civil Magistrates for the Constituting of
Christian Churches; because the Apostles had received their immediate Authority
of Preaching the Gospel from him, who is the King of kings, and by whose
Command all Mankind were then called to repentance. From what has been said,
this rational Conclusion may be drawn; That the Apostles had not only a Power
to plant Churches in all places, where they found their Auditors inclined to
receive the Doctrine of the Gospel, but that, also in all other places, whither
this Doctrine was transplanted, the Believers might enter into such a Society,
or plant a Church upon their own accord, without any Commission or Permission
for so doing, from the Apostles; but, that, pursuant to our Savior's
Expression, it was sufficient, if two or three were inclined to meet in his
Name. If we trace the true nature of these Societies, which are constituted by
a free Choice and Consent of certain Men. we may easily find to contain, all of
them, something resembling a Democracy, where such Matters as concern the whole
Body of the Society are to be dispatched by common Consent, and where no
particular Person can claim any further Power over the rest, than what he has
received by their joint Consent. From whence it may be rationally concluded,
that at the first beginning, the Power of Constituting Teachers, and other
Ministers of the Church, was originally lodged in the whole Church, or, the
whole Congregation of the Believers. And, though it is unquestionable, that in
the first primitive Church, Teachers were constituted by the Apostles in a
great many places; nevertheless the Greek word (...), (which implies something
of a Democracy, and is often used in the Scriptures in this Case) argues
sufficiently, that this was not done without the Approbation of the Church. It
would be a hard Task to prove, that the Apostles did constitute Teachers
themselves in all lesser Towns, or that they preached the Gospel in all lesser
Places and Villages. It seems rather probable, that the Gospel was published by
the Apostles in great Cities, and other places of note; from whence it was
communicated unto other Places; and, that such Churches, as were not provided
with Teachers, Bishops, or Presbyters by the Apostles themselves, or their
special Authority, used either to choose those very Persons to that Function,
who were the first Preachers of the Gospel among them, or any others, whom they
esteemed to be endowed, before others, with the Gift of Teaching. If we consult
the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans, it seems that the Gospel had been taught
at Rome, before ever Peter and Paul came thither; And the High Treasurer of the
Chap. 16.
Queen Candaces, who is generally believed to have first carried the Doctrine
of the Gospel to Aethiopia, and to have been the first Founder of the Christian
Churches in those Parts, received no Ordination as a Bishop or Presbyter from
Philip, after his Baptism. Neither did Acts 8.
Christ or his Apostles prescribe any certain Form, to be used in the
Ordination of Bishops, as he did in the use of the Sacraments; which seems to
prove that for the obtaining of this Function, there is nothing more required,
than for the Person to be called by the Church, and to have the Gift of
Teaching. It is not to be denied, but that the Ordination of Ministers, and
Imposition of Hands by the Bishops and Presbyters is a very laudable and useful
Ceremony, and ought to be received as such, with this restriction nevertheless,
that the same need not to be deemed so absolutely necessary, as if without it
no Person ought to be taken for a true Minister of the Church; especially since
these miraculous Gifts which accompanied that Ceremony in the Infancy of the
Primitive Church are many Ages past, become useless. The Church, like all other
Colleges, 1 Timothy 4: 14.
have power to collect Stipends for their Ministers, and to make Collections
for the Use of the Poor; but in a different degree from that which belongs to
Civil Magistrates or Sovereigns, who levy Taxes. and have a Power to force
their Subjects to a compliance with their Commands; But, in the Church this
Power is founded upon the mere Liberality and free Consent of all the Believers
in general, who being made sensible of their Duty of paying a Workman his
Stipend, and relieving those in Distress, ought not to refuse such Acts of
Justice and Humanity. It properly belongs to all 1 Cor. 8. 2, 3. c. 2. 12, 13.
c. 9. 5, 9, 7.
Colleges as well as Churches, to have a Power to make, with joint Consent of
their Members, such Statutes, as may conduce toward the obtaining the Ends of
their Society, provided they do not interfere with the legal Rights of their
Sovereigns. Of this kind are these Statutes, which St. Paul recommends to the
Corinthians in his first Epistle, in the 7 Chapt. If any one acted contrary to
these Rules, he deservedly was to receive Correction, or to undergo such a
Penalty as was dictated by the Statute, and which was to be laid upon him not
by Virtue of an Inherent Power in the College, but pursuant to their Contract.
And, though Colleges have not any Power or Jurisdiction over their Members,
unless what is absolutely requisite for the obtaining the true end of each
Society, or else has been granted to them by their Sovereigns; Nevertheless, it
is often practiced in these Societies, and may be done without prejudice to the
Rights of their Sovereigns, that, if any Differences arise betwixt the Members
of one and the same College, these are composed by the Interposition and
Arbitration of the rest of the Members of that College or Society, to the End,
that a mutual good Correspondency may be cultivated among them. In which sense
is to be taken the Admonition which St. Paul gives to the Corinthians
concerning this point in the 1 Epistle, in the 6 Chapter, in the first and
following Verses. Lastly, because many Vices were at the time of the first
publishing of the Gospel in vogue among the Heathens, which were not punishable
by the Pagan Laws, they being more encouraged to the observance of Moral Duty
by the prospect of Honors than by any civil Commands; And, the Christians
believing it more peculiarly belonging to themselves to recommend and adorn
their Profession by a holy Life, and, by an innocent Conversation, to excel the
Heathens, some Statutes were, at the very beginning, introduced into the
Primitive Church, which were thought most convenient to correct all manner of
Licentiousness, according to St. Paul's Direction: If any one that is called a
Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, 1 Cor. 5. 2.
or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one
do not eat. From whence it appears, that in the primitive Times, Church Censure
was used in the Churches, all which may easily be supposed to have been done
without the least prejudice to the Sovereign Power, it being always for the
Interest of the State, that Subjects should lead an innocent Life. It is worth
our Observation, that the Punishments inflicted by virtue of these Statutes,
were of such a nature, as might be put in execution without the least prejudice
to the Civil Government; such were private Admonitions, public Reprimands, and
Church Penances, the extreme Remedy was Excommunication, by virtue of which, a
Member of the Church was either for a time deprived from enjoying the benefit
of the Public Worship, or entirely excluded from being a Member of the Church.
This being the utmost, unto which any College can pretend, viz. entirely to
exclude a Member of their Society. This Exclusion, though in it self considered,
of the greatest moment, (since thereby a Christian was deprived of the whole
Communion with the Church) Nevertheles did not alter the Civil State or
Condition of a Subject; But those that were thus excommunicated suffered no
loss in their Dignities, Honor, Rights, or Fortunes. For, that the Church
Censures should extend to the real Prejudice of the civil Condition of any
Subject, is not any ways requisite for the obtaining the Ends for which the
Church is Established; Neither can it be supposed, that without defrauding
Sovereigns of their Right, such a Power can be exercised over Subjects, unless
with their own Consent, and by virtue of a public Civil Authority.

. 40. The next thing which deserves our Consideration is, whether the Church
is, and Concerning the condition of the Church under Christian Princes
how far it received any Alteration from its former Condition, after Princes,
whole Kingdoms, and States did profess the Christian Religion? Where it is to
be observed, That the Churches did thereby not receive any essential
Perfection; it being evident, that the Christian Religion could be exercised,
and subsist without the State; and Commonwealths did not depend from the
Christian Religion; The scope of the Christian Religion, and of civil
Governments, being quite different in their own nature. For, our (...), our
Conversation Phil. 3. 20. 2 Cor. 5 ^, 8. 1 Cor. 14 19.
is in Heaven; and, if in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all
Men most miserable. For this Reason it was, that the Apostles were never
forward to appear before Princes, though they might have obtained an easy Access
by their miraculous Deeds. So Herod was exceeding glad when he saw Jesus,
because he hoped to have seen some Miracle done Luke 23. 8.
by him. But they were very cautious in this point, lest it might appear to
some, as if the Gospel wanted to be maintained by Human Strength, or that
perhaps those Princes might pretend to a greater Authority over them, than was
consistent with the safety of the Christian Religion. Notwithstanding all this,
the Christian Religion does not in any wise impair or eclipse the legal Rights
of Sovereigns, but rather confirms and establishes the civil Power, Mat. 22.
21. Joh. 18. 2. Romans 13. 1 Cor. 35. 24.
as is apparent out of several passages in the holy Scripture. If it should be
granted that the Church was a State independent from any temporal Jurisdiction,
the consequence would be this, That the civil Power could not but receive a
most remarkable Limitation and Diminution, and the condition of a Subject must
receive a great alteration; whereas on the other hand, the condition of
Christians, or of Teachers in the Church (considered as such) is neither
abolished nor altered, because either the Prince, or the Subjects in general do
receive the Christian Faith, there being not the least footstep to be met
withal in the Scriptures, implying any such alteration: Besides this, there is
not any express Command in the New Testament, directed to Sovereigns, which
entitles them to any particular Prerogative in the Church, like to that which
the Kings of Israel had received in the 17 Chap. of Deuteronomy: From whence
arises this conclusion, that, what right Sovereigns can claim in the Church,
and Church Affairs, must be deduced, either out of the natural constitution of
the civil Power, or out of the true Genius of the Christian Religion, or else
must owe its offspring to the free consent of the Church.

. 41. Out of what has been laid down, it Churches do not alter their nature of
being a College.
appears first of all, that, if a Prince or whole Commonwealth, do receive the
Doctrine of Christ, the Church does thereby not receive any other Alteration,
as to her natural Constitution, but that, whereas she was formerly to be
considered only as a private Society or College, yet such a one as being
subordinate to the Law, and therefore to be cherished by the Higher Powers, who
had no legal Right to disturb, prosecute or destroy it; She now being put under
the particular Protection of her Sovereigns, enjoys a greater share of
Security, and is beyond the reach of the Persecutions of the Infidels.
Notwithstanding this, the Church is thereby not exalted from a College to a
State, since, by the receiving of the Christian Religion, the civil Government
does not undergo any Alteration or Diminution; On the contrary, Sovereigns
loose nothing of their legal Rights, neither are Subjects in any wise absolved
from their Duties and Obligations. For it implies a contradiction, that a
double Sovereignty, and two different sorts of Obligations in the Subject
should be lodged in one and the same Commonwealth. It is a frivolous Objection,
that the Church and civil Government have different Ends and Objects, not
repugnant to one another; For, from thence is not to be inferred, that the
Church must be a State, or that the Christian Religion cannot be propagated,
maintained or exercised, without the Church assume the same Power that belongs
to the civil Government. In these places therefore, where the whole People and
the Prince profess the Christian Religion, the Commonwealth receives the Church
into its Protection, and, though strictly united, there is no collision or
emulation betwixt them, nor does either of them receive any prejudice in their
respective Rights, but without the least Interference with one another, the
Church remains a College, whereof the Prince, and all the Subjects are now
become Members. So, that each Subject, besides the Person he represented in the
State, has assumed that of a Christian, and in this respect is esteemed a
Member of the Church. Neither is every one to be considered in the Church
according to the Station or Dignity he bears in the Commonwealth, but, these
Qualifications are, as it were, laid aside there, and he is only regarded as a
Christian. So, that the General of an Army cannot claim any Prerogative to
himself in the Church beyond the private Sentinel. And it is past all doubt,
that one and the same Man may represent several Persons, according to the
several Functions and Obligations belonging to him.

. 42. It is also, according to my Opinion (...) made Bishops.
beyond question, that Kings, Princes, or other civil Magistrates, by receiving
the Christian Doctrine, are not constituted Bishops or Teachers in the Church,
this Function not properly belonging to every Christian, but only to such as
have a lawful Vocation, and are fitly qualified for it. Besides this, the Royal
Office and that of Teachers are of such a nature, that they cannot conveniently
be Administered by one and the same Person, not, because of any natural
repugnancy betwixt them, but that each of them is involved in such a multitude
of Trouble and variety of Business, that it cannot rationally be supposed for
one Man to be able to undergo such a Fatigue. I^ ^s no less evident, that
Sovereigns, by becoming Christians, are not authorized to alter the Ministry of
the Church, or to order it at pleasure, or to force the Ministers of the Gospel
to teach any Doctrine which is not founded in the Scriptures, or to preach up
Human Inventions for Articles of Faith. For, what, and how Ministers ought to
Teach, is prescribed by God himself, who expects an exact Obedience in this
Point, as well from Kings as other Christians. And it is to be considered, that
whenever Princes receive the Christian Doctrine, the Teachers, notwithstanding
this remain in their former Station as to their Duty and Obligation to God, as
well, as all the rest of their Christian Subjects, who having received their
Instructions, as to their Religion, only from God, without the assistance of
their Sovereigns, these cannot claim any right to impose any thing of this kind
upon them.

. 43. Notwithstanding all this, it is not Concerning the Duty and Right of
Christian Princes of defending the Church
to be supposed that Sovereigns, by becoming Christians, have acquired no
peculiar Rights, or have not a more particular Duty laid upon them than before;
There being certain Obligations, which owe their offspring to the union of
that Duty, which is incumbent to every Christian, with that of the Royal
Office. The first and chiefest of these Obligations seems to be, that
Sovereigns ought to be Defenders of the Church, which they are obliged to
protect not only against all such of their Subjects, as dare to attempt any
thing against it, but also against Foreigners, who pretend to be injurious to
their Subjects upon that score. And, though the Christian Doctrine is not to be
propagated by violence or force of Arms, and our Savior has highly recommended
Patience and Sufferings as peculiar Virtues belonging to Christians, Princes
are nevertheless not debarred from their Right of Protecting the Christian
Religion by all lawful means, and Patience ought not to take place here, except
when no other lawful means can secure us against our Enemies. So we see that
St. Paul Acts 2. 2^
saved himself from being scourged by declaring himself to be a Roman, and
escaped the Fury of the Jews by making his Appeal to the Emperor. And our
Savior himself left this Mat. 10. 2^.
Advice to his Disciples, That when they were persecuted in one City, they
should fly into another. And, it being an incumbent Duty belonging to all
Sovereigns, to defend their Subjects against all violence; they ought to take
more effectual care that they do not suffer any Injuries for the Christian
Religions sake; for, what could be more reproachful to a Christian Prince, than
that his Subjects should be sufferers upon that account? The next care which
belongs to Christian Princes, is, to provide necessary Revenues for the
exercise of the Christian Religion. For as has been shown before, that no other
Patrimony belonged to the Primitive Church, but the Alms and free Contributions
of the Believers, and that these cannot but be supposed to be very uncertain,
the Ministers and Teachers in the Church run no small hazard of being exposed
to want, if they have nothing else to rely upon, but the bare contributions of
the Congregation, who being in some places poor, and Subject to other Taxes,
are incapable of supplying their want. And, not to dissemble the Truth, after
Princes and en^tire States have received the Doctrine of Christ, it would
appear very ill, that, whereas they enjoy such ample Revenues, they would deal
so sparingly with the Church, the more, because it is a general Maxim among
Men, to value a Function according to its Revenues. What St. Paul recommends to
the Romans in the 15th Chapter, v. 27. and in the 1 Epist. to the Corinthians
9. 11. ought to be the more taken notice of by Christian Princes, because they
can with less difficulty, or any sensible injury to themselves, put it in
practice in their Station, they having the management of the Public Revenues
in their hands. It cannot be denied, but that too vast Revenues are not always
useful to Ministers of the Church, and prove som^times prejudicial both to
Church and State; and that such as make profession of the Ministry of the
Gospel, ought not to make a Trade of their Function, or to think it their main
Business to gather Riches, and take the Ministry for their By-work;
nevertheless, if it be duly considered, that he who cordially (as he ought to
do) applies himself to the Ministerial Function, has no other ways left him to
provide for his Family; and that the vulgar Sort scarce pay a due Respect to a
Minister, unless they see him live handsomely and well; whereas he, who is
starved by his Function is the May Game of the common People, unto whom may be
applied that old Saying of the Poet; That this Man appears to be the Servant of
a poor and wretched Lord. Apparet servum hunc esse Domini pauperis miserique.
Princes ought therefore to look upon this as one main part of their Devotion,
to settle certain and constant Sallaries or Revenues upon the Ministers of the
Church, as much as may be, at least sufficient for their Maintenance. In the
Old Testament the Priests were to live from the Altar, but those of the best
kind were Vid. Ep. Gal. 6. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 4.
brought to the Altar. Besides this, Princes ought not only to take care of
Church-Buildings, but also to erect and maintain Schools, which being the
Seminaries both of the Church and State, if the first Rudiments of Christianity
be not implanted in the Schools, it cannot scarce be expected, that Men, when
grown up, should receive much benefit by public Sermons.

. 44. But among other Considerations, as Co^ce^ning the rights of Princes, as
to Ecclesiastical Affairs. And first, of the g^n^ral Inspection.
to what Rights properly belong to Princes as to Ecclesiastical Affairs, it is
evident, that, since by the Doctrine of the Gospel the Civil Power is in no
wise impaired, and a Prince cherishes a Church under his Jurisdiction, he
legally claims a Right of having a general Inspection over this as well as all
other Societies; at least, so far as to take care that nothing be transacted in
these Colleges to his Prejudice. For Mankind being so perverse in its Nature,
that in Matters, even the most Sacred, if managed without control, they seldom
let it slip through their hands without a Stain; And that therefore it is
scarce to be questioned, but the Christian Doctrine is subject to the same
Corruption, and that under Pretense of Religion many pernicious Designs may be
hatched against the Interest of the Commonwealth. A Prince in whose Territories
a Church is planted, if he afterward enters into the Communion of that Church,
has questionless a Right to examine what Matters, and in what Manner they are
transacted in the Convention of their Presbyters, or in their Ecclesiastical
Courts, if there be any such among them; Whether they do not transgress their
Bounds? whether they act according to the Civil Laws, or whether they do not
assume to themselves a Power to determine such Cases as properly belong to the
Civil Jurisdiction? Of this Kind are Matrimonial Cases, which without Reason,
and upon very slender Pretenses, the Priests have drawn under their
Jurisdiction, to the great Prejudice of the Sovereign Power; For, it being an
unquestionable Right belonging to Sovereigns to constitute Laws concerning
Matrimonial Cases, according to the Law of Nature and of God, I cannot see any
Reason why they have not a Right to determine Matrimonial Differences. And
because the Ministers of the Church make use of Church discipline, the Prince
may make a legal Enquiry whether, under Pretense of these Rules prescribed by
our Savior, they do not introduce Novelties, which may prove prejudicial to
the State? And as these Enchroachments are no essential Part of the Christian
Doctrine, but rather to be looked upon like Spots which disgnise its natural
Beauty; So, I cannot see with what Face it can be denied, that those ought to
be taken off, especially by the Authority of those whose Interest is most
nearly concerned; unless they have Impudence enough to own, that the Christian
Religion may lawfully be misapplied to By-uses. And let it be granted, that
every thing is transacted as it ought to be in these Conventions of the
Presbyters, Consistories or Episcopal Courts, why should they be ashamed or
angry at their Sovereigns taking Cognizance of their Proceedings. And this
Right of Inspection does never cease after the Sovereign has once entered into
the Communion of the Church, it being his Duty to take care that no Abuses may
creep into the Church, in process of Time, that may endanger the State.

. 45. Because the Right of Constituting Concerning the Right of Princes, as to
Church Ministers.
Ministers of the Church does originally belong to the whole Congregation the
Prince must needs have his Share in it, as being a Member of the Congregation;
I say his Share: For it is not reasonable that a Minister should be forced upon
any Church against their Consent, and without their Approbation, except it be
for very weighty Reasons. For, the Right of Constituting Ministers in the
Church does not belong to the Prince in the same manner, as it is his
Prerogative to constitute Civil Magistrates and other Public Ministers of
State, which being a part of the Sovereign Power, cannot be called in question.
But Teachers in the Church, considered merely as such, are none of the King's
Ministers, but Servants of Christ, and Ministers of the Church, not Officers of
the State. And because, in the Primitive Church, Ministers used to be
constituted by (...), or by the Suffrages of the Christians, the Prince may
lawfully claim his Vote in the same Church. whereof he is a Member; But as for
the other Churches under his Jurisdiction, they ought to be left to their free
Choice, exept there be some prevailing Reasons, which oblige the Prince to
interpose his Authority; it being unjust, that a Minister should be put upon a
Church against their Will, if they can allege any lawful Exception against
him. For, a Teacher thus forced upon his Auditors, for whom they have neither
esteem nor Love, is likely to edify but little by his Doctrine. Nevertheless,
Sovereigns ought to have a watchful Eye over the Churches, and to take care
that Persons not fitly qualified for this sacred Function, may not be promoted
to the Ministry either by Simony or other unlawful Means: For though it is the
Interest of the whole Church to provide against these Corruptions, Sovereigns
are likely to do it with much better Success than can be expected from private
Persons. They may authorize certain Persons to be present at these Elections,
and who, by their Authority, may prevent all manner of Disorder or Corruption,
and at the same time make a due enquiry, whether such Persons as are to be put
into the Ministry are of an approved Life and Doctrine. And, because the
Ministers of the Church do 1 Timothy 3 10.
sometimes act negligently or preposterously in their Office, which often
proves the Occasion of Scandal and Schism in the Church, Romans 16 17.
Sovereigns may constitute over them Inspectors, with an Authority to reprove,
and sometimes to punish such as transgress their Rules. But these Inspectors,
being no less subject to human Frailties than other men, Care ought to be taken
that their Authority be so limited as to be accountable of all their
Proceedings, either to the Prince, or before a Consistory authorized for that
purpose, if they transgress their Bounds or trespass upon the Ministers of the
Church. As all these matters do contribute to the maintaining of good Order in
the Church, and may best be put in execution by the Sovereign Authority; So it
is manifest, that Princes, as they are chief Members of the Church, may justly
claim this Prerogative as properly belonging to their high Station and Princely
Office.

. 46. In case of any Difference or Controversy Concerning the Right of calling
together a Synod.
concerning any Point of Doctrine which may sometimes arise in the Church, so,
that the Teachers are divided in their Opinions, it belongs to the Sovereign
Authority to take care that these Differences may be composed, not only as the
Sovereign is a Member of the Church, but as he is the Supreme Head of the
Commonwealth; It having been frequently observed, that Differencee of Opinions
and Animosities of the Parties concerned, cause great Commotions in the State
Upon such Occasions Sovereigns have a Right to call together an Assembly of the
most able Divines, and to authorize them to examine the Controversy, and to
determine it according to the Tenure of the Scriptures; The Supreme Direction
of this Assembly ought to be managed by the Prince'^ Authority; For, since it
can scarce be supposed that matters should be transacted there without Heats
and Animosities, it will be both for the Honor and Interest of this Assembly,
if by the Presence of certain Persons well versed in Business, these Heats be
allayed, and matters carried on with an equal Temperament. Neither do I see how
any one besides the Prince can lay claim to this Power of calling such an
Assembly; for, put the case, that one Party should refuse to appear, and to
submit unto the other's Direction, which way will they be able to compel them
to it? And who is it, that can with less Difficulty put in execution the
Decrees of such a Synod, than he, who has the Sovereign Power in his Hands?
Though at the same time it ought not to be forgotten, that this Power must not
extend it self beyond its due Bounds, but be suitable to the Genius of the
Christian Religion. But, in case Divines out of other Countries are to be
called unto this Convocation or Assembly, it is, I think, a plain case, that
these cannot appear there without leave first obtained from their Sovereigns.
And if a Council should be called, consisting of selected Divines out of a
great many Commonwealths, this cannot be done without a foregoing Agreement
made betwixt those Sovereigns that are concerned therein. For it is not
allowable for Subjects of another State to come to us upon such an Account, no^
can ours go to them upon such an Errand, unless by joint Consent of the higher
Powers. And since Sovereigns cannot claim any Jurisdiction over one another,
there will be no place left for any Prerogative, but Matters must be transacted
according to mutual Contract.

. 47. For what Reasons the Primitive The^r Right concerning Church Discipline.
Christians did introduce Church Discipline, viz. to be distinguished from the
Heathens by their holy Life and Conversation, and to supply the Defects of the
civil Pagan Laws, which did not restrain them from such Vices as were
abominable to the Christians, has been sufficiently explained before. This
Reason takes no more place now, after whole Commonwealths as well as their
Sovereigns are entered into the Communion of the Christian Church; for there is
not the same Occasion now to be distinguished from the Heathens by an unspotted
Conversation, after the rooting out of the Pagan Religion, all Christians being
under an equal Obligation to endeavor an unblemished Life. But,
notwithstanding the general Conversion of whole Commonwealths to the Christian
Faith, care ought to be taken, that Holiness of Life be not laid aside among
Christians; from whence arises this Question: Whether it be better to make use
of the ancient Church Discipline now, in the same manner as it was practiced in
the Primitive times? Or, whether it be not more expedient to admit of some
Alterations, after Sovereigns are entered into the Communion of the Church? The
last of these two seems to be most probable; because this ancient Church
Discipline which was introduced for a certain time, to supply the deficiency of
the Pagan Laws, and to amend their vicious Lives and Conversation, and was thus
left to the direction of certain People, is not an Essential part of
Christianity; and, besides this, carries this Inconveniency along with it, that
it may easily degenerate into a kind of a pretended Sovereignty, and prove
prejudicial to the Civil Power. And, as Sovereigns have a Right to provide
against every thing that may be the probable cause of Convulsions in the State;
so may this defect be supplied by the Civil Laws, and Vices may be suppressed
by Civil Punishments. Neither do I see any reason to the contrary, why Vices
should not be as easily corrected by Punishments prescribed by the Civil Laws,
as by Church Censures; or, why the first should not prove as effectual as the
latter for the suppressing of Public Scandals? It will perhaps be objected,
That Ecclesiastical Discipline has a much greater Influence over Christians
toward the amendment of their Lives, than Civil Punishments; because the first
penetrates into the Heart; whereas Civil Punishments do not touch us but
superficially: Unto this it may be answered, That Church Discipline does not
always answer this end, it being not to be doubted, but that some Men, though
they undergo all the Church-Penances, retain in their hearts the same vicious
Inclinations, or sometimes grow more stubborn and bold. But if it be taken as
an Expiation for our Sins in regard of God Almighty, it is to be observed, that
if we pretend to an Expiation for any Trespasses, which fall under the
cognizance of Humane Laws, we must therein be directed by the Word of God,
which does not prescribe Church-Penance as a proper Satisfaction in this case.
For our sins are not remitted, because we have undergone Church-Penance, but
because our Hearts are purified by the Blood of Christ, provided we, by the
Faith, apply his Sufferings unto us. But, supposing it should be thought most
convenient, that some sort of Vices ought to be corrected by Church Discipline,
the best Expedient would be, to leave it first to the determination of the
Civil Judges, who, according to the Circumstances of the Case, ought to send
the Delinquents to the Ecclesiastical Court, there to undergo the
Church-Censure. For, Christian Sovereigns have an unquestionable Right to
determine, what sort of Misdemeanors are punishable by the Civil Laws, and
which of them come under the Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Courts; and
consequently, to decree, what sort of Church-Censure ought to be laid upon the
Delinquents, according to the different Nature of the Trespass; which may be
put in Execution by the Ministers accordingly. Concerning Excommunication, the
same ought not to be put in Practice, but with this caution, that it ought not
to be left to the discretion of Priests, so as to be inflicted by them a^
pleasure; but this Power ought to be limited by certain Rules prescribed by
those that have the Legislative Power in a State. For, in a Christian
Commonwealth Excommunication alters the Civil Condition of a Subject, and
^enders him infamous and detestable among his Fellow Christians: And as it
affects the Civil State of Subjects, Sovereigns, unless they will let others
encroach upon their Prerogative, ought to determine concerning its Legality.

. 48. Since the Christian Religion does not Concerning the Power of making
Ecclesiastical Canons or Statutes.
in any wise diminish the Rights of Sovereigns, these, if entered into the
Communion of the Church, have a Power to examine, what Canons or Ecclesiastical
Statutes are received in the Church; and if some of them are found superfluous,
or interfering with the Sovereign Power, to abolish the same; and if there
appears any deficiency, to supply what is wanting toward the maintaining a
good Order, and the Glory of the Church (which however, ought not to be done
without the Advice, at least, of the chief Men of the Church) and lastly, give
to those Statutes the force of Civil Laws. This Power nevertheless, of making
Ecclesiastical Statutes, must be exercised with a great deal of caution, the
same being limited to the outward form of the Church Government, and to
maintain its Order and Decency, Christians being not to be over-heap'd with a
vast number of Canons. For, those that stretch Colos. 2. 16. 21, 22. 1 Timothy 4.
^4.
the Power of Sovereigns to such a pitch, as to make them the absolute Judges
of the Christian Religion, and to attribute to them a Right of establishing
certain Articles of Faith by Civil Laws, or to annex to them a force equal to
the Civil Constitutions, and to force upon their Subjects a certain Religion,
under severe Penalties, or oblige them either to profess or to deny certain
Points of Doctrine, which are controverted amongst Christians; These, I say,
act quite contrary to the true Genius of the Christian Religion, and to the
Method made use of by Christ and his Apostles, for the propagating of this
Doctrine; They destroy the very Essential part of our Faith, which being a Gift
of the Holy Ghost, and a Belief founded in our Hearts, is transmuted into an
outward Confession, where the Tongue, to avoid Temporal Punishment, is forced
to speak those things which are in no wise agreeable to the Heart. This however
admits again of a Limitation; For herein are not comprehended these Points,
which proceeding from Natural Religion, are also contained in the Christian
Doctrine, and all of them imply a profound Reverence to be paid to the Supreme
BEING. For, it is beyond all question, that those that act against the very
Dictates of Reason, ought to be subject to Civil Punishments, since they strike
at the very Foundation of Civil Societies: Such are Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Profanation of the Sabbath; where nevertheless great care is to be taken, that
a due difference be made betwixt the Moral part of that Precept concerning the
Sabbath, which is unalterable, and the Ceremonial part of it. Princes therefore
at their first entrance into the Communion of the Christian Church, might
Lawfully destroy the Images and Temples of the Idols, and the Groves, and other
Meeting-places dedicated to their superstitious Worship. Neither can it be
called in question, but that Christian Sovereigns have a Right to inflict Civil
Punishments upon such as revile the whole System of the Christian Religion, and
ridicule the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, at least, they may Banish them
the Country. But for the rest, it is in vain to believe, that the true
enlightening of our Mind, and the inward consent to such Articles of Faith as
surpass our Understanding, can be procured by violent means, or temporal
punishments. For, supposing you force a Man to dissemble his thoughts, to speak
contrary to what he conceives in his own Opinion, let his Confession be never
so formal, and his Gestures never so well composed and conformable to certain
prescribed Rules, this has not the least affinity with true Religion, unless he
at the same time does feel an inward motion, and hearty compliance with what he
professes. Neither ought People, according to the true Genius of the Doctrine
of Christ, be enticed to receive the Christian Religion by Temporal Interest,
Honors, or other such like Advantages; for, Christ did promise, that those
that followed him, should receive their Reward in the Life to come, but
foretold them nothing but Crosses and Tribulations in this. And, those that
embrace any Religion out of a Motive of Temporal Advantages, do plainly show,
that they have a greater Value for their own ^erest, than Religion. And
certainly, scarce any body, that has but common sense, can persuade himself,
that such a sort of Worship can be pleasing to God Almighty. Sovereigns being
not constituted for Religion's sake, they cannot under that color exact from
their Subjects a blind Obedience in matters of Religion, it being
unquestionable, that if Subjects should blindfold follow the Religion of their
Sovereign, they cannot by all his Authority be assured of their Salvation; from
whence it is evident, that, in case any Subject be fully convinced, that he can
out of the Holy Scripture discover any Errors, which are crept into the Church,
even that by Law established (especially concerning any Principal Point of
Faith) he neither can, nor ought to be hindered in his design by the Sovereign
Authority, before his Reasons be heard, and well debated in the presence of the
best and ablest Judges; and, if by them he be legally and plainly convicted of
his Error, then, and (...) before, ought he to be silenced. To force People
into the Church ^y the bare Civil Authority, must needs fill the Commonwealth
with Hypocrites, who cannot be supposed to Act according to the Dictates of
their Consciences. For, since in Religions Matters an absolute Uniformity
betwixt the Heart and Tongue is required, how can it otherwise be, but that
such as profess a Religion disagreeable to their Opinion, should never be
satisfied in their Consciences, when they consider, that they impose upon God
Almighty.

. 49. The Care of preserving the Public What Prerogatives belong to
Sovereigns, as being Protectors of the Public Tranquillity.
Peace, belonging in a most peculiar manner to Sovereigns, has furnished some
with a specious Pretense to affirm, that since differences in Religion cause
frequent Convulsions in the State, and it is to be deemed one of the greatest
Happinesses of a Government, if its Subjects, in general, are of one Religion,
all means, though never so violent, may be put in execution to extirpate these
Differences in Religion. They allege, that as much more precious our Souls are
before our Bodies, the more Sovereigns are obliged to be watchful over them;
and, that the true Love which a Sovereign bears to his Subjects, can never be
more conspicuous, than when he takes effectual care of their Salvation. These,
it must be confessed, are very specious Pretenses, and have sometimes had such
powerful influence over Princes, who were else naturally not inclined to
Severity, that they have nevertheless by these plausible Arguments been
prevailed upon to assist with their Authority the cruel Designs of Priests. It
will therefore not be beyond our scope, to make a strict Enquiry what account
ought to be made of these so specious Reasons in a well constituted Government.
In the first place then, it is to be considered, that it has been foretold by
our Savior, that there should always be in the Church Weeds amongst the Wheat;
that is to say, that there should be false Doctrines raised in the Church; and
these, according to the Commands of our Savior, were not to be extirpated Root
and Branch, but to be reserved for the Day of Judgment. For a Sovereign that
takes to such violent courses, may make a havoc among his Subjects, which
commonly proves equally pernicious to the Innocent and Guilty; nevertheless, he
will find it impracticable quite to abolish all Errors and Differences in the
Church. Never did any body show a greater Love to Mankind than our Savior, who
sacrificed himself for our Salvation; Yet he made use of no other ways to
propagate his Doctrine, than Teaching, when he might have commanded Twelve
Legions of Angels to force Mankind to Obedience. How can a Prince be esteemed
to follow the Footsteps of Christ, who makes such profligate Wretches as the
Dragoons his Apostles, for the Conversion of his Subjects? That Pretense of the
Love of Sovereigns toward their Subjects, let it be never so specious, he ought
not under that color endeavor to subvert or alter the Method of propagating
the Christian Doctrine, according to the true Genius of the Christian Religion.
Besides this, it is not absolutely necessary to maintain the Public
Tranquillity, that all the Subjects in general should be of one Religion, or,
which is the same in effect, the differences about some Points in Religion,
considered barely as such, are not the true causes of Disturbances in a State;
but the Heats and Animosities, Ambition and perverted Zeal of some, who make
these Differences their Tools, wherewith they often raise Disturbances in the
State. Such turbulent Spirits ought to be curbed, and care to be taken so to
tie up their Hands, as that they want Power to influence the Minds of such
Subjects, as otherwise would be well satisfied, to enjoy peaceably a Liberty of
Conscience. And what should move a Prince to disturb his good Subjects merely
upon the score of Differences in Opinion, as long as they live quietly under
his Government? For, supposing their Opinion to be erroneous, it is not at his,
but their own Peril, and they alone must be answerable for it. For, in my
Opinion, Sovereigns are entrusted with the Sword, wherewith to dissect
Controversies, as Alexander did with the Gordian Knot. But, that it may not be
objected as if I intended to encourage all sorts of Heresies and
Licentiousness, I do declare, that this is far different from my purpose, but
that on the contrary, it is to be wished, and ought to be endeavored, to
procure but one Faith and Religion in a State, and especially such a one as is
absolutely agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, contained in
the Holy Scripture; such a one as cannot but contrbute toward the maintaining
of the Public Tranquillity. For, I do not think, that all Uniformity in
Religion is equally capable of procuring that Union; neither can the Pagan
Religion, Mahometans, Arians, Anabaptists, and that of Antichrist himself,
claim that Prerogative, but only the true and ancient Religion contained in the
Holy Scripture. For, this is only to be deemed the truly Ancient Religion,
which is derived from the pure and genuine Spring of the Primitive Christian
Religion. As among the Jews, such only could boast to follow the true
footsteps of Antiquity, as proved their Doctrine out of the Books of Moses.
All what degenerates from the Nature of its genuine Spring, though backed by the
Traditions of some Ages, being only to be looked upon as an inveterate Error.
Princes being then Protectors of the Public Tranquillity, have an Authority to
inspect what Canons are received into the Church, and to cause them to be
examined according to the true Tenure of the Holy Scripture; and this care is
not to be committed to the management of a few, who may perhaps be swayed by
Faction or Interest, but to all such as have a solid knowledge of the Holy
Scripture. If every thing be found consonant to its Rules, then may a Sovereign
by his Authority Command this Doctrine to be Taught both in public and
private. But where there is not any Public Form of Religion established in a
Commonwealth, it is the Sovereign's care, that one may be composed by the
assistance of such as are well versed in the Holy Scripture, which being
approved of by the general consent of his Subjects, ought to be professed by
all, and all those especially, who pretend to the Ministry, are to be tied up
to its Rules. This form of Worship being once received,, a Prince may justly
deny his Peotection to all such as will not comply with it, unless he find it
to be against the Common Interest of the Commonweal. If any one should
undertake to contradict this Public Form, especially in such Points as are the
Heads of the Christian Religion, he ought to be admonished to desist, his
Reasons, if he has any, to be examined, and when convicted of his Error, to be
silenced; if all this prove fruitless, he may lawfully be banished. For, since,
according to the Doctrine of the Apostles, we are to avoid the Conversation of
Heretics, it would be unreasonable that a whole Society of Men should fly from
one or a few capricious Persons; So that he or they ought to seek out for a new
Habitation, after they have been legally convicted of their Error; for fear
they should spread their erroneous Doctrines further than may be consistent
with the Public Safety. But we allow no other Punishment in such a case,
except their Doctrine should amount to Blasphemy.

. 50. Notwithstanding what has been alleged Concerning Tolerating of several
Religions in a State.
there may be such a juncture of Time and Circumstances, that Sovereigns may,
nay ought with a safe Conscience to tolerate such of their Subjects as are of a
different Opinion from the Established Religion. For, it may so happen, that
the number of the Dissenters is so great, as not to be expelled without great
Prejudice to the State, and, not without danger to the Commonwealth, if they
should settle under another Government. For that common Saying of a certain
Sort of Men, that it is better to have a Country lie waste, than to have it
inhabited by Heretics, savours of Barbarity, if not Inhumanity. And a certain
Prince who said, that he would rather walk out of his Territories with nothing
but a Staff in his hands, than to suffer it to be inhabited by Heretics, may
well pass for one of the most bigoted Zealots in Christendom. For the Doctrine
of the Gospel is not destructive to civil Society, neither is thereby the least
Obligation laid upon Princes, to propagate Religion by violent and destructive
means, or to undertake more in that behalf, than belongs to them as Protectors
of the public Tranquillity; they may therefore with a safe Conscience supercede
such violent ways, by which the State either is endangered or weakened;
especially, since neither our Savior did make use of them himself, nor
commanded any thing like it to his Apostles. On the other hand, those that
expect to be tolerated in a State, ought by all means to endeavor to live
peaceably and quietly, and as becomes good Subjects, they ought not to Teach
any Doctrine which savours of Sedition and Disobedience, or to suffer such
Principles to be fomented in their Congregations, as may prove destructive to
the Prerogatives of their Sovereigns. For, there is not the least question to
be made, but Princes have a right to rout out such as propagate these
Doctrines, they having not the least relation to Religion, but are like spots,
wherewith some turbulen Heads bespatter the Christian Religion. Besides this,
there is another duty incumbent to Sovereigns over a State, where more than one
Religion is tolerated; viz. to keep a watchful eye over them, that the
Dissenting Parties do not break out into extravagant Expressions about the
Differences in Religion, these being the Fuel that enflames them into
Animosities, which oftentimes prove the spring of Factions, Troubles, and
intestine Commotions. A much greater Obligation lies upon Sovereigns to
tolerate Dissenters, if they, when they first submitted to the Government, had
their Liberty of Conscience granted them by Contract; or have obtained it
afterward by certain Capitulations, any following Statutes, or by the
fundmental Laws of the Land; all which ought to be sacred to Princes, and to be
observed by them with the same Circumspection, as they expect a due Obedience
from their Subjects. No Opinion concerning matter of Religion ought to be
declared Erroneous, before it be duly examined, and the Parties convicted,
especially if they are ready to prove the same out of the Fundamental Articles
of the Christian Faith; And great care is to be taken that such a Decision be
not left to the Management of their Adversaries, who being perhaps guided by
self Interest, oftentimes are both Accusers and Judges. There are not a few
Politicians, who are of opinion, that Sovereigns may with a safe Conscience
give Protection to their Subjects; though of an erroneous Opinion, provided it be
for the benefit of the Commonwealth; especially if care be taken, that they do
not draw away others into the same Error. For, supposing the established
Religion both in point of Doctrine and Morality, to excel all others, it is to
be hoped that the Dissenting Parties may be in time brought over to it, rather
than to be feared, that they should seduce others; Besides, that it may
contribute to the increase of the Zeal and Learning of the established Clergy,
it being sufficiently proved by Experience, that in those places and times,
where and when no Religious Differences were in agitation, the Clergy soon
degenerated into Idleness and Barbarity.

. 51. Furthermore, as Sovereigns in all other Sovereigns in matters of Religion
ought not to be misguided by Flatterers.
Matters of Moment ought to act with great Circumspection; so, especially in
matters of Religion, they cannot proceed with too much caution, an injustice of
this nature, being the most sensible of all that can be done to a Subject. For
what can be more abominable, than to let Subjects suffer unjustly for their
Faith in Christ, and that perhaps for no other reason, but, because some others
out of self Interest, cannot agree with them in Opinion. And, if a Prince, who
prompted by his own cruel Inclinations tyrannises over his Subjects, is odious
to all the World, how much more abominable appears a Prince, who acts the part
of an Executioner, and is made an Instrument by others to fulfill their cruel
Designs against their Fellow Subjects? All Christian Princes therefore, as they
tender their Consciences, ought to avoid all manner of Extreamities in Matters
of this Nature, which ought never to be undertaken, unless they be well
instructed beforehand in every particular Point. A Prince ought not only to be
satisfied with, or rely entirely on what is represented to him by his Clergy,
(though never so pious in outward appearance;) there being too many Instances to
be given, that the best of Princes, by their own Inclinations, abhorring all
manner of Cruelty, have, by the Instigation of over-zealous Clergymen, turned
the most cruel Tyrants: We scarce ever read of any Prince, who undertook to
decide Controversies in Physic, or other Sciences (except he had attained to a
particular Knowledge in these Matters) and, why should Sovereigns be too
forward in deciding Religious Differences, which are of much greater Moment,
(the eternal and temporal welfare of Millions of People do depend thereon)
unless they be very well instructed in every thing that has any relation to it?
And, since Princes very rarely bestow sufficient Time and Pains in being fully
instructed in Divinity, it is to be wished, that they would be biased by their
own natural Understanding, rather than be influenced by the Opinions of others.
As for an Instance, in those Controversies which are betwixt the Protestants
and Papists, there are such evident Signs, from whence it is a difficult matter
for a Christian Prince to discern, which of these two ought to be preferred
before the other. For, if it be considered, that the Protestants are so far
from forbidding the reading of the holy Scripture to the Laity, that on the
contrary, they exhort them to it, and make the Scriptures the Touchstone of
their Doctrine, and the true Judge of their Controversies; That the
Protestants, trusting upon the goodness of their own Cause, do not forbid the
reading of Popish Authors, but allow them to be publicly sold, as being
confident, that the weakness of their Arguments cannot have any influence, even
over an indifferent Understanding; it cannot but seem very strange, why in the
Church of Rome, the Laity is not allowed the reading of the holy Scripture,
nay, that they leave no stone unturned, to suppress the Validity of the holy
Scripture; so, that in those places where the Inquisition is in vogue, a Man
may with less danger be guilty of Blasphemy, Perjury, and other the most
enormous Crimes, than to read and examine the Mysteries of the holy Scripture.
On the other hand, what a clamor do they make about Traditions, and the
Prerogatives of the Church, which Title they claim as belonging, in a most
peculiar manner to themselves, and notwithstanding the same is not allowed them
by others, they assume to themselves the Authority of giving Judgment in their
own Cause. It is very well worth the Consideration of a Prince, that they will
not allow our Books to be read among them, and especially, how careful they are
in keeping them from the Knowledge of Great Men, though belonging to the
Communion of their Church. Who is so ignorant as not to know, what great
Difficulties and Obstacles were to be surmounted before it could be obtained,
that the Augsburgh Confession was read to the Emperor Charles V. All which,
taken together, are most evident Proofs to any unbyassed Person, that the
Protestants act like Men, as relying upon the goodness of their Cause; but the
Roman Catholics, as mistrusting themselves, and fearing, that if their
Doctrine should be examined, according to the Tenure of the holy Scripture, and
out of the Protestant Wrttings, the same would scarce bear the Touchstone. It
may also be taken into consideration, how far different the Interest of the
Roman Catholics Party is from that of the Protestants: For, though both Parties
with equal Zeal in Public pretend to the Honor of God, and the Truth of the
Gospel; and it is not to be denied, but that a great many among the Roman
Catholics, are very Zealous for the same; nevertheless, if we duly consider
the Nature of Mankind in general, it may easily be supposed, that they aim at
something more; And, what this something is, is easily discernable, if we make
a due comparison betwixt the Clergy of both Parties. Among the Protestants, the
greatest part of the Clergy are so stinted in their Revenues, as to give them
no opportunity of living in State; what Respect is paid them, is on the account
of their Function as being Teachers, their power very seldom reaches beyond
their Revenues, which are very moderate, and oftentimes very mean. Both their
Persons and Estates depend from the Authority of their Sovereigns, neither have
they any where else to seek for Protection. On the contrary, in what Pomp and
affluence of Fortune does the Popish Clergy live! Unto what hight have they not
exalted their Power in Europe! Have they not so ordered their Matters, as to be
almost independent from the Civil Magistrates? What likelihood can there be in
all this, that the Protestants should be as much concerned for a Temporal
By-Interest as the Popish Clergy? For, whereas, they first can expect no more
than what is alloted them already, the latter have no less in view than vast
Riches, and the Possessions of whole Kingdoms. All these Matters duly
considered, may be convincing Proofs, that all the Clamor which the Popish
Clergy makes against the Protestants, is of the same nature with that of
Demetrius at Ephesus, when he exclaimed against St. Paul, Love and Meekness
being the products of the Christian Faith; the Cruelties of the Popish Clergy
exercised against Protestants, ought to be suspected by Princes, and serve them
as a forewarning; what good is to be expected from those that prosecute with so
much Barbarity all such, as oppose their Pride and Ambition? After the
Persecutions were ceased in the Primitive Church, the Arians were the first,
who showed their teeth to the Christians; But they would have blushed for
shame, if they should have attempted to propagate their Religion by force of
Arms, and such other cruel Persecutions as are now in vogue among the Popish
Clergy. If we were not sufficiently convinced, that the Spirit of Envy is not
the Spirit of Christ; we may be instructed as to this Point by our Savior
himself (when he rebuked James and John, who would have Luke 9. 54, 55, 56.
fire come down from Heaven) in these words: Ye know not, what manner of Spirit
you are of; For the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's lives, but to save
them. The Sword of Christ is not girted on the side of Men, but goes out of his
Mouth, and in all the Rev. 19. 15.
holy Scripture, there is not one passage, where the Church of Christ is said
to be drunken with the Blood of Heretics; but it is said of the Whore of
Babylon, that she is drunken with the Rev. 17. 6.
Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Christ.

. 52. Lastly, Since Sovereigns ought to be Sovereigns are often encroached upon
in their rights under a religious pretext.
jealous of their own Prerogatives, they may without Injustice make an Enquiry,
whether the Protestant or the Popish Religion be most encroaching upon their
Authority, and which of these two be most consistent with the Civil Government.
For whenever the Civil Power bears any diminution under a Religious Pretense,
it is then high time for Sovereigns to look about them, to examine upon what
Foundation these Pretensions are built; it being evident, that Civil Government
was introduced before the Christian Religion, and that therefore it ought
plainly to be demonstrated, how Civil Authority came to be diminished by the
Christian Religion. Now, if we look into the Constitution of the Popish Clergy,
it is manifest, that by many steps and degrees, and by various Artifices and
Intrigues, they have at last patched up a Potent State of their own; and that
their Supreme Head, for these many Ages past, is possessed of great
Territories, and Acts as a Sovereign; and, not only this, but also obtrudes his
Authority upon all such as profess the Roman Catholic Religion. For, they
don't think it sufficient that the whole Clergy have their dependence from him,
but he pretends to an Absolute Authority of determining all Matters of Faith,
by which means he is sure to guide the Minds of the People where ever he
pleases. If any thing in the World is destructive to the Civil Powers, it must
of necessity be this, when a Party inhabiting their Territories, disown their
Jurisdiction and depending from a Foreign Power; deny the Authority of their
Natural Prince over them, or at least acknowledge it no longer than they think
it convenient. If Neighboring States are commonly the most jealous of one
another, must it not be looked upon as a great Solocism of State, to permit
such as depend from a Foreign Jurisdiction to abide in the Commonwealth? It is
next door to take Foreign Garrisons into our Forts, or to allow a Foreign Force
to Encamp in the midst of our Dominions. And this Mischief seems to be the more
pernicious, when the Revenues, by which the Grandeur of this Ecclesiastical
State is maintained, are squeezed out of the Subjects of any Prince, and the
best part of his Territories exhausted; whereas on the contrary, these Leeches
are not only freed from all manner of Taxes, but also pretend to a Legislative
Authority, so as to inflict Punishments upon the Subjects, and to Absolve them
from their Allegiance due to their Sovereigns. I cannot see how Princes,
without great Prejudice to the Commonweal, can allow the least Authority over
their Persons, to the Clergy; For, if the Prince and they happen to jarr
together, the poor Subjects pay for it with a Vengeance, when they are to serve
two Masters of a contrary side at one time; and the Taxes must fall the heavier
upon the Subjects, where the Clergy are exempted from all Contributions.
Lastly, is it not a heavy Burden to the Subjects, to be subject both to an
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Jurisdiction? The former being generally the most
severe; as is most evident in Spain and Italy, where the Courts of Inquisition
are in vogue. It being therefore beyond all question, that all these things are
practiced by the Roman Catholics, but in no wise by the Protestants, such
Princes, as, being misled by the Popish Clergy, endeavor to extirpate their
Protestant Subjects, Act not only contrary to Justice, but even against the
very Dicrates of right Reason. What has been objected by some, viz. That
Protestants have not been altogether free from the imputation of raising
Disturbances in the State, and having joined with a Foreign Power, scarce
deserves an Answer; For, this is not to be imputed to Religion it self, but
rather, to some dangerous Juncture, and other Circumstances, which often prove
the occasion of dangerous Commotions in a State; Or else, the Papists have
first begun the Dance, and what Wonder is it, if some Protestants, to avoid
their cruel Designs against them, have endeavored to repel the Fury of their
Adversaries; and when they found themselves insufficient, have sought for Aid
by Foreign Princes. For, as it is the greatest piece of Injustice to compel
Subjects by force of Arms to any Religion, so these may justly defend their
Religion by force of Arms, especially if they live under a Government where
they have a Right belonging to them of Protecting their Liberties against any
Invaders.

. 53. Last of all, it very well deserves to Concerning the Right of Reformation.
make an Enquiry who it is that has the Power in the Commonwealth to amend such
Errors and Abuses, as are crept into the Church, either in Point of Doctrine,
Morality, or Church Government? Or, which turns to the same Account, who has
the Right of Reformation? Where first of all it is unquestionable, that there
is no occasion of a Reformation, where the Clergy, upon Admonition, desist from
these Abuses; like as when a Creditor, upon Summons, is paid by his Debtor,
ought to supercede his Action against him. But, put the case, that the Clergy
either absolutely refuse, or from time to time protract to desist from such
Abuses, so that there is but two ways left to be chosen; either patiently to
submit to their capricious Humor, or else certain Persons in the State, being
damnified by these Abuses, have a Right and Power to control their
Extravagancies. Those that maintain the first Position, must prove, that the
Clergy has been invested with such an unlimited Power by God Almighty, to
impose upon Christians, even the most absurd Matters, at leisure, without being
liable to be contr^^ued by any Power upon Earth; Or, they must demonstrate,
that Christians have absolutely submitted their Faith to the Clergy, and that
in such a manner, that every thing which should be ordained by them, should be
received for Truth with all imaginable submission and patience. But, because it
would savor of too much Impudence to pretend to the first, it lies then at
their Door to prove, that the Clergy, and their Supreme Head, did never err,
either in Point of Doctrine, Ceremonies, or Church Government; All which having
been sufficiently demonstrated to the contrary, by the consent of several
Christian Nations. We are of Opinion, that when any Abuses are crept into the
Church, which are prejudicial to the Commonwealth, or the Authority of
Sovereigns, these, by virtue of their Sovereign Right and Prerogative, have a
Power to abolish and reform all such matters as interfere with the Public Good
and Civil Authority. At the same time, it cannot be denied, but that in a case
of such moment it may be very convenient to acquain^ the People with the
Reasons of such a Reformation, lest they should be surprised at it, and look
upon it as an Innovation, which might prove of dangerous consequence. And, if
especially, the Rights of the People are invaded by these Abuses, this
Reformation ought to be undertaken with the knowledge and approbation of the
Subjects. It may be objected, that by such a Reformation Divisions are raised
in the Church. But this is to be looked upon as a matter of no great Weight;
such a Division being not to be imputed to those that rectify such Errors, but
to those that obstinately refuse to return into the right Path, either out ^
Self-interest or Pride. There is nothing more obvious out of the ancient
Ecclesiastical History, than that such as were plainly convicted of an Error,
used to be excluded from the Communion of the Church. But such as begin a
Reformation upon a good and legal Account, can under no Color whatsoever be
accused of Schism or Rebellion. For, those are Rebels, who by forcible Ways
endeavor to withdraw themselves from the Allegiance due to their lawful
Sovereign: Whereas all such as free themselves from Abuses unjustly imposed
upon them, without their own consent, or any Divine Authority, rather deserve
to be styled defenders of their own Liberty and Conscience; especially, if
these Abuses and Errors are dangerous to their Souls. For, no Teacher, no
Bishop, no Convention whatsoever, was ever invested with an absolute Power of
domineering over Christians at pleasure, so that no Remedy should be left
against their Usurpation. It cannot therefore but be looked upon as a great
piece of Impudence in the Roman Catholic Party, when they assume to themselves
wholly and entirely the Title of the Church, with exclusion to all others, that
are not of the same Communion. For, they either must pretend their Church to be
the Universal, or else a particular Church By the Universal Church, is,
according to the Tenure of the Holy Scripture, understood the whole multitude
of the Believers, wheresoever dispersed in the World, whose Union consists in
this, That they acknowledge one God, one Redeemer, one Baptism, one Faith and
Eternal Salvation; from whence only are excluded such as pretend to dissolve
this Union; that is, who deny the true God, and his Son Christ, and who do not
agree with the very Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion. This is
the true Catholic Church, not the Pope with his Ecclesiastics and Ceremonies,
who impose their Authority upon Christendom. And, since those that, for weighty
Reasons have withdrawn themselves from the Church of Rome, may and do believe a
true Baptism, a true God and Father, a Faith agreeable to the Holy Scripture,
it is evident that the Roman Church is not to be taken for the Universal
Church; and that a Christian may be a Member of the true Catholic Church, in a
right sense, notwithstanding that he never was in the Communion of the Roman
Church, or, upon better Consideration, has freed himself from its Abuses and
Errors. But the Popish Religion, considered as a particular Church, as it ought
to be, (though, if we unravel the bottom of its modern Constitution, it will
easily appear, that the whole frame of that Church is not so much adapted to
the Rules of a Christian Congregation, as to a Temporal State; where, under a
Religious pretext, the chief aim is to extend its Sovereignty over the greatest
part of Europe) those, that have withdrawn themselves from that Communion, are
no more to be counted Rebels, than our Modern Philosophers are to be taken for
Fools and Madmen, because they differ in Opinion from Aristotle. For, all
Believers, who adhere to the true Faith, are, in regard of their Head Jesus
Christ, of an equal degree, and aim all at the same End. And Christ having
given this Promise to all Believers; That where two or three were gathered
together Mat. 18. 20.
in his Name, there would he be in the midst of them; no Church can claim any
Prerogative by reason of the number of its Adherents. What the Romanists
allege for themselves out of the Apostolical Creed, is so full of absurdity,
that it contradicts it self, viz. out of these words: I believe one Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolical Church; For, except they could cajole us into a
belief that these words imply as much as to say: There is but one true Church
upon Earth, which is the Roman Catholic, there being no other besides that, I
cannot see what Inference can be drawn from thence to their Advantage; Besides,
that the very sense of the words contradict this Interpretation, if Reason, the
Holy Scripture, and Experience it self did not sufficiently convince us to the
contrary. It is beyond contradiction, that there is but one true Church upon
Earth, there being but one God, one Christ, one Baptism, and one Faith; But,
concerning one Point, many Errors and Abuses may be committed. Neither have the
Popish Party any reason to brag of a particular Holiness, especially concerning
these matters, wherein they differ from the Protestants. The word Catholic,
relates here to a Doctrine, not to a Sovereign State, whose Authority is to be
Universal over Christendom, so that that Church is to be esteemed a Catholic
Church, which contains every particular Point of Doctrine in the true sense, as
they are proposed in the Holy Scripture; And those are called Heretics, who
only profess some particular Points out of the Holy Writ, (for such as
absolutely reject it, are counted Infidels and Reprobates) but either deny, or
explain the rest in a wrong and perverted sense. How can the Popish Clergy
therefore assume the Title of the Catholic Church, before they have, and that
without contradiction, proved every Point of their Faith out of the Holy
Scripture? Or, exclude us Protestants from that Title, till they have proved
that our Doctrine is contrary to it? Lastly, It is called the Apostolical
Church, as being founded upon the Doctrine of the Apostles. And the true Church
loses nothing of its intrinsic Value, whether it has been planted by the
Apostles, or whether the Apostolical Doctrine has been transmitted to them by
others.

. 54. But it is not a very difficult Task to Whether Subjects, without the
Consent of their Sovereigns, may separate themselves from an Erroneous Religion?
introduce a Reformation in Religion with the mutual Consent of Sovereign and
Subjects; so it may be questioned, whether Subjects may attempt a Reformation,
when their Sovereigns, and the whole Clergy, or at least the greatest part of
them, do not acknowledge their Error, but rather pretend to maintain it? In
this case, it is our Opinion that, provided these Errors ^o touch the
Fundamental Points of our (...) Subjects, as by the Grace of God, and the ^ight
of his holy Spirit have attain^ ^he true Knowledge, may separate themselves
from the Communion of that Church without the consent of their Sovereigns of
the Clergy. For, every body being accountable to God for his Religion, and
answerable for his own Soul, those Salvation cannot absolutely be committed to
any Body else; and, a Christian, in Matters of Faith, being not altogether to
rely upon his Sovereign or the Clergy, (at least no farther than their Doctrine
is congruous with the holy Scripture.) It is undeniable, that Subjects may
separate themselves from the Communion of that Church, which is prosessed by
their Sovereign and Clergy, provided they can make it evidently appear, that
such a Church is infected with gross Abuses, and dangerous Errors. For, the
Church is a College, whose Members are not kept in Union by any Temporal
Power, but by the Union of the Faith; and, whosoever relinquishes that, he
dissolves the sacred Tie of the Believers. Besides that, it is not absolutely
necessary for our Salvation, that the Church be composed of a great Number, but
the same may be obtained, either by a greater or lesser Number of the
Believers. Neither can this Separation prove in the least prejudicial to the
Sovereign Authority, it being supposed, that those who have separated
themselves adhere to the true pure Doctrine of the Gospel, free from all
Poison, and Principles dangerous or prejudicial to the Government. For, civil
Society was not instituted for Religion's sake; neither does the Church of
Christ participate of the nature of a Temporal State; and therefore a Prince
that embraces the Christian Faith, does not thereby acquire an absolute
Sovereignty over the Church or Men's Consciences. So, that, if, notwithstanding
this Separation, the Subjects pay due Allegiance to their Prince in Temporal
Affairs, there is no reason sufficient which can oblige him to trouble them
merely upon the score of their Consciences. For, what loss is it to the Prince,
whether his Subjects are of the same Religion with himself, or of unother? Or,
(which was supposed before) whether they did maintain the same Errors, as he
does? The case indeed, would be quite different, if they should endeavor to
withdaw themselves from their Allegiance, to set up a separate Society without
his Consent; though it is undeniable, that there are some Cases of Necessity,
when this civil Tie or Allegiance may be dissolved, as for Instance; when
Subjects, for want of sufficient Protection from their natural Prince, are so
hardly pressed upon by a more Potent Enemy, that they are forced to submit to
his Power. And granted the Power of Sovereigns in the Church to be much
greater, than in effect it is, Subjects are nevertheless bound to take care of
their Souls, whose Salvation is to be preferred before all other things, in
regard of which they may separate themselves from an Established Religion,
provided they are convinced of its Errors. For, that Subject who sacrifices his
Life for his Prince, does doubtless a glorious Action; but what Prince can be
so unreasonable, as to expect that his Subjects should Sacrifice their Souls to
the Devil for his sake. That Prince therefore who does trouble his faithful
Subjects for no other reason, but because they cannot conform to his Opinion
(especially if they can maintain theirs out of the Holy Scripture) commits an
Act of Injustice; Nay, I cannot see how he can with Justice force them out of
his Territories. It is true, he may refuse to receive Heretics into his
Dominions, unless it be for Reasons of State; Neither can a true Believer take
it amiss, if he is not permitted to settle in a Commonwealth governed by
Heretics. For, the Right of Naturalization belongs to Sovereigns, which they
may refuse and give to whom they think it convenient. But, as it is certainly
the greatest Injustice in the World, to force an in-born Natural Subject, who
has settled all his Fortunes in a Commonwealth, merely for his Religion's sake,
without being convicted of his Error, out of his Native Country, to the great
detriment and danger of himself and his Family. So, if a Subject inclines
voluntarily to leave his Native Country, either to avoid the Frowns of his
Prince, or the hatred of the Clergy and Common People, and to serve God with
more freedom according to his own Conscience, it ought not to be refused by his
Sovereign. I remember there is a certain Proverb used among the Germans, viz.
He that Commands the Country, Commands Religion. But this cannot be applied to
the Princes of the Roman Catholic Religion, who cannot lay any Claim to it, it
being evident that the Popish Clergy do not allow any such thing to these
Princes; And, as to what concerns the Protestant Estates of Germany, it cannot
be denied, but that they made use of this Pretension against the Emperor at the
time of the Reformation, which however ought to be thus interpreted; That they
denied the Emperor to have any Power of intermedling in the Affairs relating to
their own Dominions, not, that only they claimed it as belonging to the Rights
of Sovereignty to impose any Religion, though never so false, upon their
Subjects; notwithstanding all which, there are not wanting Examples, that
Princes have acted conformable to this Proverb with their Subjects. A Prince,
who troubles his faithful Subjects merely upon the score of Religion, commits a
gross Error; no Christian Prince being obliged to propagate his Religion by
forcible means; provided his Subjects stand firm to their Allegiance to him, he
being not answerable in particular for their Religion. It cannot be taken
notice of without astonishment, how both in former times and our Age, some
Princes, who were naturally not inclined to Cruelty, having in other respects
given great Proofs of their Clemency, yet have been prevailed upon to raise the
most horrid Persecutions against their Subjects, barely upon the score of
Religion. But it has been foretold in Holy Scripture, that this Fate should
attend the Christian Church, when it is said, That Mighty Kings upon Earth
should commit Rev. 18. 3.
Whoredom with the Whore of Babylon. And, who is ignorant that Gallants will
often commit the most barbarous Acts, merely to please their Harlots? All true
Christians therefore ought courageously to oppose the Threats and Attempts of
this Beast, committing the rest to Divine Providence. And, as for such Princes
and States, as have shaken off the Yoke of Popish Slavery, if they seriously
reflect, how their fellow-Protestants are persecuted, and in what barbarous
manner they are treated, will, questionless without my Advice, take such
measures, as may be most convenient for to secure themselves from so imminent a
Danger.

The following ANIMADVERSIONS Made by the Author, upon some Passages of a Book,
Entitled, A POLITICAL EPITOMY, Concerning the Power of Sovereigns in
Ecclesiastical Affairs. WRITTEN BY ADRIAN HOUTUYN, Having a very near Relation
to the former TREATISE, it was thought sit to Insert them here by way of
APPENDIX.
IT is a Question of the greatest moment, which, if rightly determined, tends
to the Benefit of Mankind in general, viz. Unto whom, and under what
Limitations the Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs is to be ascribed in the State?
If the old Proverb, That those who choose the middle way are commonly the most
successful, has not lost its force, it may without question, be most properly
applied in this Case, where both Extremes are equally dangerous, since thereby
the Consciences of Subjects are left to the arbitrary disposal, either of the
Pope of Rome, or their Sovereigns. There having not been wanting, both in the
last and our Age, Men eminent for their Learning, who have with very solid
Arguments opposed the Tyranny of the first, it is but reasonable for us, to
take heed, that since we have escaped the danger of Scylla, we may not be
swallowed up by Charybdis. For, as scarce any body that is in his right Senses
can go about to deny, that the Sovereign Power ows its original either to God,
or the general Consent of the People; So it is a matter mutually advantageous
both to the Prince and Subjects, to understand, how far this Power is limited
in the State, that the first may not transgress their due Bounds, and, instead
of being Fathers of their Subjects, prove their most dangerous Enemies. Adrian
Houtuyn a Civilian in Holland, having in a Treatise, called, A Political
Epitomy, inserted several Assertions tending to the latter of these two
Extremes, and it having been observed of late, that this Book has been
recommended by some Doctors in the Law, to the great detriment of young
Students; I thought it not amiss to make some Animadversions upon his LXIII,
and following SECTIONS, which may serve as a Guide to the younger Sort, lest
they, under the Cloak of asserting the Prerogatives of Sovereigns, may be
mislead into the latter of these Extremes, and attribute that to the Prince,
which God has reserved as his own Prerogative, and thus, irrecoverably, play
the Prodigal with their own Liberty and Property.

This Author speaking concerning the Prerogative of Princes, Sect. LXIII, runs
on thus: He has an uncontrolled Power over all External, Ecclesiastical
Affairs, which are not determined in the Holy Scripture. He alleges for a
Reason, because that Power is granted to Sovereigns at the same time when
Subjects submitted, themselves and their Fortunes to their Disposal. But it
ought to be taken into Consideration, that certain Matters belonging to the
external Exercise of Religious Worship have so strict an Union with the
internal Part, that, if the first be not disposed in a manner agreeable to this
inseparable Tie, the latter must of necessity undergo such Alterations, as are
inconsistent with its Nature. And, since Mr. Houtuyn does not leave the
internal Part to the Disposal of Sovereigns, how can the exterior Worship be
submitted to their mere Pleasure, considering this strict Union betwixt them?
Besides this General Submission, he speaks of admits of Limitation, in regard
of that End, for which Civil Societies were Instituted, which is, the mutual
defense against Violences: From whence it is evident, that there are certain
Matters, belonging to every private Person, derived from the State of natural
Freedom, which were not absolutely left to the Disposal of Sovereigns, at
least, no further than they were necessary to obtain that End. Religion having
not any relation to this End, it is not to be imagined, that Subjects did
submit their Religion to the arbitrary Pleasure of Sovereigns. And, it being
unquestionable, that Subjects may exercise certain Acts belonging to them by
Virtue of an inherent Right, derived from the free State of Nature, and
independent from their Sovereigns, it may rationally be concluded, that, when
Subjects did submit themselves, in Matters of Religion, to their Sovereigns, it
was done with this Supposition, that both the Prince and Subjects were of one
and the same Religion; and that the external Exercise of Religious Worship was
not left to the Disposal of the first, any further, than in such Matters as are
indifferent in regard of the internal Part of it. What is alleged concerning
the the maintaining a good Order, and avoiding of Confusion, it is to be
observed, that this is not the main End, for which Civil Societies were
Instituted, nor has it any relation to it, but only thus far, as it may be
instrumental to maintain the Public Tranquillity.

As to N. 2. It is to be observed, that, because Priests have a dependence from
the Civil Power in certain Respects belonging to its Jurisdiction, this does
not involve Religion (considered as such) under the same Subjection. The
following words ought also to be taken notice of: A Christian Prince commands
over the Church, as being a College, and representing one single Person in the
Commonwealth. The Church, thus considered, is a Civil Society or Body Politic,
founded upon the Public Authority and Power, and ought to be regarded, as
being in the same condition with other Colleges and Bodies Politic; and in
this Sense a King is the Head of the Church in his Dominions. Whoever will
consider the real difference betwixt the Church and Commonwealth, must needs
find as many Errors, as there are words here. For, because a Prince has the
Sovereign Jurisdiction in a Commonweath, consisting of Christian Subjects; no
inference is to be made, that therefore he may, in the same degree, exercise
his Sovereignty in the Church, as in the Commonwealth, and that in the same
Sense, he may be called, The Supreme Head of the Church, as of the
Commonwealth. It Is true, the Church is a Society, but not a Body Politic,
founded upon the Public Authority, but owes it Original to a higher Principle,
having not, like other Colleges, its dependency from the State. What is
alleged out of Titus, 2. 9. Colos. 3. 20, 22. Romans 13. 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 14. is
strangely misrepresented to evince, that Ecclesiastical Matters are dependent
from the absolute Pleasure of Sovereigns. What Follows might also very well
deserve some Animadversions, if it were not beyond our scope at present.

N. 13. It is a gross Error, That, as a Consequence of this Sovereign Power in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, he attributes to them, the Titles of Pastors,
Ministers, Heralds of God, Bishops, Priests, and Apostles. Pray, with what
Authority, and with what sense? For, the Duty belonging to Sovereigns, which
entitles them to the name of being the Guardians of both Tables of the
Decalogue, and of being the Foster-Fathers and Defenders of the Church, is of a
far different Nature from what he would insinuate here. And, if it be not to be
left to the absolute Judgment of the Clergy it self, with exclusion of the rest
of the Members of the Church, to determine in Ecclesiastical Affairs, what is
agreeable to the Word of God, how can this Judgment belong to the Sovereign
alone, without allowing a share to the rest of the Members of the Church?

These words in the. LXIV. Each Sovereign may establish what Religion he
pleases in his Dominions, ought not to be let pass by without a severe
Correction. The Reason alleged is very frivolous: Because all Public and
external Actions depend from the Public Authority. Is this your Assertion,
good Mr. Houtuyn, that Princes may impose what Religion they please upon their
Subjects, and by their absolute Authority make it the established Religion,
with exclusion to all others, who, if not complying, must, forsooth, sly the
Country? What Religion they please, do you say! the the Pagan, False, Fictious,
or Superstitious, it matters not which. From whence, pray, was this Power
derived to Sovereigns? Not certainly from God, except you can show us a Divine
Authority for it. Not from the common consent of those that entered into Civil
Societies; Commonwealths not being instituted for Religion's sake, and of a
later date; besides, that such a Power is not requisite for the attaining that
end, for which Civil Societies were established. Neither is it left to the bare
pleasure of any Person, though considered as in the Natural state of Freedom, to
profess what Religion he pleases: But, supposing it was, no Inference can be
made from thence, that the same may be forced upon others. The distinction he
makes betwixt the internal and external Religion, must also be taken with a
great deal of Circumspection, lest some People might persuade themselves, that
it is indifferent what Religion a Man professes in outward show, provided he be
satisfied as to the internal part of it. Furthermore, it is absolutely false,
that all Public Actions, that is, every thing done in Public in the
Commonwealth, owes its Original to the Sovereign Power; there being several
things to be done by Subjects in public, depending merely from that Liberty
belonging to them in the Natural state of Liberty, or from God's Command, or
from a certain Power granted to them by God Almighty.

It is no less false, That all exterior Actions depend from the Civil
Authority; For, according to Mr. Houtuyn's Opinion, the Doctrine of Divinity,
and the Confession of Faith, as comprehended in a certain form, are to be
reckoned among those exterior Actions. Mr. Houtuyn is much in the wrong, when
he pretends to draw an Inference from thence; that, because it belongs to
Sovereigns to take care, that their Subjects may be well instructed concerning
what Opinion they ought to have of God, as the Establisher of Justice; they
therefore have a Right of disposing (in an Arbitrary way) of revealed Religion,
and to declare any Religion whatsoever, which pretends to Revelation, the
Established Religion in the Commonwealth. It is a much grosser Mistake yet,
when he asserts: That any Religion established in a State, though never so false,
contributes to the Public Tranquillity of that Commonwealth. It is possible
that a Religion defective in some Points, may nevertheless lead People into the
way of Salvation; but those that contain false Doctrines of God and his
Attributes, are incapable of producing that Effect. The Public Tranquillity,
founded upon such false Opinions, will be very unstable, and may with more
ease, or at least with the same convenience be obtained by the true Doctrine;
especially if it be taken into consideration, that, though it be possible that
such Impostures may beguile the giddy-headed Multitude, they cannot always pass
for current among Men of a sound Understanding: It is to be remembered, that the
Southsayers at Rome cannot forbear laughing, when they meet another of the same
Profession. We must beg Mr. Houtuyn's Pardon, if we question his Authority,
when he pretends to persuade us: That Faith, which he is pleased to call every
ones private Religion, independent from any Temporal Power, will not be
impaired by a Man's professing any other Religion, established by the Sovereign
Authority; and he leaves it to the discretion of those Civil Governors, which
of all Religions they will be pleased to establish in their Dominions, whether
that of the Japoneses, of the Brachmans, Mahometans, Jews, or Christians; and
among all those that pretend to the Christian Name, such a one as may be most
agreeable to their own Fancy. I much question, whether he will meet with many
Tools, that will take his Word for it. A great part of Christendom did look
upon it as a thing insufferable, that the Pope of Rome should set up for the
great Arbitrator of Christendom in matters relating to the Christian Faith,
though his Pretenses did not reach further than to force one Religion upon the
World, which he knew was most likely to turn to his own Advantage: But now it
seems it has pleased God, that Sovereigns should be invested with a Power of
establishing any Religion at pleasure; and it being beyond question, that there
are several Religions which have not the least relation to one another, they
may, with the same Right, at several times, declare, several distinct
Religions, nay, even those that are quite opposite to one another, the
established Religion, and nevertheless every one of these must be accepted,
forsooth, as the true Religion. The next Consequence will be, that Sovereigns,
having a Right of defending and altering the established Religion, and to
punish such as trespass against it, one Prince will have no more Right to
cherish and maintain one Religion, but his Successors may, with the same Right,
abolish it, and punish such of his Subjects as adhere to it. So that according
to the Doctrine of Mr. Houtuyn's Gospel, the established Religion will be
settled upon the same Foundation with some Statutes, which may be enacted and
repealed by Sovereigns at pleasure.

In. LXV. He entirely, and without limitation, ascribes to the Prince the Power
of Constituting Ministers of the Gospel, in the same manner as if they were
Ministers of the State. But in the Commonwealth of the Jews, regulated
according to God's own Institution, no such Power was granted to their Kings;
Neither had the Apostles themselves, (though the most general Teachers that ever
were (as being sent to Preach the Gospel to all the World) their Authority of
Teaching from any Temporal Sovereigns. Neither can it be proved, that the
Church, at the time, when Sovereigns first embraced the Christian Faith, did
transferr this Power of constituting Ministers of the Gospel, without
limitation, to those Princes; though at the same time it is not to be denied, but
that Sovereigns have a considerable share in it. His Argument taken from the
care Parents ought to have of the Salvation of their Children, does not reach
to what he pretends to prove; for, says he, Princes being the Public Fathers
of the Commonwealth; it belongs to their Princely Office, to provide for the
Eternal Salvation of their Subjects. For, besides that, the Title of Father of
the Commonwealth is a Metaphorical Expression, the Fatherly and the Regal
Office depend from a quite different Principle, and the care to be taken of
Children of a tender Age, is of another Nature with that which ought to be
employed for the Safety of a whole People; neither were Sovereigns invested
with the Supreme Authority to enable them to procure Eternal Salvation to their
Subjects, God having prescribed other ways and means for the obtaining of it.
It cannot be denied, but that a Prince must not be regardless of this Care,
nevertheless ought the same not to reach beyond its due Bounds, but must be
effected by such Methods as are approved of in the Holy Scripture, and suit
with the true Genius of the Christian Religion; Wherefore, it is in vain to
attribute to Sovereigns a Power of obtruding any Religion, at pleasure, upon
their Subjects; it being beyond question, that not all Religions are conducing
to obtain Eternal Salvation. So Abraham, the Father of Believers, did not
impose upon his Children what Religion he thought most convenient, but he
charged them to walk in the ways of the Lord, such as were manifested to them
in the Holy Scripture. What St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2. 2. is very well worth
taking notice of, viz. That the chief care of the Supreme Governors shall be,
so to Rule over their Subjects, that they may live under them, not only
honestly, but piously; this being the way to Eternal Salvation. It is to be
observed, that those Princes, for whom the Apostle enjoined the Christians to
pray, being Pagans, made but little account of Piety, especially of that
belonging to the Christians; but it was thought sufficient for the Christians
to enjoy the common Benefit of the Public Tranquillity under their Protection,
the rest being left to their own care. So we read that the Poet's enjoyment of
his Muses, was owing to Augustus Caesar's Protection; nevertheless the Emperor
did not concern himself about the Rules of Poetry. Furthermore, it is a very
gross way of Arguing, when he Asserts: That, the Commonwealth and Church are
both one and the same thing under a Christian Prince, whose Subjects also
profess the Christian Religion, the only difference being in respect of their
different Qualifications: They being in the Commonwealth to be considered as
they are Subjects, in the Church as Believers. It seems, Mr. Houtuyn looks upon
that Difference to be of little moment, which arises from diverse Moral
Qualifications, and includes different Obligations, and is founded upon another
Legal Principle. It is confessed, that in such a case where the Head is not
differing in his Natural Constitution from the Rights and Power belonging to
him, the rest of the Members, though differently considered under diverse
Qualifications, are nevertheless to be looked upon as one and the same Society.
As for instance: If a Prince puts himself at the Head of all his Subjects upon
an Expedition, these, though they may be considered either as Soldiers or
Subjects, yet do not differ in any Essential Part; As for Example: The People
of Israel, when going upon their Expedition under the Conduct of Joshua, was
the very same that afterward, under his Protection, enjoyed and inhabited the
Country of Canaan. But the Church and Commonwealth, though composed out of the
self-same Persons, do not only differ in their very Foundation, but also a
Sovereign cannot claim the same Right and Name of being the Supreme Head of the
Church in the same sense, as he is the Supreme Governor of the State. For, in
the latter he exercises his Authority without control, being subject to no
body; But, the Head of the Church is Christ, who Rules it by his Word,
announced to us by the Teachers of the Church; so, that a Sovereign cannot as
much as claim the Right of being Christ's Vicegerent in the Church; And, on the
other hand, though it is said of Christ, That all Power is given unto him in
Heaven, and upon Earth, nevertheless it cannot be said of him, to be, in the
same manner, the Head of Civil Societies, as of the Church. The next following
Assertion runs thus: Where the whole Commonwealth is not composed out of
Christians, the Church is a Congregation of the Believers in the Commonwealth.
But, where all Subjects are Christians, the Church is nevertheless nothing else
than a College in the Commonwealth. But what he alleges of the Church being
sometimes taken in the same sense with the Commonwealth, is absolutely false.
For the words, (...) in Acts 14 23. and those in Titus 1. 5. (...) are no
Synoms; but the latter is to be understood thus: In all the Towns and Cities,
where there was any Christian Church. The Inference he would make from the
Military Function, and the Administration of Justice, being both included in
one Government, is to no purpose; both of them owing their Offspring to that
End for which Civil Societies were instituted, which is not the same in the
Church; and Sovereigns are entrusted with the Sword of War and Justice, not
with the Ministerial Function of Preaching the Gospel. From whence it comes,
that Generals and Judges are subordinate to the Princely Office, but not the
Ministers of the Gospel, they being (barely considered as such) not properly
Ministers of the Prince and State, but Ministers of Christ and the Church. He
says further; That the assignation of the Ministerial Function does not
appertain to the Internal part of Religion. But if Faith comes from hearing,
and no body can believe, without being instructed; it is undeniable, that those
that Preach the Gospel, have a share in the internal part of Religion, they
being to be considered as the Instruments, by the help of whom, the Gospel, and
consequently the Faith, is conveyed to their Auditors. It is false, when he
asserts, That Sovereigns, though no Christians, have a Right of constituting
Ministers; For, says he, their Right is the same. But a Prince, who makes not
Profession of the Christian Faith, though he has Christian Subjects under his
Jurisdiction, and allows them the free Exercise of their Religion, has
nevertheless not the least Power over their Church, as being no Member of it.
It is no less false, what he says, that since Princes are become Christians,
the Vocation of Ministers does no more depend from the Church; Just as a Man,
by submitting himself under another Jurisdiction, is no more at his own
disposal. For, a Prince by becoming a Member of the Church, does thereby not
make himself Master of that Church, but rather submits to the Obedience of
Christ, the Head of the Church; and therefore does not incroach all its Rights
to himself, but only can claim his share as such, unless a certain Church
should voluntarily surrender its Rights, as far as it lies in its power, to the
Sovereign. And I see no reason, why the Church may not be under the Protection
of a Christian Sovereign, as representing a certain Person in the Commonwealth,
and therefore to Act and Decree by plurality of Votes, which implies a Right,
at least by Consent. For, there is a Medium betwixt the State or Commonwealth
and a disorderly Multitude, viz. a College, where there is no occasion for a
coer^ive ^overeign Power. This may be illustrated by an Example: For, supposing
in a Commonwealth a certain Society or Company of Merchants, regulated by
certain Statures of their own, under the Direction of some of its own Members.
Into this College a Prince has a mind to be received as a Member, paying his
certain share. By being thus made a Member of this Company, he has not obtained
an absolute disposal over this Society; but rather has accommodated himself to
the Statutes of the College, neither can he claim any other Prerogative there,
but what is derived either from his share in that Company, or from a free Gift,
and voluntary consent of the rest of its Members; and as a Member of this
College he is to be considered, not as a Prince, but as a Merchant. There is
nevertheless one remarkable difference, viz. That it is in the Power of a
Sovereign to hinder the setting up of such a Society, which is not the same in
regard of the Church. He plainly betrays his Ignorance, when he says: That the
Church is to be considered as a multitude of People, comprehended in the Person
of one Prince; from whence the Prince represents the People, like one Public
Person, through whom the whole People declare their Sentiments. For, though this
be appliable to the Commonwealth, it is not to the Church, they being quite
different from one another. It cannot be denied, but that those who have the
Sovereign Power in the State, may Enact what Laws they think most convenient;
But to attribute the same Power to Sovereigns over the Church, is a Madness,
and savours of Blasphemy. And, supposing a Prince should be misled into Errors,
or Heresy, must therefore the whole Church be accounted Erroneous, or
Heretical? Except he would persuade us also, that Princes are Infallible.
Wherefore in those places where the Election of Ministers is independent from
the Prince, it is supposed to proceed from a Right transferred unto him by the
Church; The same is to be understood, where this Election is managed either by
the Bishops or Presbyters. But in case the same be done by the whole Church, it
would be preposterous to say, that such an Election was made by virtue of a
Privilege granted by the Prince. Mr. Houtuyn having granted before, That the
Pastoral Function, not being annexed to any certain Person, (considered as
such) had no dependency from the Civil Jurisdiction, but owed its Institution
to Christ. Nevertheless in. LXVI. he affirms: That the actual Administration of
the Ministerial Function is an External Public Act, such as is subject to the
Civil Power. Which is the same in effect, as if he said, Matrimony is a Divine
Institution, but it depends from the Prince, whether he will allow his Subjects
to Marry actually or not. For, supposing a Sovereign should take a Resolution
to forbid the ancient Exercise of the Ministerial Function, what would, in such
a Case, become of this Pastoral or Ministerial Function? It is also
insufferable what he says immediately after: An Election is a voluntary Act,
therefore revocable at pleasure; it being certain, that it cannot be done
without impairing the Reputation of the Minister.

What relates to. LXVII. It is denied, that Nebuchadonosor had any legal
Authority to put to Death such as refused to adore the great Statue, set up by
his Order. For, a Prince who inflicts any Punishment upon his Subjects, against
the express Command of the holy Scripture, does not, at that time exercise his
legal Authority, but commits an hostile and tyrannical Act. So, when King Ahab,
under pretense of a legal Process, and by subborning of false Witnesses,
possessed himself of Naboth's Vineyard, did no more exercise his legal
Jurisdiction, than a Guardian may be said to do, when he commits a Rape upon a
Pupil committed to his Management. But, when the same Nebuchadonosor publishes
his Edict, That no body dare to blaspheme the God of the Jews, he did, without
all question, nothing but what belonged to his high Station. He runs on
further; viz. That Peter, John, Stephen, Paul, nay, even our Savior himself,
did appear before the Sanhedrim, before Foelix, Festus, Caesar and Pilate,
without taking the least Exception against the legality of their Jurisdiction.
What could be more falsely invented? Did Peter and John acknowledge the
Jurisdiction of the Sanhedrim in respect of the Christian Doctrine, when they
told them to their very Faces, that they would not obey their Command, of not
preaching in the Name of Jesus? Did Stephen acknowledge the Jurisdiction Act.
4. 19, 20.
of the Sanhedrim, when he told them, You uncircumcised in your Hearts and
Ears, you always resist the holy Ghost? Neither is it an Argument, that Paul,
and an infinite Number of Martyrs did acknowledge the Jurisdiction of those
Princes, and other Civil Magistrates, when they, being forced to appear before
them, endeavored to prove their Innocence, there being no other Tribunal to
which they could appeal; and it being at that time looked upon as a Crime
deserving Death, for any one to profess himself a Christian. All the defense
they made may be reduced under two Heads: For they either denied those Crimes
laid to their Charge, as calumnious, or else they asserted even to the last,
That the profession of the Christian Religion did not depend from the Civil
Jurisdiction. And those Magistrates that absolved the Confessors of this Truth,
did in effect give this Sentence: That this was a Cause not belonging to their
Jurisdiction. It is a wonder to me how Mr. Houtuyn, who pretends to be a
Lawyer, can find out any thing in the least resembling a legal Process in that
Action of Pilate, it being to be considered no otherwise than a public
Robbery, and a power Luke 22. 53.
of darkness, since in all his Proceedings, there is not a footstep of a legal
Process to be met with. And it is so manifest, that, when religious Matters
were in question, the due Method and judicial Order of a legal Process have
been violated a thousand times over and over, that it would be superfluous to
allege any Examples of it here. When Sovereigns punish or chastise a Pastor or
Minister of the Church, who has abused his Function, or been defective in it,
this power does properly not proceed from the Civil Jurisdiction, but from a
Right translated to the Sovereign by the Church. But those that are punished by
the Civil Authority, because they have stirred up, by their turbulent Speeches
and Sermons, the People to Rebellion against their Soverereigns, or have
attempted to withdraw the Auditors from, and to resist the Power of a legal
Jurisdiction, cannot be said to undergo Punishment on the account of the
Christian Religion. Furthermore, it is false, that the Church (considered as
such) can claim any Jurisdiction, properly speaking. It is no less false, that
the Power of disposing and exercising those Functions, belonging to each
Church, is a civil Act, in regard of its public Effect. Mr. Houtuyn has been
drawn into all these Errors, by confounding the Commonwealth with the Church.
If these two be not very nicely distinguished, but we allow the Church to be
entirely swallowed up in the civil Power, what have we got by shaking of the
Popish Yoke? For, the condition of the Church will be never the better, if all
Ecclesiastical Matters, without Exception are left to the arbitrary Disposal of
Sovereigns; To maintain which, Mr. Houtuyn, in contradiction to all Reason and
the Scripture it self, has invented; A spiritual Good, or the eternal Welfare
of People, as the main End and Duty of the Sovereign Power; By Virtue of which,
he enables his Prince to force his Subjects to profess publicly what Religion
he will be pleased to impose upon them, though never so contrary to their own
Opinion. For it may be sufferable for a Man to keep his own Opinion concealed
to himself, but to be obliged to profess what is quite contrary to it, is both
abominable and intolerable. The Saying of Constantine the Great, so much
extolled by Mr. Houtuyn himself, is contradictory to his Assertion, viz. That
he could have wished, all his Subjects to have been Christians, but that he
never forced any. For, this Emperor not only never attempted to force any one
from his own Opinion (which indeed was beyond his Power) but also never
constrained his Subjects to profess themselves Christians against their own
Inclinations. Our Author does also not a little contradict himself, in what he
says concerning Words, sometimes exempting them from any civil Cognizance;
whereas, before he had made them liable to the civil Jurisdiction: What, says
he; if our Faith expressed by Words should come to the knowledge of our
Sovereign? It ought to be looked upon not so much as a Crime, but rather as an
Error, to correct which, is not to be effected by Punishments (which do
illuminate our Mind) but rather by good Instructions. But those that know the
real difference betwixt the Commonwealth and Church, that is to say, betwixt
the State and a College, may without much difficulty dissolve these knotty
Questions, which he has started concerining the Jurisdiction and Legislative
Power of Princes over the Church.

As to the. LXIX. It is to be observed, that it is put beyond all question,
that Sovereigns have a Right to give the Authority and Force of a Law to such
Statutes as they find suitable to the State, it being their Prerogative to
determine, according to what Laws Judgment is to be given in Civil Courts of
Judicature, what is punishable, and what is to be left to the Conscience of
every Subject. But it implies an Absurdity, to attribute to Sovereigns a Right
of giving public Authority to Prophesies themselves, neither the Intrinsic
nor Historical Faith having any dependence on the Civil Jurisdiction, by the
force of which Subjects may be obliged to act, but not to believe. From whence
it is evident, that if any Prophecy appear to be from God, it cannot receive
any Addition by the Authority of the Prince, no more than if he should declare
Cicero to be a good Latin Author. But in case a pretended Prophecy be either
ambiguous or supposititious in it self, and a Prince should persuade himself to
be able by his own Authority to make it pass current for Truth, he would be
looked upon as one beyond his Senses; What he insinuates concerning the New
Testament in general, is much of the same Stamp: It was not, says he, in the
power of Christ and his Apostles, to establish this Doctrine (of the New
Testament) by Public Authority, which was the reason it remained in a private
condition, ^ill such time when Princes having received the Christian Faith,
they gave it a public Authority, and the force of Laws. But the Rules and
Doctrine of Christ cannot receive any additional Strength from the Civil Power,
it being contrary to its Genius to be established and promoted by civil
Punishments; For, whosoever out of fear of Temporal Punishments, professes in
outward show only this Doctrine, does not act according to, nor fulfill the Will
of Christ.

The same may be repliy'd to. LXX. For, as the Scripture and the Christian
Doctrine do not owe their Authority to the civil Jurisdiction, the latter being
introduced in the Government by God's peculiar Assistance, inspite of all the
Resistance of the civil Powers; So ought the Interpretation of the the
ambiguous and controverted Passages in the holy Scripture, not to be determined
by the Sovereign Authority; it belonging not to the Prince only, but to the
whole Church, or such as are authorized by the Church; though at the same time,
the Prince, considered as the Chief Member of it, cannot b^ ^xcluded from
having his share in such a Debate. It is a profane Expression when he says:
Christ himself having an unquestionable Power of introducing a new Law, must
needs have a right to interpret the same. But, since during the time of his
abode here, he lived among those, that either out of Ignorance or Disobedience
did not own Christ, and that in a private Condition, subject to the civil
Power; it is evident, that his Laws, Doctrine, and the Interpretation of them,
did acquire their obliging Power, and public Authority from the civil
Constitution. A little more would have made the Office of Christ, as being
Mediator of the World, also dependent from the civil Jurisdiction. Is it not a
prodigious Absurdity to affirm; That the Doctrine of Christ has received its
public Authority from the civil Power, among those, who denied Christ? And
what follows: That, if at the time of Christ, Princes had been Christians, they
would have acknowledged him for the true God, and the Son of God, submitting
themselves to his Judgment; so, that the Interpretation of the Christian
Doctrine would have been owing by Christ, to their Submission. Away with such
Fictions not agreeable even to common Sense. He might as well say, that God's
Power over us Mortals did owe its original to the submission of Princes; and in
case they thought fit to withdraw themselves from this Obedience, God Almighty
(I cannot relate it without horror) must thereby be reduced to the Condition of
a private Person.

In the next Assertion, he is not altogether so much beyond his Senses, when he
grants, even to Pagan Princes, a Right of determining the controverted Points
among Christians, which is as much as to make a blind Man a competent Judge of
the difference of Colors. When the Primitive Christians were forced to appear
before the Pagan Judges, it was not on the Account of the Interpretation of the
Scripture; The Christians could never be guilty of so gross an Error, as to
Consult with the Unbelieving concerning the controverted Articles of Faith;
But, being forced, against their will, to appear before them, they could not
avoid to receive their Judgment, such as they were pleased to give, as having
no way left them to decline it. Furthermore, our Author is pleased to affirm,
That such an Interpretation ought to be looked upon as established by Public
Authority, which carries along with it an obliging force, at least in outward
appearance; so, that Subjects are obliged to conform themselves to it by a
verbal Confession, though never so discrepant, from that Opinion, they keep
concealed within their hearts. But, the outward Behavior, and verbal
Confessions of a Christian, which are not agreeable to the true Sentiments of
his Heart, having not the least affinity with Religion it self, I don't see,
upon what Account this Chimerical Power is attributed to Princes, unless it be,
to furnish them with a specious pretext to afflict their Innocent Subjects.
Thus much is certain, that Christ did not command his Doctrine to be propagated
by forcible means; so, that, supposing the Articles, thus established by the
Civil Authority, to be never so consonant to Truth, it is nevertheless
inconsistent with the Genius of the Christian Religion, to impose them upon
Subjects by force, and under severe Penalties; But, supposing them to be false,
the case of Subjects must needs be very miserable, when they suffer Punishment,
because they will not profess an erroneous or false Doctrine. I see no other
benefit to be reaped from the egregious Assertions of our Author, than to serve
for a Justification of the most Tyrannical Persecutions that have been, and to
declare them to have been done by Virtue of a Legal Authority. At this rate it
will be no difficult Task to justify the Proceedings against the Protestants
in France, which move both Pity and Horror in all good Men, at least, Mr.
Houtuyn has very freely offered his Advice and Patronage. What follows next, is
very smartly said, to wit, That the Coersive Power may be Legal, whereas the
Act of Obedience is not allowable. No body of common sense but will
acknowledge, that this implies a most manifest Contradiction, and, that the
Legal Sovereign Authority, and the Obligation of paying Obedience to it, are
inseparable from one another. Yet with this Nicety Mr. Houtuyn is so mightily
taken, that he does not consider, that at the same time, he grants an absolute
Authority to his Prince, to persecute his Subjects on the Account of Religion,
he takes away from them the Power of denying the true Religion. But, what
Reason can be given, why the one should have a coersive Power, where the other
cannot obey; unless it be done on purpose to encourage ambitious and imperious
Princes, either to force their Subjects to a sinful compliance, or never to
want an Opportunity of afflicting the Innocent at Pleasure? For those that take
to these violent ways of propagating the Faith, or rather (to speak Truth)
Hypocrisy and Superstition, by their booted Apostles, are not contented to
silence their Subjects, dissenting from them in Point of Religion, who are also
debarred even to save themselves by flight; (though it be no small Misfortune to
a Subject, to be forced to leave his Native Country) but they compel them to
profess publicly those things for Truth, which they abhor in their Hearts, and
appear to be Idolatrous, Superstitious, or Fictitious; invented on purpose by
those that make their Market by Religion. Mr. Houtuyn himself cannot but
confess, That no body can safely acquiesce in any determination made concerning
an Article of Faith, unless by his own private Judgment he find it agreeable to
the Word of God. And, if he find it not consonant to that, he ought not to rest
satisfied in it, for fear he should disown his Faith, this being the worst, and
most unbecoming thing belonging to a Christian. But, if it be unbecoming a
Christian to deny his Faith, which is the same in effect, as to rest satisfied
in ones own private Opinion and Conscience, to keep secret within the heart
what one believes, not to indulge ones Tongue, and to refrain from External
Actions. This being the Advice (which in contradiction to himself, he had not
long before given to the Dissenting Subjects) what Reason can he give for his
Assertion, when he attributes to his Prince a Power so unlimited, that his
Christian Subjects must either be forced to undergo such an Indignity, or else
the most horrible Persecutions that can be invented? The first Inventer of this
unlimited Power, as far as ever I could learn, was Mr. Thomas H^bbs, the worst
Interpreter that ever was in Divinity; whose Opinion, as to this kind, no body
has taken so much pains to revive with the same Impudence, as Mr. Adrian
Houtuyn. What I most admire at, is, that this should be attempted by one living
in a State, whose Maxims are quite opposite to these Principles, and where
consequently he could not reasonably propose to himself any Reward of his
Adulation; There being not the least likelihood that the States General of the
United Provinces should ever lay claim to such a Power; As it is not very
probable that Princes will apply themselves to the Ministry of the Church, and
undertake the Public Exercise of the Pastoral Function in Person; so, that I
cannot see, to what purpose our Author has been so careful in asserting it, in
the behalf of Sovereigns; Unless he has pleased himself with this Fancy, that
his Assertions cannot fail to make him to be the more admired among the
Youngsters, by how much the more remote they are from common Sense. Thus much
at present for Mr. Houtuyn.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black Boy, over against St. Dunstan 's
Church in Fleet Street.
SOlid Philosophy asserted, against the Fancies of the Ideists: Or, The Method
to Science farther illustrated. With Reflections on Mr. Lock's Essay concerning
Human Understanding. By I. S.

A True History of the several Designs and Conspiracies against His Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government; as they were continually carried on from 1688. to
1697. Containing Matters extracted from Original Papers, Depositions of the
Witnesses, and Authentic Records, as appears by the References to the
Appendix, wherein they are digested. Published with no other Design than to
acquaint the English Nation, that notwithstanding the Present Posture of
Affairs, our Enemies are still so Many, Restless, and Designing, that all
imaginable Care ought to be taken for the Defense and Safety of His Majesty and
his Three Kingdoms. By R. K.

The Doctrine of Acids in the Cure of Diseases farther asserted: Being an
Answer to some Objections raised against it by Dr. F. Tuthill, of Dorchester in
Dorsetshire. In which are contained some things relating to the History of
Blood: As also an Attempt to prove what Life is, and that it is principally
supported by an Acid and Sulphur. To which is added an Exact Account of the
Case of Edmund Turner, Esquire deceased; as also the Case of another Gentleman, now
living, exactly parallel to Mr. Turner's. By John Colbatch, a Member of the
College of Physicians, London.

Books Printed for A. Bosvile, at the Dial against St. Dunstan 's Church in
Fleet Street.
A Discourse of Conscience. Showing, 1. What Conscience is, and what are its
Acts and Offices. 2. What is the Rule of it. 3. The several sorts of
Conscience. 4. How some Practical Cases or Questions concerning Conscience may
be resolved. 5. The Benefit and Happiness of a Good Conscience, and the
Unhappiness of an Evil one. 6. How a Good Conscience may be attained, and how
we may judge whether we have attained it. Published chiefly for the Benefit of
the Unlearned, though it may also be useful to others. Together with brief
Reflections upon that which the Author of Christianity not Mysterious says
upon that known Text, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

The Christian Belief: Wherein is asserted and proved, That as there is nothing
in the Gospel contrary to Reason, yet there are some Doctrines in it above
Reason; and these being necessarily enjoined us to Believe, are properly
called, Mysteries; In Answer to a Book, entitled, Christianity not Mysterious.
The Second Edition; with a Preface, and other Additions.


