THE University of OXFORDS Plea refuted. OR, A full ANSWER to a late printed
Paper, Entitled, The Privileges of the University of Oxford in point of
Visitation: Together with, the Universities Answer to the Summons of the
Visitors.

Manifesting the Vanity and Falsity of this pretended University Privilege and
Plea to the Visitors Jurisdiction; That the right of Visiting the University of
Oxford is only in the Kings Majesty, and that it is exempt from all other
Jurisdiction by its Foundation, Prescription, and several Grants of Exemption.
And insufficiency of all the Allegations and Authorities produced to support it.

Published for the information of the Judgments, and satisfaction of the
consciences of all ingenuous Members of that University, who only out of
Ignorance or Error, not Obstinacy or Malignity, have demurred to the
Jurisdiction of the Visitors thereof, though appointed, authorized by Ordinance
of Parliament, and Commission under the Great Seal of England.

By William Prynne, Esquire one of the said Visitors

Prove. 19. 20. Hear Counsel, and receive Instruction, that thou may he wise
in in thy latter end.

London, Printed by T. B. for Michael Spark, 1647.

ROBERT: DAVIES of ILannerch^ Denbighshire^



The University of OXFORDS Plea refuted.
THE ingenuous Answer of some of the Doctors, and both the Proctors of my
Mother-University of Oxford, to the honorable standing Committee of Lords and
Commons for its regulation, on the 16. of this instant November, (before whom
they were then personally convented, for demurring to the jurisdiction of the
Visitors appointed them by both houses of Parliament) to this effect: That they
did in their former papers presented by the Proctors, October 8. by way of
petition, only represent their sense of their own privileges, and their
Obligations (as they conceived) by diverse oaths for the maintaining of them,
without circumscribing or limiting, much less denying or contemning the
authority of the Lords and Commons, but purposely avoiding (as still they did
desire to avoid) all questions of so high and transcendent a nature; it being
possible that they might be in an error, and yet to be obliged in conscience,
not to do otherwise then they have done, till they are convinced of that
error. And therefore humbly d^sired convenient time to advise with council,
more fully to inform themselves, in a case so extraordinary, and of so great
concernment, not only to themselves, but to the whole University in present,
and in future, etc. enduced me, not only then to move this honorable
Committee, that the University and they might be fully heard by their Counsel
on a convenient day, to allege whatever they could, both in maintenance of
their respective Answers delivered in under their hands to some of the
Visitors, and then by them there acknowledged, which was accordingly ordered in
their favor; But likewise to borrow some time from my other employments, to
examine and refute all those pretended University privileges, and false
allegations to support them, in a Letter lately printed at Oxford (by the
Universities approbation, if I am not misinformed) entitled, The Privileges
of the University of OXFORD in point of Visitation, etc. (which has seduced
many to dispute and disobey the Visitors power;) wherein the substance of all
their Objections against the Visitors jurisdiction in point of law or
conscience, are comprised; that so I might in a University way, by strength of
argument and evidence, not by power and force, inform the misguided judgments,
and satisfy the erroneous consciences of all such members of this University,
liable to our visitation, whose obstinacy or malignity shall not render them
altogether incapable of better instruction, and consequently of any hopes of
commiseration or pardon for their contumacy.

I^ is not my design in this summary Discourse, to enter into any large debate
of the Sovereign power of both houses of Parliament, whose supreme jurisdiction
to visit, punish; reform all abuses and corruptions in the Kings own Court, in
the highest Courts of Justice, the greatest Officers of State, and in all
Corporations and Societies of men whatsoever, within this Realm, I have largely
vindicated in The Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, Part 1, 2. and
the Appendix at the end of the fourth part.
other Treatises, seeing the University it self, and the parties convented, do
willingly wave this dangerous Dispute, as fatal and destructive to them, if
positively insisted on; but only to demonstrate to them the vanity and falsity
of this their pretended Privilege they peremptorily assert, and principally
rely on, as their lawful Inheritance and Birthright, which they are obliged
by oath and duty to maintain.

That the right of visiting the University of Oxford is only in the Kings
Majesty, and that it is exempt from all other jurisdiction, both by foundation,
prescription, and several grants of exemption.

This their claim and assertion, I shall irrefragably falsify and refute by
Histories and Records, which clearly evidence;

First, That the University of Oxford was anciently of right for many ages,
under the jurisdiction, if not visitation of the Bishop of Lincoln, as he was
their Diocesan.

Secondly, that it was anciently of right, and so continued till this
Parliament, under the visitation and jurisdiction of the Archbishops of
Canterbury as Metropolitanes (who have frequently visited this University and
Cambridge too) as being within their Province, and have been acknowledged and
adjudged by King Richard the second, King Henry the fourth, and an whole
Parliament in his reign, and by King Charles himself, upon solemn debate, to be
lawful Visitors of it, de jure. And that these three Kings, and the Parliament
of 13. H. 4. have by their Charters and Votes absolutely disclaimed the King's
sole right of visiting the Universities, and always resolved the contrary,
when the Universities for their own ends have set it on foot, and laid claim
unto it: no King of England before Henry the eight, ever visiting either of the
Universities, for ought appears by any authentic Records.

Thirdly, That the Pope by his Legate has visited both Universities, without
resistance, or any Plea put in to his jurisdiction, no longer since then Q.
Mary's reign; and that the Universities are subject to their Chancellours
jurisdiction and visitation too, by their own conffessions.

Fourthly, That most particular Colleges and Hals in both Universities, as
Colleges, Hals and Members of the University^ have their particular Visitors
appointed by the founders, to whose visitation and jurisdiction they are
subject, and not to the King's alone.

Fifthly, That their pretended grants of exemption were procured only from
Popes, not from the Kings of England; that our Kings themselves and one
Parliament, have damned them, as derogatory to the King's Prerogative, even in
times of Popery, and the University it self disclaimed and renounced, them both
before the King, and in full Convocation, as a grievance, not a privilege,
obtained against their wills, and without their privity, to their prejudice.

When I have made good these positions, the whole University and their
Delegates (if not stupendiously obstinate) must necessarily retract this their
Plea as false and nugatory, and disclaim their imaginary Privilege.

For the first of these, it is as clear as the noon^ day Sun, that the
University of Oxford was under the jurisdiction, if not visitation of the
Bishops of Lincoln, as being their Diocesans: First, by the very Bulls of Pope
About Anno 1300.
Boniface the eight, and Anno 1475.
Sixtus the fourth, cited in the third page of the Privileges of the
University of Oxford in point of Visitation; in express terms exempting the
University, ab omni jurisdictione Episcopali and a Visitatione: which needed no
such exemption by two successive Popes, from the Bishops jurisdiction and
visitation, if the University (founded many hundred years before these Bulls
were granted) had never been subject to, but exempted from it by foundation and
prescription too, as is pretended; it being then a mere superfluity for these
Popes to grant, or the University to embrace, as a special privilege and
indulged favor.

Next, by these ensuing clear Historical passages: Tiguri 1589.
Matthew Paris in anno dom. 1257. page 915, 916. writes thus concerning the
Bishop of Lincolns and University of Oxford's contest then happening between
them about his jurisdiction and the Universities privileges, which he
endeavored to infringe in the general, without specifying the particulars,
which difference was referred to the Parliament then at hand to determine.

Eodem tempore, videlicet septimo idus Martii, venerunt ad sanctum Albanum
quidam Magistri Oxoniae, circiter novem Artistle, q^i querula voce coram Rege,
in Capella Sancti Oswini reposuerunt querimoniam de Episcopo Lincolniensi, qui
contra Statuta Universitatis antiqua and approbaca, nitebatur libertates
Scholarium eneruare: and statutus est dies responsionis ad instans magnum
Parliamentum, ut auditis partium rationibus, pacificarentur, etc. Godwin's
Catalog^e of Bishops, p. 241 242. who likewise recites this controversy.
Henry Lexinton was then Bishop of Lincoln.

What the Parliament (here made the proper Judge of the Universities
privileges by the Kings own refere^ce) determined in this controversy, or
what the privileges co^troverted were, I find not in any Historian or Record:
but certain it is, they determined naught against the Bishops jurisdiction over
the University of Oxford, who had the better cause and right; as appears by
this passage of Matthew Parker, in his Londini 1572.
Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 204. in the life of John Peckam, anno 1287.

Hoc etiam tempore lis quaedam inter. Lincolniensem Episcopum and Universitat^m
Oxon, aliquot innis de jurisdictione Episcopi in Scholares Universitatis
agitata est. In qua Joannis Cantuariensis, cum SCHOLARIVM CAVSAM VACILLARE, NEC
IVRA STARE POSSE intellexerat, Scholaribus rescripsit; si in Jure contenderent,
VINCI EOS ET SVPERARI NECESSE ESSE; praesertim cum his quibus uterentur
Privilegiis A JURISDICTION EPISCOPALI IVRE COMMVNI STABILITA, EXIMI NEQVAQVAM
POTVISSENT: Godwins Catalog^e o^ Bishops, p. 242.
Oliver Sutton was then Bishop of Lincoln.

Upon this advice, it seems the University submitted to the Bishop of Lincoln's
jurisdiction, as their Diocesan, so far as to present their Chancellor to him
for his approbation and confirmation; as is evident by this History, recorded
in Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 268.

Anno 1350. Oxoniensis Universitatis Scholares Cancellarium suum, quendam
Willihelmum de Palmorna elegerunt: Qui cum ad Lincolniensem Episcopum, in cujus
Diocaesi tunc ste^i^ Oxonium confirmandus venisset, crebris procrastinationibus
in aliud temporis ab Episcopo rejectus est: Id tam Universitas Oxonien^is quam
ipse Cancella^ius electus indigne tulit. Qui facti querela coram A^^chiepiscopo
(Simone Islippe) declarata, ab eo opem and remedium ad tam diutinam and
voluntariam sine causa tollendam moram, petierunt. Archiepiscopus edicto
Lincolniensi praecepit, Ut Cancellarium electum die quodam statuto confirmaret,
aut coram se compareret, dicturus causam, cur admitti and confirmari non
debeat. Interea Archiepiscopus causam Johanni Coulton Cancellario suo, and
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Wellensis Decano commisit. Die statuto aderant
Cancellarius electus, and Oxoniensis Universitatis procuratores, qui
confirmationem and consecrationem instanter petierunt; Lincolniensis autem
Episcopus non comparuit: in cujus absentis contumaciam Cantuariensis
Cancellarius in negotio electionis legitime procedens, eam legitime riteque
celebratam, ac canonicam esse pronunciavit. Quo facto Archiepiscopus
Cancellarium confirmavit, and eundem ad Universitatem Oxoniensem regendam
admisit; gregique Scholarium scripsit, ut ei jam admisso juxta Universitatis
jura ac statuta obtemperent atque pareant. Ab hac admissione Lincolniensis
Episcopus privilegie suo antedicto (ut se suosque papali privilegio, quod
Avinione a Papa Clemente magnis muneribus impetravit, ab hujus Archiepiscopi
jurisdictione defenderet) fretus, ad Papam appellavit. Archiepiscopus antem
rejecta appellatione, eum ut suae jurisdictionis and Archiepiscopalis
authoritatis contemptorem, ad sui tribunal vocavit, and non accedentis
proterviam interdictis Ecclesiasticis in ejus terras praediaque latis
mulc^avit: multa deinceps in hac lite coram Papa agitanda controversa sunt, in
quibus Lincolniensis revocato suo privilegio a Cantuariensi victus succubuit.

This great Contest happened in the time of John Synwell Bishop of Lincoln, as
Catalogue of Bishops, p 95, 245.
Godwin (who relates it too) informs us; adding, That the Pope also granted at
the same time unto the University, that the Chancellor should be only elected
by the Scholars themselves, and so presently authorized to govern them,
without the admission of any other.

But this I conceive is a clear mistake; for Matthew Parker (out of whom he
relates it) records, That this exemption of the University of Oxford from the
Bishop of Lincoln's jurisdiction, was procured by the intercession of William
Wittlesey Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 1375. (and that from another
Pope, not Clement but Urban, some 25. years after this contestation) which he
thus expresses, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 283.

Hujus Archiepiscopi intercessione atque gratia Oxoniensis Academia a
jurisdictione Lincolniensis Episcopi, per Urbanum Papam quintum EXEMPTAEST: and
tam libera potestas Cancellarium suum eligendi ^acta Scholaribus ut
Cancellarius sine admissione quacunque simulatque electus sit magistratum inire
atque gerere possit. An undeniable evidence, that till this Papal exemption
procured, the University and Chancellor of Oxford were under the Bishops of
Lincol^ns jurisdiction, as their Diocesans.

After this, Thomas Hyndeman Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and
Nicholas Faux his Commissary, procuring another exemption from the Pope
[BONIFACE the eighth, as some affirm] of this University and the Scholars in
it, both from Archiepiscopal and EPISCOPAL JURISDICTION; the Scholars, and
Doctors of Oxford complained of it to Archbishop Arundel, and the whole
Convocation at London in the year 1396. and there openly renounced it, as non
mod^ in Metropolitani and ORDINARII, sed and ipsius Vniversitatis praejudicium
atque gravamen: Whereupon it was damned by the whole Convocation (as you may
read at large in Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 304) and likewise by King Richard the
second, in the twentieth, and by Henry the fourth, and the Lords and Commons in
Parliament in the 13th year of his reign: (of which more anon:) whereby the
Bishop of Lincoln's jurisdiction over the University of Oxford was not only
acknowledged and revived, but likewise submitted to by the whole University of
Oxford; and this exemption from it by Popes Bulls only, declared to be a
prejudice and grievance to the University it self, and the Bishop too: whose
jurisdiction thus revived, was never afterward impeached or abrogated by any
subsequent Bulls or Patents I can meet with, but continued its vigor till the
erection of the Bishopric of Oxford out of Lincoln by Act of Parliament, and
Letters Patents of King Henry the eighth, in the year 1541. which abolished the
Bishop of Lincoln's power, and translated this part of his Diocese to the
Bishop of Oxford, as the Patents of 33. and 37. H. 8 to the Bishop of Oxford
demonstrate.

In fine, Richard Flemming Bishop of Lincoln, Godwin's Catalogue of Bishops, p.
246.
in the year 1430 founded Lincoln College in Oxford, and William Smith Bishop
of Lincoln, anno 1513. founded Brasenose College in Oxford; of both which
Colleges (though members of the University) and of some others, he and his
Successors continued Visitors till this present Parliament.

By all these evidences, I humbly conceive I have sufficiently fortified my
first position, That the University of Oxford was subject to the jurisdiction,
if not visitation of the Bishops of Lincoln (as the University of Cambridge was
to the Bishops of Ely, which I can fully evidence, were it pertinent) and
refuted the Universities and their Delegates false plea, That the right of
visiting the University of Oxford is only in the King's Majesty, and that it
is exempt from all other jurisdiction, by its foundation, prescription, and
several grants of exemption.

I shall now proceed to the proof of my second position, touching the
Archbishops of Canterburies right and jurisdiction to visit the University of
Oxford (and Cambridge too) as Metropolitans, being situated within their
province, by History, Records, and our Kings avowing of this their right, and
disclaiming their own ONLY OR SOLE RIGHT TO VISIT THE UNIVERSITIES; wherein I
shall make use of non^ bu^ punctual authorities.

Godwin in his Catalogue of English Bishops p. 74. writes thus of Robert
Kilwardly Archbishop of Canterbury; That (in the year 1278.) he visited all his
Province, and BOTH THE UNIVERSITIES; in which he disputed excellently, and
showed himself in diverse kinds of exercise. And Matthew Parker in his Ant.
Eccles. Brit. p. 198. records of him, Totam Cantuar. Provinciam visitationis
jure peragravit; In hac VISITATIONE ACADEMIAS IPSAS METROPOLITICA AVTHORITATE
INGRESSVS EST; (and that without any opposition or demurrer to his
jurisdiction, for ought appears:) and Oxonii in Scholis, non modo de
Theologia, sed de Philosophia atque Logica argute disp^tavit. In quibus artibus
multas Oxoniensium opiniones and sententias tanquam minus probabiles
reprehendit atque refellit.

His next Successor John Peckam, anno 1288. visited the University of Oxford by
his Metropolitical right, without any resistance or dispute, Antiqu. Ecclef.
Brit. p. 204. Ipseque perlustrata reliqua Provincia OXONIENSEM ACADEMIAM IURE
METROPOLITICO VISIT ATVRVS ADLIT: In qua visitatione, quasdam philosophicas
opiniones, quos errores, and a Roberto Kylwarby ante reprehens^s docuit,
tanquam Haereses and a fide Christiana abhorrentes e suggestu Latin refellit.

Simon Islippe Archbishop of Canterbury anno 1350. received an Appeal from the
Chancellour-elect and Proctors of Oxford against the Bishop of Lincoln, who
refused to admit and conform William Palmorin, whom they had elected and
presented to him for their Chancellor; upon whose default, he admitted and
approved of his election, confirmed him in his Office, and wrote to the
Scholars of the University to submit unto and obey him, according to the laws
and statutes of the University, as Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 258. and Godwin in
his Catalogue of Bishops, p. 95. affirm, and Page 5, 6.
I have formerly manifested more at large: A pregnant evidence of his
Metropolitical jurisdiction both over the Chancellor and University.

Anno 1390. William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury (as Antiqu. Eccles. Brit.
p. 302. inform us) Visitationem totius Provinciae suscepit: and being strongly
opposed by the Bishops of Exeter and Sarisbury, whom he enforced to cry
peccavi, and to submit to his visitation at last; reliquas tunc Diocaeses sine
molestia visitavit: In Lincolniensi solummodo a visitatione quorundam
Monachorum, gratia and intercessione Abbatis Albanensis, OXONII cessavit:
(visiting all the rest of the University.) Ita visitatione peracta aliquantulum
cessavit. And in the Register of Archbishop Arundel, fol. 46. the Doctors,
Batchelours and Scholars of the University of Oxford, in their Articles
exhibited against their Chancellor and Vice Chancellor, to Archbishop Arundel
and the Convocation of the Clergy, recite and make this honorable mention of
this Archbishop Courtney's visitation of the University (where he was joyfully
received without the least oppositio^, though forcibly resisted in other
places) Quod dictus Archiepiscopus IPSAM VNIVERSITATEM TAM IN CAPITE QVAM IN
MEMBRIS, plura gravamina revocando, crimina corrigendo, excessus reformando,
diversas personas ab act: scholasticis suspendendo, AVTHORITATE SVA
METROPOLITICA VISITAVIT.

These three Archbishops having visited the University of Oxford (and Cambridge
too) in their Metropolitical visitations without the least contest or
opposition; Thomas Hyndeman their Chancellor, and Nicholas Faux his
Commissary, without the Universities and Scholars consents, procured a Bull
from the Pope, to exempt themselves, together with the University, Colleges
and Scholars in it, from all Archiepiscopal and Episcopal jurisdiction and
visitation: Whereupon Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, intending to
visit the University (as his Predecessors had done) in the year of our Lord
1396. was opposed by the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor, who pleaded the self
same plea against this Archbishops visitation, as the Universities Delegates
and Doctors do now against the Visitors appointed by Ordinance of Parliament,
and Commission under the great Seal; namely, That the visitation of the
University of Oxford, as a University, belonged only and solely to the King,
and not to the Archbishop, or any other: and that the University and Scholars
in it, were by the Popes own Bull exempted from the Archbishops and Bishops
jurisdiction and visitation. Whereupon the Doctors, Proctors and Scholars of
the University complained to Archbishop Arundel and the Convocation against the
Chancellor and Vice Chancellor for procuring this Bull, which they renounced,
and the Convocation then damned; and the whole matter coming afterward before
King Richard the second, he disclaimed any such Privilege and Prerogative of
sole visiting the University, as they would fasten on him, acknowledged and
ratified the Archbishops and Ordinaries jurisdiction over them, and nulled the
Popes Bull of exemption. This is apparent by Archbishop Arundels Register, fol.
46, 91, 92. by Archbishop Parkers Register fol. 269. and these ensuing passages
in Antiq. Eccles. Brit. transcribed out of it, page 304. Anno 1397. Januarii
19. Cleri Synodus Londini convenit. In hac Synodo Scholares Oxonienses
quaerelam contra Thomam Hyndeman Universitatis Cancellarium, and Nicholaum Faux
ejus Commissarium proposuerunt; Quod exemptionis jura, quibus ab
Archiepiscopali and Episcopali jurisdictione Universitas fiat immunis a Papa
impetrassent, non modo in METROPOLITANI and Ordinarii, SED IN IPSIVS
VNIVERSITATIS PRAEIVDICIVM ATQVE GRAVAMEN: Quod privilegium SERVITVTIS POTIVS
QVAM LIBERTATIS INSTAR ESSE DOCEBANT. Cum enim antea si iniquis Cancellarii aut
Procancellarii imperiis opprimerentur, aut injuriis afficerentur,
appellationibus and Archiepiscopali aequitate subventum eis suit, nunc in unius
potestatem redacti, a quo nec permissa esset provocatio, nec superioris
jurisdictione possit coerceri, quasi perpetuae servituti subjacerent. Itaque ab
Archiepiscopo petierunt, ut QVONIAM SVAM IN EOS IURISDICTIONEM AGNOSCERENT, and
antecessoris sui Willielmi Courtney moderationem atque prudentiam CVM ACADEMIAM
OXONIENSEM TAM IN CAPITE QVAM IN MEMBRIS VISIT ARET, experti essent, VT EA a
Cancellario ejusque Commissario procurata PRIVILEGIA RESCINDRET; QVIBVS IPSI,
interposito ad id Michaele Sergeaux juris utriusque Doctore legitimo
procuratore, EXPRESS ATQVE PUBLIC IN SYNODO RENVNCIARVNT. Eam RENVNCIATIONEM
Archiepiscopus RATAM HABVIT, ET EXEMPTIONIS OXONIENSIS PRIVILEGIA IRRITAET IN
ANIA IVDICAVIT. Tum Cancellarius quasi furore actus petulanter ac immodeste se
abdicavit Magistratu, Synodoque sine venia discessit; sed Archiepiscopus eum
edicto revocavir, ejusque proterviam atque audaciam repressit. In eadem Synodo
DOCTORES OXONIENSES quosdam Joannis Wicly^^i opiniones exposuerunt, quas
Synodus condemnavit. And page 309. anno 1413. Legatis autem ad concilium
generale Pisis emissis, ARCHEPISCOPVS in ea Synodo Jura quaedam QUIBVS TAM
CANTABRIGIENSIS QVAM OXONIENSIS ACADEMIAE TENERENTVR, condidit; quoe in
publicis constitutionibus continentur; Nam and RICHARDUS REX, Thomae Arundel
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, antequam in exilium iret VTRASQVE ACADEMIAS, ETSI
EXEMPTIONEM CLAM A PAPA OBTINVISSENT, SVBIECIT, ET OBTENTA PRIVILEGIA non minus
ARCHIEPISCOPALI QVAM REGIAE AVTHORITATI PRAEIVDICIALIA, IDEOQVE RESCINDENDA,
DECREVIT.

This will yet more evidently and undeniably appear by the Patent of King
Richard the second himself, recorded in the Patent-Rols, De anno Vicessimo
Richardi secundi, part 3. Memb. 9. and entered in the Registers of Archbishop
Warham, fol. 111. and Archbishop Parker, fol. 269, which for fuller
satisfaction, I shall at large transcribe.

Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. falutem. Sciatis quod cum quaedam dissentiones,
lites and debatae nuper motae fuerunt and subortae inter Venerabilem Patrem
Thomam Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem ex part una, and Cancellarium
Universitatis Oxoniensis, and QUOSDAM ALIOS (not the whole body or major part)
ejusdem Universitatis ex altera, super ^su and exercitio jurisdictionis and
VISITATIONIS dictae UNIVERSITATIS, clamante videlicet prae^ato Archiepiscopo
and VENDICANTE JURISDICTIONEM ET VISITATIONEM HUJUSMODI AD IPSUM ET SUCCESSORES
SUOS, AC ECCLESIAM SUAM PERTINERE, AC PERTINERE DEBERE, Praedecessoresque suos
hujusmodi jurisdictionem ET VISITATIONEM IN UNIVERSITATE PRAEDICTA HABUISSE ET
EXERCUISSE. Allegantibusque praefato Cancellario and aliis praedictis (the very
plea in terminis alleged by the University and their Delegates now)
Visitationem dictae Universitatis ut Universitatis, AD NOS SOLUM ET IN SOLIDUM
PERTINERE, ET PERTINERE DEBERE (the very first time that any such pretense or
privilege was insisted on without any authority or president to back it;) Nos
volentes hujusmodi dissentiones, lites and debatas, prout Regiae convenit
Majestati (attentis damnis and periculis quae inde verosimiliter evenire
possint) sedare and pacificare, ac pacem, quietem and tranquilitatem inter
parts praedictas pro viribus con^overe; ac considerantes, QUOD VISITATIO
HUJUSMODI AD PRAEFATUM ARCHIEPISCOPUM ET SUCCESSORES SUOS, AC ECCLESIAM SUAM
PRAEDICTAM DE JURE COMMUNI PERTINET, AC PERTINERE DEBET; QUODQUE NOS AUT
PROGENITORES NOSTRI CANCELLARIUM AC UNIVERSITATEM PRAEDICTAM RETROACTIS
TEMPORIBUS MINIME VISITARE CONSUEVIMUS, (a clear evidence and fatal judgment
against this pretended privilege and feigned plea, which this King himself in
terminis disclaimed, when first invented and alleged:) Volumus and EX CERTA
SCIENTIA DECLARAMUS, Quod VISITATIO Cancellarii and Procuratorum dictae
UNIVERSITATIS qui pro tempore fuerint, necnon OMNIUM DOCTORUM, MAGISTRORUM
REGENTIUM ET NON REGENTIUM, AC SCOLARIUM EJVSDEM VNIVERSITATIS, QVORVMCVNQVE
eorum servientium, aliarum personarum QVARVMCVNQVE cujuscunque status vel
conditionis extiterint, libertatibus ant privilegiis dictae Universitatis
utentium^ se^ illis gaudere volentium; NECNON VNIVERSITATIS PRAEDICTAE ETIAM UT
VNIVERSITATIS, AD PRAEFATVM ARCHIEPISCOPVM, SVCCESSORES SVOS, AC ECCLESIAM SVAM
PERTINET, ET PERTINERE DEBET, AC PERPETVIS FVTVRIS TEMPORIBVS PERTINEBIT.
Salvis Nobis and Haeredibus Nostris omnibus aliis quibus in Vniversitate
praedicta Nos and Progenitores Nostri uti consuevimus temporibus retroactis. In
cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. primo die Iunii: Per ipsum Regem.

An ancient royal Declaration and judgment in the present Controversy, so full
and diametrally opposite against the Universities and Delegates present Plea
and pretenses, that nothing can be replied thereunto.

This Declaration and Resolution of King Richard the 2d, was afterward more
fully recited, approved and ratified by King Henry the fourth, and the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, as I shall presently manifest in its proper place.

Not long after this Declaration and Patent, this Archbishop Thomas Arundel, in
the year of our Lord 1407. visited the University of Cambridge, and the
Colleges therein, thus summarily expressed by Matthew Parker in his Antiq.
Eccles. Brit. p. 308, 309. Post haec Archiepiscopus Cantabrigiensem Academiam
JVRE METROPOLITICO VISITAVIT, multaque Collegiorum statuta ordinavit, pravas
consuetudines delevit, facinora Scholarium castigavit, and cum visitationem
remisit, omnia quae sibi in visitatione detecta fuerunt, causasque de quibus
cognoscere ac inquirere caepit, suae jurisdictioni reservavit.

The relaxation of this Metropolitical Visitation was not till October. 15. 1404.
so as it depended three whole years or more, as is apparent by the Register of
Arundel, 1. pars, f. 388 wherein the whole form of his visitation of Cambridge
University and Colleges, being at large recorded, fol. 491, 492, 493. it will
neither be impertinent nor unprofitable to give you this account thereof, in
the words of the Register, fol. 492, etc. which may serve for a pattern of
direction now.

Item decimo septimo die mensis Septembris anno domini 1401. idem
reverendissimus Pater Archiepiscopus supradictus, visitavit Cancellarium and
Vniversitatem Cantabrigiae in domo Congregationis ejusdem Vniversitatis,
comparentibus tunc ibidem coram eo Cancellario, a^ omnibus and singulis
Doctoribus and Magistris regentibus and aliis personis quibuscunque dictae
Vniversitatis qui hujusmodi visitationi interesse tenebantur, and deberent de
consuetudine vel de jure: and facta deinde collatione, ac proposito verbo Dei,
and causis suae visitationis hujusmodi seriose expositis; Cancellarius
Vniversitatis praedictae certificatorium de and super executione mandati. Sibi
pro ipsa visitatione alias directi, coram eodem Reverendissimo Patre tunc
ibidem exhibuit, sub eo qui sequitur verborum tenore. Reverendissimo in Christo
patri ac Domino, Domino Thomae Dei gratia Cantuariensis Archiepiscopo, totius
Angliae primati and Apostolici sedis Legato, ejusve Commissariis quibuscunque,
suus humilis and devotus filius Cancellarius Vniversitatis Cantabrigiae,
Eliensis Diocaesis, tam debitam quam devotam, obedientiam cum omni reverentia
and honor debitis tanto Patri mandatum vestrum reverendum nuper recepi,
tenorem continens subsequentem. Thomas permissione, etc. Dilecto filio
Cancellario Vniversitatis Cantabrigiae, Eliensis Diocaesis, nostrae Provinciae
Cantuariensis, salutem, etc. Quia nos in progressu visitationis nostrae
Metropoliticae in dicta Diocaesi exercenda, vos and dictam Vniversitatem
adjuvante Domino proponimus visitare; vos tenore praesentium peremptory
Citamus and per vos omnes and singulos Doctores and Magistros regentes, and
alias personas quascunque praedictae Vniversitatis qui nostri visitationi
hujusmodi interesse tenentur de consuetudine vel de jure, citari volumus and
mandamus, quod compareatis and compareant coram nobis in domo Congregationis
Vniversitatis praedictae decimoseptimo die mensis Septembris proxime futuri,
cum continuatione and prorogatione dierum tunc sequentium, visitationem nostram
hujusmodi juxta juris exigentiam subituri, facturique ulterius and recepturi
quod Canonicis conveni^ institutis: and quid f^ceritis in praemissis nobis
dictis die and loco debite certificetis per literas vestras patentes, hunc
tenorem, una cum nominibus and cognominibus omnium and singulorum per vos in
hac part Citatorum in schedula eisdem literis vest is annectenda descriptis
habent^s, sigillo vestro consignata: Datum in Manerio nostro de Lambeth 18. die
mensis Augusti, anno domini millesimo quadringentesimo primo, and nostrae
translationis anno quinto. Cujus auctoritate mandati omnes and singulos
doctores and magistros regentes and alias personas quascunque praedictae
Vniversitatis tempore receptionis dicti mandati vestri, and nunc in dicta
Vniversitate existentes, qui dictae visitationi vestrae hujusmodi interesse
tenentur de consuetudine vel de jure personaliter inventos, peremptory Citavi,
quod compareant coram vobis aut vesti is Commissariis dictis die and loco cum
continuatione and prorogatione praedictis visitationem vestram hujusmodi juxta
juris exigentiam subituri, facturique ulterius and recepturi quod in ea part
canonicis convenit institutis. Quantum vero ad personam meam, dictis die and
loco cum continuatione and prorogatione consimili coram vobis seu vestris
Commissariis annuente domino personaliter comparebo facturus humiliter and
recepturus quod dictum mandatum vestrum exigit and requirit. Nomina vero and
cognomina omnium and singulorum doctorum and magistrorum regentium, and aliarum
personarum dictae Vniversitatis quarumcunque per me citatorum in schedula
praesentibus annexa continentur: In cujus reitestimonium Sigillum officii mei
praesentibus apposui; Dat. Cantebrigiae quoad sigillationem praesentium. Idib.
Septembris anno Domini supradicto. Quo certificatorio tunc ibidem incontinenti
perlecto, idem reverendissimus Pater Archiepiscopus supradictus ab eisdem
Cancellario, ac Doctoribus, magistris regentibus and personis aliis
supradictis, and a singularibus personis eorundem obedientiam recepit
canonicam. Et deinde examinavit dictum Cancellarium singulariter ac secret^ and
sub silentio dictis doctoribus and magistris regentibus and aliis personis
supradictis seorsim separatis, super i^^is particulis, videlicet. An statuta
and laudabiles consuetu^lines Vniversitatis abamnibus observentur? Item, an
sint aliqui scholares in dicta Vniversitate mandatis and monitionibus dicti
Cancellarii obtemperare nolentes? Item, an sint aliqui pacem and Vnitatem in
dicta Vniversitate perturbantes? Item, an communes cistae and pecuniae ac
claves earundem fideliter conserventur? Item, an Magistri, Doctores
Bacchalaurei and scholares debi^e and fideliter perficiant formas suas, and
meritis and scientia exigentibus ascendant gradus suos? Item, an sint aliquae
personae and suspectae de Lollardia vel de haeretica pravitate? Item, si
Doctores reputant and disputent public in scholis, and quotiens and quando?
Item, si sit numerus sociorum completus in Aulis sive Collegiis dictae
Vniversitatis juxta ordinationem and voluntatem fundatorum? Item, an sint
aliqui scholares aliquo notorio crimine irretiti seu infamati, vel non
proficientes in studio, aut impedientes alios quo minus proficiant? Item,
qualiter regitur eadem^ Vniversitas, videlicet in victualibus and aliis
necessariis? etc. Et examinatus ^uit idem Cancellarius super aliis Articulis
etiam in hujusmodi visitatione de jure requisitis. Aliis insuper Doctoribus,
Magistris and personis aliis supradictis secundum quod de jure debuerunt
secret, and singulariter examinatis, and eorum dictis and depositis
conscriptis in registro, idem reverendissimus Pater singula tunc ibidem
successive exercuit quae in hujusmodi visitatione de jure quomodolibet fuerunt
requisita.

Item, eodem die reverendissimus Pater per certos Commissarios suos visitavit
Collegium sanctae Trinitatis Cantebrigiae, in capella ejusdem Collegii,
comparentibus coram eisdem commissariis Gardiano sive custode, una cum singulis
suis consociis and scholaribus ejusdem collegii; quibus singulariter and
secret examinatis super statu and regimine ipsius collegii, and aliis
articulis in hujusmodi visitatione de jure requisitis, and eorum dictis and
depositis conscriptis in Registro, ab eisdem and eorum singulis, vice and
auctoritate dicti reverendissimi Patris, obedientiam receperunt canonicam, and
singula exercuerunt ibidem quae de consuetudine vel de jure ulterius
quomodolibet fuerint requisita; and exhibitum suit certificatorum pro
visitatione hujusmodi per Gardianum sive custodem supradictum continens hunc
tenorem. Reverendissimo in Christo patri ac Domino suo Domino Thomae, etc.
ejusve Commissariis quibuscunque suus humilis and devotus ^ilius Gardianus sive
custos Collegii Sanctae Trinit^^is Cantebrigiae, Eliensis Diocaesis, tam
debitam quam devotam obedientiam, cum omni roverentia and honor debito tanto
Patri, mandatum vestrum reverendissimum nuper recepi, tenorem continens
subsequentem. Thomas etc. dilecto in Christo filio Gardiano sive custodi
Collegii Sanctae Trinitatis Cantebrigiae, Eliensis Diocaesis, nostraeque
Cantuariensis provinciae salutem, etc. Quia nos in progressu visitationis
nostrae Metropoliticae praedictae Diocaesis vos and Collegium vestrum in
personis and rebus annuente Domino, visitare intendimus, tenore praesentium
peremptory vos citamus, and per vos omnes and singulos consocios and scholares
praedicti Collegii citare volumus and mandamus, quod compareatis and compareant
coram nobis and Commissariis nostris in capella sive domo capitulari praedicti
Collegii decimo septimo die mensis Septembris proxime futuri, cum continuatione
and prorogatione dierum tunc sequentium, visitationem hujusmodi juxta juris
exigentiam subituri, ulteriusque facturi and recepturi quod canonicis convenit
institutis, and quid feceritis in praemissis nos aut Commissarios hujusmodi
dictis die and loco debite certificetis per literas vestras patentes, hunc
tenorem, una cum nominibus and cognominibus omnium and singulorum sociorum and
scholarium per vos in hac part citatorum in schedula eisdem literis annectenda
descriptis habentes. Dat. in manerio nostro de Lambeth 18. die mensis Augusti
anno domini Millesimo quadringentesimo primo, and nostrae translationis anno
quinto. Cujus auctoritate mandati omnes and singulos consocios and scholares
praedicti collegii in eodem collegio tunc praesentes personaliter inve^tos,
peremptory citavi, aliis vero tunc absentibus, infra tamen provinciam vestram
existentibus, dictum mandatum vestrum and visitationem hujusmodi intimari et
notificari, eosque praemuniri feci, quod dictis die et loco cum continuatione
et prorogatione praedictis coram vobis seu vestris Commissariis compareant,
visitationem vestram hujusmodi juxta juris exigentiam recepturi, facturique
ulterius and recepturi quicquid dictum mandatum vestrum exigit and requirit;
caeteros autem consocios et scholares dicti Collegii ab eodem Collegio tunc et
nunc absentes, and in diversis remotis partibus etiam extra dictam provinciam
agentes, non citavi nec praemunivi prout nec pot^i quovismodo: Quantum ad
personam meam, praedictis die and loco cum continuatione and prorogatione
praedictis, coram vobis s^u Commissariis vestris, Dante Domino, personaliter
comparebo, fecturasque humiliter and recepturus quod dictum, etc. In cujus rei
testimonium Sigill^m commone dicti Collegii duxi praesentibus apponendum. Datum
Cantebrigiae in dicto Collegio quoad consignationem praesentium 2^ Id.
Septembris, Anno Domini supradicto.

Visitatio Collegii de Clara, Collegii beatae Mariae, Procratus Alborum
Canonicorum

Item, eodem die eisdem modo and forma idem Reverendissimus Pater visitavit per
Commissarios suos Collegium de Clare Hall Cantebrigiae in capella ejusdem
Collegii: Et Collegium Annunciacionis beatae Mariae Cantebrigiae in capella
ejusdem Collegii; ac Prioratum Alborum Canonicorum Cantebrigiae in ecclesia
ejusdem Prioratus, recepta obedientia Canonica, and singulis aliis exercitis in
et circa loca praemissa quae in visitationibus hujusmodi de jure fuerint
quomodolibet requisita.

Item decimo nono die dicti mensis Septembris idem reverendissimus Pater
Archiepiscopus supradictus per certos Commissarios, quos ad hoc sufficienter
deputavit, visitavit domum sive Prioratum Monialium Sanctae Radegundis
Cantebrigiae, Priorissam, ac singulas consorores et commoniales suas in dicta
domo capitulari ejusdem prioratus, recepta ab eisdem et earum singulis
obedientia Canonica, et ipsis secret et singulariter examinatis, earumque
dictis et depositis conscriptis in registro; similiterque aliis exercitis quae
in hac part de jure fuerint requisita, ac sub modo and forma in aliis locis
hujusmodi superius observatis seu r^citatis.

Item, eodem die modo et forma in aliis Collegiis superius observ^tis, Dominus
visitavit per Commissarios suos Collegium Sancti Michaelis Cantebrigiae in
capella ejusdem Collegii; et eodem die per Commissarios hujusmodi visitatum
suit Hospitale sive domus Sancti Iohannis Cantebrigioe in Ecclesia ejusdem
Hospitalis; and Collegium Sancti Petri in capella ejusdem Collegii; ac
Collegium de Pembroke Hall Cantebrigioe in capella ejusdem Collegii: et eodem
die idem reverendissimus Pater iter ar^ip^it versus Ecclesiam Cathedralem
Eliensem, pro sua visitatione hujusmodi inibi exercenda; ubi eodem die a
venerabili patre Domino Iohanne, Dei gratia Eliensi Episcopo, ad suum palatium
Eliense cum se et suis honorifice fuit receptus.

This Archbishop having thus peaceably without any resistance, visited the
University, Colleges and Scholars of Cambridge by his mere Metropoliticall
right, as being within the Diocese of Ely, and part of his Province (though in
regard of their foundation and Bulls of exemption from several Popes, they might
have pleaded as full an exemption from Archiepiscopal and Episcopal jurisdiction
and visitation as the University of Oxford, which I could demonstrate, if
material) After this, in the year of our Lord 1411. he determined to visit the
University of Oxford in the twelft year of King Henry the fourth his reign; but
coming thither to visit, was repulsed by the Chancellor Richard Courtney,
Benedic^^ Brent and John B^rch Proctors, and some Scholars of their faction,
which Thomas Walsingham in his Historia Angliae, and ^podigma Neust^iae too
(Anno Dom. 1411. thus relates: Dominus Cantuariensis dum ni^itur visitare
Vniversitatem Oxoniarum, repulsam passus est. Whereupon the Archbishop
complaining to the King of that affront, both parties referred themselves to
his royal determination of this Controversy; who after a full h^a^ing of both
parties, the seventeenth day of December, in the twel^t year of his reign, by
deliberate advice of his Council, confirmed the Order ^ormerly made by King
Richard the second, overruled the Chancellours and Proctors pretenses, (now
revived and insisted on) That the University was exempt from all
Archiepiscopall and Epi^copall visitation by the Bull of Pope Boniface the
eight (which he d^clared null and prejudicial to his crown, and they then
renounced the second time) and that the King was the only and sole Visitor of
the University as a University: which he then likewise disclaimed, and
adjudged, That the Archbishops of Canterbury should and ought for ever after to
visit the University, Chancellor, Proctors, and all Doctors, Scholars and
Members of the University whatsoever; and that if the Archbishops were
hereafter disturbed in their Visitations of the University, all its Franchises,
Liberties and Privileges should be seized into the King's hands till their
submission thereunto; and they should likewise pay a thousand pound fine to the
King for such their disturbance. Which resolution and proceedings before the
King in this cause being drawn up in writing and presented to the King, Lords
and Commons in the Parliament of 13. Henry 4. and there read before them, were
they all ratified and confirmed by them, and enacted to be of as great vigor
and effect, as if they had been done and made in Parliament; which is evident
by the Parliament Roll it self, An. 13. H. 4. number. 15. and by Archbishop
Parkers Register, fol. 269. a true transcript whereof (for the full conviction
and satisfaction of all our present Opposers) I shall here insert

Memorandum, quod venerabilis in Christo Pater Thomas Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis in praesenti Parliamento nostro exhibuit quandam petitionem, una
cum quadam schedula eidem annexa in haec verba. A Tressovereigne Sr. Nostre Sr.
Le Roy Supply humblement vostre humble chapellein Thomas Archevesque de
Canterbiis, Que pleise a vous Tressovereign Sr. par assent de Signeurs Esperit
aelx and Temporells, and les Comes in cest present Parliament, de graunteir
approver, ratifier and confirmer tout cest quest compris en un cedul^, a cest
bille annexe, and que meisme ceste cedule puisse se e^tre enrollee and enacte
in cest present Parliament selo^e la form and effect de mesme le cedule, and
que mesme la cedule and tout ceo quest compris e^ icelle soient de taunt de
force effect and authorite, and mesme les force effect and auctoritee eient
and teignent, come ils ussent estre faict^^ en ceste Parliament and per
auctoritee de mesme le Parliament.

Memorandum, Quod cum Richardus secundus, nuper Rex Angliae, propter diversas
dissentiones, lites et discordias quondam habitas in Vniversitate Oxoniensi
super jure and titulo visitationis dictae Vniversitatis, ac de quadam Bulla
exemptionis praetensa ad excludendum Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem tunc
existentem and Successores ^uos, ac quoscunque ali^s Ordinarios infra
Vniversitatem praedictam, ac quoscunque fundatores dictae Vniversitatis ac
Collegiorum ejusdem Vniversitatis a visitatione dictae Vniversitatis, and ab
omni jurisdictione Ordinaria, per eosdem Archiepiscopum Ordinarium and
fundator^s and suos successores ac commissarios suos in eadem Vniversitate
fa^iond. and ex^rcend. Per breve su^m venire fecerit in Cancellaria sua apud
Westmonasterium Bullam Praedictam; and Cancellarius et Procuratores dictae
Universitatis tunc existentes sufficiens Warrentum sigillo commune
Universitatis praedictae ^igil. latum pro se et Universitate praedicta
habentes, et secum in Cancellaria praedicta deferentes, ad exhibendum,
publicandum ostendendum et praesentandum coram dicto nuper Rege in Cancellaria
praedicta Bullam praedictam; necnon ad respondendum ibidem, et ulterius
faciendum et recipiendum quod per eundem nuper Regem and consilium suum
ord^natum fuisset and definitum, prout de recordo in eadem Cancellaria before
liquet: ac postmodum iidem Cancellarii, et Procuratores pro se and to^a
Vniversitate praedicta submiserunt se de materiis praedictis Ordinationi et
di^finitioni dicti nuper Regis: Q^i quidem nuper Rex, habita inde matura and
pleniori deliberatione cum consilio suo, ac clare considerans, Eullam
praedictam fore impetratam in praejudicium ^o^onae suae, ac legum and
con^uetudinum Regni sui enervationem, and in Haereticorum and Lollardorum, ac
homicidiarum and aliorum male factorum favorem, and audaciam, dictaeque
Vniversitatis verisimil^m destructionem; Ordinavit, and per breve suum
praecepit and inhibuit dicto Cancellario, Magistris, Doctoribus et Scholaribus
Universitatis praedictae, in fide, Legeancia and dilectione quibus sibi
tenebantur, ac sub poena amissionis privilegiorum Vniversitatis praedictae, and
sub forisfactura omnium aliorum que sibi forisfacere poterant, ne dictam Bullam
in aliqua sui part^ exiqui, seu exercere, sue beneficium aliquod exemp^ionis
per Bullam illam aliqualiter repor^are seu reciper^ praesume^ent, sed omnibus
exemptionibus and privilegiis in ea part contentis, coram tune dil^cto clerico
suo notorio Richardo Renhalle, quem ad eos ex causa praedicta destinavit, palam
and public, pro imperpotuo renunciarent, ac super renunciationem hujusmodi
quandam certificationem sibi sub sigillo dictae Universitatis, ac publica
instrumenta fieri, er sibi per eundem Clericum suum transmitti facerent, sub
poenis supradictis. Postmodum allegantur praefato Cancellario et aliis sibi
adhaerentibus nomine Universitatis praedictae VISITATIONEN PRAE^DICTAM AD
DICTUM RICHARDUM NUPER REGEM SOLUM ET INSOLIDUM PERTINERE; consideransque, quod
visitatio Vniversitatis praedictae ad praefatum Archiepiscopum and successores
suos, ^ ac ad eccles^am su^m Cantuarien^em PERTINUIT ET PERTINERE DEBUIT; QUOD
QUE IPSE AUT PROGENITORES SUI CANCELLARIUM AC UNIVERSITATEM PRAEDICTAM
RETROACTIS TEMPORIBUS MINIME VISITARE CONSUEVERUNT. Voluit and ex certa
scientia sua declaravit, quod visitatio Cancellarii ac Procuratorum dictae
Vniversitatis qui pro tempore fuerint, necnon omnium Doctorum, Magistrorum
Regentium and non Regentium, ac Schola^ium ejusdem Vniversitatis quorumcunque,
eorumque servientum, aliarumque personarum cujuscunque status vel conditionis
exstiteriat libertatibus aut privilegiis dictae Vniversitatis utentium seu
illis gaudere valentium, NECNON UNIVERSITATIS PRAEDICTAE ETIAM UT
UNIVERSITATIS, ad praefa^um Archiepiscopum and Successores suos, ac ecclesiam
suam praedictam PERTINUIT ET PERTINERE DEBUIT, AC FUTURIS TEMPORIBUS
PERTINERET. Postmodumque praedictus ^uper Rex per diversa Brevia sua
Cancellario, Procuratoribus, cunctis Doctoribus and Scholaribus Vniversitatis
praedictae praeceperat, quod ipsi Archiepiscopo praedicto and successoribus
suis in visitatione sua praedicta in eadem Universitate facienda in omnibus sub
poenis praedictis parerent et obedirent; Postmodumque sicut datum fuit
intelligi Domino nostro Regi Henrico quarto post conquestuw quod visitante
Thoma Archiepiscopo Cantuari^nsi jure suo Metropolitico Diocaesi Lincoln. Anno
Regni dicti Henrici Regis duodecimo, venit ad praedictam Vniversitatem Oxonii
ad exequendam in forma juris ecclesiastici ibidem visitationem suam, Richardus
Courtnay ad ^unc Cancellarius Universitatis praedictae, ac Benedictus Brent and
Johannes Birch ad tunc Procuratores dictae Vniversitatis, ac quamplures alii
eis adherentes, in eadem Vniversitate dictum Archiepiscopum de visitatione sua
praedicta and jurisdictione ejusdem Archiepiscopi manuforti injuste
impedierunt, et ei absque causa rationabili resistebant: super quo diversae
lites dissentiones and discordiae inter ^r fatum Thomam Archiepiscopum and
eosdem Cancellarium and Procuratores ac alios Scholares Universitatis
praedictae eorumque fautores, de and super jure and impedimento visitationis,
and jurisdictionis praedictarum, mot^^ fuerint and exortae in Vniversitate
praedictae, and super hoc praesente Thoma Comite Arundel, and aliis personis
honorabilibus secum existentibus in Vniversitate praedicta, tam Praefatus
Archiepiscopus pro se and Ecclesia sua praedicta quam praefatus Richardus
Courtnay Cancellarius Vniversitatis praedictae and Benedictus Brent and
Johannes Birch Procuratores ejusdem Vniversitatis, pro se et eorum
adhaerentibus in m^teriis praedictis ac pro Vniversitate praedicta per assensum
eorundem adhaerentium se submisserunt and concesserunt stare arbitrio judicio
and ordinatione ac decreto illustrissimi Principis and Domini dicti Domini
nostri Regis Henrici de and super jure and impedimento visitationis and
jurisdictionis praedictarum per dictos Magistrum Richardum Cancellarium and
sibi adhaerentes praestito^ ac dissentionibus, Litibus and discordiis
praedictis, and earum dependentiis, and super hoc dictus Dominus noster Rex
Henric^s dictum Magistrum Richardum Courtney Cancellarium ac dictos Benedictum
Brent and Iohannem Birch venire fecit coram eo in propria persona apud Lambeth
in crastino Nativitatis beatae Mariae dicto anno Regni sui duodecimo, ad
faciendum and recipiendum quod per cundem dictum Regem de advisamento Consilii
sui foret consideratum in materiis praedictis; and praedictus Archiepiscopus
ibidem coram praefato Domino Rege comparuit, and tam praefatus Archiepiscopus
quam iidem Cancellarius and Procuratores ad tunc and ibidem coram dicto Domino
Rege submissionem praedictam in omnibus (ut praedictum est) fore factum in
forma praedicta recognoverunt, and ibidem concesserunt stare arbitrio, judicio
and ordinacioni ejusdem Domini nostri Regis de and super jure and impedimento
visitationis and jurisdictionis praedictorum ae aliis mate^iis and omnibus
dependentiis earundem: Qui quidem Dominus Rex postea 17. die mensis Septembris
dicto anno duode^imo apud Lambeth praedictu^, auditis and intellectis tam
allegationibus quam responsionibus partium praedictarum, and etiam habens
considerationem ad dictam submissionem factam tempore dicti Regis RICHARDI, ac
ordinationem judicium and determinationem super eandem submissionem, tangentem
visitationem and jurisdictionem praedict. ac clare consid^rans, QVOD VISITATIO
VNIVERSITATIS pra^dictae etiam us Vniversitatis, ET OMNIVM IN VNIVERSITATE
PRAEDICTA COMMORANTIVM AD DICTVM ARCHIEPISCOPVM ET SVCCESSORES SVOS VT DE IVRE
ECCLESIAE PRAEDICTAE PERTINET ET DE IVRE PERTINERE DEBERET, et quod iidem
Cancellarius et Procuratores ac alii ^is in hac part adhaerens^s ^undem
Archiepiscopum de visitatione et jurisdictione praedictis INIVSTE and ABSQVE
TITVLO SEV RATIONABILI CAVSA MANVFORTI IMPEDIERVNT, dictum judicium,
ordina^ionem and determinationem praedicti Richardi nuper Regis ratificavit,
approbavit, and confirmavit PRO IMPERPETVO duratura; and ulterius tam
authoritate sua Regia quam virtute submissionis praedictae sibi factae ad
^uncibidem arbitratus fuit, ordinavit, consideravit, decrevit and adjudicavit,
QVOD PRAEDICVS ARCHIEPISCOPVS ET SVCCESSORES SVI IMPERPETVVM HA^EANT
VISITATI^NEM ET IVRISDICTIONEM IN VNIVERSITATE PRAEDICTATAM CANCELLARII^
COMMISSARII, quam Procurat^rum EIVSDEM VNIVERSITATIS QVI PRO TEMPORE FVERINT;
NECNON OMNIVM DOCTORVM, MAGISTRORVM RE^ENTIVM and non Regentium ac Scholarium
ejusdem Universitatis quorumcunque, eorum servientium, aliarumque personarum
cujuscunque status v^l conditioni^ ex^iterint, ET ETIAM EIVSDEM VNIVERSITATIS
VT VNIVERSITATIS; and quod Cancellariu^, Commissarius, et Procuratores
Universitatis praedic^ae qui pro tempore fuerint, eorum Successores, et omnes
alii in dicta Universitate pro tempore commorantes, futuris temporibus eidem
Archiepiscopo et Successoribus suis in visitatione et jurisdictione^
Universitatis praedictae etiam ^t Universitatie, in omnibus pareant et
obedi^nt; et quod ne^ aliqui^ aliu^ in Universitate praedicta^ aliquod
privilegium se^beneficium examptionis ad ex^ludendum praesatum Archiepiscopum
seu. Success^res suo^ de-visitatione et jurisdictione praedictis in
Universitate praedicta color alicujus Bullae seu alterius tituli cujuscunque
erga praedictum Archiepiscopum seu Successores ^uos clameant, habeant seu
vendicent ullo modo in futuro: et quod quotiens Cancellarius, Commissari^s vel
locum tenens ipsorum, vel alicujus ipsorum, vel Procuratores di^tae
Universit^tis, qui pro tempore fuerint, vel eorum Successores; ^ive aliquis
eorum impedierint, vel impedierit praefatum Archiepiscopum vel Successores suos
aut ecclesiam suam praedictam, aut ipsorum vel alicujus ipsorum Commissarium
vel Co^missarios de hujusmodi visitatione seu jurisdictione dictae^
Universitatis, vel in aliquo contravenerint dictis arbitrio, ordinationi ^ive
judicio per praetatum Richardam nuper Regem factum, sive arbitrio, judicio,
decreto, considerationi vel ordinationi ipsius Domini nostri Regis Hen^i^i in
^ac casu (...) aliquis dictae Universitatis in fut^^^ impedierit dictum
Archiepiscopum vel Successores suos, aut Ecclesiam suam praedictam, aut ipsorum
vel alicujus ipsorum Commissarios vel Commissarium, de visitatione sua aut
jurisdictione antedictis, vel in aliquo contravenerit d^cto arbicrio five
judicio per praefatum Richardum nuper Regem in forma praedicta facto, vel
arbitrio, judicio, decreto considerationi seu ordinationi ipsius Domini nostri
Regis Henrici; and quod Cancellarius, Commissarius Procuratores Universitatis
praedictae tunc non fe^erint diligentiam and posse eorum ad adjuvandum dictum
Archiepilcopum vel Successores suos aut Ecclesiam praedictam, seu Commissarium
vel Commissario^ de visitatione aut jurisdictione antedictis, vel in aliquo
co^travenerint dictis arbit^io ordinationi ^ive judicio per praefatum Richardum
nuper Regem in forma praedicta factis, vel arbitrio, judicio, decre^o,
considerationi seu ordinationi ipsius Domini nostri Regis Henr^^; and quod
Cancellarius, Commissarius and Procuratores Universitatis praedictae tunc non
fecerint diligentiam and posse ^orum ad adjuvandum dictum Archiepiscopum and
Successores suos aut Ecclesiam suam praedictam, seu Commissarium vel
Commiss^^os suos in hujusmodi Casu, ac etiam ad puniendum hujusmodi impedientes
and resistentes; Quod to^iens omnes Franches^^e, lib^rta^es, ac omnia
privilegia ejusdem Universitatis in manu^ Domini Regis vel haeredum suorum
seisiantur, in eisdem manibus ipsorum Domini Regis vel haeredum suorum
remansura quo usque praedictus Archiepiscopus vel Successores sui pacificam
visitationem ac jurisdictionem in forma praedicta in dicta Universitate
habuerit vel habuerint, and etiam totiens Cancellarius, Commissarius, and
Procuratores ejusdem Universitatis quo pro tempore fuerint and eorum
Successores, ac Universitas praedicta solvant and teneantur, solvere ipso
Domino nostro Regi Henrico and haeredibus suis mill libras legalis monetae
Angliae: Quae quidem cedula visa ac cum matura and diligenti deliberatione
examinata and intellecta, dictus Dominus Rex in pleno Parliamento asseruit and
declaravit, omnia and singula in eadem schedula contenta per ipsum secundum
quod in eadem continetur facta, arbitrata, ordinata, considerata, decreta and
adjudicata in omnibus esse and ex^itisse: and sic de assensu Dominorum
Spiritualium and Temporalium necnon Communitatis in eodem Parliamento
existentium qui super eisdem pleniorem deliberationem similiter habuerunt and
eisdem decreto and judicio plenarie consenserunt and agreaverunt, eandem
cedulam and omnia and singula in eadem contenta concessit approbavit,
ratificavit and confirmavit: Quodque eadem schedula in Rotulo parliamenti
secundum formam and effectum ejusdem irrotularetur and inactaretur, ac etiam
quod eadem schedula and omnia in ea contenta sunt tanti et talis valoris
effectus et authoritatis, et eosdem valorem effectum et authoritatem habeant et
teneant ac si in praesenti Parliamento, ac per auctoritatem ejusdem Parliamenti
facta exti^issent.

Et puis apres sur diverses matieres moeney par enter le dit Erceve^que et
Lercevesque Deverwyke sur certaines privileges pretenses par le dit Ercevesque
Deverwike pour le College appellee Queen-hall, en la University Oxenford, le
dit Erchevesque de Canterbiis en presence du Roy et des Signeurs en le dit
Parliament provist, que se le dit Erchevesque Deverwyck purroit sufficientment
monstrer ascum privilege ^u especialtee de record perount le dit Er^evesque de
Canterbiis ne deust user ne exercer s^ visitation du dit College, il se vorroit
eut abstinier; Sauvant a Luj touteffois la visitation de les Escoliers
demourantez en le dit College solone les juggementx and decrees faictz and
donnez par le dit Roy Richard, and par nostre Signeur le Roy Henry pressed come
en le record eut fuit plus ple nement est declarez.

This Act is likewise recorded even by Robert Hare himself, in his Collectio
Libertatum and Privilegiorum Vniversitatis Oxon.

Lo here a full and punctual resolution of two successive Kings, Richard the
second and Henry the fourth, and of the Lords and Commons in Parliament against
the present pretended Privilege and Plea of the University of Oxford and their
Delegates, which subverts all the grounds of their feigned exemption from all
other Visitors but the King, either by foundation, prescription or papal Bulls
and Grants.

This Archbishop Arundel not only visited the University of Oxford, but
likewise held a Provincial Council therein Anno Dom. 1408. in which he made a
constitution concerning the Heads and Wardens of the University, thus
entitled, Gardiani principales and Praepositi Universitatis Oxoniensis, semel
in singulis mensibus inquirant de moribus and Doctrina suorum Scholarium (and
that under pain of deprivation, in case of wilful neglect) which Constitution
is recorded at large by Iohannis de Aton, Constitutiones Legit. fol. 154. Yea,
Ex memorand. Phillip Repingdon, Epist. Lincol. f. 196.
Phillip Repingdon Bishop of Lincoln sent forth his Citations for a visitation
to the University of Oxford, as their Diocaesan, intended to be held by him in
St Mary's Church in Oxford, dated, apud Leicest. 12. Feb. Anno Dom. 1415.
(being the first year of Henry the fifth his reign) to which the University, as
to some particulars readily submitted, as is evident by their answer to him,
viz. That they intended to make PERSONAL APPEARANCE to his Summons at the time
and place appointed, Recepturi quae ad Officium inquisitionis haereticae
pravitatis duntaxat pertinere noscumtur. Sub hac tamen protestatione, quod per
illam personalent comparitionem non intendimus in vos consentire SVPER
QVIBVSCVNQVE ARTICVLIS. (haereticae pravitatis duntaxat exceptis) etc. Datum
apud Oxon. 4^ mensis Martii Anno Dom. 1413. A clear evidence, that by the
repeal of the Popes Bulls of exemption in Parliament, 13. H. 4. not only the
Archbishops of Canterbury, but likewise the Bishops of Lincoln's jurisdiction
over, and visitation of the University of Oxford as their Diocesan, was revived
and submitted to, at least in cases of Heresy.

And in this very year 1413. this Archb. Arundel made certain Statutes for the
government of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, as Antiqu. Eccles.
Brit. relates, p. 309. the greatest badge of his jurisdiction over them.

Anno Dom. 1417. Henry Chirbley Archbishop of Canterbury upon the frequent and
grievous complaints of diverse in both Universities, made a Constitution and
Ordinance in full convocation, to endure for ten years, touching the promotion
of Graduates in the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, enrolled in his
Register, fol. 13, and 14.

John Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year of our Lord 1490. visited
diverse Diocesses within his Province, and among others the Diocese of Lincoln,
wherein the University of Oxford then was, Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 342, 343. in
which visitation it is probable he visited the University, as part of that
Diocese, though I find no express mention of it.

Anno Dom. 1557. Reginald Poole Archbishop of Canterbury, visited the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge by his Delegates, the History where of its
recorded at large in Master Fox his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 3. Edit. 1640. p.
762. to 780. and epitomized in Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 422. which Visitation
some say he kept only as Popes Legate, not in his Metropolitical right, though
I conceive he visited in both those capacities; altering and reforming the
Statutes of both Universities, and making new ones of his own for them to
observe, yet extant among their Records.

An. 19. of Queen Elizabeth's reign, Edmund Grindall Archbishop of Canterbury
and his Commissary, received an Appeal from William Wylson elected Rector of
Lincoln-colledge in Oxford, whom the Bishop of Lincoln and his Delegates
(Visitors of that College) refused to admit, and thereupon granted an
Inhibition to the Bishop and his Visitors, and summoned them to appear before
him to determine this election, as appears by the Queens Commission to examine
this business, dated 23. Apr. 19. Eliz. endorsed on the Rolls of that year.

In the twelft year of King CHARLES William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury
intending to visit both Universities by his Metropolitical Right, the
Universities revived this Plea against his jurisdictio^, which had rested in
peace without any controversy from K. Henry the 4th his resolution, Anno 1612.
till that very year 1635. The Universities alleged, that the King only was
and ought to be their sole Visitor, and that they were exempt from all.
Archiepiscopal and Episcopal visitation by foundation, prescription, papal
Bulls, royal Charters and express Statutes; and the Vice Chancellor, and
Heads of the University of Cambridge, on the 24. of December 1635. presented
this ensuing Paper to the Archbishop, against his Metropoliticall power to
visit them (comprizing in it whatever the University of Oxford has alleged,
or can colorably object against their present visitation) the Original whereof
I have in my custody, endorsed with the Archbishop's own hand.

A Summary Brief or Extract of the REASONS wherefore the University of
CAMBRIDGE is exempt both from Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Jurisdiction and
VISITATION.
IT being laid for a ground, that the Chancellor of the University as
Ordinarius, has, and of ancient time had ordinary jurisdiction within the
University, as may appear, as well by the Letters patents of King Richard the
second, under the great Seal of England, of a grant to the Chancellor, to make
a significavit into the Chancery of his excommunications, as Bishops used to
do; whereupon the Writ of De excommunicato capiendo was to issue; as also, by a
multitude of presidents, of the exercise of spiritual Censures and
Jurisdictions; amongst which it does appear, that in the time of King Edward
the first, the Chancellor of the University did excommunicate the Builiffs of
Cambridge for infringing the Privileges of the University: and in the time of
King Henry the eighth, John Edmunds then Master of Peter-house, and
Vice Chancellor of the University did excommunicate Dr Cliffe, Chancellor to
the Bishop of Ely, for excommunicating a privileged man, and the matter
coming before Cardinal Woolsey the Popes Legate, it was ordered for the
University; and Doctor Cliffe submitted to the said Vice Chancellor, and was
absolved by him publicly in the University.

In the first place, The University of Cambridge is Studium generale, and
Communitas Clericorum; and it is Note this, the very first Plea of our Oxonians
now.
one of the royal Prerogatives of the Kings of England, that where they are
founders of Monasteries, Colleges, or other Religious places, such Religious
places, so founded are eo ipso exempt from Episcopal and Archiepiscopall
Jurisdiction, and are only to be visited by persons delegated by the King's
Majesty, by Commission under the great Seal of England.

That the University is of the royal foundation of the King's Progenitors or
Predecessors, it appears not only by authentic Historians, but also by a
Petition exhibited by the Chancellor and Scholars of the University, 5. R. 2.
to the King in Parliament, concerning the Townsmen of Cambridge burning their
Charters and other Writings and Muniments, etc. And the reason of the Petition
is given, Cum dicta Vniversitas Cantebrigiae sit ex. ordinatione and fundatione
illustrium Progenitorum vestrorum, propter honorem Dei and Sanctae Ecclesiae.
which Petition was accepted, and a Decree thereupon made in Parliament against
the Townsmen.

2. The Popes of Rome until 26. H. 8. did usurp upon the Imperial Crown of the
Realm, and did assume to themselves a superiority and supremacy in all matters
of Ecclesiastical government, and in very The same with the Oxenians second
Plea, in words and substance.
ancient times there were Grants, Rescripts or Bulls to free the University from
the jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Diocese, and of the Archbishop.

Pope John the two and twentieth, in the eleveneh year of the reign of King
Edward the second, and at his request, does confirm to this University (which
he called Studium generale) all manner of Privileges and Indulgences before
that time granted to it by any of his Predecessors, or any Kings of this Realm.

The Prior of Barnwell also, Anno Dom. 1430. as delegate to Pope Martin the
fifth, by virtue of that power committed to him, confirms the jurisdiction and
exemption of the University by an authentic instrument under the seal of the
said Pryor and his Covent, called, Processus Barnwellensis, the Original
whereof is still in Archivis Academia.

Pope Eugenius Anno Dom. 1433. being 12. H. 6. reciting the Bulls of Pope
Honorius and Sergius primus (the which were I doubt these pr^^ended Bu^s were
mcc^ forgeries and bais indeed.
seven hundred years before that time) for the freeing of the University from
the jurisdiction of the Bishop and Archbishop, and reciting the process of
Barnwell, does confirm the same, and supplies all defects, as appears by the
Original in Parchment in Archivis Vniversitatis.

3. There is a The xouians third Plea in words and substance.
constant custom and prescription for the freeing of the University from the
jurisdiction of the Bishop and Archbishop; And a Prescription and Custom will
prevail in this case, as well upon the canon Law, as it will upon the municipal
and fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: and the rather, because the canon Law had
his force in this Realm by usage and custom: And to prove, that this Custom
and Prescription was ancient in the time of Henry the sixth; it appears by the
foresaid instrument under the seal of the Prior of Barnwell, termed Processus
Barnwellensis, that the Masters, Doctors and Scholars of the University, for
the preserving of their immunities and exemptions from the Bishop and
Archbishop (their Charters and Bulls from the Popes being lost or burnt) did
address themselves by Petition to Pope Martin the fifth, who did make a
Commission Delegate to the Prior of Barnwell and John Deeping, and to either of
them to enquire, etc.

The Prior takes upon him the execution of the Commission; the University in
the Regent house make a Proctor under the common Seal: There are seven
Witnesses examined who speak for the time of their memory, some of them for
sixty years, that (by all that time) the Chancellor of the University had
exercised Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the University, and names Richard
Scroop, and eleven other Chancellours of the University, and This was direct
perjury, since Archbishop Arunde^ visited that University, and all Colleges in
it An. 1477 not 30. years before, p. 3. 54. etc.
that no Archbishop or Bishop did interpose; and does instance Doctor Fordham
Bishop of Ely, coming to Cambridge with an intention to visit the University,
when he understood of the Privilege of the University, he did supersede.
Sithence that Process, being above two hundred years ago,. there have been
fourteen Archbishops of Canterbury, and sixteen Bishops of Ely, and none of
them have visited the University of Cambridge, notwithstanding they have
visited their Diocese and Province.

4. Not insisting on sundry The Oxonians fourth Plea in substance and words.
ancient Charters of former Kings; King Edward the second, An. 11. of his
reign, writes to Pope John the two and twentieth for confirming the ancient
Privileges which the University then used, with augmentation of new; the which
is in the Tower of London, and was under the great Seal of England. And 22.
Maii 36. Edw. 3. that King directs Letter Patents to the Archbishops, Bishops
and Ecclesiastical persons by way of Prohibition, that Scholars should not be
cited into Ecclesiastical Courts out of the University: And 6. Hen. 5. when a
Commission was granted for the enquiring and correcting of Heretics, according
to the Statute of 2. Hen. 5. there is this clause; Nolumus tamen quod aliquis
vestrum de aliquo praemissorum quae per privilegia and libertates Vniversitatis
per Cancellarium ejusdem Vniversitatis solummodo corrigi and terminari debent,
color praesentis commissionis nostrae in aliquo intromittatis.

In the Letters Patents of King James of blessed memory, in March 20. of his
reign, he first declares his intention to confirm the Privileges and Customs
used in the University: Secondly, he does in express terms confirm the
jurisdiction as well spiritual as temporal, the Privileges, Quietances and
Exemptions, not only by the Grants of his Progenitors, vel aliarum personarum
quarumcunque, but also praetextu aliquarum Chartarum, donationum,
consuetudinis, praescriptionis, etc. And thirdly, Grants that the Chancellor,
and (in his absence) the Vice Chancellor shall visit Colleges which have no
special Visitor, which Charter is also exmero motu and certa scientia.

5. It appears by the Statute of 25. H. 8. cap. 19. and 21. that albeit the
supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical be resumed to the Crown from the Pope, yet
no part of that power which the Pope or Archbishop of Canterbury (as his Legate)
in any wise ever had, is invested In the Archbishop; but it is Alleged by the
Oxonians too.
especicially provided, That in the case of Monasteries, Colleges, etc. exempt
from Episcopal power, and immediately subjected to the Pope, the Visitation
shall not be by the Archbishop, but by Commissioners to be nominated by the
King by his commission under the great Seal. It is true, that by the Statute of
31. H. 8. in a proviso therein contained, there the Bishop and Archbishop have
a power given unto them over Monasteries, Colleges, etc. which before were
immediately subjected to the Pope; but that enlarging of the power of the
Archbishop does extend only to Religious houses dissolved; it does not extend
to the University: and the Statute of 1. Phil. and Mary cap. 8. repealing the
Statutes made against the Pope's Supremacy, and giving power to the Archbishop,
etc. to visit in places exempt, has a special proviso thereby, not to
diminish the Privileges of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, nor the
Privileges granted to the church of Westminster, Windsore, and the Tower.

There is no new power given to the Archbishop by the Statute of 1.
Elizabethae, and this appears evidently in the proviso therein touching the
Visitation, for (if he will visit) he must be having jurisdiction, and he must
visit only within his jurisdiction, and the power is also given to Ordinaries
within their jurisdictions.

6. The Oxonians Argument too.
Presidents and examples in the very point; wherein not to insist upon the
president of any Archbishop before the time of 26. H. 8. in as much as the Pope
then being reputed the Supreme head of the church, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury having a Legatine power, his acts then are not to be ensampled to
the succeeding Archbishops, who have not any power in the point in question
touching visitation, from the Pope; but what has been done sithence is most
material, and that time has taken up above an hundred years, which by the
Canon Law is accounted not only tempus antiquum, but tempus antiquissimum.

The first Visitation of the University, sithence that time was 27. H. 8. when
the Lord Cromwell was Chancellor of this University, and the same was by There
is no such Commission to be found.
commission under the great Seal of England (to the Lord Cromwell Chancellor,
and others) according to the foresaid Statute of 25. H. 8. The second
visitation was This Commission is extant.
3. Edw. 6. and as it does appear by the Letter of the Duke of Somerset the
then Chancellor of the University, that visitatio Regia was, by reason that he
was moved by the Letters of the University to send Visitors: he being then
Protector was not in Commission.

In the third and fourth year of the reign of Phillip and Mary (the Pope being
restored to his usurped power) Cardinal Poole did visit the University; but it
appears in the process, that it was as Legatus, by Commission from the Pope,
cui Papa commisit visitationem and reformationem studiorum generalium: which
clause, together with the proviso in the said Statute 1, and 2. Phil. and Mary,
proves, that this Visitation was not authoritate Metropolitica.

And lastly, there was a Royal Visitation 1. Eliz. by There is no such
Commission extant in the Rols.
Commission under the great Seal, to Sir William Cecill, then the Chancellor
of the University, and to others: The Queens Letter before the said Visitation,
to Sir William Cecill, is, Because the chief order and governance of Our
University of Cambridge appertains to you, being the chancellor of the same,
etc. We thought meet to will you in Our name to give signification, that We
mean very shortly, with your advice, to visit the same by some discreet and
meet persons.

Yet notwithstanding all these reasons, presented by the Vniver. of Camb. and
others of like nature sent from Oxf. amplified by council, upon a full and
deliberate hearing of both parties before the King himself and the Lords of the
privy Counsel at Hampton court, the King and Lords resolved against the
Universities claims and reasons, and confirmed the ancient Declarations and
Resolutions of King Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, disclaiming this
new revived Monopoly, of the King's sole right of visiting the Universities,
they would attribute to him as his Royal Prerogative, and their grand
Privilege and Birthright (which they are bound by oath and duty to maintain)
as this ensuing Charter of King Charles himself will demonstrate, to their
eternal refutation.

Anno duodecimo CAROLI, pars sexta November 2.
Commis. visitat. Archiepiscopo Cant.
REX omnibus ad quos, etc. Suborta nuper lite and controversia inter
Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, and
Vniversitates nostras Oxonii and Cantebrigiae super jure and titulo
visitationis Metropoliticae Universitatum praedictarum, praefato Archiepiscopo
jus visitandi praedictas Universitates sibi and Ecclesiae suae Metropoliticae
Christi Cantuariensi vendicante; praefatisque Universitatibus se a visitatione
praedicta exemptas esse pretendentibus; liteque and controversia praedictis, ad
Nos and judicium and sententiam nostram Regiam delatis, Nos ad stabiliendam
pacem inter parts praedictas and ad tollendam in perpetuum bujusmodi
controversiae materiam, Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem praedictum and
perquam fidelem Consiliarium nostrum Willielmum, providentia divina
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem totius Angliae Primatum and Metropolitanum, and
Vniversitatis Oxonii Cancellarium, Necnon perdilectum and perquam fidelem
consanguineum and Censiliarium nostrum Henricum Comitem Holland, Vniversitatis
Cantebrigiae Cancellarium, aliosque nonnullos a praedictis Universitatibus
mandata sufficientia habentes, venire fecimus coram Nobis and Consiliariis
Nostris in Aula Nostra apud honorem Nostrum de Hampton Court vicessimo primo
die mensis Junii, Anno Regni Nostri duodecimo; ibidemque auditis and
intellectis quae per parts praedictas hinc inde dici and allegari potuerunt,
habitaque cum praefatis Consiliariis Nostris deliberatione matura, ad
definiendam and dejudicandam litem and controversiam praedictam processimus in
modum fequentem. Primo and ante omnia per probationes legitimas and per
confessionem utriusque partis, Nobs constabat, Nos jure Coronae nostrae Regni
Angliae habuisse and habere potestatem visitandi Universitates praedictas
quoties and quandocunque Nobis and Successoribus nostris visum ^ fuerit:
praefatumque Archiepiscopum jure Ecclesiae suae Metrop^^^ticae Christi
Cantuariensis habuisse, and habere potestatem visitandi totam Provinciam suam
Cantuariensem, in qua Universitates praedictae positae sunt. Cum vero ex part
Universitatum propositum esset, Universitates praedictas per quasdam Chartas
nostras and Praedecessorum nostrorum, and Bullas Papales fuisse exemptas and
immunes ab omni visitatione and jurisdictione Archiepiscopi praedicti,
eandemque immunitatem ligitima temporis usu fuisse praescriptam; ex part
praefati Archiepiscopi coram Nobis ostensum and probatum fuit, tres
Praedecessores suos Archiepiscopos Cantuarienses actualiter visitasse
Universitates praedictas jure Ecclesiae suae Metropoliticae Christi
Cantuariensis, and non per potestatem legitimam; ortaque olim lite inter
Archiepiscopum Canturiensem and Universitatem Oxon. super jure visitationis
praedictae tempore Richardi secundi Praedecessoris Nostri, Regis Angliae,
eundem Praedecessorem Nostrum plene auditis quae per parts utrinque proponi
potuerint, pro Archiepiscopo and jure visitationis suae judicasse; eademque
controversia itorum emergente inter Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem and
Universitatem Oxon. tempore Henrici quarti Praedecessoris Nostri Regis Angliae,
eundem Praedecessorem Nostrum similiter pro Archiepiscopo praedicto and JURE
VISITATIONIS SUAE PRAEDICTAE PRONUNCIASSE ET DETERMINASSE, EASDEMQUE SENTENTIAS
ET DETERMINATIONES PER ACTUM PARLIAMENTI Anno tertiodecimo Henrici quarti
fuisse ratificatas and confirmatas. Quinetiam Nobis constabat, praedictas
exemptiones and immunitates a visitatione Metropolitica Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis, vel earum aliquam, per aliquam Chartam Nostram vel
Praedecessorum Nostrorum non fuisse concessas, easdemque per Bullas Papales
concedi non potuisse, nec per cursum temporis citra actuales visitationes
Archiepiscoporum praedictorum fuisse legitime praescriptas, nec de jure Nostro
Ecclesiastico potuisse praescribi: praefatus^^ Archiepiscopus coram Nobis
protulit schedulam subscriptam manibus Magistrorum Collegiorum Universitatis
Cantebrigiensts in qua Magistri pro se and Universitate sua, privilegiis and
immuntatibus Papalibus Universitati praedictae concessis, renunciabant. Quibus
omnibus per Nos consideratis, habitaque deliberatione cum praefatis
consiliariis Nostris, JUDICAVIMUS ET DETERMINAVIMUS JUS VISITANDI CANCELLARIOS,
MAGISTROS ET SCHOLARES UNIVERSITATUM PRAEDICTARUM, SUCCESSORUM SUORUM, EORVMQUE
SERVIENTIUM, ALIARUMQUE PERSONARUM PRO TEMPORE EXISTENTIUM LIBERTATI ET
PRIVILEGIIS UNIVERSITATUM PREFAT. UTENTIVM, NECNON UNIVERSITATUM PRAEDICTARVM
VT VNIVERSITATES, SPECTARE ET PERTINERE ad praefatum Archiepiscopum and
SVCCESSORES SVOS and Ecclesiam Metropoliticam praedictam, PER SE, COMMISSARIVM
SEV COMMISSARIOS SVOS EXERCENDVM: Et quod praefati Cancellarii, Magistri,
Scholares, and reliquae personae Privilegiis Vni. versitatum utentes, eorumque
Successores, PERPETVIS FVTVRIS TEMPORIBVS EIDEM ARCHIEPISCCPO ET SVOCESSORIBVS
SVIS, EORVMVE COMMISSARIIS IN VISITATIONE ET JVRISDICTIONE VNIVERSITATVM
PRAEDICTARVM IN OMNIBVS PAREANT ET OBEDIANT. Cum vero coram Nobis praeterea
proponeretur non satis constare quoties and visitatio praedictarum
Vnivesitartum exerceri debeat, ad amputandas similes controversias in futuro,
Ordinavimus, quod licebit praefato Archiepiscopo and Successoril us suis
VISITARE VNIVERSITATES PRAEDICTAS NON TANTVM SEMEL IN VITA, sicut in reliquis
partibus Provinciae Ca^tuariensis nuper visitat. suit, verii ETIAM QUOD LICEBIT
IIS EORUMQUE SINGULIS POST PRIMAM VISITATIONEM METROPOLITICAM FINITAM
PRAEDICTAS VNIVERSITATES PER SE VEL COMMISSARIOS SVOS VISITARE QVOTIESCVNQVE
ILLVD NECESSARIVM PRAEFATIS ARCHIEPISCOPIS VISVM FVERIT EX CAVSA RATIONABILI ET
LEGITIMA PER NOS ET SVCCESSORES NOSTRO SP RIMITVS APPROBANDA. Cumque praeterea
coram Nobis proponeretur, ex part Cancellarii praedicti, futurum valde
incommodum sibi and successoribus suis pro dignitate personarum suarum, si in
visitationibus praedictis personaliter debeant comparere; declaravimus, jure
satis consultum esse eorum incommodis in hac part, cum possint in
visitationibus praedictis per Procuratores suos comparere. Denique per
praefatum Archiepiscopum a Nobis humiliter petitum fuit, hoc Nostrum judicium
and declaratio potestatis visitandi Vniversitates praedictas sibi and
successoribus suis jure Ecclesiae Metropoliticae Christi Cantuariensis,
competent. non possint in futuro extendi ad EPISCOPOS ET ARCHIDIACONOS LOCORVM
IN QUIBUS VNIVERSITATES PRAEDICT. POSITAE SVNT: Et ut praefatae Vniversitates
per praefatos Episcopos and Archidiaconos IMPOSTERVM NON POSSINT VISITARI: Et
ut hoc nostrum judicium, ordinationem and determinationem sub magno sigillo
Angliae concedere confirmari dignaremus: cujus petitioni annuentes,
declaravimus, QVOD VNIVERSITATES PRAEDICTAE PER EPISCOPOS ET ARCHIDIACONOS
PRAEDICTOS IMPOSTERVM NON VISITENTVR. Et hoc Nostrum judicium, ordinationem and
declarationem sub magno sigillo Angliae communiri, and confirmari jussimus.
Mandantes praefatis Cancellariis Magistris and Scholaribus Vniversitatum
praedictarum ut VISITATIONI PRAEFATI ARCHIEPISCOPI ET SVCCESSORVM SVORVM SE
SVBMITTANT, ET VT NVLLAM EXEMPTIONEM SEV IMMVNITATEM ADVERSVS VISITATIONEM
PRAEDICTAM SIBI VENDICARE PRAESVMANT.

In cujus rei, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. tricessimo die Januarii, Anno Regni
Caroli Regis Angl. etc. duodecimo. Per breve de privato Sigillo.

By all these recited Histories and Records it is unquestionably apparent, both
in point of fact and right too, That the Archbishops of Canterbury have from
time to time visited the Universities both of Oxford and Cambridge, the
several Colleges and Hals in them, by their mere Metropolitical right. That
this right of theirs, and jurisdiction over the Universities, was never
opposed, nor this Plea or Privilege of the King's sole right, ever pretended
or insisted on till 20. R. 2. and that only by a factious party in the
University of Ozford. That this King himself, on whom that Prerogative was
first fixed, did by an express Charter and Decree absolutely disclaim, and
adjudge it for the Archbishops, against the University of Oxford, upon a solemn
reference of the whole business to him. That when the University of Oxford
renewed it again, King Henry the fourth, to whose determination the University
and Archbishop submitted the descision thereof, adjudged it for the Archbishops
against the University, and disclaimed this pretended Prerogative of his sole
visiting she Universities: which determination of his was ratified by the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, as a binding Decree against the University, and
their Successors: That the Archbishops of Canterbury enjoyed the Privilege of
visiting the Universities without dispute, till 12. Caroli, who upon full
hearing of both Universities and the Archbishop, before himself and his
Council, by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, confirmed the descisions
of Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, and the Archbishops Metropolitical
right of visiting the Universities, notwithstanding all Pleas, Bulls and
Charters alleged for their exemprion; and likewise disavowed his own pretended
right of sole visiting the Universities as Universities; That the Popes Bulls
now insisted on for exempting the Universities from Episcopal and
Archiepiscopal jurisdiction and visitation, have been renounced by the
Universities themselves, and declared null and void by these three Kings, and
the Parliament of 13. H. 4. and no bar at all to the Archbishops right then,
much less to the Parliaments now: That no Kings of England ever visited the
Universities till King Henry the eighth, and that neither his visitation of the
University by his Commissioners (if real) nor K. Edward the sixth by his, nor
the Statutes of 26. H. 8. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 19, 31. nor 1 and 2 Phil. and Mary
c. 8. nor 1 Eliz. c. 1. did deprive the Archbishops of Canterbury of this
jurisdiction, nor yet the Bishop of the Diocese, whose jurisdiction continued
till the twelft year of King Charles, as this clause in his Letters Patens,
Declaramus quod Vniversitates praedictae per Episcopos and Archidiaconos IN
POSTERVM NON VISITENTVR, intimates: which fully makes good my second, and fifth
position too, in every particular branch.

I shall be brief in proof of my third. That Cardinal Poole Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the third and fourth year of Queen Mary's Reign, as Popes
Legate, visited both Universities, is thus related by Matthew Parker his
immediate successor, Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 422. Reginaldus Polus in
LEGATIONE ADMINISTRANDA, quia ^um in vivis vix aliqui Evangelici quas flammis
extingueret noti essent, in mortuos saevire decrevit. Ac primum Cantuariensem
Diocaesim VISITAVIT; deinde CANTEBRIGIENSEM ET OXONIENSEM ACADEMIAS, Johanni
Christophersono Cicestrensi, and Cutberto Scoto Cestrensi Episcopis, necnon
Colo, and maxim Ormaneto (quem omnit us rebus praefecit) LVSTRANDAS, and ad
Pontificiam ^mussim atque normam reducendas commisit. Hi c^^m in collegi^s
omnia perturbassent, novisque duris legibus multorum juvenum praeclar^s indoles
a studiis prorsus alienassent, ne quid crudelitatis omitterent, mort^orum
sepulchra violarunt, etc. The whole form and proceedings of their visitation of
the University and Colleges of Cambridge, is at large recorded by Master Fox
in his Acts and Monuments, Edit. 1640. Vol. 3. p. 762, to 780. where those who
please may read them at their leisure; both the Universities submitting to his
Visitors visitation of them, not only as Archbishop, but Popes Legate too: cui
Papa commisii visitationem and reformationem Studiorum generalium; as he
expressed in his Process: This Cardinal altered the old, and made new Statutes
for the Universities, rejecting those made by King Edward the sixth his
authority, which Statutes of his are yet remaining among the Records of both
Universities.

That the Chancellours of both Universities have anciently, and at this day
claimed a power of jurisdiction and visitation too (in some cases) over them,
is confessed and argued by the University of Cambridge, in the Summary Brief of
their Reasons, forecited, p. 29, 32. they alleging this as one principal
reason, why they should be exempt from all Episcopal and Archiepiscopall
jurisdiction and visitation too, in some cases: and the University of Oxford,
(as is apparent by the words of the Commission of Queen Elizabeth, 23. Aprilis,
19 Eliz.) made the se^^ same Plea and suggestion against Archbishop Grinda^s
jurisdiction in receiving an Appeal from William Wilson (Rector elect of
Lincoln-colledge in Oxford) against the Bishop of Lincoln and his Visitors, who
refused to admit him Rector of chat College, That the Chancell^ur of the
University of OXFORD, time out of mind, had been in quiet possession of this
Privilege among others: Quod Doctores, Magistri and Scholares omnes and
singuli dictae and Academiae, ab omni jurisdictione, Dominio vel potestate
quorumcunque Archiepiscoporum, etiam Legatorum natorum, necnon Episcoporum,
aliorum Ordinariorum, and judicum quorumcunque quoad omnes Contractiones, vel
quasi initos infra praedictam Vniversitatem, and quoad OMNIA CRIMINA, vel quasi
and PVNITIONEM corundem (exceptis prae-exceptis, mahemia, and felonia, and
Assisis, and placitis de libero tenemento) and quoad OMNES ACTVS SCHOLASTICOS,
quamdi^ degerint in e^dem Vniversitate, sunt exempti and totaliter liberati,
and praedicto CANCELLARIO SUBJECTI. Et quod CANCELLARIUS praedictae
Vniversitatis OMNEM ET OMNIMODAM JURISDICTIONEM ECCLESIASTICAM ET SPIRITUALEM
IN PRADICTOS SCHOLARES ET ALIAS PERSONAS EXERCERE LIBERE ET LICITE POSSIT ET
VALEAT. The reality of which pretended exemption, privileges and infringment
of them by Wilson's Appeal, the Queen referred to the examination and
determination of the Bishops of London and Rochester, Christopher Wray chief
Baron of the Exchequer, Sir William Cordell Master of the Rols, Thomas Wilson
Doctor of Law, one of the Masters of Request^, John Gibbons, Doctor of Law, and
one of the Masters of the Chancery, and John Griffeth Doctor of Law, or any
seven, six, five, four, three or two of them; but what they did or determined
therein is uncertain.

If then the Popes Legates and the Chancellours of both Universities, have
exercised, and time out of mind enjoyed such jurisdiction over the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; their pretense, of being subject only to
the King's visitation and jurisdiction, must necessarily be disclaimed, being
directly contrary to their own express claims, in relation to their
Chancellours.

My fourth position, That the particular Colleges, Hals and Members of the
University have their particular Visitors appointed by their founders and
private Statutes, to whose visitation and jurisdiction they are subject, not to
the King's alone; is such a known truth, that I need not prove it, having given
some touches upon it Page 7.
already in Lincoln-colledge and Brasennose. The rather, because the author of
the Privileges of the University of Oxford, p. 6. makes this Argument against
the Visitors present jurisdiction, We have yet a more strict and particular
Obligation, being sworn by our respective Statutes, to allow and submit to no
visitation but from those who are nominated by our Founders. And the common and
Statute Law of England allows the Founders of any College, Abbey, Hospital,
Free School or Free-Chappel, without cure of souls, to visit or nominate those
who shall visit the same, as is evident by 8 Ass. 29. 8. E. 369. 13 Ass. 2. 11
H 4 12. 84. 27 E. 3 84. 6 H. 714. Fitz. Not. Bre. 42. a. b. 50. (...). Brook
Praemunire 1. 5. H. 5. c. 1. 25 H. 8 c. 21. 43 Eliz. c. 4. Now of all the
Colleges or Hals in the University of Oxford, as Doctor Fell (the pretended
Vice Chancellor alleged before the Committee of Lords and Commons for
regulating the University) there is none but Christ. Church only, of which the
King is immediate Visitor, (and that originally founded by Cardinal Woolsey,
not the Kings Progenitors) and no more but it and Speed's History, p. 1066,
1085, etc.
Orial college, and St. Mary-Hall (founded by K. Edward the 2d) and
Iesus-colledge (founded by Qu. Elizabeth) whereof the King and his Progenitors
have been Founders; which three later have their particular Visitors appointed
by their Founders Statutes: and no College in the University of Cambridge but
Kings-colledge, Trinity-colledge any Christs-colledge, whereof the King's
Ancestors are immediate Founders; how then the King can truly and really be
styled, the sole Founder or Visitor of both or either our Universities (there
being but three Colleges in Oxford, and three in Cambridge of his foundation,
and but one of his visitation) I desire the University at leisure to resolve,
since this their Plea, We have yet a more strict and particular obligation,
being sworn by our respective Statutes, to allow and submit TO NO VISITATION
but from those who are appointed by our Founders, quite subverts their grand
pretended Privilege, and strongest Plea in Bar (which the Author of The
Privileges of the University of Oxford undertakes to make good) That the right
of visiting the University of Oxford, is only in the King's Majesty, and that
it is exempt from all other jurisdiction, by its Foundation, Prescription and
grants of Exemption; when as I have proved it to be anciently and legally
subject both to the jurisdiction and visitation of the Bishops of Lincoln, of
the Archbishops of Canterbury, the Popes Legates, the Chancellor; and the
Colleges and Hals as Members of it, to sundry particular Visitors, appointed
by their respective Statutes and Founders; the two last whereof themselves
acknowledge and urge too. Which fully refutes the King's pretended royal
Monopoly of sole visiting the University, which himself and his Progenitors
have several times disclaimed and resolved against in express terms, as I
have manifested.

My fifth position is P. 9, 10, 11, 21, 36, 38.
already substantially proved in every syllable, in the evidence for probat of
the second; which I shall not repeat, but only conclude, the Author of the
Universities Privileges was very ill advised to plead Popes exploded, illegal,
antichristian Bulls in Bar against the jurisdiction of both houses, and the
Visitors deputed by them, in these Anti-papal times of Reformation, which might
justly induce them to suspect, that the Heads and Members of the University
have a higher and more reverent esteem of the Popes usurped, abandoned
authority, and illegal Bulls, then of both houses rightful Power and
Ordinances, which they would have these void Papal Bulls (no better then the
white Bull in Osny Tower) control, though the very Letter of them extends
only to exempt themselves from Archiepiscopal and Episcopal, not Parliamentary
jurisdiction and visitation, no more then Regal.

These five positions being all confirmed, and the Universities pretended grand
Privilege and false Plea thereby sufficiently refuted, I shall next examine
and refeil the false grounds and impertinent Evidences produced by their
advocate to make them good, and so leave them without excuse.

Object.
The first ground in maintenance of this exemption is, That the University The
Unversities Privilege, p 2, 3.
of Oxford wholly refers to the King, as its Original and Founder; That almest
800. years since, King Alured not only founded public Schools of Arts and
Lectures, but their Privileges and Immunities, having gotten them confirmed by
the then Pope; That the University ever submitted and she^^^red themselves
under the title of the Kings Foundation and yet do. For which some Instruments
of the University to K. Richard the 2d, and others, wherein they recite they
are Vestrae fundationis and Patronqtus, are cited in the Margin: Now all
Societies whereof the King or his Predecessors were Founders, are ONLY
VISITABLE BY THE KING, by the common Law of this Realm 6 H. 7 f. 14. 2 H. 5 (I
suppose he intends the Statute of 2 H. 5 c 1. since there is nothing in the
year book to that purpose.)

To this I answer, Answ.
first, That the original Founder of the University of Oxford is not certainly
known: Secondly, That King Alured was not the first Founder of this University,
or of Schools and Lectures in it, (which had been time out of mind before, as
Master Cambden in his Britiania, p. 378. proves out of Ass^r) but only the
Restorer and Repairer of them, recalling the long banished Muses unto their own
sacred cells, it being a University above three hundred years before at lest;
its Orders and Ordinances for Lectures, etc. being made and established by
Gildas, Melkin, Ninnius, Kentigerne, and other godly and learned men, which
Saint German wondrous well allowed of ^ which the old Schoolmen of the
University proved by the undoubted testimony of old Chronicles before King
Alured, in their contest with Grimbald their Divinity Professor there: And it
is one thing to be a Founder, another a Repairer or enlarger; else every
Founder of a new College or School in the University, or Repairer of an old
one, should be the Founder of the University and College it self. Thirdly,
That this King conferred any Privileges or Immunities on this University, and
got them confirmed by the Pope; I find no satisfactory evidence: but admit he
did, this makes him no more a Founder of the University, then Edward the 3d,
Richard the 2d, King Henry the 8th, Queen Elizabeth, King James, or King
Charles, who confirmed and allowed the Universities ancient privileges.
Fourthly, there are only three Colleges and one Hall in Oxford now remaining
of the King's and his Predecessors foundation, and one of them Christ-church,
was really founded by Cardinal Wool^ey as a College, and by the Godwins
Catalogue of Bishops, p. 404.
King only as a Deanary and Cathedral; all other Colleges and Hals, with the
public Schools and Library had other Founders; therefore the King and his
Progenitors cannot be properly styled, the sole Founder of the whole
University, and so the only Visitors by the common Law. Fifthly, the Parliament
it self (to speak properly) is the true real Founder and establisher of both
Universities, they being incorporated and made capable to sue, purchase and
enjoy all their Privileges and Lands without controversy, only by an act of
Parliament in the 13. year of Queen Elizabeth, rot. 36. the title whereof is
only mentioned in the printed Acts; therefore the Parliament being the true
Founders of it, have best right to visit it by the common Law, by us their
Commissioners, as this Objection proves. Sixthly, this plea, That the University
is of the King's foundation only, (as the Objector grants) is but the
Universities own device, who anciently did, and yet do shelter themselves under
the title of it, against their lawful Visitors, and are very ill advised to
fly to this false shelter now, since three Kings and one Parliament have
several times driven them from it, as the premises evidence. Seventhly, admit
the antecedent true, that the King and his Predecessors were sole Founders of
the University, yet the sequel is unfound: Ergo they only are the Visitors of
it, and none others, seeing I have proved, that others have of right visited
and had jurisdiction in and over it as a University from time to time, besides
our Kings, and that of right, by our Kings and Parliaments resolutions,
notwithstanding this pretext of being sole Founders. Eighthly, the King and his
progenitors by their Charters are as much Founders of every Corporation, every
Company of Merchants and other Tradesmen in London and other Cities, as of the
Universities; will it therefore follow, Ergo, none must visit or regulate them
but the King, and the houses of Parliament, the Committees for Trades,
Complaints, Grievances, Clothiers, Weavers, etc. may not regulate nor reform
them, much less the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen, as they have usually
done. Ninthly, the Book of 6 H. 7 14. is no resolution, but a private opinion;
It only speaks of the Kings free Chapels without cure, which he or his
Chancellours shall visit, not the Bishop, but by Commission; not of
Universities or Colleges, the thing in question; nor yet of Monasteries,
Churches and Chapels with cure of souls, which the Archbishop and Bishop of
the Diocese shall visit, though built, founded and endowed by the King
himself, as this very Law-book [6 H. 7 14.] grants; whence most ancient Abbeys
founded by our Kings, were exempted from archiepiscopal and Episcopal
visitation and jurisdiction by special Charters confirmed in Spelman Council.
Tom. 1. p. 631. to 635. Joan. S^ldeni No^ae ad Eadmerum p. 165.
Parliament, and Popes Bulls, the King's mere foundation and Charters alone
being no legal exemption from their power by the common or Canon Law. As for
the Statute of 2 H. 5 c. 1. it speaks only of Hospitals of the King's
foundation, that the Ordinaries shall visit them by his Commission, not of
Colleges or Universities; without the words and intention of the act. Tenthly,
this and other Law Books only say, that the Bishop shall not visit Hospitals
and Free-Chappels of the King's foundation; but no Book avers, the Houses of
Parliament may not visit them nor their Delegates: and to argue, the Bishop of
the Diocese may not visit the King's Free-Chappels or Hospitals; Ergo, the
Parliament may not do it; is no better Logic then; The Ordinary cannot visit
nor reform the greatest Officers of State, the Course of Justice at Westminster,
the Kings own Court; nor any civil abuses, and public grievances: Ergo, the
Houses of Parliament cannot do it. Yea, all our Books agree, that the Bishop by
Commission, under the great Seal, may lawfully visit the Kings Freechappels and
Foundations, and the stat. of 2. H. ^. c. 1. enacts as much: But we have such a
Commission to visit the University, therefore we may lawfully do it. These
answers, I suppose, have sufficiently shaken the sandy foundation of the
Universities Exemption, the Kings Foundation of it, whereon they most rely.

Yea, but the Objector learnedly replys, p. 3. Here you may please to consider,
that the Foundation of the University being the Kings personal act, his
interest lies not within the reach of that Beaten evasion, of a public and
politic Capacity. I answer, I understand not well what he means by the Kings
personal act: Unless the act of the King in his natural Capacity, as a Man, not
in his Politic, as a King. If so, then it follows: 1. That the King and his
Progenitors, as Kings in their public and politic Capacities, were not
founders of the University, but only in their natural, as private men; which
subverts his own assertion and foundation. 2. That this privilege of a Founder
is not annexed to the Kings public and politic, but natural and personal
Capacity, and so not descendible nor hereditary; since personal actions, acts
and privileges, by the rules of the Law, Actio personalis moritur cum persona.
die with the person. If he mean by the Kings personal act; that the King in
person, laid the very first Foundation stone of the University with his own
hands; or writ and sealed the Patent or Charter that first founded it, himself,
and not by any Substitutes or Officers: This will b^ hard for him to prove; and
the sequel will be; That the King only in his own Royal person, must visit the
University now; but net by any Commissioners or Delegates; and so all his other
Foundations, contrary to all former presidents, Statutes and Law Books, that he
may visit them by Commissioners, which the Un^versities Answer acknowledges,
and himself to^

The next * Ground of Exemption urged, Object. 2.
is pre-scription and Bulls of Popes; both which being abandantly refuted in
the premised positions, and no plea at all against both Houses of Parliament,
or any power derived from them, (not mentioned, nor included in, nor yet
confinable by these Bulls) though they might hold good against any ordinary or
inferior Jurisdiction, if true, I shall here therefore pretermi^ without
further Answer.

The 3d, Object. 3.
ground of Exemption alleged, it Page 2. 3. 4.
grants of Exemption by Popes, allowed and confirmed by Charters from several
Kings, both by themselves and in Parliaments; to prove which, there are quoted
in the Margin some Popes Bulls, out of H^re, the old book of Oxford Statutes,
and the Senior Proctors Book, with this addition, 25. H. 8. c. 21. All power of
Visitation is given only to such, as shall have immediate Authority by the
Kings Commission, under the great Seal of England, in places formerly exempted;
as COLLEGES etc. All Letters, Patents heretofore made by the Kings
Progenitors, in behalf of the Universities, are confirmed by act of Parliament.
13. Eliz. and 19. Eliz. part. 13. in Dorso; The Privileges of the University
are confirmed in the very words of Boniface, 8. acknowledged they had them by
prescription; the immediate subjection of the University to the Authority and
Jurisdiction of the Prince, and all their other Exemptions ratified; and those
acknowledged to be sworn to, in the Oath taken by every Graduate. These are all
the evidences of moment produced to make good this ground.

I answer. Answer.
1. That all these Popes Bulls of Exemption now insist^^^on, were so far from
being allowed and confirmed by Charters from several Kings, both by themselves
and in Parliaments; that King Richard the 2. and King Henry the 4. by both
their Charters, and in Parliament, upon solemn debate, disallowed, ^ulled and
declared them merely void, and the University it self, absolutely renounced
them as nullities and prejudicial, in both their Raigns: King Charles himself
by his Charter, ratifying and approving their resolutions herein, as I have
proved. Therefore this allegation is a most palpable falsehood, there being no
one Charter, nor Act of Parliament that ever allowed or confirmed them before
or since these Kings Declarations of their nullity. And admit these Bulls so
confirmed, yet they ex end only to exempt the University from Archiepiscopal,
or Ordinaries Visitations and Jurisdictions, not from the Kings or Parliaments,
not mentioned nor intended in them.

I shall close up this with Matthew Parkers Authority, the first Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. De Antiqu. Eccles. Brit. p. 35, (before
the Archbishops lives) where thus he writes of the Jurisdiction of the Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, even in this Queens Reign, and of these Popes Bulls
nullity. Episcopatus et Diocaeses suae Provinciae quandocunque, et quocunque
ordine sibi videbitur expedire, visitat etc. Tamque late patent hujus
Archiepiscopatus privilegia, ut in loca firmissimi^ septa ac munita privilegijs
se insinuent. Multa onim loca quae a Metropolitica et Ordinaria Jurisdiction
se eximi procurassent, ab hujus tamen Authoritate immunia ac tuta esse non
poterant. Inter quae ILLAE CELEBRES CANTABRIGIENSIS ET OXONIENSIS in Anglia
ACADEMIAE, quanquam peculiaria jura, et exemptionis privilegia sibi quondam a
Papa concedi procurassent, illis tamen authoritate postea Regia irriti^ ac
rescissis, IN CANTVARIENSIS ARCHIEPISCOPI AVTHORITATEM SESE REDDIDERVNT, et tam
VISITATIONES SVAS SVBIRE COGVNTVR, quam ad Synodalia sua concilia per
Cancellarios acceduxt: In Cantabrigiae Collegio S. Petri, cujus Eleensts
Episcopus est patronus, sede vacant, tam Praefectum quam socios admittit, et
uni scholarium cui gratificare voluerit, vacantsem societatem confert. OXONII,
Collegiorum omnium animarum, et Mertoniensis est Patronus, ac in utrisque
Ordinariam et OMNIMODAM JVRISDICTIONEM EXERCET. So that he reputed this
Jurisdiction of visiting the Universities, a Right belonging to the
Archbishops of Canterbury, notwithstanding any pretended exemptions, Charters
or Statutes to the contrary, then in being; or the Bulls of Pope Boniface the
8, which Ioannes Cajus: De Antique Cantabrig. Academiae, p. 71. confesses to
be abolished, by the Le^ters Patents of K. Richard the 2. made to Archbishop
Arundel, in the 20. year of his Reign, and after confirmed by King Henry the
fourth, and an act of Parliament, in the 13 year of his Reign; as the Premises
at large demonstrate.

2. I answer, that the objected clause of the Act of Parliament 25. H. 8. c.
21. extends not at all to the University of Oxford, or any Colleges in it, as
is most evident by the express words of the proviso, which I shall here
transcribe.

Provided always, that the said Archbishop of Canterbury, or any other person
or persons, shall have no power or authority, by reason of this act, to visit or
vex any Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Colleges, Hospital, houses, or other
places Religious. Which be or were exempt, before the making of this act, any
thing in this act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. But that Redress,
Visitation and Confirmation shall be had by the Kings highness, his heirs and
successors, by Commission under the Great Seal, to be directed to such persons
as shall be requisite for the same, in such Monaster^^s Colleges, Hospitals,
Priories, houses and places Religious, exempt. So that no Visitation nor
Confirmation shall from henceforth be had or made in, or at any such
Monasteries, Colleges, Hospitals, Priories, houses and places Religious
Exempt, by the said Bishop of Rome; nor by any of his authority, nor by any out
of the Kings Dominions; nor that any person Religious, or other resiant in any
the Kings Dominions, shall from henceforth depart out of the Kings Dominions, to
or for any Visitation, Congregation, or assembly for Religion. But that all
such Visitations, Congregations, and Assemblies shall be within the Kings
Dominions.

By this it is apparent. First, that this act extends only to such See Speeds
Catalogue of Religious houses, Colleges and Hospitals.
Colleges, is were Religious Houses, consisting of Menks and Friors, not to
Colleges of Scholars in the University, as the coupling it with Monasteries,
Abbeys, Priories, and other Places RELIGIOUS, and the last clause: Nor that ANY
PERSON RELIGIOUS, depart out of the Kings D^minions, to or for any Visitation
or Assembly FOR RELIGION, manifests: 2. That it excludes only the Archbishop
of Canterbury, his Commissaries, and under- Officers, formerly mentioned in the
body of the Act (the any other person or persons, intended in this clause) from
visiting these exempted Colleges and Religious Houses: and that not simply,
but BY REASON OF THIS ACT: Not the Houses of Parliament, or any V^sitors of
their appointment, 3. It extends only to Colleges, not to Universities, not
once named or intended in this Law: And a College (especially of Monks and
Religious persons as here) is one thing, a University another, by the Objectors
own concession. p. 6. 4. It reaches only to such Colleges and Places
Religious, as were exempt from Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Vis^^ation, AT, and
BEFORE THE MAKING OF THIS ACT; Therefore, not to the Universities and Colleges
of Oxford and Cambridg, which at and before its making were not exempt, but
subject both to the Archbishops and Bishops Visitation and Jurisdiction, as I
have largely proved, 5. Such exempt Colleges as are within this Act, are to be
visited, not by the King in person, or such persons as he shall personally
nominate, as the Objector dreams (no such words being in this Act) but, BY
COMMISSION UNDER THE GREAT SEAL, TO SUCH PERSONS AS SHALL BE APPOINTED, and
requisite for the same; and that either by both houses of Parliament, or by the
Keepers of the Great Seal, who usually nominate and appoint all Commissioners
of the Peace, Sewers, Oyer and Terminer, for Visitations, Inquiries, and the
like, not the King in person. And the present Visitors of Oxford, being thus
appointed by Ordinance of both Houses, and by commission under the Great Seal;
are sufficiently authorized to visit the University and Colleges in it, admit
them places exempt within this proviso, as they are not. 6. Admit all that can
be; it is clear, that both H^uses of Parliament by this Law conferred the Power
of visiting Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Colleges, Hospitals, houses, and
other places Religious, exempt before this act, from Archiepiscopal and
Ordinary Visitation, on the King, his heirs and successors; who could not
confer it on themselves. Ergo, by the self-same reason, both Houses may now by
Ordinance and Commission, lawfully confer the like power of visiting the
University, though formerly exempted, on the Visitors now appointed by them;
they being the supreme Visitors and Reformers of all corruptions and abuses,
both in Church and State, and appointing who shall be Visitors, and what person
or person shall be visited, and what things inquired of in Visitations, in
sundry other Acts of Parliament, as 31. E. 1. Rastal 304. 2 H. 5. c. 1. 25. H.
8. c. 21. 26. H. 8. c. 21. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 28. H. 8. c. 10. 31. H. 8. c. 13.
14. 2. E. 6. c. 1. 5. E. 6. c. 3. 1. and 2. Phil. and Mary, c. 1. 8. 1. Eliz.
c. 1. 2. 14. Eliz. c. 5.

3. I answer, it is true, That the ancient Privileges, Liberties and
Franchises of the respective Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, heretofore
granted, ratified and confirmed by the Queens Highness, and her most noble
Progenitors, for the better increase of learning, and further suppressing of
Vice, are confirmed by Act of Parliament, An 13. Eliz. rot. 36. which
incorporates both Universities; but it neither confirmed the Popes Bulls of
exemption, nor gave them any Immunity from Archiepiscopal or Episcopal
Jurisdiction and Visitation, it being no ancient Liberty, Privilege, or
Franchise, ratified or confirmed to them by the Queen, or any of her noble
Progenitors, nor yet once mentioned or intended in the Large Patent of
Privileges, of King Henry the 8. bearing date the 10, of April. in the 14,
year of his R^ign, made and granted to the Chancellor, and Scholars of Oxford,
nor in Queen Elizabeth's Patent to the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the
University of Cambridge, bearing date the 26, of April, in the 3, years of her
Reign, particularly confirmed by this Act. Therefore this Act makes nothing at
all to purpose.

4. The Objected Commission in 19, Eliz, part. 12. in dors^, pretends no
exemption of the University and Colleges from Archiepiscopoll and Episcopal
Visitation and Jurisdiction simply; the thing not then in question; neither
does it acknowledge or confirm the Universities Privileges, and all other
Exemptions, in the very words of Boniface the 8. and acknowledge they had them
by prescription etc. as is untruly surmised. But first, it mentions diverse
privileges then claimed by the Chancellor, Doctors and Scholars of the
University, and some exemptions in causes wholly belonging to the Chancellors
conusance; and next it only complains of William Wilsons infringing these
Privileges and Exemptions contrary to his Oath, in complaining to the Deane of
the Arches of Canterbury, and to Archbishop Grindal, against the Bishop of
Lincoln, and his Visitors of Lincoln College in Oxford, for refusing to admit
him to the Rectorship thereof to which he falsely pretended he was really and
lawfully elected and presented; and for sending Inhabitions and Citations
thence to the Bishop and his Visitors (who were Members of the University) to
appear in the Arches, and with taking the final Examination and Determination
of this election unto themselves, which of right belonged to the Chancellor and
University. Upon which bare suggestion and complaint, the Queen granted a
Commission to two Bishops and six others, in a summary way; without any noise
or formal proceedings, according to the truth and mere equity of the cause, by
the best and most effectual means they could; De et super VERITATE PRAEMISSORVM
et PRIVILEGIORVM et EXEMPTIONVM DICTAE VNIVERSITATIS, ac in causa et causis
praedictis etc. procedere, et fine debito, omni appellatione et querela
nuillitatis, et supplicatione quacunque remotis, terminare; statutis,
Canonibus, et consuetudinibus in contrarium editis, litisve pendentibus, in
aliquo non obstante. So as this Commission does no ways confirm the
privileges, nor ratify the exemptions therein claimed by the Chancellor and
University, by Charter, statutes and prescription; for then it would have
remitted this cause of Election from the Deane of the Arches, and Arch Bishops
Delegates to the Chancellor and University (to whom by ancient Privilege they
alleged it did belong) but only refers the Examination of the truth of the
Premises, Privileges, Exemptions, and Determination of this cause and
controversy about this Election to certain Commissioners, thus summarily to
determine, any Statutes, Canons, Customs, or suits depending to the contrary,
notwithstanding, and so rather doubts of, and questions the truth of there
alleged University Privileges and Exemptions, then confirms them, though
procured by the Chancellors and Universities means, and drawn up by their own
directions.

But admit this Commission ratified and confirmed the Privileges and
Exemptions claimed in it by the University; yet the substance of them is no
more then this: That See the Charter of 36 E, 3, pars. 1, mem. 5 Rot, Claus. 9.
R. 2 and 15 R 2 mem 17. in Tur. London. to this effect, and p 41
all personal contracts, suits, controversies, and offenses of Scholars and
Privileged persons arising within the precincts of the University (except
maihmes and fellonies) are to be tried and determined in the University before
the Chancellor only, not before any Archbishops, Legates, Bishops, or Ordinary
Judges, out of the University. Will it therefore follow; Therefore the
University cannot without multiplied perjury, acknowledge any Visitor but the
King, and such as are immediately sent by him; and is totally exempted, not
only from all Archiepiscopal and Episcopal, but likewise from the Parliaments,
and their Delegates Visitation? No doubtless; the rather, because King Charles
himself, and his Couns^^ resolved, that neither this Commission, nor Here p 36
any other Charter of Privileges or Exemptions, did free the Universities from
the Archbishop of Canterburies Metropolitical Visitation, much less then from
both Houses Delegates, authorized by Ordinances and Commission for to visit it.

The 4th. ground and argument urged for the Universities Exemption from our
Visitation, Object. 4.
is this. Page. 4.
That all visitations of the Universities (except in Queen Mary's Reign, by
Cardinal Pool, as Popes Legate) were held by the respective Princes authority,
and the persons visiting were immediately sent by them, only as their
Representatives, and who ever sat, the King visited; For which one Visitation,
by K. Henry the 8. another by King Edward the 6. a third by Queen Elizabeth's
Visitors and Commissions are cited: therefore the Universities are exempt from
all other Visitors, and those now appointed by both Houses, but not immediately
by the King.

To this I answer: Answer.
First, That no King of England before Henry the ^, did either in Person or by
Commission visit the Universities; and his once mere Visitation of them by
Commissioners (if true, since I find no such Commission extant after much
inquiry) was no exemption of them, in point of Law, from their former Visitors,
no more then of the particular Colleges (which they likewise visited) from the
Visitors designed them by their Founders. Secondly, King Edward the 6. his
Commission, and Commissioners, for their Visitation, were made by the advice of
the Lord Protector, and others of his privy Council, (He being then an infant
but of 11. years of age) and not made nor nominated personally and immediately
by himself, as the Commissions themselves attest: And for any Commission under
the great Seal of Queen Eliz. for the Universities Visitation, it is to me a
mere non liquet, which I cannot find upon search after it. Thirdly, King Charl^
himself and his Counsel resolved upon f^l d^bate^ that those Royal Visitations
of his Predecessors did not exempt them from the Archbishops Visitation by his
metropolitical right. Therefore they can much less privilege them against the
present Visitors, commissioned under the great Seal and armed with both Houses
right, from whom our Kings derived their power of Visitation at first.

The 5. Object 5.
and principal Plea in point of conscience, most inculcated, is this: Page 6.
That the Heads and Members of the University are sworn by their respective
Statutes, to allow or submit to no Visitation, but fr^^ those who are nominated
by their Founder^^ Therefore they cannot, without multiplied perjury, submit to
the present Visitors.

I answ: Answ.
First, That this Oath obliges them not as Members of the University, but only
as fellows of particular Colleges or Hals: Therefore it cannot be pleaded
against our visiting the University in general, but such particular Colleges
only who are obliged by such an Oath. Secondly, This Oath was never made not
prescribed with any intention to exempt those particular Colleges that take is
from the Kings or his Commissioners Visitations, as the Objectors (I presume)
will grant, not yet from the Archbishops, (which I have formerly proved) though
not appointed Visitors by the Founders, to both which these Colleges have
submitted, without any perjury or violation of their Oath; the end whereof was
only to exclude all wrongful intrusions of coordinate or inferior visitors and
persons, upon the Founders right, by way of usurpation, not any superior lawful
Jurisdiction or Authority, which the Founders had neither power nor right to
ab^idg. This is evident in the common case of Hospital; which though bound by
Oath and Sta^utes to admit no other Visitors but such as their Founders
appoint; yet the Ordinaries both by Statute, Common and Canon Law, (...) and
ought to visit them notwithstanding, as is evident by 2 H. 5. c. ^ by virtue of
their superintendent power. Thirdly, This Oath is like the Oath of Homage at
the common Law, having an implied ^avi^g^^ it, as that has an express: I
become your man from this day forwards of life and limb and of earthly worship,
Littleton l. 2. chap. 1^
and unto you shall be true and faithful, and bear you faith for the Tenement
that I claim to hold of you; saving the faith that I ow unto our Sovereign Lord
the King. O^, salva^fide Deo and terrae Principi. The reason of which Saving
is, because the King is the Sovereign Landlord and Paramount the Mean-lord.
Which Oath of Homage. * Walter Bishop of Exon giving to his Tenants in Cornwall,
nulla facta mentione de Homagio and Fidelitate Domino Regidebitis: thereupon
one Michael de North exhibited an Information against, co^ks 1 Instit, f. 65
them in 6. E. (...) to the Kings Crown, ^i ad damnum and ded^cus ipsius Domino
Regis, And upon the same ground it is, that if a man hold (...) Ho^^ge of
diverse Lords, he (...) say in the end of his Homage done savings he faith which
I ow to our Lord the King; (...) other Lord. If a man should make ^ solemn Vow
(having been overtaken with wine) never to drink wine more; (...) one addicted
to swearing, vow never to swear any more: yet these Vows would not extend to
exclude him from drinking wine at the Lords Supper: or taking an oath upon
summons or just occasion in any Court of Justice, or before a lawful
Magistrate. So if a servant swear, not to bewray his masters secrets; or a
fellow of a College, not to discover the secrets of the Horse, or a
Grand-Ju^or, not to discover his fellows secrets; yet these Oa^^^ bind them
not when they are called to discover them in a legal way, upon a just cause
before a lawful Magistrate, upon any Action of Account, B^ls of discovery or
trial; it being not within the intention of these Oaths, nor in the power of
those who prescribed them to restrain such legal discoveries, or abridg the
superior Magistrates power to the obstructing of public justice: upon which
gro^nd, the Lords and others of the privy Council heretofore, and this very
Pa^l^ament in the case of the Earl of Strafford, when summoned as witness^^,
(...)
have without pe^jury, or breach of trust discovered their Fellow-Councellors
evil counsel and secret advice to his Majesty, contrary to the Letter of their
Oaths. Fourthly, It is the Apostles express command, Col. 3. 20, 22, Children
obey your Parents in all things, for this is wel-pleasing unto the Lord.
Servants obey your Masters in all things according to the flesh: Yet all
Divines, See Gratian Cause. 11, qu. 3
Canonists, and Casuists, resolve: That if Parents and Masters command one
thing; and Kings, Magistrates or God himself command another thing; Children
and Servants in such a case ought rather to obey the Magistrates, King and God
himself, then either their Parents or Masters; notwithstanding these universal
precepts of obeying them in all things; which, have this employed qu^lification
involved in them, to wit, in all lawful things not contrary to the superior
just commands of the King, Magistrate or God himself, which being the superior
powers, ought principally to be obeyed before natural Parents and Masters.
Hence is that known resolution of Augustine subscribed by Cause. 11. q. 3
Gratian, and all Canonists. Quiresistit potestati De^^rdinations resistit. Sed
quid (...) Iubentur (...) quod non, debe^^ facere? hic sane conte^^^
potestate^. (...) Legum grad^s adverte verte: Si aliquid ^uss^rit curator,
faciendum est; non tamen s^ contra Proconsul jubeat. Non utique contemnis
potestatem sed eligis majori servire; nec hic debet minor irasci si mayor
pr^elatus est. Rursus, si ipse Consul aliquid jubeat, and aliud jubeat
Imperator; vel si aliud jubeat Imperator, et aliud Deus, quid i^dicatis? Mayor
potestas De^s: da veniam o Imperator: Tu carcerem, ille gehen^am mi^atur. Hic
jam tibi assu^^nd^ est ^ides tua tanqu^m scutum, in quo possis om^ia ignea
iacula inimici oxtinguere. This resolve of his, will dissolve the present
Objection; that these Oaths and Statutes of particular Colleges, will exclude
all other Visitors appointed by an equal or inferior, but not by a superior
Authority, as the present V^sitors are. Fifthly, I find an express president in
point. When Fox Acts and Monuments Vol. 3. p. 765, 766.
Cardinal Pool by his D^legates v^si^^d the University of Cambridg in Queen
Mary's days, Robert Brassy Master of Kings College, (aworthy old man both for
his wisdom and hoar hairs) hearing his own nam^^ecited next after the
Vice-Chancellors, said. He was there present as all the other were;
nevertheless for as much as the Reformation of his House was WHOLLY RESERVED to
the discretion of the Bishop of Lincoln, not only by the Kings Letters
Pattents, but also by grant of confirmation of the Bishop of Rome himself,
under a penalty, if he should suffer any stranger to intermed^e, he openly
pro^essed in discharge of his duty, that ^nlesse their, Commission gave them
Authority and Jurisdiction upon, the College, either by Our Ordinances and
C^mmissions do so in express words.
express words or manifest sense, he utterly exempted himself from being
present. This his exception they took all in greas displeasure, alleging, that
they were fully authorized for the order of the matter by the Cardinal, out of
whose Jurisdiction no place nor person was exempted: wherefore he had done
evil, to call in question their Authority, so well known to all men. The next day
the Delegates going to visit this College, Mr. Brassy the Master excusing
himself, made the same exception to them then he had before. To which the
Bishop of Chester, with a frowning look and angry coun^enance, said; He needed
not to repeat the things he had protested before, nor they to make answer any
more to those things wherein they had sufficiently informed him before. He
rather feared that their quarrel was not good, that they made such a do about
it, and s^ught such starting ^ol^^. For so were diseased persons often times wont
to do, when for the pain and grief they are not able to abide a stronger
medicine: As though that any ever were able to grant so strong a privilege, as
to withstand the Popes authority. As for the Popes Letters, they must needs
make on his side and those that were with him, (and could not in any wise be
alleged against him. Therefore he admonished him to desist from his
^nprofitable altercation, and to conform himself and his to such things as were
then in doing. Whereupon the Master and Scholars submitted to their
Visitation, and were at sworn and examined to such interroga^^ries as were
propounded them; but some of them swore conditionally, so as their faith
formerly given to the College were not impeached thereby; Which submission and
president in print, in case of the Pope and his Legates Visitors should induce
all these Oxonians whom it concerns, in like manner to submit to both Houses
Visitors, (having express power by Ordinance and Commission to visit all
Colleges etc.) notwithstanding these objected Oaths and Statutes.

Having (as I conceive) satisfactorily answered all Objections against the
Jurisdiction and Power of the Oxford Visitors, Object. 6.
I shall briefly answer some allegations against their persons and proceedings.

Their exceptions to all their persons in general (and Page 4, 5.
that with wonder and just scorn) is; That they are their fellow subjects; When
as for almost 800 years before they have been the care and stri^e of Princes.
King Alured himself visits, An. 806. Edw. ^. and Rich. 2. descided
Controversies in the University. The late Visitations performed by
Commissioners, were by the chief Nobility of the Kingdom; And his Majesty that
now is visited Christ Church personally, with 8 Lord of the Council. To others
of them in particular; That they (...) their own members, who having sworn the
observation of their Statutes, Liberties and Customs, cannot appear as Judges
over them without a violation of their Oaths, nor yet without a manifest
opposition of Nature, where Do not the King and Parliament, let parts judge the
whole?
part Judge the whole; and the Laws of Justice too, especially if they consider
the Interests and Engagements may often professions of the most active
instruments of this work.

To the fifth I answer; Answer.
First, that if these Objections were of moment, they might all be made against
all proceedings of Justices of Ass^^, Justices of Peace, and Juries, at Assi^es
and Sessions; yea, against Magna Chart^, and the fundamental Laws of the Realm,
which enact; That no man shall be condemned or proceeded against, but by the
Lawful Judgment of his PEERS, not of Kings and Nobles, of his Superior^; And
against all proceedings in the University it self, either in Congregation,
Convocation or the Vice-Chancellors Court, where Scholars and others are
judged and ordered by fellow subjects, and the whole University, by some
particular Members of it, without any guilt of perjury or violence offered,
either to nature or common justice. 2. I answer, that though the Visitors
nominated by the Houses, are but their fellow subjects, and neither Kings nor
Nobles, yet many of them are persons of quality and reputation, meet for such
an employment. Two of them are dignified with the honorable order of
Knighthood, by the King himself; Sir Natha. Brent.
and one of them formerly in visiting as Vicar General to the late Archbishop
of Canterbury (Chancellor of the University of Oxford) who thought him worthy
to visit the whole Province of Canterbury, and therefore fit and meet to visit
the University. Others of them are Esqui^es by birth, place, or profession;
others dignified with the highest. Titles the University could bestow upon
them, where they have been ancient. Governors, and the meanest of them are
sufficiently eminent both for piety and learning: Therefore, not to be slighted
with wonder and just scorn, especially by their equals, or inferiors in all
respects, as most in the University are 3. That King Alured himself visited the
University in person, or any other of our Kings after him; it is untrue; as for
King Charles and his Nobles visiting of Christ Church personally, otherwise
then by resorting to it, to behold a Play, or Pastoral heretofore, or to lodge
in it in these times of War; I never heard of it til now: That King Alured,
Edward the 1, Richard the 2, (yea Henry the 4, and King Charles too) did
themselves decide Controversies between the University and others about their
Privileges, and concerning the Archbishops Metropoliticall Right to visit
them, is true; the distempers of the University requiring it, who would rest
satisfied with no meaner parties decision; yet no^ her of them visited it in
Person or by Commission. Thirdly in the Visitation of the Universities by the
Kings Commissions, the Visitors named, were not all Princes and Nobles, as is
suggested. There are but two such Commissions extant on record; the one in 2
Ed. 6. pars. 3. in Dorso, for visiting the University of Cambridg; wherein Sir
William Paget, Contributor of the Kings household, Thomas Smith the Kings
Secretary, John Cheek the Kings Tutor^ William Mayor Doctor of Law; one of the
Master of Requests, and Dean of Paul's, and Thomas W^^die the Kings Physician,
or any 7. 6. 5. 4. 3. 2. or one of them were the sole Visitors, not one of them
a Peer, much less of the chief Nobility. The other in 3 Edward 6. pars. 2. for
visiting the University of Oxford; wherein John Earl of Warwick, high
Chamberlain, Henry Bishop of Lincoln, and Richard Bishop of Rochester, William
Paget, Controulor of the household, William Peter Knight, the Kings Secretary,
Richard Fox the Kings Almoner and Tutor, Simon Heynes Dean of Ex^ter,
Christopher Nevense Doctor of Law, and Richard Morison. Esquire, or any 7. 6.
5. 4. 3. 2. or one of them were nominated Visitors; the meanest of them only
doing the work, without any exceptions to their inferior quality. What
Delegates Cardinal ^^ole appointed to visit both Universities you have heard
already; and that our Archbishops and Bishops have usually appointed as mean
persons as any nominated by the Parliament, to visit their P^ovi^ces and
Diocesses is well known to all. In fine, the Visitors now appointed have no
absolute definitive power in all things, but are subordinate to the Honorable
Committee of Lords and Commons for regulating the University, to whom they are
to certify all their proceedings, and to whom there is liberty of appealing
granted to any that deem themselves injured: so as this Honorable Committee,
and both Houses are in truth, the real Visitors, the others but their
Substitutes. Therefore these scorns against their persons (which must reflect
upon the Parliaments wisdom and judgment) might have well bin spared. As for any
of their interests, engagements and professions, I shall believe they are all
public and sincere, til the contrary be demonstrated.

The next exception is to their proceedings; Object. 7.
Page. 5.
That their power was not manifested by some legal way etc.

I answer; Answer.
That this is untrue, ^or it was first manifested by a printed Ordinanos of
both Houses, wherein their names and power were comprised. 2. In a public
Citation, subscribed by most of them, of which all the University, Colleges
and Halls had legal notice. 3. By an additional Ordinance of both Houses, and a
Commission under the Great Seal of England, of which they had a copy delivered
to them upon their own request, by the Visitors that sat.

The last Objection Objection.
is, Page. 6.
That there is now no necessity nor want of a Visitation etc.

I answer; Answer.
That this is to question the wisdom of both Houses, who deem a Visitation
necessary; and to prejudge the Visitors, who may find more enormities in the
persons to be visited, then they can yet discern in themselves, who unusquisque
sui ipsius iniquus Iudex.
are no competent Judges in their own cause. However, if their Innocence be
such as to evidence to the world, they are not those Monsters, that their
Enemies Charactor would speak them; Nor yet are altogether unworthy their
Education, or their Founders Magnificance; as the Objector blasons them; they
have then the less cause to refuse or decline the Visitors test, and will come
off with greater honor to themselves, and shame to their unjust Accusers, if
they appear such after stricktest S^rutiny, then if they had not at all been
brought to such a public Trial.

I have now made good all my Positions, and answered all the Universities
allegations in point of Law or Conscience against their present Visitors
Jurisdiction; not out of any design to diminish or infringe the Universities
just Privileges (which I have been formerly sworn to maintain) in the least
title, but out of a real affection to the Universityes welfare, and a desire to
rectify the erroneous Judgments, and satisfy the scrupelous Consciences of all
present Opposers of the Visitors power, to prevent those tragical effects
which their Obstinacy and Contumacy in this high contest are like inevitably to
produce, to their own and the Universities prejudice, if persisted in. I shall
ever endeavor to my power, that the University may enjoy all her just Rights
and Privileges, with Subordination to both Houses superior Authority, and
flourish more abundantly now then ever in piety, virtue, and all sorts of
learning, which they cannot take unkindly at my hands. I shall only add: That as
the University of Cambridg submitted to the Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament, made for its regulation, dated 22. Jan. 1643. which enabled the
Honorable Ea^le of Manchester alone, to appoint a Committee under him, who
should have full power to call before them all Provosts, Masters and Fellows of
Colleges, Students and Members of that University, who were scandalous in
their lives, or ill affected to the Parliament, or fomentors of these unnatural
wars, or wilful refusers to obey the Ordinances of Parliament, or deserters of
their places of residence and to send for witnesses, and examine any complaint
or testimony against them upon Oath, and to certify their names with the Charge
and proofs against them to the said Earl, who had power thereby given him to
sequester and elect them. and put others in their places; which he accordingly
executed without any such public opposition as we now find at Oxford: So I
hope the University of Oxford will receive so good satisfaction of their
scruples, from the premises, as shall enduce them to a like submission to their
present Visitors, authorized by both Houses Ordinances, and a Commission under
the great Seal, without any further plea or demurrer, or else leave them
without excuse to both Houses severest justice, for their wilful contempt of
their Sovereign power, against which they have publicly (in words) disavowed
the least opposi^ion or dispute, and yet strenuously oppose it in reallity, by
this contest against their Visitors, upon mere groundles Pretenses so
frequently overruled against them heretofore, that it can be b^t mere
obstinacy in them to insist upon them any longer now.

The Statutes of 9. H. 5. c. 8. 1. H. 6. c. 3. 2. H. 6. c. 8. 14. H. 8. c. 2.
5. 21. H. c. ^6. 1. E. 6. c. 14. 7. E. 6. c. 5. 1. Phil. and Mar. c. 3. 1. and
2. Phil. and Mar, c. 7. 8. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. c. 15. 1. El. c. 4. 5. El.
c. 8. 13. El. c. 10. 12. 18. El. c. 6. 20. 3. Iac. c. 4. make mention of the
Universities, and give them some privileges, but no exemption from
Visitations, and prescribe Laws unto them.

ERRATA.
P. 18. l. 9. read facturusque p. 20. l. 10 they were p. 23. l. 12. Ordinationi
l. 31. pradictarum p. 25. l. 13. factis p. 31. l. 5. Academiae l. 38.
university p. 38. l. 4. primitus. p. 40. l. 17. quos

P. 27. l. 3 in the margin, Episo. p. 31. l. 18. 1407.

FINIS.

