THE Whole Duty of Man According to the LAW OF NATURE.

By that famous Civilian SAMVEL PVFFENDORF Professor of the Law of Nature and
Nations, in the University of Heidelberg, and in the Caroline University,
afterward Counselor and Historiographer to the K. of Sweden, and to his
Electoral Highness of Brandenburg.

Now made English.

Licensed and Entered according to Law.

-- Quod ad nos
Pertinet, and nescire malum est, agitamus. --
Hor. S. 2. 7. LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte, for Charles Harper, at the
Flower-de-luce over against S. Dunstan's Church, Fleetstreet. MDCXCI.

To his Honored Friend Mr. GEORGE WHITE Of London, MERCHANT;
This TRACTATE Concerning the Law of Nature IS Offered, Dedicated, Presented

BY His humblest and most obliged Servant, The Translator.

TO THE READER.
THE Translator having observed, in most of the Disputes wherewith the present
Age is disquieted, frequent Appeals made, and that very properly, from Laws and
Ordinances of a meaner Rank to the everlasting Law of Nature, gave himself the
Pains, to turn over several Writers on that Subject. He chanced, he thinks with
great Reason, to entertain an Opinion that this Author was the clearest, the
fullest and the most unprejudiced of any he met with: and hereupon that he
might the better possess himself of his Reasonings, he attempted to render the
Work into Mother Tongue, after he had first endeavored to set several better
hands upon the Undertaking, who all for one Reason or other declined the Toil.
He thought when 'twas done, it might be as acceptable to one or other to read
it, as it had been to himself to translate it. If he have not done right to the
Author, as he hopes he has not missed in any material Point, he is very willing
to be corrected.

The Work, it is true, is as it were, an Epitome of the Author's large Volume;
but having been extracted and published by Himself, the Reader cannot be under
any doubt, but that he has the Quintessence of what is there delivered. What is
pared off, being mostly Cases in the Civil Law, Refutations of other Authors,
and some Notions too fine and unnecessary for a Manual.

Concerning the Author it is enough to say, that he has surely had as great
regard paid him from Personages of the highest degree, as perhaps ever was
given to the most learned of men; being invited from his Native Country, first
by the Elector Palatine to be Professor of the Law of Nature and Nations in the
University of Heidelberg; then by the King of Sweden to honor his new-raised
Academy by accepting the same Charge therein, and afterward being admitted of
the Council and made Historiographer both to the same King, and to his
Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh: Where, except he be very lately dead, he
lives at this time in the greatest respect of all men of Sense and
Understanding.

The AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
HAD not the Custom which has so generally obtained among Learned men almost
procured to itself the force of a Law, it might seem altogether superfluous to
premise a Word concerning the Reason of the present Undertaking; the Thing
itself plainly declaring my whole Design to be the giving as short and yet, if
I mistake not, as plain and perspicuous a Compendium of the most material
Articles of the Law of Nature, as was possible; and this, lest if those who
betake themselves to this sort of Study should enter the vast Fields of
Knowledge without having fully imbibed the Rudiments thereof, should at first
sight be terrified and confounded by the Copiousness and Difficulty of the
Matters occurring therein. And at the same time it seems plainly a very
expedient Work for the Public that the minds of Youth especially should be
early imbued with that Moral Learning, for which they will have such manifest
occasion and so frequent use through the whole Course of the Lives. And
although I have always looked upon it as a Work deserving no great Honor, to
Epitomize the larger Writings of others, and more especially ones own; yet
having thus done out of Submission to the commanding Authority of my Superiors,
I hope no honest man will blame me for having endeavored hereby the
improvement of the Understandings of young Men more particularly; to whom so
great regard is to be had, that whatsoever Work is undertaken for their sakes,
though it may not be capable of great Acuteness or splendid Eloquence, yet it
is not to be accounted unworthy of any man's Pains. Beside that no Man in his
Wits will deny that these Principles thus laid down are more conducive to the
understanding of all Law in general, than any Elements of the Law Civil can be.

And this might have sufficed for the present, but I am minded by some, that it
would not be improper to lay down some few Particulars, which will conduce much
to a right Understanding of the Constitution of the Law of Nature, and for the
better ascertaining its just Bounds and Limits. And this I have been the more
ready to do, that I might on this occasion obviate the Pretenses of some
over-nice Gentlemen who are apt to pass their squeamish Censures on this sort
of Learning, which in many Instances is wholly separate from their Province.

Now it is very manifest, that Men derive the Knowledge of their Duty, and what
is fit to be done, or to be avoided in this Life, as it were from three Springs
or Fountain-Heads; to wit, from the Light of Nature, from the Laws and
Constitutions of Countries, and from the special Revelation of Almighty God.
From the first of these proceed all those most common and ordinary Duties of a
man, more particularly those that constitute him a sociable Creature with the
rest of Mankind; from the second are derived all the Duties of a Man, as he is
a Member of any particular City or Commonwealth; from the third result all the
Duties of a Christian Man. And from hence proceed three distinct Sciences; the
first of which is of the Law of Nature, common to all Nations; the second is of
the Civil or Municipal Law peculiar to each Country, which is or may be as
manifold and various as there are different States and Governments in the
World: the third is Moral Divinity, as it is contra-distinct to that Part of
Divinity, which explains the Articles of our Faith.

Each of these Sciences have a peculiar way of proving their Maxims, according
to their own Principles. The Law of Nature asserts that this or that thing
ought to be done, because from right Reason it is concluded that the same is
necessary for the Preservation of Society amongst men.

Of Civil Laws and Constitutions, the supreme Reason is the Will of the
Lawgiver.

The Obligation of Moral Divinity lies wholly in this, because God in the
sacred Scripture has so commanded.

Now as the Civil Law presupposes the Law of Nature, as the more general
Science; so if there be any thing contained in the Civil Law, wherein the Law
of Nature is altogether silent, we must not therefore conclude that the one is
any ways repugnant to the other. In like manner if in Moral Divinity some
things are delivered as from Divine Revelation, which by our Reason we are not
able to comprehend, and which upon that score are above the reach of the Law of
Nature; it would be very absurd from hence to set the one against the other, or
to imagine that there is any real Inconsistency between these Sciences. On the
other hand, in the Doctrine of the Law of Nature, if any things are to be
presupposed, because so much may be inferred from Reason, they are not to be
put in Opposition to those things which the holy Scripture on that Subject
delivers with greater Clearness, but they are only to be taken in an abstracted
Sense. Thus, for Example, from the Law of Nature, abstracted from the Account
we receive thereof in holy Writ, there may be formed an Idea of the Condition
and State of the first Man as he came into the World, only so far as is within
the Comprehension of Humane Reason. Now to set those things in opposition to
what is delivered in Sacred Writ concerning the same State, would be the
greatest Folly and Madness in the World.

But as it is an easy matter to reconcile the Civil Law with the Law of
Nature; so it seems a little more difficult to set certain Bounds between the
same Law of Nature and Moral Divinity, and to define in what Particulars
chiefly they differ one from the other.

And upon this Subject I shall deliver my Opinion briefly, not with any Papal
Authority, as if I was exempted from all Error by any Peculiar Right or
Privilege, neither as one who pretends to any Enthusiastic Revelation; but
only as being desirous to discharge that Province which I have undertaken,
according to the best of my Ability. And, as I am willing to hear all Candid
and Ingenuous Persons, who can inform me better, and am very ready to retract
what I have said amiss; so I do not value those Pragmatical and Positive
Censurers and Busybodies, who boldly concern themselves with things which no
ways belong to them; of these Persons we have a very Ingenious Character given
by Phaedrus: They run about, says he, as mightily concerned, they are very
busy even when they have nothing to do, they puff and blow without any
occasion, they are uneasy to themselves, and troublesome to every body else.

Now the Chief Distinction, whereby these Sciences are separated from one
another, proceeds from the different Source or Spring, whence each derives its
Principles; and of which I have already discoursed. From whence it follows; if
there be some things, which we are enjoined in Holy Writ either to do or
forbear, the Necessity whereof cannot be discovered by Reason alone, they are
to be looked upon as out of the Cognizance of the Law of Nature, and properly
to appertain to Moral Divinity.

Moreover in Divinity the Law is considered as it has the Divine Promise
annexed to it, and with relation to the Covenant between God and Man; from
which consideration the Law of Nature abstracts, because the other derives it
self from a particular Revelation of God Almighty, and which Reason alone could
not have found out. Besides too there is this Great Difference, in that the
main End and Design of the Law of Nature is included within the Compass of this
Life only, and so thereby a Man is informed how he is to live in Society with
the rest of Mankind: But Moral Divinity instructs a Man how to live as a
Christian, who is not obliged to live honesty and virtuously in this World; but
is besides in earnest expectation of the Reward of his Piety after this Life,
and therefore he has his Conversation in Heaven, but is here only as a Stranger
and a Pilgrim. For although the Mind of Man does with very great ardency pursue
after Immortality, and is extremely averse to its own Destruction, and thence
it was that most of the Heathens had a strong persuasion of the separate State
of the Soul from the Body, and that then Good Men should be rewarded, and Evil
Men punished: yet notwithstanding such a strong Assurance of the certainty
hereof, upon which the Mind of Man can firmly and entirely depend, is to be
derived only from the Word of God. Hence it is that the Dictates of the Law of
Nature are adapted only to Humane Judicature, which does not extend it self
beyond this Life; and it would be absurd in many respects to apply them to the
Divine Forum, which concerns itself only about Theology. From whence this also
follows, that, because Humane Judicature regards only the external Actions of
Man, but can no ways reach the Inward Thoughts of the Mind, which do not
discover themselves by any outward Sign or Effect; therefore the Law of Nature
is for the most part exercised in forming the outward Actions of Men. But Moral
Divinity does not content itself in regulating only the Exterior Actions; but
is more peculiarly intent in forming the Mind, and its internal Motions
agreeable to the good Pleasure of the Divine Being; disallowing those very
Actions, which outwardly look well enough, but proceed from an impure and
corrupted Mind. And this seems to be the Reason why the sacred Scripture does
not so frequently treat of those Actions, that are enjoined under certain
Penalties by Humane Laws, as it does of those, which, as Seneca expresses it,
are out of the reach of any such Constitutions. And this will manifestly appear
to those, who shall carefully consider the Precepts and Virtues that are
therein inculcated; although even those Christian Virtues do very much dispose
the Minds of Men, toward the maintaining of Mutual Society; so likewise Moral
Divinity does mightily promote the Practice of all the main Duties, that are
enjoined us in our Civil Deportment: So that if you should observe any one
behave himself like a restless and troublesome Member in the Commonwealth, you
may fairly conclude that the Christian Religion has made but a very slight
impression on that Person, and that it has taken no Root in his Heart. And from
these Particulars I suppose may be easily discovered not only the certain
Bounds and Limits which distinguish the Law of Nature, as we have defin*d it,
from Moral Divinity; but it may likewise be concluded that the Law of Nature is
no ways repugnant to the Maxims of sound Divinity; but is only to be abstracted
from some particular Doctrines thereof, which cannot be fathomed by the help of
Reason alone. From whence also it necessarily follows, that in the Science of
the Law of Nature, a Man should be now considered, as being depraved in his
very Nature, and upon that Account, as a Creature subject to many vile
Inclinations: For although none can be so stupid, as not to discover in himself
many Evil and Inordinate Affections, nevertheless, unless we were informed so
much by Sacred Writ, it would not appear that this Rebellion of the Will, was
occasioned by the first Man's Transgression; and consequently since the Law of
Nature does not reach those Things which are above Reason, it would be very
preposterous to derive it from the State of Man, as it was incorrupt before the
Fall; especially since even the greatest part of the Precepts of the Decalogue,
as they are delivered in Negative Terms, do manifestly presuppose the depraved
State of Man. Thus for Example, in the First and Second Commandment it seems to
be supposed that Mankind was naturally prone to the belief of Polytheism and
Idolatry. For if you should consider Man as in his Primitive State, wherein he
had a clear and distinct Knowledge of the Deity, as it were by a peculiar
Revelation; I do not see how it could ever enter into the Thoughts of such a
one, to frame any thing to himself, to which he could pay Reverence instead of
or together with the true God, or to believe any Divinity to reside in that
which his own Hands had formed; therefore there was no necessity of laying an
Injunction upon him in Negative Terms, that he should not worship other Gods;
but this Plain, Affirmative Precept would have been sufficient; Thou shall
love, honor and adore God, whom you know to have created both yourself and the
whole Universe. And the same may be said of the Third Commandment, for why
should it be forbidden in a Negative Precept, to blaspheme God, to such a one
who had at the same time a clear and perfect Understanding of his Bounty and
Majesty, and who was actuated by no inordinate Affections, and whose Mind did
cheerfully acquiesce in that Condition, wherein he was placed by Almighty God?
How could such a one be Guilty of so great Madness? But he needed only to have
been admonished by this Affirmative Precept, That he should glorify the Name
of God. But it seems otherwise of the Fourth and Fifth Commandments, which as
they are Affirmative Precepts, neither do they necessarily presuppose the
depraved State of Man, they may be admitted, Mankind being considered as under
either Condition. But the thing is very manifest in relation to the other
Commandments, which concern our Neighbor; for it would suffice plainly to have
enjoined Man, considered as he was at first created by God, that he should love
his Neighbor, whereto he was beforehand inclined by his own Nature. But how
could the same Person be commanded, that he should not kill, when Death had not
as yet fallen on Mankind, which entered into the World upon the account of Sin?
But now there is very great need of such a Negative Command, when instead of
loving one another, there are stirred up so great Feuds and Animosities among
Men, that even a great Part of them is owing purely to Envy, or an inordinate
Desire of invading what belongs to another; so that they make no scruple not
only of destroying those that are innocent, but even their Friends, and such as
have done them signal Favors, and all this forsooth they are not ashamed to
disguise under the specious pretense of Religion and Conscience. In like manner
what need was there expressly to forbid Adultery among those married Persons,
whose mutual Love was so ardent and sincere? Or what occasion was there to
forbid Theft when as yet Covetousness and Poverty were not known, nor did any
Man think that properly his own, which might be useful or profitable to
another? Or to what purpose was it to forbid the bearing False Witness, when as
yet there were not any to be found, who sought after Honor and Reputation to
themselves, by Slandering and aspersing others with false and groundless
Calumnies? So that not unfitly you may here apply the Saying of Tacitus,
Vetustissimi Mortalium, nulla adhuc prava libidine, sine probro, scelere, eoque
sine poena aut coercitionibus agebant; and ubi nihil contra morem cuperent,
nihil per metum vetabantur. Whilst no corrupt Desires depraved Mankind, the
first Men lived without Sin and Wickedness, and therefore free from Restraint
and Punishment, and whereas they coveted nothing but what was their due, they
were barred from nothing by Fear.

And these things being rightly understood may clear the way for removing this
Doubt; whether the Law was different or the same in the Primitive State of
Nature before the Fall? Where it may be briefly answered, that the most
material Heads of the Law were the same in each State; but that many particular
Precepts did vary according to the diversity of the Condition of Mankind; or
rather that the same Summary of the Law was explained by diverse, but not
contrary, Precepts; according to the different State of Man, by whom that Law
was to be observed. Our Savior reduced the Substance of the Law to two Heads:
Love God, and Love thy Neighbor: To these the whole Law of Nature may be
referred, as well in the Primitive, as in the depraved State of Man; (unless
that in the Primitive State there seems not any or a very small difference
between the Law of Nature, and Moral Divinity.) For that Mutual Society, which
we laid down as a Foundation to the Law of Nature, may very well be resolved
into the Love of our Neighbor. But when we descend to particular Precepts,
there is indeed a very great difference both in relation to the Commands and
Prohibitions. And as to what concerns the Commands, there are many which have
place in this State of Mankind, which seem not to have been necessary in the
Primitive State: And that partly because they presuppose such a Condition, as,
it is not certain, could happen to that most happy State of Mankind; partly
because there can be no Notion of them, without admitting Misery and Death,
which were unknown there: As for Instance, we are now enjoined by the Precepts
of the Law of Nature, not to deceive one another in buying or selling, not to
make use of false Weights or Measures, to repay Money that is lent, at the
appointed time. But it is not yet evident, whether if Mankind had continued
without sin, there would have been driven any Trade and Commerce, as there is
now in the World, or whether there would then have been any Occasion for the
Use of Money. In like manner if such kind of Communities, as are now adays, were
not to be found in the State of Innocence, there would be then likewise no
Occasion for those Laws, which are presupposed as requisite for the well
ordering and Government of such Societies. We are also now commanded by the Law
of Nature to succor those that are in want, to relieve those that are
oppressed, to take care of Widows and Orphans. But it would be to no purpose to
have inculcated these Precepts to those who were no ways subject to Misery,
Poverty or Death. The Law of Nature now enjoins us to forgive Injuries, and to
use our utmost Endeavors toward the promoting of Peace amongst Mankind; which
would be unnecessary among those who never offended against the Laws of Mutual
Society. And this too is very evident in the Prohibitory Precepts which relate
to the Natural not Positive Law. For although every Command does virtually contain
in itself a Prohibition of the opposite Vice; (as for instance, he that is
commanded to love his Neighbor, is at the same time forbidden to do such
Actions, as may any ways thwart or contradict this Duty of Love:) yet it seems
superfluous that these things should be ordained by express Commands, where
there are no disorderly Inclinations to excite Men to the committing such
Wrongs. For the Illustration of which, this may be taken notice of, that Solon
would by no Public Law enact any Punishment for Parricides, because he thought
that no Child could be guilty of so horrid an Impiety. The like whereof we may
find in what is reported by Francis Lopez, in his History of the West Indies,
Chap. 207. concernning the People of Nicaragua; he tells us, that they had not
appointed any Punishment for those who should kill their Prince; because, say
they, there can be no Subject, who would contrive or perpetrate so base an
Action. I am afraid it may savor too much of Affectation to enlarge any
farther in the Proof of what is in itself so clear and evident. Yet I shall add
this one Example fitted to the meanest Capacity. Suppose there are two
Children, but of different Dispositions, committed to the Care of a certain
Person; One whereof is Modest and Bashful, taking great Delight in his Studies;
the other proves Unruly, Surly, giving himself over more to loose Pleasures,
than to Learning. Now the Duty of both of these is the same, to follow their
Studies; but the particular Precepts proper to each, are different; for it is
sufficient to advise the former to what kind of Studies he must apply himself,
at what time and after what manner they are to be followed: But as for the
other, he must be enjoined under severe Penalties, not to wander abroad, not to
Game, not to sell his Books, not to get others to make his Exercises, not to
play the good Fellow, not to run after Harlots. Now if any one should undertake
in a set Discourse to declaim against these things to him of the contrary
Temper, the Child may very well enjoin him Silence, and bid him inculcate them
to any Body else, rather than to him, who takes no Delight or Pleasure in such
Practices. From whence I look upon it as manifest, that the Law of Nature would
have a quite different Face, if we were to consider Man, as he was in his
Primitive State of Innocence. And now since the Bounds and Limits of this
Science, whereby it is distinguished from Moral Divinity, are so clearly set
down, it ought at least to have the same Privileges with other Sciences, as
the Civil Law, Physic, Natural Philosophy and the Mathematics; wherein if any
Unskilful Person presumed to meddle, assuming to himself the Quality of a
Censor, without any Authority, he may fairly have that objected to him, which
was formerly done by Apelles to Megabyzus who undertook to talk at random about
the Art of Painting; Pray, said he, be silent, lest the Boys laugh at you, who
pretend to talk of Matters you do not understand.

Now upon the whole, I am contented to submit my self to the Judgment of
Discreet and Intelligent Persons; but as for Ignorant, and Spiteful Detracters,
it is better to leave them to themselves, to be punished by their own Folly and
Malice; since, according to the Ancient Proverb, The Ethiopian cannot change
his Skin.

CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
Chap. I. OF Human Actions. Page 1. II. Of the Rule of Human Actions, or of
Laws in general. 25 III. Of the Law of Nature. 33 IV. Of the Duty of Man
toward God, or, concerning Natural Religion. 50 V. Of the Duty of Man toward
himself. 64 VI. Of the Duty of one Man toward another, and first of doing no
Injury to any Man. 88 VII. The Natural Equality of Men to be acknowledged. 98
VIII. Of the mutual Duties of Humanity. 105 IX. The Duty of Men in making
Contract 112 X. The Duty of Men in Discourse. 131 XI. The Duty of those that
take an Oath. 138 XII. Duties to be observed in acquiring Possession of Things.
145 XIII. The Duties which naturally result from Man's Property in Things. 160
XIV. Of the Price and Value of Things. 164 XV. Of those Contracts in which the
Value of things is presupposed, and of the Duties thence arising. 174 XVI. The
several Methods by which the Obligations arising from Contracts are dissolved.
191. XVII. Of Meaning or Interpretation. 196


BOOK II.
Chap. I. OF the Natural State of Men. 207 II. Of the Duties of the married
State. 220 III. The Duty of Parents and Children. 228 IV. The Duties of Masters
and Servants. 237 V. The impulsive Cause of Constituting Communities. 241 VI.
Of the internal Frame and Constitution of any State or Government. 249 VII. Of
the several Parts of Government. 259 VIII. Of the several Forms of Government.
265 IX. The Qualifications of Civil Government. 273 X. How Government,
especially Monarchical, is acquired. 276 XI. The Duty of supreme Governors.
283 XII. Of the special Laws of a Community. 293 XIII. Of the Power of Life and
Death. 299 XIV. Of Reputation. 310 XV. Of the Power of Governors over the
Goods of their Subjects. 316 XVI. Of War and Peace. 319 XVII. Of Alliances. 329
XVIII. The Duty of Subjects. 333


Written by the same AUTHOR, and Translated by J. C.
THE History of Popedom, containing an Account of the Rise, Progress, and Decay
thereof. Sold by C. Harper at the Flower-de-luce over against S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet, and J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball over against the
Royal Exchange, Cornhill.

THE Whole Duty of Man, According to the LAW of NATURE.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of Human Actions.
WHAT we mean here by I. What is Duty.
the word Duty, is, that Action of a Man, which is regularly ordered according
to some prescribed Law, so far as he is thereto obliged. To the understanding
whereof it is necessary to premise somewhat, as well touching the nature of a
Human Action, as concerning Laws in general.

BY a Human Action we mean not II. What a Human Action.
every motion that proceeds from the faculties of a Man; but such only as have
their Original and Direction from those faculties which God Almighty has
endowed Mankind withal, distinct from Brutes; that is, such as are undertaken
by the Light of the Understanding, and the Choice of the Will.

FOR it is not only put in the power III. Human Capacity.
of Man to know the various things which appear in the World, to compare them
one with another, and from thence to form to himself new Notions; but he is
able to look forwards, and to consider what he is to do, and to carry himself
to the performance of it, and this to do after some certain Manner, and to some
certain End; and then he can collect what will be the Consequence thereof.
Beside, he can make a Judgment upon things already done, whether they are done
agreeably to their Rule. Not that all a man's Faculties do exert themselves
continually, or after the same manner, but some of them are stirred up in him by
an internal Impulse; and when raised, are by the same regulated and guided.
Neither beside has a Man the same Inclinations to every Object, but some he
desires and for others he has an aversion: and often, though an Object of
Action be before him, yet he suspends any motion toward it; and when many
Objects offer themselves, he chooses one and refuses the rest.

AS for that Faculty therefore of comprehending IV. Human Understanding.
and judging of things, which is called the Understanding, it must be taken for
granted, first of all, That every Man of a mature Age, and entire Sense has so
much Natural Light in him, as that, with necessary care and due consideration,
he may rightly comprehend at least those general Precepts and Principles which
are requisite in order to pass our lives here honestly and quietly; and be able
to judge that these are congruous to the Nature of Man. For if this at least be
not admitted within the bounds of our Humane Forum, men might pretend an
invincible Ignorance for all their Miscarriages; because no man in Civil
Judicature.
foro humano can be condemned for having violated a Law which it was above his
Capacity to comprehend.

THE Understanding of Man, when V. Conscience rightly informed and probable.
it is rightly informed concerning that which is to be done or omitted, and
this so, as that he is able to give certain and undoubted Reasons for his
Opinion, is wont to be called Conscience truly guided. But when a Man has
indeed entertained the true Opinion about what is to be done or not to be done,
the truth whereof yet he is not able to make good by reasoning; but he either
drew such his Notion from his Education, way of living, Custom, or from the
Authority of persons wiser or better than himself; and yet no reason appears to
him that can persuade the contrary, this uses to be called Conscientia
probabilis, Conscience grounded upon Probability. And by this the greatest part
of Mankind are governed, it being the good fortune of few to be able to enquire
into and to know the Causes of things.

AND yet it chances often, to some VI. Conscience doubting.
Men especially in singular Cases, that Arguments may be brought on both sides,
and they not be Masters of sufficient Judgment to discern clearly which are the
strongest and most weighty. And this is called a doubting Conscience. In which
Case this is the Rule; as long as the Understanding is unsatisfied and in
doubt, whether the thing to be done be good or evil, the doing of it is to be
deferred. For to set about doing it before the Doubt is answered, implies a
sinful design or at least a neglect of the Law.

MEN also oftentimes have wrong apprehensions VII. Error.
of the matter, and take that to be true which is false; and then they are said
to be in an Error; and this is called Vincible Error, when a man by applying
due Attention and Diligence might have prevented his falling thereinto; and
it is said to be Invincible Error, when the person with the utmost Diligence and
Care that is consistent with the common Rules of Life, could not have avoided
it. But this sort of Error, at least among those who give their Minds to
improve the Light of Reason and to lead their Lives regularly, happens not in
the common Rules of living, but only in peculiar matters. For the Precepts of
the Law of Nature are plain; and that Legislator who makes positive Laws, both
does and ought to take all possible Care, that they may be understood by those
who are to give obedience to them. So that this sort of Error proceeds only
from a supine Negligence. But in particular Affairs it is easy for some Error
to be admitted, against the will and without any fault of the person,
concerning the Object and other Circumstances of the Action.

BUT where Knowledge simply is VIII. Ignorance.
wanting it is called Ignorance. Which is two ways to be considered; first, as
it contributes somewhat to the Action; and next, as it was in the person either
against his will or not without his own fault. In the first respect Ignorance
uses to be divided into efficacious and concomitant. That, is such as if it had
not been, the present Action had not been undertaken: This, tho it had not
been, it l^^d not hindered the Undertaking. In the latter respect the Ignorance
is either Voluntary or Involuntary. The first is, when it was chosen by the
person, he rejecting the means of knowing the Truth, or suffering it to come
upon him by not using such diligence as was necessary. The latter is, when a
Man is ignorant of that, which he could not nor was obliged to know: And this
again is twofold; for either a man may indeed not be able to help his Ignorance
for the present, and yet may be to blame because he continues in such a state;
or else he may not only be for the present unable to conquer his Ignorance, but
may also be blameless that he is fallen into such a Condition.

THE other Faculty which does peculiarly IX. The Will.
distinguish Men from Brutes is called the Will, by which as with an internal
Impulse Man moves himself to Action, and chooses that which best pleases him;
and rejects that which seems unfit for him. Man therefore has thus much from
his Will; first, that he has a power to act willingly, that is, he is not
determined by any intrinsic Necessity to do this or that, but is Himself the
Author of his own Actions; next, that he has a power to act freely, that is,
upon the Proposal of one Object, he may act or not act, and either entertain or
reject: or if diverse Objects are proposed, he may choose one and refuse the
rest. Now whereas among human Actions some are undertaken for their own sakes,
others because they subserve to the attaining of somewhat farther; that is,
some are as the End, and others as Means; as for the End, the Will is thus far
concerned, That being once known, this first approves it, and then moves
vigorously toward the atchieving thereof, as it were driving at it with more
or less earnestness; and this End once obtained it sits down quietly and enjoys
its acquist with pleasure. For the Means, they are first to be approved, then
such as are most fit for the purpose are chosen, and at last are applied to use.

BUT as Man is accounted to be the X. The Will unforced.
Author of his own Actions, because they are voluntarily undertaken by himself;
so this is chiefly to be observed concerning the Will, to wit, that its
Spontaneity or natural Freedom is at least to be asserted in those Actions,
concerning which a man is wont to give an Account before any human Tribunal.
For where an absolute Freedom of choice is wholly taken away, there not the man
who acts, but he that imposed upon him the Necessity of so doing, is to be
reputed the Author of that Action, to which the other unwillingly ministered
with his strength and Limbs.

FURTHERMORE, though the Will XI. The Will variously affected.
do always desire good in general, and has continually an Aversion for Evil
also in general; yet a great variety of Desires and Actions may be found among
men. And this arises from hence, that all things that are good and evil do not
appear purely so to Man, but mixed together, the good with the bad and the bad
with the good; and because different Objects do particularly affect diverse
parts, as it were, of a Man; for instance, some regard that good Opinion and
Respect that a Man has for himself; some affect the outward Senses; and some
that Love of himself, from which he desires his own Preservation. From whence
it is, that those of the first sort appear to him as decorous; of the second as
pleasant; and of the last as profitable: And accordingly as each of these have
made a powerful Impression upon a Man, it brings upon him a peculiar propensity
that way-ward; whereto may be added the particular Inclinations and Aversions
that are in most Men to some certain things. From all which it comes to pass,
that upon any Action several sorts of Good and Evil offer themselves, which
either are true or appear so; which some have more, some less sagacity to
distinguish with solidity of Judgment. So that it is no wonder that one man
should be carried eagerly on to that, which another perfectly abhors.

BUT neither is the Will of Man always XII. The Will biased by Natural
Inclinations.
found to stand equally poised with regard to every Action, that so the
Inclination thereof to this or that side should come only from an internal
Impulse, after a due consideration had of all its circumstances; but it is very
often pusht on one way rather than another by some outward Movements. For, that
we may pass by that universal Propensity to Evil, which is in all Mortals, the
Original and Nature of which belong to the Examination of another The Judgment
of the Divines.
Forum; first, a peculiar disposition of Nature puts a particular kind of bias
upon the Will, by which some are strongly inclined to certain sorts of Actions;
and this is not only to be found in single Men, but in whole Nations. This
seems to proceed from the Temperature of the Air that surrounds us, and of the
Soil; and from that Constitution of our Bodies which either was derived to us
in the Seed of our Parents, or was occasioned in us by our Age, Diet, the want
or enjoyment of Health, the Method of our Studies or way of Living and Causes
of that sort, beside the various formations of the Organs, which the Mind makes
use of in the performance of its several Offices, and the like. And here,
beside that a man may with due ear very much alter the temperament of his body
and repress the exorbitances of his natural Inclination, it is to be noted,
that how much power soever we attribute hereto, yet it is not to be understood
to be of that force as to hurry a man into such a violation of the Law of
Nature as shall render him obnoxious to the Civil Judicature, where evil
Desires are not animadverted on, provided they break not forth into external
Actions. So that after all the pains that can be taken to repel Nature, if it
take its full swinge, yet it may so far be restrained as not to produce open
Acts of Wickedness; and the Difficulty which happens in vanquishing those
Propensities is abundantly recompensed in the Glory of the Conquest. But if
these Impulses are so strong upon the mind, that they cannot be contained from
breaking forth, yet there may be found a way, as it were to draw them off,
without Sin.

THE frequent Repetition of Actions of XIII. By Custom.
the same kind does also incline the Will to do certain things; and the
Propensity which proceeds from hence is called Habit or Custom, for it is by
this that any thing is undertaken readily and willingly, so that the Object
being presented, the Mind seems to be forced thitherward, or if it be absent,
the same is earnestly desirous of it. Concerning which this is to be observed,
that as there appears to be no Custom, but what a Man may by applying a due
Care, break and leave off; so neither can any so far put a force upon the Will,
but that a Man may be able at any time to restrain himself from any external
Acts at least, to which by that he is urged. And because it was in the persons
own Power to have contracted this Habit or no, whatsoever easiness it brings to
any Action, yet if that Action be good, it loses nothing of its value
therefore, as neither does an evil thing abate ought of its Pravity. But as a
good Habit brings Praise to a man, so an ill one shows his Shame.

IT is also of great consideration, whether XIV. By Passion.
the mind be in a quiet and placid state, or whether it be affected with those
peculiar Motions we call the Passions. Of these it is to be known, that how
violent soever they are, a man with the right use of his Reason may yet conquer
them, or at least contain them without the bounds of Action. But whereas of the
Passions some are raised from the appearance of Good, and others of Evil; and
do urge either to the procuring of somewhat that is acceptable, or to the
avoiding of what is mischievous, it is agreeable to Human Nature, that these
should meet among men more favor and pardon, than those; and that according to
such degrees, as the Mischief that excited them was more hurtful and
intolerable. For to want a Good not altogether necessary to the preservation of
Nature is accounted more easy, than to endure an Evil which tends to Natures
destruction.

FURTHERMORE, as there are certain XV. By Intoxication.
Maladies, which take away all use of the Reason either perpetually or for a
time, so it is customary in many Countries, for men on purpose to procure to
themselves a certain kind of Disease which goes off in a short time, but which
very much confounds the Reasoning Faculty. By this we mean Drunkenness;
proceeding from certain kinds of Drink and Fumes, which incense and disturb the
Blood and Spirits, thereby rendering men very prone to Lust, Anger, Rashness and
immoderate Mirth; so that many by Drunkenness are set as it were beside
themselves, and seem to have put on another Nature than that which they were
of, when sober. But as this does not always take away the whole use of Reason;
so as far as the person does willingly put himself in this state, it is apt to
procure an Abhorrence rather than a favorable Interpretation of what is done
by its Impulse.

NOW of Human Actions as those are XVI. Actions Involuntary.
called Voluntary, which proceed from and are directed by the Will; so if any
thing be done wittingly altogether against the Will, these are called
Involuntary, taking the word in the narrowest sense; for taking it in the
largest, it comprehends even those which are done through Ignorance. But
Involuntary in this place is to signify the same as forced; that is, when by
an external Power which is stronger, a man is compelled to use his Members in
any Action, to which he yet signifies his Dissent and Aversion by Signs, and
particularly by counterstriving with his Body. Less properly those Actions are
also called Involuntary, which by the Imposition of a great Necessity are
chosen to be done, as the lesser Evil; and for the Acting whereof the person
had the greatest abomination, had he not been set under such Necessity. These
Actions therefore are called mixed. With Voluntary Actions they have this in
common, that in the present State of things the Will chooses them as the lesser
Evil. With the Involuntary they are after a sort the same, as to the Effect,
because they render the Agent either not at all, or not so heinously blameable,
as if they had been done spontaneously.

THOSE Human Actions then which XVII. Voluntary Actions imputable
proceed from, and are directed by the Understanding and the Will, have
particularly this natural Propriety, that they may be imputed to the Doer; that
is, that a Man may justly be said to be the Author of them, and be obliged to
render an Account of such his Doing; and the Consequences thereof, whether good
or bad are chargeable upon him. For there can be no truer reason why any Action
should be imputable to a Man, than that, he did it either mediately or
immediately, knowingly and willingly; or that it was in his power to have done
the same or to have let it alone. Hence it obtains as the prime Axiom in
matters of Morality which are liable to the Human Forum; That every man is
accountable for all such Actions, the performance or omission of which were in
his own Choice. Or, which is tantamount, That every Action, capable of human
direction, is chargeable upon him who might or might not have done it. So on
the contrary, no man can be reputed the Author of that Action, which neither in
itself nor in its cause, was in his Power.

FROM these Premises we shall deduce XVIII. Conclusions from the Premises.
some particular Propositions, by which shall be ascertained, What every man
ought to be accountable for; or, in other words, which are those Actions and
Consequences of which any one is to be charged as Author.

NONE of those Actions which are The first Conclusion.
done by another man, nor any operation of whatsoever other things, neither any
Accident, can be imputable to another person, but so far forth as it was in his
Power, or as he was obliged to guide such Action. For nothing is more common in
the world, than to subject the Doings of one Man to the Manage and Direction of
another. Here then, if any thing be perpetrated by one, which had not been
done, if the other had performed his Duty and exerted his Power; this Action
shall not only be chargeable upon him who immediately did the fact, but upon
the other also who neglected to make use of his Authority and Power. And yet
this is to be understood with some restriction; so as that Possibility may be
taken morally, and in a large sense. For no Subjection can be so strict, as to
extinguish all manner of liberty in the person subjected, but so that 'twill be
in his Power to resist and act quite contrary to the direction of his Superior;
neither will the state of Human Nature bear, that any one should be perpetually
affixed to the side of another, so as to observe all his motions. Therefore
when a Superior has done every thing that was required by the Rules of his
Director-ship, and yet somewhat is acted amiss, this shall be laid only to the
charge of him that did it. Thus whereas Man exercises dominion over other
Animals, what is done by them to the detriment of another, shall be charged
upon the Owner, as supposing him to have been wanting of due Care and
Circumspection. So also all those Mischiefs which are brought upon another, may
be imputed to that person, who when he could and ought, yet did not take out of
the way the Cause and Occasion thereof. Accordingly it being in the power of
Men to promote or suspend the Operations of many Natural Agents, whatsoever
Advantage or Damage is wrought by these, they shall be accountable for, by
whose application or neglect the same was occasioned. Beside, sometimes there
are extraordinary Cases, when a man shall be charged with such Events as are
above human Direction, as when God shall do particular Works with regard to
some single person. These and the like Cases being excepted, for all the rest
it suffices, if a Man can give an Account of his own doings.

WHATSOEVER Qualifications a XIX. The second Conclusion.
Man has or has not, which it is not in his power to exert or not to exert,
must not be imputed to him, unless so far as he is wanting in Industry to
supply such Natural Defect, or does not rowse up his native Faculties. So
because no man can give himself an Acuteness of Judgment and Strength of Body,
therefore no one is to be blamed for want of either, or commended for having
them, except so far as he improved, or neglected the cultivating thereof. Thus
Clownishness is not blameable in a Rustic, but in a Courtier or Citizen. And
hence it is, that those Reproaches are to be judged extremely absurd, which are
grounded upon Qualities, the Causes of which are not in our power, as, Short
Stature, a deformed Countenance and the like.

THOSE things which are done XX. The third Conclusion.
through invincible Ignorance are not imputable. Because we cannot properly
direct our Action, unless by the Light of the Understanding; (and it is here
supposed Man is unable to procure such Light) neither are we to blame that we
cannot. Now in the common affairs of Life, the word Possible is to be morally
understood, and by Ability is meant that Faculty, Diligence and Circumspection
which is commonly judged to suffice, and which is well supported with probable
reasons.

Ignorance of, or Error concerning the XXI. The fourth Conclusion.
Laws and that Duty, which is incumbent upon every man, does not excuse from
blame. For whosoever imposes Laws and Services, is wont and ought to take care
that the Subject have notice thereof. And these Laws and Rules of Duty
generally are and should be ordered to the Capacity of such Subject, if they
are such as he is obliged to know and remember. Hence, he who is the Cause of
the Ignorance shall be bound to answer for those Actions which are the effects
thereof.

HE who, not by his own fault, wants XXII. The fifth Conclusion.
an opportunity of doing his Duty, shall not be accountable, because he has not
done it. Now to a fair occasion these four things are requisite; 1. That an
Object of Action be ready: 2. That a proper Place be had, where we may not be
hindered by others, or receive some Mischief: 3. That we have a fit Time, when
business of greater Necessity is not to be done, and which may be seasonable
for other matters which concur to the Action: and 4. lastly, That we have
natural Force sufficient for the performance. For since an Action cannot be
achieved without these, 'twould be absurd to blame a man for not acting, when
he had not an opportunity so to do. Thus a Physician cannot be accused of
Sloth, when no body is sick to employ him. Thus no man can be liberal, who
wants it himself. Thus he cannot be reproved for burying his talent, who having
taken a due care to set himself in a useful Station, has yet missed of it:
though it be said, To whom much is given, from him much shall be required. Thus
we cannot blow and suck all at once.

NO man is accountable for not doing XXIII. The sixth Conclusion.
that which exceeded his Power, and which he had not strength sufficient to
hinder or accomplish. Hence that Maxim, To Impossibilities there lies no
Obligation. But this Exception must be added, Provided, that by the persons own
fault he has not impaired, or lost that strength which was necessary to the
Performance; for if so, he is to be treated after the same manner, as if he had
all that power which he might have had: For otherwise it would be easy to
elude the performance of any difficult Obligation, by weakening ones self on
purpose. XXIV. The seventh Conclusion.


NEITHER can those things be imputable, which one acts or suffers by
Compulsion. For it is supposed, that 'twas above his power to decline or avoid
such doing or suffering. But we are said after a twofold manner to be
compelled; one way is, when another that is stronger than us violently forces
our Members to do or endure somewhat: the other, when one more powerful shall
threaten some grievous Mischief (which he is immediately able to bring upon us)
unless we will, as of our own accord, apply our selves to the doing of this, or
abstain from doing that. For then, unless we are expressly obliged to take the
Mischief to our selves which was to be done to another, he that sets us under
this Necessity, is to be reputed the Author of the Fact; and the same is no
more chargeable upon us, than a Murder is upon the Sword or Ax which was the
Instrument.

THE Actions of those who want the XXV. The eighth Conclusion.
use of their Reason are not imputable; Because they cannot distinguish clearly
what they do, and bring it to the Rule. Hitherto appertain the Actions of
Children, before their reasoning Faculties begin to exert themselves. For
though they are now and then chid or whipped for what they do; yet this is not as
if they had deserved Punishment, properly so called in the Human Forum; but
barely by way of Discipline and in order to their Amendment; lest by their
tricks they become troublesome to others, or get ill habits themselves. So also
the doings of Franticks, Crackbrains and Dotards are not accounted Human
Actions, nor imputable to those who contracted such incapacitating Disease,
without any fault of their own.

LASTLY, A man is not chargeable XXVI. The ninth Conclusion.
with what he seems to do in his Dreams; unless by indulging himself in the day
time with such Thoughts, he has deeply impressed the Ideas of such things in
his mind; (though matters of this sort can rarely be within the cognizance of
the Human Forum.) Otherwise the Fancy in sleep is like a Boat adrift without
a Guide, so that it is impossible for any man to order what Ideas it shall form.

BUT concerning the Imputation of another XXVII. Imputation of another Actions.
man's Actions it is somewhat more distinctly to be observed, that sometimes it
may so happen, that an Action ought not at all to be charged upon him that
immediately did it, but upon another who made use of this only as an
Instrument. But it is more frequent, that it should be imputed both to him who
perpetrated the thing, and to the other, who by doing or omitting something
showed his concurrence to the Action. And this is chiefly done after a
threefold manner; either, 1. As the other was the principal Cause of the
Action, and this less principal, or, 2. As they were both equally concerned;
or, 3. As the other was less principal, and he that did the act was principal.
To the first sort belong those who shall instigate another to any thing by
their Authority; those who shall give their necessary Approbation, without
which the other could not have acted; those who could and ought to have hindered
it, but did not. To the second Class appertain, those who order such a thing to
be done or hire a man to do it; those who assist; those who afford harbor and
protection; those who had it in their Power, and whose Duty it was to have
succored the wronged person, but refused it. To the third sort are referred
such as are of counsel to the Design; those that encourage and commend the Fact
before it be done; and such as incite men to sinning by their Example, and the
like.

CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Human Actions, or of Laws in general.
BECAUSE all Human Actions depend I. The necessity of a Rule.
upon the Will, and have their estimate according to the concurrence thereof;
but the Wills of single men are not always the same, and those of other men run
diverse ways; therefore to preserve Decency and Order among Mankind, it was
necessary there should be some Rule, by which they should be regulated. For
otherwise, if where there is so great a Liberty of the Will, and such variety
of Inclinations and Desires, any man might do whatsoever he had a mind to,
without any regard to some stated Rule, it could not but give occasion to vast
Confusions among Mankind.

THIS Rule is called Law; which is II. Law.
a Decree by which the Superior obliges one that is subject to him, to
accommodate his Actions to the directions prescribed therein.

THAT this Definition may the better III. Obligation.
be understood, it must first be enquired, What is an Obligation? whence is its
Original? who is capable of lying under an Obligation? and who it is that can
impose it? Obligation then is usually said to be that rightful Bond, by which a
man is necessitated to do somewhat. That is, hereby a Bridle, as it were is put
upon our Liberty; so that though the Will does actually drive another way, yet
we find our selves hereby struck as it were with an internal Sense, that if our
Action be not performed according to the prescript Rule we cannot but confess
we have not done right; and if any mischief happen to us upon that account, we
may fairly charge our selves with the same; because it might have been avoided,
if the Rule had been followed as it ought.

AND there are two reasons why Man IV. Man subject to Obligation.
should be subject to an Obligation; one is, because he is endowed with a Will,
which may be diverse ways directed, and so be conformed to a Rule; the other,
because Man is not exempt from the power of a Superior. For where the Faculties
of any Agent are by Nature formed only for one way of acting, there it is to no
purpose to expect any thing to be done of choice: and to such a Creature it is
in vain to prescribe any Rule; because it is incapable of understanding the same
or conforming its actions thereto. Now if there be any one who has no Superior,
then there is no power that can of right impose a Necessity upon him; and if he
perpetually observes a certain Rule in what he does, and constantly abstains
from doing many things, he is not to be understood to act thus from any
Obligation that lay upon him, but from his own good pleasure. It will follow
then, that He should be capable of Obligation, who has a Superior, and is able
to understand the Rule prescribed, and is endued with a Will which may be
directed several ways; and yet which (when the Law is promulg'd by his
Superior) knows he cannot rightly depart therefrom. And with all these
Faculties it is plain Mankind is furnished.

AN Obligation is superinduced upon V. Who can oblige.
the Wills of Men properly by a Superior, that is, not only by such a one as
being greater or stronger, can punish Gainsayers; but by him who has just
reasons to have a power to restrain the Liberty of our Will at his own
pleasure. Now when any man has either of these, as soon as he has signified
what he would have, it necessarily stirs up in the mind of the party concerned
Fear mixed with Reverence; toward the first in contemplation of his Power; and
toward the second for the sake of those other Reasons, which even without Fear,
ought to allure any man to a compliance with his Will. For he that can give me
no other reason for putting me under an Obligation against my Will, beside
this, that he is too strong for me, he truly may so terrify me, that I may
think it better to obey him for a while than suffer a greater Evil; but when
this Fear is over, nothing any longer hinders, but that I may act after my own
choice and not his. On the contrary he that has nothing but Arguments to prove
that I should obey him, but wants Power to do me any Mischief, if I deny. I may
with Impunity slight his commands, except one more potent take upon him to make
good his despised Authority, Now the Reasons upon which one man may justly
exact Subjection from another, are; If he have been to the other the Original
of some extraordinary Good; and if it be plain, that he designs the others
Welfare, and is able to provide better for him than it is possible for himelf to
do; and on the same account does actually lay claim to the Government of him:
and lastly if any one does voluntarily surrender his Liberty to another, and
subject himself to his Direction.

FURTHERMORE, that a Law may VI. The Legislator and the true meaning of the Law
to be known.
exert its force in the minds of those to whom it is promulg'd, it is required,
that both the Legislator and the Law also be known. For no man can pay
obedience, if he know not whom he is to obey, and what he is to perform. Now
the knowledge of the Legislator is very easy; because from the light of Reason
it is certain the same must be the Author of all the Laws of Nature, who was the
Creator of the Universe: Nor can any man in Civil Society be ignorant who it is
that has power over him. Then for the Laws of Nature, it shall be hereafter
declared how we come to the knowledge of them. And as to the Laws of a man's
Country or City, the Subject has notice given of them by a Publication plainly
and openly made. In which these two things ought to be ascertained, that the
Author of the Law is he, who has the supreme Authority in the Community, and
that this or that is the true meaning of the Law. The first of these is known,
if he shall promulge the Law with his own Mouth, or deliver it under his own
Hand; or else if the same be done by such as are delegated to that purpose by
him: whose Authority it is in vain to call in question, if it be manifest, that
such their acting belongs to that Office they bear in the Public, and that
they are regularly placed in the Administration thereof; if these Laws are to
be put judicially in Execution, and if they contain nothing derogatory to the
Sovereign Power. That the latter, that is, the true Sense of the Law be known,
it is the Duty of those who promulge it, in so doing to use the greatest
Perspicuity and Plainness; and if any thing obscure do occur therein, an
Explanation is to be sought of the Legislator, or of those who are publicly
constituted to give judgment according to Law.

OF every perfect Law there are two VII. Two parts of a perfect Law.
parts: One, whereby it is directed what is to be done or omitted: the other,
wherein is declared what punishment he shall incur, who neglects to do what is
commanded, or attempts that which is prohibited. For as, through the Pravity of
Human Nature ever inclining to things forbidden, it is to no purpose to say, Do
this, if no Punishment shall be undergone by him who disobeys; so it were
absurd to say, You shall be punished, except some reason preceded, by which a
Punishment was deserved. Thus then all the force of a Law consists in
signifying what the Superior requires or forbids to be done, and what
Punishment shall be inflicted upon the Violators. But the power of obliging,
that is, of imposing an intrinsic Necessity; and the power of forcing, or by
the proposal of Punishments compelling the Observation of Laws, is properly in
the Legislator, and in him to whom the Guardianship and Execution of the Laws
is committed.

WHATSOEVER is enjoined by any VIII. Other Essentials.
Law ought not only to be in the power of him to perform on whom the Injunction
is laid, but it ought to contain somewhat advantageous either to him or others.
For as it would be absurd and cruel to exact the doing of any thing from
another, under a Penalty, which it is and always was beyond his power to
perform; so it would be silly and to no purpose to put a restraint upon the
natural Liberty of the Will of any man, if no one shall receive any benefit
therefrom.

BUT though a Law does strictly include IX. Power of Dispensing.
all the Subjects of the Legislator who are concerned in the matter of the
same, and whom the said Legislator at first intended not to be exempted; yet
sometimes it happens that particular persons may be cleared of any obligation
to such Law: and this is called Dispensing. But as he only may dispense in
whose power it is to make and abrogate the Law; so great care is to be taken,
lest by too frequent Dispensations and such as are granted without very weighty
reasons, the Authority of the Law be shaken and occasion be given of Envy and
Animosities among Subjects.

YET there is a great difference between X. Equity.
Equity and Dispensing: Equity being a Correction of that in which the Law, by
reason of its General Comprehension was deficient; or an apt Interpretation of
the Law, by which it is demonstrated, that there may be some peculiar Case
which is not comprised in the Universal Law, because if it were, some Absurdity
would follow. For it being impossible that all Cases, by reason of their
infinite Variety, should be either foreseen or explicitly provided for;
therefore the Judges, whose office it is to apply the general Rules of the Laws
to special Cases, ought to except such from the Influence of them, as the
Lawgiver himself would have excepted, if he were present, or had foreseen such
Cases.

NOW the Actions of men obtain certain XI. Actions allowable good and bad.
Qualities and Denominations from their relation to and agreement with the Law
of Morality. And all those Actions, concerning which the Law has determined
nothing on either side, are called allowable or permitted. Although sometimes in
ordinary Law-Cases, where all matters cannot be examined with the greatest
accuracy, those things are said to be allowable, upon which the Law has not
assigned some Punishment, though they are in themselves repugnant to Natural
Honesty. And then those Actions which are consonant to the Law are good, those
that are contrary to it are called bad: But that any Action should be good,
it is requisite, that it be exactly agreeable in every point to the Law; whereas
it may be evil, if it be deficient in one point only.

As for Justice it is sometimes the Attribute XII. Justice of Persons.
of Actions, sometimes of Persons. When it is attributed to Persons, it is
usually defined to be, A constant and perpetual desire of giving every one
their own. For he is called a just man, who is delighted in doing righteous
things, who studies Justice, and in all his Actions endeavors to do that which
is right. On the other side, the unjust man is he that neglects the giving
every man his own, or, if he does, it is not because it is due, but from
expectation of Advantage to himself. So that a just man may sometimes do unjust
things, and an unjust man that which is just. But the just does that which is
right, because he is so commanded by the Law; and acts the contrary only
through Infirmity; whereas the wicked man does a just thing for fear of the
Punishment which is the Sanction of the Command, but he acts wrongfully from
the naughtiness of his heart.

BUT when Justice is attributed to XIII. Of Actions.
Actions, then it is nothing else but a right application of the same to the
Person. And a just Action done of choice, or knowingly and wittingly, is
applied to the person to whom it is due. So that the Justice of Actions differs
from Goodness chiefly in this, that the latter simply denotes an agreement with
the Law, whereas Justice also includes the regard they have to those persons
upon whom they are exercised. Upon which account Justice is called a Relative
Virtue.

MEN do not generally agree about XIV. Division of Justice.
the Division of Justice. The most received Distinction is, into Universal and
Particular. The first is, when every Duty is practiced and all right done to
others, even that which could not have been extorted by force, or by the rigor
of Law. The latter is, when that Justice only is done a man, which in his own
right he could have demanded; and this is wont to be again divided into
Distributive and Commutative. The Distributive takes place in Contracts made
between a Society and its Members concerning fair partition of Loss and Gain
according to a rate. The Commutative is mostly in Bargains made upon even hand
about things and doings relating to Traffic and Dealing.

KNOWING thus, what Justice is, XV. Injustice what.
it is easy to collect what is Injustice. Where it is to be observed, that such
an unjust Action is called Wrong-doing, which is premeditately undertaken, and
by which a violence is done upon somewhat which of absolute right was another
man's due, or which by like right he one way or other stood possessed of. And
this Wrong may be done after a threefold manner, 1. if that be denied to
another which in his own right he might demand (not accounting that which from
Courtesy or the like Virtue may be another due); or 2. if that be taken away
from another, of which by the same right then valid against the Invader, he was
in full possession: or 3. if any damage be done to another, which we had not
authority to do to him. Beside which, that a man may be charged with Injustice,
it is requisite that there be a naughty mind and an evil design in him that
acts it. For if there be nothing of these in it, then it is only called
Misfortune or a Fault, and that is so much slighter or more grievous, as the
Sloth and Negligence which occasioned it was greater or less.

LAWS with respect to their Authors XVI. Laws distinguished.
are distinguished into Divine and Humane; that proceeds from God, and this
from Men, But if Laws be considered, as they have a necessary and universal
Congruity with Mankind, they are then distinguished into Natural and Positive.
The former is that which is so agreeable with the rational and sociable Nature
of Man, that honest and peaceable Society could not be kept up amongst Mankind
without it. Hence it is, that this may be sought out and the knowledge of it
acquired by the light of that Reason, which is born with every man, and by a
consideration of Human Nature in general. The latter is that which takes not
its rise from the common condition of Human Nature, but only from the good
pleasure of the Legislator; not that this ought to be without its reason, but
should carry with it advantage to those men or that Society, for which it is
designed. Now the Law Divine is either Natural or Positive; but all Human Laws,
strictly taken, are Positive.

CHAP. III. Of the Law of Nature.
THAT man who has thoroughly examined I. Law Natural obvious.
the Nature and Disposition of Mankind, may plainly understand what the Law
Natural is, the Necessity thereof, and which are the Precepts it proposes and
enjoins to us Mortals. For as it much conduces to him who would know exactly
the Polity of any Community, that he first well understand the condition
thereof, and the manners and humors of the Members who constitute it: So to
him who has well studied the common Nature and Condition of Men, it will be
easy to find by what Laws the universal Safety must be preserved.

THIS then Man has in common with II. Self-Preservation.
all other Animals, who have a Sense of their own Beings; that he accounts
nothing dearer than Himself; that he studies all manner of ways his own
Preservation; and that he endeavors to procure to himself such things as seem
good for him, and to avoid and keep off those that are mischievous. And this
desire of Self-Preservation regularly is so strong, that all our other
Appetites and Passions give way to it. So that whenever an Attempt is made
upon the Life of any man, though he escape the danger threatened, yet he usually
resents it so, as to retain a Hatred still and a desire of Revenge on the
Aggressor.

BUT in one particular Man seems to III. Society absolutely necessary.
be set in a worse condition than that of Brutes, that hardly any other Animal
comes into the world in so great Weakness; so that 'twould be a kind of
miracle, if any man should arrive at a mature Age, without the aid of some body
else. For even now after so many helps found out for the Necessities of Human
Life; yet a many Years careful Study is required before a man shall be able of
himself to get Food and Raiment. Let us suppose a man come to his full strength
without any oversight or instruction from other men; suppose him to have no
manner of knowledge but what springs of itself from his own natural wit; and
thus to be placed in some Solitude destitute of any Help or Society of all
Mankind beside. Certainly a more miserable Creature cannot be imagined. He is
no better than dumb, naked, and has nothing left him but herbs and roots to
pluck, and the wild fruits to gather; to quench his thirst at the ^ext Spring,
River or Ditch; and, to shelter himself from the injuries of the weather, by
creeping into some Cave, or covering himself after any sort with Moss or Grass;
to pass away his tedious life in Idleness; to start at every Noise, and be
afraid at the sight of any other Animal; in a word, at last to perish either by
Hunger or Cold or some wild Beast. It must then follow, that whatsoever
Advantages accompany Human Life, are all owing to that mutual help men afford
one another. So that next to Divine Providence, there is nothing in the world
more beneficial to Mankind than Men themselves.

AND yet, as useful as this Creature IV. Man to Man inclinable to do hurt.
is or may be to others of its kind, it has many faults, and is capable of
being equally noxious; which renders mutual Society between man and man not a
little dangerous, and makes great caution necessary to be used therein, lest
Mischief accrue from it instead of Good. In the first place, a stronger
Proclivity to injure another is observed to be generally in Man, than in any of
the Brutes; for they seldom grow outrageous, but through Hunger or Lust, both
which Appetites are satisfied without much pains; and that done, they are not
apt to grow furious or to hurt their Fellow Creatures without some Provocation.
Whereas Man is an Animal always prone to Lust, by which he is much more
frequently instigated than seems to be necessary to the Conservation of his
Kind. His Stomach also is not only to be satisfied, but to be pleased; and it
often desires more than Nature can well digest. As for Raiment, Nature has
taken care of the rest of the Creatures that they don't want any: but Men
require not only such as will answer their Necessity, but their Pride and
Ostentation. Beside these, there are many Passions and Appetites unknown to the
Brutes, which yet are to be found in Mankind; as an unreasonable Desire of
possessing much more than is necessary, an earnest pursuit after Glory and
Preeminence; Envy, Emulation, and Outvyings of Wit. A proof hereof is, that
most of the Wars with which Mankind is harrass'd, are raised for causes
altogether unknown to the Brutes, Now all these are able to provoke men to hurt
one another, and they frequently do so. Hereto may be added the great Arrogance
that is in many men, and Desire of insulting over others, which cannot but
exasperate even those who are naturally meek enough, and from a care of
preserving themselves and their Liberty, excite them to make resistance.
Sometimes also Want sets men together by the ears, or because that Store of
necessaries which they have at present seems not sufficient either for their
Needs or Appetites.

MOREOVER, Men are more able to V. And very capable.
do one another harm than Brutes are. For tho they don't look formidable with
Teeth, Claws or Horns, as many of them do; yet the Activity of their Hands
renders them very effectual Instruments of Mischief; and then the quickness of
their Wit gives them Craft and a Capacity of attempting that by Treachery which
cannot be done by open force. So that it is very easy for one Man to bring upon
another the greatest of all Natural Evils, to wit, Death it self.

BESIDE all this, it is to be considered VI. And likely so to do.
that among Men there is a vast diversity of Dispositions, which is not to be
found among Brutes; for of them all of the same kind have the like
Inclinations, and are led by the same inward motions and appetites: Whereas
among Men, there are so many Minds as there are Heads, and every one has his
singular opinion; nor are they all acted with simple and uniform Desires, but
with such as are manifold and variously mixed together. Nay, one, and the same
man shall be often seen to differ from himself, and to desire that at one time
which at another he extremely abhorred. Nor is the Variety less discernable,
which is now to be found in the almost infinite ways of living, of managing our
Studies, our course of Life, and our methods of making use of our Wits. Now,
that by occasion hereof Men may not dash against one another, there is need of
wise Limitations and careful Management.

SO then Man is an Animal very desirous VII. The Sum of the foregoing
Paragraphs.
of his own Preservation; of himself liable to many wants; unable to support
himself without the help of other of his kind; and yet wonderfully fit in
Society to promote a common Good; but then he is malicious, insolent and easily
provoked, and not less prone to do mischief to his fellow than he is capable of
effecting it. Whence this must be inferred, that in order to his Preservation,
it is absolutely necessary, that he be sociable, that is, that he join with
those of his kind, and that he so behave himself toward them, that they may
have no justifiable cause to do him Harm, but rather to promote and secure to
him all his Interests.

THE Rules then of this Fellowship, VII. Law Natural defined.
which are the Laws of Human Society, whereby men are directed how to render
themselves useful Members thereof, and without which it falls to pieces, are
called the Laws of Nature.

FROM what has been said it appears, IX. The Means designed where the End is so.
that this is a fundamental Law of Nature, That every man ought, as much as in
him lies, to preserve and promote Society, that is, the Welfare of Mankind.
And, since he that designs the End, cannot but be supposed to design those
Means without which the End cannot be obtained, it follows that all such
Actions as tend generally and are absolutely necessary to the preservation of
this Society, are commanded by the Law of Nature; as on the contrary those that
disturb and dissolve it are forbidden by the same. All other Precepts are to be
accounted only Subsumptions, or Consequences upon this Universal Law, the
Evidence whereof is made out by that Natural Light which is engrafted in
Mankind.

NOW though these Rules do plainly X. A God and Providence.
contain that which is for the general Good; yet that the same may obtain the
force of Laws, it must necessarily be presupposed, that there is a God, who
governs all things by his Providence, and that He has enjoined us Mortals, to
observe these Dictates of our Reason as Laws, promulg'd by him to us by the
powerful Mediation of that Light which is born with us. Otherwise we might
perhaps pay some obedience to them in contemplation of their Vtility, so as we
observe the Directions of Physicians in regard to our Health, but not as Laws,
to the Constitution of which a Superior is necessary to be supposed, and that
such a one as has actually undertaken the Government of the other.

BUT that God is the Author of the XI. The same farther demonstrated.
Law of Nature, is thus demonstrated (considering Mankind only in its present
State, without enquiring whether the first Condition of us Mortals were
different from this, nor how the Change was wrought.) Whereas our Nature is so
framed, that Mankind cannot be preserved without a sociable Life, and whereas
it is plain that the Mind of Man is capable of all those Notions, which are
subservient to this purpose; and it is also manifest, that Men not only, like
the other Creatures, owe their Original to God, but that He governs them, let
their Condition be as it will, by the wisdom of his Providence. Hence it
follows, that it must be supposed to be the Will of God, that Man should make
use of those Faculties with which he is peculiarly endowed beyond the Brutes,
to the preservation of his own Nature; and consequently, that the Life of man
should be different from the lawless Life of the Irrational Creatures. And
since this cannot otherwise be achieved but by an Observance of the Law
Natural, it must be understood that there is from God an obligation laid upon
Man to pay obedience hereto, as a Means not invented by the Wit or imposed by
the Will of Men, nor capable of being changed by their Humors and
Inclinations; but expressly ordained by God himself in order to the
accomplishing this End. For he that obliges us to pursue such an End, must be
thought to oblige us to make use of those Means which are necessary to the
attainment thereof. And that the Social Life is positively enjoined by God upon
Men, this is a Proof, that in no other Animal is to be found any Sense of
Religion or Fear of a Deity, which seems not so much as to fall within the
Understanding of the ungovernable Brute; and yet it has the power to excite in
the minds of Men, not altogether profligate, the tenderest Sense; by which they
are convinced that by sinning against this Law Natural, they offend him who is
Lord of the Soul of Man, and who is to be feared, even where we are secure of
any Punishment from our Fellow Creatures.

THOUGH it be usually said, that we XII. This Law how written in Man's Heart.
have the knowledge of this Law from Nature itself, yet this is not so to be
taken, as if there were implanted in the Minds of men just newborn plain and
distinct Notions concerning what is to be done or avoided. But Nature is said
thus to teach us, partly because the knowledge of this Law may be attained by
the help of the Light of Reason; and partly because the general and most useful
points thereof are so plain and clear, that they at first sight force the
Assent, and get such root in the minds of men, that nothing can eradicate them
afterward; let wicked men take never so much pains to blunt the edge and
stupifie themselves against the Stings of their Consciences. And in this Sense
we find in Holy Scripture, that this Law is said to be written in the hearts of
men. So that having from our Childhood had a sense hereof instilled into us
together with other Learning in the usual Methods of Education, and yet not
being able to remember the punctual time when first they took hold of our
Understandings and possessed our Minds; we can have no other opinion of our
knowledge of this Law; but that it was connate to our Beings, or born together
and at the same time with our selves. The Case being the same with every man in
learning his Mother Tongue.

THOSE Duties which from the Law of XIII. Division of Natural Duties.
Nature are incumbent upon Man seem most aptly to be divided according to the
Objects about which they are conversant. With regard to which they are ranged
under three principal heads; the first of which gives us directions how by the
single dictates of right Reason Man ought to behave himself toward God; the
second contains our Duty toward our selves; and the third that toward other
men. But though those Precepts of the Law Natural which have a relation to
other men may primarily and directly be derived from that Sociality, which we
have laid down as a Foundation; yet even the Duties of Man toward God may be
indirectly deduced from thence, upon this account that the strongest obligation
to mutual Duties between man and man arises from Religion and a fear of the
Deity; so as that Man could not become a sociable Creature if he were not
imbued with Religion; and because Reason alone can go no farther in Religion
than as it is useful to promote the common Tranquillity and Sociality or
reciprocal Union in this Life: For so far forth as Religion procures the
Salvation of Souls, it proceeds from peculiar Divine Revelation. But the Duties
a man owes to Himself arise jointly from Religion and from the Necessity of
Society. So that no man is so Lord of himself, but that there are many things
relating to himself, which are not to be disposed altogether according to his
Will; partly because of the obligation he lies under of being a religious
Adorer of the Deity, and partly that he may keep himself a useful and
beneficial Member of Society.

CHAP. IV. Of the Duty of Man toward God, or, concerning Natural Religion.
THE Duty of Man toward God, I. Natural Religion, its parts.
so far as can be discovered by Natural Reason, is comprehended in these two;
that we have true Notions concerning him, or know him aright; and then that we
conform our Actions to his Will, or obey him as we ought. And hence Natural
Religion consists of two sorts of Propositions, to wit, Theoretical or
Speculative, and Practical or Active.

AMONGST those Notions that every man ought to have of God, the first of II.
That God is.
all is, that he firmly believe his Existence, that is, that there is indeed
some supreme and first Being, upon whom this Universe depends. And this has
been most plainly demonstrated by learned and wise men, from the Subordination
of Causes to one another, which must at last be found to have their Original in
somewhat that was before them all; from the nature of Motion; from the
consideration of this great Machin, the World, and from the like Arguments.
Which if any man denies himself to be able to comprehend, he is not therefore
to be excused for his Atheism. For all Mankind having been perpetually, as it
were, possessed of this persuasion, that man who undertakes to oppose it, ought
not only solidly to confute all those Arguments that are brought to prove a
God, but should advance Reasons for his own Assertion which may be more
plausible than those. And since by this Belief of the Deity the Weal of Mankind
may be supposed to have been hitherto preserved, he ought to show that Atheism
would better answer that end than sober Religion and the Worship of God. Now
seeing this can by no means be done, the Wickedness of those men who attempt
any way to eradicate this Persuasion out of the minds of men, is to be above
all things abominated, and restrained by the severest Punishments.

THE Second is, that God is the Creator III. God the Creator of the World.
of this Universe. For it being manifest from Reason, that none of these things
could exist of themselves, it is absolutely necessary that they should have
some supreme Cause; which Cause is the very same that we call GOD. And hence it
follows, that those men are cheated, who every now and then are putting upon us
Nature, forsooth, as the original Cause of all Things and Effects. For, if by
that Word they mean that Energy and power of acting which we find in every
thing, this is so far from being of any force to prove there is no God, that it
proves Him to be the Author of it self. But if by Nature they would have us
understand the Supreme Cause of all things, this is only out of a profane
Nicety to avoid the received and plain appellation of GOD. Those also are in a
great Error, who believe that any thing can be GOD, which is the Object of our
Senses, and particularly the Stars, among the rest. For the Substance of these
argues them all to derive their beings from somewhat else, and not to be the
first things in nature. Nor do they think less unworthily of God who call him
the Soul of the World. For the Soul of the World, let them conceive of it as
they please, must signify a Part of the World; and how can a Part of a thing
be the Cause of it, that is, be something before itself. But if by the Soul of
the World, they mean that first and invisible Being, from which all things
receive their Vigor, Life and Motion, they only obtrude upon us an obscure and
figurative Word for one that is plain and obvious. From hence also it appears,
that the World did not exist from all Eternity; this being contrary to the
nature of that which has a Cause. And he that asserts that the World is
Eternal, denies that it had any Cause of its being, and consequently denies God
himself.

THE Third is, that God governs the IV. God governs the World.
whole World, and particularly Mankind: Which plainly appears from the
admirable and constant Order which is to be seen in this Universe; and it is to
the same moral purpose whether a man deny that God is, or that he rules and
regards the affairs of Men; since either of them destroy all manner of
Religion. For let him be never so excellent in himself, it is in vain to fear or
worship him, if he be altogether regardless of us, and neither will nor can do
us either good or hurt.

THE Fourth is, that no Attribute can V. God infinitely perfect.
belong to God, which implies any manner of Imperfection. For it would be
absurd, He being the Cause and Source of all things, for any Creature of his to
think itself able to form a notion of any Perfection, of which he is not fully
possessed. Nay, His Perfection infinitely surmounting the Capacity of so mean a
Creature, it is most reasonable to express the same in negative rather than in
positive terms. Hence nothing is to be attributed to God that is finite or
determinate; because what is finite has always somewhat that is greater than
itself: and whatsoever is determinate or subject to Figure and Form, must
suppose Bounds and Circumscription. Neither can He be said to be distinctly and
fully comprehended or conceived in our Imagination, or by any Faculty of our
Souls; because whatsoever we can comprehend fully and distinctly in our Minds,
must be Finite. And yet when we pronounce God to be Infinite, we are not to
think we have a full Notion of Him, for by the word Infinite we denote nothing
in the Thing itself, but only declare the Impotence of our Understandings, and
we do, as it were, say, that we are not able to comprehend the Greatness of his
Essence Hence also it is, that we cannot rightly say of God that he has any
Parts, as neither that He is All any thing; for these are Attributes of things
finite; nor that he is contained in any Place, for that denotes limits and
bounds; nor that he moves or rests, for both those suppose him to be in a
place: So neither can any thing be properly attributed to God which intimates
Grief or any Passion, such as Anger, Repentance, Mercy. I say properly; because
when we find such things said of Him, they are to be supposed to have their
signification from the Effect and not from any Emotion in the Mind of the
Deity, the Expression being only conformed to Humane Passions and Capacities.
Nor may we say of Him ought that denotes the Want or Absence of any Good, as
Appetite, Hope, Concupiscence, Desire of any thing; for these imply Indigence
and consequently Imperfection, it not being supposable that one should desire,
hope or crave any thing of which he does not stand in some need. And so when
Understanding, Will, Knowledge, and Acts of the Senses, as Seeing, Hearing,
etc. are attributed to God, they are to be taken in a much more sublime sense,
than we conceive them in out selves. For the Will is a rational Desire; but
Desire, as is said before, presupposes the Want or Absence of something that is
agreeable and necessary. And Understanding and Sense implies some Operation
upon the Faculties of a Man, wrought by exterior Objects upon the Organs of his
Body and the Powers of his Soul; which being signs of a Power depending upon
some other thing, demonstrate it not to be most perfect.

LASTLY, it is utterly repugnant to the V. God but One.
Divine Perfection, to say there are more Gods than one; for, beside that the
admirable Harmony of the World argues it to have but one Governor, then God
must be finite, if there were more Gods of equal Power with himself and not
depending upon Him; and it involves a Contradiction to say, There are many
Infinites. Upon the whole then, it is most agreeable to Reason, when we attempt
to express the Attributes of God, either to make use of words of a Negative
signification, as, Infinite, Incomprehensible, Immense, Eternal, i. e. which
had no beginning nor shall have end; or Superlative, as most Excellent, most
Powerful, most Mighty, most Wise, etc. or Indefinite, as Good, Just, Creator,
King, Lord, etc. and this in such a sense as we would not think our selves to
express What he is; but only in some sort to declare our Admiration of Him, and
profess our Obedience to Him, which is a token of an humble Soul and of a Mind
paying all the Veneration it is capable of.

THE Propositions of Practical Natural VI. Internal Worship of God.
Religion are partly such as concern the Internal, and partly the External
Worship of God. The Internal Worship of God consists in honoring Him. Now
Honor is a high Opinion of another Power conjoined with Goodness: And the
Mind of Man is obliged from a consideration of this his Power and Goodness to
fill itself with all that Reverence toward him of which its Nature is
susceptible. Hence it is, that it is our Duty to love him as the Author and
Bestower of all manner of good; to hope in him, as from whom only all our
Happiness for the future does depend; to acquiesce in his Will, he doing all
things for the best, and giving us what is most expedient for us; to fear him,
as being most powerful, and the offending whom lays us liable to the greatest
Evil; lastly, in all things most humbly to obey him, as our Creator, our Lord,
and our Best and Greatest Ruler.

THE external Worship of God is chiefly VII. External Worship of God.
shown in these instances: That Man give thanks to God for so many good things
received of him: That, so far as is in his power, he transcribe God's Will into
his Actions, that is, that he obey his Commands: That he admire and celebrate
his Greatness: That he pour forth his Prayers before him, for the procuring of
Good and averting of Evil; for Prayer is a sign of Hope, and Hope is an
acknowledgment of the Divine Power and Goodness: That, if a just occasion shall
require, he call God only a Witness to his Oath, and that he most religiously
observe the same; upon the consideration that God is Omniscient and Almighty:
That he speak not of God otherwise than seriously and considerately; for that
is a Token of Awe, and Awe plainly confesses a Power: Hence it follows, that
the Name of God ought not to be used rashly and in vain; both which to do is
inconsiderate: Nor are we to swear, without a lawful occasion, for that is in
vain: Neither may we dispute nicely and over-familiarly concerning the Nature
of God and the Methods of his Providence; for nothing comes of this, but only
shows that we would measure Him and His Workings by the Scantling of our own
Reason. Add to these, that whatsoever is done for or given to God ought to be
the best in its kind, and fit to express the Honor we have for him. Also, that
we worship God not only in private, but openly and publicly in the sight of
men; for to do any thing in secret, seems to hint as if we were ashamed to act
it openly, but Worship publicly paid not only gives testimony of our own
devotion, but excites others by our example to do the like. And lastly, we are
with our utmost endeavor to observe the Laws of Nature; for as it is the
greatest Affront to slight the commands of God; so on the contrary, Obedience
to him is more acceptable than any Sacrifice. VIII. Eternal Salvation not
acquired by Natural Religionalone.


AND yet, after all, it must be confessed, that the Effects of this Natural
Religion, nicely considered and with regard to the present State of Mankind,
are concluded within the prospect of this Life; but that it is of no avail
toward procuring eternal Salvation. For Humane Reason left alone to itself
knows not that the Pravity which is so discernable in our Faculties and
Inclinations proceeded from Man's own Fault, and that hereby he becomes
obnoxious to the Wrath of God and to eternal Damnation: So that with the
guidance of this only, we are altogether ignorant of the necessity of a
Savior, and of his Office and Merit; as well as of the Promises made by God to
Mankind, and of the several other matters thereupon depending, by which alone,
it is plain from the holy Scriptures, that everlasting Salvation is procured to
mortal men.

IT may be worth the while, yet a IX. Religion the firmest Bond of Society.
little more distinctly to consider the Benefits which through Religion accrue
to Mankind; from whence it may appear, that It is in truth the utmost and
firmest bond of Humane Society. For in the Natural Liberty, if you take away
the Fear of a Divine Power, any man who shall have confidence in his own
Strength, may do what violences he please to others who are weaker than
himself, and will account Honesty, Modesty and Truth but as empty words; nor
will he be persuaded to do that which is right by any Arguments, but from a
sense of his own Inability to act the contrary. Moreover, lay aside Religion,
and the Internal Bands of Communities will be always slack and feeble; the Fear
of a temporal punishment, the Allegiance sworn to Superiors, and the Honor of
observing the same, together with a grateful consideration that by the favor
of the supreme Government they are defended from the Miseries attending a State
of Nature; all these, I say, will be utterly insufficient to contain unruly men
within the bounds of their Duty. For in this case that Saying would indeed have
place, He that values not Death, can never be compelled; because to those who
fear not God nothing can be more formidable than Death. He that can once bring
himself to despise this may attempt what he pleases upon those that are set
over him; and to tempt him so to do, he can hardly want some Cause or Pretense;
as, either to free himself of the uneasiness he seems to lie under by being
subject to another command, or that himself may enjoy those Advantages which
belong to him that possesses the Government; especially when he may easily
persuade himself, that his enterprise is just, either because He that at
present sits at the helm of Government is guilty of Mal-Administration, or that
himself thinks he could manage it by many degrees to better purpose. An
Occasion too cannot long be wanting for such Attempts, either from the Princes
want of Circumspection in the care of his Person (and indeed in such a state of
things who shall guard even the Guards themselves?) or from a powerful
Conspiracy, or, in time of foreign War, from a Defection to the Enemy. Beside
private men would be very prone to wrong one another; for the proceedings in
humane Courts of Judicature being governed by Proofs of Matter of Fact all
those Wickednesses and Villainies which could be secretly acted and without
Witnesses, if any thing were to be gained by them, would be accounted
Dexter^ties of Wit, in the practice of which a man might enjoy some
Self-satisfactio^ Again, no man would be found tha^ would do works of Charity
or of Friendship, except with probable expectation o^ Glory or Profit. From
whence it would follow, that, supposing no Punishmen^ from above, one man not
being able to place any solid confidence in the Troth of another, they must
every one always live anxiously in a mutual Fear and Jealousy, lest they be
cheated or harmed each by his Neighbor. The Governors also would have as
little inclination, as the Governed, to Actions that are brave and Honorable;
for those that govern, not being obliged by any tie of Conscience, would put
all Offices, and even Justice it self to sale; and in every thing seek their
own private Profit by the Oppression of their Subjects; from whom they being
always fearful of a Rebellion, they must needs know there can be no surer means
to preserve themselves, than by rendering them as heartless and as weak as
possible. The Subjects also, on the other side, standing in fear of the
violences of their Rulers, will always be seeking opportunities to rebel though
at the same time they must be mutually distrustful and fearful of each other.
The same would be the Case of married persons; upon any slight Quarrel, they
would be suspicious lest one should make away the other by Poison or some such
clandestine way; and the whole Family would be liable to the like danger. For
it being plain, that without Religion there will be no Conscience, it would not
be easy to discover such secret Villainies; they being such as mostly are
brought to light by the incessant prickings of the Conscience, and internal
horrors breaking forth into outward Indications. From all which it appears, how
much it is the Interest of Mankind, that all means be used to check the
spreading of Atheism in the world; and with what vain Folly those men are
possessed, who think to get the reputation of being notable Politcians, by
being seemingly inclined to Looseness and Irreligion.

CHAP. V. Of the Duty of a Man toward Himself.
ALTHOUGH the Love of Himself be I. Man liable to Obligation to Himself.
so deeply fixed in the mind of Man, as to put him always under a solicitous
care of Himself, and upon endeavors by all means to procure his own advantage;
so as, upon consideration hereof, it would seem superfluous to find out Laws to
oblige him to the same: yet in other respects it is necessary, that he be bound
to the observation of some certain Rules touching Himself. For Man not being
born for Himself alone, but being therefore furnished with so many excellent
Endowments, that he may set forth his Creators Praise, and be rendered a fit
Member of Humane Society; it follows hence, that it is his Duty, to cultivate
and improve those Gifts of his Creator which he finds in himself, that they
answer the end of their Donor; and to contribute all that lies in his power to
the benefit of Humane Society. Thus, though true it is, that the Ignorance of
any man is his own Shame and his own Loss; yet we accuse not the Master of
Injustice, who chastises his Scholar for Negligence in not learning those
Sciences of which he is capable. II. Two parts of M^n, (...) the Mind.


AND since Man consists of two parts, a Soul and a Body, whereof the first
supplies the part of a Directer, the other that of an Instrument or subordinate
Minister, so that our Actions are all performed by the Guidance of the Mind and
by the Ministration of the Body; we are hence obliged to take care of both, but
especially of the former: And that is above all things so to be formed and
accommodated as to bear a fit part in the Social Life, and to be imbued with a
Sense and Love of Duty and Decency. Then we are to be take our selves to the
learning of somewhat proper to our Capacity and our Condition in the world; or
else we shall become a useless burden to the earth, cumbersome to our selves,
and troublesome to others. And after all we are in due time to make choice of
some honest State of Life, agreeable to our natural Inclinations, the abilities
of our Body and Mind, Extraction, or Wealth; or according as the just Authority
of our Parents, the Commands of our Superiors, Occasion or Necessity shall
require. III. 2. The Body.


BUT the Soul being supported by and depending upon the Body, it is necessary
that the strength thereof be continued and confirmed by conven^^^t Nourishment
and Exercise; and that it be not weakened by any Intemperate eating or
drinking; nor debilitated by unseasonable and needless Labors, or otherwise.
Upon this account Gluttony, Drunkenness, the immoderate use of Women and the
like are to be avoided: And besides since unbridled and exorbitant Passions not
only give frequent occasion to disturb Human Society, but are very hurtful even
to the person himself; we ought to take care with our utmost to quell them and
subject them to Reason. And because many dangers may be escaped, if we
encounter them with Courage, we are to cast off all effeminacy of the Mind, and
to put on Resolution against all the terrible appearances that any Event may
set before us.

AND yet because no man could give IV. Man not Lord of his own Life.
himself Life, but it must be accounted as the bounteous Favor of God, it
appears that Man is by no means vested with such a power over his own Life, as
that he may put an end to it when he pleases; but he ought to tarry, till he is
called off by Him who placed him in this Station. Indeed since Men both can and
ought to be serviceable to one another, and since there are some sorts of
Labor or an over-straining in any, which may so waste the strength of a man,
that Old Age and Death may come on much sooner than if he had led an easy and
painless Life; there is no doubt but that a man may without any contravention
to this Law, choose that way of living which may with some probability make his
Life the shorter, that so be may become more useful to Mankind. And whereas
oftentimes the Lives of many will be lost, except some number of men expose
themselves to a Probability of losing their own on their behalf, in this case
the lawful Governor has power to lay an Injunction on any private man under
the most grievous penalties, not to decline by Flight such danger of losing his
Life. Nay farther, he may of his own accord provoke such danger, provided there
are not Reasons more forcible for the contrary, and by thus adventuring he has
hopes to save the Lives of others, and those others are such as are worthy so
dear a Purchase. For it would be silly for any man to engage his Life together
with another to no purpose, or for a person of Value to die for the
preservation of a paltry Rascal. But for any other cases, there seems nothing
to be required by the Law of Nature, by which he should be persuaded to prefer
another man's Life before his own, but that all things rightly compared, every
man is allowed to be most dear to himself. And indeed, all those who
voluntarily put an end to their own Lives, either as tired with the many
Troubles which usually accompany this Mortal State; or from an Abhorrence of
Indignities and Evils, which yet would not render them scandalous to Humane
Society; or through Fear of Pains or Torments, by enduring which with fortitude
they might become useful Examples to others; or out of a vain Ostentation of
their Fidelity and Bravery; all these, I say, are to be certainly reputed
Sinners against the Law of Nature.

BUT whereas it often happens that V. Self-Defence.
this Self-Preservation, which the tenderest Passion and exactest Reason thus
recommends to Mankind, does seem to interfere with our Precepts concerning
Society, then when our own Safety is brought into jeopardy by another, so far
that either we must perish or submit to some very grievous mischief, or else we
must repel the Aggressor by force and by doing him harm: Therefore we are now
to deliver, With what Moderation the Defense of our selves is to be tempered.
This Defense of our selves then will be such as is, either without any harm to
him from whom we apprehended the mischief, by rendering any Invasion of us
formidable to him and full of danger; or else by hurting or destroying him. Of
the former way there can be no doubt, but that it is lawful and altogether
blameless:

BUT the latter may admit of scruple, VI. Self Defense by hurting another.
because Mankind may seem to have an equal Loss, if the Aggressor be killed, or
if I lose my Life; and because one in the same Station with my self will be
destroyed, with whom it was my Duty to have lived in Civil Society: Beside that
a forcible Defense may be the occasion of greater outrages than if I should be
take my self to slight, or patiently yield my Body to the Invader. But all
these are by no means of such weight as to render this sort of Defense
unlawful. For when I am dealing fairly and friendly with another, it is
requisite that he show himself ready to do the like, or else he is not a fit
Subject of such good Offices from me. And because the End of the Law of Society
is the Good of Mankind, therefore the Sense thereof is so to be taken, as
effectually to preserve the Welfare of every Individual or particular man. So
tha^ ^f another man make an attempt upon my Life, there is no Law that commands
me to forgo my own Safety, that so he may practice his Malice with Impunity:
And he that in such case is hurt or slain, must impute his Mischief to his own
Wickedness, which set me under a Necessity of doing what I did. Indeed
otherwise, whatsoever Good we enjoy either from the bounty of Nature or the
help of our own Industry, had been granted to us in vain, if we were not at
liberty to oppose the Violences of Russians who would wrongfully ravish all
from us; and honest men would be but a ready Prey for Villains, if they were
not allowed to make use of Force in defense of themselves against the others
Insults. Upon the whole then, it would tend to the Destruction of Mankind, if
Self-Defence even with Force were prohibited to us.

NOT however that hence it follows, VII. Extremities last to be used
that as soon as any Injury is threatened us, we may presently have recourse to
Extremities; but we must first try the more harmless Remedies; for instance, we
must endeavor to keep out the Invader by cutting off his Access to us; to
withdraw into strong places; and to admonish him to desist from his outrageous
Fury. And it is also the Duty of a prudent man to put up a slight Wrong, if it
may conveniently be done, and to remit somewhat of his Right, rather than by an
unseasonable opposition of the Violence to expose himself to a greater danger;
especially if that upon which the Attempt is made, be such as may easily be
made amends for or repaired. But in cases where by these or the like means I
cannot secure my self, in order to it I am at liberty to have recourse even to
Extremities.

BUT that we may clearly judge, whether VIII. Two sorts of persons in this Case.
The first.
a man contains himself within the bounds of an unblamable Defense of himself;
it is first to be examined, whether the person be one who is in a state of
Natural Liberty or subject to no man, or one who is obnoxious to some Civil
Power. In the first Case, if another shall offer violence to me, and cannot be
brought to change his malicious mind and live quietly, I may repel him even by
killing him. And this not only when he shall attempt upon my Life, but if he
endeavor only to wound or hurt me, or but to take away from me what is mine,
without meddling with my Body. For I have no assurance but that from these
lesser Injuries he may proceed to greater; and he that has once professed
himself my Enemy, can no longer pretend any Right in his own defense, but that
I may resist him after what manner I please. And indeed the Sociality necessary
to Human Life would become unpracticable, if a man may not make use even of
Extremities against him who shall irreclamably persist in the commission though
but of meaner Wrongs. For at that rate the most modest persons would be the
continual Laughing Stock of the vilest Rakehels. Farther, in this State, I may
not only oppose with force the present danger threatened, but having repelled
that, I may pursue the Invader to such purpose, as to render my self
sufficiently secure of him for the future. Concerning which Security this is to
be observed. If a man having done me wrong, afterward of his own accord
repenting of what he has done, shall beg my Pardon and offer Reparation of the
Damage, I am then obliged to be reconciled to him upon his faithful Promise;
because it is the most certain Token of an amendment of Mind, if a man repent of
himself and beg pardon. But he who then only pretends Repentance when he wants
Power to prosecute his Violences, is not safely trusted for his bare Word; and
therefore from such a one all Possibilities of doing mischief are to be cut
off, or some Confinement must be laid upon him, that so he may never after
become formidable.

BUT in the second State, those who live IX. The second.
Subjects to a Civil Power, may then only be take themselves to Violence in the
Defense of themselves, when the Time and Place will not admit of any
application to the Magistrate for his assistance in repelling the Injury, by
which man's Life, or ought that is as valuable as Life, or some Good which can
never be repaired is manifestly endangered; and this is to be used no farther
than for the avoiding the Mischief; the rest being left to the Judgment of the
Magistrate, to wit, Punishing and Caution that the Offender do so no more.

IT is moreover not only lawful for us X. An Aggressor by mistake.
to defend our selves against such a one as out of an evil design against us
shall offer us a Mischief, but against him also who shall do so by Mistake. For
instance, if a Mad man shall set upon me, or one that takes me for another
person for whom he has a grudge. For it is enough, that no man has a Right to
assault or kill me, and I am not under any Obligation to suffer Death for
nothing.

CONCERNING the Time in which XI. Time for Self-Defence. The first Case.
the Defense of our selves may be made, it is to be two ways considered, as in
the two Cases just before laid down. Where each party live in their Natural
Liberty, although it may and ought to be presumed, that they will mutually
comply with the Duties of the Law of Nature; yet considering the Pravity of
Humane Inclinations, they are not obliged to be so secure of themselves, but
they may seasonably take care of their Safety by innocent Methods of Defense;
as suppose, by fortifying their Avenues against any that shall pretend to act
hostilites upon them; by providing Ammunition and listing Men; by making
Confederacies; by having a watchful Eye upon the designs of others, and the
like. But this Suspicion, which has its rise from the Pravity of Humane Nature,
is not so to be improved, as to give occasion to oppress others by Violence
under pretext of Self-Defence; no, not tho I see my Neighbors Power to grow too
great, especially if such Power has its increase from harmless Industry, or be
the effect of the Bounty of Providence, without the Oppression of others. Nay,
if such Neighbor shall, beside his Power of hurting, demonstrate also a Design
so to do not to me, but to another, I may not presently without any more ado
invade him in my own name; unless I am under an Alliance to assist that other
who is assaulted by this greater Power. And then it goes farther in this Case,
and makes it expedient to use greater Vigor in my Resistance, if it be
probable, that as soon as this great Power has dispatched the other, I am like
to be next invaded, and that the first Conquest he shall make is to be the
Instrument of another which he intends. But again when it plainly appears, that
another is making preparation to invade me, though he have not openly declared
his Intention, I may immediately enter upon violent Methods for my own Defense,
and anticipate the Aggressor; supposing that he would not lay by his hostile
Designs upon any friendly Advice, or that the proposing such Advice may prove
of ill consequence to my affairs. So that in this case he is to be accounted
the Aggressor, who first meditates mischief to his Neighbor, and makes
preparation to that purpose; and he shall be interpreted to proceed by way of
Self-Defence, who acting with greater expedition shall surprise the former,
before he can bring his Design to perfection. For it is not absolutely
necessary to Self-Defence that I receive the first stroke, or that I only ward
off and avoid the Blows that are aimed at me.

BUT among men who live in a Community, XII. The second.
the liberties for Self-Defence ought not to be near so large. For here, though
I may know for certain, that another man has armed himself in order to set upon
me, or has openly threatened to do me a mischief; this will by no means bear me
out in assaulting him; but he is to be informed against before the Civil
Magistrate, who is to require Security for his good behavior. The use of
Extremities in repelling the Force being then only justifiable, when I am
already set upon and reduced to such streights, that I have no opportunity to
require the Protection of the Magistrate or the Help of my Neighbors; and even
then I am not to make use of Violence, that by the slaughter of my Adversary I
may revenge the Injury, but only because without it my own Life cannot be out
of danger. Now the instant of Time, when any man may with impunity destroy
another in his own defense, is, when the Aggressor being furnished with Weapons
for the purpose and showing plainly a design upon my Life, is got into a place
where he is very capable of doing me a mischief, allowing me some time, in
which it may be necessary to prevent rather than be prevented; although in foro
humano a little Exceeding be not much minded in regard of the great disturbance
such a danger must be thought to raise in the Spirit of Man. And the Space of
Time in which a man may use Force in his own defense, is so long as till the
Assailant is either repulsed, or has withdrawn of his own accord, (whether in
that moment repenting of his wicked design, or for that he sees he is like to
miss of his aim) so that for the present he cannot hurt us any more, and we
have an opportunity of retiring into a place of Safety. For as for Revenge of
the wrong done, and Caution for future Security, that belongs to the Care of
the Civil Magistrate, and is to be done only by his Authority.

NEVERTHELESS though true it is, XIII. Allowances and Limitations.
that we ought not to take away another man's Life, when it is possible for us
after a more convenient way to avoid the Danger we are in; yet in consideration
of that great perturbation of Mind, which is wont to be occasioned upon the
appearance of imminent Mischief, it is not usual to be over-rigorous in the
examination of these matters; for it is not likely that a man trembling under
the apprehension of Danger should be able to find out so exactly all those ways
of escaping, which to one who sedately considers the Case may be plain enough.
Hence though it is Rashness for me to come out of a safe Hold to him who shall
challenge me; yet, if another shall set upon me in an open place, I am not
straight obliged to be take my self to Flight, except there be at hand such a
place of Refuge as I may withdraw into without peril: Neither am I always bound
to retire; because then I turn my defenseless Back, and there may be hazard of
falling; beside that having once lost my posture, I can hardly recover it
again. But as the Plea of Self-Defence is allowed to that person who shall thus
encounter Danger when he is going about his lawful business, whereas if he had
staid at home he had been safe enough: so it is denied to him who being
challenged to a Duel, shall by appearing set himself in that condition, that
except he kill his Adversary, himself must be slain. For the Laws having
forbidden his venturing into such Danger, any excuse on account thereof is not
to be regarded. XIV. Defense of Members.


WHAT may be done for the defense of Life may also for the Members; so as that
he shall be acquitted for an honest man who shall kill a Russian, that perhaps
had no farther Intention than to maim him or give him some grievous wound: For
all Mankind does naturally abhor to be maimed or wounded; and the cutting off
any, especially of the more noble Members, is often not of much less value than
Life it self; beside, we are not sure beforehand, whether upon such wounding
and maiming Death may not follow; and to endure this is a sort of Patience that
surpasses the ordinary Constancy of Man, to which no man is regularly obliged
by the Laws, only to gratify the outrageous humor of a Rogue.

MOREOVER, what is lawful to be XV. Defense of Chastity.
done for preservation of Life, is adjudged to be so for Chastity. Since there
cannot be a more horrid Abuse offered to an honest Woman, than to force her out
of that which being kept undefiled is esteemed the greatest Glory of their Sex;
and to put upon her a Necessity of raising an Offspring to her Enemy out of
her own blood.

AS for Defense of Goods or Estate, this XVI. Defense of Goods Estate.
may, among those who are in a State of Natural Liberty, go as far as the
Slaughter of the Invader, provided what is in controversy be not a Thing
contemptible. For without things necessary we cannot keep our selves alive; and
he equally declares himself my Enemy, who wrongfully seizes my Estate, as he
that attempts upon my Life. But in Communities, where what is ravished from us
may with the assistance of the Civil Anthority be recovered, this is not
regularly allowed; unless in such case when he that comes to take away what we
have, cannot be brought to Justice; on which account it is, that we may
lawfully kill Highway-men and Night-robbers.

AND thus much for Self-Defence in XVI. Self-Defence in him that first injured.
those who without provocation are unjustly invaded by others. But for him who
has first done an Injury to another, he can only then rightly defend himself
with force and hurt the other again, when having repented of what he has done,
he has offered Reparation of the Wrong and Security for the future; yet he who
was first injured shall out of ill nature refuse the same, and endeavor to
revenge himself by violence.

Lastly, Self-Preservation is of so much XVIII. Self-Preservation in cases of
Necessity.
regard, that if it cannot otherwise be had, in many cases it exempts us from
our obedience to the standing Laws; and on this score it is, that Necessity is
said to have no Law. For seeing Man is naturally inspirited with such an
earnest desire to preserve himself, it can hardly be presumed that there is any
Obligation laid upon him, to which he is to sacrifice his own Safety. For
though not only God, but the Civil Magistrate, when the Necessity of affairs
requires it, may lay upon us so strict an Injunction, that we ought rather to
die than vary a tittle from it; yet the general Obligation of Laws is not held
to be so rigorous. For the Legislators, or those who first introduced Rules for
Mankind to act by, making it their design to promote the Safety and common Good
of Men, must regularly be supposed to have before their eyes the condition of
Human Nature, and to have considered how impossible it is for a man not to shun
and keep off all things that tend to his own Destruction. Hence those Laws
especially called Positive, and all Human Institutions are judged to except
Cases of Necessity; or, not to oblige, when the Observation of them must be
accompanied with some Evil which is destructive to Human Nature, or not
tolerable to the ordinary Constancy of men; unless it be expressly so ordered,
or the Nature of the thing requires, that even that also must be undergone. Not
that Necessity justifies the breach of a Law and commission of Sin; but it is
presumed from the favorable intention of the Legislators and the consideration
of Man's Nature, that Cases of Necessity are not included in the general Words
of a Law. This will be plain by an Instance or two.

THOUGH otherwise Man have no such XIX. Cutting off Members.
Power over his own Members, as that he may lose or maim any of them at his
pleasure; yet he is justifiable in cutting off a Gangrened Limb, in order to
save the whole Body, or to preserve those parts which are sound, or lest the
other Members be rendered useless by a dead and cumbersom piece of Flesh.

IF in a Shipwreck more men leap into XX. One lost to save many.
the Boat than it is capable of carrying, and no one has more right than
another to it; they may draw Lots who shall be cast overboard; and if any man
shall refuse to take his chance, he may be thrown over without any more ado, as
one that seeks the destruction of all.

IF two happen into imminent danger of XXI. One lost to save Self.
their Lives, where both must perish; one may, as he sees good, hasten the
death of the other, that he may save himself. For instance, If I, who am a
skilful Swimmer, should fall into some deep Water with another who could not
swim at all, and he clings about me; I not being strong enough to carry him off
and my self too, I may put him off with force, that I may not be drowned
together with him; though I might for a little while be able to keep him up. So
in a Shipwreck, if I have got a Plank which will not hold two, and another
shall endeavor to get upon it, which if he does, we are both like to be
drowned, I may keep him off with what violence I please. And so if two be
pursued by an Enemy meaning to kill them, one may be shutting a Gate or drawing
a Bridge after him, secure himself, and leave the other in great probability of
losing his Life, if it be not possible to save both.

CASES of Necessity may happen, where XXII. Another destroyed or hurt to the
same end.
one may indirectly put another in danger of Death, or some great Mischief,
when at the same time he means no harm to the Person, but only for his own
Preservation he is forced upon some Action, which probably may do the other a
damage; always supposing that he had rather have chosen any other way, if he
could have found it, and that he make that damage as little as he can. Thus, if
a stronger man than I pursues me to take away my Life, and one meets me in a
narrow way through which I must fly, if upon my request he will not stand out
of the way, or he has not time or room so to do, I may throw him down and go
over him, though it be very likely that by the fall he will be much hurt;
except he should be one who has such peculiar relation to me, that I ought for
his sake rather to surrender my self to the Danger. And if he who is in the way
cannot, upon my speaking to him, get out of the way, suppose being lame or a
Child, I shall be excused who try to leap over him rather than to expose my
self to my Enemy by delaying. But if any one shall out of wantonness or cross
humor hinder me or deny to give me the liberty of escaping, I may immediately
set upon him and throw him down. Now those who in these Cases get any Harm, are
to look upon it not as a Fault in the Person that did it, but as an unavoidable
Misfortune.

IF a man, not through his own fault, XXIII. Case of extreme Want.
happen to be in extreme want of Victuals and Clothes necessary to preserve him
from the Cold, and cannot procure them from those who are wealthy and have
great store, either by entreaties, or by offering their value, or by proposing
to do work equivalent; he may without being chargeable with Theft or Rapine
furnish his Necessities out of their Abundance either by force or secretly,
especially if he do so with a design to pay the Price, as soon as he shall have
an opportunity. For it is the Duty of the rich man to succor one in such a
needy condition. And though regularly what depends upon Courtesy ought by no
means to be extorted by Force, yet the Extreme Necessity alters the Case, and
makes these things as claimable as if they were absolutely due by a formal
Obligation. But it is first incumbent upon the Necessitous person to try all
ways to supply his Wants with the Consent of the Owner, and he is to take care
that the Owner be not thereby reduced to the same Extremity, nor in a little
time like to be so; and that Restitution be made, especially if the Estate of
the other be such, as that he cannot well bear the loss.

Lastly, THE Necessity of our own affairs XXIV. Destroying other men's Goods.
seems sometimes to justify our destroying the Goods of other men; provided
still, that we do not bring such Necessity upon our selves by our own
Miscarriage; that there can not be any better way found; that we cast not away
that of our Neighbors which is of greater value in order to save our own which
is of less; that we be ready to pay the Price, if the Goods would not otherwise
have been destroyed, or to bear our share in the Damage done, if the Case were
so that his must have perished together with ours, but now by their Loss ours
are preserved. And this sort of Equity is generally found in the Law-Merchant.
So also in case of Fire, I may pull down or blow up my Neighbors House,
provided those whose Houses are by this means saved, do make good the Damage
proportionably.

CHAP. VI. Of the Duty of one man to another, and first of doing no Injury to
any man.
WE come now to those Duties which I. Reciprocal Duties of two sorts.
are to be practiced by one man toward another. Some of these proceed from
that common Obligation which it has pleased the Creator to lay upon all men in
general; others take their Original from some certain Humane Institutions, or
some peculiar adventitious or accidental State of men. The first of these are
always to be practiced by every man toward all men; the latter obtain only
among those who are in such peculiar Condition or State. Hence those may be
called Absolute, and these Conditional.

AMONG those Duties we call Absolute, II. No Wrong to be done.
or those of every man toward every man, this has the first place, that one do
no wrong to the other; and this is the amplest Duty of all, comprehending all
Men as such, and it is at the same time the most easy, as consisting only in
an omission of acting, unless when unreasonable Desires and Lusts are to be
curbed. It is also the most necessary, because without it Human Society cannot
be preserved. For I can live quietly with him that does me no good, or with
whom I have no manner of Correspondence, provided he do me no harm. Nay this is
all we desire from the greatest part of Mankind, the doing mutually good
Offices lying but between a few. But I can by no means live peaceably with him
that wrongs me; Nature having instilled into every man such a tender Love of
himself and what is his own, that he cannot but by all means repel those men
who shall make any attempt upon one or to other.

BY this Duty are fenced not only what III. So to do, a Crime.
we have by the Bounty of Nature; such as our Laws, Bodies, Limbs, Chastity,
Liberty: but whatsoever by any Humane Institution or Compact becomes our
Propriety; so as by this it is forbidden to take away, spoil, damage or
withdraw in whole or in part from our Use whatsoever by a lawful Title we are
possessed of. Whence all those Actions are hereby made Crimes, by which any
Wrong is done to others, as Murder, Wounding, Striking, Rapine, Theft, Fraud,
Violence, whether practiced directly or indirectly, mediately or immediately,
and the like.

FARTHER, hence it follows, That if IV. Reparation of Wrongs.
any Harm or Damage be done to another, he who is truly chargeable as Author of
the Wrong, ought as far as in him lies, to make Reparation. For otherwise the
Precept would be to no purpose, That no man shall be hurt nor receive damage;
if when he has actually sustained a Mischief, he must put it up quietly, and he
who did the Injury shall enjoy securely the Fruit of his Violence, without
refunding. And setting aside this Necessity of Restitution the Pravity of Man's
Nature is such, that they would never forbear injuring one another, and it
would be very hard for him who has suffered Wrong, to compose his mind so as to
live peaceably with the other, till Reparation were made.

THOUGH the word Damage may seem V. Damage how to be accounted.
properly to belong to loss in Goods, yet we take it here in the large sense,
that it may signify all manner of Harm, spoiling, diminishing, or taking away
what is already ours, or intercepting that which by an absolute Right we ought
to have, whether it be bestowed upon us by Nature, or given us by Man and
humane Laws; or lastly, the Omission or Denial of paying what by a perfect
Obligation is due to us. But if such Payment only be stopped, as was not due by
any perfect Obligation, it is not looked upon as a Damage that ought to be made
good; for it would be unmeet to account it a Wrong suffered, if I receive not
such Stipends, and unreasonable for me to demand as my Right, what I cannot
expect from another but under the name of a Free Gift, and which I can by no
means call my own, till after I have received it.

UNDER the head of Damage liable to VI. Damage in expectations.
Reparation, we must also comprize not only a Mischief, Loss or Interception of
what is ours or due to us; but also such Profits, as do naturally accrue from
the thing, or have already accrew'd, or may fairly be expected, if it was the
right of the Owner to receive them; allowing still the Expenses necessary for
gathering in such Profits. Now the Value of Profits thus in Expectation only is
to be high or low according as they are certain or uncertain, and will be
sooner or later received. And lastly, that also is to be called Damage, which
upon a hurt given, does of Natural Necessity follow thereon.

ONE man may damnifie another not VII. Damage mediately or immediately done.
only immediately or by himself, but also by others: And it may happen that a
Damage immediately done by one man may be chargeable upon another, because he
contributed somewhat to the Action either by doing what he ought not, or not
doing what he ought to have done. Sometimes among several persons who concurred
to the same Fact, one is to be accounted the Principal, others but Accessories;
sometimes they may all be equally Parties. Concerning whom it is to be
observed, that they are so far obliged to repair the Wrong as they were indeed
the Causes thereof, and by so much as they contributed to doing all or part of
the Damage. But where any one did not actually assist in the Trespass
committed; nor was antecedently a Cause of its being done, nor had any
Advantage by it; there though upon occasion of the Injury done, he may be
blameworthy, yet he cannot be any ways obliged to Restitution: and of this
sort are such as rejoice at their Neighbors Misfortunes, such as commend the
Commission of Outrages, or are ready to excuse them, who wish or favor the
practice of them, or who flatter the Actors therein.

WHERE many have joined in an Action VIII. Damage done by many.
from whence Damage has come, he in the first place shall be chargeable with
Reparation, by whose Command or powerful Influence the others were put upon the
Action; and he who immediately perpetrates the thing, to which he could not
decline his helping hand, shall be esteemed but only as the Instrument. He who
without any constraint concerned himself in the Enterprise shall be chiefly
liable, and then the rest who assisted in it. But this so, as that if
Restitution be made by the former, then the latter are cleared, (which in Penal
Cases is otherwise.) If many in combination have committed an Injury, all are
obliged for each one single and each one single is obliged for all; so as that
if all are seized, they must each pay their shares to make good the Loss; and
if all escape but one, he shall be obliged to pay for all; but where some
amongst 'em are insolvent, those who are able must pay the whole. If many not
in combination concur to the same thing, and it can plainly be discerned how
much each of them contributed to the doing of the Mischief; each shall only be
accountable for so much as himself was the Cause of. But if one shall pay the
whole, they are all discharged for the same.

NOT only he who out of an evil design IX. Damage by Negligence.
does wrong to another, is bound to Reparation of the Damage, but he who does
so through Negligence or Miscarriage, which he might easily have avoided. For
it is not a slight part of the Duties of Society, to manage our selves so
circumspectly, that our Conversation become not mischievous or intolerable to
our Neighbor; and often men are by peculiar Obligations tied to use the utmost
Diligence in certain affairs; nay, if the Nature of the Case did require the
exactest Care, then a very little blame shall suffice to make Reparation to be
due: Unless the fault lay rather more in him who was harmed than in him who did
it; or unless some great Perturbation of mind or some Circumstance in the
matter would not allow the most deliberate Circumspection; as, when a Soldier
in the heat of Battle in handling his Arms shall hurt his Comrade.

BUT he who by mere Chance, without X. Damage by Chance.
any Fault of his own, shall do harm to another, is not obliged to Reparation.
Because nothing in this Case being done which can be chargeable upon him, there
is no reason, why he who unwillingly did a Mischief should rather suffer, than
he to whom it was done.

IT is also agreeable to Natural Equity, XI. Damage by a Vassal.
if my Vassal, though not by my desire, do Wrong to another, that either I make
it good or surrender him to the Party injured. For it is true this Vassal is
naturally obliged to Reparation; but he not having wherewith, and his Body
being the Property of his Patroon, it is but just that such Patroon either
repair the Loss sustained, or deliver him up. Otherwise such a Bondsman would be
at liberty to do what Mischief he listed, if Amends cannot be had from him,
because he is the Owner of nothing, no not of the Body he bears; nor of his
Patroon. For, let him beat the Slave never so severely, or punish him with the
closest Imprisonment, this gives no Restitution to the person wronged.

THE same seems to be just in the Case XII. Damage by Cattle.
of our Cattle or any living Creature we keep, that, when they against our
Wills and by a motion of their own contrary to their Natures, do a Mischief to
another, we either make Reparation or give up the same. For, if I am hurt by
any Animal that lives in irs Natural Liberty, I have a Right, by what means I
can, to give my self satisfaction by taking or by killing it; and this Right
doubtless cannot be taken away by its being in the possession of another. And
whereas the Owner of this Animal makes some Gain by it, but I have suffered
Loss by the same; and whereas the Reparation of Wrong is more to be favored
than procuring Gain; it appears that I may with reason demand Satisfaction from
the Owner, or if the Animal be not worth so much, then that it at least be
delivered to me on account of the Damage sustained.

THUS then he who without any evil XIII. Recapitulation.
Intention does an Injury to another, ought of his own accord to offer
Reparation, and to protest himself to have done it unwillingly, lest the
injured person take him for his Enemy and endeavor to retaliate the Mischief.
But he who with a naughty design shall wrong his Neighbor is not only bound to
offer Reparation, but to declare his Repentance for the Fact and to beg Pardon.
On the other side, the wronged party having Satisfaction made him, is obliged
upon the Repentance of the other and at his Request to grant him Pardon. For he
that will not be content when Reparation is made him, and a fit Submission, but
still seeks to revenge himself by force, does nothing else but gratify his own
ill Nature, and so disturbs the common Peace of Men without cause. And upon
that account Revenge is by the Law of Nature condemned, as proposing no other
end, than doing Mischief to those who have hurt us, and pleasing our selves in
their Sufferings. Moreover, men ought to be the more apt to pardon each others
Offenses upon a consideration how often themselves transgress the Laws of God,
and have therefore daily so much need of begging Forgiveness of Him.

CHAP. VII. The Natural Equality of Men to be acknowledged.
MAN is a Creature not only most solicitous I. Equality of Mankind.
for the Preservation of Himself; but has of Himself also so nice an
Estimation, that to diminish any thing thereof does frequently move in him as
great Indignation as if a Mischief were done to his Body or Estate. Nay there
seems to him to be somewhat of Dignity in the appellation of Man, so that the
last and most efficacious Argument to curb the Arrogance of insulting men, is
usually, I am not a Dog, but a Man as well as your self. Since then Humane
Nature is the same in us all, and since no man will or can cheerfully join in
Society wity any, by whom he is not at least to be esteemed equally as a Man
and as a partaker of the same Common Nature: It follows that, among those
Duties which men owe to each other, this obtain the second place, That every
man esteem and treat another, as naturally equal to himself, or as one who is a
Man as well as he.

Now this Equality of Mankind does II. Where this Equality consists.
not alone consist in this, that men of ripe age have almost the same Strength,
or if one be weaker he may be able to kill the stronger, either by Treachery,
or Dexterity, or by being better furnished with Weapons; but in this, that
though Nature may have accomplished one man beyond another with various
endowments of Body and Mind; yet nevertheless he is obliged to an observation
of the Precepts of the Law Natural toward the meaner person, after the same
manner as himself expects the same from others; and has not therefore any
greater liberty given him to insult upon his Fellows. As on the other side the
Niggardliness of Nature or Fortune cannot of themselves set any man so low, as
that he shall be in a worse condition as to the enjoyment of Common Right than
others. But what one man may rightfully demand or expect from another, the same
is due to others also (Circumstances being alike) from him; and whatsoever one
shall deem reasonable to be done by others, the like it is most just he
practice himself: For the Obligation of maintaining Sociality among Mankind
equally binds every man; neither may one man more than another violate the Law
of Nature in any part. Not but that there are other popular Reasons which
illustrate this Equality; to wit, that we are all descended of the same Stock;
that we all are born, nourished and die after the same manner; and that God has
not given any of us a certain Assurance that our happy Condition in the World
shall not at any time be changed. Besides, the Precepts of the Christian
Religion tell us that God favors not man for his Nobility, Power or Wealth,
but for sincere Piety, which may as well be found in a mean and humble man, as
in those of high degree.

Now from this Equality it follows, III. Recompense for Service done.
that he who would make use of other men's labor for his own benefit, ought to
be ready to make a Recompense. For he who requires that other men should do him
kindnesses, and expects himself to be free from doing the like, must be of
opinion that those other men are below himself, and not his Equals. Hence as
those persons are the best Members of a Community, who without any difficulty
allow the same things to their Neighbor that themselves require of him; so
those are altogether incapable of Society, who setting a high rate on
themselves in regard to others, will take upon 'em to act any thing toward
their Neighbor, and expect a greater Respect than the rest of Mankind, and
demand a larger share of matters to which no man has a claim, though they can
make out no better Right than another: Whence this also is an universal Duty of
the Law Natural, That no man, who has not a peculiar Right, ought to arrogate
more to himself, than he is ready to allow to his fellows, but permits other
men to enjoy the same Equity with himself.

THE same Equality also shows what IV. Distributive Justice.
every man's behavior ought to be, when his business is to distribute Justice
among others; to wit, that he treat them as Equals, and indulge not that,
beside the Merits of the Cause, to one, which he denies to another. For if he
do otherwise, he who is discountenanced is at the same time affronted and
wronged, and loses somewhat of the Dignity which Nature bestowed upon him.
Whence it follows, that things which are in common, are of right to be divided
by equal parts among those who are equal; where the Thing will not admit of
Division, they who are equally concerned, are to use it indifferently; and, if
the Quantity of the thing will bear it, as much as each party shall think fit;
but if this cannot be allowed, then it is to be used after a stated manner, and
proportionate to the Number of the Claimants; because it is not possible to find
out any other way of observing Equality. But if it be a Thing of that nature as
not to be capable of being divided, nor of being possessed in common, then it
must be used by turns; and if this yet will not answer the point, and it is not
possible the rest should be satisfied by an Equivalent, the best way must be to
determine Possession by Lot; for in such Cases a fitter Remedy cannot be thought
on, as to removing all opinion of Partiality and Contempt of any party, and not
debasing the person whom Fortune does not favor.

THIS Duty is violated by Pride, when V. Pride.
one without any cause or for a cause not sufficient, bears himself above his
Fellows, and despises them as beneath himself. We say, without any Reason. For
where a man is regularly possessed of some Right, which gives him a Preference
to other men, he may lawfully make use of and assert the same, so it be without
vain Ostentation and the contempt of others; as on the contrary every one is
with good reason to yield that Respect and Honor which is due to another. But
for the rest, true Generosity has always for its Companion a decorous Humility,
which arises from a Reflection on the Infirmity of our Nature, and the Faults,
of which our selves either have been or may hereafter be guilty, which are not
less heinous than those which may be committed by other men. The Inference we
ought to make from hence, is, that we do not overvalue our selves with regard
to others, considering that they equally with us are endowed with a free use of
their Understanding, which they are also capable of managing to as good
purpose: the regular Use whereof is that alone which a man can call his own,
and upon which the true Value of Himself depends. But for a man without any
reason to set a high esteem upon himself is a most ridiculous Vice; first,
because it is in itself silly, for a man to carry it high for nothing at all;
and then because I must suppose all other men to be Coxcombs* if I expect from
them a great (...) when I deserve none.

THE ^^olation of this Duty, is yet VI. Signs contemptuous.
carried (...), if a man show his Contempt of (...) by outward Signs, Actions,
Wor^^ (...) Derision, or any other abusive way* And this fault is therefore the
more grievous, because it easily excites the (...) men to Anger and Revenge: So
that there are many who will rather ventu^e their Lives upon the spot, much
more will they break the Public Peace, than put up an Affront of that nature;
accounting that hereby their Honor is wounded and a slur is put upon their
Reputation, in the untainted preservation of which consists all their
Self-satisfaction and Pleasure of mind.

CHAP. VIII. Of the mutual Duties of Humanity.
AMONG the Duties of one man toward I. Doing good to others.
another, which must be practiced for the sake of Common Society, we put in the
third place this, That every man ought to promote the good of another, as far
as conveniently he may. For all Mankind being by Nature made, as it were, akin
to each other; it would be no great matter for us not to hurt or not to despise
our Fellows; but we ought also to do such good Offices to others, or mutually
to communicate the same, as that common brotherly Love may be kept up among
Men. Now we become beneficial to our Neighbor, either indefinitely or
definitely; and that either parting with something or nothing our selves.

THAT man indefinitely promotes the II. Benefactors, the first sort.
good of others, who takes such necessary care of his Mind and Body, that he
may be able to perform such Actions as may be profitable to his Neighbor; or
who by the Acuteness of his Wit finds out something that may be of advantage to
Mankind. So that those are to be accounted guilty of a breach of this Duty, who
betaking themselves to no honest Calling spend their Lives in Sloth, as if
their Souls were given 'em but to serve as Salt to keep their Bodies from
stinking, or as if they were born but to make up a Number and eat their share:
And such as being content with the Estates their Ancestors have left 'em, think
they may give themselves up to Idleness without blame, because they have
whereon to live by the Industry of others: And those who alone enjoy what they
have got, not bestowing any part upon others: Finally, all those who like Hogs,
do good to no one till they die; and all that sort of Wretches who only serve
to load the Earth with their useless weight.

ON the other side, to those who make III. Such deserve Honor.
it their business to deserve well of Mankind the rest of the World owe thus
much, that they don't envy 'em, nor lay any rubs in their way while by their
noble Actions they seek the Universal Good: And if there be no possibility for
themselves to imitate 'em, they at least ought to pay a Regard to their Memory
and promote their Honor, which perhaps is all they shall get by their Labors.

NOW not to do readily all that Good IV. Good done without detriment to Self.
to others which we can do without detriment, labor or trouble to our selves,
is to be accounted detestable Villainy and Inhumanity. These are wont to be
called Benefits which cost nothing, or which are of advantage to the Receiver
without being a charge to the Bestower. Such as, to allow the use of the
running Water, the letting another light his Fire by mine, the giving honest
Advice to him that consults me, the friendly directing a wandering man to the
right Way, and the like. So if a man have a mind to quit the possession of a
thing, either because he has too much, or because the keeping of it becomes
troublesome, why should he not rather leave it fit for use to others, (provided
they are not Enemies) than to mar or destroy it? Hence it is a Sin for us to
spoil Victuals, because our Hunger is satisfied; or to stop up or cover a
Spring, because we have quenched our Thirst; or to destroy Sea-marks or
Inscribed Posts set up in Highways to direct
Mercuries, when our selves have made use of them. Under this Head may be
comprehended also the little Alms bestowed by the wealthy upon Travel*
those who are in want; and that Kindness which we justly show to Travelers,
especially if under necessities, and the like.

BUT it is a higher degree of Humanity, V. Benefactors, the second sort.
out of singular favor to do a good turn freely, which costs either Charge or
Pains, that so another may either have his Necessities relieved, or acquire
some considerable Advantage. And these, by way of Excellence, are called
Benefits, and are the fittest matter for rendering men Illustrious, if rightly
tempered with Prudence and Magnanimity. The Dispensation whereof and the Manner
are to be regulated according to the Condition of the Giver and Receiver.
Wherein care is first of all to be taken, that the Bounty we are about to
exercise do not more hurt than good to the person to whom we design a kindness,
and to others; next, that our Bounty be not greater than consists with our
Ability; then that the worthiness of men be regarded in our distribution, and
preference given to the well-deserving; that we consider how far each stands in
need of our help, and observe the degrees of Relation among men; moreover it is
to be known what every one wants most, and what they can or cannot compass with
or without our assistance. The Manner also of exercising acts of Kindness will
render them more acceptable, if they be done cheerfully, readily, and heartily.

AND then he who receives a Benefit VI. Gratitude.
ought to have a grateful Mind, by which he is to make it manifest, that it was
acceptable to him, and that for its sake he has kind wishes for the Donor, and
that he wants nothing but an opportunity or an ability of making, if possible,
a Requital of the full value or more. For it is not absolutely necessary that
the Returns we make be exactly tantamount to the Courtesy we receive, but our
Good Will and hearty Endeavor are in lieu to be accepted. Not but that
sometimes he who pretends to have done me a kindness, may not have reason to
say, he has obliged me; as, if a man shall drag me out of the Water, into which
he pushed me before, I owe him no thanks for that.

NOW by how much the more Benefits VII. Thanks.
are apt to oblige and place engagements on the minds of men, by so much ought
the party who is beholden be the more eager to return his Thanks. If it be but
because we ought not to suffer our Benefactor, who out of a good opinion he had
of us has done us a kindness, to think worse of us; and because we should not
receive any Favor, but with a design to endeavor, that the Giver shall never
have cause to repent of what he has done for us. For, if for any particular
reason we are not willing to be beholden to such or such a man, he may civilly
avoid the accepting of the Courtesy. And truly if no grateful Returns were to
be made upon the Receipt of Benefits, it would be unreasonable for any man to
cast away what he has, and to do a good turn where beforehand he is sure it
will be slighted. By which means all Beneficence, Good Will and brotherly Love
would be lost among men; and there would be no such thing as doing kindnesses
frankly nor any opportunities of procuring mutual Friendships left in the World.

AND though, the ungrateful man cannot VIII. Ingratitude.
be precisely said to do a Wrong; yet the charge of Ingratitude is looked upon
as more base, more odious and detestable than that of Injustice: because it is
judged a sign of an abject and rascally Soul for a man to show himself unworthy
of the good opinion which another had entertained of his Probity, and not to be
moved to some sense of Humanity by Benefits, which have a power to tame even
the Brutes. But, let Ingratitude be never so abominable, yet simply considered,
as it is a bare Forgetting of a Courtesy, and a Neglect of making a due return
upon occasion, Courts of Judicature take no cognizance of it; for it would lose
the name of Bounty, if it were redemandable by Law, as Money lent is; because
then it would be a Credit. And whereas it is a high instance of Generosity to
be grateful, it would cease to be a generous Action, when so to do could not be
avoided. Beside that it would take up the business of all Courts, by reason of
the great difficulty in making an Estimate of all the Circumstances which
either would enhanse or lessen the Benefit: And that it was to this end I
bestowed it, (to wit, that I did not therefore demand a Promise of Repayment,)
that so the other might have an occasion of showing his Gratitude, not for fear
of Punishment, but out of love to Honesty; and to manifest, that it was not in
hopes of Gain, but only out of mere Kindness that I was liberal of that, which
I would not take care should be reimburs'd to me. But for him who improves his
Ingratitude, and not only gives no thanks to, but injures his Benefactor; this
shall cause an Aggravation of his Punishment, because it plainly demonstrates
the profligate Villainy and Baseness of his Mind.

CHAP. IX. The Duty of men in making Contracts.
FROM the Duties Absolute to those I. Contracts.
that are Conditional we must take our Passage, as it were, through the
intermediate Contracts; for, since all Duties, except those already mentioned,
seem to presuppose some Covenant either expressed or implied; we shall
therefore in the next place treat of the Nature of Contracts, and what is to be
observed by the parties concerned therein.

NOW it is plain that it was absolutely II. The Necessity of them.
necessary for men to enter into mutual Contracts. For though the Duties of
Humanity diffuse themselves far and near through all the instances of the Life
of Man; yet that alone is not Ground sufficient whereon to fix all the
Obligations which may be necessary to be made reciprocal between one and
another. For all men are not endowed with so much Good Nature, as that they
will do all good Offices to every man out of mere kindness, except they have
some certain expectation of receiving the like again: and very often it happens
that the Services we would have to be done to us by other men are of that sort,
that we cannot with Modesty desire them. Frequently also it may not become one
of my Fortune or in my Station to be beholden to another for such a thing. So
that many times another cannot give, neither are we willing to accept, unless
that other receive an Equivalent from us; and it happens not seldom, that my
Neighbor knows not how he may be serviceable to my occasions. Therefore, that
these mutual good Offices, which are the Product of Sociality, may be more
freely and regularly exercised, it was necessary that men should agree among
themselves concerning what was to be done on this side and on that, which no
man from the Law of Nature alone could have assured himself of. So that it was
beforehand to be adjusted what, this man doing so by his Neighbor, he was to
expect in lieu of the same, and which he might lawfully demand. This is done by
means of Promises and Contracts.

WITH respect to this general Duty it III. Veracity.
is an Obligation of the Law of Nature, that every man keep his Word, or fulfill
his Promises and make good his Contracts. For without this a great part of that
Advantage which might naturally accrue to Mankind by a mutual communication of
good Offices and useful Things, would be lost. And, but that an exact
Observance of ones Promise is absolutely necessary, no man could propose to
himself any Certainty in whatever he designed, where he must depend upon the
assistances of others. Besides that Breach of Faith is apt to give the justest
occasions to Quarrels and Wars. For if, according to my Agreement, I perform my
part, and the other falsify his word, whatsoever I have done or deposited in
expectation of his performance, is lost. Nay, though I have done nothing as
yet, yet it may be a Mischief for me by this Disappointment to have my Affairs
and Purposes confounded, which I could have taken care of some other way, if
this man had not offered himself. And there is no reason I should become
ridiculous for having trusted one whom I took to be an honest and a good man.

BUT it is to be observed, that such IV. Distinction.
things as are due to me only of Courtesy, differ from those which I can claim
on account of a Contract or Promise, in this respect chiefly: That, it is true,
I may fairly desire the honest performance of the first; but in this if the
other shall neglect my Request, I can only charge him with Rudeness, Cruelty or
hard dealing; but I cannot compel him to do me reason either by my own Power or
by any superior Authority. Which I am at liberty to do in the latter case, if
that be not freely performed which ought to have been according to an absolute
Promise or Covenant. Hence we are said to have an imperfect Right to those
things, but to these our Claim is perfect; as also that to the performance of
the first we lie under an imperfect, but to the other under a perfect
Obligation. V. Obligations different.


OUR Word may be given, either by a single Act where one party only is obliged;
or by an Act reciprocal, where more than one are parties. For sometimes one man
only binds himself to do somewhat; sometimes two or more mutually engage each
other to the performance of such and such things. The former whereof is called
a Promise, the latter a Covenant or Contract.

PROMISES may be divided into imperfect VI. Promises imperfect.
and perfect. The former is, when we mean indeed to be obliged to make good our
word to him to whom we promise; but we intend not to give him a power of
requiring it, or of making use of force to compel us to it. As, if I say thus,
I really design to do this or that for you, and I desire you will believe me. Here
I seem more obliged by the rules of Veracity than of Justice; and shall rather
appear to have done the promised Service out of a regard to Constancy and
Discretion, than to Right. Of this sort are the Assurances of great men who are
in favor, whereby they seriously, but not upon their Honors, promise their
Recommendation or Intercession, their preferring a man or giving him their
Vote, which yet they intend shall not be demanded of them as matters of Right,
but desire they may be wholly attributed to their Courtesy and Veracity; that
the Service they do may be so much the more acceptable, as it was incapable of
Compulsion.

BUT that is called a perfect Promise, VII. Promise perfect.
when I not only oblige my self by my Word, but I give the other party
Authority to require at my hands the performance of what I stipulated, as if
'twere a Debt.

MOREOVER, that Promises and Contracts VIII. Consent.
may have a full Obligation upon us to give and to do somewhat, which before we
were at liberty not to have done; or to omit that which we had a power to do,
it is especially requisite that they be made with our free Consent. For whereas
the making good of any Promise or Contract may be accompanied with some
Inconvenience, there can be no readier Argument why we should not complain,
than that we consented thereto of our own accord, which it was in our power not
to have done.

AND this Consent is usually made IX. Consent express or tacit.
known by outward Signs, as, by Speaking, Writing, a Nod, or the like; though
sometimes it may also be plainly intimated without any of them, according to
the Nature of the thing and other Circumstances. So Silence in some Cases and
so circumstantiated passes instead of a Sign expressing Consent. To this may be
attributed those tacit Contracts, where we give not our formal Consent by the
Signs generally made use of among men; but the Nature of the business and other
circumstances make it fairly supposable. Thus frequently in the principal
Contract, which is express, another is included which is tacit, the Nature of
the Case so requiring: And it is usual, in most Covenants that are made, that
some tacit Exceptions and implied Conditions must of necessity be understood.

BUT to render a man capable of giving X. Who capable of giving censent.
a valid Consent, it is absolutely requisite, that he have so far the Use of his
Reason, as fully to understand the business that lies before him, and to know
whether it be meet for him, and whether it lie in his power to perform it; and
having considered this, he must be capable of giving sufficient Indications of
his Consent. Hence it follows, that the Contracts and Promises of Idiots and
Mad men (except such whose Madness admits of lucid Intervals) are null and
void: And the same must be said of those of Drunken men, if they are besotted
to that degree as that their Reason is overwhelmed and stupefied. For it can
never be accounted a real and deliberate Consent, if a man when his Brains are
disordered and intoxicated, shall on a sudden and rashly make foolish
Engagements, and give the usual Demonstrations of Consent, which at another
time would have obliged him: and it would be a piece of Impudence for any man
to exact the performance of such a Promise, especially if it were of any
considerable weight. But if one man shall lay hold on the opportutunity of
another being drunk, and craftily making an advantage of his Easiness of
Temper under those Circumstances, shall procure any Promise from him, this man
is to be accounted guilty of a Cheat and Knavery: Not but that, if, after the
Effects of his Drink are over, he shall confirm such Promise, he shall be
obliged; and this not with any regard to what he said when drunk, but to his
Confirmation when sober.

AS for Consent in young Persons, it is XI. Consent in young Persons.
impossible for the Laws Natural to determine so nicely the exact time how long
Reason will be too weak in them to render 'em capable of making Engagements;
because Maturity of Discretion appears earlier in some than in others; Judgment
therefore must be made hereof by the daily Actions of the Person. Though this
is taken care for in most Commonwealths by Laws prescribing a certain Term of
years to all in general; and in many places it is become a commendable Custom
to set these under the Guardianship of wiser men, whose Authority must be had
to any Contracts they make, till the others youthful Rashness be a little
abated. For persons of this Age, however perhaps they may well enough
understand what they do, yet are prone to act with overmuch Eagerness and
Imprudence, and to be too free of their Promises, having great Assurance,
desiring to be accounted Liberal, apt to be obstinate in the choice of their
Companions, and not inclined to Wariness and necessary Distrust. So that he can
hardly pass for an honest man, who makes any advantage of the Easiness of this
Age, and would gain by the losses of young people, who for want of Experience
could not foresee or place a true estimate thereon.

CONSENT also may be rendered invalid XII. Mistake in Contracts.
by a Mistake or Error. Concerning which these Rules are to be observed. (1.)
That when to my Promise, some Condition is supposed, without the consideration
whereof I should not have made such Promise; the same shall, without the other,
have no Obligation upon me: For in this Case the Promiser does not engage
absolutely, but upon a Condition, which not being made good, the Promise
becomes null and void. (2.) If I am drawn into a Bargain or Contract by a
Mistake, which Mistake I find before, as we use to say, Bulk is broke, or any
thing done in order to the Consummation thereof, it is but Equity that I should
be at liberty to retract; especially if upon the Contract making, I plainly
signified for what Reason I agreed to it; and that the other party suffers no
damage by my going off from my Bargain, or, if he does, that I am ready to make
Reparation. But when, as was said before, Bulk is broke, and the Mistake is not
found till the Covenant is either wholly or in part already performed, the
party who was under an Error cannot retract, any farther than the other shall
of Courtesy release to him. (3.) When a Mistake shall happen concerning the
Thing, which is the Subject of the Contract, such Contract is invalid, not for
the sake of the Mistake, but because the Bargain is not made good. For in
Bargains of this nature, the Thing and all its Qualifications ought to be
known, without which knowledge a fair Agreement cannot be supposed to be made.
So that he who is like to suffer wrong by any Defect therein either may throw
up his Bargain, or force the other to make the Thing as it should be, or else
to pay him the Value, if it happened through his Knavery or Negligence.

BUT if a man be drawn into a Promise XIII. Guileful Contracts.
or Bargain by the Craft and fraudulent means of another; then the matter is
thus to be considered. (1.) If a third man were guilty of the Cheat, and the
party with whom the Bargain is driven was not concerned in it, the Agreement
will be valid: but we may demand of him who practiced the Knavery so much as we
are losers by being deceived. (2.) He who knavishly procures me to promise or
contract with him, shall not set me under any Obligation. (3.) If a man will
indeed come freely with a plain design to drive a Bargain, but in the very
Action shall have a Trick put upon him; suppose, in the Thing bargained for,
its Qualities or Value; the Contract shall be so far naught, as to leave it in
the power of him who is deceived, either to relinquish his Bargain, or to
require satisfaction for his loss. (4.) If unfair dealing chance to be used in
some things not essential to the business, and which were not expressly under
regard, this weakens not the Agreement, if for the rest it be regularly made;
though perhaps one party might have an eye to it, whilst he bargained, and his
Opinion might be cunningly cherished till the Contract were perfectly
transacted.

WHENEVER Fear is to be considered XIV. Contracts suspicious.
in Promises or Bargains, it is twofold, and may either be called a probable
Suspicion lest we should be deceived by another, and this because he is one who
is very much addicted to unjust practices, or has sufficiently intimated his
fraudulent design; or else a panic Terror of the Mind, arising from some
grievous Mischief threatened, except we make such a Promise or Contract.
Concerning the first sort of Fear, (or Mistrust rather) these things are to be
observed. (1.) He who trusts the Engagements of one who is notoriously
negligent of his Word and Troth, acts very imprudently; but, for that reason
only can have no remedy, but shall be obliged. (2.) When a Bargain is made, and
no new Indications appear of any knavish design, the same shall not be
invalidated by any objection of Faults which were sufficiently known before the
Agreement. For, that Reason which could not hinder the making of the Bargain,
cannot excuse the fulfilling of it. (3.) Where after the Bargain made, it
appears plainly that the other person intends to clude his part of the
Contract, as soon as I have performed mine; here I cannot be forced to comply
first, till I am secure of a performance on the other side.

As for the other sort of Fear these XV. Contracts through Fear.
Rules are to be observed, (1.) Contracts entered into through Fear, occasioned
by a third man shall be valid; for there is no defect in the other party to the
Bargain, but he may recover of me what is his due, beside that he is well
worthy a Recompense, if by his Interposition, he have delivered me from Fear of
that other. (2.) All such Covenants as are made out of Fear or Reverence of our
lawful Superiors, or by the Awe we have for those to whom we are very much
beholden, shall be firm and good. (3.) Those Bargains which are wrongfully and
forcibly extorted from a man by the person to whom the Promise or Agreement is
made, are invalid. For the Violence he unjustly uses to set me under that Fear
renders him incapable of pretending to any Right against me on account of such
Action of mine. And whereas in other Cases every man is bound to Reparation of
what Wrong he shall do to another, this Restitution to which he is bound is
understood as it were to take off any Obligation from such Promise, since if
what was promised were paid, it ought to be immediately restored.

MOREOVER not only in Contracts, XVI. Consent mutual.
but in Promises the Consent ought to be reciprocal; that is, both the Promiser
and he to whom the Promise is made must agree in the thing. For if the latter
shall not consent, or refuse to accept of what is offered, the thing promised
remains still in the power of the Promiser. For he that makes an offer of any
thing, cannot be supposed to intend to force it upon one that is unwilling to
receive it, nor yet to quit his own title to it; therefore when the other
denies acceptance, he who proffered it loses nothing of his Claim thereto. If
the Promise was occasioned by a Request before made, the same shall be
accounted to oblige so long, as till such Request be expressly revoked; for in
that case the thing will be understood to be accepted beforehand; provided yet
that what is offered be proportioned to what was desired. For if it be not,
then an express Acceptance is requisite; because it may often do me no good to
answer my Request by halves.

AS for the Matter of our Promises XVII. Impossible Engagements.
and Contracts, it is absolutely necessary, that what we promise or make a
bargain for be in our power to make good, and that so to do be not prohibited
by any Law; otherwise we engage our selves either foolishly or wickedly. Hence
it follows that no man is obliged to do things impossible. But if it be a thing
which at the time of the Bargain-making was possible, and yet afterward by
some Accident without any fault of the Contracter became altogether impossible,
the Contract shall be null, if there be nothing as yet done in it; but if one
party have performed somewhat toward it, what he has advanced is to be
restored to him, or an Equivalent given; and if this cannot be done, by all
means it is to be endeavored that he suffer no loss thereby. For in Contracts
that is principally to be regarded which was expressly in the Bargain; if this
cannot be obtained it must suffice to give an Equivalent; but if neither can
this be had, at least the utmost care is to be taken that the party undergo no
Damage. But where any man shall designedly or by some very blameable
miscarriage render himself incapable of making good his part of the Bargain, he
is not only obliged to use his utmost endeavor, but ought also to be punished,
as it were, to make up the amends.

IT is also manifest that we cannot set XVIII. Unlawful Engagements.
our selves under any obligation to perform what is unlawful. For no man can
engage himself farther than he has lawful Authority so to do. But that
Legislator who prohibits any Action by a Law takes away all legal power of
undertaking it, and disables any man from obliging himself to perform it. For
it would imply a Contradiction, to suppose, that from a Duty enjoined by the
Laws should flow an Obligation to do that which the same Laws forbid to be
done. So that he transgresses who promises to do what is unlawful, but he is
doubly a Transgressor who performs it. Hence also it follows, that neither are
those Promises to be kept, the observation of which will be mischievous to him
to whom they are made; because it is forbidden by the Law-Natural to do hurt to
any man, even though he do foolishly desire it. And if a Contract be made to do
some filthy and base thing, neither shall be obliged to fulfill it. If such
filthy thing be done by one party pursuant to the Bargain, the other shall not
be bound to give the Reward agreed for; but if any thing be already given on
that account, it cannot be demanded again.

AND then, it is plain, that such Engagements XIX. Engagements concerning other
men, etc.
and Bargains as we shall make of what belongs to other men are altogether
insignificant, so far as they are not ours, but subject to the Will and
Direction of others. But if I promise thus, "I will use my endeavor that such
a man (always supposing him to be one not absolutely under my command) shall do
so or so: then I am obliged by all methods morally possible, (that is, so far
as the other can fairly request of me, and as will consist with Civility) to
take pains to move that person to perform what is desired. Nay we cannot
promise to a third man things in our own possession or Actions to be done by
our selves, to which another has acquired a Right, unless it be so ordered as
not to be in force till the time of that others Claim is expired. For he who by
antecedent Pacts or Promises has already transferred his Right to another, has
no more such Right left to pass over to a third person: And all manner of
Engagements and Bargains would be easily eluded, if a man after having
contracted with one, might be at liberty to enter a Treaty with another,
wherein Disposals should be made contrary to the first Agreement, and with
which it is impossible this should consist. Which gives foundation to that
known Rule, First in time, prior in Right.

BESIDE all which it is to be chiefly XX. Conditions various.
observed concerning Promises, that they are wont to be made positively and
absolutely; or conditionally, that is, when the Validity thereof relies upon
some Event depending on Chance or the Will of Man. Now Conditions are either
possible or impossible; and the former are subdivided into Casual or
fortuitous, which we cannot cause to be or not to be; or Arbitrary, or such as
are in the power of him to whom the Promise is made, that they are or are not
complied with; or else Mixed, the fulfilling of which depends partly on the Will
of the person receiving the Promise and partly on Chance. Impossible Conditions
are either such as are naturally or morally so, that is, some matters are by
the Nature of things not capable of being done; others are forbidden by the
Laws and Rules of Morality; and as for these impossible Conditions, if we
follow the downright way of judging concerning them, they bring a Negative
sense upon the Promissory words; though it is true by Laws it may be provided,
that if they are annexed to a serious business, the Pact may remain good,
rejecting these Conditions as if they had never been made; that so men may not
have busied themselves about that which otherwise can signify nothing.

Lastly, WE promise and contract not XXI. Mediatory Contracts.
only in our own persons, but oftentimes by the Mediation of other men, whom we
constitute the Bearers and Interpreters of our Intentions: by whose
Negotiations, if they deal faithfully by us in following the Instructions we
gave, we are firmly obliged to those persons who transacted with them as our
Deputies.

AND thus we have done with the Absolute XXII. Conclusion.
Duties of Man, and with those by which we pass to the other. The rest do all
presuppose some Human Institution founded upon a Universal Agreement and so
introduced into the World; or else some peculiar State or Condition. And of
this sort of Institutions there are three chiefly to be insisted on, to wit,
Speech or Discourse, Propriety and the Value of things, and the Government of
Mankind. Of each of these and of the Duties arising therefrom we shall next
discourse.

CHAP. X. The Duty of men in Discourse.
HOW useful and altogether necessary I. General Rule.
an Instrument of Human Society Discourse is, there is no man can be ignorant;
since many have made that only an Argument to prove Man to be by Nature
designed for a Social Life. Now that a lawful and beneficial use may be made
hereof for the good of the same Human Society, the Law of Nature has given men
this for a Duty, That no man deceive another either by Discourse, or any other
Signs which customarily are accepted to express our inward meaning.

BUT that the Nature of Discourse may II. Uniform Signification of Words.
be more thoroughly understood, it must first be known, that there is a twofold
Obligation respecting Discourse, whether expressed with the Voice or written in
Characters. The first is, that those who make use of the same Language, are
obliged to apply such certain Words to such certain Things, according as Custom
has made them to signify in each Language. For since neither any Words nor any
particular strokes formed into Letters can naturally denote any certain Thing
(otherwise all Languages and Characters for writing would be the same,) and
hence the use of the Tongue would be to no purpose, if every man might call
every Thing by what Name he pleased; it is absolutely necessary among those who
speak the same Language, that there be a tacit Agreement between 'em, that this
certain Thing shall be so or so called and not otherwise. So that unless an
uniform Application of Words be agreed upon, 'twill be impossible for one man
to gather the Meaning of another from his Talk. By virtue then of this tacit
Compact every man is bound in his common Discourse to apply his Words to that
Sense, which agrees with the received Signification thereof in that Language;
from whence also it follows, that albeit a man's Sentiments may differ from what
he expresses in Words, yet in the Affairs of Human Life he must be looked upon
as intending what he says, though as was said, perhaps his inward Meaning be
the clean contrary. For since we cannot be informed of another Mind otherwise
than by outward Signs, all use of Discourse would be to no purpose, if by
mental Reservation, which any man may form as he lists, it might be in his
power to elude what he had declared by Signs usually accepted to that end.

THE other Obligation which concerns III. Discourse to be plain.
Discourse, consists in this, that every man ought by his Words so to express
to another his Meaning, that he may be plainly understood. Not but that it is
in a Man's power to be silent as well as to speak; and whereas no man is bound
to tell every one what he bears in his mind; it is necessary that there be some
peculiar Obligation that shall engage him first to speak, and then so to speak
as that another shall fully understand his Meaning. Such Obligation may arise
from a particular Compact, or some common Precept of the Law Natural, or from
the Nature of the present Affair, in which Speech is made use of: For
oftentimes a Bargain is made expressly with a man, that he shall disclose to me
all that he knows in some matter; as, suppose I desired to be instructed in any
Science: frequently also I may be commanded by some Precept of the Law of
Nature to communicate my Skill to another, that by this means I may be helpful
to him, or that I may save him from Mischief, or that I may not give him some
cause or occasion of receiving a Harm: and lastly, the present Case may require
me to declare my Opinion in a Matter wherein another is concerned; as it
happens often in Contracts of the greatest Importance.

BUT because it cannot always happen that IV. Silence.
upon any of these heads I am obliged to signify my thoughts upon any matter,
it is plain that I am not bound to disclose in Words any more than another has
a Right either perfect or imperfect to require. So that I may by holding my
tongue lawfully conceal, what he has no just Claim to the knowledge of, or to
the discovery whereof I lie under no Obligation, however earnestly it be
desired.

NAY, Since Speech was not only ordained V. Counterfeit Discourse.
for the use of others, but our own benefit also: therefore whenever my
private Interest is concerned and it occasions Damage to no body else, I may so
order my Words, that they may communicate a Sense different from that which I
bear in my mind*

Lastly, BECAUSE oftentimes those to VI. Figurative Speech.
whom we talk upon some matters may be so disposed, that from a downright and
plain Discourse they would perceive the true State of the Case, which ought
rather to be concealed, because a full knowledge would not procure the good end
we drive at, but be a detriment to 'em; we may in such Cases use a figurative
or shadowed way of Speech which shall not directly represent our Meaning and
plain Sense to the Hearers. For he who would and ought to benefit another,
cannot be bound to attempt it after such a manner, as shall incapacitate him
from obtaining his End.

FROM what has been said may be gathered VII. Verity.
wherein that Verity consists, for their regard to which good men are so much
celebrated; to wit, that our Words do fitly represent our Meaning to any other
person who ought to understand them, and which it is our Duty to express
plainly to him, either by a perfect or imperfect Obligation; and this to the
end either that he upon knowing our minds may make to himself some Benefit
thereby, or that he may avoid some undeserved Evil, which he would incur upon a
wrong understanding of the case. Hence by the by it is manifest, that it is not
always to be accounted Lying, when even for the nonce a Tale is told concerning
any thing in such a manner as does not exactly quadrate with the Thing it self,
nor with our own Opinion of it; and consequently, that the Congruity of Words
with Things, which constitutes the Logical Verity, is not in all points the
same with Moral Truth.

ON the contrary that is rightly called a Lie, when our Words bear a different
VIII. A Lie.
Signification from that which we think in our minds, whereas the person to
whom we direct our Discourse has a Right to understand the thing as it really
is, and we are under an Obligation of making our Meaning plain to him.

FROM what is said it appears, that IX. Untruth.
those are by no means chargeable with Lying, who entertain Children or the
like with Fables and fictitious Discourses for their better Information, they
being supposed incapable of the naked Truth. As neither are those who make use
of a feigned Story to some good end, which could not be attained by speaking
the plain Truth; suppose, to protect an Innocent, to appease an angry man, to
comfort one who is in sorrow, to encourage the fearful, to persuade a
nauseating Patient to take his Physic, to soften the obstinate, or to divert
the evil Intention of another, and the like; or, if the Secrets and Resolutions
of a Community are to be kept from public knowledge, we may raise false Rumors
in order to conceal them, and to mislead the importunate Curiosity of others;
or, if we have an Enemy, whom by open force we cannot annoy, we may by way of
Stratagem make use of any lying Tales to do him Mischief.

ON the other side, if any man be X. Part of the Truth etc.
bound in Duty to signify plainly his true meaning to another, he is not
without blame, if he discover only a part of the Truth, or amuse him with
ambiguous Discourse, or use some mental Reservation not allowed in the common
Conversation of men.

CHAP. XI. The Duty of those that take an Oath.
ALL men agree in the Opinion, that I. An Oath.
an Oath gives a great additional Confirmation to all our Assertions and to
those Actions which depend upon our Discourse. An Oath is, A Religious
Asseveration, by which we disavow the Divine Clemency, or imprecate to our
selves the Wrath of God, if we speak not the Truth. Now when an All-wise and an
Almighty Witness and Guaranty is invoked, it causes a strong Presumption of the
Truth, because no man can easily be thought so wicked, as to dare rashly to
call down upon himself the grievous Indignation of the Deity. Hence it is the
Duty of those that take an Oath, To take the same with awful Reverence, and
religiously to observe what they have sworn.

NOW the End and Use of an Oath is II. The End and Use.
chiefly this, To oblige men the more firmly to speak the Truth, or to make
good their Promises and Contracts out of an awe of the Divine Being who is
infinitely Wise and Powerful; whose Vengeance they imprecate to themselves when
they swear, if they wittingly are guilty of Deceit; whereas otherwise the Fear
of what men can do may not be sufficient; because possibly they may hope to
oppose or escape their Power, or to beguile their Understandings.

AND since nothing but the Deity is III. Swearing by what.
Omniscient and Almighty, it is absurd to swear by any thing which we do not
suppose to be invested with Divinity, in this sense, as to call upon such Thing
to be a Witness to the Oath and an Avenger of the Perjury: though it is true it
may be common to name in Oaths some certain thing, by which a man may be said
to swear in this sense, that he implores God, if he swears falsely, to execute
his Vengeance upon that thing chiefly, as being most dear and of greatest value
to him who swears. IV. Forms how to be accommodated.


IN Oaths the Form which is prescribed, (by which the person swearing invokes
God as a Witness and an Avenger,) is to be accommodated to the Religion of the
said Swearer, that is, to that Persuasion and Opinion of God which he is of.
For it is to no purpose to make a man swear by a God, whom he does not believe,
and consequently does not fear. But no man supposes himself to take an Oath in
any other Form nor under any other Notion than that which is consonant to the
Precepts of his Religion, which in his opinion, is the true. Hence also it is,
that he who swears by false Gods, which yet himself takes to be true ones,
shall however be obliged, and if he break his word, shall be accounted guilty
of Perjury. Because he set the general Notion of the Deity before his Eyes,
it is no matter what singular Conceptions he might have thereof, and so having
knowingly forsworn himself, he has as much as in him lay, violated the
Reverence which is due to the Divine Majesty.

THAT an Oath may be binding, it is VI. Deliberation necessary.
necessary it be taken with Deliberation; Whence he shall not be obliged by an
Oath who merely recites it, or speaking in the first Person dictates the
concept formal Words thereof to another who is to say after him. But he who
shall seriously behave himself as one that is about to swear solemnly, shall be
obliged, whatsoever mental Reservations he all the while may harbor in his
mind. For otherwise all Oaths, nay all Methods of mutual Obligation by the
Intervention of the plainest Significations would be of no use to humane Life,
if any man by his tacit Intention could hinder such an Act from producing those
Effects which were the very Design of its being done.

OATHS do not of themselves produce VI. Oaths how obliging.
any new and particular Obligation, but are superinduced upon an Obligation
that was before valid, as an Accessional Strength to the Engagement. For always
when we swear we have somewhat under our Contemplation, which not made good, we
provoke the Divine Wrath upon our selves; and this 'twere absurd to think, if
it were not unlawful not to perform what is supposed, and consequently not
obliged so to do beforehand. Though sometimes it must be allowed that the prime
Engagement and the Oath too may be comprised in the same Sentence, as thus, As
God help me, I Will give you a hundred Pounds. Where the Oath is not superfluous,
albeit it is added to a Promise that was valid of it self. Because though every
good man believe a bare Promise to oblige, yet it is looked upon to be the more
firm when it is reinforced with an Imprecation of Vengeance from above upon a
Failure. Hence it follows, that any Acts which have naturally a flaw in
themselves, cannot be made obligatory by the Accession of an Oath; as neither
can a subsequent Oath avoid a former legitimate Engagement, or annul that Right
which another may claim thereby; thus a man would swear in vain not to pay
another person what is justly due to him: Nor will an Oath be of any validity,
where it appears, that 'twas made by the Juror upon supposition of a thing to
be done which was not really so; and that he would not have so sworn, had not
he believed it to be done; especially if he were cajoled into such his Error by
the Craft of him to whom the Oath was made: Neither shall he, who by setting me
under panick Fear forces me to take an Oath, have any good title to require my
Performance. Farthermore, an Oath shall have no Obligation upon me to do any
unlawful Act, or to omit the performing any Duty enjoined by the Laws of God or
Man. Lastly, an Oath cannot alter the Nature or Substance of the Contract or
Promise to which it is annexed; Hence it cannot oblige to Impossibilities.
Again, a Conditional Promise by the addition of an Oath is not changed into
Positive or Absolute; and to a sworn Promise, as well as to one without an
Oath, Acceptance from the other party is required to make it obligatory.

BUT the taking of an Oath has this VII. Punishment.
Effect among men, for the sake of that Invocation of God which is therein made
use of, whose Wisdom no man's Cunning can elude, and who suffers not the man
that mocks Him to escape unpunished; that not only a heavier Punishment is
assigned to him who forswears himself, than to him who barely breaks his Word;
but it puts them in mind to avoid all Deceit and Prevarication in the matters
about which it is conversant.

NOT yet that all Oaths are to be considered VIII. Strict Interpretation.
in their greatest Latitude, but that sometimes they must be interpreted in the
narrowest sense, if so it be, that the Subject Matter seem to require it; for
instance, if the Oath proceed from some Malice born to another, and so is not
added to a Promise, but a Threat. Neither does an Oath exclude tacit Conditions
and Limitations, provided they are such as plainly result from the Nature of
the Thing; as suppose, I have sworn to give another whatsoever he shall
request, if he ask what it is wicked or absurd for me to grant, I am not at all
obliged. For he who indefinitely promises any thing to him that desires, before
he knows what he is like to ask, presupposes the other will crave nothing but
what is honest and morally possible, not things absurd or mischievous to
himself or any body else.

THIS is also to be noted, that in Oaths IX. Sense of an Oath.
the Sense of all the words thereof is to be such as he shall acknowledge
himself to take them in, who accepts the Oath, that is, to whom the other party
swears. For the Oath is to be looked upon to be made for his sake and not for
the sake of the Juror. Whence it is his part to dictate the Form of the Oath,
and this to do in words as plain as is possible; so that himself may signify
in what Sense he conceives them, and the person swearing may profess that he
well understands his Meaning, and then those Words are distinctly to be
expressed, that so no room may be left for Cavils or Shuffling.

OATHS may most fitly be distinguished X. Oaths divided.
according to the Use they are applied to in Human Life. Some being annexed to
Promises and Contracts, thereby to procure a strict and religious Observance of
the same; others are applied to the Confirmation of any man's Assertion
concerning a Matter of Fact not altogether evident, and where the Truth cannot
by other means be more conveniently searched out; such are the Oaths
administered to Witnesses, and those who are privy to another man's doings;
sometimes also two Adversaries or Litigants may, with the consent of the Judge,
or the Concession of one party, by taking such or such an Oath put an end to
their Lawsuit.

CHAP. XII. Duties to be observed in acquiring Possession of Things.
WHEREAS such is the Condition I. Other Creatures useful to Man.
of Man's Body, that it cannot be supported, and preserved from that which would
destroy its Fabric, without the assistance of Things without him; and whereas
by making use of other Creatures his Life may be rendered much more comfortable
and easy; we may safely gather, that it is the Will of the supreme Moderator
of the World, that he be allowed to apply such other Creatures to his Service,
and that he may even destroy many of them for his Occasions. Neither does this
hold, as to Vegetables only which have no Sense of the loss of their beings;
but it reaches even the innocent Animals, which though they die with Pain, yet
are killed and devoured by men for their Sustenance without Sin.

FARTHER, all these outward Things II. Possession introduced.
are understood to have been left in the beginning by God indifferent to the
claim of all men, that is, so that none of them were the Propriety of this man
rather than that. Not but that Men were at liberty to dispose Things so, as
should seem requisite to the Condition of Mankind, and the Conservation of
Peace, Tranquillity and good Order in the World. Hence it was that at first,
while the Human Race was but of a small Number, it was agreed, that whatever
any one did first seize should be his, and not be taken from him by another,
with this Provision, that he should apply it to his own use; and leave the Body
or Thing, which produced it, still free from being claimed by any particular
man. But afterward, when Mankind was multiplied, and they began to bestow
Culture and Labor upon those things which afforded them Food and Raiment; for
the prevention of Quarrels, and for the sake of good Order, those Bodies or
Things also, which produced such Necessaries, were divided among particular
men, and every one had his proper Share assigned him, with this general
Agreement, that Whatsoever in this first Division of Things, was yet left
unpossess'd, should for the future be the Propriety of the first Occupant. And
thus God so willing, with the previous Consent or at least by a tacit Compact
of Man, Propriety or the Possession of Things was introduced into the World.

NOW from Propriety flows a Right, III. Propriety what.
whereby the Substance, as it were, of any thing so belongs to One, that it
cannot after the same manner wholly belong to Another. From whence it follows,
that we may at our own pleasure dispose of those things which are our
Propriety, and hinder all other people from the use of them; unless by
Agreement they have procured from us some special Right. Although in
Communities it does not always happen that Proprieties are kept so unmixt and
absolute, but are sometimes circumscribed and limited by the Municipal Laws
thereof, or by Orders and Agreements of men among themselves. But when any
certain Thing belongs jointly to more persons than one after the same manner,
then it is said to be common to those several Persons.

BUT as Things did not all at once become IV. All things not possessed.
the Possessions of men, but successively, and according as the State of
Mankind seemed to require; so it was not necessary neither that every Thing in
the World should be claimed by one man or other, but, the Peace of Mankind
being preserved, some things may, and some things ought to continue, as at the
beginning, common to all. For there are Things which are, it is true,
advantageous to man, but since they are inexhaustible, so that every man may
have the Benefit of 'em, and yet no single person can have the less Use of
them, it would be foolish and to no purpose for any one to enclose or lay claim
to 'em. Such are the Light of the Sun, the Air, the running Water, and the
like: Among which also may be accounted the vast Ocean flowing between great
Continents, for so much of it as is very far distant from the Shore. Because
it is not only more than sufficient for the promiscuous use of all men, but it is
morally impossible for any single Nation to guard it. For where a Thing is of
that Nature, that other men cannot by any means be hindered from the Use of it,
it is not only in vain to divide or lay claim to it, but it is apt to give
occasion for insignificant Quarrels.

THE Methods of acquiring Property V. Twofold Propriety.
are either Original or Derivative; Those deduce Propriety from the beginning
of things; These transfer Propriety already acquired from one to another. The
former may be again subdivided into those which are simply such as give
immediate Possession of some particular thing; and those which have a regard to
some other matter, whereby some Improvement is made of what we before possessed.

AFTER it had been covenanted among VI. Premier Seisin.
Mankind that Things should be appropriated to this or that man, it was also
agreed, that what things soever had not fallen within that first Division,
should thereafter become the Propriety of the first Occupant, that is, of him,
who before any other, should actually seize it with a design of possessing the
same. So that even at this time the Original Method of acquiring Propriety in
many things is only Premier Seisin or the first Occupancy. After this manner
Titles are made to desolate Regions, which no man ever claimed, which become
his who first enters upon 'em with an Intention of making them his own,
provided he cultivate 'em and assign Limits* how far he propounds to occupy.
But when any number of men jointly possess themselves of any tract of Land,
it is customary to assign to each Member of the Company a Share, and to account
what is left undivided to belong to the Society in common. By this first
Occupancy also are gained all the wild Beasts, Birds, and Fishes living in the
Sea, Rivers or Lakes thereunto appertaining; as well as what by the Sea shall
be thrown upon the Shore; except particular Laws inhibit the promiscuous
Seizure of the same, or assign them to some certain Claimant. These if we would
make our own, we must actually seize them and take 'em into our Possession. By
this Occupancy also we may rightfully acquire possession of things whereof the
Propriety which any other person could have is extinct. As for instance, in
things which are cast away with intention of the Owner not to have them any
more, or in things which at first we lost unwillingly, but in time relinquished
and fore-went. To which may be added what the Lawyers call Treasure trove, or
Money found, the Owner whereof is not known, which goes to the Finder, except
by the special Laws of a Country it be otherwise provided.

MOREOVER there are many things VII. Accessional Improvements.
capable of being possessed, which continue not always in the same state, but
some after several manners increase of themselves or enlarge their Substance;
to others some external Additions are made; many bring forth Fruit, and not a
few by Man's Labor and Workmanship admit of Improvement. All these are
comprised under the head of Accessional Advantages, and may be divided into two
sorts; for some without the help of Man accrue from Nature alone; while others
either wholly or in part are to be attributed to Human Industry. Concerning
both which this is to be the Rule, To him who is the Owner of the Thing to the
same belong the Improve ments and Accessional Advantages; and he who has formed
any Matter of his own into such or such a Fashion, is Owner of that Form or
Fashion.

BUT Cases often happen, where either VIII. Services.
by Contract or some different way, another man may get a Right to receive a
certain Profit out of Things that are ours, or to prohibit us the using even of
what is our own to every purpose. These Rights are wont to be called Services,
and they are of two sorts, either Personal, where the Advantage from what
belongs to another man comes to the Person immediately; or Real, where such
Benefit is received from that which is another by the means or Mediation of
that which is ours: among which are accounted the Right of receiving profits,
of making use of what is another, of living in such a place, of commanding the
work of Servants. The Real Services are again subdivided into such as regard
the City or the Country: the first sort are the supporting my Neighbors House
or Wall which cannot but bear upon mine, affording the benefit of Lights, not
stopping them up, allowing Prospects, carrying off the Rainwater, and the
like: the latter are liberty of Passage for men or Cattle, leave to derive or
draw Water, or to water Cattle, or to graze 'em for a time, etc. All which
Services have been introduced for the preservation of good Neighborhood.

AMONG the derivative Methods of IX. Derivative Propriety.
acquiring Propriety, some are when by the Disposal of the Law Things are
devolved from one upon another; others are when Possession is transferred by
the former Owner; and this sometimes affecting the same in whole, and sometimes
in part.

THE Whole of an Estate by the death X. Inheritance.
of the former Owner generally passes by Succession to the next Heir of the
Intestate. For it being repugnant to the common Inclinations of Men, and
altogether disserviceable to the Peace of Mankind, that such Possessions should
be accounted as foregone and relinquished, and as left to be a Prey to any one
who shall seize them, which such Owner had while he lived, taken so much care
and pains to get: Hence, by the Dictates of Reason it has obtained among all
civilized Nations, that if any man dies not having disposed of what he had, the
same shall devolve to those, whom according to the general Inclination of
Mankind he must be thought to have holden most dear to him. And these,
regularly considered, are those who descend from us, as our Children, etc.
after them those who are of the same Consanguinity, according as they are
nearly allied. And tho there may be many, who either for having received
Benefits or from some particular Affection have a greater Respect for persons
not at all by Blood related to them, than for the nearest Kin; yet for Peace
sake it is necessary without taking notice of the peculiar Case of some Few,
rather to follow the universal Propensity of Man, and to observe that Method of
Succession which is most plain and least obnoxious to Controversies; which
would be very apt to arise, if the Benefactors and Friends of the deceased
might be admitted to contest Succession with the next of Kin. So that if a man
has a mind to prefer those to whom he stands obliged by kindnesses, or such as
he has on any other account a Love for, he is to make such Disposals openly and
expressly.

WHENCE it follows, that the next XI. Heirs.
Heirs to any man are his Children, which are given by Nature to Parents to be
carefully bred and educated, and for whom every Parent is supposed to wish a
most plentiful Provision, and to design to leave whatsoever he shall die
possessed of. But by Children are chiefly understood such as are born in lawful
Matrimony: For to these much Favor is due from Reason itself, from the Hon^ur
and Decency of the Married Life, and from the Laws of all Civilized Countries,
above the Illegitimate. All which Considerations obtain yet with these
Exceptions, to wit, unless the Father has sufficient Reason not to acknowledge
such a one for his Son, or disinherits him for some heinous Wickedness. In the
same case with Children are also to be considered Progeny of lower degrees, as
Grandchildren, whom the Grandfather is bound to bring up, and who have Right
to share his Inheritance together with the Uncles on both sides; and this,
because there can be no reason, that the Misery of losing their deceased Parent
should be aggravated by being excluded from their Proportion of Inheritance in
the Estate of their Grandfather. Upon failure of Heirs descendent, it is
reasonable the Goods of Children revolve to their Parents; and that to those
who are Fatherless, Motherless and Childless their Brethren should succeed; and
upon default of these the next of kin to the deceased ought to inherit. Though
in order to prevent Contentions, to which on this score great occasions are
frequently given, and that this matter may be settled for the public Good, in
most Communities the Order of Succession is found to be accurately stated; and
such Directions of the Government it is most safe for every private man to
follow in this Case, unless very weighty Causes force him to the contrary.

THE Whole also of an Estate may, XII. Last Will.
by an Act of the former Proprietor upon his Death be passed away by his Last
Will and Testament; for this has been allowed by most Nations that for some
kind of Ease to our Thoughts of Mortality, a man yet alive may, if Death
happen, transfer what he has of outward Goods to some person that he loves
best. Now whereas in the most ancient times it seems to have been customary,
that the dying man upon the approach of his End openly declared his Heirs, and
with his own hands delivered such or such Portions into the hands of them who
were to receive; yet afterward for good reasons, another manner of Bequeathing
was approved by many People; to wit, that a man may at any time, when himself
thinks good, make his own Will, and either declare it openly, or keep it close
in Writing, which Will also he may at his pleasure alter, and of which the
Heirs he has named or written down cannot make any use till the Testator be
dead. Not but that such Last Wills of how much authority soever they are among
men, yet are to be ordered with Consideration of the Parties various Relations
to men and of the Good of the Community; the Neglect whereof has given occasion
for the Laws oftentimes to provide and give Rules fot making them; from which
prescribed Directions, if any man depart, he has no reason to complain that
regard was not had to his Last Will.

WHILE men are yet living Things XIII. Gift.
are transferred by the Act of the first Proprietor, either Gratis or Freely;
or else by the Mediation of some Contract. The former way of Transferring is
called Gift; and of the latter, which is Contracting, we shall speak hereafter.

SOMETIMES also Things change their XIV. Forcible Possession.
Owner without the Consent and even against the Will of the same Owner; and
this is mostly in Communities by way of Fine, when sometimes all the Estate of
a Convict, sometimes such a Portion only shall be forfeited, and the same shall
be given either to a private person who has suffered wrong, or applied to the
uses of the Public. So in War Goods are forcibly taken from the Possessor, who
parts with them very unwillingly, by an Enemy who is too strong for him, and
become the true Propriety of the Seizer; not but that the first Owner has still
a Right with a greater force, whenever he can, to recover 'em, so long as till
by subsequent Treaties of Peace he does in effect renounce his Pretenses
thereto.

BESIDE these there is yet a peculiar XV. Prescription.
way of acquiring Propriety, called Vsucaption, or Prescription; by which a man
who without Violence, Knavery or Injustice has possessed himself of any thing,
and enjoyed the same quietly and without interruption a long time, is at length
accounted the absolute lawful Owner thereof; insomuch that he shall be able to
keep off any ancient Claimant who shall pretend a Title thereto. And the Reason
of admitting this sort of Right, was, that any man must be adjudg'd to have
relinquished and forgone a Thing which he has time out of mind neglected to
assert to himself, whereas occasions for so doing can hardly be supposed to be
so long wanting; and partly for the sake of Peace and Tranquillity, which
require that Possessions have some time or other in which they may be for ever
fixed and settled beyond dispute. And this still the rather, because it is much
harder and more grievous to be turned out of a Possession honestly acquired,
than never to enjoy one that was lost a great while ago, when all hankering
Thoughts after the same have been long discontinued. But in Communities it is
very necessary for the prevention of Controversies, that certain limited Times
be set, which shall make a good Prescription, according to Reason and
Convenience.

CHAP. XIII. The Duties which naturally result from Man's Property in Things.
1. PROPRIETY in Things being introduced I. Quiet Enjoyment.
among men, these Duties from thence naturally arise, 1. That every man is
obliged to permit another, who is not a declared Enemy, quietly to enjoy what
things soever are his, and neither by Fraud or Violence to spoil, embezle or
convert them to his own use. Whereby Thefts, Rapines and the like Crimes, which
tend to the invading and encroaching upon other men's Properties, are forbidden.

2. WHEN any thing that belongs to another II. Restitution.
comes fairly to our hands without any trick or fraud of ours, and we have
still the same in possession, we are obliged to take care as far as in us lies
that it be returned to its right Owner. Not that we are bound to restore it at
our own charges, but if we have been at any cost in preserving it, we may
justly demand to be reimburs'd, or stop the Thing till satisfaction be made.
And in such a Case only we are obliged to Restitution, when we certainly know,
that the Thing does really and truly belong to another. For then we ought to
give notice, that the same is in our Possession, and that we do not hinder the
Right Owner from receiving it. Not but that, if we have purchased any thing
justly and lawfully, we our selves are no ways obliged to call our own Title in
question, and to make Enquiry by Proclamation, as 'twere, whether any one can
lay claim thereto. And this Duty is superior to any private Contracts, so as in
many Cases to bar their Obligation. As for instance, if a Thief does trust and
deposite with me upon my Promise of Redelivery, somewhat that he has stolen, I
being altogether ignorant of the matter; after which the Right Owner appears,
the same is to be restored to him and not to the Thief.

BUT if any thing belonging to another, III. Restitution, part consumed.
which yet we came by fairly and honestly, be wasted and consumed, it is our
Duty to restore only so much to the Owner as we have received Profit by it.
Because we have no Right to reap Advantage from another undeserved Loss.

FROM these Premises we may deduce IV. Conclusions. First.
the following Conclusions, 1. A Presumptive Owner, (or one who without any
Covin on his part becomes the Possessor of what belongs to another man) is not
obliged to make any Restitution, if the Thing perishes; because neither the
thing it self is in his power, neither has he received any Gain or Advantage
thereby.

2. SUCH a Presumptive Owner is obliged V. Second.
to make Restitution, not only of the Thing it self, but also of the Fruits and
Profits, which are in being at the time. For to whomsoever the Thing really
belongs, to the same likewise the Profits and Advantages thence arising do
accrue. Nevertheless it is lawful for the Possessor to deduct what charges he
has been at upon the Thing, or upon its Culture and Improvement, by means
whereof it has produced those Fruits and Profits.

3. A Presumptive Owner is obliged to VI. Third.
make Restitution of the Thing, and of the Fruits and Profits of it that are
consumed, if otherwise he would have consumed as much of his own, and can
recover the value thereof from him of whom he received Possession. For
otherwise he would enrich himself, whilst by spending what belongs to another,
he spares his own.

4. A Presumptive Owner is not obliged VII. Fourth.
to make good the Fruits and Profits which he might have made of the Thing in
his possession, but neglected so to do: Because he has not the Thing nor ought
in lieu thereof, and he must be considered, to have done by it as he would have
done by that which was truly his own.

5. IF a Presumptive Owner makes a VIII. Fifth.
Present or Donation of any thing belonging to another, which was given to
himself, he is not bound to restore it; unless he had been obliged in Duty to
have given the like Value. For in such a Case he would be a Gainer, by saving
what he must have given of his own.

6. IF a Presumptive Owner makes over IX. Sixth.
what he has purchased of another man upon a valuable Consideration, he is not
bound to make Restitution; unless so far as he has made any advantage by it.

7. A Presumptive Owner is obliged to X. Seventh.
restore that which belongs to another, though he bought it upon a valuable
Consideration; nor can he demand of the true Owner the Price he paid for it,
but only of him from whom he had it; unless so far as the Charges which the
Owner must necessarily have been at, in regaining the possession of his Right;
or that otherwise he did freely promise some Reward for the Recovery.

WHOSOEVER happens to find any XI. Things found.
thing belonging to another, which, it is probable, the right Owner lost against
his Will, he cannot take it up with an intention to detain it from him when he
requires it. But if the Owner appear not, he may fairly keep it himself.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Price and Value of Things.
AFTER Propriety was introduced into I. Price.
the World, all Things not being of the same Nature, nor affording the same
Help to Human Necessities; and every man not being sufficiently provided with
such things as were necessary for his Use and Service, it was early brought
into practice among men to make mutual Exchanges of one Thing for another. But
because it very often happened, that Things of a different Nature and Use were
to be transferred; lest either party should be a loser by such Exchanging, it
was necessary by a common Agreement and Consent among themselves to assign to
Things such a Quantity or Standard, by which those Things might be compared and
reduced to a Balance between each other. The same also obtaining as to Actions,
which it was not thought good should be done gratis by one man for another. And
this Quantity or Standard is that which we call Price or Value.

THIS Price is divided into Common II. Price twofold.
and Eminent; The first is in Things or Actions which come within the compass
of ordinary Commerce, according as they afford either Usefulness or Delight to
Mankind. But the other is in Money, as it virtually contains the Value of all
Things and Works, and is understood to give them their common Estimate.

THE natural Ground of the Common III. Common Value.
Value, is that Fitness which any Thing or Action has for supplying, either
mediately or immediately, the Necessities of Humane Life, and rendering the same
more easy or more comfortable. Hence it is we call those things which are not
of any Use to us, Things of no value. There are nevertheless some things most
useful to Humane Life, which are not understood to fall under any determinate
Price or Value; either because they are or ought to be exempted from Dominion
and Property, or because they are not capable of being exchanged, and therefore
cannot be traded for; or else, because in Commerce they are not otherwise
regarded than as Appendages to be supposed of course to belong to another
Thing. Besides also when the Law of God or Man places some Actions above the
reach of Commerce, or forbids that they should be done for a Reward, it is to
be understood that the same Laws have set them without the bounds of Price or
Valuation. Thus the upper Regions of the Air, the Sky, and the Heavenly Bodies,
and even the vast Ocean are exempt from Human Property, so that no Rate or
Value can be put upon them. So there is no Rate or Price to be set upon a
Freeman, because Freemen come not within the compass of Commerce. So the clear
Light of the Sun, the serene and pure Air, the delightful Aspect of the Earth,
so far only as it pleases the Sight, the Wind, the Shade, and the like
considered separately and in themselves, have no Price or Valuation; since men
cannot enjoy these things without the Use of the Earth. Nevertheless they are
of great importance in advancing or lessening the Price of Countries, Lands or
Farms. So likewise it is unlawful to set any Rate or Price on Sacred Actions, to
which any moral Effect is assigned by Divine Institution; which Crime is called
Simony. And it is great Wickedness in a Judge to expose Justice to Sale.

NOW there are various Reasons why IV. Enhaunsing or Debasing a Price.
the Price of one and the same thing should be increased or diminished, and why
one thing should be preferred before another, tho this may seem to be of equal
or greater Use to Humane Life. For here the Necessity of the thing or its
extraordinary Usefulness is not always regarded; but on the contrary we see
those things are of the least account or Value, without which Human Life is
least able to subsist; and therefore not without the singular Providence of
Almighty God, Nature has been very bountiful in providing plentiful store of
those things. But the Rarity or Scarceness of Things conduces chiefly to the
enhansing their Value; which is the more looked upon, when they are brought
from remote Countries. And hence the wanton Luxury of Mankind has set
extravagant Rates upon many things, which Humane Life might very well be
without, for instance upon Pearls and Jewels. But the Prices of Things, which
are of daily Use, are then chiefly raised where the Scarcity, is joined with
the Necessity or Want of them. The Prices of Artificial Things, besides their
Scarceness, are for the most part enhans'd by their ingenious Contrivance and
Curiosity of Art, that is seen in them, and sometimes by the Fame and Renown of
the Artificer, the Difficulty of the Work, the want of Artists in that way, and
the like. The Prices of Works and Actions are raised by their Difficulty,
Neatness, Usefulness, Necessity, by the Scarcity, Dignity and Ingenuity of the
Authors of them; and lastly by the Esteem and Reputation, which that Art has
gotten in the World. The Contrary to these are wont to diminish the Price of
Things. Sometimes again there may be some Certain Thing, which is not generally
much esteemed, but only by some Particular Persons, out of a Peculiar
Inclination; for Example, because he, from whom we had it, is mightily beloved
by us, and that it was given as a Token of his Particular Affection to us; or
because we have been accustomed thereto, or because it is a Remembrancer of
some remarkable Accident, or because by the help thereof we have escaped any
extraordinary danger, or because the Thing was made by Our selves. And this is
called the Estimate of singular Affection.

BUT there are other Circumstances likewise V. Particular Prices. Legal.
to be considered in stating the Rates and Prices of Particular Things. And
among those indeed, who live in a Natural Independence on any other, the Prices
of Particular Things are determined no otherwise, than by the Will of the
Persons Contracting; since they are entirely at their own liberty to make over
or to purchase what they please, nor can they be controlled in their Dealings
by any superior Authority. But in States and Governments the Prices of Things
are determined two several ways. The First is by an Order from the Magistrate
or some Particular Law; the second is by the Common Estimate and Judgment of
Men, or according as the Market goes, together with the Consent and Agreement
of those who Contract among themselves. The former of these by some is called
the Legal, the other the Vulgar Price. Where the Legal Rate is fixed for the
sake of the Buyers, which it is for the most part, it is not lawful for the
Sellers to exact more; though they are not forbidden, if they will, to take
less. So where the Rate of any Labor or Work is taxed by the Public
Magistrate for the sake of those who have occasion to Hire, it is not lawful
for the Workman to demand more, though he be not prohibited to take less.

BUT the Vulgar Price, which is not VI. Vulgar Price.
fixed by the Laws, admits of a Certain Latitude, within the Compass whereof
more or less may be and often is either taken or given, according to the
Agreement of the Persons Dealing; which yet for the most part goes according to
the Custom of the Market. Where commonly there is regard had to the Trouble and
Charges, which the Tradesmen generally are at, in the bringing home and
managing their Commodities; and also after what manner they are bought or sold,
whether by Wholesale or Retail. Sometimes also on a sudden the Common Price is
altered by reason of the Plenty or Scarcity of Buyers, Money or the Commodity.
For the Scarcity of Buyers and of Money, (which on any particular account may
happen,) and the plenty of the Commodity may be a means of diminishing the
Price thereof. On the other hand the Plenty of Buyers and of Money, and the
Scarcity of the Commodity enhanses the same. Thus as the value of a Commodity
is lessened, if it wants a Buyer; So the Price is augmented, when the Possessor
is solicited to sell what otherwise he would not have parted with. Lastly, it
is likewise to be regarded, whether the Person offers ready Money, or desires
Time for Payment; for allowance of Time is part of the Price.

BUT after Mankind degenerated from VII. Price eminent.
their primitive Simplicity, and introduced into the World several kinds of
Gaining; it was easily discerned that that Common and Vulgar Price was not
sufficient for the dispatching the Business of Men and for the carrying on of
Commerce, which then daily increased. For at first all kind of Trading
consisted only in Exchanging and Bartering, and the Labors of others could no
otherwise be valued than by Work for Work, or some Thing given in hand for
Recompense. But after Men began to desire so many several things for
Convenience or Pleasure, it was not easy for every one to become master of
That which another would be willing to take in Exchange, or which might be of
equal value to the Things he wanted from him. And in Civilized States or
Societies, where the Inhabitants are distinguished into several Stations, there
is an absolute necessity there should be different Degrees and Sorts of Men,
which, if that simple and plain way of bartering of Things and Works had been
still in use, could not, or at least not without great difficulty support
themselves. Hence most Nations, which were pleased with a more sumptuous way of
living, thought fit by Public Consent to set an Eminent Price or Value upon
some Certain Thing, whereby the Common and Vulgar Prices of other Things should
be measured, and wherein the same should be virtually contained. So that by
means of this Thing any one may purchase to himself whatsoever is to be sold,
and easily manage and carry on any kind of Traffic and Bargain.

FOR this purpose most Nations chose VIII. Gold, Silver, etc.
to make use of the Nobler kind of Metals, and such as were not very Common.
Because these being of a very compacted substance, they cannot easily be worn
out, and admit of being divided into many minute Parts; nor are they less
proper to be kept and handled; and for the Rarity of 'em are equivalent to many
other things. Although sometimes for Necessity, and by some Nations for want of
Metals, other Things have been made use of instead of Money.

MOREOVER, in Communities it is IX. Coin.
only in the power of the Chief Magistrates to assign the Value of Money, and
thence Public Stamps are wont to be put upon them. Nevertheless in the
assigning thereof, respect is to be had to the Common Estimate of the
Neighboring Nations, or of those with whom we have any Traffic or Commerce.
For otherwise, if the State should set too high a Value on their Money, or if
they should not give it a just and true Allay, all Commerce with Foreign
Nations, which could not be carried on by Exchange, or Barter alone, would be
at a stand. And for this very Reason the Value of Money is not rashly to be
altered, unless a very great Necessity of State require it. Though as Gold and
Silver grows more plentiful, the Value of Money in Comparison to the Price of
Land, and things thereon depending, is wont as it were insensibly and of it
self to grow lower.

CHAP. XV. Of those Contracts in which the Value of Things is presupposed, and
of the Duties thence arising.
A PACT or Agreement in general is I. Pacts and Contracts.
the Consent and Concurrence of Two or more in the same Resolution. But because
oftentimes simple Agreements are contradistinguish'd to Contracts, the
Difference seems chiefly to consist herein, that by Contracts are understood
such Bargains as are made concerning Things and Actions, which come within the
Compass of Commerce, and therefore suppose a Property and Price of Things. But
such Covenants as are concluded upon, about other Matters, are called by the
Common Term of Pacts or Agreements. Although even to some of these is
promiscuously given the Name of Pacts and Contracts.

CONTRACTS may be divided into II. Contracts of two sorts.
Gratuitous and Chargeable. The former sort affords gratis some Advantage to
one of the Parties Contracting, as is a Commission, a Thing Lent, or Deposited.
The other obliges both Parties reciprocally to the performance of some certain
Condition. For in these Contracts something is performed or delivered with
intention, that an Equivalent thereto may be received.

NOW all Chargeable Contracts naturally III. Equality.
imply an Equality in 'em, that is, that each of the Persons Contracting
receive of the other so much in value as himself parts with; and if any
Inequality happens, that Party who received too little, may lawfully demand
what is wanting to be made up, or else he is at liberty wholly to throw up the
Contract. And this is chiefly practiced in Governments and Societies, where the
Prices of Things are ascertained either by Law or the Custom of the Market. But
for the better stating and determining this Equality, it is requisite, that the
Contracting Parties do well understand the Thing about which they are driving a
bargain, with all those of its Qualifications and Circumstances that are of any
Consideration. And hence it is, that He who is about to transfer any Thing to
another by Contract, ought to lay before him not only the Good Qualities of the
Thing, but also its Faults and Defects. For without this a Just Price cannot be
put upon it. Not that it is necessary to declare such Circumstances, as no ways
affect the Thing it self; nor is there any occasion to take notice of Faults
which are already known on both sides. For he that wittingly buys any Thing
that is amiss, must take the blame upon himself.

NOW in these Contracts an Equality is IV. Defects to be made good.
so far to be regarded, that although nothing at all was concealed or
dissembled; yet if afterward any Inequality be found out, even though neither
of the Parties Contracting were blameworthy, either for that the Defect lay
altogether hid and undiscovered, or that there was some mistake in the Price,
such like things must be rectified, and he who has too much, must allow to him
that wanted to make the Bargain good. Although for the avoiding a multitude of
unnecessary Suits, the Laws of every Country have here chiefly made Provision
against the most Notorious Abuses; as to the Rest, supposing every one will be
careful in his own Concerns.

GRATUITOUS Contracts are chiefly V. Deputation or Commission.
Three, a Commission, a Thing Lent, and a Deposit or Trust. A Commission is,
when any one shall undertake Gratis the management and Dispatch of Another
business at his Desire and Request. And this happens two several ways, either
when the Method of managing it is prescribed to him, or when it is left to his
Judgment and Discretion. In this Case as Faithfulness and great Diligence is
required, since no Body almost will give a Commission but to a Friend, and one
of whom he has a very good Opinion; so on the other Hand the Trustee ought to
be indempnified from the Expenses he is at upon the Thing committed to his
Care; and also from the Losses he may incur by reason thereof, and which
properly proceeded from the Commission it self.

A Thing Lent is, when we grant gratis VI. Thing lent.
the Use of what is our own, to another. Wherein it is to be observed, that
every one should carefully and diligently preserve and look after the Thing
entrusted; not convert the same to other Uses, or further than the Person
Lending does consent; and to restore the same entire and in the same Condition
as he received it, allowing only for what detriment it must of necessity
receive by the common and ordinary use thereof. But if any Thing be granted for
a Certain time, and in the mean while the Owner be in great want of it, by
reason of some accident which was not foreseen at the time of the Lending
thereof, the same must be restored whenever he demands it, without any
shuffling or delay. But if the Thing Lent perishes suddenly or by any Accident,
without any neglect of the Person to whom it was lent, the Value thereof is not
to be made good, if the same in all Probability would have likewise perished in
the Custody of the Right Owner. Otherwise it is but Equity that the Person to
whom it was lent should pay the Price of it, because the Right Owner would not
have lost it, had he not been so kind to Another. On the other hand if the
person borrowing have been at any necessary Expense upon the Thing Lent besides
that, which by Consequence attends the Use of it, the same ought to be refunded
by the Owner thereof.

A Deposit or Thing left is, when we commit VII. A Deposit.
any thing of our own, or any ways belonging to us, to the Trust of another
Person, to keep the same Gratis. In which Case it is requisite, that the Thing
so entrusted should be carefully looked after, and restored to the Deponent,
whenever he pleases to call for it; unless such a Restitution would be
prejudicial both to the Owner and to Others, and upon that score it may be
deferred. Nor is it lawful to make Use of the Thing so deposited, without the
Consent of the Owner, if it can any ways receive Damage by the Use, or it be
for the Interest of the Owner, that it should not be seen. And if any one shall
presume to do it, he shall make good whatsoever Damages it may have sustained
by the Use. Neither is it Lawful to take the Thing deposited out of those
Covers and Receptacles, wherein it was wrapped up and enclosed by the Person who
left it. But as it is very base and even more heinous than Theft it self to
deny the Redelivery of any thing that was left to our Trust; so it is yet much
more detestable for any one to disown a Miserable Deposit, that is, what was
left with him by reason of any Misfortune, in Danger of Fire, Confusion or
Tumult. Again, the Deponent is to refund the Charges that have been laid out
upon the Thing Deposited.

NOW among chargeable Contracts, or VIII. Bartering.
Covenants which imply somewhat to be done or given on both parts, the most
Ancient, and that whereby Trading and Commerce was carried on before the
Invention of Money, was Permutation or Bartering, whereby on each side
something was given for some other thing equivalent thereto. Although at this day,
since the Invention of Money, that sort of Exchange is chiefly practiced among
Merchants, whereby things are not simply compared between themselves, but they
are first reduced to Money, and afterward delivered as so much Money. But
Reciprocal Donation is a different sort of a Thing from the Contract of Barter,
for in this there is no necessity that an Equality should be observed.

BUYING and Selling is, when for Money IX. Buying and Selling.
the Property of any thing is acquired, or else such a Right as is equivalent
thereto, of which kind this is the most plain and obvious, when the Buyer,
after the Value is agreed upon, immediately pays down the Price, and the Seller
thereupon delivers the Commodity. Yet oftentimes the Agreement is made so, that
the Commodity should be immediately delivered, and the Price thereof paid at a
Certain Time. And sometimes the Price is agreed upon, but the Delivery of the
Thing or Commodity is to be within a Certain Time Limited. In which Case it
seems but Equity, that before the Time be elapsed, the Seller should stand to
the hazard of it; but if after the Time is elapsed, the Buyer makes delay and
neglects the taking it away, then, if the Commodity perishes, the Buyer shall
stand wholly to the loss thereof. Now to this of Buying and Selling are wont to
be added several other kinds of Bargains. As that, which is termed Addictio in
diem, whereby any Thing is sold with this Proviso, that it may be lawful for
the Seller to accept of better Terms, offered by another within a Certain Time.
So also the Lex Commissoria, which is such a Condition in any Contract, as, not
being performed within a Time Limited, the Bargain becomes void. So likewise
any kind of Recalling, or Privilege of recanting a Bargain, which is to be
either so understood, that if the Price be laid down within a certain Time
limited, or at any time whatever is offered, the Buyer shall be obliged to
restore it again to the Seller; or else so, as if the Thing be offered again,
the Seller is bound to return back again the Price thereof; or so as, if the
Buyer be willing to sell the same again, the First Seller should have the
Refusal of it, before any other, which is likewise called Jus protimiseos or
the Right of Pre-emption. It is also customary that the Seller should reserve
to himself a Certain Portion of the Lands which he sells, or some Use or
Acknowledgment for the same. There is another way of Buying, which they call
per aversionem, when several Things of different Prices are not valued singly,
but at haphazard, and, as it were, in the lump. In that way of Sale, which is
called an Auction, the Thing is adjudg'd to that Person, who, among several
Bidders, offers most. Lastly, there is another way of Buying, whereby not any
Certain Thing is bought, but only the Probable Hopes and Expectation thereof;
which implies something of Chance; so as, neither the Buyer, if his Expectation
fails him, nor the Seller, tho it much exceed, have any Reason to complain.

HIRING and Letting is when the X. Hiring and Letting.
Use of a Thing, or any Labor is granted to another, upon a Certain
Consideration. Wherein, although regularly the Price is for the most part
agreed upon before hand; yet if any one without making a Bargain makes over his
Labor or the Use of any Thing belonging to him, he is supposed to expect so
much as the Common Custom, or the Honesty and Equity of the Person Hiring will
allow. Concerning this kind of Contract, it is to be observed, that if the Thing
let out happens wholly to perish, from that time the Person Hiring is no longer
obliged to pay the Wages or Pension agreed upon. But if the Thing hired has any
Certain and Determined Use, so as the Owner is obliged to make it fit and
serviceable for that purpose; in this Case if it receives any Prejudice, that
Person who hires it may deduct so much of the Hire, as the Thing is decayed as
to its Use. But if the Profit or Increase of the Thing farmed out be uncertain,
and have any thing of Chance attending it, as a large Increase happens to the
Advantage of the Hirer, so a small one is to his Loss; nor can there be any
Thing deducted from the Pension in strictness of Law, upon the Account of
Barrenness; especially since a Dearth of one Year may be recompensed by the
Plenty of another. Unless those Accidents, which prevent the Increase, do but
very rarely happen, and the Person Hiring be presumed not to have any ways
imagined the taking such a Chance upon himself. For it is but equitable that
such like Accidents should contribute to the lessening of the Pension. But as
he who lets out any Thing to another, is obliged to make the Thing fit for Use,
and to undergo the Necessary Charges; so the Person Hiring must be a Good
Husband in managing the Thing, and must make good what was lost through his
Neglect. And he who has hired any Work to be done, which by his own fault was
spoiled, must do the like. He that has agreed with another for any Service of
his, which he is to do presently, if he be hindered by any Accident from
performing the same, he cannot demand any Reward. But he who has hired any one
for some considerable Time, if he happens to be rendered unfit for Service for
a short time by Sickness or any other Accident, it is inhuman to turn him out
of his Business or to deduct any thing out of his Wages.

IN a Contract of Things Lent, Something XI. Things lent.
is given to a Certain Person upon this Condition, that he be obliged to
restore the same Kind after a Certain Time in the same Quantity and Quality.
Now those Things which are usually Lent, are called Fungibiles, that is, such
Things as are capable of being repaid in Kind, though not in Specie; because
any Thing of that kind may so perform the Part of another thing, that he who
receives any thing of that Kind in the same Quantity and Quality, may be said
to have received the same, which he gave. The same Things are likewise
determined and specified by Number, Weight and Measure, in which respect also
they are commonly called Quantities, as they are contradistinct to Species. Now
a Thing is lent either gratis, so as no more is to be received than was
delivered; or else for some Profit or Advantage, which is called Usury; and
which is no ways repugnant to the Law of Nature, provided it be moderate, and
proportionable to the Gain, which the other Person makes of the Money or the
Thing Lent; and which had it not been put out, would have been neither Loss nor
Gain; and that it be not exacted of Poor Men, to whom a Thing Lent is sometimes
as good as an Alms.

IN a Contract of Partnership Two or XII. Partnership.
More join together their Money, Wares, or Works with an Intention that every
one should receive a proportionable share of the Profit; and if there happens
to be any Loss, that likewise must be born ratably by each Party. In which kind
of Society as all Parties are obliged to Faithfulness and Industry; so no Party
must break off the Partnership before the Time, or to the detriment of his
Partner. But when the time of the Partnership is expired, after the Gain and
Loss is allowed, each Party is to receive what Stock he put in. But if one
Person puts in Money or Goods, and the other contributes his Labor, we must
consider, after what manner such a Contribution was made. For when one man's
Labor is only concerned about the managing and disposing of the other Persons
Money or Goods, the Shares of the Gain are so to be determined, as the Profit
of the Money or Commodity bears Proportion to the Value of the Labor; the
Principal still remaining the Property of him only who first contributed it.
But when any Labor is bestowed in the Improvement of any Commodity which is
put in by another, he is supposed to have such a Share in the Thing it self as
is Proportionable to the Improvement it has received. Again, when men engage
all that they have in any Joint Stock, as each of the Partners must faithfully
bring into the Account the Profits they have made; so also every one of them is
to be maintained out of the Joint Stock according to their Condition. But when
the Partnership is broken off, the Division of the Goods is made ratably
according as each Party at first brought in; without any Regard had, by whose
Goods any Gain or Loss happened to the Company, unless beforehand it was
otherwise agreed.

THERE are likewise several Contracts, XIII. Contracts upon Chance.
which imply a Chance: amongst which may be reckoned Wagers, when the Certainty
of any Event, which is not yet known by either Party, is affirmed by one and
denied by the other, a Certain Value being laid on both sides, which is
adjudg'd to that Person, to whose Assertion the Event is found to agree.
Hitherto may also be referred all sorts of Games, wherein we play for any thing
of Value. Among which those have the least Chance, which contain a Trial of
Wit, Dexterity, Skill or Strength. In some of these Skill and Chance have both
a like share. In others Chance does chiefly determine the matter. Although it is
the Part of the Civil Magistrate to consider how far such kind of Contracts may
be tolerated, as consistent with the Public or Private Good: Among these we
may reckon the various sorts of Lotteries; as either when several men having
paid for a Thing by Money laid down jointly, refer it to a decision by Lot,
which of them shall have the Whole: or when a Box or Pot of Lots is made use
of, into which a Certain Number of Lots or Papers, both Blanks and Prizes are
put, and for some set Price, Liberty is granted of drawing them out, so that
the Person drawing may receive the Prize marked upon the Lot. To these
Contracts the received Methods of Insurance have some kind of Affinity, which
are such Bargains whereby is undertaken the securing from and making good any
Damage, so that the Insurer, for a certain Sum of Money paid down, takes upon
himself and is obliged to satisfy for whatsoever Losses or Damages any
Commodities may undergo in their transportation to remote Countries; so that if
it shall happen that they be lost, he is bound to pay the Owner the Value of
them.

FOR the rendering of Contracts and XIV. Sureties and Pledges.
Covenants more firm and secure, Sureties and Pledges are frequently made use
of. A Surety is, when another Person, who is approved of by the Creditor, takes
upon himself the Obligation of the Principal Debtor, so that unless he makes
payment, the other must make it good; Yet so, that the Principal Debtor is
obliged to repay him and save him harmless. And although the Surety cannot
stand bound for a Greater Sum, than the Principal Debtor, yet nothing hinders
but that the Surety is more firmly tied than the other, because more is relied
upon his Credit than upon that of the Principal Debtor. Yet in course the
Principal Debtor is to be called upon before the Surety, unless he has wholly
taken the Obligation upon himself; and such a Person in the Civil Law* is
commonly called Expromissor, or an Undertaker. Now if several Persons be
Security for one, each of them is to be called upon for his Proportion only;
unless by Accident any one of them becomes Insolvent, or is not to be found.
For in such a Case the others must be charged with his Share.

IT IS likewise oftentimes customary for XV. Pledge or Mortgage.
the Debtor to deliver or make over to the Creditor for securing his Debt, some
certain Thing, which is called a Pledge or a Mortgage, until the Debt be paid.
The Intent of which is not only that the Debtor should be excited to make
payment out of a desire of recovering what belongs to him; but also that the
Creditor should have some Prospect, how he may be satisfied. And upon this
account Pledges ought regularly to be of equal, or greater Value than the Debt
it self. Now the Things which may be offered as Pledges, are either
Improveable, or not Improveable; as to the former kind there is commonly added
a Covenant called Pactum (...), which impowers the Creditor to enjoy the Fruits
and Profits of that Pledge, instead of Interest; Now as to the other sort the
Lex Commissoria takes Place; which provides that the Pledge shall be forfeited
to the Creditor, if Payment be not made within a Certain time Limited: And this
is no ways unreasonable, when the Pledge is not of greater Value than the Debt,
together with the Use for the intermediate Time, and provided the Overplus be
restored to the Owner. But as the Creditor is obliged to restore the Pledge
upon payment of the Debt; so in the mean time he ought to be as careful in the
preserving thereof, as if it were really his own. And when there is no Pactum
(...), and the thing be of that nature, as to receive any damage by Use, or if
it be any ways for the Debtor's Advantage, he ought not to make use of it
without his Consent. Now a Mortgage differs from a Pledge in this, that a
Pledge consists in the Delivery of the Thing, but a Mortgage, tho the Thing be
not delivered, holds good by the bare Assignation of a Thing altogether
Immovable, from which, Payment not being made, the Creditor may receive
satisfaction for his Debt.

AND thus what the Duties of Persons XVI.
contracting are, will plainly appear from the End and Nature of these
Contracts.

CHAP. XVI. The several Methods by which the Obligations arising from Contracts
are dissolved.
AMONG the several ways of discharging I. Fulfilling or Payment.
Obligations arising from Contracts, and by which likewise the Duties and
Offices which proceed from thence do utterly expire, the chiefest and most
Natural of all is the Fulfilling or Payment of what was agreed upon. Where
although generally he that is the Debtor, is obliged to make the Payment; yet if
it be performed by any other in his name, who contracted the Obligation, the
same is dissolved; since it is no ways material by what Person the Thing is
performed. Yet with this Proviso, that he who pays for another, without any
Intention of bestowing it upon him, he may demand from the same again what he
laid out upon his Account. Moreover, Payment must be made to that Person to
whom it is due, or else to one whom he has appointed to receive the Debt in his
Name. And lastly, that very Thing must be performed or paid, which was agreed
upon; not any Thing else instead thereof, entire and not imperfect, not only in
parcels or by piecemeal; and likewise at the Place and Time appointed. Although
frequently the Courtesy of the Creditor or the Inability of the Debtor may be
the occasion of prolonging the time of Payment, or of receiving a Debt by
little Sums at once, or else of accepting of one Thing for another.

OBLIGATIONS are likewise taken II. Compensation.
away by Compensation, which is an Adjusting or Ballancing the Credit and the
Debt, one against the other, or when the Debtor is therefore discharged,
because it is manifest that the Creditor himself stands indebted to him for
something that is of the same kind, and of the same Value. Especially since in
those Things (called res fungibiles, that is) which admit of being repaid in
kind tho not in specie, an Equivalent is looked upon to be the same Thing; and
where the Debt is Mutual, since I must presently return back as much as I have
received; for the declining of unnecessary Payments, it seems to be the most
convenient way so to order the matter that each Party may keep what he has. Now
it is evident that those Things aforementioned may very properly be brought to
a Balance, of which the time for Payment is either present, or past. But it is
not so in other Things or Performances which are of a Different Nature; unless
they are estimated on both sides and reduced to Money.

AN Obligation also ceases when the III. Release.
Thing is released and forgiven by him, to whom it was due, and whose Interest
it was that the Obligation should have been performed. And this is done either
expressly, by some Certain Tokens declaring his Consent; as by giving a
Discharge, by giving up or cancelling the Bonds and Writings; or else tacitly,
if he himself hinders, or is any ways the Occasion that what is owing to him
cannot be paid.

THOSE Obligations are likewise some IV. Breaking off mutually.
times dissolved, which imply some Performance on both sides, by a mutual
breaking off before any thing on either side be done in the Contract; unless
this be expressly forbidden by the Laws. But if any thing is performed by one of
the Parties, the same must either be by him released to the other, or else be
made up some other way.

BESIDES, an Obligation is not indeed V. Falseness on one side.
properly dissolved, but rather broken off by the Falseness of either Party;
for when the one does not perform, what was agreed upon, neither is the other
obliged to make good what he undertook, in contemplation of the Others
performing. For as to the main Things which are to be performed in Contracts,
the Former are alway^ included in the Latter by way of Condition; as if it
should be said, I will perform this, if you perform that first.

OBLIGATIONS likewise cease, when VI. Case altered.
that State of things upon which they chiefly depended is either altered by the
Party who was obliged to perform somewhat, or by him to whom and for whose sake
it was to be done.

SOMETIMES also Time it self puts VII. Time.
an end to some Obligations, whose Duration depends upon a certain precise Day;
unless it be prolonged by the Express or tacit Consent of each Party. Yet there
is a Necessity that the Power of exacting the Obligation within the time
Limited should stand good.

Lastly, OBLIGATIONS which exist VIII. Death.
only with regard to some particular Person, are dissolved by Death; for when
the Subject is taken away, the Accidents also must of necessity be
extinguished. Yet oftentimes the Obligations of the Deceased are continued in
the Persons surviving. And that either because the Survivor, out of Duty, or
for other Reasons takes upon himself to fulfill the Obligations of the Person
Deceased; or because the Obligation must be satisfied out of the Goods of the
Deceased, with which the Heir is charged when he receives the Possession.

ANY one may make over by Assignment IX. Assignment.
his Debtor to his Creditor, provided he approves him, that he, instead of the
other may discharge the Debt. Where indeed there is required the Consent of the
Creditor, but not of that third Person who is the Debtor, whom I may turn over
without his knowledge or consent to the other Person that is to accept him. For
it is no great matter, to whom any Person makes payment; but from whom the Debt
is to be required, is very material.

CHAP. XVII. Of Meaning or Interpretation.
SO indeed it is, that neither in those I. Rules for Interpretation necessary.
Things which are commanded by the Supreme Magistrate, no man is accounte^ to
be bound any further than the sam^ Magistrate requires; and whosoever of hi^
own free Will sets himself under any Obligations, binds himself but according
t^ his own Intention. Yet because one Man cannot make a judgment of another
man^ Intention, but by such Signs and Actio^ as are apparent to the Senses;
hence therefore every one in foro humano is adjudg'd to be obliged to that
Thing, which he may fairly be supposed to have suggested by a Right
Interpretation of the outward Signs made by him. Wherefore it is of great Use
for the true Understanding both of Laws and Covenants, and for the better
discharging the Duties thence arising, that there should be laid down Certain
Rules for the true Interpretation of Words especially, they being the most
common and ordinary Signs whereby we express our Mind and Intention.

CONCERNING Common and Vulgar II. Popular Terms.
Terms this is the Rule: Words are generally to be taken in their most Proper
and received Signification, which they have not so much from Analogy and
Construction of Grammar, or Conformity of Derivation, as by Popular Use and
Custom, which is the Sovereign Comptroller and Judge of Speech.

TERMS of Art are to be explained according III. Terms of Art.
to the Definitions of Persons knowing in each Art. But if those Terms are
differently defined by several Persons, for the avoiding of Disputes, it is
necessary that we express in Vulgar Terms, what we mean by such a Word.

BUT for discovering the genuine meaning IV. Conjectures.
of Words it is sometimes necessary to make use of Conjectures, if either the
Words in themselves or the Connection of them be Ambiguous and liable to a
double Interpretation; or if some Parts of the Discourse seem to contradict the
other, yet so as by a fair and true Explanation they may be reconciled. For
where there is a plain and manifest Contrariety the latter part must be
accounted to contradict that which went before.

NOW Conjectures of the Mind, and V. Taken from the Subject Matter.
the Right meaning thereof in an Ambiguous, or Intricate Expression are chiefly
to be taken from the Subject Matter, from the Effects and the Accidents or
Circumstances As to the Matter this is the Rule: Words are generally to be
understood according to the Subject Matter. For he that speaks is supposed to
have always in view the Matter, of which he discourses, and therefore agreeable
thereunto the meaning of the Words is always to be applied.

AS to the Effects and Consequences this VI. From the Consequences.
is the Rule: When Words taken in the Literal and Simple Sense admit either o^
none or else of some absurd Consequences* we must recede so far from the more
received Meaning, as is necessary for the avoiding of a Nullity or Absurdity.

FARTHERMORE most probable Conjectures VII. From Circumstances.
may be taken from the Circumstances; because of Consequence every one is
presumed to be consistent with himself. Now these Circumstances are to be
considered either as to their Place, or only as to the Occasion of them.
Concerning the Former of these this is the Rule: If the Sense in any Place of
the Discourse be expressed plainly and clearly, the more obscure Phrases are to
be interpreted by those plain and familiar ones. To this Rule there is another
nearly related: In the explaining of any Discourse the Antecedents and
Consequents must be carefully heeded, to which those Things that are inserted
between are presumed to answer and agree. But concerning the Latter this is the
Rule: The obscure Expressions of one and the same Man are to be interpreted by
what he has delivered more clearly, tho it was at another Time and Place;
unless it manifestly appears that he has changed his Opinion.

IT is likewise of very great Use for VIII. The Reason of the Thing.
finding out the true Meaning, in Laws especially, to examine into the Reason
of that Law, or those Causes and Considerations which induced the Legislator to
the making thereof; and moreparticularly when it is evident, that that was the
only Reason of the Law. Concerning which this is the Rule: That Interpretation
of the Law is to be followed, which agrees with the Reason of that Law; and the
contrary is to be rejected, if it be altogether inconsistent with the same. So
likewise when the Sole and Adequate Reason of the Law ceases, the Law it self
ceases. But when there are several Reasons of the same Law, it does not follow
that if one of them ceases, the whole Law ceases too, when there are more
Reasons remaining, which are sufficient for the keeping it still in Force.
Sometimes also the Will of the Lawgiver is sufficient, where the Reason of the
Law is concealed.

MOREOVER, it is to be observed that IX. Words of various signification.
many Words have various Significations, one meaning being of great Latitude
and the other more strict and confined; and then the Subject Matter is
sometimes of a favorable Nature, sometimes invidious, sometimes between both
or Indifferent. Those are favorable where the Condition is Equal on both
sides, where regard is had to the Public Good, where provision is made upon
Transactions already ratified, and which tends to the promoting of Peace, and
the like. The Invidious or most distastful is that which aggrieves one Party
only or one more than the other, that which implies a certain Penalty, that
which makes any Transaction of none effect or alters what went before, that
which promotes Wars and Troubles. That which is between both and Indifferent
is, That indeed which makes some Change and Alteration in the former State of
things, but it is only for the sake of Peace. Concerning these, this is the
Rule: That those Things which admit of a Favorable Construction are to be
taken in the largest and most comprehensive meaning, but those things which are
capable of an unpleasing Construction in the most Literal and strictest sense
of the Words.

THERE are likewise some kind of X. Conjectures extended.
Conjectures which are elsewhere to be fetched than from the Words, and which
are the occasion that the Interpretation of them is sometimes to be extended,
and at other times to be confined. Although it is more easy to give Reasons why
the Explanation thereof should be confined and limited than extended. But the
Law may be extended to a Case, which is not expressed in the Law, if it be
apparent, that the Reason which suits to this Case, was particularly regarded
by the Lawgiver amongst other Considerations, and that he did design to include
the other Cases of the like Nature. The Law also ought to be extended to those
Cases, wherein the subtilty of Ill men have found out tricks in order to evade
the force of the Law.

NOW the Reason why some Expressions XI. Conjectures limited.
delivered in General Terms should be restrained, may happen either from the
Original Defect of the Will or from the Repugnancy of some Emergent Case to the
Will and Intention. That any Person is to be presumed not at first to have
intended any such thing, may be understood, 1. From the Absurdity, which
otherwise would follow from thence; and which, it is believed, no man in his
wits could design. Hence General Expressions are to be restrained, inasmuch as
such Absurdity would thence otherwise arise. 2. From Want of that Reason which
might chiefly cause him to be of that mind. Hence in a General Expression those
Cases are not comprehended, which do no ways agree with the Sole and Adequate
Reason of the Law. 3. From Defect of Matter, which always he that speaks is
supposed to have considered. And therefore all those General Words are to be
regarded with relation to the same.

NOW that an emergent State of Things XII. Emergent Cases.
is repugnant to the Intention of the Person who made the Constitution, may be
discovered either from Natural Reason or else from some declared mark and
Signification of his Meaning. The First happens, when we must exclude Equity,
if some certain Cases be not exempted from the Universal Law. For Equity is the
Correcting of what is defective in the Law by reason of its Universality. And
because all Cases could neither be foreseen, nor set down, because of the
infinite variety of them; therefore when General Words are applied to special
Cases, those Cases are to be looked upon as Exempt, which the Lawgiver himself
would likewise have exempted, if he had been consulted upon such a Case. But we
must not have recourse to Equity, unless there be very sufficient Grounds for
it. The Chiefest of which is, if it be evident, that the Law of Nature would be
violated, if we follow too closely the Letter of that Law. The next Ground of
Exception is; that tho it be not indeed unlawful to keep to the very words of
the Law; yet, if upon an impartial consideration the Thing should seem too
grievous and burdensome, either to Men in General, or to some certain Persons;
or else if the Design be not of that Value, as to be purchased at so dear a
Rate.

Lastly, AN Exception is to be made XIII. Exception with regard to Time.
from a General Expression, if Words put in another Place, are not indeed
directly opposite to the present Law o^ Agreement, but by reason of some
Circumstance in Time pro hic and nunc cannot be observed all at once. Here
therefore some certain Rules are to be taken notice of, in order to understand
what Law in that Case, when both cannot be observed at the same Time, is to be
preferred. 1. That which is only permitted, is to give place to what is
enjoined. 2. What must be done at some certain Time, is to be preferred to that
which may be done at any time. 3. An Affirmative Precept gives place to the
Negative; or when the Affirmative Precept cannot be observed, without the
Violation of the Negative, the Performance of the former is to be omitted for
the present. 4. Among Agreements and Laws which are otherwise of equal
Authority, a Particular is to be preferred before a General one. 5. Of two
Covenants made together at one and the same Time, whereof the One is founded
upon more honorable, and beneficial Reasons than the other, it is but equal
that the Former should take place of the Latter. 6. A Covenant or Contract that
is confirmed by an Oath, takes place of one which is not so, when both cannot
be observed at the same time. 7. An Imperfect Obligation gives place to that
which is perfect. 8. The Duty of Beneficence, all circumstances rightly
compared, gives place to the Duty of Gratitude.

THE Whole Duty of Man, According to the LAW Of NATURE. BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the Natural State of Men.
IN the next place we are to enquire I. Condition of Man.
concerning those Duties which are incumbent upon a Man with regard to that
particular State wherein he finds himself ordained by Providence to live in the
World. What we mean by such State is in general that Condition or Degree with
all its Relatives in which men being placed, they are therefore supposed to be
obliged to those or these Performances: And such State, whatever it be, has
some peculiar Rights and Offices thereunto belonging.

THE State of Man then may be distinguished II. Twofold. Natural, and
Adventitious.
into either Natural or Adventitious. The Natural State by the help of the
Light of Natural Reason alone, is to be considered as threefold, either as it
regards God our Creator, or as it concerns every single man as to Himself, or
as it affects other men; concerning all which we have spoken before.

THE Natural State of Man considered III. Natural State threefold. First.
in the first mentioned way, is that Condition wherein he is placed by the
Creator pursuant to his Divine Will, that he should be the most excellent
Animal in the whole Creation. From the consideration of which State it follows,
that Man ought to acknowledge the Author of his Being, to pay him Adoration,
and to admire the Works of his hands; and moreover to lead his Life after a
different manner from that of the Brutes. So that the contrary to this State is
the Life and Condition of Brutes.

IN the second way we may contemplate IV. Second.
the Natural State of Man, by seriously forming in our minds an Idea of what
his Condition would be, if every one were left alone to himself without any
help from other men, especially considering the present Circumstances under
which we at this time find Humane Nature: Which would certainly be much more
miserable than that of a Beast, if we think with our selves, with what weakness
man enters this World, so that he must immediately perish, except he be
sustained by others, and how rude a Life he must lead, if he could procure
nothing for himself, but by means of his own single Strength and Skill. But
it is plain, that we owe it all to the aid of other persons, that we are able to
pass through so many Infirmities from our Infancy to Manhood; that we enjoy an
infinite number of Conveniences; that we can improve our Minds and Bodies to
such a degree as to be useful to our selves and our Neighbor. And in this
sense the Natural State is opposed to a Life not cultivated by the Industry of
men.

AFTER the third way we are to regard V. Third.
the Natural State of Man, according as Men are understood to stand in respect
to one another merely from that common Alliance which results from the Likeness
of their Natures, before any mutual Agreement made or other Deed of Man
performed, by which one could become obnoxious to the Power of another. In
which Sense those are said to live reciprocally in a State of Nature, who
acknowledge no common Superior, and of whom none can pretend Dominion over his
fellow, and who do not render themselves known to each other either by the
doing or good turns or injuries. And this State in this Sense distinguishes it
self from the Condition of Man in a Community.

MOREOVER, the Property of this VI. Considered again two ways.
Natural State may be considered, either as it is represented to us Notionally
and by way of Fiction, or as it is really and indeed. The former is done, when
we imagine a certain Multitude of men at the beginning to have started up into
beings all at once without any dependence upon one another, as it is fabled of
the Cadmean Harvest of Brethren; or else when we form a Supposition, that all
the mutual Ties by which Mankind are one way or other united together were now
dissolved, so that every man might set up for himself apart from the rest, and
no one man should have any other Relation to his Fellow, but the likeness of
their Natures. But the true State of Nature, or that which is really so, has
this in it, that there is no man who has not some peculiar Obligations to some
other men, though with all the rest he may have no farther Alliance than that
they are Men and of the same Kind, and beside what arises from thence he ows
them no Service at all. Which at this time is the Case of many Kingdoms and
Communities, and of the Subjects of the same with respect to the Subjects of
the other; and the same was anciently the State of the Patriarchs when they
lived independently.

IT is then taken for manifest, that all VII. Paternal Authority.
Mankind never were universally and at once in the former Natural State; for
those Children who were begotten and born of the Protoplasts, or first created
Man and Woman, (from whom the whole Human Race derives its Original, as the
Holy Scriptures tell us) were subject to the Paternal Authority. Not but that
this Natural State arose afterward among some People: for Men at first, in
order to spread over this wide World, and that they might find for themselves
and their Cattle more spacious Abodes, left the Families of their Fathers, and
roaming into various Regions, almost every single man became himself the Father
of a Family of his own; and the Posterity of these again dispersing themselves,
that peculiar Bond of Kindred and the Natural Affections thence arising by
little and little were extinct, and no other Obligation remained, but that
common one, which resulted from the Likeness of their Natures. Till afterward
when Mankind was vastly multiplied, they having observed the many
Inconveniences of that loose way of Living, the Inhabitants of places near one
another by degrees joined in Communities, which at first were small, but grew
soon greater, either by the voluntary or forced Conjunction of many which were
lesser. And among these Communities the State of Nature is still found, they
being not otherwise obliged to each other, than by the common Tie of Humanity.

NOW it is the chief Prerogative of VIII. Natural Liberty.
those who are in the State of Nature, that they are subject and accountable to
none but God only; in which respect also this is called a State of Natural
Liberty, by which is understood, that a Person so circumstanc'd without some
antecedent human Act to the contrary, is to be accounted absolutely in his own
power and disposition, and above the control of all mortal Authority.
Therefore also any one person is to be reputed equal to any other, to whom
himself is not subject, neither is that other subject to him. And furthermore
whereas Man is endued with the Light of Reason, by the guidance whereof he may
temper and regulate his Actions, it follows, that whosoever lives in a State of
Natural Liberty, depends not on any other for the direction of his doings; but
is vested with a Right to do according to his own Judgment and Will any thing
he shall think good, and which is consonant to found Reason. And whereas Man,
from that universal Inclination which is implanted in all Living Creatures,
cannot but (in order to the Preservation of his Person and his Life, and to the
keeping off whatsoever Mischiefs seem to threaten the Destruction thereof) take
the utmost care and pains, and apply all necessary means to that end; and yet
whereas no man in this Natural State has any superior person, to whom he may
submit his Designs and Opinions, therefore every one in this State makes use of
his own Judgment only in determining concerning the Fitness of Means, whether
they conduce to his Self-Preservation or not. For tho he may give ear to the
Advice of another, yet it is in his choice whether he will approve or reject
the same. But that this absolute Power of governing himself be rightly managed,
it is highly necessary, that all his Administrations be moderated by the
Dictates of true Reason and by the Rules of the Law of Nature.

AND yet this Natural State, how alluring IX. Its Inconveniences.
soever it appears to us with the Name of Liberty, and flattering us with being
free from all manner of Subjection; yet was it clogged, before men joined
themselves under Governments, with many Inconveniences; whether we suppose
every single man as in that Condition, or only consider the Case of the
Patriarchs or Fathers of Families, while they lived independent. For if you
form in your mind the Idea of a Man even at his full growth of Strength and
Understanding, but without all those Assistances and Advantages by which the
Wit of man has rendered Human Life much more orderly and more easy than at the
beginning; you shall have before you, a naked Creature, no better than dumb,
wanting all things, satisfying his Hunger with Roots and Herbs, slaking his
Thirst with any Water he can find, avoiding the extremities of the Weather by
creeping into Caves or the like, exposed an easy prey to the ravenous Beasts,
and trembling at the sight of any of them. It Is true, the way of Living among
the Patriarchs might be somewhat more comfortable even while they contained
their Families apart; but yet it could by no means be compared with the Life of
men in a Community, not so much for the Need they might have of things from
abroad, which, if they restrained their Appetites, they might perhaps well
enough bear withal; as because in that State they could have little Certainty
of any continued Security. And that we may comprehend all in a few words, in a
State of Nature every man must rely upon his own single Power, whereas in a
Community all are on his side; there no man can be sure of enjoying the Fruit
of his Labor, here every one has it secured to him; There the Passions rule,
and there is a continual Warfare accompanied with Fears, Want, Sordidness,
Solitude, Barbarity, Ignorance and Brutishness; here Reason governs, and here
is Tranquillity, Security, Wealth, Neatness, Society, Elegancy, Knowledge and
Humanity.

BESIDE, in the Natural State, if any X. Most convenient Remedy in
Controversies.
one either will not voluntarily make good, what he has covenanted to do, or
does another an Injury, or if upon any other account some Dispute arise;
there is no man has Authority to force the naughty person to perform his
Bargain, to cause him to repair the Wrong, or to determine the Controversy; as
there is in Communities, where I may have recourse for help to the Civil
Magistrate. And here because Nature allows not that upon every occasion we
should be take our selves to violent means, even though we are very well
satisfied in our Consciences of the Justice of our Cause; therefore we are
first to try, whether the matter may not be composed after a milder way, either
by an amicable reasoning of the point in question between the parties
themselves, or by a free and unconditional Compromise, or Reference of the
Debate to Arbitrators. And these Referees are to manage the matter with an
equal regard to both sides, and in giving their Award they are to have an Eye
only to the Merits of the Cause, setting aside all partial Animosity or
Affection. For which reason it is not best to choose any man an Arbitrator in
such a Cause, wherein he shall have greater hopes of Profit or particular
Reputation, if one party get the better rather than the other; and consequently
where it is his Interest that that Litigant at what rate soever gain the point.
Hence also there ought not to be any underhand Bargain or Promise between the
Umpire and either of the Parties by which he may be obliged to give his
Judgment on the behalf of the same. Now in this affair, if the Arbitrator
cannot find out the Truth in Fact neither from the Confessions of the parties,
nor from apparent Writings nor any other manifest Arguments and Signs; he must
then inform himself by the Testimonies of Witnesses, whom though the Law of
Nature obliges, especially being usually reinforced by the Religion of an Oath,
to speak the Truth, yet it is most safe not to admit the Evidence of such as
are so peculiarly affected to one party, that their Consciences will be forced
to struggle with the Passions either of Love, Hatred, desire of Revenge, any
violent Affection of the Mind, or else some strict Friendship or Dependence;
all or any of which every man is not endued with Constancy enough to surmount.
Controversies also are frequently made an end of by the Interposition of the
common Friends of each party, which to do is deservedly accounted among the
best Actions of a good man. For the rest, in this State, when Performances are
not made good by either side of their own accord, the other seeks his Due after
what manner he likes best.

NOW though it was the Will of Nature XI. Uncertainty of the State of Nature.
itself that there should be a sort of Kindred between all Mankind, by virtue
of which they might be obliged at least not to hurt one another, but rather to
assist and contribute to the Benefit of their Fellows: Yet this Alliance is
found to be but of little force among those who live promiscuously in a State
of Natural Liberty, so that any man who is not under the same Laws and
possibilities of Coercion with our selves, or with whom we live loosely and
free from any Obligation in the said State, is not indeed to be treated as an
Enemy, but may be looked upon as a Friend not too freely to be trusted. And the
reason hereof is, that Man not only is accomplished with an Ability to do
mischief to his like, but for many causes has also a Will so to do: For some
the Pravity of their Natures, Ambition or Covetousness incite to make insults
upon other men; others, though of a meek and modest Nature, are forced to use
Violence either in defending themselves from imminent Outrages, or by way of
Prevention. Beside that a Rivalship in the desire of the same thing in some and
in others Competition for Priority in one Quality or other shall set them at
Variance. So that in this State it is hardly possible but that there should be
perpetual Jealousies, Mistrusts, Designs of undoing each other, Eagerness to
prevent every one his Fellow, or Hopes of making addition to his own Strength
by the Ruin of others. Therefore as it is the Duty of every honest man to be
content with his own, and not to give provocation to his Neighbor, nor to covet
that which is his; so also it behooves him who would be as wary as is needful,
and who is willing to take care of his own good, so to take all men for his
Friends, as not to suppose yet but that the same may quickly become his
Enemies; so to cultivate Peace with all men, as to be provided though it be
never so soon changed to Enmity. And for this reason happy is that
Commonwealth where in times of Quietness consideration is had of requisites
for War.

CHAP. II. Of the Duties of the Married State.
AMONG those States of Man which I. Matrimony.
we have called Adventitious, or in which a man is placed by some antecedent
humane Act, Matrimony obtains the first place. Which also is the chief
Representation of the Social Life, and the Seed-Plot of Mankind.

AND first it is certain, that that ardent II. Instituted by Nature.
Propensity found to be in both Sexes to each other was not implanted in them
by the All-wise Creator merely that they might receive the Satisfaction of a
vain Pleasure; for had it been so, nothing could have been the occasion of
greater Brutishness and Confusion in the world; but that hereby married persons
might take the greater delight in each others Company; and that both might with
the more cheerfulness apply themselves to the necessary business of
Propagation, and go through those Cares and Troubles which accompany the
Breeding and Education of Children. Hence it follows, that all Use of the Parts
destined by Nature for this work is contrary to the Law Natural, if it tends
not to this End. On which account also are forbidden all Lusts for a different
Species or for the same Sex; all filthy Pollutions, and indeed all Copulations
out of the State of Matrimony, whether with the mutual Consent of both parties,
or against the Will of the Woman.

THE Obligation under which we lie to III. Obligation to Matrimony.
contract Matrimony may be considered either with respect to Mankind in
general, or to our particular Station and Relation in the World. The strength
of the former of these consists in this, that the Propagation of Mankind
neither can nor ought to be kept up by promiscuous and uncertain Copulations,
but is to be limited and circumscribed by the Laws of Wedlock, and only to be
endeavored in a married State: For without this no man can imagine any Decency
or orderly Society among men, nor any Observation of the Civil Rules of Life.
But men singly considered, are obliged to enter the Matrimonial State, when a
convenient occasion offers itself; whereto also not only a mature Age and an
Ability for Generation-Work is necessary, but there ought beside to be a
possibility of lighting on a person of the like Condition, and a Capacity of
maintaining a Wife and the Posterity she shall bring forth; and that the Man
may be such a one as is fit to become the Master of a Family. Not still but
that any man is excepted from this Duty, who be takes himself to a chaste single
life, finding his Constitution accommodated thereto, and that he is capable in
that rather than in the married State, to be useful to Mankind or to the
Commonwealth; especially also if the Case be so, that there is no fear of the
want of People.

BETWEEN those who are about to IV. Matrimonial Contract.
take upon themselves the Married State, a Contract ought and is wont to
intervene, which, if it be regular and perfect, consists of these heads. First,
because the Man (to whom it is most agreeable to the Nature of both Sexes that
the Contract should owe its Original) intends hereby to get to himself Children
of his own, not spurious or supposititious; therefore the Woman ought to plight
her troth to the Man, that she will permit the use of her Body to no other man
but to him; the same on the other hand being required of the Husband. And
secondly, since nothing can be more flatly contrary to a Social and Civil Life,
than a vagabond, desultory and changeable way of Living without any Home, or
certain Seat of his Fortunes; and since the Education of that which is the
Offspring of both, is most conveniently taken care of by the joint help of
both Parents together; and whereas continual Cohabitation brings more of
Pleasure and Comfort to a Couple who are well matched, whereby also the Husband
may have the greater Assurance of his Wives Chastity: Therefore the Wife does
moreover engage her Faith to her Husband, that she will always cohabit with him
and join herself in the strictest bond of Society, and become of the same
Family with him. And this mutual Promise must be supposed to be made from the
Husband to her of the like Cohabitation, the Nature of this State so requiring.
But because it is not only agreeable to the natural Condition of both Sexes,
that the Case of the Husband should be the more honorable of the two, but that
he should also be the Head of the Family, of which himself is the Author; it
follows, that the Wife ought to be subject to his Direction in matters relating
to their mutual State and to their Household. Hence it is the Prerogative of the
Husband to choose his Habitation, and she may not against his Will wander abroad
or lodge apart. Yet it does not seem essentially necessary to Matrimony, that
the Man should have power of Life and Death or of inflicting any grievous
Punishment, as neither of disposing at his pleasure of all the Estate or Goods
of his Wife: but these points may be settled between the Married Couple by
peculiar Agreements, or by the municipal Laws of the Place.

NOW though it is manifestly repugnant V. One Man and one Woman.
to the Law of Nature, that one Woman should have more Men than one at once;
yet it obtained among the Jews of old and many other Nations, that one Man
might have two or more Wives. Nevertheless let us allow never so little weight
to Arguments brought from the Primitive Institution of Marriage delivered in
Holy Writ, yet it will appear from Right Reason, that it is much more decent and
fit for one Man to be content with one Woman. Which has been approved by the
Practice of all the Christians through the World that we know of, for so many
Ages.

NOR does the Nature of this strict VI. Contract perpetual.
Union tell us less plainly, that the Bond of Matrimony ought to be perpetual,
and not to be unloosed, but by the Death of one Party; except the essential
Articles of the principal Matrimonial Covenant be violated either by Adultery
or a wicked and dishonest Desertion. But for ill dispositions which have not
the same Effect with such lewd Desertion, it has obtained among Christians that
a Separation from Bed and Board shall be sufficient, without allowing any
Engagement in a new Wedlock. And one great Reason hereof, among others is this*
that too free a Liberty of Divorce might not give encouragement to either party
to cherish a stubborn Temper; but rather, that the irremediable State of each
might persuade both to accommodate their Humors to one another and to stir
them both up to mutual Forbearance. For the rest, if any Essential Article of
the Matrimonial Contract be violated, the wronged Party only is discharged from
the Oligation; the same still binding the other, so long as the former shall
think good.

ANY man may contract with any Woman, VII. Moral Impediments.
where the Law makes no special Prohibition, if their Age and Constitution of
Body render them capable of Matrimony, except some Moral Impediment be in the
way: presupposing that he or she is under a Moral Impediment, who are already
married to some other person.

AND it is accounted a Moral Impediment VIII. Kindred.
of lawful Matrimony, if the parties are too nearly allied by Blood or by
Affinity. On which score even by the Law of Nature those Marriages are
accounted incestuous and wicked which are contracted between any persons
related in the Ascending or Descending Line. And for those in the other
transverse Order, as with the Aunt either on the Fathers or Mothers side, the
Sister, etc. As also those in Affinity, as, with the Mother-in-Law,
Stepmother, Step-Daughter, etc. not only the positive Divine Law, but that of
most civilized Nations, with whom also all Christians agree, does abominate.
Nay the Special Laws of many Countries forbid Marriage even in the more remote
Degrees, that so they may keep men from breaking in upon those which are more
sacred, by setting the Barrier at a greater distance.

NOW as the Laws are wont to assign IX. Ceremony.
to other Contracts and Bargains some Solemnities, which being wanting, the Act
shall not be adjudg'd of validity: so also it is in Matrimony, where the Laws
require for the sake of Decency and good Order that such or such Ceremonies be
performed. And these though not enjoined by the Law Natural, yet without the
same those who are Subjects of such a Community, shall not consummate a legal
Matrimony; or at least such Contract shall not be allowed by the Public to be
effectual.

IT is the Duty of a Husband to love X. Mutual Duties.
his Wife, to cherish, direct and protect her; and of the Wife to love and
honor her Husband, to be assistant to him not only in begetting and educating
his Children, but to bear her part in the Domestic Cares. On both sides the
Nature of so strict an Union requires, that the Married Couple be partakers as
well in the good as ill fortune of either, and that one succor the other in
all Cases of Distress; moreover, that they prudently accommodate their Humors
to each other; in which matter it is the Wives Duty to submit.

CHAP. III. The Duty of Parents and Children.
FROM Matrimony proceeds Posterity, I. Paternal Authority.
which is subjected to the Paternal Power, the most ancient and most sacred
kind of Authority, whereby Children are obliged to reverence the Commands of
their Parents and to acknowledge their Preeminence.

THE Authority of Parents over their II. Its Foundation twofold.
Children has its chief Foundation on a twofold Cause. First, because the Law
of Nature itself, when Man was made a Sociable Creature, enjoined to Parents
the Care of their Children; and lest they should herein be negligent, Nature
implanted in them a most tender Affection for their Issue. Now that this Care
may be rightly managed, it is requisite that they have a Power of ordering the
Actions of their Children for their good, because these as yet understand not
for want of Discretion how to govern themselves. Next, this Authority is also
grounded on the tacit Consent of their Offspring. For it may fairly be
presumed, that if an Infant at the time of its Birth had the use of Reason, and
saw that its Life could not be preserved without the Care of the Parents, to
which must be joined a Power over itself, it would readily consent to the same,
and desire for itself a comfortable Education from them. And this Power as
actually in the Parents, then when they breed and nurse up the Child, and from
him as well as they can, that he may become a fit Member of Humane Society.

BUT whereas the Mother concurs no III. Which Parent has greater Right.
less than the Father to the Generation of Children, and so the Offspring is
common to both, it may be inquired, which has the greatest Right thereto.
Concerning which point we are to distinguish. For if the Issue were begotten
not in Matrimony, the same shall be rather the Mothers, because here the Father
cannot be known except the Mother discover him. Among those also who live in a
State of Natural Liberty and above Laws, it may be agreed that the Mothers
claim shall be preferred to that of the Father. But in Communities which have
their Formation from Men, the Matrimonial Contract regularly commencing on the
Man's side, and he becoming the Head of the Family, the Fathers Right shall take
place; so as, though the Child is to pay the Mother all Reverence and
Gratitude, yet is it not obliged to obey her, when she bids that to be done
which is contrary to the just Commands of the Father. Yet upon the Fathers
Decease his Authority over his Child, especially if not of Age, seems to
devolve upon the Mother, and if she marry again, it passes to the Step-Father,
he being esteemed to succeed to the Trust and Care of a Natural Father. And he
who shall allow liberal Education to an Orphan or a forsaken Child, shall have
a Right to exact filial Obedience from the same.

BUT that we may handle more accurately IV. Paternal Authority distinguished.
the Power of Parents over their Children, we must distinguish first between
Patriarchs, or Chiefs of independent Families; and such as are Members of a
Community: and then betwixt the Power of a Father as Father, and his Power as
Head of his Family. And whereas it is enjoined by Nature to a Father as such,
that he bring up his Children well, in order to render 'emfit Members of Human
Society, so long as till they can take care of themselves; hence he has so much
Power given him over them, as is necessary for this End: which therefore by no
means extends itself so as to give the Parents liberty to destroy their unborn
Offspring, or to cast away or kill it when it is born. For tho it is true, the
Issue is of the Substance of the Parents, yet it is placed in a Human State
equal to themselves, and capable of receiving Injuries from them. Neither also
does this Authority vest them with the Exercise of a Power of Life and Death,
upon occasion of any Fault, but only allows them to give moderate Chastisement:
since the Age we speak of is too tender to admit of such heinous Crimes as are
to be punished with Death. But if a Child shall stubbornly spurn at all
Instruction, and become hopeless of Amendment, the Father may turn him out of
his own House, and abdicate or renounce him.

MOREOVER, this Power, thus nicely V. Childhood.
taken, may be considered according to the diverse Age of Children. For in
their early years, when their Reason is come to no maturity, all their Actions
are subject to the Direction of their Parents. During which time, if any Estate
fall to the young person, it ought to be put into the Possession and under the
Administration of the Father, so that the Property be still reserved to the
Child: though it may be reasonable enough that the Profits arising therefrom
should be the Fathers till the other arrive at Manhood. So also any Advantage
or Profit, that can be made by the Labor of a Son, ought to accrue to the
Parent; since with the latter lies all the care of maintaining and of educating
the former.

WHEN Children are come to Man's Estate, VI. Manhood.
when they are endued with a competent share of Discretion, and yet continue
themselves a part of the Fathers Family, then the Power which the Father has
comes distinctly to be considered, either as he is a Father, or as Head of the
Family. And since in the former Case he makes his End to be the Education and
Government of his Children, it is plain, that when they are of ripe years they
are to be obedient to the Authority of their Parents as wiser than themselves.
And whosoever expects to be maintained upon what his Father has, and afterward
to succeed to the Possession of the same, is obliged to accommodate himself to
the Methods of his Paternal Household; the management whereof ought to be in his
Fathers power.

PATRIARCHS or Heads of independent VII. Patriarchs Power abridg'd.
Families, before they joined in Communities, acted in many Cases after the
manner of Princes, in their Houses. So that their Progeny, who continued a part
of their Families, paid the highest Veneration to their Authority. But
afterward this Family-Royalty (as well as some other private Rights) was
moderated for the Benefit and Order of Communities; and in some places more, in
others less of Power was left to Parents. Hence we see that in some
Governments, Fathers have in Criminal cases a power of Life and Death over
their Children; but in most it is not allowed, either for fear Parents should
abuse this Prerogative to the detriment of the Public, or to the unjust
Oppression of those so subjected; or lest through the tenderness of Paternal
Affection many Vices should pass unpunished, which might break forth one time
or other into public Mischiefs; or else that Fathers might not be under a
Necessity of pronouncing so sad and ungrateful a Sentence.

BUT when a Son or Daughter have left VIII. Piety ever due to Parents:
the Fathers House, and either have set up a new Family of their own, or joined
to another; the Paternal Authority indeed ceases, but Piety and Observance is
for ever due, as being founded in the Merits of the Parents, whom Children can
never or very seldom be supposed to requite. Now these Merits do not consist in
this only, that a Parent is to his Child the Author of Life, without which no
good can be enjoyed; but that they bestow also a chargeable and painful
Education upon them, that so they may become useful Parts of Humane Society;
and very often lay up somewhat for them in order to make their Lives more easy
and comfortable.

AND yet though the Education of Children be a Duty laid upon Parents by IX.
Education entrusted.
Nature itself, it hinders not but that, either in case of Necessity or for the
benefit of the Children, the Care thereof may by them be entrusted with
another; so still that the Parent reserve to himself the Oversight of the
person deputed. Hence it is, that a Father may not only commit his Son to the
Tutorage of proper Teachers; but he may give him to another man to adopt him,
if he perceives it will be advantageous to him. And if he have no other way to
maintain him, rather than he should die for want, he may pawn him, or sell him
into some tolerable servitude, reserving still a liberty of redeeming him, as
soon as either himself shall be able to be at the charge, or any of his Kindred
shall ^e willing to do it. But if any Parent shall inhumanely expose and
forsake their Child, he who shall take it up and educate it shall have the
Fatherly Authority over it; so that the Foster-Child shall be bound to pay
filial Obedience to his Educator.

AND as the Father ought not to turn X. Marriage with Parents consent.
his Child out of his Family, while he stands in need of Education and
Assistance from him, without the most weighty Reasons; so also ought not the
Son or Daughter leave the Parents House without his Consent. Now whereas
Children frequently leave their Fathers Family on occasion of Matrimony; and
since it much concerns Parents what persons their Children are married to, and
from whom they are to expect Grandchildren; hence it is a part of filial Duty,
herein to comply with the Will of the Parents, and not to marry without their
Consent. But if any do actually contract Matrimony against their liking, and
consummate the same, such Marriage seems not to be void by the Law of Nature,
especially if they intend to be no longer burthensom to their Parents, and that
for the rest their Condition be not scandalous. So that if in any Country such
Marriages are accounted null and void, it proceeds from the Municipal Laws of
the Place.

THE Duty of Parents consists chiefly XI. Duty of Parents.
in this, that they maintain their Children handsomely, and that they so form
their Bodies and Minds by a skilful and wise Education, as that they may become
fit and useful Members of Humane and Civil Society, Men of Probity, Wisdom and
good Temper. So that they may apply themselves to some fit and honest way of
Living, by which they may as their Genius and Opportunity shall offer, raise
and increase their Fortunes.

ON the other hand it is the Duty of XII. Duty of Children.
Children to honor their Parents, that is, to give them Reverence not only in
outward show, but much more with a hearty Respect, as the Authors not only of
their Lives, but of so many other unvaluable Benefits to 'em; to obey 'em; to
be assistant to 'em to their utmost, especially if they are aged or in want;
not to undertake any business of moment, without deferring to their Advice and
Opinion; and lastly to bear with Patience their Moroseness and any other their
Infirmities, if any such be.

CHAP. IV. The Duties of Masters and Servants.
AFTER Mankind came to be multiplied, I. Servile State how begun.
and it was found how conveniently Domestic Affairs might be managed by the
Service of other men; it early became a Practice to take Servants into a Family
to do the Offices belonging to the House. There at first probably offered
themselves, driven thereto by Necessity or a Consciousness of their own want of
Understanding; and then being assured that they should constantly be supplied
with Food and Necessaries, they devoted all their Services for ever to their
Master. And then Wars raging up and down the World, it grew a Custom with most
Nations, that those Captives to whom they granted their Lives should be made
Slaves ever after, together with the Posterity born of them. Though in many
Countries no such Servitude is in use; but all Domestic Offices are performed
by Mercenary Servants hired for a certain time.

NOW as there are several Degrees, as II. A temporary Servant.
it were, of Servitude, so the Power of the Masters and the Condition of the
Servants do vary. To a Servant hired for a time the Duty of the Master is to
pay him his Wages; the other making good on his part the Work as agreed for:
And because in this Contract the Condition of the Master is the better,
therefore such Servant is also to pay Respect to his Master according to his
Dignity; and if he have done his business knavishly or negligently, he is
liable to Punishment from him; provided it go not so far as any grievous
Maiming of his Body, much less so far as Infliction of Death.

BUT to such a Servant as voluntarily III. A voluntary perpetual Servant.
offers himself to a perpetual Servitude the Master is obliged to allow
perpetual Maintenance and all Necessaries for this Life; it being his Duty on
the other hand to give his constant Labor in all Services whereto his Master
shall command him, and whatsoever he shall gain thereby he is to deliver to
him. In thus doing however the Master is to have a regard to the Strength and
Dexterity of his Servant, not exacting rigorously of him what is above his
power to do. Now this sort of Servant is not only subject to the Chastisement
of his Master for his Negligence, but the same may correct his Manners which
ought to be accommodated to preserve Order and Decency in the Family: But he
may not fell him against his Will; because he chose this for his Master of his
own accord, and not another; and it concerns him much with whom he serves. If
he have been guilty of any heinous Crime against one not of the same Family, he
is subject to the Civil Power, if he live in a Community; but if the Family be
independent, he may be expelled. But if the Crime be against the same Family,
it being independent, the Head thereof may inflict even Capital Punishment.

CAPTIVES in War being made IV. Captive Slaves.
Slaves are frequently treated with greater Severity, something of a hostile
Rage remaining toward 'em, and for that they attempted the worst upon us and
our Fortunes. But as soon as there intervenes a Mutual Trust, in order to
Cohabitation in the Family* between the Victor and the vanquished person, all
past Hostility is to be accounted as forgiven: And then the Master does wrong
even to a Servant thus acquired, if he allow him not Necessaries for Life, or
exercise Cruelty to him without cause, and much more if he take ^o way his
Life. when he has committed no fault to deserve it.

IT is also the Practice to pase away on V. Alienable.
Property in such Slaves who are taken in War, or bought with our Money, to when
we please, after the same manner as we do our other Goods and Commodities. So
that the Body of such Servant is holden to be a Chattel of his Master. And I
yet here Humanity bids us not to forget that this Servant is a Man however, and
therefore ought not to be treated as we do our Movables, use 'em or abuse 'em,
o^ destroy 'em as willist. And when we all minded to part with him, we ought
not to deliver him into the hands of such as we know will abuse him inhumanely
and undeservedly.

Lastly, IT is every where allowed, that VI. Offspring of Slaves.
the Progeny of Parents who are Bondmen, are also in a Servile State, and
belong (...) Slaves to the Owner of their Mother. Which is justified by this
Argument, that whosoever is Proprietor of the Body, is also Proprietor of
whatsoever is the Product thereof; and because such Issue had never been born,
if the Master had executed the Rigor of War upon the Parent; and for that the
Parent having nothing she can call her own, the Off spring cannot otherwise be
brought up but at her Masters charge. Whereas therefore the Master afforded
such Infant Nourishment, long before his Service could be of any use to him,
and whereas all the following Services of his Life could not much exceed the
value of his Maintenance, he is not to leave his Master's Service without his
Consent. But it is manifest, that since these Bondmen came into a State of
Servitude not by any fault of their own, there can be no Pretense they should
be otherwise dealt withal, than as if they were in the condition of perpetual
hired Servants.

CHAP. V. The Impulsive Cause of Constituting Communities.
ALTHOUGH there be hardly any Delight I. This Enquiry necessary.
or Advantage, but what may be obtained from those Duties, of which we have
already discoursed: It remains nevertheless that we enquire into the Reasons,
why Men, not contenting themselves with those Primitive and small Societies
have founded such as are more Ample called Communities. For from these Grounds
and Foundations is to be deduced the Reason of those Duties, which merely
relate to this Civil State of Mankind.

HERE therefore it suffices not to say, II. Difficulty herein.
that Man is by Nature inclined to Civil Society, so as he neither can nor will
live without it. For since indeed it is Evident, that man is such a kind of
Creature, as has a most tender Affection for himself and his own Good; it is
manifest, that when he so earnestly seeks after Civil Society, he respects some
particular Advantage that will accrue to him thence. And although without
Society with his Fellow Creatures, Man would be the most miserable of all
Creatures; yet since the Natural Desires and Necessities of Mankind might be
abundantly satisfied by those Primitive kind of Societies, and by those Duties
to which we are obliged either by Humanity or Contracts; it cannot immediately
be concluded from this Natural Society between Man and Man, that his Nature and
Temper does directly incline him to the forming of Civil Communities.

WHICH will more evidently appear; III. Twofold Enquiry.
if we consider, what Condition Mankind is placed in by the Constitution of
Civil Communities: What is required that he may be truly said to be a
[Political Animal or] Good Patriot and Subject; and lastly, what Aversion may
be discovered in the Nature of Man to living in such Civil Community.

WHOSOEVER becomes a Subject, IV. Natural State.
immediately loses his Natural Liberty, and submits himself to some Authority,
which is vested with the Power of Life and Death; and by the Commands of which,
many Things must be done, which otherwise he would have been no ways willing to
do, and many Things must be let alone, to which he had a strong Inclination;
Besides most of his Actions must terminate in the Public Good, which in many
Cases seems to clash with private men's Advantage. But man by his Natural
Inclinations is carried to this, to be subject to no one, to do all things as
he lists, and in every thing to consult his single Advantage.

BUT we call him a [Political Animal V. Civil State.
or] True Patriot, and Good Subject, who readily obeys the Commands of his
Governors; who endeavors with his utmost to promote the Public Good, and
after that regards his Private Affairs; nay more who esteems nothing profitable
to himself, unless the same be likewise profitable to the Community; lastly,
who carries himself fairly toward his Fellow Subjects. But there are few men
to be found, whose Tempers are naturally thus well inclined. The greater part
being restrained merely for fear of Punishment; and many continue all their
Lifetimes ill Subjects and unsociable Creatures.

FURTHERMORE, there is no Creature VI. Civil State.
whatsoever more fierce or untameable than Man, or which is prone to more Vices
that are apt to disturb the Peace and Security of the Public. For besides his
inordinate Appetite to Eating, Drinking, and Venery, to which Brute Beasts are
likewise subject, Mankind is inclined to many Vices, to which Brutes are
altogether Strangers; as is the unsatiable desire and thirst after those things
which are altogether superfluous and unnecessary, and above all to that worst
of Evils, Ambition; also a too lasting resentment and memory of Injuries, and a
desire of Revenge increasing more and more by length of time; besides an
infinite diversity of Inclinations and Affections, and a certain Stiffness and
Obstinacy in every one to indulge his own particular Humor and Fancy.
Moreover, Man takes so great delight in exercising his Cruelty over his
Fellow Creatures, that the greatest part of the Evils and Mischiefs, to which
Mankind is obnoxious, is wholly owing to the merciless Rage and Violence of
other Men.

THEREFORE the genuine and principal VII. Reason Change.
Reason which induced Masters of Families to quit their own natural Liberty,
and to form themselves into Communities, was; that they might provide for
themselves a Security and Defense against the evils and mischiefs that are
incident to Men from one another. For as, next under God, one Man is most
capable of being helpful to another; so the same may be no less prejudicial and
hurtful to one another. And those persons have entertained a right conception
of the Malice of Men, and the remedy thereof, who have admitted this as a
common Maxim and Proverb; that unless there were Courts of Judicature, one Man
would devour another. But after that by the Constituting of Communities, Men
were reduced into such an Order and Method, that they might be safe and secure
from mutual Wrongs and Injuries among themselves, it was by that means
provided, that thereby they might the better enjoy those Advantages, which are
to be reaped and expected from one another, to wit, that they might from their
Childhood be brought up and instructed in good Manners, and that they might
invent and improve several kinds of Arts and Sciences whereby the Life of Man
might be better provided and furnished with necessary Conveniences.

AND the Reason will be yet more cogent VIII. Farther Penalties.
for the Constituting of Communities, if we consider, that other means would
not have been capable of curbing the Malice of Men. For although we are
enjoined by the Law of Nature not to do any injury one to another; yet the
respect and reverence to that Law is not of that prevalence as to be a
sufficient security for Men to live altogether quietly and undisturbed in their
Natural Liberty. For although, by accident, there may be found some few Men of
that moderate quiet temper and disposition, that they would do no injury to
others, though they might escape unpunished; and there may be likewise some
others that in some measure bridle in their disorderly Affections through fear
of some mischief that may ensue from thence; yet on the contrary there are a
great number of such, as have no regard at all to Law or Justice, whenever they
have any prospect of Advantage, or any hopes, by their own subtle Tricks and
Contrivances of being too hard for, and deluding the injured Party. And as it
behooves every one, that would take care of his own safety, to endeavor to
secure himself against this sort of Persons; so no better care and provision
can be made than by means of these Communities and Civil Societies. For although
some particular persons may mutually agree together to assist each other; yet
unless there be some way found out, whereby their Opinions and Judgments may be
united together, and their Wills may be more firmly bound to the performance of
what they have agreed upon, it will be in vain for any one to expect and rely
upon any certain Succor and Assistance from them.

LASTLY, although the Law of Nature IX. Ad^antage of Penalties.
does sufficiently insinuare unto Men, that they, who do any violence or injury
to other Men, shall not escape unpunished; yet neither the fear and dread of a
Divine Being, nor the stings of Conscience are found to be of sufficient
efficacy to restrain the Malice and Violence of all Men. For very many Persons,
through the prejudice of Custom and Education, are as it were altogether deaf
to the force and power of Reason. Whence it comes to pass, that they are only
intent upon such things as are present, taking very little notice of those
things which are future; and that they are affected only with those things
which make a present impression upon their Senses. But since the Divine
Vengeance is wont to proceed on but slowly; from whence many ill Men have taken
occasion to refer their evils and misfortunes to other Causes; especially since
they very often see wicked Men enjoy a plenty and abundance of those things
wherein the vulgar sort esteem their Happiness and Felicity to consist.
Besides, the checks of Conscience, which precede any wicked Action, seem not to
be of that force and efficacy, as that Punishment which follows the Commission
of the Fact, when, that which is done, cannot possibly be undone. And therefore
the most present and effectual Remedy, for the quelling and suppressing the
evil Desires and Inclinations of Men, is to be provided by the Constituting of
Civil Societies.

CHAP. VI. Of the Internal Frame and Constitution of any State or Government.
THE next Enquiry we are to make, is, I. Conjunction necessary.
upon what bottom Civil Societies have been erected, and wherein their Internal
Constitution does consist. Where in the first place this is manifest, that
neither any Place, nor any sort of Weapons, nor any kind of brute Creatures can
be capable of affording any better and safer Guard or Defense against the
Injuries to which all men are liable by reason of the pravity of Mankind, than
is one Man to another; but since their Power cannot be extended to Places far
remote, it was necessary that those, by whom this End was to be obtained,
should be firmly joined together and associated into Communities.

NOR is it less evident, that the Consent II. Numbers necessary.
and Agreement of Two or Three particular Persons cannot afford this Security
against the Violence of other men: Because it may easily happen, that such a
number may conspire the ruin of those few Persons, as may be able to assure
themselves of a certain Victory over them; and it is very likely they would with
the greater boldness go about such an Enterprise, because of their certain
hopes of Success and Impunity. To this end therefore it is necessary that a
very considerable number of men should unite together, that so the addition of
a few men more to the Enemies, may not be of any great moment to determine the
Victory on their side.

AMONG those many, which join together III. Agreement to be perpetual.
in order to this End, it is absolutely requisite that there be a perfect
Consent and Agreement concerning the Use of such Means as are most conducive to
the End aforesaid. For even a great multitude of Men, if they do not agree
among themselves, but are divided and separated in their Opinions, will be
capable of effecting but very little: Or although they may agree for a certain
time, by reason of some present Motion or Disposition of the mind; yet as the
Tempers and Inclinations of men are very variable, they presently afterward
may divide into Parties. And although by Compact they engaged among themselves,
that they would employ all their Force for the common Defense and Security; Yet
neither by this means is there sufficient Provision made that this Agreement of
the Multitude shall be permanent and lasting. But something more than all this,
is requisite, to wit, that they who have once entered into a mutual League and
Defense for the sake of the Public Good, should be debarred from separating
themselves afterward, when their private Advantage may seem any ways to clash
with the Public Good.

BUT there are Two Faults, which are IV. Faults herein, how remedied.
chiefly incident to Humane Nature, and which are the occasion that many who
are at their own Liberty, and independent one upon the other, cannot long hold
together for the promoting of any Public Design. The One is the Contrariety of
Inclinations and Judgments in determining what is most conducive to such an
End: to which in many there is joined a Dullness in discerning that Resolution,
among several, which may be most advantageous, and a certain Obstinacy in
defending whatsoever Opinion we have once embraced. The other is a certain
Carelessness and Abhorrence of doing that freely, which seems to be convenient
and requisite, whenever there is no absolute Necessity that compels them,
whether they will or no, to the performance of their Duty. The First of these
Defects may be prevented by a Lasting Uniting of all their Wills and Affections
together. And the Latter may be remedied by the constituting of such a Power as
may be able to inflict a present and sensible Penalty upon such as shall
decline their Contributing to the Public Safety.

THE Wills and Affections of a great V. Union of Wills.
number of Men cannot be united by any better means, than when every one is
willing to submit his Will to the Will of One particular Man, or One Assembly
of Men, so that afterward whatsoever he or they shall will or determine
concerning any Matters or Things necessary for the Public Safety, shall be
esteemed as the Will of All and every particular Person.

NOW such a kind of Power, as may VI. And of Forces.
be formidable to All, can by no better means be constituted among a great
Number of Men, than when All and every one shall oblige themselves, to make use
of their strength after that manner, as he shall command, to whom All Persons
must submit and resign the ordering and direction of their united Forces. And
when there is an Union made of their Wills and Forces, then this Multitude of
men may be said to be animated and incorporated into a Firm and Lasting Society.

MOREOVER, that any Society may VII. Other Requisites. One Covenant.
grow together after a Regular manner, there are required Two Covenants, and
One Decree or Constitution. For first, of all those many, who are supposed to
be in a Natural Liberty, when they are joined together for the forming and
constituting any Civil Society, every Person enters into Covenant with each
other, that they are willing to come into one and the same lasting Alliance and
Fellowship, and to carry on the Methods of their safety and security by a
common Consultation and Management among themselves; in a word, that they are
willing to be made Fellow Members of the same Society. To which Covenant, it is
requisite, that All and singular Persons do consent and agree, and he that does
not give his Consent, remains excluded from such Society.

AFTER this Covenant it is necessary, VIII. Constitution.
that there should be a Constitution agreed on by a Public Decree setting
forth, what form of Government is to be pitched upon. For till this be
determined, nothing with any certainty can be transacted, which may conduce to
the Public Safety.

AFTER this Decree concerning the IX. Another Covenant.
Form of Government, there is occasion for another Covenant, when he or they
are nominated and constituted, upon whom the Government of this Rising Society
is conferred: by which Covenant the Persons that are to Govern do oblige
themselves to take care of the common Safety, and the other Members do in like
manner oblige themselves to yield Obedience to them; whereby also all Persons
do submit their Will to the Will and Pleasure of him or them, and they do at
the same time convey and make over to him or them the Power of making use of
and applying their united strength as shall seem most convenient for the
Public Security. And when this Covenant is duly and rightly executed, thence
at last arises a Complete and Regular Government.

A Civil Society and Government thus X. A Community defined.
constituted is looked upon as if it were but One Person, and is known and
distinguished from every particular man by one Common Name, and it has peculiar
Rights and Privileges, which neither Each one alone, nor Many, nor All
together can claim to themselves, without him, who is the Supreme, or to whom
the Administration of the Government is committed. Whence a Civil Society is
defined to be, One Person morally incorporated, whose Will containing the
Covenants of many united together, is looked upon and esteemed as the Will of
All, so that he is in a Capacity of making use of the Strength and Power of
every particular Person for the Common Peace and Security.

NOW the Will and Intention of any XI. How subjected to One.
Constituted Government or Society exerts itself, as the Principle of Public
Actions, either by one particular Person, or by one Council or Assembly,
according as the Power of managing Affairs is conferred on him or on such an
Assembly. Where the Government of the State is in the power of One man, the
said Society is supposed to will, whatsoever shall be the Will and Pleasure of
that Man, allowing that he is in his perfect Senses; and it being about those
Affairs which only relate to Government.

BUT when the Government of a State XII. How to many.
is conferred upon a Council, consisting of several Men, every one of them
retaining his own Natural Free Will; that regularly is esteemed to be the Will
and Pleasure of the State, whereto the Major Part of the Persons, of whom the
Council is composed, does give their Assent; unless it be expressly declared,
how great a Part of the Council consenting is required to represent the Will of
the whole. But where two differing Opinions are equally balanced on both
sides, there is nothing at all to be concluded upon, but the Affair still
remains in its former State. When there are several differing Opinions, that
shall prevail, which has more Voices than any of the other differing Opinions,
provided so many concur therein, as otherwise might have represented the Will
and Pleasure of the whole, according to the Public Constitutions.

A State or Government being thus constituted, XIII. Various Forms of Governm.
the Party on whom the Supreme Power is conferred, either as it is a single
Person, or a Council consisting of Select Persons, or of all in General, is
called a Monarchy, an Aristocracy, or a Free State; the rest are looked upon as
Subjects, or Citizens, the word being taken in the most comprehensive Sense:
Although in strictness of speech some call only those Citizens, who first met
and agreed together in the forming of the said Society, or else such who
succeeded in their Place, to wit, House-holders or Masters of Families.
Moreover, Citizens are either Originally so, or such as are born in the Place,
and upon that account claim their Privileges, or else Adscititious, or such as
come from foreign Parts. Of the first sort are either those who at first were
present and concerned in the forming the said Society, or their Descendents,
whom we call Indigenae or Natives. Of the other sort are those who come ftom
foreign Parts in order to settle themselves there. As for those who come thither
only to make a short stay, although they are for that time subject to the Laws
of the Place; nevertheless they are not looked upon as Citizens, but are called
Strangers or Sojourners.

NOT that what we have delivered concerning XIV. Government from God.
the Original of Civil Societies, does any ways hinder, but that Civil
Government may be truly said to be from God. For it being his Will, that the
Practices of Men should be ordered according to the Law of Nature; and yet,
upon the Multiplication of Mankind, Human Life would have become so horrid and
confused, that hardly any room would have been left for the same to exert its
Authority; and seeing the Exercise thereof would be much improved by the
Institution of Civil Societies; therefore (since he who commands the End, must
be supposed to command likewise the Means necessary to the said End,) God also
by the mediation of the Dictates of Reason is to be understood antecedently to
have willed that Mankind when they were multiplied, should erect and constitute
Civil Societies, which are, as it were, animated with a Supreme Authority. The
Degrees whereof he expressly approves in Divine Writ, ratifying their Divine
Institution by Peculiar Laws, and declaring that himself takes them into his
especial Care and Protection.

CHAP. VII. Of the several Parts of Government.
WHAT are the Constituent Parts of I.
Supreme Power, and by what Methods it exerts its Force in Civil Societies, may
easily be gathered from the Nature and End of the said Societies.

IN a Civil Society all Persons are supposed II. Will of the Supreme to be made
known.
to have submitted their Will to the Will and Pleasure of the Governors, in
such Affairs as concern the Safety of the Public, being willing to do
whatsoever they require. That this may be effected, it is necessary, that the
Governors do signify to those who are to be governed, what their Will and
Pleasure is concerning such Matters. And this they do not only by their
Commands directed to particular Persons about particular Affairs; but also by
certain general Rules, whence all Persons may at all times have a clear and
distinct Knowledge of what they are to do or to omit. By which likewise it is
commonly defined and determined what ought to be looked upon to be each Man's
Right and Propriety, and what does properly belong to Another, what is to be
esteemed Lawful, and what Unlawful in any Public Society, what Commendable or
what Base; what every man may do by his own Natural Liberty, or how every one
may dispose and order his own particular Rights toward the advancement of the
common Peace and Tranquillity; In fine, what and after what manner every one by
Right may lay claim to from another. For it conduces very much to the Peace and
Prosperity of any Civil Society, that all these things should be clearly and
plainly laid down and determined.

MOREOVER, this is the Chief End III. Penalty.
of Civil Societies, that Men by a mutual Agreement and Assistance of one
another might be secured against the Injuries and Affronts which may and very
often do befall us by the Violence of other men. Now that this End may the
better be obtained by those Men, with whom we are linked together in the same
Society; it is not sufficient, that they should mutually agree among themselves
not to injure one Another; nor is it enough that the bare Will and Pleasure of
the Supreme Magistrate should be made known to them; but it is likewise
requisite that there should be a certain Fear and Dread of Punishment, and a
Power and Ability of inflicting the same. Which Punishment or Penalty, that it
may be sufficient for this End, is to be so ordered; that there may plainly
appear a greater Damage in violating the Laws than in observing them; and that
so the Sharpness and Severity of the Penalty may outweigh the Pleasure and
Advantage, gotten or expected by doing the Injury. Because it is impossible but
that of two Evils men should choose the Least. For although there are many men
who are not restrained from doing Injuries by any prospect of Punishment
hanging over their heads, yet that is to be looked upon as a Case that rarely
happens; and such as considering the present Condition and Frailty of Mankind,
cannot be wholly avoided.

BECAUSE also it very often happens IV. Controversies.
that many Controversies do arise about the Right Application of the Laws to
some particular Matters of Fact, and that many Things are to be nicely and
carefully considered in order to determine whether such a Fact may be said to
be against Law; therefore, in order to the establishment of Peace and Quietness
amongst the Subjects, it is the part of the Supreme Governor to take
cognizance of and determine the Controversies arising between Subject and
Subject, and carefully to examine the Actions of Particular Persons which are
found to be contrary to Law, and to pronounce and execute such Sentence as
shall be Agreeable to the same Law.

BUT that those, who by mutual Agreement V. Power of Peace and War.
have constituted a Civil Society, may be safe against the Insults of
Strangers, the Supreme Magistrate has Power to assemble, to unite into a Body,
and to Arm, or instead of that to list as many Mercenaries as may seem
necessary, considering the uncertain Number and Strength of the Enemy, for the
maintaining the Public Security; and it is likewise entirely left to the
Discretion of the same Magistrate to make Peace whenever he shall think
convenient. And since both in times of Peace and War Alliances and Leagues with
other Princes and States are of very great Use and Importance, that so the
different Advantages of diverse States and Governments may the better be
communicated to each other, and the Enemy by their joint Forces may be repulsed
with the greater Vigor, or be more easily brought to Terms; it is also
absolutely in the Power of the Supreme Magistrate to enter into such Leagues
and Treaties as he shall think convenient to each Occasion, and to oblige all
his Subjects to the observation of them, and at once to derive and convey down
to the whole Civil Society all the Benefits and Advantages thence arising.

SEEING also the Affairs of any Considerable VI. Public Officers.
State as well in time of War as Peace cannot well be managed by one Person,
without the assistance of subordinate Ministers and Magistrates, it is
requisite that able Men should be appointed by the Supreme Magistrate to decide
and determine in his room the Controversies arising between Subject and
Subject, to enquire into the Counsels of the Neighboring Princes and States,
to govern the Soldiery, to collect and distribute the Public Revenue, and
lastly in every Place to take special care of the common Good. And from each of
these Persons the Supreme Magistrate may and ought to exact the Performance of
their Duty, and require an Account of their Behavior in their respective
Stations.

AND because the Concerns of any VII. Taxes.
Civil Society can neither in time of War nor Peace be managed without
Expenses, the Supreme Authority has power to compel the Subjects to provide the
same. Which is done several ways; either when the Community appropriates a
certain Portion of the Revenues of the Country they possess, for this Purpose;
or when each Subject contributes something out of his own Estate, and if
occasion requires, gives also his Personal Help and Assistance; or when Customs
are set upon Commodities importported and exported, (of which the first chiefly
affects the Subjects, and the other Foreiners,) Or lastly, when some moderate
Tax is laid on those Commodites which are spent.

To conclude, since the Actions of Each VIII. Public Doctrines.
Person are governed by his own particular Opinion: and that most People are
apt to pass such a judgment upon Things as they have been accustomed unto, and
as they commonly see other People judge; so that very few are capable of
discerning what is just and honest; upon this account therefore it is expedient
for any Civil Society, that such kind of Doctrines should be publicly taught,
as are agreeable to the Right End and Design of such Societies, and that the
minds of the Inhabitants should be seasoned betimes with these Principles. It
does therefore belong to the Supreme Magistrate to constitute and appoint
fitting Persons to inform and instruct them publicly in such Doctrines.

NOW these several parts of Government XV. All these Parts concentred.
are naturally so connected, that to have a Regular Form suitable to any Civil
Society, all these Parts thereof ought radically to center in One. For if any
Part be wanting, the Government is defective, and incapable of procuring its
End. But if these several Parts be divided, so that some of them be radically
here, and others there, hence of Necessity will follow an irregular and
incoherent State of Things.

CHAP. VIII. Of the several Forms of Government.
THE Supreme Power considered either I. Diverse Forms.
as it resides in a single Man, or in a select Council or Assembly of men, or
of all in General, produces diverse Forms of Government.

NOW the Forms of Government are II. Regular and Irregular.
either Regular or Irregular. Of the first sort are those, where the Supreme
Power is so united in one particular Subject, that the same being firm and
entire, it carries on by one Supreme Will the whole Business of Government.
Where this is not found, the Form of Government must of necessity be Irregular.

THERE are Three Regular Forms of III. Three Regular Forms.
Government: The First is, when the Supreme Authority is in one Man; and that
is called a Monarchy. The second, when the same is lodged in a select Number of
Men, and that is an Aristocracy. The Third, when it is in a Council or Assembly
of Freeholders and Principal Citizens, and that is a Democracy. In the First,
he who bears the Supreme Rule, is styled a Monarch, in the Second the Nobles,
and in the Third the People.

IN all these Forms the Power is indeed IV. Forms compared.
the same. But in one respect Monarchy has a considerable Advantage above the
rest, that in order to deliberate and determine, that is, actually to exercise
the Government, there is no necessity of appointing and fixing certain Times
and Places; but he may deliberate and determine in any Place and at any Time;
so that a Monarch is always in a readiness to perform the necessary Actions of
Government. But that the Nobles and the People, who are not as one Natural
Person, may be able so to do, it is necessary that they meet at a certain Time
and Place; there to debate and resolve upon all Public Business. For the Will
and Pleasure of a Council, or of the People, which results from the Majority of
Votes consenting, can no otherwise be discovered.

BUT as it happens in other matters, V. A distempered State.
so in Governments, that the same may be sometimes well, and at other times
scurvily and foolishly managed. Whence it comes to pass, that some States are
reputed Sound, and others Distempered: Not that on Account of such kind of
Imperfections, there is any necessity of setting up any Peculiar Forms of
Government. But these Distempers of Civil Societies sometimes are in the
Persons, and sometimes in the Constitution it self. Whence the First are styled
Imperfections of the Men, and the Latter, Imperfections of the State.

THE Imperfections of the Men in a VI. Monarchy.
Monarchy are, when he who possesses the Throne, is not well skilled in the
Arts of Ruling, and takes none or but a very slight Care for the Public Good,
prostituting the same to be torn in pieces and sacrificed to the Ambition or
Avarice of Evil Ministers; when the same Person becomes terrible by his Cruelty
and Rage; when also he delights without any real necessity to expose the
Public to Danger; when he squanders away, by his Luxury and profuse
Extravagance, those Supplies which were given for the support of the Public;
when he heaps up Treasure unreasonably extorted from his Subjects; when he is
Insolent, Haughty or Unjust; or guilty of any other scandalous Vice.

THE Imperfections of the Men in an VII. Aristocracy.
Aristocracy are, when by Bribery and base Tricks Ill men and Fools get into
the Council, and Persons much more deserving than they, are excluded; When the
Nobles are divided into several Factions; when they endeavor to make the
Common People their Slaves, and to convert the Public Stock to their Private
Advantage.

THE Imperfections of the Men in a Democracy VIII. Men in a Democracy.
are, when Silly and Troublesome Persons stickle for their Opinions with great
Heat and Obstinacy; when those Excellencies which are rather beneficial than
hurtful to the Commonwealth are deprest and kept under; when, through
Inconstancy, Laws are rashly established and as rashly annulled, and what but
just now was very pleasing is immediately without any Reason rejected: and when
base Fellows are promoted in the Government.

THE Imperfections of the Men, which IX. Men in any Government.
may promiscuously happen in any Form of Government, are; when those who are
entrusted with the Public Care, perform their Duty either amiss or slightly;
and when the Subjects, who have nothing but the Honor of Obeying, grow restiff
and ungovernable.

BUT the Imperfections of any Constitution X. Faults in a Constitution.
are, when the Laws thereof are not accommodated to the Temper and Genius of
the People or Country; or when the Subjects make use of them for fomenting
intestine Disturbances or for giving unjust Provocations to their Neighbors;
or when the said Laws render the Subjects incapable of discharging those Duties
that are necessary for the preservation of the Public; for instance, when
through their defect the People must of necessity be dissolved in Sloth, or
rendered unfit for the enjoyment of Peace and Plenty; or when the Fundamental
Constitutions are ordered after such a manner that the Affairs of the Public
cannot be dispatched but too slowly and with difficulty.

TO these distempered Constitutions, XI. How called.
men have given certain Names; as a corrupt Monarchy is called Tyranny, a
corrupt Aristocracy is styled an Oligarchy, or a Rump-Government. And a corrupt
Popular State is called an Anarchy, or a Rabble-Government. Although it often
happens, that many by these Nicknames do not so much express the Distemper of
such a Government, as their own Natural Aversion for the present Governors and
Constitution. For oftentimes he who is dissatisfied with his King, or a
Monarchical Government, is wont to call even a Good and Lawful Prince, a Tyrant
and Usurper, especially if he be strict in putting the Laws in Execution. So he
who is vexed because he is left out of the Senate, not thinking himself
Inferior to any of the other Counselors, out of Contempt and Envy he calls
them a Pack of assuming Fellows, who though in no respect they excel any of the
Rest, yet domineer and lord it over their Equals, nay over Better men than
themselves. Lastly, those men who are of a haughty Temper, and who hate a
Popular Equality, seeing that all People in a Democracy have an equal Right to
give their Suffrages in public Affairs, tho in every Place the common People
makes the greatest Number, they condemn that as an Ochlocracy, or Government by
the Rabble, where there is no Preference given to Persons of Merit, as they,
forsooth, esteem themselves to be.

AN Irregular Constitution is, where that XII. An Irregular State.
Perfect Union is wanting, in which the very Essence of a Government consists:
And that not through any Fault or Maladministration of the Government, but
because this Form has been received as Good and Legitimate by Public Law or
Custom. But since there may be Infinite varieties of Errors in this Case, it is
impossible to lay down distinct and certain Species of Irregular Governments.
But the Nature thereof may be easily understood by one or two Examples; for
instance, if in a State the Nobles and the People are each vested with a
Supreme and unaccountable Power; Or if in any Nation the Nobles are grown so
great that they are no otherwise under the King, than as unequal Confederates.

WE call those Unions when several Constituted XIII. Union of several
Communities.
Societies by some special Tie are so conjoined, that their Force and Strength
may be looked upon in effect as the United Force and Strength of one Civil
Society. Now these Unions may arise two several ways: the one by a Common
Sovereign, the other by League or Confederacy.

SUCH a Union happens, by means of XIV. Union by a common Sovereign.
a Common Sovereign, when diverse separate Kingdoms, either by Agreement, or by
Marriage, or hereditary Succession, or Victory, come to be subject to the same
King; yet so that they do not close into one Realm, but each are still governed
by the same Common Sovereign, according to their own Fundamental Laws.

ANOTHER sort of Union may happen, XV. Union by Confederacy.
when several Neighboring States or Governments are so connected by a perpetual
League and Confederacy, that they cannot exercise some Parts of the Supreme
Power, which chiefly concern their Defense and Security against Strangers, but
by a general Consent of them All: Each Society nevertheless, as to other
matters, reserving to its self its own Peculiar Liberty and Independency.

CHAP. IX. The Qualifications of Civil Government.
IT is always one Prerogative of the Government I. Supreme Authority.
by which any Community is directed in every form of Commonwealth whatsoever,
to be invested with the Supreme Authority: whereby it has the regulating of all
things according to its own Judgment and Discretion, and acts without
dependence upon any Superior, that can pretend to annul or countermand its
Orders.

FOR the same Reason, a Government II. Unaccountable.
so constituted remains unaccountable to all the World: there being no
Authority above it to punish it, or to examine whether its proceedings are
right or no.

AND a third qualification of like nature III. Above the Laws.
with the former, is, that inasmuch as all Civil Laws, of humane Authority,
derive both their Beginning and their Continuance from the favor of the
Government; it is impossible they should directly oblige the very Power that
makes them; because the same Power would in consequence be superior to it
self. Yet it is a happy Prospect and a singular advantage to the Laws, when a
Prince conforms himself of his own pleasure, as occasion serves, to practice
the same things that he commands his Subjects.

THERE is also a peculiar Veneration to IV. Obedience due to it.
be paid to the Supreme Government, under which we live: not only in obeying it
in its just Commands, wherein it is a Crime to disobey, but in enduring its
Severities with the like Patience, as the rigor of some Parents is submitted to
by dutiful Children. Wherefore when a Prince proceeds to offer the most heinous
Injuries imaginable to his people, let them rather undergo it, or every one
seek his safety by flight, than draw their Swords upon the Father of their
Country.

WE find, in Monarchies and Aristocracies V. An absolute Monarchy.
especially, that the Government is sometime Absolute and sometime Limited. An
absolute Monarch is one, who having no prescribed form of Laws and Statutes
perpetually to go by in the method of his Administration, proceeds entirely
according to his own Will and Pleasure, as the condition of Affairs and the
public Good in his judgment seem to require.

BUT because a single Person may be VI. A limited Monarchy.
subject to be mistaken in his Judgment, as well as to be seduced to evil
Courses in the enjoyment of so vast a Liberty; it is thought convenient by some
States, to circumscribe the exercise of this Power within the limits of certain
Laws, which are proposed to the Prince at his Succession to be the future Rule
of his Government. And particularly when any Extraordinary Concern arises,
involving in it the ^^^erest of the whole Kingdom, for which there can be no
provision extant in the Constitutions foregoing: They then oblige him to engage
in nothing without the previous Advice and Consent of the People, or their
Representatives in Parliament; the better to prevent the danger of his swerving
from the Interest of the Kingdom.

WE see likewise a difference in the right VII. Right and Manner of holding.
and manner of holding some Kingdoms, from what it is in others. For those
Princes especially as have acquired Dominions by Conquest and made a People
their own by force of Arms, can divide, alienate, and transfer their Regalities
at pleasure in the manner of a patrimonial Estate. Others that are advanced by
the Voice of the People, though they live in full possession of the Government
during their Reigns, yet have no pretensions to such a Power. But as they
attained to the Succession, so they leave it, to be determined either by the
ancient Custom or the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: for which reason they
are compared by some to Usufructuaries or Life-Renters.

CHAP. X. How Government, especially Monarchical, is acquired.
ALTHOUGH the Consent of the I. Consent of the Subject, free or forced.
Subject is a thing to be required in Constituting of every lawful Government,
yet it is not always obtained the same way. For as it is sometimes seen, that a
Prince ascends the Throne with the voluntary Acclamations of the People; so
sometimes he makes himself a King by Conquest, and brings a People to consent
by Military force.

WHICH latter Method of acquiring II. Of Conquest.
a Government is called Conquest: it happening, as often as a Victorious
Prince, having Fortune on his side and a just Cause, reduces a People by his
Arms to such Extremities, as compel them to receive him for their Governor.
And the Reason of this Title is derived, not only from the Conquerours Clemency
in saving the Lives of all those whom in strictness of War he was at liberty to
destroy, and instead thereof laying only a lesser inconvenience upon them; but
likewise from hence, that when a Prince will choose to go to War with one that
he has injured, rather than he will condescend to satisfy him in a just and
equal manner; He is to be presumed to cast himself upon the fortune of War with
this intention, that he does beforehand tacitly consent to accept of any
Conditions whatsoever shall befall him in the Event.

AS for the Voluntary Consent of the III. Election.
People, a Government is acquired by it, when in an Election the People either
in order to their Settlement, or at any time after, do nominate such a One to
bear that Office as they believe is capable of it. Who, upon presentation of
their Pleasure to him, accepting it; and also receiving their promises of
Allegiance; he thereby actually enters upon the Possession of the Government.

BUT betwixt this Election of a new IV. An Interregnum.
Prince and the Death of the former, there uses in Monarchies that are already
fixed and settled to intercede an Interregnum; which signifies an imperfect
kind of State, where the People keep together merely by Virtue of their
Original Compact: Only that this is much strengthened by the common Name and
love of their Country, and the settlement of most of their Fortunes there;
whereby all good Men are obliged to preserve the Peace with one another, and
study to restore their fallen Government again as soon as they can. Yet to
prevent the mischiefs which are apt to arise in Interregnums, it is very
convenient the Law should provide Administrators, to manage the public Affairs
during the vacancy of the Crown.

NOW tho, as is said, in some Monarchies; V. Succession.
as every King dies, they proceed again to a new Election: Yet in others the
Crown is conferred upon Conditions to descend to certain Persons successively,
(without any intervening Election) for all time to come. The right to which
Succession may either be determined by the order of the Prince, or the order of
the People

WHEN Princes hold their Crowns in VI. Devisable when.
the manner of a Patrimony; they have the liberty of disposing of the
Succession as themselves please. And their declared Order therein, especially
if their Kingdoms are of their own founding or acquiring, shall carry the same
force with the last Testament of any private Man. They may divide, if they
please, their Kingdom amongst all their Children, not so much as excepting the
Daughters. They may, if they think fit, make an Adoptive or their Natural Son
their Heir, or one that is not in the least akin to them.

AND when such an Absolute Monarch VII. Succession upon an Intestate.
as this dies, without leaving order for the Succession; It is to be presumed
he did not thereby intend the Kingdom should Expire with himself; but first,
that it should devolve to his Children (before all others), because of the
natural Affection of Parents to them. Then, That the same Monarchical
Government shall continue, which he recommended by his own Example. That the
Kingdom be kept undivided, as one Realm; because any Division thereof must give
occasion to great Troubles both among the Subjects and the Royal Family. That
the Elder reign before the Younger, and the Male before the Female in the same
Line: And lastly, That in default of Issue the Crown shall devolve upon the
next in Blood.

BUT in those Monarchies, whose Constitution VIII. Succession in the People.
from the very Beginning was founded upon the voluntary Choice of the People,
there the Order of Succession must have an Original Dependence upon the Will of
the same People. For if, together with the Crown, they did confer upon the
Prince the Right of appointing his Successor; whosoever shall be nominated to
the Succession by him, will have all the Right to enjoy it. If they did not
confer it upon the Prince, it is to be understood as reserved to themselves.
Who, if they pleased, might make the Crown Hereditary to their Princes Family:
either prescribing the Order of Succession to be like other ordinary
Inheritances, so far as can consist with the Public Good; or set the same
under any peculiar necessary Limitations. IX. Of Hereditary Kingdoms.


WHEN a People have barely conferred upon their King an hereditary Right, with
out any thing farther expressed; Though it is true it may seem to be intended,
that the Crown shall pass to the Heirs in the same common order of Descent as
private Inheritances do; Yet the public Good requires, that the sense of such
a Public Act shall be taken under some restrictions, notwithstanding their not
being particularly expressed. As 1. It is supposed, That the Kingdom shall
continue inseparable, as one Realm. 2. That the Succession shall go to the
Descendants of the first Prince of the Line. Excluding 3. Illegitimate and
adopted Children, with all that are not born according to the Laws of the
Realm. 4. That the Heirs male be preferred before the female in the same Line,
tho their Inferiors in Age. And 5. That each Prince esteem his Succession, not
as the Gift of his Predecessor, but as the bounty of the People.

NOW because after a long Descent of X. A Lineal Succession.
Princes, there may easily arise Controversies almost inextricable, about the
person of the Royal Family, who approaches nearest in kindred to the Prince
deceased; therefore, for prevention of such, in many Kingdoms they have
introduced a lineal Succession, of this nature; That as every one descends from
the Father of the Stem Royal, they compose as it were a perpendicular Line;
from whence they succeed to the Crown, according to the priority of that Line
to others: And though perhaps the nearest of Kin to the Prince last deceased
may stand in a new Line, different from that of His; Yet there is no passing
out of the old Line thither, till Death has exhausted the same.

THE Series of Succession most regardable, XI. By the Fathers side, or the
Mothers.
are those two, deduced from the several families of the Father and the Mother:
the Relation whereof is distinguished in the Civil Law by the names of
Cognation and Agnation. The First does not exclude the Women, but only
postpones them to Males in the same Line; for it recurrs to them in the case of
the others default. But by the second, both the Women and all their Issue, even
Males, are excluded for ever.

WHEN in a Patrimonial Kingdom XII. Differences about Succession, how to be.
there arises a Dispute concerning the Succession, the most advisable way to
determine it, is to put it to the Arbitration of some of the Royal Family; And
where the Succession originally depended upon the Consent of the People, there
their Declaration upon the matter will take away the doubt.

CHAP. XI. The Duty of Supreme Governors.
IF we consider what is the End and I.
Nature of Communities, and what the parts of Government, it will be easy from
thence to pass a judgment upon the Rules and Precepts wherein consists the
Office of a Prince.

BEFORE all things it is requisite, II. Their proper Studies, and Conversation.
that he apply himself with the utmost Diligence to the study of whatever may
conduce to give him a perfect comprehension of the Affairs belonging to a
person in his Station: because no man can manage a place to his Honor, which
he does not rightly understand. He is therefore to be sequestered from those
remote and foreign Studies, which make nothing to this purpose. He must abridg
himself in the Use of Pleasures and vain Pastimes, that would divert his
Attention from this Mark and End. And for his more familiar Friends, instead of
Parasites, and Triflers, or such as are accomplished in nothing but Vanities,
(whose Company ought utterly to be rejected;) Let him make choice of men of
Probity and Sense, experienced in Business and skilful in the ways of the
World: being assured, that until he thoroughly understands as well the Condition
of his own State as the disposition of the People under him, he will never be
able to apply the general Maxims of State-Prudence, to the Cases that will
occur in Government, in such a manner as they ought. More especially let him
study to be excellent in Virtues, that are of the greatest use and luster in
the exercise of his vast Charge; and so compose the manners of his Life, that
they may be answerable to the height of his Glory.

THE most general Rule to be observed III. The Public Good, the Supreme Law.
by Governors, is this; The Good of the Public is the Supreme Law of all.
Because in conferring the Government upon them, what is there else intended,
but to secure the common End for which Societies were instituted in the
beginning? From whence they ought to conclude, that whatsoever is not expedient
for the Public to be done, neither is it expedient for themselves.

AND it being necessary in order to IV. Laws, Discipline, and Religion.
preserve a people at peace with one another, that the Wills and Affections of
them should be disposed and regulated, according as it is most proper for the
Public Good; There ought to be some suitable Laws for the purpose prescribed
by Princes, and also a public Discipline established with so much strictness,
that Custom as well as fear of Punishment may be able to confine men to the
practice of their their Duty. To which end it is convenient to take care, that
the Christian Religion after the most pure and most incorrupt way be professed
by the Subjects of every Realm or Community; and that no Tenets be publicly
taught in the Schools, that are contrariant to the designs of Government.

IT will conduce to the advancement of V. The Laws, plain and few.
the same end, if in the Affairs which are wont to be most frequently
negotiated betwixt the Subjects, the Laws which are prescribed are clear, and
plain; and no more in Number than will promote the good of the Kingdom and its
Members. For considering that men use to deliberate upon the things they ought
or ought not to do, more by the strength of their natural Reason, than their
understanding in the Laws; whenever the Laws do so abound in Number as not
easily to be retained in Memory, and are so particular in their Matter, as to
prohibit things which are unprohibited by the light of Reason, it must
certainly come to pass, that innocent Persons, who have not had the least ill
intention to transgress the Laws, will be many times unknowingly hampered by
them, as by Snares, to their unreasonable prejudice, against the very end of
Societies and Government.

YET it is in vain for Princes to make VI. And duly executed.
Laws, and at the same time suffer the violation of them to pass with impunity.
They must therefore cause them to be put in Execution, both for every honest
Person to enjoy his Rights without Vexation, Evasions, or Delays; and also for
every Malefactor to receive the punishment due to the quality of his Crime,
according to the intention and malice in the committing it. They are not to
extend their Pardons to any without sufficient reason. For it is an unjust
practice, which tends greatly to irritate the minds of people against the
Government, not to use Equality (all Circumstances considered) toward persons
that are Equal in their deservings.

AND as nothing ought to be Enacted VII. Penalties.
under a Penalty, without the consideration of some profit to the
Commonwealth; So in the fixing of Penalties proportionably to that end, it is
fitting to observe a Moderation; with care, that the damage thence arising to
the Subject on the one hand, exceed not the advantage that redounds to the
Commonwealth on the other. In sine, to render Penalties effectual in obtaining
the end intended by them, it is clear they should still be magnified to such a
degree, as by their severity to outweigh the contrary gain and pleasure that
is possible to proceed from choosing the Crime.

MOREOVER, inasmuch as the design VIII. Injuries.
of people in incorporating together in a Commonwealth, is their security from
harms and Violence; it is the Duty of the Supreme Magistrate to prohibit any
injury of one Subject to another so much the more severely, because by their
constant Cohabitation in the same place they have the fairer opportunities to
do them or to resent them. Remembering, that no distinctions of Quality or
Honor derive the least pretense to the greater to insult over the less at
their pleasure. Neither has any Subject whatsoever the liberty to seek his
satisfaction for the Injuries, he presumes are done him, in the way of a
private Revenge. For the design of Government is destroyed by such a Proceeding
as this.

AND although there is no one Prince, IX. Ministers of State and Judges.
how ingenious soever in Business, that is able in his own person to manage all
the Affairs of a Nation of any considerable extent, but he must have Ministers
to participate with him in his Cares and Counsels; Yet as these Ministers
borrow their Authority, in every thing they do, from Him; So the praise or
dispraise of their Actions returns finally upon Him also. For which reason, and
because according to the quality of Ministers, business is done either well or
ill, there lies an Obligation upon a Prince to advance honest and fit Persons
to Offices of Trust in the Government, and upon occasion to examine into the
proceedings of the same; and as he finds them deserving, to reward or punish
them accordingly, for an Example to others to understand, that there is no less
fidelity and diligence to be used in managing the public Business, than one
would practice in any private Affair that relates to himself. So when wicked
people are encouraged to put their Inclinations in practice upon the hopes of
escaping very easily unpunished under Judges that are subject to Corruption;
it' is a Prince's Duty to animadvert severely upon such Judges, as Favorers of
Vice, against the safety of the Subject and quiet of the Nation. And though the
dispatching of the ordinary affairs may be committed to the Ministers care; yet
a Prince is never to refuse to lend his Ear with Patience, when his Subjects
present him with their Complaints and Addresses.

FOR Taxes and the like Duties, to X. Of Taxes and Duties.
which Subjects are upon no other account obliged, than as they are necessary
to support the public Charge in Peace and War; it deserves to be the Care of
Princes not to extort more, than either the Necessities or signal advantages of
the Nation require; and so to alleviate and soften them in the ways and means
of laying them upon the Subject, that every one may find their weight as little
offensive as it can possibly be; being charged upon particulars in a fair and
Equitable proportion, without favoring of one to deceive or oppress another.
And let not the Money that is so raised be consumed by Princes in Luxury and
Vanities, or thrown away in Gifts and needless Ostentation; but laid out upon
the occasions of the Nation: always foreseeing that their Expenses be made to
answer to their Revenue; and in case of any failure in the latter to do it,
that they attempt a Remedy by means of Frugality and in retrenching unnecessary
Expenses.

IT is true, Princes have no Obligation XI. Interest of the Subject to be
advanced by Princes.
upon them to find maintenance for their Subjects, otherwise than Charity
directs them to a particular Care of those, for whom it is impossible to
subsist of themselves by reason of some Calamity undeserved. Yet because the
Money, that is necessary for the conservation of the Public, must be raised
out of the Subjects Estates, in whose Wealth and Happiness the strength of a
Nation does consist; it therefore concerns Princes to use their best
Endeavors, that the fortunes of their Subjects improve and flourish: as
particularly by giving Orders, how the fruits of the Earth and Water may be
received in the most plentiful measure; and that men employ their Industry on
things of Domestic growth, not purchasing at their Expense that Labor from
others, which themselves are able conveniently to undergo. That all Mechanic
Arts and Merchandise, and in Maritime places, Navigation be encouraged, as of
great consequence to the Commonwealth. That Idleness be banished from amongst
them, and Frugality be restored by Sumptuary Laws, contrived on purpose to
avoid superfluous Expenses; especially those, which occasion the transporting
of Riches out of the Kingdom. Whereof if the Prince is pleased to set an
Example in his own Person, it is likely to prove of greater force than all the
Laws besides.

FINDING also that the internal XII. Factions and Parties.
Health and Strength of a Nation proceeds in a particular manner from the Unity
that is between the People; and according as this happens to be more and more
perfect, the power of the Government diffuses it self through the whole Body
with so much the greater Efficacy, it is yet a further care incumbent upon
Princes, to hinder both the growth of public Factions as well as of private
Associations of particular persons by Agreements amongst themselves. As also to
see, that neither all nor any of the Subjects, under any pretense whatsoever
Religious or Civil, do retain a dependence upon a Stranger, within or without
the Kingdom, more than upon their lawful Prince: in whom alone, before all
others, all their Expectations ought to be reposed.

Lastly, SINCE the Peace of Nations XIII. Of War and Peace with foreign Nations.
in reference to one another depends upon no very great Certainties; it ought
to be the endeavor of Princes to encourage Valor and Military Studies in
their Subjects; having all things, as Fortifications, Arms, Men, and Money
(which is the Sinews of Business) ready prepared in case of an Assult to repel
it: though not voluntarily to begin one upon another Nation, even after
sufficient Cause of War given, unless invited by a very safe opportunity and
the Publicks being in a good Condition conveniently to go through with the
undertaking. For the same Reason it is proper to observe and search into the
Counsels and Proceedings of Neighbors with all exactness; and to enter with
them into Leagues and Alliances as prudently, as so great a Concern requires.

CHAP. XII. Of the Special Laws of a Community relating to the Civil Government.
IT now remains, that we take a View I. What they are.
of the particular parts of Supreme Government, together with such
Circumstances thereunto belonging as we find are worthy to be observed. In the
first place there are the Civil Laws, meaning the Acts and Constitutions of the
highest Civil Authority for the time being, ordained to direct the Subject in
the course of his Life as to what things he ought to do, and what to omit.

THEY are called Civil, upon two accounts II. Why so called.
especially: that is, either in regard of their Authority or their Original. In
the first sense, all manner of Laws whatsoever, of force whereby to try and
decide Causes in a Court of Civil Judicature, let their Original be what it
will, may pass under that denomination. In the other we call only those Laws
Civil, which derive their Original from the Will of the Supreme Civil
Government, treating upon the Subject of such things, as neither the Laws of
God or Nature have determined; yet are found to conduce much to the profit of
Particular Commonwealths.

AS nothing therefore ought to be made III. The Law of Nature, to be reinforced
by them.
the Subject of a Civil Law, but what relates to the good of the Commonwealth
that does ordain it; So it seeming in the highest degree expedient toward the
beauty and ease of living in a Community, that in particular the Law of Nature
should be diligently observed by all people; it lies upon Supreme Governors to
authenticate the said Law with the Force and efficacy of a Civil Law. For since
indeed the wickedness of a great part of Mankind is arrived to a degree, which
neither the apparent Excellency of the Law of Nature nor the fear of God
himself is sufficient to restrain; the most effectual Method remaining, to
preserve the happiness of living in a Community, is, by the authority of the
Government to enforce the Natural by the Civil Laws, and supply the Disability
of the one with the Power of the other.

NOW the Force and Power, which is in IV. The Penal Sanction.
Civil Laws, consists in this; that to the Assertory part of the Statute,
concerning Things to be done or omitted, there is annexed a Penal Sanction,
rehearsing the Punishment that is appointed to attend a man in a Court of
Justice for omitting what he ought to do, or doing what he ought to omit. Of
which kind of Sanctions the Laws of Nature being of themselves destitute, the
breaking of them does not fall under the punishment of any Court in this World;
but yet is reserved for the Judgment of the Tribunal of God.

MORE particularly it is inconsistent V. Of Actions.
with the nature of living in a Community, for every one, what he accounts to
be his due, to exact it of his own proper Violence. So that here the Civil Laws
come in to the assistance of the Natural. For they allow the Creditor the
benefit of an Action, whereby the Debt that is owing to him by Virtue of a Law
of Nature, with the help of the Magistrate, may be demanded and recovered in a
Court of Justice, according to the Course of the Laws of the Kingdom: whereas
without such enforcement of the said Laws, you can extort nothing from a Debtor
against his Will; but must entirely depend upon his Conscience and Honor. The
Civil Laws admit of Actions chiefly in the Case of those Obligations, that are
contracted betwixt Parties by an express Bond or Covenant. For as to other
Affairs, where the Obligation arises from some indefinite Duty of the Law of
Nature, the Civil Laws make them not subject to an Action at all; on purpose to
give occasion to good men to exercise their Virtue, to their more extraordinary
Praise, when it is evident they do that which is just and honest without
Compulsion. Beside that freqently the point in question may not be of
Consequence enough to trouble a Court about it.

AND whereas the Law of Nature commands VI. The prosecution of them.
many things at large, in an indefinite manner, and leaves the application of
them to every one in his own breast; the Civil Laws, being careful of the
Honor and Tranquillity of the Community, prescribe a certain time, manner,
place, persons, and other circumstances, for the due prosecution of those
Actions, with the proposal of a Reward upon occasion to encourage people to
enter upon them. And when any thing is obscure in the Law of Nature, the Civil
Laws explain it. Which Explication the Subjects are obliged to receive, and
follow, although their own private Opinions do otherwise lead them to a
contrary sense.

So that there being thus a number of VII. Form.
Actions left by the Law of Nature to be considered according to the will and
judgment of each person, which nevertheless in a Commonwealth ought to be
regularly stated for the greater Decency and Quiet of the same; it uses to be
the care of the Civil Laws to reduce all those Actions, with their respective
Concerns, to a proper Form; as we see it is in Wills, Contracts, and diverse
other Cases: from whence it comes, that they limit us (as they do) in the
exercise of several Rights, to the use whereof the Law of Nature left us much
at liberty.

FOR so far as the Civil Laws do not VIII. The Obedience due to the Civil Laws.
openly contradict the Law of God, the Subject stands obliged to obey them, not
merely out of fear of Punishment, but by an internal Obligation confirmed by
the Precepts of the Law of Nature it self. This being one of them, amongst
others, that Subjects ought to obey their lawful Sovereigns.

NAY, it is their Duty to obey even IX. And to the particular Commands of the
Sovereign.
the personal Commands of their Sovereigns, no less than they do the Common
Laws of the Kingdom. Only here they must observe, whether the thing commanded
is to be done by them as in their own Names, in the quality of an Action
belonging properly to Subjects to do; or whether it be barely to undertake the
Execution of an Affair for the Sovereign, in consequence of that Authority
which he has to command it. In the latter Case, the Necessity that is imposed
upon the Subject excuses him from Sin, though the Fact it self is a Sin in the
Sovereign to command. But in the other, for a Subject as in his own name to do
a thing which is repugnant to the Laws of God and Nature, it can never be
lawful. And this is the reason, why if a Subject takes up Arms in an unjust War
at the Command of his Sovereign, he sins not: Yet if he condemns the Innocent,
or accuses and witnesses against them falsely upon the like Command, he sins.
For as he serves in War, he serves in the name of the Public: but acting as a
Judge, Witness, or Accuser, he does it in his Own.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Power of Life and Death.
THE Civil Government, that is Supreme I. Twofold.
in every State, has a Right over the Lives of its Subjects, either indirectly,
when it exposes their Lives in defense of the Public; or directly, in the
punishment of Crimes.

FOR when the force of Foreiners in an II. Indirectly.
Invasion (which often happens) is to be repelled by Force; Or, that we cannot
without the use of Violence obtain our Rights of them; it is lawful for the
Government, by its Supreme Authority, to compel the Subjects to enter into its
Service: not thereby purposely intending their Death, only their Lives are
exposed unto some Danger of it. On which occasions that they may be able to
behave themselves with Skill and Bravery, it is fit they should be exercised
and prepared for the purpose. Now the Fear of Danger ought not to pre^^il with
any Subject to render himself incapable of undergoing the duties of a Soldier.
Much less ought it to tempt a man that is actually in Arms to desert the
Station appointed him: who ought to fight it out to the last drop of his blood,
unless he knows it to be the will of his Commander that he should rather
preserve his Life than his Post, or if he be certain that the maintaining of
such Post is not of so great importance, as the preservation of the Lives
engaged therein.

THE Government claims a Power III. Directly.
to take away the Lives of Subjects directly, upon the occasion of any heinous
Crimes committed by them; whereon it passes judgment of Death by way of
Punishment. As likewise the Goods and Chattels of Criminals are subject to the
Censure of the Law. So that here some General things concerning the nature of
Punishments come to be discoursed.

PUNISHMENT is an Evil that is suffered, IV. Of Punishments.
in Retaliation for another that is done. Or, a certain grievous pain or
pressure, imposed upon a person by Authority, in the manner of a Force, with
regard to an Offense that has been committed by him. For although the doing of
some things may oftentimes be commanded in the place of a Punishment, yet it is
upon this consideration, that the things to be done are troublesome and
laborious to the doer, who will therefore find his sufferings in the
performance of such Action. A Punishment also signifies its being inflicted
against the wills of people: For it would not otherwise obtain its end; which
is, to deter them from Crimes by the sense of its Severity: An effect it never
will produce, if it were only such, as an Offender is willing and pleased to
undergo. As for other Sufferings, which happen to be undergone in Wars and
Engagements; or which one bears innocently, through the means of an Injury done
him: the former not being inflicted by Authority, and the other not referring
to an antecedent Crime, they do neither of them import the proper sense and
meaning of a Punishment.

BY our Natural Liberty we enjoy the V. Inflicted by the Government.
Privilege to have no other Superior but God over us, and only to be
obnoxious to punishments Divine. But since the introduction of Government, it
is allowed to be a branch of the Office of those in whose hands the Government
is entrusted, for the good of all Communities; that upon the representation of
the unlawful practices of Subjects before them, they shall have power
effectually to coerce the same, that people may live together in Safety.

NEITHER does there seem to be any VI. The Benefit of them.
thing of Inequality in this; that he who Evil does should Evil suffer. Yet in
the course of Humane Punishments, we are not solely to regard the quality of
the Crime, but likewise to have an Eye upon the benefit of the Punishment. By
no means executing it on purpose to feed the fancy of the party injured, or to
give him pleasure in the pains and sufferings of his Adversary: Because such
kind of Pleasure is absolutely inhumane, as well as contrary to the disposition
of a good fellow-Subject.

THE Genuine end of Punishments in a VII. The End of them.
State, is, the Prevention of wrongs and injuries: which then has its effect,
when he who does the Injury is amended, or for the future incapacitated to do
more, or others taking Example from his Sufferings are detered from like
Practices. Or, to express it an other way; That which is to be considered in
the business of Punishments, is the Good, either of the Offender, or the Party
offended, or generally of All.

First, WE consider the Good of the Offender: VIII. Upon the Offender.
in whose mind the smart of the Punishment serves to work an alteration toward
Amendment, and extinguishes the lust of doing the same again. Diverse
Communities leave such kind of Punishments as are qualified with this End to be
exercised by Masters over the members of their own Families. But it never was
thought good they should proceed so far as to Death, because he that is dead is
past Amendment.

IN the next Place, a Punishment intends IX. Upon the Party offended.
the good of the party Offended: securing him, that he suffer not the like
mischief for the future, either from the same or other persons. It secures him
from the same; if the man's Life, or, pardoning that, his Power to do hurt be
taken from him; or perhaps sad Experience unteaches him the Art he has learnt
to Offend. It secures him from others, by being performed in the most open and
public manner, accompanied with the circumstances of form and pomp that are
apt to strike a dread into as many as behold it.

IN a word, the good of all people is X. Upon All.
intended by the Execution of Punishments. For by this means care is taken,
that he who has done a mischief to one, shall do no such mischief again to
another: the terror of whose Example may also be an Antidote for the rest
against the temptations to his Crime: And this Good accrews after the same
manner as the former.

BUT if together with the End of Punishments XI. Internal Acts of the mind, not
subject to them.
we consider the condition of Humane Nature, we shall see that all sins are not
of that quality, that they must necessarily fall under the Sentence of a Court
of Justice. The Acts of the mind within it self, which are merely internal; as
thinking upon a Sin with delight, coveting, desiring, resolving to do an ill
thing, but without effect; though they should be afterward made known by man's
own Confession, yet are all exempted from the stroke of humane Punishments. For
so long as those internal Motions have not occasioned the prejudice of any,
whom does it concern or profit to cause the Author to suffer for the same?

IT would also be over-severe in Laws, to XII. Nor minute Lapses.
punish the most minute Lapses in the actions of men: when in the condition of
our Natures the greatest attention cannot prevent them.

THERE are many instances of Actions XIII. And other Actions.
more, of which the public Laws dissemble the taking of any Notice, for the
peace of the Nation. As sometimes, because a good Act shines with greater
glory, by being wrought without sight of a Constraint: or perhaps, it is not
altogether worth the troubling of Judges and Courts about it: Or, it is a
matter extraordinarily difficult to be decided: or, some old inveterate Evil,
which cannot be removed without causing a Convulsion in the State.

ADD hereunto the Vices of the mind, XIV. Nor the Vices of the Mind.
flowing from the common corruption that reigns in the World: as Ambition,
Avarice, Rudeness, Ingratitude, Hypocrisy, Envy, Pride, Anger, private
Grudges, and the like. All these of necessity must be exempted from the
cognizance of humane Judicatures, so long as they break not out into public
Enormities: seeing they abound to that degree, that if you should severely
pursue them with Punishments, there would be no people left to be commanded.

FURTHER, When there have been XV. Of Pardons.
Crimes committed, which are punishable by the Civil Judicature, it is not
always necessary to exert the execution of Justice upon them. For in some cases
a Pardon may possibly be extended to Criminals, with a great deal of reason,
(as it never ought to be granted without it;) and amongst other Reasons, these
especially may be some; That the Ends, which are intended by Punishments, seem
not so necessary to be attended in the case in question; where a Pardon may
produce more good than the Punishment, and the said Ends be more conveniently
obtained another way. That the Prisoner can alledg those excellent Merits of
his own or of his Family toward the Commonwealth, which deserve a singular
Reward. That he is famous for some remarkable rare Art or other; or, it is
hoped, will wash away the stain of his Crime by performing of some Noble
Exploit. That Ignorance did intervene in the Case, though not altogether such
as render him blameless: or, that a particular reason of the Law ceases in a
fact like his. For these reasons, and oftentimes for the number of the
Offenders being very great, Pardons must be granted rather than the Community
shall be exhausted by Punishments.

To take an Estimate of the greatness XVI. The greatness of a Crime.
of any Crime, there is to be considered, first the Object, against which it is
committed; How Noble and Precious that is. Then the Effects; what Damage more
or less it has done to the Commonwealth: and next the pravity of the Author's
Intention, which is to be collected by several signs and circumstances: As,
whether he might not easily have resisted the Occasions that did tempt him to
it; and besides the common reason, whether there was not a peculiar one for his
forbearance? What circumstances aggravate the Fact; or, is he not of a Soul
disposed to resist the allurements of a Temptation? Enquiring yet further,
whether he was not the Principal in the Commission? or was he seduced by the
Example of others? and once, or oftener, or after admonitions spent in vain upon
him?

BUT for the precise Kind and Measure XVII. Measure and kind of punishment.
of Punishment that is fit to be pronounced upon each Crime, it belongs to the
Authority of the Government to determine it, with an entire regard to the
profit of the Commonwealth. Whence the same Punishment may and oftentimes is
imposed upon two Unequal Crimes; understanding the Equality that is commanded
to be regarded by Judges, to mean the particular case of those Criminals, who
being guilty of the same kind of Fact, the one shall not be acquitted and the
other condemned without very sufficient reason. And although men ought to show
to one another all the Mercy and Tenderness that may be, yet the good of the
Nation and the security of its Subjects require upon occasion, when either a
Fact appears most pernicious to the Public, or there is need of a sharp
Medicine to obviate the growing Vices of the Age, that the Government should
aggravate its Punishments: which deserve at all times to be carried high
enough, to be sufficient to control the Propensity of men toward the Sins
those Punishments are levelled against. And let the Government observe, that no
greater punishments be inflicted than the Law assigns, unless the Fact be
aggravated by very heinous Circumstances.

MOREOVER since the same Punishment, XVIII. The person of the Offender.
not affecting all persons alike, meets with various returns to its endeavors
to restrain in them the itch of evil-doing, according to the disposition of
every one that encounters it; Therefore both in the Designation of Punishments
in general and in the Application of them to particulars, it is proper to
consider the person of the Offender, in conjunction with as many qualities, as
concur to augment or diminish the sense of Punishment; as Age, Sex, Condition,
Riches, Strength, and the like.

AND as no man in a Court of Civil XIX. Crimes done by Communities.
Judicature can properly be punished for another's Crime; so in the Commission
of a Crime by a Community, whoever does not consent to it, shall not be
condemned for it; nor suffer the loss of any thing he does not hold in the name
and service of the Community; further then it is usual on these occasions for
the Innocent to feel the smart of the Common Misfortune. When all those are
dead, who did consent or assist toward the said Crimes; then the guilt thereof
expires, and the Community returns to its pristine Innocence.

YET it frequently happens, that the XX: Effect of one man* Crime upon an there.
Crime of one shall occasion the inconvenience of many others, even to the
intercepting of a future blessing from them that they justly expected to
receive. So when an Estate is confiscated for a Crime done by the Parents, the
innocent Children fall into beggary. And when a Prisoner upon Bail makes his
escape, the Bail is forced to answer the Condition of the Bond, not as a
Delinquent, but because it was his voluntary act to oblige himself to stand to
such an Event.

CHAP. XIV. Of Reputation.
REPUTATION in General is that I. Defined.
Value set upon Persons in the World, by which they are Compared and Equalized,
preferred or postponed to others.

IT is divided into Simple, and Accumulative. II. Divided.
And may be considered as to both, either in a People living at their natural
liberty, or United together under a Government.

SIMPLE Reputation amongst a People III. Simple reputation in a State of Nature.
in their Natural Liberty consists chiefly in this; that by their Behavior
they have the Honor to be esteemed and treated with as Good men, ready to
comport themselves in Society with others according to the prescription of the
Law of Nature.

THE Praise whereof remains Entire, IV. How preserved.
so long as no Evil and Enormous fact is knowingly and wilfully done by them,
with a wicked purpose, to Violate the Laws of Nature toward their Neighbor.
Hence every one naturally is to pass for a Good Man, until the contrary is
proved upon him.

THE sam is diminished by transgressing V. Diminished, and repaired.
against the Law of Nature maliciously, in any heinous matter: which serves
also as a Caution for the future, to treat with him that does it with greater
circumspection: though this stain may be washed off either by a voluntary
Reparation of damages, or the testimonies of a serious Repentance.

BUT by a Course of life directly tending VI. Lost, and recovered.
to do mischief, and the seeking of advantages to themselves by open and
promiscuous injuries toward others, the Reputation described is totally
destroyed. And until men of this sort repent, they may lawfully be used as
Common Enemies, by every one, that is in any manner liable to come within the
reach of their Outrages. Yet it is not impossible even for these men, to
retrieve their Credit; if after they have repaired all damages and obtained
their Pardons, they abjure their vicious, to embrace for the time to come, an
honest course of living.

SIMPLE Reputation amongst those who VII. Under Government.
live together in a Community, is that, by which a man is understood to be of
some Account; and has never been declared a vicious member, by the Laws and
Customs of the Place.

HERE therefore the same perishes, either VIII. Lost by an ill condition of
life.
by reason of the course of a man's life, or in Consequence of some Crime. The
first is the case of Slaves; whose Condition, tho naturally having no Turpitude
in it, in many Communities places them, if possible, below Nothing. As likewise
that of Panders, Whores, and such like, whose lives are accompanied with Vice,
at least the scandal of it. For tho, whilst the Community thinks fit publicly
to tolerate, they participate of the benefit of the Common Protection; yet they
ought however to be excluded the Society of Civil Persons. And we may conclude
no less of others, who are employed in works of Nastiness and Contempt, though
naturally not including any Vitiousness in them.

BY Crimes men utterly lose their Reputation, IX. And his Crimes.
when the Laws set a brand of Infamy upon them for the same; either by Death,
and so their Memory is disgraced for ever; or by Banishment out of the
Community, or by Confinement in the quality of scandalous and corrupt Members.

OTHERWISE it is very clear, that X. Otherwise Indelible.
the Natural Honor of no man can be taken from him solely by the will of the
Government. For how can it be understood, that the Government should have a
power collated on it, which conduces in no degree to the Benefit of the
Commonwealth? So neither does it seem as if a real Infamy can be contracted by
executing the Commands of the Government, barely in the quality of a Minister.

ACCUMULATIVE Reputation we call XI. Accumulative Reputation.
that, by which Persons, reciprocally equal as to their Natural Dignity, come
to be preferred to one another according to those Accomplishments, which use to
move the minds of People to pay them Honor. For Honor is properly the
signification of our judgment concerning the Excellency of another person.

THIS sort of Reputation may be considered, XII. Twofold.
either as amongst those who continue in the liberty of a State of Nature, or
amongst the members of the same Commonwealth. We will examine, what the
foundations of it are, and how they produce in people, both a Capacity to
expect the being Honored by others; and an actual Right, strictly so called,
to demand it of them as their due.

THE foundations of an Accumulative XIII. The grounds of it.
Reputation are in general reckoned to be all manner of Endowments, either
really containing or such as are supposed to contain some great Excellency and
Perfection, which has plainly a tendency in its effects to answer the ends of
the Laws of Nature or Societies. Such are Acuteness and readiness of Wit, a
Capacity to understand several Arts and Sciences, a sound Judgment in business,
a steady Spirit, immovable by outward Occurrences and equally superior to
Flatteries and Terrors, Eloquence, Beauty, Riches, but more especially the
performing of brave Actions. XIV. The distinction of a Capacity and a Right to
it.


ALL these things together produce a Capacity to receive Honor, not a Right.
So that if any person should decline the payment of his Veneration to them, he
may deserve to be taken notice of for his Incivility, but not for an Injury.
For a perfect Right to be honored by others, and bear the Ensigns thereof,
proceeds either from an Authority over them; or, from some mutual agreement; or
from a Law that is made and approved by one Common Lord and Master.

AMONGST Princes and Independent XV. Amongst Princes and States.
States, they usually alledg for Honor and Precedence, the Antiquity of their
Kingdoms and Families; the extent and richness of their Territories, their
Power abroad and at home, and the splendor of their Styles. Yet neither will
all these pretenses beget a perfect right in any Prince or State to have the
Precedence of others, unless the same has been first obtained by Concession or
Treaty.

AMONGST Subjects the Degree of Honor XVI. Amongst Subjects.
is determined by the Prince, who wisely therein regards the Excellency of each
Person and his Ability to advance the Public Good. And whatever Honor a
Subject receives in this Nature, as he may justly claim it against his
fellow-Subject, so he ought no less to satisfy himself in the quiet enjoyment
of it.

CHAP. XV. Of the Power of Governors over the Goods of their Subjects.
AS it wholly lies at the pleasure of Supreme Governors, to appoint with I.
Threefold.
what Restrictions they will allow their Subjects to have Power over the Goods,
which themselves derive upon them; So also over the Goods of the Subject's own
acquiring by their proper industry or otherwise, the said Governors claim a
threefold kind of Right, resulting from the Nature and as being necessary to
the End of Communities.

THEIR first, consists in this; that it belongs II. By Laws.
to them to prescribe Laws to the Subjects, about the measure and quality of
their Possessions; and which way to transfer the same from hand to hand, with
other particulars of the like nature; and how to apply them in the Use to the
best advantage of the whole Body.

BY the second, they claim to appropriate III. By Taxes and Customs.
to themselves, out of the Goods of the Subjects, a Portion by the name of
Tribute and Customs. And it is but reasonable, that since the Lives and
Fortunes of all the Members are defended by the Community, the necessary
Charges thereof should be defrayed by a general Contribution. For he must be
very impudent indeed, who will enjoy the Protection and Privileges of a Place,
and yet contribute nothing in Goods or Service toward its Preservation. Only
herein there will be great occasion for Governors to accommodate themselves
with Prudence to the querulous temper of common people: and let them endeavor
to levy the Money the most insensibly that they can: Observing first an Equality
toward all, and then to lay the Taxes rather upon the smaller Commodities, of
various kinds, than upon the chief in a more uniform way.

THE third is a Right of Extraordinary IV. By Seizure for public use
extraordinary.
Dominion, consisting in this; that upon an urgent Necessity of State, the
Goods of any Subject, of which the present occasion has need, may be taken and
applied to public uses, though far exceeding the proportion, that the party is
bound to contribute toward the expenses of the Commonwealth. For which
reason, as much (if it be possible) ought to be refunded to him again, either
out of the public Stock or by the Contribution of the rest of the Subjects.

BESIDES these three pretensions over V. Public Revenues unalienable.
the private, in diverse Communities there are some, particularly called, the
Public Estate; which carry also the name of the Kingdoms, or the Princes
Patrimony, according as they are distributed into the Treasury or the
Privy-Purse. The latter serves for the maintenance of the Prince and his
Family; who has a propriety in it during life, and may dispose of the Profits
thence arising at his pleasure. But the Use of the other is appropriated for
the public occasions of the Kingdom: the Prince officiating therein as
Administrator only, and standing obliged to apply all to the purposes that are
designed by them. And neither of the two Patrimonies can be alienated by the
Prince without the Peoples Consent.

MUCH less can a whole Kingdom (that VI. Neither Royal Power nor Allegiance
alienable.
is not held patrimonially) or any part of it, be alienated without their
consent to it: and in the latter case particularly the consent of that part
that is to be alienated. As on the other hand no Subject against the will of
his Community, can possibly disingage himself from the bonds of his Duty and
Allegiance to it; unless the force of foreign Enemies reduces him to such a
Condition, that he had no other way to be safe.

CHAP. XVI. Of War and Peace.
ALTHOUGH nothing is more agreeable I. Necessity of War sometimes.
to the Laws of Nature, than the mutual Peace of men with one another,
preserved by the Voluntary Application of each person to his duty; living
together in a State of Peace being a peculiar distinction of men from Brutes;
Yet it is sometimes both lawful and necessary to go to War, when by means of
another's Injustice we cannot without the use of Force preserve what is our
own, nor enjoy those Rights which are properly ours. But here common Prudence
and Humaty do admonish us to forbear our Arms there, where the prosecution of
the injuries we resent, is likely to return more hurt upon us and ours, than it
can do good.

THE just Causes upon which a War may II. Just Causes of War.
be undertaken, come all to these. The Preservation of our selves, and what we
have, against an unjust Invasion: and this sort of War is called Defensive. The
Maintenance and Recovery of our Rights from those that refuse to pay them: The
reparation of Injuries done to us, and Caution against them for the future. And
this sort of War is called Offensive.

NOT that upon a Prince's taking himself III. Amicable Composition.
to be injured, he is presently to fly to Arms, especially if any thing about
the Right or Fact in Controversy remains yet under dispute; But first let him
try to compose the matter in an amicable way, by Treaties, by appeal to
Arbitrators, or by submitting the matter in question to the decision of a Lot,
and those Methods are the rather to be chosen by that Party who claims from
another, because Possession with any show of Right is wont to meet with the
most favorable Constructions.

THE unjust Causes of War are either IV. Unjust Causes of War.
those, which openly to all the World are such; as Ambition and Covetousness,
and what may be reduced thereto: or those, that admit of a faint and imperfect
Color to be pretended in their excuse. Of this kind there is Variety. As the
fear of a Neighbors growing Wealth and Power, Convenience of a Possession to
which yet no Right can be made out, Desire of a better Habitation, the denial
of common Favors, the folly of the Possessor, the desire of extinguishing
another Title lawfully acquired, because it may be prejudicial to us, etc.

AND though the most proper way of V. Of Deceits in War.
acting in War is by that of Force and Terror; Yet it is altogether as lawful
to attack an Enemy by Stratagems and Wiles, provided that the Faith and Trust
which you give him is inviolably observed. It is lawful to deceive him by
Stories and feigned Narrations, not by Promises and Covenants.

BUT concerning the Violence, which VI. Violence.
may be used against him and what belongs to him; we must distinguish betwixt
what it is possible for him to suffer without injustice, and what we may easily
inflict without the breach of Humanity. Whoever declares himself my Enemy, as
he makes profession by that very act of enterprizing upon me the greatest
Mischiefs in the World; So at the same time he fully indulges me the leave to
employ the utmost of my Power, without Mercy, against himself. Yet Humanity
commands me, as far as the fury of War will permit, that I do my Enemy no more
harm, than the defense or vindication of my right requires, with care to my
security for the time to come.

WE commonly divide War into Solemn VII. Solemn and unsolemn Wars.
and Vnsolemn. To a Solemn War it is required, that it be made on both sides by
the Authority of the Sovereign Governors; and preceded by a public
Declaration. The other either is not publicly denounced, or perhaps is begun
amongst private persons. To which latter Head belongs also Civil Wars.

AS the Power of making War in all VIII. Power of making War.
Nations lies in the same hands, that are entrusted with the Government; So it
is a matter above the Authority of a Subordinate Magistrate to engage in,
without a delegation from thence, though he could suppose with reason, that
were they consulted upon the matter they would be pleased with it. Indeed all
Military Governors of fortified places and Provinces, having Forces under them
to command upon the defense thereof, may understand it to be enjoined them by
the very Design of their Employments, to repel an Invader from the parts
committed to their trust by all the ways they can. But they are not rashly to
carry the War into an Enemies Country.

IN a State of Natural Liberty, a Person IX. Wars occasioned by protecting of
Refugees.
is assaulted by Force only for the injuries that are done by himself. But in a
Community, a War often happens upon the Governor or the whole Body, when
neither of them has committed any thing. To make this appear just, it is
necessary, the act of a third Party must by some way or other pass upon them.
Now Governors do partake of the Offenses not only of their proper Subjects,
but of others that occasionally fly to them; if either the Offenses are done by
their Permission, or that they receive and protect the Offender. The sufferance
of an Offense becomes then blameable, when at the same time that one knows of
the doing it, he has a power to hinder it. Things openly and frequently done by
the Subjects, are supposed to be known to their Governors: in whom it is always
presumed there is a Power also to prohibit, unless a manifest proof appears of
its defect. Yet to make it an occasion of War to give Admittance and Protection
to a Criminal, who flies to us for the sake only of escaping his Punishment, is
what must proceed rather by virtue of a particular Agreement betwixt Allies and
Neighbors, than from any common Obligation: unless the Fugitive, being in our
Dominions, contrives Hostilities against the Commonwealth he deserts.

ANOTHER received Custom betwixt X. Reprisals.
Nations, is; when a Debt is owing from one to another, which sometimes comes
to be occasioned by not administering of Justice rightly, to arrest the effects
of the private Subjects of the Nation indebted, and assign them to the use and
satisfaction of those of their own, to whom particularly the Debt is owing:
leaving such as by this means have the misfortune to lose their Goods, to seek
for Restitution of the Party, that is really guilty of the Debt. And these
Executions use to be called Reprisals, which commonly prove to be the
forerunners of War.

A War may be made by a person, not XI. Of Wars in the defense of others.
only for himself, but for another. In order to do this with Honesty, it is
requisite, that He for whom the War is undertaken shall have a just Cause; and
his Friend, a probable Reason, why he will become an Enemy to that other for
his sake. Amongst those, in whose behalf it is not only lawful but our Duty to
make War, there is in the first place our Natural Subjects, as well severally,
as the universal Body of them; provided, that the War will not evidently
involve the State in greater mischiefs still. Next there is the Allies, with
whom we have engaged to associate our Arms by Treaty: Yet therein not only
giving the Precedence to our own Subjects, if they should chance to stand in
need of assistance at the same juncture; but presupposing also, that the Allies
have a just Cause and begin the War with Prudence. After our Allies, our
Friends deserve to be assisted by us, even without our Obligation to do it by a
special Promise. And where there is no other reason, the common Relation alone
of men to men may be sufficient, when the party imploring our aid is unjustly
oppressed, to engage our endeavors, as far as with convenience we are able, to
promote his Defense.

THE liberty, that is in War, of killing, XII. The liberty of killing, etc, in
War.
plundering and laying all things wast, extends it self to so very large a
Compass, that though a man carries his Rage beyond the uttermost bounds of
Humanity, yet in the opinion of Nations he is not to be accounted infamous, or
one that ought to be avoided by persons of Worth. Excepting that amongst the
more Civilized World, they look upon some particular Methods, of doing hurt to
Enemies, to be base; as poisoning or corrupting of Soldiers or Subjects to kill
their Masters, etc.

MOVEABLE things are understood XIII. Of things taken in War.
to be Taken in War then, when they are carried out of the reach of the Enemy
who before possessed them. And Things immovable, when we have them within our
Custody so, that we can beat the Enemy away from thence. Yet the right of the
former Possessor to retake the same, is never utterly extinguished, until he
renounces all his pretensions to them by a subsequent Agreement. For without
this, it will be always lawful, what by force is lost, by force to retrieve
again. The Soldiers fight by the Authority of the Public; and whatever they
obtain from the Enemy, they get it not for themselves but properly for the
Community they serve. Only it is customary in most places, to leave to them by
Connivance the Movables, especially those of small Value, that they take, in
the place of a Reward or perhaps their Pay, and for an Encouragement to them to
be free of their Blood, besides in the Cases of Necessity. When Things
immovable that have been lost to, are retaken from the Enemy, they return into
the possession of the former Owners: And Movables ought to do the same; but
that amongst most people they are delivered over as a prey to the Army.

EMPIRE also or Government comes XIV. Conquest.
to be acquired by War, not only over the particular persons conquered, but
entire States. To render this lawful, and binding upon the Consciences of the
Subjects, it is Necessary; that on the one side the Subjects swear Fidelity to
the Conqueror; and on the other that the Conqueror cast off the State and
Disposition of an Enemy toward them.

THE Proceedings of War are suspended XV. Truce.
by a Truce; which is an Agreement, the State and Occasion of the War remaining
still the same as before, to abstain on both sides from all acts of Hostility
unto a time appointed. When that is past, if there be no Peace concluded in the
Interim, they resume their Hostilities again, without the formality of a new
Declaration.

NOW Truces are either such as they XV. Treaties of Truce.
consent to during the continuance of the Expedition, whilst both sides keep
their Forces on foot; or those, upon which they quite disband their Forces and
lay aside all Military Preparations. The first are seldom taken but for a small
time. The others they may and usually do take for a Continuance so great, as to
carry the face of a Peace and sometimes also the very Name, with the addition
of a term of Years, only to distinguish it from a perfect Peace indeed, which
regularly is Eternal and extinguishes the Causes of the War for ever. Those
that they call tacit Truces, oblige to nothing. For as on both sides they lie
quiet for their pleasure, so whenever they think fit they may break out into
acts of Hostility.

BUT when a Peace is mutually ratified XVI. Treaties of Peace.
by each Sovereign Governor, upon Articles and Conditions agreed betwixt
themselves, which they engage to observe and put in Execution faithfully by a
time prescribed; Then a War is perfectly ended. In confirmation whereof, it is
usual, not only for both Parties to take their Oaths and interchange Hostages;
but for some others oftentimes, especially amongst the Assistants at the
Treaty, to undertake the Guaranty, of the same, with promises of Aid to him,
whoever is first injured by the other, in opposition to the Articles of the
Peace that is made.

CHAP. XVII. Of Alliances.
ALLIANCES interchangeably passed I. Alliances twofold.
betwixt Sovereign Governors, are of good use both in times of War and Peace.
They may be divided, in respect of their Subject, either into such as reinforce
the Duty already incumbent on us from the Law of Nature; or such as superadd
some thing to the Precepts of that Law; at least they determine their Obligation
to such or such particular Actions, which before seemed indefinite.

BY the first sort are meant Treaties of II. Treaties of Peace.
Peace, wherein nothing more is agreed upon than the simple exercise of
Humanity toward one another, or a forbearance of Mischief and Violence. Or
perhaps they may establish a general sort of Friendship betwixt them, not
mentioning particulars; or fix the Rules of Hospitality and Commerce, according
to the directions of the Law of Nature.

THE others of the latter sort, are called III. Equal Leagues.
Leagues, and are either Equal or Unequal. Equal Leagues are so far composed of
the same Conditions on both sides, that they not only promise what is Equal
absolutely or at least in proportion to the abilities of man; but they
stipulate in such a manner too, that neither party is to the other obnoxious or
in a worse condition.

UNEQUAL Leagues are those, wherein IV. Unequal.
Conditions are agreed upon that are unequal, and render one side worse than
the other. This Inequality may be either on the part of the Superior, or else
of the Inferior Confederate. For if the Superior Confederate engages to send
the other Succors, unconditionally, not accepting of any terms from him; or
engages to send a greater proportion of them than He, the Inequality lies upon
the Supeor. But if the League requires of the inferior Confederate the
performance of more things toward the Superior, than the Superior performs
toward him, the inequality there no less evidently lies on the side of the
Inferior.

AMONGST the Conditions required V. Conditions put upon Inferiors.
of an Inferior Ally, some contain a diminution of his Sovereign Power,
restraining him from the Exercise thereof in certain Cases without the
Superior's consent. Others impose no such prejudice upon his Sovereignty, but
oblige him to the performance of those we call transitory Duties, which once
done are ended altogether. As to discharge the pay of the others Army, to
restore the expenses of the War, to give a certain sum of Money, to demolish his
Fortifications, deliver Hostages, surrender his Ships, Arms, etc. And yet
neither do some perpetual Duties diminish the Sovereignty of a Prince. As to
have the same Friends and Enemies with another, though the other be not
reciprocally engaged to have the same with him: To be obliged to erect no
Fortifications here, nor to sail there, etc. To be obliged to pay a certain
friendly reverence to the other's Majesty, and to conform with Modesty to his
pleasure.

BOTH these sorts of Leagues, as well VI. The Subject of Leagues.
Equal as the Unequal, are wont to be contracted upon various Reasons: whereof
such especially produce effects of the strongest and most binding Complexion,
as tend to the conjunction of many Nations in a League that is to last for
ever. But the Common Subject of the Leagues most in use, is either the
preservation of Commerce, or the furnishing of Succors in a War, Offensive or
Defensive.

THERE is another famous Division of VII. Real and personal Leagues.
Leagues into Real and Personal. The Latter express such a near regard to the
Person of the Prince they are contracted with, that whenever he dies, they
expire also. Real Leagues are those, which not being entered into in
consideration so much of any particular Prince or Governor, as of the Kingdom
or Commonwealth, continue in full force, even after the death of the first
Contracters of them.

THE next in Nature to Leagues, are VIII. Sponsions.
the Agreements of a Public Minister, made upon the Subject of the Affairs of
the Prince his Master, without Orders for the same: which are usually called
Overtures. The Conditions whereof impose no Obligation upon the Prince, until
he pleases afterward to ratify them by his own Authority. And therefore, if
after the Minister has agreed upon the Compact absolutely, he cannot obtain his
Prince's confirmation of it; it lies upon himself to consider, what
satisfaction he ought to render unto those, who depending upon his Credit have
been deceived by him with insignificant Engagements.

CHAP. XVIII. The Duty of Subjects.
THE Duty of Subjects is either General, I. Twofold.
arising from the Common Obligation which they owe to the Government as
Subjects: or Special, upon the account of some particular Office and
Employment, that the Government imposes upon them.

THEIR General Duty respects the demeaning II. General.
of themselves severally, toward their Governors, the Commonwealth, and one
another in particular.

To their Governors they owe Honor, III. Toward their Governors.
Fidelity and Obedience. Beside that they ought to entertain good and
honorable thoughts of them and their Actions, and speak accordingly; to
acquiesce with Patience and Content under the present State of things, not
suffering their desires to wander after Innovations; nor adhering to any
Persons, or admiring and honoring them, more than they do the Magistrates that
are set over them.

IN reference to the Commonwealth, IV. The Commonwealth.
their Duty is, to prefer the Happiness and Safety of it to the dearest things
they have in the World: to offer their Lives, Estates and Fortunes with
cheerfulness toward its preservation; and study to promote its Glory and
Welfare by all the powers of their Industry and Wit.

TOWARD one another, their behavior V. One another.
ought to be friendly and peaceable, as serviceable and as affable as they can
make it: not to give occasion of trouble by Moroseness and Obstinacy, nor
envying the happiness of any, or interrupting their Enjoyments.

AND as for their particular Duties, VI. Their special Duties.
as Officers, whether they influence the whole body of the Nation, or are
employed only about a certain part of it, there is this one general Precept to
be observed for all; That no person affect or take upon him any Employment, of
which he knows himself by the sense of his disabilities to be unworthy and
incapable.

PARTICULARLY, let those who assist VII. The Duty of Privy Counselors.
at the Public Counsels, turn their Eyes round into all parts of the
Commonwealth; and whatever things they discover to be of use, thereupon
ingenuously and faithfully without partiality or corrupt intentions lay open
their observations. Let them not take their own Wealth and Grandeur, but always
the Public good, for the end of their Counsels; nor flatter their Princes in
their Humors to please them only. Let them abstain from Factions and unlawful
Meetings or Associations. Dissemble nothing that they ought to speak, nor
betray what they ought to conceal. Let them approve themselves impenetrable to
the corruptions of Foreigners, and not postpone the Public Business to their
private Concerns and Pleasures.

LET the Clergy, who are appointed VIII. The Clergy.
publicly to administer in the sacred Offices of Religion, perform their work
with gravity and attention; teaching the Worship of God, in Doctrines, that are
most true, and making themselves an eminent Example of what they preach to
others: that the dignity of their Function, and the weight of their Doctrine
may suffer no diminution by the Scandal of an ill led Life.

LET such who are publicly employed IX. Public Readers.
to instruct the minds of People in the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, teach
nothing that is false and pernicious; delivering their Truths so, that the
Auditors may assent to them, not out of a Custom of hearing but for the solid
Reasons that attend them: and avoiding all Questions which incline to embroil
Civil Society; let them assure themselves, that whatever humane Science or
Knowledge returns no good to us either as men or Subjects, the same deserves
their Censure as impertinent Vanity.

LET those Magistrates, whose Office X. Lawyers.
it is to distribute Justice, be easy of Access to all, and ready to protect
the Common people against the oppressions of the more mighty: administering
Justice both to Rich and Poor, Inferior and Superior with a perfect Equality.
Let them not multiply Disputes unnecessarily; abstain from Corruption; be
diligent in trying of Causes, and careful to lay aside all Affections that may
obstruct sincerity in Judgment; not fearing the person of any man while they
are doing their Duty.

LET the Officers of War diligently XI. Officers of the Army.
Exercise their men in all occasions and harden them for the enduring the
Fatigue of a Military Life, and preserve the Discipline of them inviolable. Let
them not rashly expose them to the danger of the Enemy, nor defraud them of any
of their Pay or Provisions; but procure it for them with all readiness they are
able, and keep them in the love of their Country, without ever seducing them to
serve against it.

ON the other hand, let the Soldiers XII. Soldiers.
be content with their Pay, without plundering, or harrassing the Inhabitants.
Let them perform their Duty courageously and generously in the defense of their
Country; neither running upon danger with Rashness, nor avoiding it with Fear:
Let 'em exercise their Courage upon the Enemy, not their Comrades; and maintain
their several Posts like men, preferring an honorable Death before a
dishonorable Flight and Life.

LET the Ministers of the Commonwealth XIII. Ambassadors and Envoys.
in foreign parts be cautions, and circumspect; quick to discern Solidities
from Vanity, and Truths from Fables: in the highest degree, Tenacious of
Secrets, and obstinately averse to all Corruptions out of their care of the
Good of the Commonwealth.

LET the Officers for Collecting and XIV. Officers of the Public Revenues.
disposing of the Public Revenue have a care of using needless Severities, and
of increasing the Subjects Burden for their own Gain, or through their
troublesome and petulant humors. Let them misapply nothing of the public
Stock; and satisfy the persons who have Money to be paid out of it, without
delays unnecessary.

ALL these Particular Duties of Subjects XV. The continuance of the Duties
aforesaid.
continue, during the time of Employment: And when that ceases, the other
expire also. But their General Duties are in force, so long as ever Men
continue to be Subjects: that is, till by either the express or tacit Consent
of the Nation, they depart thence, to fix the Seat of their Fortunes elsewhere;
that they are banished, and deprived of the Rights of Subjects for their Crimes;
or being overcome in Battle, they are forced to yield to the disposal of the
Conqueror.

The End.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de Luce over
against S. Dunstan 's Church in Fleetstreet.
DOctor Willis's Practice of Physic* being the whole Works of that Renowned
and Famous Physician, Rendered into English. Second Edit. with Forty Copper
Plates, Fol. The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts, of the Reverend and
Learned Peter Heylyn, D. D. now collected into one Vol. And an Account of the
Life of the Author, never before Published, Fol. The Religion of Protestants, a
safe Way to Salvation, with a Discourse of the Apostolical Institution of
Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which in this Edit. is added, showing
the Reason why he left Popery, Fol. The History of Queen Elizabeth: By W.
Cambden King at Arms. Fourth Edition. Fol. The Second and Third Parts of the
Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, The Second containing what was Written and
Published by himself in his younger Years: Now Reprinted together. Sixth
Edition. The Third Part containing his Six Books of Plants never before
Published in English. viz. The First and Second of Herbs, the Third and Fourth
of Flowers, the Fifth and Sixth of Trees: Now made English by several Hands,
with necessary Tables to both Parts, and diverse Poems in Praise of the Author,
Fol. An Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning
of the Scotch Rebellion in the Year 1639, to the Murder of King Charles the
First, Fol. in 2 Vol. Dugdales Monasticon Anglicanum, Fol. The History of the
Life, Reign and Death of Edward II. King of England and Lord of Ireland, Fol.
The Laws of Jamaica, Fol. Dr. Willis's practical Part of Physic. 80 Bishop
Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience required of the Subject, with a
large Preface by Bishop Sanderson, 80 Some Animadversions upon a Book
Entitled, The Theory of the Earth, by Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford, 80


Law Books.
The Lord Coke's Reports in English, Fol. Judge Crook's Reports in 3 Vol. Third
Edit. with References to all the late Reports, Fol. The Lord Coke's Commentary
on Littleton, Fol. -- His Commentary on Magna Charta, Fol. -- His Pleas of the
Crown, of the Third Part of the Institutes, Fol. -- His Jurisdiction of Courts,
or Fourth Part of the Institutes. -- His Eleven Reports in French, Fol.
Bulstrode's Reports with new References, Fol. Leonard's Reports in Four Parts
with new References, Fol. The Year Books in Ten Vol. the last Edit. with new
Notes and Tables to them all, Fol. The Reports of the Lord Keeper Littleton, in
the time of K. Charles I. Fol. The Reports of the learned Judge Sir Henry
Hobart, the Fourth Edition corrected and amended, Fol. Reports in the Court of
King's Bench at Westminster, from the 12th. to the 30th. Year of King Charles
II. by Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire. in 3. Vol. Fol. Kelway's Reports with new
References to all the late Reports, Fol. Reports of several especial Cases in
the Court of Common Pleas, by S. Carter of the Inner Temple Esquire. Fol. An
Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier Performance of their Duty,
the First Part containing the particular Clauses of all such Statutes from
Magna Charta, until the 1st. of King James II. that do any ways concern a
Justice of Peace; in the other Part, the whole Office of a Justice of Peace is
methodically digested, with the most approved Presidents under proper Heads, to
which is now added a Table for the ready finding out the Presidents, never
before Printed, by Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire. An exact Abridgment of the
Records in the Tower of London, being of great Use for all that are concerned
in Parliamentary Affairs, and Professors of the Laws of this Realm, collected
by Sir Robert Cotton Knight and Baronet, Fol. An exact Abridgment of all the
Statutes in Form and Use from the beginning of Magna Charta; begun by Edmond
Wingate of Gray's Inn Esquire. and since continued under their proper Titles
Alphabetically, by I. Washington of the Middle Temple, Esquire. to the Year 1689.
In this Impression many Hundreds of false References are corrected with great
Exactness and Care. A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues, wherein their
Nature is fully explained, and their Usefulness proved, as being the best Rules
of Life; and the Causes of their Decay are inquired into, concluding with such
Arguments as tend to revive the Practice of them. With a Preface showing the
Vanity and Deceitfulness of Vice, by I. Hartcliff B. D. and Fellow of Kings
College, Cambridge.



