THE OATH OF PACIFICATION: OR A form of Religious Accommodation: Humbly
proposed both to KING and PARLIAMENT. THEREBY, To set an end to the present
Miseries and Broils of this discomposed, almost Ship-wrackt State.

Claudite, Pastores, rivos, sat prata biberunt.
Shut, shut the Sluices of this purple flood,
The Meadows have carous'd enough in blood.
LONDON, Printed for ROBERT BOSTOCK, at the Sign of the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

The Oath of Pacification: OR A Religious form of Accommodation: Humbly
proposed Both to the KING and PARLIAMENT, etc.
THE Kings last Declaration of July the thirtieth was published as an Act of
great grace to the Subject: and being issued immediately after his Majesty's
good success, obtained against the Lord Fairfax, Sir William Waller, and
Colonel Fines, it emblematized the King (as some Courtiers fansied) with a
victorious Palm in one hand, and a peaceful Olive in the other.
Nevertheless, it appears by the close of that Declaration, that the intent of
it was, to bring in Men, Money, Plate, Horses and Arms, as well as to
proclaim pardon, for it proclaimed pardon to no other persons, than such as
should forthwith apply themselves to the King, nor on no other Conditions than
upon the bringing in of such like Ayds, and supplies. The favor was not to be
extended to all, nor was it clothed in the habit of a Composition, or
peaceable Accommodation, it only set to sale a pardon, and the price of that
pardon was besides treacherous combination with the Papists against the
Parliament, such Money, such Plate, such Horses, etc. It Is true the rate of the
purchase was left indefinite; but it is well enough known that all such as
have submitted to the King, and confessed a guilt of Treason in themselves, and
undertaken to redeem the same by new services have found their penances
rigorous, and their Ghostly Fathers very hard to be satisfied. The effect
therefore which that Declaration had, was no other, as we can perceive, but to
put more courage into the lovers of Parliaments, and to quicken all good men
the more in the raising of new Forces, and imbarking in harder Adventures: And
Gods Name be praised, who did not only then give us such pious and manly
resolutions, but has also speeded and mercifully prospered our undertakings.
The face of things is now changed: The Earl of Essex has since that removed
the Kings terrible Army from before Gloucester, and after a bloody day fought
by Newbury, is returned home victorious. Sir William Waller, and the Earl of
Manchester are great in new hopes, and preparations, and the Marquess of
Newcastle is as fearful to receive annoyance from the Scots, as hopeful to
do any to the Lord Fairefax: wherefore it seems to me, that if a fair way of
Accommodation were now tendered by the Parliament, it would be held as
honorable, as seasonable: and it seems not impossible to propose such terms
of Pacification as may well stand with the honor of God, the safety of
Religion, the advantage of the King, the justice of the Parliament, and the
wishes of the people.

The King has diverse times (though not with any public Ceremony or Solemnity)
applied himself to satisfy his Subjects by protesting innocence, and
appealing to the judgment of Almighty God; but there has been such generality
in his expressions, and defect in his forms hitherto, that his Subjects
remain yet unsatisfied.

That which I shall therefore now undertake, with my utmost discretion and
ability, is to demonstrate wherein the Kings Oaths have been hitherto short,
and of little securance, and how they may yet be completed, and made
satisfying: I will in the first place set forth the form of the Oath, both as
it is conceived in his Majesty's own Words, and as it is altered with my
additions and suplements; and then I will next address my self by way of
Reason, to give some Account why it may be admitted and entertained by either
side.

In the Kings last Declaration of July aforesaid, I find the form of the Kings
Vows, and Protestations to run in these very words.

WHereas Almighty GOD, to whom all the secrets of my heart are open, knows
with what unwillingnesse and anguish of soul, I first submitted my self to
the necessity of taking up defensive Arms. I having before with Justice and
Bounty to repair my Subjects former Pressures, made excellent Laws for the
preventing of the like, and offered further to add any thing else for the
establishment of the Religion, Laws and Liberty of the Kingdom. And whereas
in September, 1642. in the head of my Army, (not then great) besides at other
times I made voluntarily a Protestation to defend and maintain the true
Protestant Religion, the just privileges, and freedom of Parliaments, and to
govern by the Laws of the Land, for whose defense only that Army was raised,
and has been since kept: And whereas there cannot be a more seasonable time,
to renew that Protestation then now, when God has vouchsafed me so many
victories. I do therefore now declare to all the World, in the presence of
Almighty God, to whom I must give a strict account of all my professions, and
Protestations, that I am so far from intending any alteration of the Religion
established, or from the least thought of invading the Liberty and Property of
the Subject, or violating the least Privileges of PARLIAMENT. That I call God
to witness, who covered my Head in the day of Battle, that I desire from my
Soul, and shall always use my utmost endeavors, to advance and preserve the
true Protestant Religion, and that the preservation of the Liberty and Property
of the Subject in due observation of the Laws of the Land shall be equally my
care; as the maintenance of my own Rights, I being desirous to govern only
by those good Laws. And I do acknowledge the just privileges of PARLIAMENT,
to be an essential part of those Laws, and will therefore most solemnly
defend and observe them.

(To add to the perfection of this Oath, and to make it satisfying, I shall
supply as follows.)

And forasmuch as general professions of maintaining of Law, and doing
justice, cannot end the present differences of this State, or secure us from
the like hereafter* but particular judgment must be given according to Law and
Justice, in the maine points now controverted betwixt us: and that Judgment
which shall ever rule, and conclude both sides must not be expected from my
breast, or any inferior Council, but from the supreme Iudicatory of the
Kingdom: by the Oath already taken, I further oblige my self, that I will
ingeniously and with my utmost skill make strict inquiry what the supreme
Iudicatorie is, which in these grand disputes is to dispense Law, and to
arbitrate betwixt King, and Subject: and the same being made known to me by
the best and most impartial advice that can be gotten, I will most entirely,
and freely submit all my claims and pretenses to it, to be resolved and
determined by it. I will not only employ my utmost power to remove all
obstructions, and impeachments, which may obviate its proceedings, but I will
vigorously concur my self in all good expedients for speeding, and
facilitating its final awards.

And lastly, since the safety and security of my Subjects depends upon my good
administration hereafter, as well as for the present* and upon the comportment
of my Substitutes and Favorites, as well as upon my own, and that in matters
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Millitarie, as well as Judicial: by the same Oath
that I have already taken, I again engage my self perpetually to tender the
propagation of the same Protestant Religion, and the Liberty and prosperity of
the English Nation, equally with my own Rights and Royalties. And that the
Lives, Liberties, Consciences, or Estates of my Subjects may not be entrusted
into the hands of such as are ill affected to them, I will exclude from my
public Counsel, and from all direct, and indirect power in State affairs,
(especially of a high nature) all that are not of the Protestant Religion, of
the British Nation, of the Masculine sex, all that are not generally reputed
virtuous, and sworn to be faithful servants to the State, as well as to the
Court. In testimony also that I do without all guile, equivocation, or mental
reservation* swear and vow these things in this reverent place, now that I am
to receive this blessed Sacrament before these Lords and Gentlemen here
present, I do beseech Almighty God so to make these mysteries profitable to my
soul, and this Solemnity satisfying to my people, as I do now cordially and
sincerely transact this for an assurance, and not for a snare to them, if I do
not in my soul purpose to fulfill the tenor of this Oath to my lives end* and
in pursuance thereof, ever to oppose the introduction of Romish superstition
into this Church, and the French arbitrary Royalty into this State, let this
venerable flesh and blood prove mortal to me, let this imprecation testify
against me; let God blot out his royal Unction upon me, and let my Subjects
justly, and by this my own Dispensation withdraw obedience from me.

These two conditional Clauses I humbly present, as necessary either to
explain what the King had sworn before, or to discover what the King intended
before: for if this Oath (as it is now framed) be accepted, it will let us
know how far we were secured formerly: and if it be rejected, it will be an
advertisement to us, what little security we are to expect hereafter.

The solemn and sanctimonious manner of taking this Oath, will next much
conduce to the satisfying of the people; for paper Oaths, as they are mingled
with other matters in Declarations are not so authentical with the Phlebeians,
and we should seem less Religious than our Ancestors were, in times of more
blindness, if we should not observe a great deal of holy state in a
business of this transcendant, and more than secular nature. The last
cautionarie advertisement that I shall humbly tender withal, is, that an Oath
may be also administered to the Queen, and to all suspected Papists, Aliens,
etc. to the restraining of them from all intermedling in matters of our Church,
or State, and from attempting any thing mediately, or immediately, directly, or
indirectly against the peace of this Kingdom.

By this means, with some more perfect alterations* or provisions, under
favor I conceive our greatest fears might be qualified, and our most
desperate maladies assuaged, if not cured: But I know some Objections will be
alleged on the Kings Part, why he ought not to make this Oath, and on the
Parliaments why they ought not to take it? Let me have a little Favor to say
something herein.

Oaths have been ever honorable, and Sacramental Obligations, such as GOD
himself has not* disdained to use* for the taking away of doubt and distrust
in man, and such as he has prescribed to men for the composing of differences
sometimes, as well betwixt public as private persons. But in this Contestation
betwixt the KING and PARLIAMENT, though both sides have sundry times had
recourse to Oaths and Invocations of GODS Name, and more especially the KING,
yet that Pacification and amicable Accommodation, which might have been hoped
therefrom, has not been concluded and consummated. And I conceive there are
two Reasons why the KINGS Protestations have not been so effectual, and
available, as was intended they should.

First, because there is great uncertainty, and dispute in that which the KINGS
Oaths principally take for their subject or matter.

Secondly, because the KING seems totally mistaken in the end of his Oaths,
or rather in those Fears and Iealousies of Ours, which his Oaths endeavor to
remove.

First, the KING by his Imprications would assure us that he intends no ill to
Religion, Law, or Liberty, as they are established in ENGLAND; but our maine
strife and controversy here is how Religion, Law, and Liberty are established
in such and such points, and who shall judge of that establishment: wherefore
to decide that Controversy and atone this strife, no general Oath of the
KING can be held sufficient. In private suits betwixt Subject and Subject, the
Law permits nor the KING to judge, much less does it stand to the KINGS
judgment, when the suit is betwixt a Subject and the KING himself; and least
of all does it rest upon the KINGS determination, when the KING is a Party of
one side, and the whole Kingdom on the other. Nevertheless, in this our
present grand debate, the KING swears in general to do justice, and yet what
that Justice is, which is to be done, he himself is ignorant; nay the
greatest of our professed Lawyers adventure not to determine, (they have great
Divisions, and Contesttions amongst themselves about it) although all
unanimously affirm, that the KING quatenus a party, and quatenus a Layman,
is of all men most incompetent for the determination thereof. When the Kingdom
groaned heretofore under the oppression of the Shipscot, and diverse other Taxes
utterly inconsistent with the Subjects Liberty, the KING intended no violation
of the Subjects Liberty. He had sworn, or might have sworn then in general
terms the same thing, with the same safety as he swears now. So if the like
dispute arise hereafter, of the like difficulty, about some other branch of
Prerogative (for Prerogative is not made now more known, but more unknown of
late) there is no hindrance but the King may treat us as he did then indeeds,
yet protest as he does now in words.

The like may be said of Religion, the KING intends no alteration of Religion,
and expects that we should acquiesce in that profession of his, and yet we
fear he judges of alteration therein by his Bishops, who aim at nothing more
than Innovations, wherefore this can be no ground of confidence in us, because*
the KING in his own understanding, may both make and keep such an Oath, yet
Popery shall still prevail, and Protestanisme decline, as it has done
hitherto. It Is far then from being a security, it is rather a danger to a state
to depend on a Princes general Oaths, when these Oaths depend upon his mere
understanding, forasmuch as Law does not direct us to the Kings breast, as our
sole and supreme Tribunal, but rather dehorts us from the same, as most of
all to be distrusted: This is a Dilemma not to be excepted against: either the
KING relyes upon his own Knowledge and Judgment, concerning alterations in
Law, etc. when he abjures them; or not: if he does undertake to know, and
judge of all alterations, and of all differences raised thereupon in Church,
and State, betwixt himself and his Subjects, then is our Government merely
Arbitrarie; more Arbitrarie than the French; then are his Edicts and Acts of
State our best arrests, and Acts of Parliement; then does our Law, and
Religion, import no more to us, than his mere pleasure. Let it but be
maintained, that we must expect satisfaction, and decision from the KINGS
breast, where Popery and Protestanisme, where Prerogative and Liberty
confine, and border one upon the other; and let the maine Secrets and Quaeries
of Law be subjected to the KINGS Cognizance, and and for my part, I shall ever
conceive, that enacted Law, and public Right, are nothing else but Royal
pleasure, and one single man's fancy, or humor; but on the other side, if the
KING do presuppose himself an incompetent Judge, and as liable to gross
misakes, and dangerous deviations in Law, and Religion, as he has been
formerly, when we were almost at an utter loss in both; if he will
acknowledge that there may be as intricate controversies, and as
undeterminable debates betwixt him and his Subjects hereafter, as have been
formerly, and as now are at this instant, then all that we can hope for from
his Oaths, is but this, that we shall be as much distracted hereafter, and
as remedilessely torn and divided with dissentions, as we were formerly, or
are now: all our assurance is, we shall be permitted to remain and continue
in the condition as we were, and as we (which makes his Oaths of no effect)
now are.

Secondly, the next Reason why the KING renouncing by Oath all alterations in
Law and Religion, does not put us out of all our fears, is, because he
always swears for himself, not his Favorites and Counselors; and yet our
fears have more respect to his Favorites than* to himself. And so
notwithstanding the security which his Oaths gives against any ill intentions,
or Machichinations from himself, we still remain exposed to ruin, by the
ill intentions, and machinations of such as have a great sway in his Counsel,
and affections, he himself perhaps being neither privy nor confenting
thereunto.

The KING favors not the Irish Rebellion, yet such as were the Favorers, nay
the Plotters, and Actors in it find favor, and receive power from the King:
and what difference is it to us, whether we perish by the KINGS hand
immediately, or by his Favorites mediately; by the Kings own accord directly,
or by his only permission indirectly? Ireland has seen more than two hundred
thousand Families of British Protestants dispeopled and massacred by
treacherous Papists, (notwithstanning that all this Deluge of Blood might have
been prevented by the KINGS timely foresight and care) and ENGLAND is now
falling into the same desolation by the same faction, and yet the KING is so
far from withdrawing favor or power from Papists and their accomplices, that
he puts more Arms into their hands here, and holds further correspondence
with them abroad: how can we then but seem as stocks, or more stupid than
beasts, if we now expect no assurance but an Oath, and include none in that
Oath but the KING?

Eli was a good man, but an ill Majestrate, he knew better how to moderate his
own affections, than to bridle the insolences of such as were subordinate to
him; insomuch, that that good which he did by himself was far out-poized by
that evil which he permitted in others, and his lenity to his Children became
cruelty to the people.

Some men are much mistaken, if there be not something of Eli in our KINGS
disposition, for though he be esteemed inflexible by such as he has once
judged adverse to his ends, yet he is much too ductile by those who have once
gotten prepossession in his good thoughts. Wherefore if his Majesty seriously
desires to put us into a Condition of security, (which is the only remedy of
our present distempers) he must rather provide for our indemnitie by
protesting against connivence at evil in his Substitutes, than doing evil in
his own person. For he himself may be as guiltless privately as Eli was, and
yet in publke we his Subjects may live as miserably under his Popish
Counselors, as the Children of Israel did under Hophni and Phineas.

The Law says the KING can do no wrong, and out of its Civilitie it imputes
all miscatriages in Government to inferior agents: but policy teaches us, that
though a Prince in Law be not questionable for it, yet in nature he is
strangely blameable, and deeply chargeable, when be makes an ill choice of
inferior Agents.

In Law, it was the blame of Rehoboam's young Counselors, that so unpolitick,
and unworthy a disgust was given to the great and honorable State of Israel:
and it was great pity that they did not suffer for it: But it was Rehoboams
blame in policy, that he would choose young Conncellors, and he himself was
the greatest loser by it. The wisdom of SOLOMON would direct him to make use
of that Wisdom which is seldom to be found but in hoarie heads, but the
more foolish Rehoboam is, the more solicitous he will be to find out vain
Consorts, fit only to comply with his own folly. Had there been any
particular good which Rehoboam might have attained too by the prejudice of his
Subjects: the old Counselors in probability would have advised him to it* for
they seemed to take more care of the KING than of the people, (as they had done
in their old Masters days, to the danger of the nex Successor) But such is the
temeritie of these green headed Statists, that they neither aim at the good of
the people, nor of the KING: They seemed to imagine, that it was a sufficient
recommendation of a thing to a Prince, to represent it as disadvantagious to
the People, and in this they* failed not to please their rash Lord, who was so
far from giving satisfaction to the People, as that he thought it profitable
to him to purchase their displeasure, though with the imminent hazard of his
own Crown; wherefore it does not seem so probable, that Rehoboham did take
preposterous courses, because he happened upon preposterous Counselors, as that
he did choose preposterous Counselors, because he did affectedly addict
himself to preposterous Courses. And when the main fault was in his will,
rather then his understanding, 'twas easy for him to err in the most
fundamental point of all politics, and to place his own peculiar good, rather
in the public disprofit, then in the benefit of his Subjects. Machiavell had
never past for a wise man, had not all his subtle grounds tended to the
pursuing of that advantage of KINGS, which consists in the peoples
disadvantage; and yet nothing can be more contrary to wisdom, or more
repugnant to the Principles of solid Policy, then this very doctrine; and
without doubt, no wise man will seek to excuse him of sottish folly, but by
accusing him of pernicious flattery; for if he did not wilfully betray PRINCES,
as perhaps Rehoboams Counselors did, surely he did but publish to the world,
the sickly conceptions of his own narrow heart. The vast business of
Government, especially where the Nation is great, or where many Nations are
united, is not to be trans-acted by any one man: where one man commands in
chief, the most sublime office of Government is attributed to him, but the
greatest burden, and most important charge must rest upon the shoulders of
thousands, as well in Monarchies* as in Democrasies, or else great obstructions
will follow.

When the Jews were but few in number, and mean of condition in the
Wilderness, Moses found the rule of them insupportable without many
assistants, he was driven to follow Iethroes Counsel, as well to preserve
himself from being crushed under too great a weight, as to open the course of
Justice to the Israelites.

That part of Government, which is most extensive, and laborious, which
requires not only most activity, but most skill in many several Arts, and
Sciences must be undergone, and managed by multitudes of Agents, and in
Monarchies, these Agents are more subject to one man's will, in Democracies
less; but that part of Government which is Supreme, and may be concentred in
one man, is more facile and narrow, and many times it is best discharged, when
that one man leaves most to his Substitutes, and assumes least to himself.
Henry the third ruled better in his minority, when the highest Acts of his
royal superintending power were exercised by his servants, then in his*
maturity, when he would arbitrarily strain his superintending power, to the
overruling of his good Counselors, and preferring of bad. The greatest honor
of PRINCES* is to be wise, and the greatest Wisdom of PRINCES is, to choose
fit instruments, and this choice cannot be without public advice, yet weak
PRINCES relish no Honor in any thing, but in enjoying their own wills, and
their wills they conceive then to be most gloriously fulfilled, when they
please themselves by displeasing their Subjects, when in their elections of
Counselors and Favorites, the State has no share at all, but is rather
crossed, and opposed. Was Gaveston so dear to Edward the Second, because he
was a good Patriot? No, if he had been such, it had been a vulgar thing in
Edward to uphold him, the power of a great PRINCE is more eminent in choosing
instruments for his own wicked pleasure, and then to uphold them, when whole
Nations seek to tear them from their Masters bosoms.

it is not so Kingly to be regulated by wisdom of Parliaments, as to do acts
of mere will; nor to concur with the public suffrages of a State, in the
promoting of good men, as to reject the prayers, and tears and cries of
Communities in the defending of incendiaries, nor to aim at the safety, and
prosperity of the people, as to compass private designs utterly opposite
thereunto. That Royalty which proposes to it self the flourishing condition of
the Subject as it is best establishment: has more regard to the deputation of
worthy Officers in State, then to any other particular interest: but since
flatterers have found out an other Royalty which proposes to it self common
servility for the truest basis of it is grand our; He which can invent any thing
for the Subject below wooden shoes, and canvas breeches is a rare Politician,
to be valued equally with a Princes life, honor and prosperity. Why was the
price of Strafford of greater esteem then the peace of three Kingdoms? because
he was a Minister better affected to this new Royalty then the several States
of the three several Nations: because he was devoted not only to serve the
King more then the Kingdom, but even against the Kingdom: because if he could
not add to the Kings public puissance by adding to the States wealth and
honor, yet he could add to the Kings private splendour, by depressing the
States wealth, and honor. If the King did profess that he ought to look upon
the Community as having ends contrary to his true Sovereignty, and the
happiness thereof, as inconsistent with his Legal Prerogative, then it were
just and reasonable that he did embrace no Ministers, but such as were odious
to the people, nor pursue no ends but such as were distructive to common
Liberty. But since his professions and oaths look an other way, it is most
wonderful that in delegating of Officers Military Judicial, etc. He should so
far abhor Parliamentary advice, and approbation, and prefer all the miseries of
this bloody war before it: fot it were better for us that Parliamentary
advice, and approbation were rejected in all other things, then in the placeing
of public Ministers, upon whose rule the welfare of the State more depends
then upon any other Act of Royalty it self* if we are not utterly mistaken in
point of Law, the great Officers of the Chancery, Admiralty, Treasury and
others, that are more properly the Kingdoms, then the Kings Ministers, are to
be chosen in Parliament: and if the Law in special terms were not such, yet by
general intendment of law all arduous affairs of general and great
importance are to be transacted by the Common Counsel of the Land. Now we
well know, that the choosing of public Officers under good Kings, which will
not choose a miss, is not of so general, and great importance, as it is under
perverted Princes, who will choose none but such as shall employ all their
abilities and endowments against the State, and to the disservice of the
people; Lawyers and Devines seldom distinguish rightly betwixt that power of
the King which is invested in him by absolute donation, and that which is
merely fiduciary. Neither do they distinguish betwixt that power which is
originally entrusted to the King, by the fundamental constitution of this
Kingdom, and that which is occasionally by intermission or non-user left to
the King at such or such times upon special confidence of his goodness. But
policy must needs teach us, that no State can be long safe where all Kings are
equally trusted, and enabled, where the same King shall enjoy that for ever as
apperteyning to his undoubted Prerogative, which at any one time he has gained,
or wrested from the people by his own fraud, or force; or perhaps by the
peoples negligence, or indulgence to his wise predecessors. Without all
question, many smaller matters are entrusted to the Kings mere discretion, but
yet quateus smaller matters only. Whereas if the same things become greater
matters, as they may, then the peoples right is not to be prejudged, because
the Law of public safety is above all Laws of Prerogative, or any other laws
whatsoever. For example, if J. S. be to cut of the intayle of his Land in
Parliament; the King by his negative voice may oppose him at his pleasure: but
if judgment be to be given against such a notorious traitor it is otherwise;
and yet even such a judgment too is not always alike: for in times of great
distress it cannot be retarded, interrupted, or denied; because of the
extrea^c hazard to the State, and in such case the King has less color to
pretend to a negative voice then at other times of more security: for as that
which is of greater concernment, is not so much within the Kings power as that
which is of lesser, so that which is of lesser concernment at one time in one
respect, is of greater at an other time in an other respect. And if Lawyers
find not these distinctions in their reports, and year books, or if Devines
find them not in the old Fathers, or in their Cannons of the Church, they must
not forbid other men that study the intrinsecall Rules of State, to make use
of more general knowledge, then that which their books afford. The Bishop of
Armach has declared himself in point of judgment against the Parliament; I
shall only demand of him whether he thinks himself wiser then the Laws of
England, or whether he thinks himself wiser in the Laws of England then the
mayor part of both Houses in Parliament. One of these he must affirm. Master
Holborne his judgment does not concur with the Parliaments in such a point
of Law. I should demand of him, whether Law must needs observe one rule in all
cases of public and of private moments or whether we are restrained from all
equitable distinctions, and interpretations except such as we find in Fitz
Herbert, Cook and Plowden? or whether his or the Parliaments resolution herein
be more authentical? surely it were in vain to trouble all our Counties,
Cities, and Buroughs with such Ludibrious elections, if some one Bishop or one
Barrister could declare Law better then those which enacted it, or enact Law
better then those for whom all Law was ordained. The Kingdom it self taken in
it is diffusive body cannot convene in any one place, nor fix upon any one
certane resolution, otherwise in all extraordinary cases, and judgments, the
final decision ought to proceed from thence, therefore it must be formed into
such an Artificial body as is fit to convene, and to deliberate. And being so
formed, it has in it all the persection, and excellence of the defusive body.
It Is true, the King may be held a representative of the people in ordinary
cases, for avoiding of a more troublesome convention, but in extraordinary
cases when such a convention is necessary, the Parliament is the only true
representative, and congregated to the King for more perfection sake, or else
it were vainly congregated. And because the people cannot be congregated at
all, much less in any more perfect form then in a Parliament, therefore the
peoples utmost perfection is truly residing in the Parliament. Let not then any
private man, Let not the King himself undertake to define how far Regal power
shall extend in judicial or Military affairs (as such a particular position
of things may happen, and according to all emergences) better then the
representative body of the Kingdom, which in no respect ought to be held any
other thing then the whole Kingdom it self: much less let it be held against
Law, or disparagable to the King, to hearken to his Parliament, in the choice
of State Officers, when so great a flux of Protestant English blood is to be
stanched thereby. If the King would exempt us from fear, and therefore swears
that he may exempt us, and yet will neither suffer us to choose Confidents for
him, nor swear for such as he himself shall choose, when our fears are chiefly
grounded upon them, either his intentions will seem fraudulent, or his oaths
nugatory; besides our fears now cause us to look upon our Enemies not merely
as men that have a power in the Kings* affections, but as men that are likely
to have a power over the Kings Arms, and when the King perhaps may want
protection for himself (if some timely prevention be not used,) how will he be
able to protect us? It Is possible for an Army composed of Papists, strangers
and those of the mercenary trade of war, not only to awe us, but such also as
first raised them against us. Absolute Empire ends not (as is expected) in the
freedom, but in the servitude of him, which sores to the highest pich of it.
If the Pretorian Legions set Caesar's foot upon the Senates neck, they will so
far set their own feet upon Caesar's neck, as to sell the Empire when they
please, and to whom they please; A hundred Nations remain in bondage to one
Grand signior by means of the Janissaries, and yet those Janissaries retain to
themselves a Supreme control over the Grand signior himself. The French King
inioyes an arbitrary Prerogative more entirely, and more cheap then any Prince
that I have read of, because he neither relyes merely upon an Army, nor
merely upon the Noblesse of that State whereby to oppress the Pesantry, but
very subtly he so makes use of both, as that he is totally engaged to
neither. But that Crown has not of late suffered any violent shock, or
concussion, if ever it does, that frame of Government will soon be shattered,
and the great body of the Community will gain a party either amongst the
Noblesse or the Souldiary. When Marquess Hartford first strained himself, to
bring in Forces for Prince Rupert he did not perhaps intend to make Prince
Rupert so imperious over himself, and over all our English Nobility, as he is
now grown. Neither did Sir Ralph Hopton think by all his meritorious services
to gain such a Rival to himself, and to all the Gentry of England, as
Captain Leg. But now I fear they are subject to more unlimitable Lords in the
Camp, then ever they stomached in the Parliament. I pray God the King himself
do not find the like. His Majesty needs no foreign discovery by Sir William
Boswells Letters, to advertise him of dangers, and conspiracies against his
sacred Person, the designs of the Jesuits (if they prosper, as by favor at
Court they are likely) can never end but in the ruin of himself, or of the
Religion which he professes, there need to be no strange Intelligencer to
inform his Majesty of this. We may then knit up this point in a more short
discourse: Sometimes Princes are voluntarily in bondage to their own Creatures,
as Themistocles was, who whilst he overruled all Athens, and Athens overruled
all Greece, yet he was himself overruled by his wife, and his wife was
overruled by her son: but this kind of bondage is commonly more Comicall. At
other times, Princes stand engaged to the factions and forces by which their
Dominions were achieved, and must be supported, and this kind of engagement
uses to be often very Tragical; as the old Stories of the Roman Emperors,
and the modern Stories of the Turkish Sultans, and of sundry other insolent
usurpers in other nations do sufficiently testify. It behooves Princes
therefore, as well for their Subjects, as their own sakes, to avoid either of
these servile Conditions: let them not impose too heavy a yoke upon their
Subjects, and they shall neither have cause, nor disposition to receive any
other yoke upon themselves. But though these additionall causes are free from
exception in themselves, yet as the case now stands, and as the Kings success
of late has been, some men may cavil perhaps, and oppose the taking of this
Oath at this time. I shall reply little herein* for it appears, as I conceive,
that this Oath, as it is now formed, does but open and explain the same
intention which the King had, or ought to have had in the other: and therefore
without great imputation, and suspicion this form cannot be refused. I shall
only supplicate his Majesty, that he will please yet more solicitously, and
intentively, to review and research the true state of this transcendent Case,
and to come to a more equal impartial debate about it, as well with other
men, as with his own conscience: Let it be his Majesty's care to hear
whatsoever can be enforced by reason from any person whatsoever, let him put
the Case all manner of ways, and take a just consideration, in what condition he
remains, if his Cause be just, or if it be unjust, or if it be dubious, or
partly just, and partly unjust; if he does not cast thus about in spite of all
prejudice, and take in all suppositions from all sides, as the fatality of this
controversy now stands, no excuse will be large enough to cover him from the
condemnation of God or man. We will first suppose his Majesty's Cause to be
just* that he has only the defensive part, and is necessitated to fight, and
that the Parliament as yet has offered no terms of Accommodation to him, but
such as are more unjust, then all the plagues of this calamitous war. This, so
being supposed, makes him innocent, but yet most unfortunate, it makes him the
first man that ever Fortune picked out to engage in such a wretched destruction
of men and treasure without blame. Amongst all his Ancestors there will not
appear, upon search, one of them who was just, and maintained a just cause* and
yet met with such general opposition from his Subjects, much less from the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: How trivial soever the Kings side
account this, there was not ever a worse prodigy in the world to amaze any
State, then this is, if it be true that the orderly presentative Body of this
Nation, has, causlesly, and unnaturally, risen up against their righteous king
to pursue him so far, as ours now is. It is not to be denied, but that some
Parliaments have done some unjust things, when they have been wrought upon by
the force or fraud of Princes; but no example can be showed, that ever any
Parliament did such an unjust thing as this, contrary to all motives and
influences of a gracious and religious Prince. Some of the kings party have
argued thus* if Parliaments may err when they are perfect, having the
concurrence of the Royal State with them, much more may they err when the
Royal State recedes from them, etc. But this I hold a grand mistake, for if I
have any reason to make a right use of Story, Parliaments are represented to me
never less liable to error, then when they receive least impressions from the
king. With what regret then ought the king to look upon this unprecedented
dysaster? Certainly, if he look upon us with a natural eye, under such
unparalleled sufferings, or upon himself with a pious eye, under such an
unequalled affliction, it cannot but administer thoughts of horror to him.
Bonus Pastor ponit vitam pro ovibus, so said that Prince of Peace, in whom
only there was no sin, and in whose flock, jointly, and severally taken, there
was nothing else but ^in, and yet his death sealed as much as his mouth
affirmed. Moses seemed to prefer the welfare of the obstinate Jews, not
only before all his temporal interests, but also before his eternal diadem
in heaven; and Saint Paul seemed to be rapt up with a species of the same
zeal. The passions of some heathen and heretical Princes toward their liege
Subjects, have been almost above the pitch of humanity: with what a strange
kind of hypochondriacall frenzy did Augustus Caesar cry out, Read mihi
Legiones Vare? If the blood of his Subjects had been drawn forcibly out of his
own dearest veins, it could not have parted from him with a stronger
resentment. How did our Queen Mary* even to the death, deplore the loss of one
Town in Picardie? With what strange instruments did grief make incision in her
heart, whilst it would in grave the name of Callice there? The loss of all
kings in all wars uses to be very dolorous, but native kings in civil wars,
when they look upon such vast desolation, as is now to be seen in England and
Ireland, must needs think that their own interest, their own honor, their own
saftie is of less consequence. We will now suppose the kings Cause to be
unjust, that the Parliament has had none but loyal intentions toward him, and
his Royal Dignity, nor has attempted any thing but to defend Religion against
the Papists, the Laws of the Land against Delinquents, and the Privileges of
both Houses against Malignants: and on the contrary we will suppose that that
private Council which the king has followed rather then his public one, has
aimed at the Arbitrary rule of France, and to effect the same has countenanced
Popery, and but pretended danger only from the Parliament, from the City of
London, and from the best affected of the whole Kingdom. Qui supponit, non
ponit: We will not assume, but presume only that the great Council of the
Land is in the right rather then the King, and his clandestine Council; but
see what will follow upon this supposition, if it prove to be true, as it is
neither impossible, nor improbable; if this be true, what a formidable day is
that to be, wherein the king shall render a strict account for all the English
Protestant blood which has heen issued out, and is to be yet issued out in
this wicked unnatural quarrel? Manasseh which filled Jerusalem with blood,
and made the kennells thereof flow with the precious blood of Saints, could not
contract so black a guilt, as he that imbrues two large kingdoms with blood,
and that with the blood of the best reformed Professors of our Saviors
Gospel. That blood of Protestants which has been shed by Papists, as in the
Parisian massacre; that blood of Christians which has been shed by Infidells,
as in Turkey; that blood of Saints which has been shed by Heretics, as in the
Arian Emperors days; that blood of strangers which has been shed by
Conquering Usurpers, as in Peru of late, may admit of some color, or excuse as
to some degree of heinousness, and may plead for some kind of expiation, but
this is beyond all thought or expression: The goodly kingdom of Ireland is
almost converted into a Golgotha, and the more goodly kingdom of England is
hasting to a worse point of desolation: It must needs be therefore, that he to
whose cruelty and injustice so much confusion shall be imputed, must be
perpetually abominated as a plague of humane kind more monstrous, and
portentuous then any age formerly had the strength to produce. The ripping up
of a mothers womb, the firing of such a Metropolis as Rome was, were but
strains of vulgar, narrow-hearted cruelty; Antichrist himself may own the
depopulation, and vastation of our British Islands, as acts worthy of his dying
fury.

But it remains now in the last place that we suppose some doubt to be in the
case, or some mixture of injustice in some circumstances: as that, though the
King incline not at all to Popery himself, yet he has favored* and enabled
Papists too far to do mischief; and though he cannot with safety cast
himself wholly upon the fidelity of the Parliament: yet he has no cause
utterly to reject their consent, and approbation in the filling up of all
places of public power and trust as the emergent necessity of the times now
is, nor to persist in this all-consuming war, rather then to condescend to an
Accommodation of that nature; if we lay down but this for supposed, we must
needs conclude that the King has not punctually and duly discharged his
Office, so as that he can clearly acquit, and absolve himself before God of
this lamentable effusion of Christian blood: For there must not only be a
perspicuous justice in the Cause, but an absolute necessity of the war, when
kings take up the sword against such a considerable number of their Subjects as
our King now fights against. Though the cause may be just, yet the war is not
lawful where the miserable consequences of it do too far outballance the
iniquity of the conditions offered, and proposed by the assailed party;
wherefore if the mere and clear justice of a cause cannot always wipe off
guilt, how shall he be purged from offense, whose cause is not totally just,
nor undeniably evident in a war of this nature? If the King does not apparently
fight for Antichrist, yet it is most apparent that Antichrist does fight for the
King, the whole Hierarchy has declared their engagement by publishing Bulls,
and by sending supplies into Ireland, and England out of several Popish
Countries: On the other side if the Earl of Essex does not apparently fight for
Christ, yet it seems very probable that Christ fights for him, for our great
Armies within the circle of this last year have four times met, and still the
Kings side has gone off with loss and disadvantage. Redding being begirt with
his Excellencies forces, all his Majesty's power could not relieve it, yet
Gloucester being begirt by his Majesty's forces, his Excellency found means to
relieve it. And as for Edgehill and Newbery, though neither side was totally
routed, yet the mastery of the field was left to his Excellency, and had not
fraud done better service to the King then force, scarce any other encounters
in other parts had been prosperous to his Popish Armies. These things seem to
make the kings Cause at least dubious, for it were strange if in these latter
days Christ and Antichrist should be so far reconciled in any one cause as to
unite their battles in the same expedition, or to pitch their tents in the
same field; and grant any doubt in this case, and the king can never be capable
of justification in prosecuting it so far with fire and sword; for the king has
already sworn to uphold and preserve in their entire vigor the Laws of the
Land, and the Privileges of Parliament, and we cannot deny but even this doubt
might be decided by the Laws in Parliament, or by some other Judicatory out of
Parliament, if the king would refer it to such a decision; if the king will
admit of no Judicatory to determine this matter, what are all our Laws, and
Privileges worth? If he will admit of one, but doubts what it is, and will not
be resolved by his Parliament in that doubt, what will all his oaths profit
us, what will all his deep professions of favor to our Laws and Privileges
stand us in stead? All those suppositions severally or jointly make it
manifest, that this war, if it can be ended by a just oath on the kings side,
not at all departing from the sense, and intent of his former Oaths, or from
the nature of his kingly office, will charge all these inexpiable mischiefs
upon him, if it be refused: Nay, when the king is not certain of Victory, and
yet has by so many dreadful oaths debarred himself from all advantages by
victory, if this devouring war (wherein so much loss is, and no gain at all
to countervaile it) be still protracted, and preferred before a composition of
this nature, future ages must needs suspect, that love of ruin, and
distraction, and a perfect hatred to the very nature, and being of man was the
execrable cause of it: To recommend this Method of Pacification to the king, I
shall say no more, and to recommend it now to the Parliament, very little will
be fit to be said, in regard that kings are more devoyd of Counsel, then
Parliaments; I shall thus only contract my self.

If we have respect to Almighty God, an appeal to him by Oath, is not less
beseeming Christianity then an appeal by sword; for ought I can understand,
this is rather a way of engaging divine Justice, then of disingaging it, if we
may be permitted to use such a word. If we have respect to the king, no course
can better save his honor or oblige his justice then this.

If we have respect to the Parliament, no other argument can more clearly
vindicate their innocence and loyalty then this.

If we have respect to Precedents, this is a transaction of State exceeding
ancient.

If we have respect to the present occasion, our affairs are now in a
condition so good, that fear cannot be upbraided to us, and the Summer is so
far spent, and our success has hitherto been so equilibrious, that we have no
reason to presume.

If we have respect to the future, as the Armies may disband without turmoile,
so we may all meet and incorporate again by this means upon more equal and
friendly terms then by any other. The old word of Command ( As you were) will
reduce us to that Posture, in which the beginning of this Parliament found us;
and then if the King observe this oath, he will incline to favor a due
reformation, and consequently decline those rocks upon which he has of late
unpolitickly both cast himself, and the State; if he observe it not, no new
advantage will accrue to him by this disbanding of both Armies, but perhaps
disadvantages, rather; and certainly he will neither ingratiate himself with
God nor man by temerating such a Sacred Paction.

The cause of all our miseries is mere obstruction of justice, and such
obstruction as nothing could work but the utmost power of a king: Now for the
opening of obstructions, this oath, if it be kept unviolated, is as effectual
as any other expedient whatsoever; and we may hope that it will be kept.

But soft, I crave pardon for saying so much, or insisting upon any inducements
at all, for I know both Scots and English are now interessed herein, and I
represent these things to the supreme wisdom of two the most religious
Kingdoms in the world.

FINIS.

