England's Interest: OR, A Brief Discourse OF THE Royal Fishery.

IN A Letter to a Friend.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed by J. Southby, at the Harrow in Cornhill. 1696.

ENGLAND's Interest: OR, A Brief Discourse OF The Royal Fishery, etc.
SIR,
I Was honored with Yours; in Answer:

The Coasts of Great Britain do yield a Continual Sea-harvest of Gain and
Benefit, to such as Diligently apply themselves to the Fishing Trade.

The Summer-fishing for Herrings, begins about Midsummer, and lasts some
part of August. The Winter-fishing for Herrings lasts from September to the
middle of November: Both which extend in place from Boughones in Scotland to
the Thames Mouth.

The Fishing for Cod, at Alamby, Whirlington, and Whitehaven, near the Coast of
Lancashire, from Easter until Whitsuntide.

The Fishing for Hake, at Aberdine, Fiscard, and other places between Wales and
Ireland, from Whitsuntide to St. James-tide.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Land, and of Severn,
from Christmas to Mid-lent.

The Fishing of Cod on the West part of Ireland, (frequented by those of
Biscay, Galicia, and Portugal) from the beginning of April until the end of
June.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North and North-east of Ireland, from
Christmas until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Pilchers, on the West Coast of England, from St. James-tide
until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling upon the North east of England, from Easter until
Midsummer.

The Fishing of Great Staple-Ling, and many other sorts of Fish lying about the
Islands of Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas, all the Year
long.

Out of these infinite Swarms and Shoals of Fish in His Majesty's Seas, the
Herring, Cod, and Ling, taken by the Dutch, were by the most experienced
Authors (even when they had not half their present number of Busses) valued,
communibus annis, at no less than Ten Millions of Pounds Sterling.

Nor will the aforegoing Estimate seem strange to such as consider, That in
Anno 1669, by the Account Taken in Holland of the Number of the Subjects of the
States General, they appeared, Two millions Four hundred thousand Souls, of
whom (besides those employed in their Inland Fishing) Four hundred and Fifty
thousand were then maintained by Fishing at Sea, and the Traffic that depends
thereon.

Now the Dutch transporting Fish to foreign Parts, Returns for it are made them
as follows, viz.

From France, Spain, and Portugal, in Bullion, Coin, Honey, Oils, Prunes,
Wines, Wool, etc.

From the Streights, in Allom, Currants and other Grocery-Wares, Money, Oils,
Sattins, Silks, Velvets, etc.

From the East Countries, in Clap-board, Copper, Corn, Deal-boards, Dollers,
Flax, Hemp, Hungary-Guilders, Iron, Pitch, Soap-Ashes, Steel, Tar, Timber,
Wainscot, Wax, etc.

From Germany, in Barratees, and many other Frankfort Commodities Button-Plate
for Armor, with other Munition, Fustins, Glass, Iron, Milstones, Rashes,
Rhenish-wines, Rix-Dollars in abundance, Steel, Silks, Velvets, etc.

From Brabant, in Hul-shop, Lace, Ready-Money, Tapesteries, etc.

Thus Holland, (whose Product is only a few Hops, Madder, Butter, and Cheese)
is rendered the mighty Storehouse of all Foreign Products and Manufactures;
from whose infinite Miscellany of Goods their Merchants are furnished with such
sartible Commodities as enables them to Trade from Port to Port, without danger
of glutting any Markets, to the great increase of their Riches and Navigation.

If Holland (which is but One hundred and Eighty Miles in circuit) reap so much
Advantage, and such a number of the Dutch can subsist by Fishing on our Coasts,
how vast a Trade and Commerce would a full Fishery in England beget! The very
Herrings usually taken by Five hundred Busses would yearly afford His Majesty
for Custom on Commodities returned for them, several Score thousand Pound: And
the Produce of such Herrings (taken without the Expense of any Foreign
Commodities) being added to that of the usual exported Products and
Manufactures of these Kingdoms, will Yearly much exceed the Amount of all our
Annual necessary Imports, and cause such an overbalance of Trade, as will turn
the Scale in our Favor, stop the Export of our Moneys, and oblige our foreign
Chapmen to send us BULLION, to make good the Difference.

The Want of Seamen enough (in time of War) at once to Man our Navy, and
Navigate our Merchantmen and Colliers, is detrimental to England, more than the
Charge of the War. Now, the Men of War and Merchantmen require many Seamen, and
breed few. The Collier indeed brings up several Apprentices, but generally
spends near as many as he makes. The great Nursery of Seamen is the Fishery,
where each Buss brings up (it may be) six, eight, or ten NEW MEN every Year.
Nor is their Value inferior to their Numbers; many brave Officers have been
trained up in that School; and the Fishermens B^siness lying where our Danger
lies, makes them know how the Sands shift, and where the Rocks and Shelves are,
and consequently, most Able Coasters and Admirable Pilots.

King CHARLES the Second well knowing the many Advantages would Accrue to
England from a Regular and Well-ordered Fishery, and that a Joint Stock and
Company was absolutely necessary and requisite to carry on the same, was
pleased, by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date
the Twenty-fifth Day of September, in the 29th Year of his Reign, to constitute
several Persons of Honor, and others therein named, and such others as
thereafter from time to time should be admitted into their Company and Society,
to be Traders and Adventurers with them; to be one BODY-POLITICK and CORPORATE,
in Deed and in Name, by the Name of, The Company of the Royal Fishery of
England; to have perpetual Succession; thereby also giving and granting unto
the said Company, and their Successors, diverse Beneficial Clauses, Powers,
Privileges, and Immunities, in order to the better Government of the said
Company, and Management of their Affairs; as by the said Charter appears.

Whereupon about Ten thousand pounds being subscribed, the Company sell to
work, and in a Three Weeks Voyage One of their Doggers brought them in Thirty
thousand Cod; and their Small Craft took in proportion: But the Dutch and
Spaniards being engaged in a War with France, the French seized the Vessels and
Goods of the Company, as Dutch, (being some, or most of them, Dutch -built and
manned) which Loss, by reason the Company's Stock was far too small, for so
great an Undertaking, at that time put a stop to their further Proceedings: In
which Misfortune the Truth of that old Maxim in Trade and Manufactory was
evident, That where there are but few employed, they will be found too many:
And where there are numbers, they may be thought too few.

However, Merchants must not give over all Trade, because some Ships have been
lost, (Bought Wit is best.) The bringing of the New-River-water to London,
(that now turns to such prodigious Advantage) was not Achieved upon the first
Attempt: The Company having thoroughly weighed and considered all former
Inconveniences and Impediments, and how to avoid them, will now set to work
with a Sufficient Stock; and in order thereunto, have caused as well the said
Letters Patents for their Incorporation, as the Constitution, Laws, Articles,
Terms or Conditions of Subscription, and bringing in Persons into the said
Company, to be Members of, or Traders or Adventurers with them therein, to be
fairly engrossed and made public in Books now Opened for receiving
Subscriptions for Three hundred Thousand pounds, being the Sum proposed for
their present Stock; or, at least, One hundred and Fifty thousand pounds for
them to begin withal; the Money subscribed is made payable by Equal Portions,
at Ten Quarterly Payments, and 3 per Cent. allowed to the Subscribers of the
first Hundred and Fifty thousand pounds, by equal Portions out of their three
first Quarterly Payments, but no Money made payable till thirty days after
publication of the completing the said Subscription for the said first Hundred
and Fifty thousand pounds; of which Notice has been given in Print, to the end
such persons in England, Scotland, or Ireland might not be excluded the Benefit
of the said 3 per Cent. as (by their early Subscribing) should be disposed to
entitle themselves to the same.

And the better to keep the Capital Stock entire, one Tenth of the Clear
Profits only is set apart for paying Sallaries, etc. to the Managing Members,
Officers Servants, and the Parts and Shares of every one settled: So that in
case of Loss in any One Year, the main Stock is first to be made good out of
the next; Thus the Salleries of all Officers will entirely depend upon their
good Conduct and frugal Management of Affairs.

Now diverse Persons of Quality, and Merchants, and others, toward the
effectual carrying on this Good Work, have already subscribed about One hundred
and Twenty thousand Pounds. And, for your encouragement in like manner to
promote the same, I shall here insert the Words in Lex Mercatoria, fol. 172,
written by that famous Merchant Gerard Malynes:

Now, to show you truly (says he) what the Charge of a Buss will be, with all
her Furniture, as Masts, Sails, Anchors, Cables, and with all her
Fishery-Implements and Appurtenances, at the first provided all new, she being
between Thirty and Forty Last, will cost Five hundred Pounds, and may continue
twenty Years, with small Reparations: But the Yearly Slite and Wear of her
Tackle and War-Ropes, with her Nets, will cost Eighty pounds.

And the whole Charge for the keeping her at Sea for the whole Summer, or three
Voyages for the filling of an Hundred Last of Cask or Barrels, VIZ.

l. 100 Last of Barrels -- 72 Salt l. 88. Beer l. 42. Bread l. 21 151 Bac^n and
Butter -- 18 Peace and ^ill^^s -- 6 Men's Wages, for 4 Months -- 88 l. 335

100 Last of Barrels filled, and sold for l. 10 per Last, is*l. 1000

Charg. deduc. l. 335

Gotten -- l. 665

Here (says he) plainly appears, that is gotten Six hundred Sixty five
pounds in one Summer, whereof if that you deduct One hundred pound for the
wearing of Ship, and the Reparation of her Nets against the next Summer, yet
still there is Five hundred Sixty five pounds remaining one Year, rating the
Herrings sold but at Ten pounds per Last; which are commonly sold by the
Hollanders at Dantzig for Fifteen and Twenty pounds.

And soon after, Barrel-Fish is proved no less advantageous to the Takers.

As to your Suggestion, That the Dutch Build cheaper, can Sail with fewer
Hands, afford cheaper Freight, and Vndersell us.

Granting it true, That the Dutch now build cheaper, you must own English-built
Ships are much stronger, and abler to brook the Seas, and will last twice as
long; for which Reason, in above three parts of the World, they are more in
request and yield better Freight; Where then lies the Odds? But pray what
should hinder the Company from Building as Cheap as the Dutch.

For Timber of their own growth, the Dutch have none, but are forced to Buy it
in Germany; whereas we have Timber sufficient, and at Reasonable Rates, growing
in England; and in many places of Ireland much stately Timber lies wasting and
decaying, for want of Money to make the Ways passible to some Rivers: Which
done, we can have it two thirds cheaper than the Dutch.

For Instance, the great Wood in the County of Wexford, near the Slane, wherein
is Timber enough to build several thousands of Herring-Busses. Now, Two or
Three thousand Pounds would not only make a Way to the said River, but so
effectually clear it, as to render prodious quantities of Timber profitable
both to the Proprietors and the Public, which at present is of little
Advantage to either.

Iron Holland produces not, their Bolt-Rods are drawn out in Germany; Whereas
with the Offal of the Timber used in building Busses, and Forest of
Dean-Cinders and Iron Stone, (which Mettel makes most excellent Iron)
sufficient quantities may be made in Bar at Nine, and drawn out for Bolts at
Eleven Pounds per Tun; which is not Two thirds what the Dutch pay for theirs.

Nor need the Company to divert any part of their Stock from the Fishery, or to
be at expense (in cleansing Rivers to come at Timber; or) for setting up
Ironworks, etc. No, the Proprietors of the Lands that produce such Materials,
by the Companys great Demands, being assured of a certain Market, will from
thence receive sufficient Encouragement, to improve their Estates, by such
Undertakings.

Hemp the Dutch have from the East Countries; but now we have found out the
right way of Retting and Dressing the Hemp our own produces, it appears in
goodness Second to none. Nor can sufficient quantities be wanting in this
Nation, since by Experience it is found, that such Marsh-Land as formerly would
not yield forty Shillings an Acre, by being laid under Hemp, is at present
Improved to five pounds: and the Methods are known that will render the
Companys Cables, Cordage and Twine near a fourth part cheaper than the Dutch
can afford them.

Sail cloth is at Fulham, (by Mr. Culliford and Mr. Evernden) already brought
to equal perfection with the best Holland's Duck (as appears by that served
into His Majesty's Stores) and they meeting with due Encouragement, our
Artizans (universally allowed the Best upon Earth for Improvements) may,
perhaps in few Years, as far excel Others in Duck, as they out do the Germans
in fine Steel-works; which though They first invented, yet now We make and sell
to them.

Masts, Tar, and Deals the Dutch have from Norway, where (if we send Sea made
Herrings, we shall in a great measure hinder the Yearly Export of our Milled.
Money thither, and yet) those Materials will stand the Company in no more than
they do our Neighbors: for, allowing that Flemish-built Ships are by Five
Shillings a Tun more advantageous for fetching Lumber from thence (than ours
non in fashion): yet surely the Danes and Swedes are able to bring us their own
Commodities as cheap as others can fetch them.

Nor do we (as our Neighbors) entirely depend upon East-Country Naval Stores*
No, in case either of Exaction or Rupture, we can be supplied by our
Plantations in America, where all sorts of them are to be had in abundance, and
at so easy Rates, that Merchants already build Ships there above a fourth part
cheaper than in England.

Pitch is now made at Reasonable Rates, of a Stone abounding in Shropshire,
which (after Two Years Trial) is found of such an excellent nature, that Heat
only causes it to penetrate deeper into Plank, and Cold cannot make it crackle
off.

In Building, for Strength, Stowage, and Sailing, English Shiprights know no
Master.

Now, as to the Dutch Sailing cheaper, because with less Hands, (none envies
them that Happiness) they lose more (in proportion) at Sea than we do,
occasioned by their Vndermanning their Ships; or else what should hinder the
Company from having their Ships and Vessels built rigged, and manned after the
Flemish Fashion? Yet the Objection holds only in Merchants Ships, to carry
their Fish to Market; their Busses and Fisher-boats carry more Men to catch
Fish than are needful to sail their Vessels: And in the Greenland-Voyages each
Ship (to Man their Shalloops when a fishing) must have five times the Crew that
can Navigate her: So that their Sailing cheaper than us, is either of no force
against the Fishery, or it is also of force against our Merchant men and
Colliers; and to discourage our Fishing upon this Consideration* is all one as
to bid us quit all Navigation whatsoever, and abandon our selves to the Mercy
of all Comers.

Provisions we have of our own growth Meat and Drink in Ireland, and in many
parts of England, are as cheap again as in Holland, which produces no other
than Butter and Cheese; and those too are cheaper with us than with them: And
it is observed, that what the Dutch Fishermen save by Eating of Grout, they
Drin^ (more than ours) in Brandy.

Salt the Dutch are obliged to fetch from France and Portugal, Holland yielding
them none for their Fishery: But in England enough to supply all Europe can b^
made and is now offered (to the Company, for their Fishery) at Twelve-pence pe^
Bushel, delivered on board: And this o^^ Salt is of so noble a quality, that it
will remove all those Mischiefs which at present (in the Fishery) have relation
to Salt.

We have many Convenient Tide-Haven-Ports, as at Hull and Harwich, to the
Northward, and Dover, Rye, Portsmouth, Southampton, Cowes, Weymouth, Dartmouth,
Catt-water, Hamos, Fowey, Falmouth, Hilford, Scilly, and Milford, Westward;
where at low water all of them are either a small Chingle or hard Sand; so that
our Ships and Vessels may easily haul ashore, and Wash and Tallow at pleasure.

Creeks and commodious places are not wanting to lodge our Busses safe when not
employed, so as to prevent Wear of Cables, Charge of Watching, Danger of Fire,
etc. and several of the said Subscribers having been concerned in the Dutch
Fishery, will be able to manage ours with all possible Foresight, Frugality,
and Good Husbandry, and frame such a Body of Instructions, for well Curing,
true Packing, etc. as may bring our Fish into r^pute, and be sufficient to give
Light to each other Particular, that can rationally be supposed to be of moment
for the Safety and better managing the Fishing Trade.

Besides, the Dutch have above a Hundred Leagues to sail before they come to
their Fishery, and there they lie at the Mercy of the Winds, for want of a Port
to Friend; and in case of unloading, they have as far back again; which takes
up a great deal of Time, hinders their Business, and endangers the loss of
their Markets. It is true, they have their Yagers or Dogger-Boats, many times
to take off their Fish at Sea, and refurnish them with Cask, and other
Necessaries: But if it happens to be a rolling Sea, they must lie still, and
wait for a Calm. Whereas we have this so Valuable a Treasure at our Feet, the
Fish upon our own Coasts, so near our Shoars, that in Case of Storm, unloading
taking in of Provisions, or the like, it is seldom above four or five hours
Work (and most commonly not so much) to recover a Harbor, and, without loss of
Time, to put to Sea again; the Work of Unloading Repacking, and sending our
Fish away to the next Market, still going on, in all Weathers; and from some
parts of His Majesty's Dominions, before the Dutch can arrive in Holland, we
may be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy, and so anticipate our
Neighbors.

Heretofore the Hamburgers used also to Fish for Herrings with Busses; but
being Yearly frozen up one month longer than the Dutch, by that one twelfth
Disadvantage were beaten out of the Trade. Now, the Shoars of England are bold;
the Coasts High Land, and easily discovered; several of our Cape-Lands
(opposite to France and Holland) make Eddy Bays, whose depth of Water is mean,
as 6, 8, 10, or 12 fathom; the Tides (on our Coast) are small and Anchor hold,
generally stiff Clay, Chalk, or hard Gravel; so that we need not dread Winter
Storms; besides the Advantage of lying in a moderate Climate, and in the very
Center of the Trade of Europe, affords us Opportunity of sending to foreign
parts from diverse of our Ports at all Seasons of the Year. But the Coast of
Holland lies extreme low, (and consequently is most subject to be hazey and
foggy) has many Shoals and Sands, some of which lay so far off at Sea, that
many times Ships are stranded before they see Land. Their Ports likewise are
often choked up with Quicksands, which makes it dangerous for all great Ships
to approach them. Their Havens also are commonly frozen up some months
together, and a North-west Wind (generally blowing the greatest part of the
Year) makes Holland a Lee, and England a Weather-Shore: So that many times,
whilst they lie Wind-bound, or frozen up at home, we can supply the Markets
abroad.

The Dutch, you note, are already settled in the Fishery.

I Answer: Not many Years since, we imported Silk-Stockings from the Levant;
yet now the Stream is turned, and we send them thither.

Trade often shifts from one place to another: The King of Portugal, in Anno
1500, having discovered the Passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good
Hope, and by it diverted the Course of Trade driven by the Venetians, from
Alexandria and the Red Sea, to his Port of Lixbon; kept Factors in Antwerp, to
vend there his Indian Commodities; which drew several Merchants from diverse
Parts, to reside there, and made the Trade of that pleasant-seated City great
and eminent. But when about Anno 1602, the Dutch began to Rival Portugal in
that Trade, the Merchants of Antwerp immediately foreseeing that they should be
Outdone, resolving not to loose the Advantage of the Skill they had acquired
in Indian Commodities, removed to Amsterdam, by which means they Improved their
own Estates, and left Antwerp bare.

England being as much happier than Holland in its Situation, Ports, and
Havens, as superior to it in the Native Growth and Production of its Soil and
Seas for Commerce, affording us Trade (as it were) without Art or Labor,
whilst our Neighbors are obliged to force theirs by Assiduity in both. A Royal
Fishery, if Established here, where (besides all other Advantages) no Duty is
paid upon the Fish we Export, must needs bear away the Bell from those who pay
ten per Cent. Custom: and Where Trade goes, Merchants follow.

You allege, The Dutch are more painful, hardy, and better able to fish than
the English.

I answer: Our Men run daily more Hazard and suffer greater Hardships in other
Voyages, than in Fishing: And for hard Labor, certainly the working of a Mine
is incomparably beyond that of a Buss. And as to the Genius of our People, it
is remarkable, that such Boys and Country Fellows as at Yarmouth, Scarborough,
etc. are once hired into the Fishing, and come to feed on the Fish they catch,
which for Variety and Delicacy (being fresh taken) is a Treat beyond what is to
be had on Shore: It improves them at such a rate, that of pitiful Weaklings at
Land, they come to be hearty, stout, and healthful persons; and upon trial,
find it so much to their liking, that not One in Twenty but take to the Sea for
good and all.

You say, Irish Cattle were prohibited to keep up Rents, and making Fish cheap
in England will hinder the sale and consumption of Flesh, and thereby make
Rents fall.

I ans. The Profits of Land do not wholly consist in Breeding. The Fishery will
cause a vast Expense of Butter, and make Farmers run much upon Dairies; the
Business whereof (though performed by the fair Sex) turns to as great Advantage
as the hardest Labor the Husbandman can spend his Time in. Now, though in
Breeding, all the Labor, Hazards of Rearing, hard Winters, etc. are the
Farmer's, the greatest Advantage arising from Cattle still accrews to the
Grazier, Drover, and Butcher: But, in a Dairie, all the care and pains is taken
by the Good Housewise and at her return from Market the Farmer receives all the
Profit to himself, and so with Ease can Pay his Landlord.

The Royal Fishery (as is shown) will also occasion Employment for many
Thousands of both Sexes, who, though now through Poverty, live only upon Bread,
Water, Pulse-Roots, and the like, when once they have the Rewards of their
Labors in their Hands, will not Punish their Carcasses to spare their Purses,
but drink Strong Beer, and eat Roast Beef, etc.

But supposing (for Argument sake) Victuals should not remain at a very
excessive rate, yet where a greater Consumption causes a quick Market, though at
a midling Price, (if the Proverb be true) Light Gains will make a heavy Purse.

Besides, in England many Acres are now set for Five or Ten Shillings an Acre,
and the Tenants scarce able to pay that, which under Corn might yield the
Farmer three or four pounds, now abate in grazing, and plough up more Pasture,
and Flesh will hold its price.

If to this you Answer, We often see Corn so cheap, that the Farmers are broke
by it, and what would they do with greater quantities?

It Is replied; The Reason why Farmers sometimes want Vent for their Grain, is,
because we have not always Store, and therefore Merchants make no Provision for
the Trade: But if we yearly sow such quantities of Corn, beyond the Expense of
the Nation, as Merchants may be no less certain of a constant Supply here than
they are in the SOUND, (where the Country depends as much on their Harvest, as
France does on its Vintage) Plenty will soon create a Trade; the Advantage of
ENGLANDS lying so much nearer than DANTZIG, to the places where Foreign Corn is
expended, together with the Allowance granted by the 25 Car. II. upon the
Exporting thereof, will sufficiently encourage Merchants to deal therein.

Besides, most of our Ships are sent light to Bilboa and Lisbon, (now what
loads our Ships helps our Navigation) and our Exports to Lisbon not answering
our Imports from thence, the more we send them in Corn, the less their Wines
will cost the Nation in READY MONEY, or BILLS of EXCHANGE, which is all one.

But if you allege, Sowing Quantities will make Corn cheap, and that will also
make Rents fall.

I Answer; Yearly catching Quantities of Fish, and sowing much Corn, will
(morally speaking) render England less subject to a Famine, which (as Sir
Walter Rawleigh truly observes) never happens here, but it enriches Holland for
Seven Years after, they having, in a Dearth, for the Corn they sold us in a
Year and a half, (according to that great man's estimate) carried away no less
than Two Millions of Pounds Sterling, to the Impoverishment of the People,
Discredit of the Merchants, and Dishonor of the Land. Besides, Are Provisions
cheaper? There needs less Taxes in time of War, a less Rate will maintain the
Poor, Housekeeping will be less chargeable, the Labourer will require less
Hire, and the Artisan afford his Work cheaper; which must fall the Price of all
our Products and Manufactures, and consequently enlarge their Exports and
Expense at home. Now, if (according to the Proverb) a Penny saved be a Penny
got, where is the Hurt the Fishery will do the Landed-Man?

But ^upposing there were only Five hundred pounds Sterling in England, an Ox
could hardly be worth a Penny, nor the Money Rent of all England be Five hundred
pounds per annum. Now, Gold or Silver-Mines England has none, and (in time of
Peace) we have no way to get BULLION from other Countries, but by foreign
Trade, to which nothing can more conduce than cheap Fishing, and the cheap
working our Native Commodities, as Copper, Lead, Iron Tin, Allom, Copperice,
Coals, Wool, etc. and cheap making the Manufactures that compose the Exports of
the Kingdom; and that is not to be effected, except Labor be cheap, which it
can never be where Provisions are dear.

Now, the more the Nation abounds with Fish, Corn, etc. still the greater will
its Exports be; and when the Wheel is set a going, Trade will beget Trade, as
Fire begets Fire, and still the more it increases, the more will Industrious
People from all Parts flock to us, and Crowds will not only force cheap Labor,
but improve our Londs, increase our Manufactories, and enlarge our Product far
beyond the whole Expense of our Nation, and thereby (in proportion) add to its
Wealth and Treasure for Merchants exporting the Surplus, will in Returns bring
back Gold, Silver, and other Valuable Commodities, which, in England, that has
Property by succession of Contracts, will diffuse amongst its Inhabitants,
whose number, will still increase with our foreign Trade, and as they augment,
will more and more improve our Lands, by increasing the Vent of our Product and
Manufactures, even in the very Expense of them that are added, one man that
works having (perhaps) five or six that only eat and wear. And much Vent will
cause many Workmen. And thus, as the consumption of the Native Product, and the
number of Persons (made rich by their Labor and Industry) enctease, and the
Choice of Tenants and Chapman is enlarged, a kind of Competition amongst them
must and will make Rents and Lands Advance in proportion: Witness Holland, and
such of our Lands in England as lie near great and populous Corporations.

You Object, Our Treasure is much exhausted.

I Answer: The greater the Dearth, the more Care should be had to Seed the
Ground, lest the Famine increase; the more our Wealth is diminished, the
greater cause we have to lay hold on the Fishery, which (as is shown) so much
enricheth our Neighbors, and, by parity of Reason, must abundantly add to our
Treasure.

You reckon, Two thousand Five hundred Persons in a whole Year are hardly able
to make a Fleet of Nets, only for Five hundred Busses; and because England has
many Wastes, and much unimprov'd Lands, conclude we shall want Hands to carry on
the Work.

Now, Sir, be pleased to consider, That a full employment of the Hands we have
is the best way to get more: For, Such as our Employment is for People, so many
will our People be: That in England (besides Voluntary Charity) the Poor Rate
in the latter end of King CHARLES the Second's Reign, came to Six hundred sixty
five thousand Three hundred sixty two pounds Sterling. per Annum; and we have
Reason to believe it now much higher: Whereby it is evident, what vast numbers
of Beggars and Idle Persons now live upon the Public, without return of Labor
for their Bread. Consider likewise of what a happy and invlting Nature the
easy Business of the Fishery is, affording Work to each Member of a Family;
Boys and Girls may do the work of spinning Twine; even the Lame, the Weak, and
the Aged of both Sexes may fit dry and warm, and yet earn their Livelihoods by
Braiding Nets, and picking Oakum, etc. nay, the very Blind may get their Bread
by turning Wheels; and you will find reason to conclude, that were our own Poor
set to work, we should not longer need to have our Nets made or mended at
Enchuysen in Holland. Now, as a constant Employment of such Poor will be a
continual ease and comfort to them, by amusing and diverting them from thinking
of their Poverty, or other Misery, so will it aleviate the Nation's Burden,
and in some measure be a Repeopling of us too, by adding so many lost Hands to
the Service of the Public.

It is hoped, by conquering, or at least streightning our Enemies, we shall
shortly oblige them to an honorable Peace, and the War ended; what an
Advantage will it be for Soldiers, to find in the Fishery work ready to their
Hand, the want whereof has formerly occasioned many (when disbanded) to leave
the Kingdom, or take the Road.

Nor need we fear, but the many Thousands of English, Scotch, and Irish
Mariners that serve our Neighbors, will return home, when so certain and so
profitable an Employment as the Royal Fishery is set on foot here, who
doubtless will be able to Catch, Cut, Pack, Salt, and Cure Fish for us, as well
as they used to do for them, and consequently to teach others.

Should Hands be yet wanting to manage the Fishery, the Parliament can easily
make good that Defect, by enacting, That all such single Persons as (by the
Statutes of 43 El. 2. 1 Jac. 25. 21 Jac. 28. and the 3 Car. 4.) the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor are empowered to put out Apprentices;
together with all such other as shall be put out Apprentices by any
Corporations, or other public Charities, (upon due request made on behalf of
the said Company, should by such Churchwardens and Overseers, or by a Justice
of the Peace, be bound Apprentice to the said Company) for Seven Years, to
learn One of the Two and thirty Trades that relate to the Fishery, for whom the
Companys Interest will oblige them to provide the soberest and best Workmen of
each Trade. And how to prevent their deserting the Companys Service, can be
shown beyond Objection.

Now, this being altogether Impracticable in Holland, for several other Reasons
a^ well as their having no such Numbers o^ Poor Children to put out Prentice,
will much Overpoise the present Advantage o^ the Dutch's Low Interest at 3 per
Cent. (the efficient cause of all their Wealth and Grandeur) and consequently
confirm to us ou^ Fishery, together with all that long Chain of Blessings
inseparably linked to it.

For, allowing the Charge of Fishing with each Buss to consist, in the Buss and
Rigging, in Victuals, Nets, etc. and in Seamens Wages, and the whole to be Nine
hundred pound.

That neither our Buss and Rigging, no Craft and Victualling will cost us so
much as the Dutch must pay for theirs, is alread^ shown: Yet however admit they
did, an^ their Charge should together amount t^ Six of the said Nine hundred
Pound, the Three hundred remains for Wages.

Now if the Company the first Year have but of a Busses Crew their own
Servants, (bateing what is paid more to Officers till their own Apprentices are
fit to command) it will save them One of the said Three hundred Pound. And
supposing that the next Year the Company should have one half of a Busses Crew
to be their own Servants, it would then save them One hundred and Fifty of the
said Three hundred Pounds* And thus their Fish would stand them the first Year
in about Ten, and the next in near Fifteen per Cent. less than the Dutch; ard
so propotionable to the number of their Servants, their Profits will increase,
till at length paying little or no Wages, they may afford to sell Fish to the
Hollanders cheaper than they can catch them.

If to this you Object, The Company's Servants will loyter, etc. and catch few
Fish.

I Answer: Such a Method for making each perform his Duty is already proposed,
as is Objection-Proof.

For want of having been bred up to Trades, many of our Poor now either leave
the Land, perish for Want, or come to untimely Ends; But the Companys
Apprentices being, in the Fishing Season, employed at Sea, and working at other
times ashore, at that of the said Two and thirty Trades relating to the
Fishery, to which they are bound; when their Time is out, will be able to get
their Livelihoods either at Sea or Land. And if to render them more capable of
Serving their Country, the Company shall at four a Clock each Saturday in the
Afternoon, cause them (when ashore) to Muster and Exercise, (although only with
Staves) and, for Diversion, to play at Cudgels, or fence, and reward the
Conquerors with the Liberty of wearing a small Ribbon, whose different color
o^ Red, Blew, etc. should distinguish them to be Captains, Lieutenants, etc.
and should cause them to be called and Respected as such, by the rest of their
Fellow Servants* till next weeks Trial of Skill; how soon would Emulation beget
Address! and what a Treasure and Strength to England would each Thousand of
such Sea-Militia be, always ready for Service, both by Sea and Land, and yet no
Charge to the Nation till actually in it.

Now as to your main Objection, Stockjobbing.

I confess, many worthy Enterprises, as working Mines, setting up New
Manufactures, and the like, have been baffled by it; for, when by Stockjobbing
Shares were raised to Above their Intrinsic Value, the first Undertakers, that
perfectly understand the Work (being generally such as have spent much of their
Time, and almost all their Estates, in acquiring that Skill) have been tempted
to sell out; and Ignoramus's coming in their places, for want of due Measures,
the whole Business has fallen to the Ground.

About Three Years since, Monsieur de Ponchartrin, one of the French Ministers
of State, concerted how to Stockjobb the Dutch East India Company, in hopes to
breed a Confusion in Holland; but the pressing Occasions his Master had for
Moneys obliged him to desist from putting it then in practice. And, to see such
a Trade as of late has been driven, is sufficient to make men conclude
Stockjobbing is not always carried on by mere Merchants.

To prevent which, it is hoped, that next Session of Parliament it will be made
Penal for any to sell more Shares or Stock in a Company, or Ioynt-Vndertaking,
than they actually have Credit for (in their own Names) in the Books of such
respective Company or Undertaking, except where the Vender sells in quality of
Executor or Administrator to any Person deceased, or as Guardian to any under
Age or Lunatic; and in Cases where the Proprietor of such Stock or Credit sold
(being in remote parts) has under Hand and Seal given Special Power to sell
the same.

And also, that it will be Enacted, That all Contracts shall be null, where the
Shares or Stock sold is not (within three days after) actually Transferred and
Accepted in the Books of each respective Company or Undertaking.

To Your Objecting, The greatness of the Undertaking;

I answer: The Flemings were long settled in the Manufacturing of our Wool, yet
(in Edward the Third's time) when we set about it our selves in good earnest,
we effectually fixed that Rich Staple in England. The Dutch likewise, for many
Years after, had the Dressing and Dying of our Woollen Manufacturies; but when
we undertook the Work, they were soon deprived of that Advantage. Which so
great Benefits our Country would have yet wanted, had not any set about them,
because all had thought them too big to be accomplished.

To conclude, we may easily assert and maintain the just Right and Title
Providence has given His Majesty to that Richer Mine than both Indies afford,
the Fishery of the British and Irish Seas; And that without quarrelling with
our Neighbors: for by only a frugal and industrious Management of Affairs, We
shall quickly become Sole Masters of the Fishing Trade. For Shame then let not
Englishmen longer say, (with Solomon 's Sloathful) -- There Is a Lion in the way.

Surely we have reason to believe our great KING, who Ventures his Royal Person
so freely, for the Preservation of these his Kingdoms, will not deny the
Assistance of his Special Grace and Favor, to a Work that in so great a
measure will contribute to our growth in Trade and Treasure.

And what just Encouragement may we not hope for from the Parliament, seeing in
the Preamble of an Act passed in 14 Car. II, cap. 28, it is declared, That the
Public Honor, Wealth, and Safety of this Realm, as well in the maintenance of
Trade and support of Navigation as in many other respects, does in an high
degree depend upon the Improvement and Encouragement of the Fishery, etc.

Thus, Sir, what has been Collected Answers your Letter; if at your Coming to
Town you shall think fit to peruse the Books of the said Company, lying at
their HALL in Thames Street near the Three Cranes, and at the Office of Puckle
and Jenkins, Public Notaries in Popes head: alley over against the Royal
Exchange, London (where: in as well the said Letters Patents, Constitution, as
all the Terms of Subscription, are fairly engrossed) notwithstanding the many
idle Reports so industriously spread abroad to Obstruct this Undertaking, (by
such, perhaps, as envy the Strength and Happiness that would accrue to England
by a well* regulated Fishery) doubt not but you will receive full Satisfaction.

London, Sept. 30. 1696. Yours, James Puckle.


