A true and perfect NARRATIVE OF What was done, spoken by and between Mr.
Prynne, the old and newly Forcibly late secluded Members, the Army Officers,
and those now sitting, both in the Commons Lobby, House, and elsewhere; on
Saturday and Monday last (the 7. and 9. of this instant May:) with the true
Reasons, Ends inducing Mr. PRYNNE (a Member of the old Parliament) thus
earnestly to press for entry, to go and keep in the House as he did: And what
proposals he intended there to make for public peace, settlement, and
preservation of the Parliaments privileges.

Put in writing and published by the said William Prynne of Lincolns Inn Esquire
to rectify the various Reports, Censures of this Action; and give public
satisfaction to all Members of the old Parliament, the whole English Nation,
especially those Vianders and free Burgesses of the Borough of Newpart in
Cornwall, (who without his Privitie, Solicitation, or good liking, unanimously
elected him for their Burgess, An. 1648. though soon after forcibly secluded,
secured, and now twice re-secluded in like manner by the Army Officers) Of his
sincere Endevors to the uttermost of his power; to preserve OUR RELIGION, LAWS,
LIBERTIES, the Essential Rights, Privileges Fre^dom of Parliament, and all we
yet enjoy, according to his Oaths, Covenant, Trust, as a Parliament Member,
against the utter Subverters of them; by mere armed force, arbitrary will and
tyrannical power, through the apparent Plots, Seductions of our professed
foreign Popish Adversaries and their Instruments.

Psalm. 3.6. I will not be afraid often Thousands of men, who have set
themselves against me round about.

Psalm. 27.3. Though an Host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear;
though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

Printed in (...) 1659.

A true and full Narrative of what was done and spoken by and between Mr.
Prynne, other secluded Members, and Army Officers, etc.
ON the 7th. day of this instant May Mr. Prynne walking to Westminster Hall,
(where he had not been six days before,) meeting with some old secured and
secluded Members of Parliament, summoned by King Charles his Writ and
Authority, for these only ends (expressed in all writs of Summons to the Lords,
and of Elections issued to Sheriffs of Counties for electing Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses of Parliament, and in the Indentures themselves by which they
were returned Members;) To confer and treat of certain, great and arduous
affairs, concerning the defense of the King Kingdom, and Church of England, and
to do and consent to those things which shall happen to be therein ordained by
Common counsel, (of the King, Lords, and Commons,) touching the aforesaid
businesses: which Parliament began at Westminster the third day of November,
1640. They showed him a Declaration of the Officers and Counsel of the Army,
made in such have and confusion, that they mistook the Month wherein they made
it, dating it April 6. instead of May 6. published by them that morning, (which
Declaration the day before, was presented to the Speaker of the said
Parliament, at the Rolls, by diverse Officers of the Army, in the name of Col:
Fleetwood, and the Counsel of officers of the Army, in presence of many Members
of the said Parliament) containing their earnest desire, That those Members who
continued to sit since the year 1648. until the 20 th. of April, 1653. would
return to the exercise and discharge of their trust, (expressed in the foresaid
Writs and Indentures alone by those who empowered, elected, and entrusted them
as their Representatives, without any other new trust whatsoever, inconsistent
with or repugnant to it) Promising their readiness in their places as became
them, to yield their utmost Assistance to them to sit in safety, for improving
the present opportunity for settling and securing the peace and freedom of this
Commonwealth; praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their
endeavors; who after they had sat many years in performance of the trust
reposed in them by the people, and being in the prosecution of that Duty
assembled in Parliament at Westminster, upon the 20 th. day of April 1653. were
then interrupted and forced out of the House from that time until this very
day: Of which force they seem in their Declaration unfeinedly to repent, by an
actual restitution of the Members formerly forced thence, much more then of
that See the Epistle and Appendix to my Speech in Parliament; and the 2d. part
to the History of Independency.
greater and more apparent force of whole Regiments of Horse and Foot drawn up
to the house it self in a violent manner, where they seized, secured Mr.
Prynne, with above forty, and secluded, forced away above 2 hundred Members
more of the Commons House, only for the faithful discharge of their Trusts and
Duties therein, according to their Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Covenants,
Consciences; wherein most think they first turned out of the way, by wandering
into other ways from righteous and equal paths; which Members though they do
not particularly invite to sit again, yet they having proved no breach of trust
against them, do not in the least measure intimate, that they would forcibly
seclude them from sitting if that Parliament should be publicly voted still in
being by virtue of the Statute of 17 Caroli c. 7. as they in their Counsel of
the Army have actually resolved, by their invitation of the Members thereof to
sit again, as Mr. P. and those Members who showed it to him conceived upon
their perusal thereof. Mr. P. being after informed, that the Old Speaker and
sundry Members of the long Parliament were then met in the painted Chamber to
consult together in order to their meeting again in the House, was moved to go
thither to them, which he refused, because it was no place where the House of
Commons ever used to meet or sit as an House, but only as a Commit upon
conferences with the Lords: Soon after Mr. P. heard by some Members and others,
that the old Speaker and about forty Members more, with the Mace carried before
them, were gone from the Lords House into the House of Commons, and there sat
as an House by virtue of the Statute and their old Elections by the Kings
Writs; Upon which there being then above 30 of the old secluded Members in
December. 1648. in the Hall; they did think fit and agree, that to avoid Tumult,
about 12. or 14. of them, in the name of the rest, if freely admitted without
any seclusion, or engagement; in a friendly manner, should desire to know of
them, Upon what account they did now sit there thus suddenly and unexpectedly,
without giving any convenient notice or summons to all the rest of the Members
to sit with them? If only by virtue of the Act of 17 Caroli chapter 7. thus penned.
Be it enacted and declared by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the Assent of
the Lords and Commons, That this present Parl. now assembled shall not be
dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; Nor
shall any time or times during the continuance thereof, be prorogued or
adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament, to be likewise passed for that
purpose. And that the House of Peers shall not at any time or times during this
present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by themselves or their own
Order. And in like manner, That the House of Commons shall not at any time or
times during this present Parliament, be adjourned, unless it be by their own
Order. And that all and every thing or things whatsoever done or to be done,
for the adjournment proroguing or dissolving of this present Parliament; shall
be utterly void and of none effect: Then they intended to send for the rest of
the Members walking in the Hall to come in unto them: and to move, that all
surviving Members of this Parliament, might by joint consent particularly be
sent to, and invited to meet and sit in the House at a convenient day, before
any Vote or Order passed by the^ then sitting, thus suddenly convened without
any notice (which would be interpreted rather a surprise, and un-Parliamentary
practice, both by the absent Members and the whole Nation, than any obliging
Parliamentary Vote or Order of the House) and more discontent than invite or
unite the absent unsummoned Members, than unite them, making the rent greater
than before. And when they were there assembled, that in the first place they
might freely and fully debate this Question, (wherein there were different
Opinions between the Members themselves, and other learned Lawyers;) Whether
this Parliament was not actually dissolved by the late Kings forcible death,
(which is clearly Mr. P. his opinion formerly published) Or, Whether it was not
still in being, by virtue of this Act, notwithstanding the Kings death, or any
other thing or things done already by the Army Officers or others for the
adjourning, proroguing or dissolving thereof? If it should upon such debate be
Voted by the Majority of the House to be really and legally dissolved; they
held it their duties and theirs now sitting, to acquiesce therein, and act no
farther as a Parl. But if voted still in being, they all held it their duty, to
sit and join their best Counsels and Endeavors to settle the Government,
Peace, Safety of our distracted Church and Nations, now more shaken, unsettled,
endangered in their apprehensions than ever, and would submit their private
contrary Opinions in this (as in all other Votes) to the overruling Judgment
of the whole House; as the only hopeful way to revive the ancient
Constitution, Rights, Privileges of Parliament; and resettle us upon lasting
foundations of Peace and Prosperity.

Upon these Resolutions alone, and none other, which Mr. P. intended to propose
to those then sitting, he went to the Lobby door of the Commons House,
accompanied with Sir George Booth, Mr. Arthur Annesley, Sir John Evelyn, Mr.
Th. Gewen, Mr. Charles Rich, Mr. Mountague, Mr. Ri. Knightly, Mr. Hungerford,
and one or two more; which being shut to keep out the people crowding on the
stairs to get in, through whom they could hardly pas; Mr. P. knocked twice or
thrice, but could get no admittance, till the door being opened to let out M.
Nigh and some other Ministers, Mr. P. with Sir Geo. Booth and Mr. Annesly, being
foremost, pressed into the Lobby; and then the door being shut and bolted again,
Mr. P. unbolted and held it open till the rest came in; where they finding Mr.
John and Mr. James Herbert standing in the Lobby, acquainted them with their
intentions to go then into the House, who resolved to go in with them. Coming
all up toward the House door, which was shut and kept Guarded (as it presently
appeared) by some Officers of the army; Mr. P. required them, to open the door
to let them in, being all Members of the old Parliament; who thereupon
demanded; Whether they had continued sitting in it since 1648. to 1653? M. P.
and the rest all answered, That being Members of the old Parliament, they would
give no account to the^ or any others of their sitting, but only to the House
it self whereof they were Members, being contrary to the Privilege of
Parliament, which they and others were obliged inviolably to maintain: Upon
which demanding their names, they said; that if they would send in a Note of
their names to the House, and they ordered them to come in, they should be
admitted. Whereto Mr. P. replied, We yet knew not who were within the House,
nor whether they were yet sitting, nor upon what account they sat; nor was it
agreeable with the Custom or Privilege of Parliament for one Member to send
tickets to his fellow Members for free admission into the House, being all
equals, and having an equal right freely to enter into it at all times, as well
as they; nor was it their duty thus to capitulate with Members, but obey their
just commands in opening the door: Which they still refusing, Mr. P. demanded,
Who and what they were, being all strangers to them? and by whose authority, or
order they thus forcibly kept them out? They answered, they were Officers of
the army, and had sufficient Authority to keep the^ out, if they had not sat
since 1648. till 1653. Mr. P. demanded, From whom they had their warrant, since
they could have none from those within, being but newly entered; and none else
could give the^ such a warrant, nor they within before they heard them, and
gave good reason for it; demanding them to produce their Order, if they had any
in writing, that they might know by whose authority they were thus forcibly
kept out; demanding their several names twice or thrice, wherewith they refused
to acquaint them. Upon this M. P. told them, They doubted of their Authority,
Orders thus to seclude the^, because they were either ashamed or afraid to tell
the^ their names, when as they told them theirs: That they knew not whether
they were Officers of the Army, or not, unless they knew their names, that so
they might inquire the truth of it, or saw their Commissions: And if they were
Army Officers indeed, they had published a printed Decl. in all their names
that morning, inviting (as they conceived) all Members they formerly secluded,
to return and sit again in the House to discharge their trusts: wherein they
professed their former force upon, and seclusion of them, to be a Backsliding,
and wandering into UNRIGHTEOUS PATHS; which they seemingly repented of;
promising to yield their utmost assistance to them to sit in safety; and
praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their endeavors: And if now
within few hours after this Remonstrance published, they thus highly and
publicly violated it in the view of all there present, by returning to their
former Backslidings and Unrighteous paths; in secluding those who were Members
afresh, and violating their own Declaration, none would henceforth credit them,
or it. Upon which one of them told M. P. He knew he was none of them who sat
since 1648, till 1653. therefore they were not bound to let him in, being not
within their Declaration. Who retorted, he thought their repentance had been
universal, not partial; of all their forces upon the House and Members,
especially of their greatest Dec. 6. 1648. when they not only secluded, but
secured and imprisoned him and 40 more in Hell, and other places, and forced
away 3 times as many more for discharging their trusts, and asserting the true
GOOD OLD CAUSE; against their Commissions, trusts, Protestations, and printed
Remonstrances; which if they would look back upon and well consider (as they
proclaim they had don in their New Decl.) they would find to be one of their
greatest Backslidings where they first turned out of the way, which caused God to
withdraw his presence and GOOD SPIRIT FROM THEM ever since, and give them up to
the prosecution of a New Romish GOOD OLD CAUSE, which had brought us into that
posture, and occasioned those vicissitudes of dangers, and caused God in his
Providence to make all Essaies to settle us, utterly ineffectual; to convince
them of, and reclaim them from their Error: which they now pursued afresh, as
vigorously as ever: That for his own part after his Impisonment by them against
both Law and Privilege in 1648. in sundry places, he was again forcibly seized
by some of the Army in his House in 1650. and kept a close Prisoner near 3.
years under armed guards of Soldiers in 3. remote Castles far distant from
those then sitting: Therefore they could not make their unrighteous Imprisonment
of him then without any cause or hearing, a just ground to seclude him from
sitting now. But all these expostulations of M. P. and others, not prevailing,
they desired all present to take notice and bear witness of this high affront
and breach of Privilege in this their forcible seclusion: And so departing Mr.
Knightly meeting Major General Lambert in the Lobby, complained to him of this
Forcible seclusion; who gave him a civil Answer to this effect; That things
were now in an hurrie, and their entering at this time into the House might
cause some disturbance, but doubted not such course would be taken by the
Officers of the Army in few days, that none should be forcibly secluded: and
so they went from the Lobby into the Hall from whence they came, acquainting
those Members they left there with the premises.

After some conference with one another, it was thought fit they should meet
about 4. a clock in the Evening under Lincolns Inn Chapel, and in the mean
time that every one should inquire, what old secluded, or secured Members were
now in town, and how many Members of the long Parliament were yet living,
chosen or sitting before December 6. 1648. when they were first forcibly
secluded by the Army. Some met accordingly, and upon conference found, there
were about 80 secluded Members now in London and Westminster; being near double
the number of those sitting that day; and above 300 Members of all sorts yet
living, chosen or sitting in the Commons House before December. 1648. over and
above those that now sat; all which they conceived ought in justice to be
summoned by the Speakers Letter, freely to meet and sit in the House at a
convenient time to be agreed upon: In order whereunto some ten of them met in
the Counsel-Chamber of Lincolns Inn (where the old Speaker used to sit in
Counsel as a Bencher with the rest of the Benchers concerning the affairs of
the Society) as the fittest place to write down a Catalogue of all the
surviving Members names, by the help of their Memories and the printed list of
them; which having finished, they departed, agreeing to meet in Westminster
Hall about 9 of the clock on Monday morning, whither M. P. carried the list of
the names formerly written, digested into an Alphabetical order, to communicate
it to other Members, Those that sat meeting on the Lords day, adjourned their
House till ten of the clock Monday morning: But the Courts not sitting in
Westminster Hall that day, Mr. P. found the Hall very thin, and few Members in
it whiles he was standing in the Hall expecting those who promised to meet
there, he was twice informed one after another, that there were no Guards at
all at the House Door, that any person might freely go into it without
examination, there being but few Members within, and the Doors standing open.
Whereupon he spoke to 4 or 5 Members there met, to go along with him into the
House, and if they were freely admitted, to give notice of it to the rest to
follow after if they pleased: Some of them were unwilling to go being formerly
repulsed, thinking it better to make a Narrative of their former forcible
seclusion on Saturday, and to signify it by a Letter directed to the Speaker,
subscribed with their names, which Mr P. conceived superfluous, since the Door
now stood feeely open to all without any Guards to seclude any, and that, as he
apprehended, in pursuit of Major General Lamberts promise to Mr. Knightly: And
it would be idle to complain of that force by Letter, wherewith they might now
acquaint those then sitting by their own mouths, if there were cause. Upon
which ground, M. Prynne, Mr. Annesly, and Mr. Hungerford about ten of the clock
went to the House, where the doors of the Lobby and House were at first knock
opened to them by the ordinary Door-keepers, upon their telling the^ they were
Members, (there being no Guard at either door:) who delivered to each of them
as Members, a printed Paper entitled, A Declaration of the Parliament assembled
at Westminster, Saturday 7. May, 1659. They found not about 9. of 10. of those
who sat, within the House, who courteously saluted them: After some short
discourses, Mr. Annesly, and Mr. Hungerford leaving Mr. Prynne in the House,
(out of which he resolved not to stir upon any occasion, for fear of a new
forcible seclusion) went back into the Hall to acquaint the Members in it, they
might freely enter if they pleas^d: Mr. Annesly returning, was forcibly kept
out from re-entring by some Soldiers, sent thither (as he conceited) for that
purpose. Wherewith he acquainted Mr. P. by a Note, desiring to speak with him at
the House door; which being opened, Mr. Annesly pressed to go in to speak with
him, but was denied entrance, unless he would give his paroll presently to come
out again and not stay in: whereupon he said, Though they had often broken
their parolls with them, yet he would not break his parol; but would come forth
so soon as he had spoken with M. P. which he accordingly performed. After this
Mr. P. had conference with diverse Members as they came in, who said they were
glad to see him in health, and meet him there again. The House being thin, M.
P. turned to the Statute of 17 Caroli, c. 7. reading it to himself; and after
that to two other Members: telling them, it was a doubt, whether the old
Parliament was not determined by the Kings death, notwithstanding that Act;
which was fit to be first freely debated in a full House, before ought else was
done. Upon which they demanded, Why he came amongst them, if he made a scruple,
or thought it to be dissolved? Who answered, to have it fully debated and
resolved in a full and free House. After which Sir Arthur Haslerigge coming in,
Mr. P. saluted and told him, He was glad to meet him again in this place: who
presently answered, he had nothing to do to sit there as a Member, being
formerly secluded. Whereto he replied, he had as good right to sit there as
himself, or any other Member whatsoever, upon the account of the old
Parliament, if in being: having acted, written, suffered more in defense of the
rights and privileges of Parliament, than himself, or any sitting with him.
Upon which Sir Henry Vane coming in, and stepping up to them, said in a
menacing manner: Mr. Prynne, what make you here? you ought not to come into
this House being formerly voted out, I wish you as a friend quietly to depart
hence, else some course will be presently taken with you for your presumption:
which Sir Arthur seconded, telling him, If he refused, that there would be a
speedy course taken, and a charge put in against him, for his meetings on
Saturday, and actings against the House. To which he replied, He had as good,
if not a better right to sit than either of them: That he knew of no Vote to
seclude, nor of any there who had right or power to vote him out, being equally
entrusted with themselves for the whole Nation, and those he represented: That
he was never convicted of any breach of his Parliamentarie trust, and hoped
they would have both the justice and patience to hear, before they voted him
out: And then he doubted not to make it appear, themselves were greater
Infringers of their trusts, and more worthy to be voted out than himself. As
for their Charge and menaces, he was no way affrighted with them: It being as
free and lawful for him and other Members, to meet and advise together both as
Members and Freemen of England, for preservation of themselves, the peoples
Rights and Parliaments Privileges, when forcibly secluded, as they did on
Saturday; as for themselves, or the Army Officers to meet privately and
publicly both in and out of the House, to deprive them of their privileges, as
they had often times done of late: That these high menacing words, were a very
ill performance of their New published Declaration, delivered him at the door:
That they were resolved (by the gracious assistance of Almighty God) to apply
themselves to the faithful discharge of their legal Trust; to assert,
establish and secure, the Property and Liberty of the People in reference unto
all, both as Men and as Christians:) which if they should publicly violate,
and null by any unjust charge, or proceedings against him, who had saffered so
much, both as an English Freeman, Christian, and Member too (by their 3 years
close imprisonment of him without cause or hearing) under their new FREE STATE,
when first erected, and now again upon their very first reviving of it, though
a Member, only for coming into the House and meeting with other Members, to
claim their rights: It would highly reflect upon their intended new Free State,
and make all out of love with it. After which, they going up with other Members
into the Committee Chamber, to consult how to dispose of or get him out of the
House, about half an hour after they all came down into the House, where Mr. P.
continued sitting: the Speaker being come in the interim, they first concluded
to go to prayers, then to sit as an House: whereupon all taking their places,
Mr. Prynne took his place too where he usually sat before, resolving not to
stir thence: which Sir Arthur and Sir Henry observing, after some whisperings
with the Speaker and others next them; though the Cushion was laid, and order
given to call in the Chaplain to pray, yet they countermanded it, telling the
Speaker, It was now somewhat late, and they could dispatch little before
dinner: therefore they would by agreement, without any adjournment, presently
rise and go to dinner, and then sit in the afternoon about one a clock, and the
Speaker in the mean time might dispatch a business he said he must needs do.
Upon which they all rising, Mr. P. continued in the House till most of them
(being about 42. with himself in his computation) were gone out, lest they
should return and sit so soon as he was gone, his presence there, being the
sole cause of their not fitting. Mr. Prynne then going out after them, found a
guard of Soldiers with Halberts at the door, and a Troop of Horse in the
Palace Yard; which were purposely sent for to keep out the other Members, and
Mr. P. if he returned, as the sequel proved. Mr. P. having acquainted some
secluded Members in the Hall with these passages in the House; who agreeing to
send a letter to the Speaker touching their forcible seclusion on Saturday, he
returned to Lincolns Inn, where he dined in the Hall: immediately after dinner
he repaired to Westminster, with a resolution to go into the House if
admitted; or protest against the force if secluded by the Army Gards there
placed: he found an whole Troop of Horse, in the Palace yard, and a Company of
Foot on the Stairs, and Court of Requests, drawn thither to keep him and other
Members out; whereupon he walked in the Hall til past 3. a clock, expecting the
Speakers coming, with whom he intended to enter; At last, being informed that
he went the back way without the Mace, and was gone into the House; Mr. P. to
avoid tumult (a company of unknown persons in the Hall going after to see the
issue) went purposely forth toward the Abbey, till all were gone from the
steps; and then going up only with one of his acquaintance, (no Member) he
found the door and stairs before the Lobby strictly guarded with Red-coats, who
with their Halberts crossed the door and steps so thick that none could pass:
whereupon Mr. P. demanded entrance, saying, he was a Member; and they being
ignorant who he was, permitted him to pass through their pikes into the Lobby,
but secluded his friend from going up with him. When he came at the House door
to enter, several Officers of the Army there placed (one of them sitting in a
chair) told him, That he must not enter, and that they had special Order to
keep him out of the House: Whereupon he Protested against this their forcible
double seclusion of him, as an high contempt and breach of Privilege, contrary
to their own and the sitting Members Declaration published that day; demanding
in the name of all the Commons of England, and those for whom he was elected,
free admission for himself and other Members they kept out by a visible force
of horse and foot; which was a worse and more real levying of war against the
Parliament, then the beheaded King or his party were guilty of; whose
imprisoning, prosecution of MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT for opposing his unlawful
will, after the Parliament: and coming to the House only to demand the 5.
impeached Members, without offering force, or secluding any Member; but ABOVE
ALL, HIS LABOVRING THE ENGLISH ARMY TO BE ENGAGED AGAINST THE ENGLISH
PARLIAMENT; (being a thing OF THAT STRANGE IMPIETY and UNNATURALNES, that
nothing can answer it, but his being a foreiner) with his breach of Faith,
Oath, Protestations, in levying war war against and offering force to the
Parliament only at a distance, without keeping out any by armed Gards) being
the principal unparale'ld Treasons, for which the most of those now sitting in
their very Declaration of 17 Martii 1648. (expressing the grounds of their late
proceedings against him, and settling the p^esent GOVERNMENT in the way of a
FREE STATE, now cried up as their GOOD OLD CAUSE) appealed to all the World to
judge, whether they had not sufficient cause to bring the K. to Justice? and
execute him as they did: Of all which they were formerly and now far more
guilty in placing Gards of Horse, and foot at the Parliament Doors to keep out
him and other Members: it being a force and levying of war upon the House it
self and Members, which would null all their Acts and Votes, as the sitting
Members in their Declaration and Speaker in his Letter, An. 1648. (upon the
London unarmed Apprentices Tumults at the House Doors, though they kept out
none) yea some now sitting in their Speeches in the last dissolved Assembly at
Westminster, declared very lately: After which some of the Officers said, Pray
talk no more with him: whereto he replies, he must talk a little more to them,
in their own Language: That the Army Officers and Counsel themselves had
forcibly turned those now sitting out of Doors, 20 April 1653. and thus branded
them in their Declarations and The true State of the case of the Commonwealth
in reference to the Government by a Protector and Parliament: maintaining
therein a full conformity to the declared principles and engagements of the
parliament and Army. It being the opinion of diverse persons who through out the
late troubles have approved themselves faithful to the cause and Interest of
God and their Country. Presented to the public, for the satisfaction of
others, printed 1654. p. 9, 11. which Mr. Prynne had then in his pocket.
other Papers he had then about him: for their Dilatory proceedings in the
House, unlimited Arbitrary proceedings at Committees, their wholly perverting
the end of Parliaments; by becoming studious of parties, and private Interests,
neglecting the Public, so that no Door of Hope being opened for redress of
their grievances,, nor any hope of easing the people in their burdens, it was
found at length by these their exorbitances, That a standing Parliament was in
it self the greatest grievance; which appeared yet the more exceeding grievous,
in regard of a visible design carried on by some among them, to have
perpetuated the Power in their own hands, it being utterly impossible in that
corrupt estate, that they who made gain the main of their business, should
become instruments of our long desired establishment: Therefore it became an
Act no less pious than necessary, for the Army now to interpose upon the same
equitable ground as heretofore in the like cases of extremity, (no ordinary
medium being left) to provide for the Main, in a way irregular and
extraordinary, by their most necessary and timely dissolution. Yet
notwithstanding all these brands they have publicly laid upon them, (which
they and others never yet wiped of by any public Answer as the formerly
secluded Members had refuted those base aspersions and calumnies the Army had
falsely cast on them) they had now invited those very Members to return and fit
again without secluding any of them, and engaged to yield them their best
protection, as the Assertors of the Good Old Cause, who had a special presence
of God with them, and were signally blessed in the work: yea as the only
Instruments for settling and securing the peace and freedom of this
Commonwealth: Therefore they had far greater reason to call in him and the
other first secluded Members than thus forcibly to exclude and ascribe and give
to them alone the Supreme Authority of the Nation which they have engrossed to
themselves without the peoples Vote or Election in who^ alone they have
formerly Ian. 6. 1648.
voted it; A presage of their subsequent Free State proceedings, when once
settled in their Government, and a strange contradiction; Wherefore they should
much more invite him and others they formerly and now afresh have forcibly
secluded, against whom they had not the least Exceptions, to settle us again in
peace and freedom, which they had done when they sat, had they not secluded
them. After which one of the Army Officers told Mr. Prynne, he had deserted the
Good Old Cause: To which he replied, That the true Good Cause for which they
were first raised, was only to defend the Kings person, Kingdom, Parliament,
all its Members, Privileges, and secure them against all force and violence
whatsoever, which cause they had not only deserted but betrayed, and fought
against, contrary to all former Engagements, to which cause he adhered, and
desired entrance to maintain it. To which he answered, That indeed was once
their Good Old Cause; but now it was not so, for since they had pursued another
Cause: Mr. P. replied, that then they were real Back-sliders therein, and their
Cause neither old nor good, but bad, new and destructive to the former old one.
In conclusion Mr. Prynne pressed them to tell him their names, which he desired
to know; They answered they would not tell him: He then told them, That
certainly their Good Old Cause was in their own Judgments and Consciences very
bad, since they durst not own it by name: They answered, That Mr. Annesly the
last day when they refused to tell their names, as they do now, had inquired
out some of them, from whom he might learn them. In conclusion when he could
not prevayl, he told them, they declared themselves and those now siting arrant
Cowards,, and their magnified Good Old Cause to be very bad, since they were
afraid of one single person without Arms, when as they were a whole Army of
armed men, and had above 40 voices to his one, yet were afraid to admit him in,
for fear he alone should blow them all up with the breath of his mouth, and
goodness of his cause. And so departing, he met Mr. Prydeaux in the Lobby, and
desired him to acquaint those within, that he was forcibly kept out of the
House by the Soldiers, who beset the passages to keep out what Members they
pleased; Then returning again into the Hall, a secluded Member he there met
pressing him to know what passed in the Lobby: he related the sum of what was
done and said, which diverse pressed about him to hear, and some common
Soldiers among others; who when he had ended his Relation, said, he was an
honest Gentleman, and had spoken nothing but truth and reason. After which
meeting with Colonel Oky in the Hall (who came over to transport him from Jersy
into England, they had some discourse touching his forcible seclusion, and the
great scandal and ill consequences of it; which diverse pressing to hear, Mr. P.
went out of the Hall to avoid Company, and meeting with the Member who drew up
the Letter to the Speaker, perused and signed the fair Copy, and so departed to
Lincolns Inn without any Company.

This being an Exact Narration of the truth, substance of what passed between
Mr. P. the Army Officers, and those now fitting, on the 7th. and 9th. of this
instant May, both in the Lobby, House, and elsewhere, Mr. Prynne being since
necessitated to publish it, to prevent and rectify the various misreports
thereof. He shall now relate, (as a Corollary thereunto) the true and only
reasons then inducing him (after earnest Prayer to God for direction and
protection in this Grand Affair) to press the admission of himself and other
Members into the House, to correct the manifold contradictory censures of what
he then did and spoke.

Some have been staggared and amazed at it, as if he were now turned an
Apostate from his former principles, acting both against his Judgment and
Conscience, to cry up, and make himself a Member of that old Parliament, which
he publicly printed to be dissolved above ten years since, by the Kings death;
Others have censured it for a rash, foolish, and desperate attempt.

A third sort condemn it as a seditious, tumultuous if not treasonable Action,
prejudicial to the public peace and settlement, deserving severe exemplary
punishments.

A fourth Classis doom it, as a scandalous Act, dishonorable, destructive to
our Religion.

A fifth sort cry it up, as a most necessary, heroic, rational, zealous
Action, deserving everlasting honor, praise, thanks from the whole English
Nation, and a necessary incumbent duty as a Member of the old Parliament,
(though legally dissolved) being pretentionally now revived against Law, Truth,
by those very Army Officers, who six years past ipso facto dissolved, and
declared it to be dissolved; yea have held many new Mock-Parliaments of their
own modelling since, all proving abortive, by forcible ruptures as the long
Parliament did.

It is not in Mr. Prynnes power to reconcile or control these contradictory
censures; neither was he ever yet so foolish or vainglorious, as to be any
ways moved with the censures, opinions, or applauses of other men; nor so
ambitious, covetous, as to pursue any private interest of honor, profit,
revenge, etc. under the notion of public Liberty, Law, Reformation as many
have done; nor so Sycophantical as to connive at others destructive
exorbitances, gilded over with specious Titles; this being his constant rule,
to keep a good Conscience in all things both toward God and man, Acts 24.16.
to discharge his public trust, duty toward God and his Native Country, though
with the probable hazard of his life, liberty, estate, friends, and what else
may be precious to other men; to trust God alone with the success, reward of
his endeavors, to let others censure him as they please; to fear no Mortal or
power whatsoever in the discharge of his duty, who can but kill the Body, Mat.
10.23. (nor yet do that but by Gods permission) being utterly unable to touch
the Soul, but to fear him alone who can cast both Soul and Body into Hell.

The only ground, end, motive, inducing Mr. Prynne thus earnestly and timely to
get into the House, was no ways to countenance any unparliamentary Conventicle
or proceedings whatsoever, nor to own those then sitting to be the old true
Commons House of Parliament, whereof he was formerly a Member, as now
constituted, much less to be the Parliament it self then sitting; but to
discharge the trust to which he was once unvoluntarily called without his
privity or solicitation, by an unanimous election, a little before the last
Treaty with the King, having refused many Burgesships, freely tendered to him
with importunity, both before his election at Newport and since, being never
ambitious of any public preserments, which he might have easily obtained, had
he but modestly demanded, or signified his willingness to accept them. After
his election against his will and inclination, he came not into the House till
the Treaty was almost concluded, (and that at the request of diverse eminent
Members) only with a sincere desire to do that cordial service for preservation
of the King, Kingdom, Church, Parliament, Laws, Liberties of England, and
prevention of those manifold Plots of forein-Popish Adversaries, Priests,
Jesuits, Sectaries, seduced Members, Army Officers, and Agitators, utterly to
subvert them, which other Members overmuch or totally neglected, coldly
opposed, or were totally ignorant of: What good service he did in the House
during that little space he continued in it, is fitter for others then himself
to relate. How fully he then discovered to them the true original Plotters,
fomenters of that Goad Old Cause, now so much cried up and revived, how
strenuously he oppugned, how truly he predicted the dangerous consequences of
it, since experimentally verified beyond contradiction, his printed Speech
December. 4. 1648. can attest, and his Memento, whiles he was a prisoner: For
this Speech and good service of his in discovering, oppugning the New
Gunpower-Treason then plotted and ripened to perfection, to blow up the King,
Parliament, Lords, Laws, Liberties, Religion at once, violently prosecuted by
the force, Remonstrance, and disobedient practices of the rebellious Army
Officers and Soldiers, he was on the 6th. of December 1648. forcibly seized on
at the Lobby-Door as he was going to discharge his trust, and carried away
thence by Col. Pride and others.

How unhumanly, unchristianly Mr. Prynne (seized with other Members at the
House door December. 6.) was used by the Army Officers, who lodged him (and them)
in bell on the bare boards all that cold night, almost starved him (and them
with hunger and cold at Whitehall the next day, imprisoned him many weeks in
the Strand, and after seized, kept him (by a new Free State warrant) a strict
close Prisoner in three remote Castles nigh three years, for his Speech in the
House, against their most detestable Treasons, and Jesuitical proceedings
against the King, Parliament, Privileges, and Members of it, is See Mr. Prynnes
Epistle and Appendix to his Speech in parliament, His 2d. part of the Narrative
of the Armies force, 1640. and A new Discovery of Free State Tyrany. 1655.
elsewhere at large related: This being all he gained by being a Member, and
for asserting that true Good Old Cause against the new Imposture now cried up
afresh, to turn our ancient Kingdom into a New Republic, and our Parliament of
King, Lords, and Commons, into a See his brief Memento to the present
unparliamentary Iuncto. 1648.
select, unparliamentary juncto, or forty or fifty Members of the old
dissipated House of Commons, elected, empowered only by the Army, not People, to
act what they prescribe, to extirpate King, Lords, Monarchy, Magistracy,
Ministry, Laws, Liberties, Properties, and reduce them all under Jesuit ^^oe at
first, and our foreign Enemies Vassallage in conclusion. Mr. Pry^^e then being
most clearly convinced thereof, by what he formerly published as a Member in
his Speech and Memento, and since in his Epistle to a New Discovery of
Free State tyranny, his Jus Patronatus, his historical and legal Vindication of
the fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Properties of all English Freemen, A
new Discovery of Romish Emissaries, his Quakers unmasked, and in his
Republicans Good Old Cause truly and fully anatomised; wherein he infallibly
demonstrates, their converting of our late English Monarchy into a new
Commonwealth, or elective Protectorship to be the ancient projected moddles of
Father In his Memorial for Reformation of England. 1590. Watso^s quodlibets p.
92. to 96.310. to 334. Will. Clarks his answer to Father Parsons Libel, p. 75.
Parsons, and other Jesuits, and Tho. Campanella the Italian Friar De
Monarchia Hisp^nica, c. 25, 27.
specially recommended by them to the pursuit of the King of Spain, who
prosecuted it all he could to promote his universal Monarchy, and so much
rejoiced at it, that he was the first foreign King who presently sent an
extraordinary Ambassador to congratulate the accomplishment, applaud the
constitution of, and enter into a League of Friendship with it; whose
flattering panygerick in his Great Catholic Kings name, in praise thereof,
and what an honor it was to them, that he was the first foreign Prince that
owned them for a Common wealth, made the Commons House so intoxicated, that
they gratified him in all his requests, and pursued all his designs, only to
ruin us and the Netherlands, laid down by Campanella, De Monarchia Hispanica,
c. 25, 27. by furnishing him with many thousands of Irish forces, quarrelling
with the Hollanders, maintaining above three years bloody wars with them, with
infinite loss and expense to both Nations, taking the French Kings Fleet,
provisions merely designed for the relief of Dunkirk, whereby he presently
regained it to our prejudice: And on the other hand Romes master piece, and
hidden works of Darkness brought to public light.
Cardinal Richlieu of France, the great Incendiary of Christendom, and
somenter of all our Domestic wars in his life; the French King and Mazarine by
his instructions in writing after his death, vigorously pursued this very
design: His instructions to this purpose (recorded by Historia part 3d.
Venetiis, 1648. p. 175, 176.
Conte de Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato, an excellent Italian Historian) are very
memorable, who relates; That Cardinal Richelieu Anno 1642. (after he had
involved the King, Parliament, and Ireland in a bloody Civil war) being near
his death, delivered these politic instructions for the King his Master to
pursue for carrying on his designs in relation to England with success; That
above all other things he should endeavor to keep the Government of Great
Britain divided and dis-united, by ayding the weaker party, that the other
might not make it self too powerful; By cau^ing the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland to be divided, either by nominating other Kings
See the instrument of Government, and petition and advice, Section 1.
(elective of another family, accomplished by erecting an elective Protector)
or by moulding them into a Commonwealth (as our Republicans have formerly and
now done again) Yet with this caution, That when they are reduced into a
Commonwealth, so to order the matter, That it may not be united into one, but
divided How punctually Cardinal Mazarine prosecuted these instructions ever
since, and accomplished them at last, the Letters taken in the Lord Digbyes
Cabinet, A Collect p. 849, 858, 862, 863, 867, 868.
printed by the Parliaments order, 1646. and O. Cromwels late intimate
correspondency with. Mazarine, discover. And how much the Jesuits and
Catholics in France in November 1648. approved, applauded the turning of our
hereditary Monarchy, which they, irreconcila^ly hated, envyed, as well as the
late King, Appendix to his Speech, p. 118. and relation of the Members
seclusion.
and turning the Old Parliament into a new Republican Representative, and that
all their hopes to effect it were in the Army, to whom they wished all
prosperity therein: you may read in a Letter sent from thence by the Armies
Agent to a sitting Republican Member, soon after published by Mr. Prynne who
got the original. See Mr. Prynne Good Old Cause stated and stunted, p. 3, 4,
5.6, 10,


Mr. Prynne knowing all this, and clearly discovering a fresh combination
between the Sectaries, Republican, Anabaptistical, Jesuitical, levelling party,
to pursue their designs afresh, and accomplish what they formerly attempted in
the short Mock-Parliament of their own election, creation Anno 1653. and what
was then passionately recommended to them by See Mr. P his Gospel plea, Watsons
quodlibers, and the Case of the Common wealth of England rightly stated.
John Can, the Anabaptist in his Voice from the Temple (dedicated to them) as
their Generation work, which God and all his people then expected and required
from them; even to extirpate the Church, and Ministry of England, Advowsons,
Glebes, Tithes; and demolish all Parish Churches as Antichristian; to extirpate
the Law root and branch under pretext of reforming and new-moulding it; to sell
all Corporation and College lands, and set up a popular Anarchy, or tyrannical
Oligarchy among us, under the disguise of the Old Dissolved Parliament, sitting
from 1648. till April 20. 1653. after six years violent ejection of them with
highest scorn and reproach, yet now invited by them to sit again to effect
these Romish designs to our utter Confusion, but secluding all those who were
like to obstruct or defeat them. Upon this consideration Mr. Prynne as a
secluded Member of the old Parliamemt, wherein he detected oppugned all these
Treasonable Designs heretofore, and since its dissolution by the Kings
beheading, held it his bounden duty to prevent, defeat them now, and nip them
in the bud; whereupon so soon as those now sitting entered the House, he assayed
to go into it, with as many old secluded Members as he could, there being 80 of
them in London: For although his judgment be, See his legal plea against
illegal Taxes, his legal Vindication, p. 3, 3, 4. his Brief Register of
Parliamentary writs, and plea for the Lords.
that this Parliament is quite dissolved by the Kings beheading, as he often
declared in print: yet since the Army Officers and those now sitting with
sundry others, pretend it still in being, and under that pretext alone have
acted all their public Tragedies, and Innovations, he conceived himself bound
in Conscience upon their Concessions, to endeavor to prevent these mischiefs,
and do all Public good he might, with better warrant and reason than most
Ministers, Lawyers, Justices, Magistrates, Members of late Parliaments, (as
they style them) have prayed for, complied with, acted in, under those late
Governors, Governments, and mock Parliaments (as he is confident some now
sitting among them in this new Convention believe it dissolved, and yet go in
only to prevent and allay those mischiefs which others violently pursue) which
their own Consciences, and our laws resolve them without scruple to be utterly
illegal; whereas this old Parliament, whereof he was a Member, was most
legallie summoned and convened beyond dispute, and has the color of a legal
Act or Parliament for its continuance, which those since have wanted: of which
Act the greatest part of those now sitting taking advantage, notwithstanding
their new Instruments, Declarations, Petitions, Advises, Addresses, and
Sessions in other new Parliaments since; and it being a great dispute now among
most secluded Members, whether that Parliament was not yet alive though the
King be dead? the majority of their Voices overruling his private Judgment,
as in all other Parliamentary Votes and proceedings, gave a present sufficient
call, warrant to him and others to enter the House to debate it, and act what
and as they did; which will satisfy all those who censure it as unwarrantable
or contradictory to his judgment: especially when they shall hear what he
really intended to propose to the sitting Members when he got into the House,
had they not gone out to prevent it.

1. He intended to inform them of those destructive Jesuitical ends and
designs, forementioned, which they were now purposely called in to accomplish,
carrying along Thomas Campanella, Richilieus Instructions, with other Books,
papers of theirs, and some printed Copies of the Republicans and others Good
Old Cause truly and fully anatamised, now put out and published, to dis-engage
them from its pursuit at the first, before they were engaged therein by any
Votes or Actions, if he could but gain audience or patience to hear them
pressed on their Consciences Viva Voce. But their unparliamentary adjourning on
purpose to prevent it when he was in, and forcibly resecluding him by armed
Gards when once out, he held himself bound in Conscience, to publish that to
them and the the world in print, which he was not permitted liberty to speak,
as he formerlie did (when forcibly imprisoned and kept from the House by the
Army as now, upon the like account) in his Brief Mememto to the present
unparliamentary Juncto, from his Pison-Chamber at the Kings Head (which they
soon after took of) Jan. 1. 1648.

2ly. He intended to propose, That all armed Gards of Soldiers in or near the
Cities of London or Westminster, might by public Proclamation be removed to a
convenient distance thence, according to the 7 E. 1. Rastall Armor, 1. Cooks 4
Instit. p. 14. Mr. Prynnes Brief Register of all Parliamentary writs p. 27,
28.177, 215, 216. Exact Abridgement of the records in the Tower, p. 11, 12, 14,
17, 19, ^^, 27, 36, 38, 195.
ancient Custom, Presidents, and Privileges of Parliament, prohibiting not
only all armed forces, but the very bearing of any Arms or weapons in or near
the place where the Parliament did sit, under severest penalties, lest they
should overawe the Members, or any way interrupt their proceedings: which the
undutifull mutinous Officers, Soldiers, now in and near the City, (though
raised purposely to protect the Parliament and its Members from all force
whatsoever) have frequently done, nay forcibly secluded, imprisoned, ejected
the Members themselves sundry times, yea turned the now sitting Members out of
Doors, and now again on Saturday last, and this very Morning secluded him, and
sundry Members when they came to enter in.

3ly. That all the Lords, all secured, secluded Members of the old Parliament,
not sitting after December. 8. 1648. now about the City, (being double in number
to those now sitting) might presently be called and freely admitted into the
House; And all living Members of the old Commons House elected or sitting at or
before that time, might by the Speakers Letter be desired in all their names,
to meet together in the Commons House forty days after, (the Mr. Prynnes Brief
Register and Survey of Parliamentary writs p 431.
ordinary time limited in most writs of Summons, or Resummons of Parliament)
and nothing acted or voted in the interval as a House of Commons, till they
were all assembled, after their ten years seclusion, dissipation by the Armies
force and war upon them. This sudden, unexpected Clandestine, stealing into
the Commons House, of about 41, or 42. Members alone, without any general
notice given thereof to all the other surviving absent Members, or places which
elected them; sitting presently as an House of Parliament, accompanied with a
present forcible seclusion of all but their own Confederates, being a most
unparliamentary practice, conspiracy, surprise, unworthy Saints, or persons of
Honor, destructive to the very being, Privileges of Parliament, injurious to
the whole Nation, as well as absent and secluded Members; yea contrary to their
own Republican Votes, Principles; See their Votes, Jan. 6. Declaration, 11
Martii 1648. The Agreement of the People and Armies Remonstrance and Petition
Nov. 16. 1648. and Ian. 20. 1649.
That the Supreme Authority of the Nation resides only in the Generality of the
people: That it cannot be transferred from them to any others, in or out of
Parliament, but by their free consents and elections: That their
Representatives in Parliament ought to be equally distributed throughout the
Nation: No Member to be secluded when duly elected; and all things to be
carried only by majority of Voices. Contrary to the principles of Law, Equity,
common Justice, Reason, which resolve, that 1 Jac. chapter 1. Ash-Parliament. 10.
public Acts of Parliament bind all men, because they all are Parties and
Assenters to them by their election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
empowered, entrusted by them, and present when they passed by their common
assent; Which they cannot be, when the far greater number are absent,
secluded, and have no notice of their present sitting: Contrary to common
Right, and that just Maxim inserted into some ancient Cl. 33. E. 1. m. 4. dors.
Parliament Writs of Summons and elections to Sheriffs, quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus approbetur, that which concerns all ought to be approved by all. And
not only so, but this their surreptitious fraudulent sudden sitting and acting
by themselves as a Parliament, if they proceeded would make them far more
criminal and guilty of highest Treason, than King Richard the 2d. of old,
impeached and, dethroned in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. amongst other Articles
for this 1 H 4. Rot. parl. n. 25. Plea for the Lords, p. 434.
That the said King in his last Parliament at Salop, purposing to oppress his
people, subtlely procured and caused to be granted, That the Power of the
Parliament by the consent of all the States of his Realm, should remain with
certain Persons, to determine, after the Parliament dissolved, certain
Petitions delivered in the same Parliament, at that time not dispatched. By
color of which Concession the persons so deputed proceeded to other things,
generally touching that Parliament, and that by the Kings will, In derogationem
status Parliamenti, and in magnum incommodum totius Regni, and pernitiosum
exemplum: In derogation of the State of the Parliament, and to the great
disprofit, (prejudice) of the whole Realm, and permitious example: And that
they might seem to have some kind of color and Authority for this kind of
their proceedings; the King caused the Rolls of the Parliament according to his
Vote, to be changed and deleted, contrary to the effect of the foresaid
Concession: which is likewise mentioned in the printed Act of 1 H. 4. c. 3 and
thus amplyfied; That a certain power was committed by authority of Parliament
to certain persons, to proceed upon certain Articles comprised in the Rolls of
the Parliament thereof made, and by authority aforesaid diverse Statutes,
Judgments, Ordinances, and Stablishments were made, ordained, and given
erroneously and dolefully, in great disherison and final destruction, and
undoing of many honorable Lords and Liege-people of the Realm and their Heirs
forever: whereupon that whole Pariament of 21 R. 2. with all the circumstances
and dependents thereupon, were wholly reversed, revoked, voyded, undone,
repealed, and annulled for ever. If this then were so high a crime and breach
of royal Trust in King R. 2. even by consent and authority of the whole
Parliament and three Estates. subtly to procure the power of the whole
Parliment to remain in the hands of certain Persons which themselves approved
of; who exceeded their Commission and acted generally as a Parliment: And if
this was a grand derogation of the state of the Parliament, a great damage to
the whole Realm, and permitious example for posterity; for which in the very
next Parliament they impeached, deposed him, and nulled all these proceedings
for ever. Then questionless their former sitting, acting in the Commons House
from December 7 1648. till Apr. 20. 1653. and now again, without, yea against
the consents, Votes of the Parliament, 3 Estates, and secluded Members, their
repealing, altering, the very Acts Ordinances of the Lords and Commons
concerning the Treaty with the King, and sundry others; their nulling the Act
for Trienial Parliments, the continuance sitting of the Lords in this
Parliament, their ^eclaring themselves alone to be the Parliament of England,
beheading the King himself, their dis-inheriting the whole House of Lords and
their Heirs for ever of their Parliamentary Session, Judicature, Privileges, as
much as in them lies; and thousands more of their real and personal Estates;
their forcible secluding, securing the greatest part of their Fe^low-Members,
then, and now again by the Armies power, and sitting under their fo^ce (which
by their own Declaration of August 6, and the Armies in pursuit the^eof August
8. the Speakers Letter, July 29. 1648. yea Sir Arthur Hasterigges own Speech,
and others of them, the very two last days they sat in the last Convention,
nulls all they voted or ordered) must needs be a more execrable transcendent
crime by thousands of degreees, a greater derogation to the state of the
Parliament and its Privileges, of more fatal consequence to the whole Kingdom,
and of far more pernicious example, than this Act of his, eternally to be
expleded, declared null, void to all intents in it self, and demeriting the
Highest censures, that the Justice of Parliament can inflict, being a more
superlative Treason and High Misdemeanour than this Kings, or Canterburies,
impeached by the whole House of Commons, and many of them thus act^ng, sitting,
Canterburies Doom, p. 27, 31. Mr. Pyms Speech, 16 F^br. 1640.
That to preserve himself from being questioned for his Traiterous courses, he
has labored to subvert the rights of Parliaments, and the ancient course of
Parliamentary proceedings: this being the last Article of his impeachment, for
which amongst others he lost his head, Which Presidents Mr. Prynne would have
pressed them viva voce seriously to consider, at which they must needs stand
mute and astonished not having one syllable to reply.

4ly. He would have propounded, That when all the Members met together, They
should in the first place debate this point, whether the old Parliament were
not actually dissolved in point of Law, by their beheading the King,
notwithstanding the Statute of 17 Caroli c. 7? which though themselves by their
former and present sitting by pretext thereof, the Army Officers heretofore and
now again deny, and many secluded Members hold still to be in being, yet for
his own opinion he held, and had See his legal Vindication against illegal
Taxes p. 44. to 51. His Plea for the Lords: and Brief Register.
published it to be dissolved notwithstanding this Act, and to be Casus omissus
out of it, which he was ready to maintain against all Opponents, by these
reasons,

1. Because it has been f^equently resolved by Parliaments themselves, the
Reverend Judges, and our Law Books, as 1 H 4 rot. Parl. n. 1, 2, 3. 1 H. 5.
Rot. Parl. n. 16. 4 E. 4. f. 44. Cooks 4. Instit. p. 44. by King Charles own
Declaration, 13 Junii, 3 Caroli, and his Judges and Counsel then, that the
deposition, and death of the King does actually dissolve the Parliament, and
that the new King cannot hold and continue the old Parliament sitting, or
prorogued at his Ancestors death, the Parliament of 22 R. 2. being dissolved by
his resignation of his Crown, and the Parliaments of 14 H. 4. and Mr.
Rushworths Historical Collect. p. 270, 271.
24 Jacobi, by the deaths of these two Kings, and by like reason the last
Parliament of 16 Caroli by his violent death.

2ly. Because the Parliament is no standing Court, sitting at certain seasons
by positive Laws, but summoned, constituted Cooks 4 Instit. c 1. Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts, Be Tit. Parliament. A Brief Register, Survey of
Parliamentary writs p. 422, 423, 424, 432. Mr. Rushworths Historical
collection, p. 423.
by the Kings writs of summons, and royal Prerogative, when and where he
pleases; and adjourned, prorogued, dissolved by his writ alone in point of Law
and practice in all ages at his pleasure; sitting sometimes longer, sometimes
shorter, and sometimes prorogued to another day, place, or countermanded after
summons, upon just occasions, as the Parliament, and Clause Rolls, the Act of
16 Caroli c. 1. and other Statutes resolve. Now all writs of summons being
actually abated by the Kings death which made them, as well as all Commissions,
Patents of all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs whatsoever, and other writs,
informations in the Kings name and behalf, as the Statute of 1 E. 6. c. 7.
Cooks 7 Report f. 29, 30. Crookes 1 Part. p. 1, 2.10.11.97, 98. and other
Lawbooks collected by Asb, Discontinuance de Process 16. and Reattachment 7.
determine. The writs of summons, and likewise of Parliament must needs abate
likewise: And the Lords being made Judges, Cooks 7 Report, Calvin's case, f. 10.
and the Commons 4 E. 4. and 44.
Members of that particular Parliament only by the Kings writ: his death must
determine their Parliamentary Judicature or Authority, sitting during the Kings
pleasure, as well as the Judges, Justices, Sheriffs Patents, and all other
Commissions whatsoever.

3ly. Because every Parliament heretofore, and in the reign of K. Charles, by
the very recitals of the Writs, is called: 1. In the name and by the authority
only of the King regnant (in his natural capacity, accompanied with his
politic) by his Christian name, Carolus Dei gratia Rex, etc. expressed in it,
not generally by the Office King but Carolus Rex. 2ly. It recites it to be
called See Mr. Prynnes Brief Register, Calendar and Survey of Parliamentary
Writs.
De avisamento Consilii nostri: 3ly. It styles it quoddam Parliamentum nostrum^
4ly. That the occasion of calling it, was about certain arduous businesses Nos
et defensionem Regni nostri, (and Jura coronae nostrae, etc. in many ancient
writs) contingentibus: 5ly. That his intention in calling it, is Quia cum
Pralatis, Magnatibus et Proceribus dicti regni nostri, or nostris Colloquium
habere volumus et Tractatum. 6ly It summons them thus; Vobis mandamus, etc.
quod personaliter intersitis Nobiscum, or ad Nos, such a day and place,
Nobiscum et cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, et proceribus praedictis
tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri, super negotiis antedictis. 7ly The
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of ports in the Commons House are
summoned to do and consent to those things which shall happen by Gods favor
to be then ordained De Communi Consilio super Negotiis antedictis (in sundry
Writs styled by the King, Negotia Nostra, Negotiorum nostrorum, etc.) which
clause is thus explained in Claus 36 E. 3. d. 16. cl. 37 ^. 3. d. 22. cl. 38 E.
3. d. 3. cl. 39 E 3. d. 2. cl. 42 E. 3. d. 22. cl. 47 E. 3. d. 29. ad
consentiendum biis quae per Nos, ac dictos Magnates et Proceres ordinari
contigerit favente Domino. From all which particular clauses in the very writs
of summons, it is undeniable, that the Parliament of 16 Caroli, was ipso facts
dissolved by the Kings death: 1. Because this Parliament was summoned
particularly by King Charles in his natural as well as politic capacity, not
in his politic alone, nor yet by or for him, his heirs and successors; who
ceased to be both Charles and a King of this Realm by his death 2ly. The
Counsel by whose advice it was summoned, was his not his heirs and successors
Counsel. 3ly. The Parliament convened, his Parliament alone, not his heirs or
successors, both of them ceasing to be his Counsel or Parliament by his
decease. 4ly. The subject matter for which it was summoned. Diverse urgent and
arduous businesses concerning Us, not our heirs or successors, and the defense
of Our (not their) Realm of England: who was no more Us, and the kingdom no
more his kingdom, so soon as he lost his life. 5ly. The end of summoning this
Parliament, was only this, for the King himself to have a conference and Treaty
with the Prelates and Nobles, and for them to be personally present with Us,
not our heirs or successors, to give Us their Counsel, etc. not our heirs and
successors: All frustrate, made impossible, and absolutely ceasing by his
death: because when once dead, they can neither parlie, conferr, nor treat with
the King himself, nor the King with them, nor be personally present with Him
for that purpose: unless they will averr, that a mere dead headless King can
really confer, treat, parley, consult, advise with his living Prelates, Lords,
Parliament, and they with him, and be Parliamentally present with each other in
the Lords House neither of which they dare admit into it, for fear the King if
living, and Lords too, should afright them out of it, as the Kings ghost, yea
the memorial of it though dead, might justly do. 6ly. The mandatory part being
in the Kings name alone; to summon them to treat with and give their Counsel
unto Us concerning the foresaid businesses relating to Us and the defense of
Our Realm, Our Businesses aforesaid, not our heirs and successors He and his
businesses all ending when he expires, the Parliament must of necessity
determine. 7ly. The Parliament ceasing to be the Common counsel of the King and
his kingdom, and nothing possible to be ordained BY US, (the King, not his
heirs and successors) Prelates, Nobles in Parliament, without his concurrent
Vote, or when he is dead; unless a dead King can give counsel, make Ordinances,
give his royal assent to Bills when deceased. It must inevitably follow, that
all the Authority, causes, grounds, ends for which the Members of this
Parliament were all summoned to treat, consult, and give their advice to the
King himself determining, and becoming impossible to be performed by his death;
the Parliament must of necessity expire and be dissolved, even as the natural
body cease to be and remain a living man when the Head is quite cut off: If
then those now sitting (who cut off the Kings Head, the Head of the Parliament,
and thereby destroyed that temporary body politic) will have their Conventicle
revived by this Act, they must set on his head again, raise him alive out of
his Grave, and bring him back into the House, to impeach, condemn, decapitate
them in this true High Court of Justice for this their beheading him in their
Court of Highest Injustice. Which Mr. Prynne presumes they dare not do, least
his revived Ghost should scare them thence, or justly retaliate their
transcendent Treachery.

4ly. If any man by his will, deed, the King by his Commissions, the Parliament
by a special Act or Order, shall Cooks 1 Instit. p. 181. b. and 5 Rep. f. 9.
Dyer 190, 191 Ash. Authority 22.24. and the Books there cited, 19 H. 7. c 7.
authorize, empower any 3. persons jointly to sell lands, give livery and
seisin, execute any Commission, as Judges, Justices, Commissioners, Auditors,
or Committees of Parliament, if any one of them die; both the survivors jointly
or severally can do nothing, because their authority, trust was joint, not
several, and jointly, nor seperately to be exercised. If there be not 40
Commoners in the House, they cannot sit or act as an House, nor dispatch the
least affair; no more can any Committee of either House, unless their Number be
sufficient to make up a Committee, as the orders and custom of Parliament
appoint: Therefore, the Parliament of England being a Dyer, f. 60.
Corporation, compacted jointly of the King, Lords, and Commons House, and
three estates, The death of the King necessarily dissolves the Parliament,
notwithstanding this Act, which did not alter the Parliaments Old constitution,
but establish it. The Modus tenendi Parl. H. de Knyghton de Event. Angliae l.
5. col. 2680.2681. Grafton p. 349, 350, Mr. Prynnes Plea for the Lords, p. 27,
29. Exact Collection, p. 125.142.360.
Kings personal absence from his Parliament heretofore and of late, was reputed
very prejudicial to it; and his calling away some Lords, Great Officers, and
other Members from it, a high way to its present dissolution, in his life.
Therefore it must much more be dissolved by his death; and the Lords and
Commons forcible seclusion both before and since it by the Army and sitting
Members; they having Plowden, f. 117. Dyer, f. 107. b. Mr. Seldens Titles of
Honor, and Mr. Prynns Plea for the Lords, and House of Peers.
Vocem and locum in quolibet Parliamento Angliae, as our Law Books, Statutes
and their Patents resolve.

5ly. The principal end of calling Parliaments is, to enact new and necessary
Laws, and alter, repeal such as are ill or inconvenient; as the Prologues of
our printed Statutes, our writs of Summons, Law Books, attest, and all accord.
But no new Act of Parliament can be made, nor no former Acts altered, repealed,
but by the Kings royal assent; who has a Negative voice to deny, as well as
Affirmative to assent to them, as well as the Lords and Commons, as all our
Parliaments, Judges, Cooks 4: Instit. p. 25. 51 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 47. 6 R. 2.
rot. Parl. 2. n. 52. 11 H. 4. n. 30.
Law Books, Parliament Records, Treatises of Parliaments, the printed Statutes
in each Kings reign, more particularly, the Statutes of 33 H. 8. c. 21. 1 Jac.
c. 1. in the close resolve; Yea, Exact Collection, p. 163, 164, 250, 316, 317,
318, 312, 793, 794.
both Houses acknowledged it in all contests with the late King, our Kings
Coronation Oaths, and all our ancient Saxon Kings Laws attest it. Therefore
his death must needs dissolve the Parliament, notwithstanding this Act, because
it could make no Act for its dissolution, nor declare, alter, repeal any other
Law, without his royal assent.

There are but 2. Objections made by any sitting or secluded Members against
these Reasons, that his death should not dissolve the Parliament. The 1. is
this, which the Republicans themselves formerly and now insist on, That the
King does never die in judgment of Law, and that there is no Interregnum,
because the Crown immediately descends to his right heir, who by Law is
forthwith King de jure and de facto, before his actual Proclamation or
Coronation; as the Statute of 1 Jacobi chapter 1. Cooks 7 Rep. f. 10, 11. Calvin's
case, and other Books resolve.

To which Mr. Prynne Answers 1. That this argument is but an Axe to chop off
their own heads, and supremacy, as they did the Kings; and the Objectors now
sitting must either renounce their sitting, acting, Knacks, Declarations
against the late King, Kingship, and the House of Lords, or quite disclaim the
Objection: For if the King never dies: Then by their own confession and our
Laws, we are still a Kingdom, not a Republike; yea Charles Steward, as heir to
his beheaded Father, was and is still de Jure and de facto the lawful King of
England, and supreme Lord and Governor of our Church, Kingdom, there being no
Interregnum, ever since his Fathers death; and then what becomes of all their
absurd, illegal Knacks against his Regality, and Kingship it self, (of which
they are forced now to pray in aid to make themselves a Parliament) of their
Mock-Parliament, without King and House of Lords; of their perfidious
treacherous Engagements against both, and Supreme Authority of the Nation which
they have tyrannically usurped? 2ly. Though the King in genere, or rather
Kingship it self, never dies, yet the Cooks ^ Report. Calvin's case, f. 10 11.
King in Individuo may, and does often times die: and if the successive deaths of
all our Kings since we were a kingdom be not a sufficient proof thereof; the
very Objectors and John Bradshawes See the History of Independency, part 2.
Salmatius and Bochartus.
beheading the late King, and putting him to such a shameful public death, as
no Pagan nor Christian lawful King of England ever formerly suffered by
perfidious, perjurious, treacherous Subjects since it was an Island, (against
our Laws and Votes of Parliament in the Highest Court of Injustice created by
them for that end) is a sufficient evidence, that the King of England dies as
well as other men, (as they all must likewise do in Gods due time) unless they
will make the World believe to expiate their Treason, that they did not kill
the King in cutting off his head, but that he is still alive, because some
others (as is reported) did reunite and sow it to his body, when severed from
it by them. But of this enough, since M. P. presumes they will henceforth
rather renounce their Parliaments being, than bottom its present existence upon
this Hab. 1.12.
bloody foundation, and their exploded Kingship.

The 2d. Objection is from the words of the Statute of 17 Caroli, Objection 2.
c. 7. which declares, enacteth, That this present Parliament now assembled
shall not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament: In the Negative:
Ergo, It shall not be dissolved by the Kings death, being no Act of Parliament,
nor any Act of Parliament yet made for its dissolution.

Whereunto Mr. Prynne answers: Answ.
1. That the sole end, scope of this Act was not to provide against the
dissolution of the Parliament by the Kings natural, or violent untimely death,
not then thought of, (he being in perfect health, likely to live many years by
the course of nature, and to survive all the ends for which this Act was made,)
but to raise credit for the Parliament to provide moneys by this Act, to
prevent the untimely dissolution, proroguing, adjourning of this Parliament by
the Kings own regal power: He having prorogued, dissolved all former
Parliaments during his Reign in discontent, by his Regal power (not death)
against the Lords and Commons wills. 2ly. This is entitled, An Act to prevent
Inconveniences which may happen by the untimely adjourning, proroguing, or
dissolving of this present Parliament, and the Prologue, Body of the Act,
provide jointly and severally against all three, to wit, the untimely
proroguing, or adjourning, as well as dissolving of this Parliament. But no
Parliament ever was, is, or possibly can be untimely prorogued, or adjourned,
by the Kings death, but only by his actual Regal will and power: Therefore the
dissolving of it, intended by this Act, must be only an untimely dissolution by
his actual will, Commission, writ, and regal power, alone, by which his former
Parliaments were prorogued, dissolved against the Lords and Commons assents,
not by his death, whether natural or violent, being against his will, and no
part of his Regal Supremacy, but only of his human frailty 3ly The
Inconveniences the Commons feared would ensue by the untimely dissolution of
this Parliament, and endeavored to prevent by this Act, are thus expressed in
the Prologue. Where as great sums of money must of necessity be suddenly
advanced and provided for relief of his Majesty's Army, and people of the
Nothern parts of this Realm, and to prevent the imminent danger this Kingdom
is in, and for supplying of other his Majesty's present and urgent occasions,
which cannot be so timely effected as is requisite, without credit for raising
the said money: which credit cannot be obtained, untiil such Obstacles he first
removed as are occasioned by Fears, Jealousies, Apprehensions, of diverse of his
Majesty's Subjects, that this present Parliament may be adjourned, prorogued,
or dissolved, (1.) before Justice shall be executed upon Delinquents, (2ly.)
public grievances redressed, (3ly.) a firm peace between the two Nations of
England and Scotland concluded, (4ly.) and before sufficient provision be made
for the repayment of the said moneys, so to be raised: all which the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, having duly considered, do therefore humbly
beseech your most excellent Majesty that it may be declared and enacted. And be
it therefore declared and enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the
assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, That this present Parliament now assembled shall not be
dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose,
etc. By which it is undeniable, 1. That the Commons when they petitioned for,
the King when he declared, enacted, and the Lords and Commons when they
assented to this Act, did never think of, or intend to provide against a
dissolution of this Parliament, by the Kings untimely death, nor of a future
dissolving it by an Act of Parliament by his Successors or others after his
decease; but on the contrary, presupposed the continuance of his life, and of
this Parliament thereby, till all the inconveniences they recite were
prevented, and a new Act passed by him and them jointly to dissolve this
Parliament when these Inconveniences were prevented and things effected: Which
is irrefragable, 1. Because they declare in Terminis, The speedy advancing and
providing of moneys, for the relief of his Majesty's Armies, and people of the
Nothern parts (not their subsequent Armies) and the supply of his Majesty's
present and urgent occasions, (not their own) and the Fears, Jealousies, and
App^ehensions of diverse his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, etc. ^o be the only
ground of their humbly beseeching his Majesty for this Act. All which
presuppose his life, being, preservation, and the Commons great care of
complying with him as their Sovereign Lord, without the least thought of his
untimely death since happening, or secluding the King or his Poueritie, out of
this and all future Parliaments by color of this Act, as those now sitting
have done point-blanck against it. 2ly The Fears, Jealousies, and Apprehensions
they had occasioning this Act, were only these, That this Parliament might be
adjourned, p^orogued, dissolved, 1. Before Justice shall be duly executed upon
Delinquents, (then in being and complained of, as Strafford, Canterb^ry, the
Ship-mony Judges and others, not new Delinquents since, not then dreamed of.
(2ly.) Before public Grievances redressed (hose then complained of, not others
arising afterward.) 3ly. Before a firm peace between the two Nations of
England and Scotland concluded, (by reason of the former not subsequent
breaches between them and the King) 4ly. Before sufficient provision to be made
for the repayment of the said moneys to be raised, (not for the Parliaments
subsequent Armies and occasions) but for his Majesty's Army and people in the
North, the preventing the then imminent danger of this Kingdom, (not of our new
Commonwealth, or dangers since arising) and for supply of other his Majesty's
present (not future) and urgent occasions. But none of these four particulars
could be accomplished by the Lords or Commons alone after his Majesty's death,
Nota.
but by the King alone, or by his concurrence with them whiles living: Yea they
were all actually accomplished in his life time, long before his death. The
first, by the Executions of Strafford and Canterbury; the impeachments,
censures of the Shipmony-Judges, and other Delinquents both in Scotland and
I^eland, The 2d. by the Better Acts than ever the Republicans made or intend to
make for the peoples ease and benefit: who only doubled, trebled all their
Taxes, Grievances, instead of removeing them.
Acts abolishing Shipmony, and the taking of tonnage, poundage, and other Taxes
without Act of Parliament: the Acts for the preventing of Inconveniences,
happening by the long intermissions of Parliament: For regulating of the
Privy-Counsel, taking away the Court of Star Chamber, and High Commission,
against diverse Encroachments and oppressions in the Stannary court: For the
certainty of Forests and their meets and bounds: for the better ordering and
regulating the Office of the Clerk of the Market; for reformation of false
Weights and Measures, for preventing vexatious proceedings touching the order
of Knightship, for the abbreviation of Michae^mas Term, and for the free
importation of Gunpowder, and Saltpeter from foreign parts, and making of them
in England. By all these good Acts passed f^eely by the King soon after or
before this Act, he fully redressed all Grievances then complained of, or
intended within this Law. The 3d. by the Act of Confirmation of the Treaty of
pacification between the two kingdoms of England and Scotland. The 4th. by the
several Acts passed for the Relief of his Majesty's army, And the Northern
parts of this kingdom; For the better raising and levying of Mariners and
others for the present guarding of the Sea and necessary defense of the Realm
(not Republike;) For the Subsidies of Tonnage and poundage granted to the King,
for the speedy provision of money for disbanding the Armies, and settling the
peace of the two kingdoms of England and Scotland; For securing such moneys as
are due to the Inhabitants of the Northern Counties, where his Majesty's Army
have been billetted. And for securing by public faith the remainder of the
friendly assistance and relief promised to our Brethren of Scotland; all passed
and published by the King himself, Anno 16 and 17 Caroli 1640. and 1641. at
least 7. years before his beheading: It is most certain, that all these ends of
making this Law, (as the Prologue thereof, and the word THEREFORE in the
Commons prayer, infallibly declare) were fully accomplished by the King in his
life, so long before his untimely death: Therefore none of the^ now remaining to
be performed; and all acted since their accomplishment by those now sitting,
being diametrically contrary to this Act, these ends, and occasions of it; this
Parliament must of necessity be beheaded, expired with the King; and cannot
survive his death. 4ly. The words, That this present Parliament assembled shall
not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that
purpose, nor shall at any time or times during the continuance thereof, (twice
recited in the subsequent clauses) be prorogued, or adjourned, unless it be by
Act of Parliament to be passed for that purpose; can be intended of no other
but that present Parliament, which passed this Act: which consisted of The
Kings Majesty our Sovereign Lord (by whom this and all other Acts passed or to
be passed, was declared and enacted; and this intended Act likewise) not of his
heir or successor after his death; and of the Lords and Commons House then in
being; not any new House of Lords or Commons succeeding after their deaths then
sitting: Therefore when the King was cut off by an untimely death, and thereby
an impossibility accruing to dissolve it by an Act of Parliament within the
words or intent of this Act; it must of necessity be dissolved by his
beheading: Impossibilities making Acts of Parliament to perform them merely
void, as our Law makes Brook, Perkins, Fit^herbert, Ash. Tit. Condition 29.
Impossible conditions; 5ly. This Act and those who made it, must have and had
a retrospect to the Writs whereby it and they were summoned, and the ends,
things therein expressed: But they all determined, and became Impossible after
the Kings beheading; Therefore the Parliament must be destroyed with him: since
cessante causa, Serj. Finch his Maxims of the Law, Cook and others.
cessat effectus, and cessante primativo, cessat derivativum, as all our
Lawyers, Law Books, and natural reason resolve. 6ly. The last Clause of this
Act, That every thing and things whatsoever done or to be done, (to wit, by the
King or any other) for the Adjournment, proroguing, or dissolving of this
present Parliament, contrary to this Act, shall be utterly void and of none
effect, do clearly ex^lain the meaning of this Act to be this, That it extends
only to things done or to be done by the Kings will and power, as to his
Commissions Proclamations, Writs, Warrants, Precepts, to adjourn, prorogue, or
dissolve this Parliament, (as he had done others heretofore) here declared to
be utterly null and void; not to his death wherein he was only passive, being
forcible against his will and the Parliaments too: which death no Parliament
can make null and void, in respect of the Act it self; so as to restore him to
life, though the whole Parliament, and our three Kingdoms may and ought to
null it, in respect of the illegal manner of his Execution, not to be paralel'd
in any Age. 7ly. The Commons themselves in their Exact Col. p. 41.
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom 15 December. 1641. Declared, That the
abrupt dissolution of this Parliament is prevented by another, (this) Bill; by
which it is provided, it shall not be dissolved, adjourned, without the consent
of both Houses: Yea the Lords and Commons in their Exact Col. p. 203.
Declaration of May 19. 1642. declare, That excellent Bill for the continuance
of this Parliament was so necessary, that without it we could not have raised
so great sums of moneys for his Majesty's service, and Common wealth as we have
done; and without which the ruin and destruction of the Kingdom must needs
have followed (as since of the Kingdom, and Parliaments too by pretext
thereof.) And we are resolved the Gracious favor of his Majesty expressed in
that Bill, and the advantage and security which thereby we have from being
dissolved (by him;) shall not encourage us to do any thing which otherwise had
not been fit to have done, Which whether these formerly and now sitting have
performed, let their own Consciences resolve. After which the Lords and Commons
in their humble Petition to his Majesty, Exact Col. p. 260.
Jun. 17. 1642. desire, That your Majesty having passed an Act, That this
Parliament shall not be dissolved but by Act of Parliament, your Majesty would
not do any thing tending thereunto, by commanding away the Lords and great
Officers whose attendance is necessary thereunto. (Therefore the sitting
Members abolishing the whole House of Lords, and their secluding most of the
Commons Members by this Petitions concession must dissolve it, Both Lords and
Commons in their Declaration Exact Col. p. 704.
26th. Maii, 1642. add. We hope the people will never be carried away with a
noise of words against the Parliament, to make any such equitable construction
of the Act for the continuance of this Parliament; as may tend to the
dissolution thereof, (by the Declaration of the King, which they Answer in
this) and their own destruction therein. By all which passages it is apparent,
That this act provided against every thing or things, done or to be done by the
Kings Will or Prerogative, without the Houses consent for the dissolution of
this Parl. not against its dissolution by his death. 8ly. The King (and his
party too,) did thus interpret it more than once in these passages. Exact.
Collect. p. 250.
In his Majesty's own Answer to the Declaration of the Lords and Commons of 19
May, 1642. We expressed a great trust in our Houses of Parliament, when We
divested our Self of the power of dissolving this Parliament, which was a Just,
Necessary, and proper Prerogative: to wit, when done by virtue of his
Prerogative, which this Act devests him of, not by a Natural much less a
Violent death, No part at all of this Prerogative, but highest Act against it,
to its and his dissolution. Exact Collection p. 323.
In his Answer to the Petition and Propositions of both Houses, 2. June 1642.
We were willingly contented to oblige our Self for the present exigent to raise
moneys, and avoid the pressure (no less grievous to us than them) the people
must have suffered by a long continuance of so vast a charge as two great
Armies, and for the greater certainty of having sufficient time to remedy the
Inconveniences, when during so long an absence of Parliaments, as for the
punishment of the Causers and Ministers of them, We yielded up our Right of
dissolving our Parliament, expecting an extraordinary moderation from it in
gratitude, for so unexpected a Grace, and little looking that any Malignant
party should have been encouraged or enabled to have persuaded them. First to
countenance the Injustices and Indignities we have endured, and that by a new
way of satisfaction for what was taken from us, to demand of us at once to
confirm what was so taken, and to give up almost all (and now more than all)
the rest. And in his Answer to their Exact Collect. p. 364.
Petition of 10 June 1642. For that part of the Petition which seemed to accuse
his Majesty of a purpose to dissolve this Parliament (contrary to the Act for
the continuance) by commanding away the Lords and Great Officers whose
attendance is necessary; which his Majesty knows to be a new Calumny, by which
the grand Contrivers of ruin for the State hope to seduce the minds of the
people from their affection to, and jealousies of his Majesty, as if he meant
this way to bring his Parliament, (which may be the case of all Parliaments) to
nothing. It is not possible for his Majesty more to express himself thereunto,
and his resolution for the Freedom, Liberties, and frequency frequency of
Parliaments than he has done. And who now considers how visible it must be to
his Majesty, that it is impossible for him to subsist, without the affections
of his people, and that these affections cannot possibly be preserved or made
use of, but by Parliaments, cannot give the least credit, or have the least
suspicion, that his Majesty would choose any other way to the happiness he
desires to himself and his posterity, but by Parliament.

From all which premises it is apparent, That the King himself and both Houses
of Parliament did never intend by this Act to prevent the dissolution of this
Parliament by the Kings natural death, (the Act of God they could not prevent)
nor yet by his violent beheading (which then they neither intended nor foresaw)
but by his own voluntary Act and Royal prerogative, by which he formerly
adjourned, prorogued, dissolved Parliaments at it his pleasure. 9 ly. It is
resolved in our Law Books, That if an Act of Parliament refer to or confirm a
thing which is not, or a thing which is utterly against Common law, Reason,
Justice, as for a man to be a Judge or Witness in his own case) or a thing
that is mis-recited, or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, there the
Common Law shall control and adjudge such an Act to be merely void, Plowdon f.
398, 399, 400. Cook 8 Reports, f. 118. a. b. Ash. Parliament, 13. Hobards
Reports p. 85.86, 87. But it is repugnant to Reason, Justice, Nature, the
intention of the Writs of Summons, yea a thing impossible, that the King should
treat and confer with his Parliament after his death, or the Parliament not
determine by it. Therefore were it particularly provided for by this Act, it
had been void in Law, (as if this Act of Parliament had declared, That a
marriage between man and wife shall not be dissolved by the death of either of
them, but continue indissolvable by death, against Nature, experience,
Scripture, Rom 7.1, 2, 3.) much more then when not expressed nor intended by
this Act, as the premises evidence.

Xly. Admit the Parliament still continuing by this Act, yet those now sitting
neither are nor can be so much as an House of Commons, much less the Parliament
within that Act, for these unanswerable Reasons,

1. The House of Commons within this Act, were a full and complete House,
consisting of above 500 Members; those now fitting in May 7, and 9. but 42.
viz. Mr Will. Lenthal, Quondam Speaker, Some of them Prisoners in execution,
sent for out of Goal, to make up an House.
Henry Martin, Lord Monson, Mr. Chaloner, Mr. Heningham, Alderman Atkins,
Alderman Penington, Th. Scot, Corn. Holland, Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Sir Henry
Vane, Sir James Harrington, Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Prydeaux, Mr. Lisle, Col. Ludlow,
Mich. Oldsworth, John Jones, Will. Purefoye, Col. White, Henry Nevil, Mr. Say,
Mr. Meston, Mr. Brewster, Col. Bennet, Sergeant Wild, Mr. Goodwin, Mr.
Lechmore, Col. Ingoldesby, Mr. Blagrave, Mr. Gold, Col. Sydenbam, Col. Byngham,
Col. Air, Mr. Smith, Augustine Skinner, Mr. Down, Mr. Dove, John Lenthal,
Rich. Salaway, John Corbet, Col. Walton; there being 300. Members more of the
old Parliament yet living, besides those who are dead. 2ly. Those then sitting
went in openly like a House, upon 40 days general Summons by Writs, setting
without Gards, secluding none of their Fellow Members by force. Those now
sitting stole sodenlie into the House, in a surreptitious manner, without any
notice given to the people of the Nation, or to those for whom they formerly
served, or to the absent Members, or those then in London, or Westminster Hall,
who were not of their combination: setting Gards of Army Officers at the Door,
(who conducted them thither,) and presently secluded Mr. Prynne, and the other
Members who upon the first notice of their sitting came to know upon what
account they sat: taking forcible possession with Soldiers, and strong hand
of the Commons House, and keeping themselves in possession thereof by force
against the secluded Members and majority of the House, contrary to the
Statutes of 5 R. 2. c. 7.15 R. 2. c. 2. 8 H. 6. c. 9. 31 Eliz c. 11. against
forcible entries and deteiners; the Statute of 7 E. 1. the Liberty, Privilege,
Rights, and Usage of Parliaments: A practice utterlie unseeming such
transcendent Saints, Patriots of public Liberty, as they boast themselves, and
that Honor, Justice, Honesty, Synceritie, Gravity, Wisdom, which becomes all
Members of a Parliament, and Reformers of all public Grievances, Frauds, and
indirect practices in others. 3ly. That old House of Commons had a special care
of providing for the Kings Army, his urgent and present occasions: professed
themselves his loyal Subjects, and him to be their King and Sovereign Lord;
humbly besought his most Excellent Majesty, that it might be declared and
enacted by him, that this Parliament might not be dissolved, prorogued, or
adjourned, but by Act of Parliament; acknowledging they could make no such Act
without his Majesty's Royal assent, and that both the King and Lords House were
essential Members of the Parliament within this Act. But those sitting since
1648. till 1653. and now again thus entering the House, by pretext of this Act,
have renounced, abjured, and professedlie engaged against all this, to which
they are direct Antipodes; Therefore no Commons House within this Act. 4ly. The
Commons House within this Act, was that House which was then in being when this
Act passed, duly elected by the people by the Kings Writs, not the
Armie-Officers, and pursued the self-same ends recited in the preamble, for
which this Act was made and assented to by the King and Lords. But this New
House was created, constituted, not by the Kings writs, or peoples election,
but the Armies swords, and conspiracy, 7 years after this Act first passed;
then disowned, and turned out of Doors above 6 years by the Army; and now
re-inducted into it by their armed Votes and force to serve their ends, not to
pursue those mentioned in the Act, accomplished many years since, and now
becoming impossible. Therefore they are not so much as an House of Commons
within this Act, and the Armie-Officers and Soldiers who formerly thrust them
out, and now recall them; may do well to consider that Gospel-Text, Gal. 2.18.
If I build again the thing I destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor, even
against this very Law, as well as the law of God, and other laws of the Land.

XI. If they are not so much as a Commons House of Parliament, much less then
are they the lawful Parliament of England, in any sense within the letter or
meaning of this Act, no more than so many of the old Gunpowder
Popish-Traitors, (had their Treason taken so good effect in blowing up King
James, the Lords whole House, and majoritie of the Commons House there
assembled, as their late new Powder Plot has done) had been the only lawful
Parliament of 3 Iac. they destroyed, in case they had entered then into the
Commons House with the Mace before them, and created, styled themselves alone
the Parliament of England, as a right devolved unto them by Conquest or
Succession; which had they presumed to do, no doubt the whole English Nation 2
Kin. 21.23, 24. c. 14 5.6, 1 1 King. 16.16 to 21.
would have risen up against them as one man, and never have so far dishonored
themselves, their Religion, or Country, as to own and submit to those
Jesuitical Romish-Traitors, only for destroying of their lawful King, Lords
House, and English Parliament it self, as the only true old English Parliament
then re-assembled. The Reasons are unanswerable,

1. Because the whole House of Commons then sitting in its primitive splendour,
fulness, freedom, was by its own quadruple acknowledgement in it, no more
but the Commons House, and one Member of this Parliament, not the Parliament it
self; never owning, owning, but professedlie disclaiming it self to be the
Parliament, or present Parliament within this Act. 2 ly. Because this Act was
made not by the Commons alone without the King or Lords concurrence, but by the
King as their Sovereign Lord, declaring and enacting, and the Lords and
Commons, as jointlie assenting thereunto. 3 ly. Because it is most absurd to
conceive, that the King and Lords by passing this Act, to continue this
Parliament as then constituted, till dissolved by Act of Parliament, did See
Exact Col. p. 131, 148, 317 to 314.
ever intend to seclude themselves quite out of it, or to make the Commons
House alone an absolute independent Parliament, without both or either of them;
though five times specially providing by name for their Parliamentarie
interests; Or that they or the Commons intended to make each of themselves a
distinct Parliament without the other, and so to erect three New Parliaments at
once, by providing against the untimelie proroguing, adjourning, or dissolving
of one; The King and Lords both jointlie and severallie having the self-same
Arguments from this Act to prove each of them a several or joint Parliament
without the Commons, by the Commons own intention in passing this law, as the
Commons have to justify themselves to be a Parliament, now they have secluded
and engaged against them both, and will admit of neither as Members of their
Parliament, when as this very Act preciselie prohibits the King to dissolve,
prorogue, or adjourn the Parliament, or either House thereof; or the Lords to
prorogue or adjourn, much less dissolve the Commons House, or the Commons to
prorogue or adjourn, much less dissolve the Lords House, declaring and
enacting, That at any time or times during the continuance of this Parliament,
the Lords House shall not be adjourned (nor yet the Commons House) but only by
their own respective Orders, and by themselves alone, declaring, enacting
every thing and things whatsoever done, or to be done to the contrary, to be
utterly void and of none effect. 4 ly. Because this Act both in the Title,
prologue and body, prevents only the untimely proroguing, adjourning, and
dissolving of this present Parliament at any time or times during the
continuance of it, but by Act of Parliament or themselves, stiling it 8.
several times, this present Parliament, and giving it no other Title, yea it
preciselie describes it to be, a Parliament only of King, Lords, and Commons,
as it was when this Act was made, and so to continue till its dissolution. But
the Parliament now sitting, was not this present Parliament, being not then
known, heard of, nor imagined ever to start up in After-ages, by any who made
or consented to this Law, it being created only by the Army 7 years after
this Act, and now revived full 18 years after it, without any King or House of
Lords, and protesting, engaging against them both as no Members of it. Neither
can they pursue any one of those ends for which this Parliament was continued.
Therefore they are doubtless beyond dispute, no Parliament at all within the
words or intention thereof, their own Consciences, Reason being Judges,
(whatever they pretend) nor yet by their own Republican principles, a free and
equal Representative of the people.

6 ly. By the Alexand. ab Alexandro, Genesis Dierum, lib. 3. c 2, 10. 2 Samuel 16,
18. c. 19.41, 42, 43.8, 11.6. c. 7. 33 H. 8. c. 27. Exact Collect. p. 146.
Law and Custom of all Nations, Nature, Reason, Justice, Equity, the laws of
England, and of all public or private Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military
Councils or Corporations, the Majority of persons, Members, Voices, Votes, are
always reputed the Parliament, Council, Synod, Corporation, and do, yea ought
of right to bind the lesser part; as well in making Laws, Ordinances, as
Elections, and all else that concerns the public. Yea the General and General
Counsel of the Army Officers in their Petition to those and others now sitting
in Parliament, and draught of an Agreement of the people for a secure and
present peace, framed, prepared, and presented to them, to be established and
subscribed by the people, January 20. 1649. not only subscribed thereto: but
proposed, Page 23. sect. 4. printed by the Armies special order, 1649.
That 150 Members at least be always present in each sitting of the
Representative, at the passing of any Law or doing of any Act whereby the
People are to be bound, saving that the Number of sixty may make the House for
Debate; or Resolutions that are preparatory thereunto. Therefore the 42 Members
secretly skipping into the House, secluding the rest, May 7, and 9 being not
the 10th part of the Members of the old Parl. now surviving, by all Nations
Laws, Consents, can be no Parliament, nor House of Commons within this Act; nor
pass any thing to bind the Majoritie of the Members or people in any kind
whatsoever; what ever any imprudent, illiterate, shameless, namelesse
Scriblers, or themselves (against their own Reasons, Ol. Cromwell, Ireton,
Corn. Holland, and others of them, styled themselves a Mock-Parliament, as John
Lilburn affirms.
Consciences, Judgments, principles, resolutions) pretend to the contrary:
but dare not once affirm in good earnest. It being a received Maxim in all
Ages Grotius de Jure Belli, l. 2. c. 15. sect. 3.16.
Populi minor pars Populum non obligit.

6 ly. It is a rule in our Plowdons Comentaries, f. 10.107, 108, 350, 364. 4 E.
4.4.
Lawbooks, That all Statutes ought to be interpreted according to Reason, and
the true mind, meaning, intention of those that made them: but it is most
certain, That it is against all reason, and the true intents, minds, meaning of
the Makers of this law, to make a Parliament without a King, or House of Lords,
or Majoritie of the Commons-House: Or that all or any of them, when they made
this Act, did ever dream of such a Juncto as this now sitting; Or to seclude
themselves, and resign up their own interests, freedoms, privileges, right of
sitting in Parliament with them, to constitute them the only Parliament of
England, as every line, syllable throughout the Act demonstrates. Therefore
they neither are nor can be a Parliament within it, neither can the Bedlam,
Turkish, Brutish, unreasonable Argument of the longest Sword, or Armie-logick,
nor the petitions, addresses of any Crack-brain'd Sectaries, and vulgar Rabble
of inconsiderable illiterate people, nor the presence of any Lawyers sitting
with, or acting under them as a Parliament, to their own and their Professions
dishonor, make them so in their own, or any Wisemens, or Judicious, honest
Lawyers Judgment whatsoever. And therefore out of Conscience, shame, justice,
prudence, and real Christianity, (have they any left) they must needs
disclaim themselves to be a Parliament, and no longer abuse the Nation, or
others under their disguise. All with Mr. Prynne, if admitted would viva Voce
have pressed home upon them, but being forcibly secluded by their Gards,
because unable to answer or contradict his Law or Reason, he now tenders to
their view, and the Judgment, Resolution of the whole English Nation, to whom
he appeals, with this public Protestation.

That if they will freely call in all the surviving Members of the Lords and
Commons House, sitting till December 1648. without secluding any by force, or
new unparliamentarie Impositions or seclusive Engagements, which they have no
power to impose: If they upon a free and full debate shall resolve, the old
parliament to be still in being, and not actually dissolved by the Kings
beheading, notwithstanding his premised Reasons to the contrary; He will then
submit his private Judgment to their Majority of Voices in this, as well as in
all other Parliamentary debates, and contribute his best assistance and advice
as a Fellow-Member, to heal the manifold breaches, prevent the approaching
ruins of our endangered Church, Realms, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Peace,
and establish them upon better foundations than those now sitting (to promote
their own and the Armies interests rather than the peoples or Nations) are ever
likely to lay. Who if they can prove themselves a true and lawful English
Parliament within this Act, without either King or House of Lords, or this
their clandestine, forcible entry into and seclusion of their Fellow Members
out of the House, and Actings in it to be lawful, equitable, righteous,
honorable, parliamentarie, Christian, and such as well becomes either Saints,
Members, or true good Englishmen, by any Records, Parliament Rolls, Acts,
Presidents of like kind in former Ages, Law Books, Customs, Common or
Civil-law, Scripture, Divinity, Reason, Ethics, Policks (except Machiavils,
and the sole Argument of the longest Sword, the most brutish, unjust,
unchristian, Turkish of all others) Mr. Prynne will then publicly declare
them to be that in truth, which as yet he neither can nor dares to acknowledge
them to be so much as in appellation, either as a Member of the Old Parliament,
a Covenanter, a Protester, a Lawyer, a Scholar, a Man, an Englishman or a
Christian. And hopes, that upon the perusal hereof they will as much disown
themselves to be the Parliament within this Act, or any lawful Parliament of
England even in their Judgments, consciences, much more in actings, for the
premised Reasons, as he or any other secluded Members do; not out of any
spirit of contradiction, but Conscience, and common duty to themselves, and
their native Country.

That which principally elevated, yea inflamed Mr. Prynnes zeal, both now and
heretofore, with all his might to oppose all late public Innovations, changes
of our ancient Government, Parliaments, Laws, was this sad and serious
consideration, which he shall with all earnest importunity entreat, advise all
Army Officers, Soldiers, sitting or secluded Members of the Lords or Commons
House, with all well-affected persons to the safety, settlement of our
Religion, Church, State, throughout our three Nations, most seriously to lay
to heart, and engrave upon their Spirits, not to read it as they do News-broks,
(only to talk of them for a day or two) but as they read the evidences of their
Inheritances, whereby they hold all their earthly (yea heavenly) possessions,
that they may remember, act according to it all their lives.

That William Watson (a secular Priest of Rome) in his Dialogue between a
Secular Priest and a Lay Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, 1601. in his Watsons
Quodlibets, P. 144, 332.
Quodlibets, printed 1602. and William Clerk a Secular Priest, in his Answer to
Father Parsons Libel, 1604. p. 75. etc. (then best acquainted with the Jesuits
designs against England of all others) did in precise terms publish to the
English Nation, in these their printed Books, a That Father Parsons the English
Jesuit, (the most active professed enemy to our English Kingship, Kings
Realm, Church, Religion) and his Consederate Iesuitical Society, did so long
since) give out and prophesied, That they have it by Revelation, and special
command from God, that their order and Society was miraculously instituted for
this end, to work a dismal change amongst us, wherein all Laws, Customs, and
Orders must be altered, and all things turned upside down: and that they being
the only men who have the name, Title, and authority of Jesus, by them it is,
that this marvelous change and alteration shall be wrought, in such sort as
from the beginning of the world was the like never heard of before to this
present Quodlib^ts, p. 322, 323, 333, 334 3^^, 209.305, 30^, 306, 307, 309.
That this Jesuit Father Parsons in his Book Of the Reformation of all the
States of England, as he Quodlib^ts, p. 322, 323, 333, 334 3^^, 209.305, 30^,
306, 307, 309.
prescribes a Reformation of the Prince, Court, Counselors, Noblemen, Bishops,
Prelates, Pastors, Universities, Lawyers, and Laws, in all which he will have
strange Metamorphoses, so he will have the Court of Parliament it self brought
to better order, to effect all these dismal changes. That the way whereby he
and they intended to bring about all these changes was, to bring all England
into an uprore; for common Soldiers to examine their Sovereigns what Titles
they hold by, and by infusing this their Jesuitical principle into the
Soldiers and people, That every Pecope or Tartarian multitude, getting once
the title and style of a public State, or Helvetian Common wealth, may alter,
change, Nota.
innovate the Course, Inheritance, and Succession of the Crown and Lands under
them* to make the Island a Iaponian Island of Jesuits, and infeoff themselves
by hook or crook in the whole imperial dominion of Great Britain, putting all
the whole Blood Royal of England to the Formidon, as but Heirs general in one
Predicament. For their better accomplishment whereof this William Watson
subjoyns his own opinion in these words Quodlibets, p. 27, 28, 169.
I verily think that all the Puritans and Anabaptists will join with the
Jesuits, (to effect the^e changes) at length, how far soever they seem to be,
and yet are, in external profession of Religion: there being at least half an
hundred principles and odd Tricks concerning Government, Authority, Tyranny,
Popularity, Conspiracy, etc. wherein they jump as just together as if both were
made of one mould; But when they shall thus join together, he predicts, That
the Jesuits having more singular fine wits amongst them, and many learned men
on their side, whereas the Puritans and Anabaptists have none but grossum
Caputs; the Jesuits many Gentiles, Nobles, and some Princes to side with
them; the Puritans but few of the first, rare, to have any of the second, and
none of the last on their side: By consequence, if matters come to hammering
between the Jesuits and Puritans, the latter are sure to be ridden like Fools,
and come to wrack. He superaddes to this, Quodlibet, 9. p. 285, 430 332.
That Father Parsons and his Company have laid a plot, as most consonant and
fitting for their other Designments, That the Common law of the Realm of
England must be (forsooth) utterly abolished, or else bear no greater sway in
the Realm than the Civil law does. And the chief Reason is, Nota.
for that the State of the Crown and Kingdom by the Common laws is so strongly
settled, as whilst they continue, the Jesuits see not how they can work their
wills. Secondly, the said good Father has set down a Course; how every man may
shake off all Authority at their pleasures, as if he would become a new
Anabaptist or John of Leydon, to draw all the World into a Mutiny, Rebellion,
and Combustion. And the Stratagem is, how the common People (and Soldiers)
must be inveigled and seduced, to conceit to themselves such a Liberty or
Prerogative, as that it may be lawful for them, when they think fit, to place
and displace Kings and Princes, as men do their Tenants at will, Hirelings, or
ordinary Servants. Which Anabaptistical and abominable Doctrine, proceeding
from a turbulent Tribe of traiterous Puritans and other Heretics, this
treacherous Jesuit would now foist into the Chatholick Church, as a ground of
his corrupt Divinity. Mr. Prynne having some year since diligently observed
all these passages, with sundry others of this nature, in those Secular
Priest-books, and comparing them with Campanella de Monarchia Hyspanica, c.
25.27. and Cardinal Here p. 19.
Richlieues Instructions forecited; having likewise read in the Jesuits own
printed Books, Imaginu^ Antwerp, an. 1940. Speculum Jesuiticum, p. 210.
That they had no less than 931 Colleges and Seminaries of Jesuits erected in
several parts of the World, within the space of 120 years, and no fewer than 15
Colleges and Seminaries in Provincia Anglicana, in the English Province in the
year 1640. wherein they had 267. See his Epistle before his Historical and
legal Vindication, etc. An. 1655.
Socii Societatis, Fellows of their own Society, besides Novices, and 4
Colleges more of English Jesuits beyond the Seas, and no less than eight
Colleges of Irish, and several Residenciaries of Scottish Jesuits in Ireland,
Scotland, and other places: And being assured by the public Speeches of Oliver
Cromwell himself, first to an Assembly of Divines and others at Whitehall
1653. and after to his new modelled Parliament at Westminster, September 4.
1654. published in print, p. 16, 17. That he knew very well that Emissaries of
the Jesuits never came over in such swarms as they have done since our late
wars and changes were on foot, and that diverse Gentlemen can bear Witness with
him, That they have a Consistory and Counsel that rules all the Affairs of the
things of England; and had fixed in England in the Circuit of most Cathedrals,
(of which he was able to produce the particular Instrument) an Episcopal power,
with Archdeacons, and other persons to pervert and seduce the people. And being
most certainly informed, That the Romes Master piece, Hidden works of
Darkness, etc. A Collection of Ordinances, p. 245.
Arch-Jesuite Sir Toby Matthew, though banished by both Houses, Sir A Collect.
of Ordinances. p. 245.
Kenelme Digby, a Jesuited papist, (whose Father had a chief hand in the old
Gunpowder Treason, and was himself particularly employed to Rome by the Queen
to procure men and moneys from the Pope against the Parliament, where he
expected to receive a Cardinals Cap,) A Collect. p. 151, 852, 858, Vid. Wekye
of Durb A Collect p. 906.
Sir John Winter a person excepted from pardon, Mr, Walter Mountague (two
notorious Jesuited Papists, who Romes Masterpiece
conspired with the Popes Nuncio and College of Jesuits in Longacre to destroy
the King, and alter the Government of the Kingdom if he refused to turn Roman
Catholic, and repeal all Laws against Romish Priests, Jesuits, Papists, and
for that very end raised the first Scottish wars, and (which is most observable)
that Orelly the Popes own Nuncio in Ireland, who promoted the late horrid Irish
Rebellion and massacre of the Protestants, sat President in the General
Counsel of the Popish Rebels there for several years, A Collect. p. 267.

The History of Independency part 2.


to carry on that Rebellion; came all over into England, walked openly in the
Streets and Westminster Hall, when the King was brought to his Trial, and
executed by their and other Jesuits instigation, and our Old Kingdom
metamorphosed into a new Commonwealth; That The History of Independency p. 2.
Owen To Oneal, and all the Irish Rebels under him, by Orellies persuasion,
ent^ed into an offensive and defensive League with the New-Republicans against
Marquess Ormond, the Lord Inchequin, and Protestant party in Ireland, who
declared for Monarchy, and the Kings Title, against their Republic. And being
withal assured by sundry persons of credit, That there were many Jesuits
under the habit of See Mr. Prynnes Speech, Memento, and Epistle to his
Historical and legal Vindication.

Ludovicus Lucius, Hist. Iesuitica, p. 144, 156, 170.


Soldiers, listed in the Army, and others of them under the disguise of
Physicians, Apothecaries, Travelers, Captains, Merchants, Factors, Tradesmen,
Anabaptists, Ranters, Seekers, Quakers, and other Sectaries, dispersed
throughout all places, to carry on and accomplish those dismal changes, so long
since predicted, projected by Father Parsons and the Jesuits. Yea, being
further assured, by an eminent Divine and others more than once, from the mouth
of a Noble English Lord, returning from Rome about 4 years since, That the
Provincial of the English Jesuits, when he went to see their College in Rome,
assured him, they had then above fifteen hundred of their Society of Jesuits
in England, able to work in several Professions and Trades, which they had
there taken upon them, the better to support, and secure themselves from being
discovered, and infuse their Principles into the vulgar People. That the Sea
the false Jew, and his examination, printed 1653.
Great Anabaptist, styled, The Administrator of Hexam near Newcastle, in the
North, since removed to Colchester, was lately a Papist (if not) a Priest or
Jesuit; that Ramsey the Scottish Jesuit was purposely sent over into England
by the Pope and Jesuits An. 1653. under the notion of a Jew, to infuse new
Notions into the Anabaptists and side with them, who thereupon addressed himself
to Paul Hobson the Anabaptist, a Grand Army-preacher, and this Administrators
Congregation, where he made a public profession, That he was a Jew by birth,
but was now thoroughly converted to the Christian Religion by their instruction,
with a public Confession of his Faith, which they printed, whereupon he was
publicly dipped by this Administrator at Hexam, and received as a Member into
their Anabaptistical Church, who much gloried in it, till within few weeks
after, he was by the Mayor and Ministers of Newcastle clearly discovered, to be
a gross Impostor, yea a Scottish Jesuit, and sent up by them to London; where
after some restraint he was enlarged without any punishment, and not long
since, twice boldly entered into the University Schools at Cambridge, desiring
conference with Mr. Smith the Hebrew Lecturer there, with whom he discoursed in
Hebrew; professing himself, to be Soul and Body for the Catholic Church of
Rome: That See his Epistle before his printed Book. 1652.
Eleazer Ben-Isaiah, and his Brother Joseph, 2. Grand Jesuitical Impostors, at
the self-same time under the Notion of converted Jews, were dipped by the
Anabaptists; maintaining Dipping, not Sprinkling to be the only Baptism of
Jesus Christ, and the Anabaptists to be the only strong and glorious
Christians, in their printed Book, dedicated unto our new Republican Parliament
and Counsel of State, 1653 Which Mr. Pr. (soon after his enlargement from
Pendennys Catile) meeting with, discovered them to be gross Impostors, one of
them a Trooper in P. Ruports Army; who after a Collection made for him (as a
Converted Jew) at Dursty in Glostershire, by Mr. Woodward on the Lords day,
drank five jugges of Bear, with sundry pipes or Tobacco, whereby to digest his
Lords day Supper, and disgorge his Sermons: then locking his Chamber Door in
the Inn, he ran to the Maid he had sent to warm his Bed, and attempted to
ravish her; whereupon she crying out, and the Boy of the House (being about 11
a clock at night) endeavoring to raise the Neighbors, he thereupon fled from
thence, (since which Mr. Prynne heard no more tidings of him.) And having since
that most clearly discovered to the whole Nation (in his Books, entitled, The
Quakers Unmasked, and New Discovery of Romish Emissaries, printed. 1655. and
1656.) That the Franciscan Freers and Jesuits were the first Erectors of our
new Sect of Quakers, (Ignatius Loyola the Jesuits Founder, being first a
Soldier, then a Quakers next a Speaker, last of all a professed Jesuit; as his
Disciples now are, first Jesuits, then Quakers, Speakers, Soldiers before or
after;) That Maurice Conry an Irish Franciscan, late Provincial of the English
Franciscan Friars, (having 15 extraordinary faculties granted him to exercise
here in England; as to absolve all Heretics in England, of what Nation soever;
to admit men into his Order; To dispense with Oaths, with saying Canonical
Hours, the Ceremonies of the Mass, for keeping Heritical Books, and other
particulars which might discover any of them to be Freers, or Papists: to
authorize, print what Books he allowed; concealing both the Name of the Author,
Printer, place, Non obstante Consilio Tridentino:) came over into England,
under the disguise of a Spanish Captain, having sundry Pasports from the King
of Spains Officers in the Low Countries, to raise men for his service in
England and Ireland, where he continued during the Regency of our Republicans;
After which in the year 1653. he procured a pass and protection to all Officers
by Sea and Land under Ol. Cromwels own hand and Seal, to pass and repass about
his occasions to and from Ireland; all which were taken about him in Bristol,
20 November 1655. and the very Originals under Seal brought to Mr. Prynne; who
published some of them in print; yet after near two years imprisonment at
Bristol, upon a Habeas Corpus brought by Conry, he was turned over Prisoner to
Newgate, to be tried as a Popish Priest, and let go thence (by direction as was
conceived) before the Sessions, and never enquired after since. Mr. Prynne
discovering all this and much more, and being most fully assured, that all the
Rebellions in the Army since 1646. against the King, Parliament, Members, and
all the late Changes, Revolutions of our Government ever since, proceeded
originally from the Jesuits, and Romish Agents powerful influences upon the
seduced Army Officers, Soldiers, Sectaries, and Republican Members. And long
since taking special notice, that during the Armies and Republicans proceedings
against the King, and in hammering out their new Commonwealth; all the most
eminent, zealous, religious Members of the Commons House, most opposite to
Jesuits, Papists, Popery, were totally secluded, secured by the Army, and
their Votes, Protestations, Advices, with the Addresses, Disswasions of all the
Godly Ministers of London and other parts, yea ( See his Justice o^ the Armies
Remonstrance. 1649.
William Sedgwicks, their own Chaplains,) totally rejected with highest
contempt; and the Counsels of the most desperate Jesuits, and popish Agents
(flocking to London from all foreign parts, and walking freely in the Streets
whiles the Members were under strictest restraints) vigorously pursued: So all
their subsequent Actions demonstrated to him and all considerate Protestants,
whose Creature their New Republic originally was, and for whose service it was
created, as these memorable particulars evidence.

1. They did quite set aside all those 5. strict excellent Bills against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Popish Recusants, and the exercise of any their
Romish Superstitions in any place within our Realms, which the secluded
Members, and Army Officers too at first, eagerly pursued; and the King in the
Treaty of the Isle of VVight assented to at the first without any scruple: For
which the Jesuits in France, at See the Prositions to the King and Mr. Prynnes
Speech, p. 57, 58. His Discovery of Freestate tyranny p. 18.
general Meeting there, presently resolved to bring him to Justice, and take
off his Head by the power of their Friends in the Army; as the King himself was
certified by an express from thence, and wished to provide against it, but two
days before his removal by the Army from the Isle of VVight, in order to his
execution.

2ly. They See their Votes in Feb. 1648. And Act for taking the Engagement,
Sep. 6. 1649.
totally set aside and repealed by express Votes and printed Knacks, the very
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, as unlawful Oaths, which themselves took
and ought to take before they sat or could sit as Members in the Commons
House; by the Statutes of 5 El. c. 2. and 7 Iac. c. 6. which Oaths were
specially made (by the great wisdom, care and piety of our Protestant
Parliaments, purposely to detect the persons, and prevent the plots,
conspiracies, Assasinations, Treasons, Usurpations, and new Gunpowder plots of
the Romish Jesuits, popish Priests, Papists, and their Instruments, against
the Lives, Crowns, Prerogatives of our Protestant Kings, Princes, their Royal
posterity, Realms, Parliaments, our protestant Church and Religion, as the
Statutes of 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4. 7 Iac. c. 6. and other
Acts, with King James his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, and sundry
learned Treatises in defense of these Oaths, declare at large: Which Oaths were
7 Iac. c. 6. To. Bellar. Responsio ad Apol. pro Iuramento Fidelitatis.
refused, opposed only by the most Iesuited and desperate Papists, at home and
abroad: but approved by the moderatest and loyallest Priests and See the Lord
William Hewards and Prestons books in defense of the Oath. Mr. Rushworths
Historical Collections, p. 347.
Lay-Papists who writ in justification of them; and repealed to their greatest
joy and advantage, by our Jesuitized zealous Republicans.

3ly. They discharged, absolved themselves, and all other Members, Subjects,
Officers, who had taken these Oaths (as most had frequently done) from the
future Observation of them, and of their Solemn Protestation, Vow, League,
National Covenant, made in pursuance of them; contrary to this express Clause
in the Oath of Allegiance, 3 Iac. c. 4.
I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, See the 2d. part of the History
of Independancy.
That neither the Pope, nor any Person whatsoever, has Power to absolve me of
this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority
to be lawfully administered to me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations
to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge
and swear, according to the express words by me spoken, and plain and common
sense of the said words, without any equivocation or mental reservation, And I
do make this recognition and acknowledgement, Heartily, Willingly, and Truly,
upon the Faith of a Christian. Yet these faithless Republicans, who took this
Oath as Members, (and several times else upon other occasions) thus
atheistically, like so many absolute Popes, against all See Grorius De Iure
Belli, l. 2. c. 13. Dr. Sanderson of Oaths.
Laws of Nations, Nature, absolved themselves and all others from it, and set
it, with the Oath of Supremacy, Covenant, Protestation, quite aside like old
Almanacks out of date.

4ly. Not content herewith, they See their Knack, Sept. 6. 1649.
imposed a new Engagement, diametrically contrary to these Oaths, the
Protestation, Vow, Solemn League and Covenant, which every one must subscribe
with his hand, To be true and faithful to their New Commonwealth as
established by them, without a King or House of Lords, putting all English
Freemen whatsoever into a New-praemunire, upon a bare suggestion only before
proof or conviction, and disabling them to sue in any Court of their Republic,
or to receive or enjoy any degree, office, augmentation, or preferment
whatsoever Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, or sit as Members
then (and now again) unless they would publicly subscribe it: Which Engagement
thousands of our Godly protestant Ministers, Gentry, Freemen refusing to
subscribe, were thereupon barred of their Actions, Executions, Judgments to
recover their just Debts, Rights, Inheritances, Goods, Offices; denied their
degrees of Learning, ejected out of their Benefices, Headships, Fellowships,
Vice-Chancelorships, Augmentations, Offices, Freeholds, Callings, against all
rules of Law, Conscience, Justice, Equity, Religion, the Fundamental Laws and
Liberties of the Land, their Native Birthrights, after all their Contests,
Wats, Contributions, Prayers, Fasts, endeavors for their defense: And all by
these Free-State-Men. A Tyranny, Treachery, Perjury, Apostasy, transcending any
since the Creation, yet most eagerly pursued by them all their Reign, to the
utter ruin of many conscientious, honest Protestants, and great rejoicing of
all Jesuits and Popish Enemies both at home and abroad.

5ly. The very first Act of Justice they did, by the first Commission of the
peace they passed under their New Republican Great Seal for Middlesex, at the
first Sessions held under them at Hix-hall, Febr. 1628. was the enlarging of a
dangerous Jesuits, and another old seducing Papist, formerly imprisoned in the
New prison: the only Acts done in this first Session, as th^se present then
informed Mr. Prynne with much regret: Which was seconded with the subsequent
enlargement of other Jesuits, Priests, Papists, elsewhere imprisoned: whereas
on the contrary they shut up Sir William Waller, Sir Will. Jews, Sir John
Clotworthy, Major General Brown, Comissary Coply, Mr. Prynne, Mr. Clement
Walker close prisoners in sundry remote Castles diverse years together, without
any cause expressed, and Mr. Gewen with other Members, several Months, and
sundry Godly Ministers, Protestants of all sorts throughout the Land, as well
Paliamenteers, as former Cavaliers; yea beheaded Mr. Love, an eminent
Protestant Minister, and other Protestants, but not one Papist in their illegal
High-Courts of Justice, erected by them, against all our Laws, whiles these
Romish Locusts were thus enlarged, unprosecuted, and had free liberty to wander
up and down our three Nations, and act what they pleased to work our Kingdoms,
Churches, and Religions ruin.

6ly. The first who publicly owned them for a Commonwealth, congratulated
this their glorious change, achievement, and entered into a League with them,
was the most Catholic K. of Spain, the Speculum Jesuit. p. 40.217, 218.
Ludovicus Lucius, Hist. Jesuit. l. 3 c. 2 p. 237, 243, 288.300, 329.
Popes, Jesuits, chief Patron and Propagator of their Catholic Faith and
designs: whose interests they prosecuted during all their Republican domination.

7ly. They entted into a bloody invasive war against their Brethren of
Scotland only for owning their rightful Sovereign King CHARLES, after his
Fathers beheading, according to their Laws, Oaths, Duties, and Solemn League
and Covenant; invaded their Country without any provocaion, slew many thousands
of them with fury and cruelty in the Field; starved, destroyed hundreds of
them taken prisoners by them, and sold others of them into foreign plantations
for Slaves; imprisoned, sequestered, banished most of their zealous Godly
Protestant Ministers, Nobles, Gentry; took all their Cities, Castles, Forts,
Ammunition, Arms, conquered, inthralled their whole Kingdom, put them under
intolerable Taxes, Tributes, and Iron-yokes of armed Governors, Garrisons
still continued amongst them to Near two hundred thousand pounds a year more
than all the Rovenues and Taxes amount to, such good husbands are we
our cost. destroyed their presbyterial and civil Government; and for an
everlasting Monument of this their barbarous unbrotherly kindness, and
gratitude toward them for their former assistances, not only kept Solemn
public Thanksgiving-Dayes throughout their Republicke for their Slaughters of
and Victories over them, but hanged up all their Ensigns in Westminster Hall,
and transported all their Records close prisoners to the Tower of London, where
they yet continue.

8ly. They instigated the Dutch to set aside the Prince of Orange his Family,
and put them out of the superior Commands, places of Trust, they formerly
merited and enjoyed, out of malice to the beheaded Kings Progeny; mutined the
States against each other, and then entted into a most costly, bloody,
dangerous, unchristian War with those our old Protestant Friends and Allies,
continuing all their Regency, to the loss of many thousands of gallant
Protestants lives, the ruin of sundry Familyes, the great weakening,
impoverishing of both Nations, the scandal, detriment of the Protestant
Religion, the griefs of all foreign Protestant Churches. the great joy and
advantage of both our professed Popish Adversaries, and King of Spain
especially; who long since designed both our ruins, by these very practices,
prescribed to him by campanella in direct words, as those who please may read
at large, in his Book De Monarchia Hispanica, c. 25. and 27.

9ly. They freely permitted (if not encouraged) all their Republican
Government, Diurnallists in their News-Books, See the Diurnals and Almanacks
from 1648. to 1653.
and those scurrilous, gross Impostors, Lilly, Culpepper, and other
Prognosticators in their Almanacks, besides sundry other Scriblers insufferably
to revile and rail against our Oxthodox, Godly, Protestant Ministers,
especially Presbyterians, to prophecy their downfull extirpation, execution,
banishment, the utter ruin of them, their Tithes, Glebes, Presbytery, to
incense both Soldiers and people to disown their Ministry, detain their
Tithes, revile, abuse their persons, as being worse than any Priests, Jesuits,
and greater Enemies, Traitors to their Republic than they, (who readily
complied with it as a Child of their own begetting.)

Xly. They permitted many thousands of Popish Primers and other Books to be
freely imported, and above thirty thousand Popish and Atheistical pamphlets of
all sor^s, against our Church, Religion, Ministers, to be printed and vended in
England without control, as the London-Stationers (moved out of Conscience)
declared and published to them in their Beacon fired 1652. and Sciatilla, which
Book was presently answered by the Beacon quenched, subscribed by Colonel Pride
(the new Faux) and other Army Officers, (though writ by a Jesuit as Mr. Prynne
was credibly informed) and presented to those then sitting at Westminster,
erecting them against the Stationers and their Beacon fired, as a New-
Gunpowder-plot, to blow up the Army, Parliament, and New Common wealth, though
a true, honest, harmless, pious, timely Discovery of the Papists and Jesuits
designs to blow up our Religion, Church, Ministry, Amongst other popish Books
then printed, See Mr. Prynnes discovery of Free state Tyranny, p. 19, 20.
Mr. Prynne met with one as far as Pendennis Castle in Folio, inittuled, The
Holy Court, written by Edmund Causin a Jesuit, translated into English by
Jesuits, dedicated to our Queen Mary, and the Duchess of Buckingham, printed
in London by William Bentley, 1650. and sold by John Williams in Paul's
Churchyard, as the Title page attests, having the Jesuits Badge, and S. J.
(Societatis Jesu) in Capitals printed in its front. In which Folio Book
(consisting of diverse Tomes) Tom. 1. p. 30 to 38.63, 64, 68, 74, 75. Tom. 2. p.
168. Tom. 3.425 to 430.461, 462. Tom. 5.173, 174.304 to 319. and other pages,
The Popes Supremacy, prayer to Saints and Angels, Purgatory, Mass,
Transubstantiation, and all other points of grossest popery were not only
maintaine^, assered* but our very Protestant Religion branded for Heresy, our
late Queen Elizabeth, our Ministers and all other Professors of it reviled,
censured for damnable Heretics, as Mr. Prynne then observed.

11ly. Themselves in diverse of their printed Declarations, Knacks, and their
Instruments in sundry Books, (as John Goodwin, Markham, Needham, Melton, and
others,) justified, maintained, the very highest, worst, treasonablest,
execrablest, of all Popish and See Prynnes Epistle before his Legal and
Historical Collections, etc. 1655.
Jesuitical, Unchristian tenants, practices, Treasons, as the murdering of
Christian Protestant Kings, (under the notion of Tyrants) the blowing up of
Parliaments, the subverting of Kingdoms, the altering of all settled Laws,
Governments, the forcible usurpation of others Crowns, Honors, Officers,
Estates, without Right or Title, by force, murder, treachery, the breach of,
dispensation with, absolution from all sacred Oaths, Leagues, Covenants,
Promises, Contracts, rebellion, against all lawful Superiors, and the open
Violation of the 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10. moral Commands of God himself, under the
pretenses of public Justice, Necessity, Self-preservation, Reformation,
Religion, public good, safety, advancement of the Gospel and Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, repayed with their own ejection.

See the 2d. part of tbe History of Independancy.
12ly They closed in an offensive and defensive League with Owen To Oneal, and
the popish Irish bloody Rebels, against Marquess Ormond, Inchequin, and the
Protestant party there who had been the Parliaments chief Generals and
Officers, against the Rebels; in opposition to Monarchy; and when (to color
the odium of it) Col Monk was questioned in the House for making this League
with them, as done without their privity; and one of them moved, That he might
be committed for it to the Tower; that famous Saint Henry Martin, stood up and
reto^ted, That he desired the Tower might be rather committed unto him for t^is
good service: What high places of trust by Sea and Land he has been advanced
to since for this service, is very well known; whereas Marquess O^mond, the
Lord Inchequin, and other Protestants in Ireland, who faithfully served the
Parliament against the Irish Rebels, and bare the brunt of the first wars
against them, were yet the very first persons excepted in their printed
Catalogues, and News-Books, from all manner of pardon or composition either for
their Lives or Estates, and are quite stripped of all their Lands in Ireland, out
of odium unto Monarchy, the Kings posterity. And all this to advance the
Protestant Religion and Christ's Kingdom by and under their New Jesuitical
Republic, the quite contrary way.

These 12. particulars, like so many true, good, honest sworn Grandlury-men,
impanelled by Mr. Prynne, out of mere zeal to his native Countries, Church,
Religions preservation, will give in a true impartial verdict, whose proper
child, our New Commonwealth, whose Instruments the Guardians of it, but Goalers
of all our liberties under it, have been and now are again, and whose works
they do. He shall subjoyn a few sad Observations of like nature, during their
Infant Republics second wardship under their late Protector, to promote the
Protestant Cause and Religion.

1. His making peace with the Hollander after he had dismounted the Republican
Grandees to set up himself in their places; was in it self a Christian, pious,
prudent, and commendable Act, beneficial to both Nations. But if the principle
motives of it were, a vast sum of money from the Dutch, put into his private
purse (as some report;) or a desire to eclipse the Honor, power of the Prince
of Orange, their chief Protector and his Family; to banish the late Kings Royal
posterity, and Adherents out of the Netherlands, and leave them no subsistence,
nor being there amongst Protestants of our and their Religion, to force them to
seek new Quarters amongst Jesuits, Papists, and cast themselves wholly on their
Charity, on purpose to pervert them in their Religion, and destroy both their
Souls and Bodies at once, which is visible and irre^ragable, they being all
actually exiled thence by special Articles upon the peace with the Dutch. What
Protestant can think upon it but with horror, as the highest Act of Impiety,
cruelty, barbarism, injustice, uncharitableness, and malice ever yet recorded
of any professors of Christianity in the Protestant Religion.

2ly. His quarrelling with the King of Spain, in hopes to gain his Indian
Mines, and sending such a Fleet, with so many thousand English Protestants and
Soldiers thither, upon the bare project of See his Book and Description of the
West Indies.
Gage, a Iesuited professed Papist and Spainiolized Priest, who had lived there
sundry years under the Spanish King as a Priest, (all whose family and
relations have been See Romes Masterpiece and Hidden works of Darkness brought
to public light.
desperate popish enemies to our Religion. King, Kingdoms) with the disasterous
success and fruits thereof, to the expense of such vast sums of our own
Treasure, the loss of so many thousand protestant Soldiers, Mariners, and
undoing, endangering of our other American plantations; if rightly weighed, was
in truth rather a Spanish and Iesuitish plot to ruin us and our religion, than
to advance them; as Mr. Prynne at first reputed them, predicting the ill event
before it happened.

3ly. His closing with France and the French Cardinal Mazarine, upon the breach
with Spain, of purpose to banish poor distressed K. Charles (whom he drove out
his 3 Protestant Kingdoms, banished out of Holland: (deprived of all charitable
supplies or hopes of relief from either for his necessary subsistence;) and
banish his Brother the Duke of York who had a command and great repute in the
French Army, with all their Dependents out of France too, that he might the
more securely establish himself and his posterity in their hereditarie Kingly
power, dominions, and leave them no place to hide their heads in, (the effect,
and chief end of that peace;) and that in pursuit of Cardinal Richelieus Here
p. 19.
forementioned Instructions to ruin our Monarchy, Kingdoms, and work his
infernal designs against us,) was such an inhumane, unchristian policy, as
very ill accords with our Saviors express precepts, Mat. 5.44. etc. Lu.
6.27, etc. Romans 12.20, 21. But I say unto you, love your Enemies: Therefore if
thy Enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink: Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness. And a President hardly paralleld.

Alas how shall the memorable Heroic charity, generosity, piety, justice, of
our Norman Conqueror King William, (censured by this new Conqueror and his Army
Saints, as the worst of Tyrants in sundry Pamphlets;) and of his Sons, William
Rufus, and Henry 1. toward Edgar Atheling Heir to the English Crown after the
death of Edward the Confessor (when he took it from him by the Sword, under
pretext of See Mr. Prynnes 3d. parr of his Legal Historical Vindication and
Collection, etc. p. 343. to 397.
King Edwards last Will, and being next Heir to him in blood, not as a
Conqueror by war:) Who though after his Ibid. p. 391, 392. Flor. Wigorn. Sim.
Dunelm. Hoveden, Mat. Westminster. Mat. Paris, Bromton, Anno 1066, 1067.
Oath of Homage, Fealty, and Subjection to William, twice set up, as Heir to
the Crown, by the English Nobility in opposition to him, twice routed by him in
the Field, driven into Scotland, and quite left destitute of forces, friends
and supplies to gain the Crown; yet upon his repair to him in Normandy, without
any precedent Articles for his security, Anno 1069. he not only pardoned his
former insurrections, but Malm. de Gest. Reg. l. 3. p. 103.
gave him a large gratuity, entertained and lodged him in his own Court diverse
years, allowing him a pound of Silver for his honorable maintenance every day
(a great sum in that Age:) After which when he desired to go into Apulia to the
holy wars, Malm. ibid. Sim. Dunelm. Col. 213. Brompton, Col. 976.
Anno 1089. he furnished him with many Ships and 200 Soldiers: whence he
returning after the loss of Robert his chief Commander and best men, though
the Emperors of Greece and Germany whom he visited in his recesse thence,
honorably received, Flor. Wigom. p. 556. Sim. Dunelm. Col. 216, 217.
and proffered to entertain and maintain him in their Courts according to the
greatness of his birth all his life time; yet he contemning all their
proffers, out of a desire to enjoy his native Country, returned into England,
where he was courteously entertained by William the Conqueror as before, till
his death. After which Edgar siding with, Robert Duke of Normandy his eldest
Son, against William Rufus the younger: he thereupon Anno 1091. deprived him of
all the honors conferred on him by Robert, and banished him out of Normandy
into Scotland: But afterward upon the accord between the 2 Brothers touching
the Crown, and peace with Scotland, he was reconciled to King Rufus, and
returned into England, where he lived securely without the least restraint; and
was in so great favor with Rufus, Flor. Wigorn. p. 464. Sim Dunelm. Col. 223.
Hov. Annal pars 1. p. 466.
that in the year 1097. he sent him as General into Scotland with an Army to
restore his Nephew Edgar Son of Malcomb (who married Edgars Sister) to the
Crown, which his Uncle Dufnald had invaded after Malcombs death, to expel
Dufnald, and make Edgar King. Which having effected, he returning again into
England, lived there quietly without the least danger or restraint all Rufus
his reign, and some years under Malm. de Gestis Reg. l. 3. p. 103.
King Henry the first, betaking himself in his old Age to a retired private
Country life, and dyed in peace, as our Historians then living record. Oh that
there were the like Charity, Ingenuity, Christianity, Piety in the Saints of
this Iron Age, against whom these 3. first Norman Kings shall rise up and
condemn in the day of judgment, when Christ himself will pronounce this heavy
sentence against them for all their pretended Saint-ship: Mat. 25.41, 42, 42.
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
for I was an hungered and you gave me no meat, I was thirsty and you gave me no
drink, (no See August. Tom 10. Ser. 21.
not out of my large hereditarie Revenues of three Kingdoms you have forcibly
invaded against your Oatht;) I was a Stranger and you took me not in, (no not
into my own Protestant Realm, Court, out of which you thrust me by violence,
neither would you permit those of Holland and France, where I was a Stranger to
take me in, but enforced them to banish and cast me out after their former
entertainment of me as a stranger,) I was naked, but ye clothed me not, (but
stripped me and mine stark naked out of our Inheritances, Wardrobes, and all we
had,) sick and in prison, (into which you cast both me and mine) and you
visited me not, yea made it High Treason for any to do it, or so much as to
pray for me in this my distressed condition, notwithstanding Gods own
Evangelical precepts to the contrary, 1 Timothy 2.1, 3. 1 Pet. 2.17. Acts 10.5,
12. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10, 11. 2 These. 3.1, 2. Romans 15.30, 31, 32. If the most
righteous and charitable Saints shall 1 Pet. 4.18.
scarcely be saved in this great day, O where shall these ungodly, unrighteous,
uncharitable, and transcendently malicious Sinners (not Saints) appear? O that
they would sadly consider it and repent thereof, as the only means to avoid
this fatal doom of Christ at the last day. This truth they cannot, dare not
deny with their Tongues, but they contradict it by their lives, Non
contradicunt lingua sed vita. Moneo, rapit; doceo, rapit; praecipio rapit,
arguo, rapit. Quomodo non contradixit? Si ergo in ignem aeternum ibit, cui
dicturus est Christus nudus sui, and non vestisti me: quem locum in igne
aeterno habebit, cui dicturus est, vestitus fui and spoliasti me? Hic fortasse
ut evadas hanc vocem, mutata consuetudine, cogitas spoliare Paganum and vestire
Christianum. Ad hoc respondebit tibi Christus, immo respondet tibi nunc per
servum qualemcunque Ministrum suum: Etiam hic parce damnis meis; Cum enim qui
Christianus es spolias Paganum, impedis fieri Christianum. Etiam and hic
fortasse respondebis: Ideo spolio Paganum, ut per hanc asperam and salubrem
Disciplinam faciam Christianum. Audirem and crederem, si quod abstulisti
Pagano, redderes Christiano, etc. O that our Harpyes and Beasts of prey, (who
have obliterated the tenth Commandment out of all their Decalogues as the
Papists have done the second) would lay it close to heart, being Saint
Augustines 21. Sermon to them, as well as Mr. Prynnes: The rather, because the
night before O. Cromwell Pro. died, Mr. Prynne then being at Swainswick near
Bath (having never dreamed of him before) dreamt he was dangerously sick at
Bath, and that he then sent a special Messenger to him importunatly desiring,
he would presently repair to Bath, for he was very sick, and desired much to
speak with him: Whereupon (though he never saw him since 1647.) he presently
went to Bath: where finding him lying on his bed, he told Mr. P. he was very
sick, and had sent for him to tell him what he should do in this condition. Mr.
Prynne thereupon forthwith answered, That he could give him us better nor other
Counsel than that of Saint Epistola 44. Tom. 2. See Homil. 50. ser. 21. Tom.
10. Peter Lumbard, sent. l. 4. did. 16. and the schoolmen on him. Alex.
Alensis, sum. Theol. pars 4. quaest. 24. mem. 6.
Augustine (asserted by all Divines as an undoubted truth) Non Remittetur
peccatum nist restitnatur ablatum: That there was no remission of Sin without
full restitution of Rapine: Therefore he must forthwith restore the banished
King to his Suddenly taken from his Son by his nearest Relations and
Army Officers, notwithstanding their proclaiming him his Successor, and all
Addresses to live and dye with him; and that without one drawn sword.
Crown and Kingdoms, of which he had most unjustly deprived him; the
Parliaments to its just rights, freedoms, and privileges, which he had utterly
subverted; and the people to their fundamental Laws, Liberties, Properties, of
which he had most unjustly and perfideously defrauded them more than any man,
against his Oaths, trust, duty, under pretext of defending them; repent of all
the blood he had shed* and mischief he had done; then there was hope of mercy
and pardon for him both from God and Men, otherwise there was none at all for
ought he knew. At he standing mute, as much amazed, without any Reply, Mr. Pr^
thereupon departed, without more words; and the next morning told this dream to
his Sister, and sundry others, telling them he was confident he should hear
some strange news of Cromwell very speedily, since he never dreamed of him
before; and within three days after he heard of his death about 12. hours
after his dream. O that all other Usurpers of others Estates, Offices, Lands,
places, by blood and rapine, would sadly consider of it, and make real
restitution of them before they die! then would our peace be soon restored
without war or bloodshed: and their souls saved; which else in all probability
August. Ep. 44.
will be damned, without real restitution when possible to be made.

4. His relieving, interceding for the massacred persecuted Protestant
Albigenses in Piedmont, charitable Collections for them and others, was a
Christian work, worthy applause: But his giving just provocation to Popish
Princes abroad, by the First (...) I^^^^^tor. subegii A^^ci^^^, Soaem (...),
^orati^^, (...), ^ungarum, P^lati^^tam ut: ^^ que, v^tisqu^ Hae (...), Huli^^^,
and RE^BILIONUM PA^ES CALVINISTAS, expolit and pe^^lig^vi, A^ to princip^^
gr^^tod, pergit^ (...), op^eloe ^cibos ^d eo auspici ^caeptom confi^ire,
pitidos ^^di. REBELLEM CALVINI AFRESIN pae^^ va^um S^I^PI^US UBI I^^^ EX
DICATE, a^ p^rt^dio and (...) revel^s^^t^, (...) que vi^eto^ (...) qu^^e c^lli^
^o, etc. Cenollu. Cae^l^ sel^^^. Prae^^. 2 1. (...) P^op^e^^^ prae^^: S^^ M.
(...) or Truth.
Jesuits instigation, to extirpate their Religion, as a very Seminary of
Treason, Sedition, Rebellion; and to massacre, eradicate them as a Company of
Traitors, Antimonarchists, Regicides, Hypocrites, Rebels, and Seditious
persons; from his own and his Confederates Antimonarchical principles,
practices, Treasons, Rebellions of this kind, both against their King,
Parliament, Monarchy, their confederated Brethren of Scotland and their King,
as being all of one Religion, persuasion; his accommodating the King of Spain
with whole Regiments of bloody Irish Papists, who had embrewed their hands in
so much Protestant blood in Ireland, and were the chief Instruments in
murdering these poor Protestants; his negligence in examining the misimployment
of this and other Collections under him for distressed foreign Protestants; the
greatest part of which are yet in the Collectors hands, or diverted otherwise.
Was in truth but first to kill, wound, plunder; and then relieve them when too
late.

5. His Confederacy with the King of Sweden to invade the Kingdom of Poland,
and usurp that Crown by force, (without right or colorable Title,) upon
pretext to advance the Protestant cause, relieve the Protestant Churches and
propagat the Gospel there; had some specious show of zeal to Religion: But to
do apparent Romans 3.^.
evil, that good might come of it; to engage in such a war to propagat the
Gospel of peace, which ended in the total extirpation of all the Protestants
and their Churches in Poland, whence they are now totally extirpated, as
himself related in his Briefs, papers for their over-late relief: and produced
a new bloody war (wherein he also sided with him) against the King of
Denmark, a Protestant King, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, the Dutch, and other
our Protestant allies, sadly divided against each other, in late bloody battles
by Land and Sea, to the endangering of all the Protestant Churches throughout
the world, and engaging them all in a New War, and our three N^tions (in all
probability) against our Protestant Brethren, (now the Popish Kings are
reconciled, and ready to destroy us all) being broken in pieces amongst our
selves, impoverished, butchered by one another, rather like savage beasts, than
men or Christians; and that in direct pursuance of De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25,
20, 27.
Campanellius, See his Instructions.
Richelieus, and Paulus Windeck de Extirpandis Haeresibus Antid. 10.11 p
408.412.580. and 244. Hospinian Hist. Jesuit. l. 3. and l 4. p. 212, 213, 214.
Lud. Lucius, H^st Jesuit. l. 1. p. 175. l. 2. p 186, 187, 188. Johan.
Cambilhonus, de Rebus Jesuitarum Abstrusioribus. An. 1608.
other Jesuited Plots, who expressly write: That the Catholics are to use all
arts and means to divide the Protestants, Lutherans, Calvinists, and Sectaries
one from and against each other, by various arts and means, and all occasions
laid hold of for that purpose, that they may with more ease oppress, destroy
them all; and that they ought not to neglect the opportunity to accomplish
their utter extirpation when their moneys are exhausted, their forces weakened,
and they divided by their intestine wars. The best means being thus to destroy
them by themselves, till they (like the Kite in the Fable) shall devour the
Frog and Mouse together, during their combats with each other; Was such a
Machiavilian Policy to advance the Protestant cause, as Mazarine and the
Jesuits suggested to him on purpose to effect their ruin; as all Wise men,
and his own Creatures now over-late discern: and Bedlam Hugh Peter's in his
Letter to a Great Army-Officer, the 10th of this instant May.

6. His endeavor to bring in the Sea my 1. and 2. Demurrer to the Jews long
discontinued Remitter into England.
Jews with their Synagogues and Jewish Ceremonies, under a pretended hopes of
their long-desired Conversion, but ^eal intended expectation to finger Two
hundred thousand pounds of their gold at present, and all the rest in future
when transplanted; to set up their Antichristian Judaism, in direct
contradiction to our Savior Jesus Christ; and at the very self-same time, by
his printed Declaration 24 November. 1655. and private Instructions to his New
Basha's (or Major Generals) to eject, silence at one blow (without conviction,
hearing, or the least legal proceeding) many hundreds of Ministers,
Schoolmasters, Scholars of the late Kings party (though learned, orthodox,
godly, pious, peaceable, formerly indemnified and admitted to exercise their
functions) and prohibit them any more to preach, marry, administer the
Sacrament, pray, teach School in any public place, or private meeting of any
other persons, than those of their own family, or in any Gentlemen's houses as
Chaplains or Tutors to their Children, under pain of 3 Months imprisonment for
the first, 6 months for the 2d. and perpetual banishment for the 3d Offense:
And to punish them as Rogues and Vagrants, if they wandered abroad to beg their
bread, on purpose to starve both them, their wives, families, or enforce them
to fly into foreign Popish Realms, (being excluded out of the Netherlands) and
there turn Papists to preserve their lives; when all Priests, Jesuits,
Sectaries whatsoever, and Jews themselves had so much Liberty under him; Was
such a transcendent Barbarism, Impiety, and High way to extirpate our Religion,
(as pious learned Archbishop Usher told him when he mediated for their
liberty, and could not prevail, as he told Mr. Prynne and others with tears,
which brake his heart soon after) as the Pope, and Jesuits themselves could
not have invented the like; and exceeded all foreign persecutions against
Protestant Ministers in Piemont, Bohemia, and Silesia, by Popish Princes, being
of a different Religion, but be a pretended Protestant Zealot.

7. His Extending not only his Toleration but real Protection to all Sects
whatsoever, except POPERY and PRELACY, and passing the late Bill 1657. (put on
by the Presbyterians) against Papists, might savor of some disgust against
those of the Romish Religion: But his extraordinary intimacy with Cardinal
Mazarine, Sir Kenelm Digby a most dangerous Jesuited Papist lodged by him in
Whitehall, (a chief Instrument of the union between him and Mazarine,) and
sundry other Papists, Jesuits, Popish Priests: His suspending all penal Laws,
Executions against Popish Priests, Jesuits, though sometimes taken in their
pontificalibus at Mass, and soon after released: His protections under hand
and seal to sundry of them, particularly to Maurice Coury, Provincial of the
Franciscans in England: Their coming over in greater swarms of later times,
than ever heretofore, without restraint, as himself see hete, p. 42, 43.
printed as well as declared in his public Speeches: His endeavors to stop the
late Bill against Papists the very morning he was to pass it, by his Whitehall
Instruments, who moved its suspension for a time, as not suiting with present
Foreign correspondencies; (against whom it was carried by 88. Votes, That it
should be carried up with the rest then passed:) With the Copy of his Letter to
Card: Mazarine, (in many good hands, affirmed to be real not counterfeit)
excusing his passing this Bill, as carried on by a violent Presbyterian party
much against his with yet it should not hurt them though passed, etc. which
accordingly fell out: The large expressions made to those of Dunkirkin his name
by their Gov: Lockert, to protect them in the full and free exercise of their
Romish Religion as amply as ever the King of Spain did: with other particulars
of that nature: And his great encouraging of all sorts of Sects My Quakers
Unmasked, 1655 And New Discovery of Romish Emistaries, 1656.
headed, acted by disguised Jesuits, Priests, Friars, as M. P. has elsewhere
fully evidenced: Are demonstrations beyond all exceptions; what an Advancer he
was of the true Protestant cause and Religion.

8. His undermining, subverting all our Fundamental Laws, Liberties,
Properties, (and Parliaments too) in the highest degree, by his own and his
Army Officers, Councils, new printed Folio Ordinances, Instruments, Taxes,
Excises, High Courts of Injustice, Major Generals Commissions, Instructions,
Proceedings, by committing sundry persons Close prisoners (some of them to
foreign Islands) without any cause expressed, legal trial or conviction dive^s
months, years, by warrants under his own or his Councils hands: His stopping
returns of Habeas Corpora, when granted, or removing the Prisoners to new
remote prisons: His seizing, securing the persons, horses, arms of thousands,
and banishing them from London time after time, upon mere forged Plots, Fears:
His disbenching his own Judges for not complying with his illegal will: His often
stiling MAGNA CHARTA, MAGNA FARTA with highest indignation: Committing 3.
Lawyers to the Tower at once as Traitors, for daring to argue an Habeas Corpus
against his illegal Commitment, and Whitehall Ordinance for Excise in Conyes
case (a president not to be paralleld:) his prohibiting See his Whitehall
Ordinances for Excise and Taxes, 14 December. and 17 March 1653. May 4. and June
8. 1654. and The 1. Part of my Legal and Historical Vindication, etc. p. 66. to
90.
all Lawyers, Sollicitors, Judges, and Courts of Justice whatsoever under him,
to plead, act, or admit any proceedings, or legal trial at Law against his
illegal Ordinances and absolute commands, under pain of his highest
indignation: His defrauding most Patrons of their livings and lapsing them, (by
his own Ordinances, Instruments) into his own hands, refusing their honestest,
ablest Clerks, without any cause assigned, and denying them the benefit of
Quare Impedits after judgment given upon them by his own Judges. All these are
clear demonstrations to Mr. P. beyond contradiction; That our Infant
Commonwealth both in its birth, growth, progress under its old Guardians, and
New Protector, was but the Jesuits, Popes, Spaniards, Mazarines, and our Popish
Enemies new Creature, and Instrument to ruin our Protestant Church, Religion,
King, kingdoms, Laws, Liberties: The very name of Magna Charta it self (for
which our ancestors heretofore spent so much blood and treasure in reality, and
we of late only in pretense) being so exec^able to our New Free-States men,
that in September 1650. it was expunged out of a Petition M. P. drew for Mr.
Luttrel, (to ^ave Dunster Castle the habitation of him and his ancestors, from
being pulled down over his head before hearing or Notice, by an Order issued
for that purpose and put in execution) to John Bradshaw and their Free State
Council at Whitehall, by their Attorney Prideaux order, because it would
distaste them: and a Great Fart was more savory to Olivers red nose than it: all
in pursuance of the Jesuits old Plot: as you have heard out of Watsons
Quodlibets: This M.P. shall a little infist on, because of a present design
against our Laws now eagerly pursued.

The late Parliament in Exact. Collection. p. 7.10 267, 268, 340,
342.376.459.491, to. 495.503.573, 575, 660.665, 666, 825.832.839.907. to.
916.932.951.
above one hundred Declarations, Ordinances, Orders, Votes, made this their
principal Charge against the Kings Jesuitical Counselors, and the Popish
Forces raised by him, against the Parliament, that they endeavored the
subversion and extirpation of our ancient fundamental Laws and Government: and
that one of the A Collection of Ordinances p. 13.30.34.42, 43.98, 99.161.167,
168, 169.185.199.203, 204,
211.227.275.282.294.305.313.317.340.363:371.380.417.420, 423, 425.432.451. to.
460.504.513.537, 539.616.623.666.679.877, 878. Appendix. P. 4.15.
chiefest causes of their taking up arms and raising Armies against them, was
for the necessary defense and preservation of these ancient Good old Laws and
Liberties, (the Inheritance and Birthright of every English Freeman) whereby
not only his Majesty's Regal Authority, but the Peoples security of Lives,
Lands, Livings, Privileges, Liberty, (both in general and particular) are
preserved and maintained, and by the abolishing, innovating or alteration of
which, it is impossible but that present confusion will fall upon the whole
State and Frame of this Kingdom: as the whole Parliament of 1 Jacobi chapter 2.
expressly declared long since in the Prologue of that Act, the late long
Parliament in sundry Declarations; Yea King Charles himself in his Declaration
by advice of his Council, to all his Subjects, Dec. 15. 1641. Exact Collect: p.
28, 29. his Answer to the Lords and Commons Petition, April 9. 1642. Ibid. p.
140. to their Declaration May 4. 1642. p. 163, 164. and elsewhere, the Defense
whereof against invasion, subversion, he made the ground of raising Forces
against an Anabaptistical party and faction in the Parliament, intending to
subvert and extirpate them root and branch, as you may read at large: Ib. p.
326, 443, 451, 514, 515, 555, 556, 561, 562, 579, 619. A Collection of
Ordinances, p. 28, 38, 39, 116, 117. Yet notwithstanding all these Parliament
Declarations and Commissions in pursuance of them; the Army Officers,
Soldiers, by the Jesuits suggestions, have been so far intoxicated, as to
attempt the utter subversion and extirpation both of our Laws (and Lawyers too)
for whose defense they were principally raised, in pursuit of Here, p. 42.
Father Parsons forementioned design, under pretext of reforming them: though
the bare indirect attempt to subvert them in a far inferior degree, was
adjudged HIGH TREASON in See their impeachments, Trials. The Act and Ordinance
for their Attainders, Mr. Pyms speech, Mr. St. John's Declaration, and Argument
against them, and first part of my Legal and Historical Vindication, etc.
Straffords and Canterburies cases, for which they both lost their Heads AS
TRAITORS, and in the Case of the Ship-mony Judges in the long Parliament.

That they have prosecuted this design in England to subvert our Fundamental
Common Laws, and Great Charter of our Liberties, is most apparent by their
proceedings in their Mock Parliament, and printed Vote 20 August 1653. Ordered,
there should be a Committee selected To consider of a New Body of the Law, and
the Government of this Commonwealth: Compared with A True state of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. printed 1654. p. 15, 16,
17, 18. which assures us, That there was a strong prevailing party in that
Assembly, whom nothing would satisfy, But a total eradication of the whole
Body of the Good Old Laws of England, (the Gardians of our Lives and Fortunes)
to the utter subversion of Civil Right and Propriety, etc. And our two
Jesuitical Lilly, and Culpepper.
Prognosticators were so confident of it (as if the Stars in heaven had
concurred herein with the Jesuits and Anabaptistical Conventicle then on
earth) that in their scurrillous Prognostications they predicted the downfall
not only of all our Ministers, and their Tithes, but of our Laws and Lawyers,
Prognosticating, in the months of January, February, September, October, and
December 1654. That the Laws and Lawyers of the Nation should be pulled down
to the ground; That the Great Charter it self should be called into question
with other Liberties, as not suting with English men's brains at this time; Nota.
That the Crabtree of the Law should be plucked up by the roots to hinder the
future growth thereof; There being no reason are should now be governed by the
Norman Law, since the Norman Race is taken away by the same instrument (the
sword of Conquest) which brought it in. They are the very words of these false
Prognosticators, who have many such like passages in them both before and
since. Which, compared with the late speeches of many Common Soldiers: That
there should be no more Terms in Westminster Hall: That they hoped very
speedily to see not only the Lawyers gowns, but the Lawyers themselves hanged
up over the Courts in Westminster Hall, where the decayed Scots colors hung,
to supply their vacant places: That it would be a goodly sight, to see all the
Trees in St. James's Park hung with Lawyers and their gowns; with sundry such
like speeches, since May 6. 1659. All these compared together, (with what Mr.
Prynne has frequently heard the Soldiers say during his near 3. years close
Imprisonment under them, and their New Republike in Dunster, Taunton, and
Pendennys Castles) That they hoped ere long to see and leave neither one
Lawyer, nor Parish Priest throughout England, Nor yet steeple, steeple-house or
Bells, which they would sell, or cast into Ordinance to fight against the
Dutch, etc. with some Petitions and Pamphlets now on foot to the like tune; and
the Army Officers fresh Proposal, to those now sitting and their Votes thereon;
for the reformation of our Laws, etc. Are an infallible evidence to him, that
all our former, late, and present changes of this Nature, for which this
formerly eiected Repvblican Conventicle is now reassembled, are the mere
proiections of the All-swaying Jesuits, to work our Laws speedy ruin. It being
their professed practice even in other foreign Popish kingdoms, to subvert their
fundamental Laws, especially those which concern the inheritance, succession
of the Crown, and Liberties of the Subjects; for which take these two
Testimonies even from foreign Papists themselves. The 1. in that memorable
Piece, See Hospinian Hist. Iesuitica, l. 3. and 4. speculum Iesuiticum, p. 119.
Ludovicus Lucius, Histor: Jesuit. l. 4: c: 5 where it is printed at large and
Thuanus Hist: l: 138:
Consilium de recuperanda et in posterum stu^ilienda Pace Regni P^loniae per
Iesuitarum ejectionem, presented to the Parl. of Poland, An. 1607. out of which
they were soon after banished. Hic autem vos notare velim ejusdem pestis
Iesuitici non minorem efficatiam esse in oppugnanda et expugnanda Republica,
e^terendis Legibus, quoties nempe sentiunt, se ab his, in instituta sua
venatione, impediri. Et quod ad Leges attinet, hae politicae tineae, Illas
praecipue arrodere consue verunt et exedere; quibus jus successionis in regno
continetur, Libertasque et Pax publica firmatur. Which he proves by several
prefidents of their shaking abolishing the very fundamental Laws of this
Nature, in France, Hungary, Styria, Austria, Carinthia, and elsewhere: and that
with such success, ut obtritis Legibus quibus praedictarum Nationum libertas
nitebatur, partem earum penitus appresserint, partem ad extremam desperationem
adigererint: In praedictis Provinciis alicubi Illustribus et Antiquissimas
Nobilitatis Familiis public diem dictum esse intra quem se, aut coram
Iesuitarum Tribunali sistant, aut relictis patriis sedibus alio migrent. And is
not this the sad, desperate condition of many ancient Noble Protestant
Families, Knights, Gentlemen and others, both in England, Ireland, Scotland,
and of the Royal Protestant Family, since our late Wars, Changes of
Government, Parliaments, and extirpation of all our Fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Properties, by the Jesuits and their Instruments? O let our whole
Nation and Republican Members too (once shamefully ejected by those now calling
them in) consider, consider, consider this over and over, and lay it close to
heart: least closing with the Jesuits now again in this New Convention, as
they assuredly did in the Old since December 1648. till April 1653. they incurr
that sad fate of Hist. Gallica and Belgica, l: ^: f. 151, 152. Speculum
Iesuiticum, p. 75.80. The general History of France, in H. 4. and Lewis 13
Hospinian Historia, Jesuit. l. 3.153. to 159. Lud. Lucius, Histor. Jesuit. l.
3. c, 2.
King Henry the 4th of France; who after the execution of some and banishment
of all Jesuits out of France, upon John Castles one of their disciples
stabbing him in the cheek, with an intent to murder him; and afterward
recalling, favoring, flattering them by building a stately College for them,
entertaining one of them for his Confessor, and bequeathing his very heart unto
them, to be interred with them after his death, together with a very large
Legacy of Plate and Lands; yet they soon after procured their desperate
Assassinate and Disciple Ravilliac to stabb him to the heart, in the open
street in Paris, An. 1610. A Just reward for his neglect, contempt of his
Parliaments timely admonitions in sundry Remonstrances presented to him, never
to trust or recall them more; and the notable Epigram against the Jesuits,
tendered to him by a true Philopater, Anno 1603. wherein there is this memorable
passage in relation to their subversion of all ancient Fundamental Laws. Cuinam
Hominum ignotum est Iesuitas nocte dieque,
Nil meditari aliud quam qua ratione modove,
Prisca Statuta queant, Patriasque evertere Leges;
Inque locum Antiquis totum in contraria Nobis,
Iura dare; and sanctos privata ad commoda Ritus.
Pl^ctere; nulli unquam quod post mutare licebit? etc.
M. Prynne considering all these particulars, and knowing that this sudden
re-assembly of the old eiected Republican M^mbers, now fitting, originally
proceeded from the Jesuits projection, solicitation, and Anabaptistical
Sectarian party formerly combining with them, in all their proceedings against
the late King, (at whose execution the Nota.
Queens own Conf^ssor was present in a Soldiers habit, flourishing his sword
when his head was off as well as other Jesuits, Popish Priests, overjoyed with
that spectacle) the secluded Members, the House of Lords, and transformation of
our Kingdom into a Commonwealth, to accomplish their remaining designs, left
unfinished; pro^ected in terminis by Watsons Quodlibets, p. 92, 94, 95. and
Dialogue, p. 95.
Father Parsons and the Jesuits, and violently pursued in the short
Mock-Parliament nominated at Whitehall by the Army Officers themselves, 1653.
viz: To eradicate the National Church, Ministers, Ministry of England,
Advowsons, Tithes, Glebes, with Parochial Churches, Chapels, as Antichristian,
and leave not one stone of them upon another: Which John Can (the new-voted
Diurnall-man) in his Voice from the Temple, then dedicated to them,
particularly excited them to, with all speed and earnestness, as their
Generation-work, expected, required of them by God and all the Saints of the
Land) To sell all the Crown, Colleges, Universities, and Corporations lands yet
remaining, to support and pay the Jesuited Army (kept up so long on purpose to
ruin, eat us out.) M. Prynne thereupon, held it his bounden duty, both as a
Member, Lawyer, Englishman, and former Patriot of his Countries Liberties,
against all Jesuitical Underminers of them and our Protestant Religion, truly
and fully to discover the same to the whole English Nation, Army, and those now
sitting; and to press it home upon their Consciences by this his Narrative,
whether they will hearken to, believe, obey it, or not, since he was forcibly
secluded from doing it by Speech: having sufficient warrant, encouragement, and
protection for it, (as he apprehends) from God himself, Ezech. 2.4, 5, 6. and
Jer. 1.18, 19. For they are hard of face, and stiff hearted; Therefore (Son of
man) I do send thee unto them, and thou shall say unto them, thus says the
Lord. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they
are a rebellious House) yet shall know, that there has been a Prophet among
them. And thou Son of man, be not afraid of them; neither be afraid of their
words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among
Scorpions; Be not afraid of their Faces, nor be dismayed at their Looks, though
they be a Rebellious House. And thou shall speak my words unto them, whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear. But thou Son of man, hear what I
say unto thee (and O that all the seduced Army, Republican Members and their
confederates would now hear and obey it too) Be not thou rebellious like that
rebellious House. For behold I have made thee this day, a defenced City, and an
iron pillar, and brazen walls against the whole Land, against the Princes
thereof, and the Priests thereof, and against all the people of the Land
(engaged against thee and thy true Good Old Cause) And they shall fight against
thee (by sundry scurrillous Pasquils, Petitions, Slanders, Reproaches, and
armed secluding Guards) but they shall not prevail against thee. For I am with
thee, says the Lord, (as well now as in all former Engagements, Trials for
this Good cause) to deliver thee, The assurance whereof has made him so
resolute, as singly by himself, to encounter an whole armed Host and House, at
once, and throuh Gods blessing to rout them in a manner by his bare presence,
and their Good Old Cause in a great measure by his single Opposition: The Ps.
115.1.
sole praise whereof he desires to render wholly and solely Is. 46.7, 11. Ps.
27.1 6
to the Lord of Hosts, and Number. 16.22. c. 27.16.
God of the Spirits of all Flesh, and not in any kind or part to himself, Ps.
22.6.
a mere worm and not a man, an earthen V^ssel: yea one of the weak, base,
despised things of the world, and a thing that can not, whom yet God can and
may make use of, to confound the things that are mighty, and to bring to naught
things that are, that no Flesh shall glory in his presence, and that the
excellency of the power might be of God and not of him; who has promised, that
2 Cor. 4.7. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. Deuteronomy. 32.30
One of his faithful people shall chase a thousand, and two, put ten thousand
to flight, (in a true Good Old Cause and Quarrel) for the Lord their God be it
is that fights for them as he has promised. What then might all the secluded
Members and old Lords House do, and all the well affected Orthodox Protestants
in our three Nations, had they but hearts, wisedoms, courage to join their
Counsels and endeavors together, ( according to their Solemn League and
Covenant) to vindicate their true Old Cause and Parliamentary privileges,
against all inconsiderable Oppugners and Subverters of them.

Mr. Prynne; having neither Wife nor Child to provide for, not much to care
for, and never yet desiring any New Office, Advancement or Employment in this
present world, nor receiving the least reward for all his faithful public
services, nor recompense for his manifold losses, sufferings, expenses for the
Public to whom he has ever been a faithful unmercinarie Servant, is in good
hopes, that the serious perusal of the premises, will convince the Good Old
Cause now cried up, to be a cheat of the Jesuits put upon the Army, (as Hugh
Peter's apprehends, styles it in his Letter, the 10th. of this May, to a chief
Officer of the Army,) and also wipe off all the Mis-reports, Scandals,
Reproaches, Censures, yea acquit him from the heavy charge of Sedition, Mutiny,
Treason, against the Infant House and Republic, cast upon him for his actions
or discourses here related, by those who are reallie guilty of these Crimes in
the highest degree, by subverting our ancient Kings, Kingdoms, Kingship,
Parliaments, Peers, Privileges, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Oaths, by their
Iesuitical plots and innovations, and making a prey of all the public wealth,
Lands, Revenues of the Crown, to enrich themselves, and maintain a seditious
Army, utterly to devour the small Remainder of our public and private wealth
almost drained to the dregs; and bettay us into the hands of our foreign
Enemies, when they have left us neither hearts, hands wills, money, nor means,
manfully to resist their invading power, and reduced us to that slavery, as
rather to live under any foreign Tyranny, than an Jer. 46.16. c. 50.16.
oppressing Sword of their own domineering Hirelings. As for the thing they
style Sedition, it is but Calipine, Holioke, summa Angelica Tit. Seditio.
Cicero de Repub. l. 6. Lu. 23.19.
scorsum itio, when a sew confederated Innovators shall separate themselves
from the General body or Assembly of the Kingdom, Church, Parliament, House,
whereof they are Members, and act a part by themselves, as a divided Republic,
Church, Parliament, House, without and against the Generality, and true
lawful Members, and separate them from their company. And if this be truth, as
See the Appendix to Mr Rushworths Historical Col p. 30. to 40, 41, 42.
our Statutes, Lawbooks, Luke 6, 22.
Casuists, Canonists, and Historians accord, we shall know in whose Hearts,
House Sedition truly dwells. And if Polit. l. 3. and Ethic. l. 8.
Aristotle Summa Angelica, Tit. Seditio.
Aquiuas, See the Sovereign Power of Parliaments, part 4. p. 187, 188.192.
Angelus de Clavasio, and p sundry others who write of Sedition, may be
credited; He who disturbs the Rule or Government of any unlawful Usurper is no
seditious Person, because such a usurped Government or Power is not ordained
for the common good, (whatever pretended) but for the private advantage of the
Usurper, Secunda secundae Artic 12. and Qu^^t.
Therefore the disturbance of such a Usurper has no^ the reason of Sedition;
yea, it is to be commended, because it freeth the Generality of the People from
a Tyrannical Power usurped over, or forcibly imposed on them against their
wills, and it is the usurping Tyrant only who truly is seditious, as they all
define in direct words. And whether Mr. Prynne and other secluded Members and
Lords, being five times their number, or those who seclude them be seditious,
let the whole Kingdom resolve.

Mr. Prynne not knowing whether he shall have the like opportunity again; shall
for a Conclusion of this Narrative address himself, and direct some things he
intended to have spoken.

1. To the Army Officers and Soldiers, Remember I beseech you in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, what your own Army-Chaplain John Sedgewick in his Justice upon
the Armies Remonstrance, from St. Albons, Nov. 16. 1648. and Rebukes of that
evil Spirit that leads them in their Counsels and Actions, has written to them
therein, and to the Lord Fairfax then General, and the General Counsel of war,
in his Epistle Dedicatorie to them, when they first espoused their present Good
Old Cause. His words are home and piercing, Destruction you practice, it is
your work, it is your end, you cannot see beyond it, and you are hastening to
it, it is the center to which you tend, and therefore I cannot but show it to
you, that you may stay your course before the pit shut her mouth upon you. You
are full of glory in the great things you have done, wonderful things! a
mighty presence of God. But in sum what is it? You have torn a poor sinful
Kingdom in pieces, you have executed wrath upon your Brethren, Friends, and
Countrymen, you have laid desolate your Father the King, the Parliament, your
Mother, your own Country: This is your glory to be Executioners, Assyria the
Rod of mine Anger, what a Crown is this? Have you restored, blessed, healed,
comforted, saved any? No, You have but plunged the Kindome and your selves into
a Pit of Darkness and Confusion. You drive furiously over the King,
Parliament, Laws, Conscience, Loyalty, Privileges, so as no human nor sacred
thing can stand before you. It is high time to withstand you, for it is not men
only that suffer from you, but the Lord: Your Sword goes so deep that it
pierces through his Soul also: You are gone so far in dissolving the
Foundations of Government, that you are come to him who upholds the Pillars of
the earth: you reach to the head of Principalities, and Powers; to the Lord who
is the Author and Upholder of all these things. He is in these despised broken
Ordinances of his, and sensible of every blow that is given to them: You have
dug through the wall of Flesh and men, and through the partition wall that
divided them from God, and now you are in the bowels of the Lord; these
miserable broken Powers are now the Lord. Go on, tear and rend, you will at
last look upon him whom you have pierced, and mourn. O that you would now do so
in good earnest, as you pretend only in your Declaration of May 6. 1659. and
Ps. 68.21.
yet go on still in your former Trespasses, for which God will wound your hairy
Scalps. O consider, that Jesus Christ, whose Servants ye pretend to be, is both
a Ps. 24.7, 8, 9, 10.
King of Glory, and a Rev. 15.3.
King of Saints: That the Gospel you profess is the Mat. 4.23. c. 9.35. c.
13.19. c. 14.24.
Gospel of the Kingdom, (not Republic) yea, the Mat. 10.7. c. 12.28. c. 21.43.
c. 4.43. c. 8.1, 10. c. 16.16. Acts 20.25.
Kingdom of God, and of Heaven in Gospel-language: That his Church whereof you
pretend your self Members, is frequently styled a 1 Cor. 15.24. Col. 1.13. Rev.
12.10.
Kingdom, never a Commonwealth (or at least but Ephesians. 2.12.
once, and that not in opposition or contradistinction to a Kingdom, which is
the first excellentest of all Commonwealths, as Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c. 12.
l. 4. c. 2.
Heathen Philosophers, Politicians and Devines accord,) but as the very same
with it: That the Saints themselves are styled, the Mat. 13 38.
Children of the Kingdom, (not Republic) Rev. 1.9.
Companions in the Kingdom of Christ, even in this world; yea a Exodus 19.6. Rev.
1.6. c. 5.10. c. 20.6. 1 Pet. 2 5.
Kingdom of Priests, a Royal Priesthood; Nay Kings and Priests to God the
Father, and that by Christ's own constitution. Consider yet further, that Heaven
it self, into which you expect at last to enter, is ever styled Mat. 5.3.19. c.
7.21. c. 8.11.
the Kingdom of Heaven, 2 Pet. 1.11. 2 Timothy 4.18.
an heavenly and everlasting Kingdom, a Heb. 12.28.
Kingdom which cannot be moved, a Dan. 7.27. Lu. 1.33. Is. 9.1.
Kingdom which shall have no end; (never a Commonwealth;) That in this Kingdom
we read of nothing but 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Pet. 5.4. Ps. 45 9. Mat. 19.28. Rev. 3 21.
c. 20.4. c. 9.11. c. 7.9.13 14.
Crowns, Scepters, Thrones, Robes of Glory and Majesty, and of 2 Timothy 2.22.
Rev. 22.5.
reigning in it for ever and ever. That Christ himself has promised,
appointed, and his Father given to all his Saints the Lu. 12.32. c. 22.22.
Kingdom of Heaven. Upon which account they are now styled James 2.5.
Heirs of the Kingdom, and shall hereafter Mat. 25.34.
inherit and possess this Kingdom, receive the Crowns, wear the Royal Robes,
sit upon the Thrones provided for them in it. How then have the Enchanters of
Rome, Spain, France, so far insatuated your understandings, blinded your
Judgments, intoxecated your Brains, perverted your Wills, corrupted your
Affections, seared your Consciences, engaged your unralie Passions, as
notwithstanding all this, to make you Bedlam mad, against all Kings,
Kingship, Kingdoms, Crowns, Scepters, Thrones, Principalites, and Kingly power,
as to a abhor, and engage against both the things themselves and their very
names, yea to extirpate them root and branch, against his express Evangelical
procepts, word and practice of all his Saints in either Testament, to dote upon
such a strange Vtopian Commonwealth, and new Freestate, the very names
whereof, much less the things, you find not once in Scripture in your sense,
and never yet read of in the militant or triumphant Church of Christ. Let Mr.
Prynne a little expostulate the case with you, not as a Lawyer but as a
Christian. Do you indeed believe the Scripture, to be the very will and word of
the Ps. 47.7. Genesis 18.25.
Great King, the Sovereign Lord, and Judge of all the Earth, and of Jesus
Christ, Rev. 5.3. etc. 19.16. 1. Tim. 6.15.
the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, and King of Saints, which you are bound
in Conscience, under pain of eternal damnation to believe and obey? If not,
proclaim it as loud to the world with your Voices, as you do by your Swords,
Ti^. 1.16.
Actions; and then all will know you in your Native colors, to be no Saints
but real Atheists, and all reasonings with you will be in vain. But having Hib.
6.9.
better persuasions of you, Isay 1.24.
Acts 26.27.
That you believe the Scripure to be the Gal. 6.16.
only rule of your Consciences, Judgments, Lives, both as Soldiers and
Christians. Then answer clearlie to these interrogations; The Lord of Hosts
himself most peremptorily and preciselie commands you, To fear God, honor the
King, 1 Pet. 2.17. Romans 13.7. Yea to fear the Lord and the King, (coupling both
these together as unseperable) and not to meddle with those who are given to
change, Prove. 24.21. How can, how dare you then dishonor, vilitie, reproach,
destroy, both your natural Kings, and Kingship too, without the least fear at
all of God or the King, and change them into a New Republican Conventicle? He
commands you to subject your selves to the King as Supreme, both by the
Ordinance of God and man, and that for the Lords sake: and avoiding scandal to
Religion, 1 Pet. 2.12, 13. To be subject to the Higher Powers, and amongst them
more especially to Kings and Principalities; and that not only for fear of
wrath, but for Conscience sake, for these Reasons clearlie expressed: Because
they are of God, and ordained by God: Because they are the Ministers of God for
your good. Because they are Gods Avengers to punish you, if you disobey,
resist, or do evil; Because they who resist them resist the Ordinance of God,
and shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.1. to 8. Tit. 3.1, 2. With
what face, heart, confidence, conscience, then can or dare you, not only not
submit, subject your selves to, but exalt your selves above, against your
lawful Sovereign Kings, and Higher powers, so far as not only to resist, but
destroy their Persons, Powers, Kingships, Principalities themselves though Gods
own Ordinance? and that out of pretended Zeal and Conscience too; and hope to
receive a Crown on Earth, or in Heaven for it, when as God himself denounces
Damnation to you, for your very unwarrantable resistance of them alone, and
much more for their destruction, God requires you to make Prayers,
Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of thanks 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
first of all FOR KINGS, that YOU may live a peaceable and quiet life (under
them) in all Godliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior. See Tertull^an Apologia.
To make prayers to the God of Heaven FOR THE LIFE OF THE KING AND OF THE KINGS
SONS, Ezra 6.12, 13. To pray with all the primitive Church and Saints of Cod,
Psalm. 72.1. Give the King thy Judgment O God, and thy Righteousness unto the
Kings Sun: How can, how dare you then, not only neglect these Duties, but
prohibit, condemn, punish them, as no less than High Treason in others? and
not only fight, but curse, revile, pray against the King, and the Kings Sons
too, and take away their lives, livelihoods, instead of praying for them,
reputing it both your godliness, honesty, yea a Duty acceptable, and well
pleasing unto God: Isay 1.2. Ps. 114.7.
Hear O Heavens, and tremble O Earth at this great impiety; God commands you
Eccles. 8.2. To keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of
God: And dare you against all your Oaths of Fealty, Homage, Supremacy,
Allegiance, Protestation, League, Covenant, printed Declarations, and your own
Propositions 1 August 1647. That the Kings Person (and Royal issue) may be
restored to a condition of safety, honor, and freedom in this Nation, without
diminution of their personal Rights does abjure, eradicate King, Kingship, and
the Royal Posterity; See the True Old Cause truly stated.
that you may no more keep nor obey any of their Superior Commands, and prefer
the Commands of any undutifull Army Officers, (raised only to defend the King
and Parliament from all force and violences) before both their Ordinances,
Proclamations, Commissions, Votes, to both their ruins? God injoyns you not to
Curse the King no not in your thoughts, and not to revile or speak evil of the
Ruler of your People, Eccles. 10.20. Exodus 22.28. Acts 23.5. Tit. 32. And can
you, like those wicked Idolators, Isay 8.21. Curse your King and your God, and
look upward: and like those unjust, carnal, brutish Beasts, (made to be
destroyed, and reserved to the day of Judgment to be punished) despise
Dominion, speak evil of Dignities, Kings, Kingship, 2 Pet. 9. to 14. Jude 8.9,
10. for which the Cospel it self denounces, Woe unto you, perishing in the
gainsaying of Core, Jude 11 that you shall utterly perish in your own
Corruption, and receive the reward of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.12, 13. Christ
himself more tha^ once enjoins you in the Cospel, To render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, to wit, all his Dues, Tributes, Custom, Fear, Honor,
Mat. 22.17, 21. Mar. 12.16, 17. Lu. 20.22, 24, 25. Romans 13.7. how can or dare
you then wrongfully forciblie take away and detain from your rightful King and
Caesar, not only all these his Dues and Crown Lands too, but his very Crown
and life to boot, and instead of making restitution of them to his Son when he
came to demand the fruits of his Fathers Vineyard, do and say with those wicked
Husbandmen in the Gospel, Mat. 21.38, 39. Lu. 20.14. this is the Heir come let
us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours, and cast him out of the
Vineyard. O remember the sad doom which Christ himself and all his Auditors
have denounced against you for it in these Texts, and Luke 19. 27. then tremble
at it. If all these Precepts will not affect nor reform you, Consider, That it
has been the general constant importunate desire of all Nations, and Gods own
People too, (wherein God himself has gratified them) to set up Kings to judge,
rule them, and fight their battles, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. 1 Samuel 8.5.19, 20, 22.
Jer. 25.18 to 27. For all the people unanimouslie to rejoice, and express
their gladness, contentment, satisfaction delight, triumph, at their Kings
solemn inaugurations, with Trumpets, Feasts, Shouts, Acclamations; and to echo
out this unanimous public Ovation, again and again, God save the King, Let the
King live, O King live for ever, and to use the self-same expressions in all
their private and public Addresses 1 Samuel 11.24. 2 Samuel 16.16. 1 Kings
1.25.34, 39. 2 Kings 11.12. 2 Chronicles. 23 11. Ezra 6.10. Psalm. 72.10, 15. Dan.
2.4. c. 3.9. c. 6.6.21. Mat. 21^5.9. And will you be Antipodes to all other
Nations, yea to Gods own people in all Ages, and cry out still with united
shouts, O do not save but destroy, crucify, behead, extirpate, King and
Kingship too; away with them, away with them from the earth, let them never
live but die, die, and that for evermore? What madness, what frenzy is this?
When the wicked Jews cried out to Pilate against our Savior Jesus Christ, (who
was born King of the Jews, Mat. 2.2.) away with him, away with him, crucify
him, crucify him. Pilate himself used this Argument to repress their fury, 1
John 9.12. to 23.
Behold your King, shall I crucify your King. At which they were so
non-plussed, that their Chief Priests had no other Answer but this to evade it,
We have no King but Caesar, If thou let this Man go thou art not Caesar's
Friend, whosoever makes himself a King speaks against Caesar: upon which he
deli^^^ed him over to them to be crucified. And when Pilate put this Title on
his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the JEWS, the Chief Priests were angry
at it, and said to Pilate, write not King of the JEWS, but that he said, I am
King of the Jews; being all convinced, that it was a most barbarous, shameful,
inhuman, worse than Jewish act, for any Subjects or people to crucify their
lawful King, though in a way of Public Justice; whence the Apostle thus
reasons, 1 Cor. 2.8. That had the Princes of this world, (and Jews themselves)
known or believed Christ to be their King; they would not have crucified the
Lord of Glory, And shall you not prove then far more transcendently impious,
treacherous than the worst of Jew, of Mortals; not only in your former
crucifying, beheading your undoubted, known, lawful, hereditary King, which
they abhorred to do, but his Kingly Office and Posterity too; if you cry still,
away with them, away with them, wittingly, wilfully, uncessantly, their blood
be on us and our Children after us; And will not the wrath of God come upon you
and yours to the uttermost for this your high provocation, as it did upon these
Jews, if you do not speedily repent of it? 1 These. 2.15, 16. It was the
loyalty, piety of David, (a Man Acts 13.22.
after Gods own heart, a gallanter Commander, Soldier, Conqueror, than the
best and greatest of you;) when he was persecuted in the Field by his Sovereign
King Saul and his Army, hunted as a Partridge from place to place to take away
his life, and had several opportunities to destroy him without danger put into
his hands, and was twice importuned by his rude Soldiers to slay him, or
permit them to do it; that he rebuked this evil spirit and counsel in them,
and gave them this Answer, Sam. 24.3. to 20. c. 26.8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, that I should
stretch forth my Hand against the Lords Anointed, seeing he is the anointed of
the Lord, destroy him not, FOR WHO CAN stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed AND BE INNOGENT: And when the Amalekite brought tidings to him of
Saul's death, telling him, that he had slain him by Saul's own command; and
presented him with his Crown and bracelets, 2 Samuel 4.10, 11, 12,
expecting a great reward from him for those good tidings, being formerly
anointed by God to succeed him: He gave him no other answer nor reward but
this; How? wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy hand to destroy the Lords
anointed? Thy blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified against thee
saying; I HAVE SLAIN THE LORDS ANOINTED. And he called one of the young men and
said, Go near and fall upon him; And he smote him that he died. And David and
all the men that were with him ^ent their clothes, and lamented with a most
pathetical lamentation over Saul; recorded for ever in sacred writ, 2 Samuel
1.12. to the end. The like reward he gave to the murderers of Ishbosheth his
competitor, 2 Samuel 4.10, 11, 12. And can you then conceit you were guided by
the holy Spirit of God which dwelt in David? Or that you deserve the Title, of
men after Gods own heart, of Saints, of honorable, pious Commanders, Soldiers,
for speaking, declaring, acting against your K. diametrically contrary to him
in all these particulars: and glorying in it as your highest praise, valor,
Saintship? His tender heart 1 Samuel 24.4, 5.
smote him to the quick, for cutting off only the skirt of King Saul's garment
privily, (when he refused to offer the least violence to his person, as his
Soldiers counseled him) because he had cut off Saul skirt: and will not your
Adamantine hearts, ( Job 11.44.
harder than the nether Millstone) yet smite you with the least compunction for
cutting off KING CHARLES HIS HEAD publicly, and parting not only his Garments
amongst you, (as the Mat. 27.35.
Soldiers did our Saviors, when they crucified him) but his Crown and
Kingdoms too? After David succeeded Saul in his Throne, his Captains, Soldiers,
People, were so careful to preserve his life from the least appearance of
danger, 2 Samuel 18 3.
That when he would have gone out to Battle against his rebellious Son Absalom,
who usurped the Crown: They answered him, Thou shall not go forth, for if we
fly away or half of us dye, they will not set their hearts on us, but now thou
art as ten thousand of us; yea they swore to him at another time, Thou shall no
more go out with us to Battle, least thou quench the light of Israel, 2 Samuel
21.17. And when Absalom was slain, All the People were at strife through all
the Tribes of Israel, saying, Absalom whom we anointed over us is dead in
Battle: Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the King back?
Whereupon they earnestly contended who should be the first that should bring
back the King, 2 Samuel 19.9, 10, 14, 15, 41, 42, 43. And can you then not only
professedly go out to Battle against the King himself and Parliament too,
against all Parliament-Votes, O^dinances, Declarations, Commissions, by which
you we^e raised, ^or their mutual defense: but destroy and slay them both, in
cold blood, after the Battle ended by a Friendly Treaty, to prevent all accord
between them, and instead of bringing the King again to his Royal City,
Parliament, Throne, in peace and safety from the Isle of Wight, not speak one
word the^eof, but bring him only back again, to a most disloyal, illegal bloody
execution, and not repent of, but persevere in this unparalled treachery
against his son, even after your anointed Absalom (who engaged you in these
unsaintly, unsoldierly, Un-English Treasons) by the 2 Chronicles. 13.20.
stroke of God himself is dead, and his Son set aside by your selves, through
divine retaliation? In few words, can it ever be your honor, glory, a Saint^,
to be the Instrument^, Executioners of Gods wrath and vengeance upon your own
Native Kings, Kingdoms, Churches, Country, to oppress, consume, and eat out
all their public, private Wealth, Revenues, and burden them with endless
Taxes, Excises, to maintain your needless, useless forces, only to overawe,
Ezech. 21.27.
overturn them all, yea our Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, with your own
new-modelled Governments, and Governors too, one after another, till they all
be brought to total and final desolation? To do the works of Assyrians,
Babilonians, Turks, Goths, Vandals, Isay 10.5, 7. Ie^. 25.9, etc.
the Rods of Gods anger, his Battel-axes, the staff of his indignation, to
shake, destroy Churches, Kingdoms, Nations, Persons, and make them desolate;
yea worse than the worst of these, who never shoke, destroyed their own Kings,
Kingdoms, Countries, but their foreign Enemies or Neighbors, against whom Isay
10.6. c. 7.18, 19.
God sent them in his wrath, for their crying provocations, to break them in
pieces and tread them down like mire in the Strees? If you repute this your
glory, and resolve to persist therein, without speedy and sincere repentance of
the mischiefs you have done, consider and read over, over and over again at
your leisure, the taunting proverb, severe judgments, divine and final reward,
menaced to, inflicted by God himself by an irreversible decree, and
irresistible power, upon the King of Babylon himself, his royal Posterity, the
City of Babylon, the whole Assyrian Host, Nation, Kingdom, for shaking,
destroying, breaking in pieces other Kings, Kingdoms, Nations, and Gods own
people too for their sins, (as you have served your own Kings, Kingdoms,
Churches, Parliaments, Nations, Laws, Liberties, against all Oaths, and
Obligations, to the contrary) recorded at large in sacred writ, Isay, 14.4. to
30^ c. 31.8, 9. Jer, 50.17, 18. chapter 51. throughout. And then sleep quietly in
your Beds, and bless your selves in these your successful Wickednesses if
you can; in respect of your present earthly prosperity, or your Posterityes
after you. As for your eternal Estate in another World, consider that dismal
Text, Psalm. 92.6, 7. A brutish man knows not, neither does a Fool understand
this: when as the wicked spring as the Grass^, and when all the workers of
Iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. and Ps.
9.16, 17. It has been your business of late years, and now again, (after your
seeming repentance for it in your new Declaration, May 6.) to shut our Kings,
Lords, honestest faithfullest Members of the Commons House out of Parliament,
and forcibly to seclude them when they knocked for entrance, yea to cast some
of them into Hell, and other Prisons for discharging their Trusts, and Mr.
Prynne beyond all others. O take heed, that when you shall come t^ knock at
Heaven Gates for entrance, and cry, Lu. 13.25. to 30.
Lord, Lord, open unto us, you receive not that Answer recorded in the Gospel
from Christ himself; I tell you, I know you not whence you are, Depart from me
all ye workers of Iniquity into the lowermost Hell, and everlasting chains of
Darkn^sse, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth; when you shall
see Abraham, Isaac (yea the secluded Mem^ers) in the Kingdom of God, (which no
1 Cor. 6 9, 10, 11. Ga^. 15.20 21.5.5. Ps. 15.1, 23.4, 5.
Murderers, Rebelli^us, S^ditio^s, Unrighteous Covetous Persons, Plunderers,
Traitors, n^ P^rnitious D^stroyers, S^bverters of Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments,
shall inherit,) and your selves shut out for ever.

You all pretend you are setting up Christ's Kingdom, and propagating his Gospel
amongst us by your Arms, Swords, Pistols, and Army Predicants: But we read in
the Gospel, ^ That the Soldiers armed with Swords, Staves, Spears, were the
only Officers and persons employed to apprehend King Mat. 26.47, 67, 68. c 27.
to 38, 66. c. 28.11 to 16. John 19, 23, 24.32.34.
Jesus himself, and bring him to justice before Pilat. The only men who
stripped him of his own Garments, put upon him a scarlet Robe, then plotted and
set a Crown of Thorns on his Head, instead of a Crown of Gold, put a Reed into
his hand instead of a Scepter, and then mocked, spit in his face, reviled,
buffetted, and bowed their Knees unto him in scorn, saying, Hayl King of the
Jews, and led him away to crucify him; After which they gave him Vinegar to
drink migled with gall, (instead of a Cordial) crucified him, then parted his
Garments; casting lots. After this they set a watch upon his Sepulcher, lest
his Disciples should take him thence. And when he was risen from the dead, to
smother the truth of his Resurrection 'The Chief Priests taking Counsel
together, gave large money to the Soldiers, saying, say ye his Disciples came
by night and stole him away whiles we slept: So they took the money and did as
they were taught, and this their lie is commonly reported among the Jews till
this day. These things truly the Soldiers did, as the Evangelists record to
their perpetual honor. After which Herod's men of war and Soldiers (who
likewise set Christ at naught, mocked him, then arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe,
and sent him to Pilate to condemn, Lu. 23.11.) stretched forth their hands to
vex certain of the Church, killed James the Apostle with the Sword, apprehended
Peter and put him in Prison, where he was guarded day and night with four
Quaternions of Soldiers, to prevent an escape, Acts 12.1. to 8. But that ever
they did set up Christ's Kingdom, and propagate the Gospel by their Swords and
Arms otherwise than this, the Gospel it self is silent: Yea ^ Chron 22.8. c.
28.3.
God himself in precise terms resolves, That men of war, who have fought great
Battles, and spilt much Blood upon the Earth, (though against his enemies)
shall not be at all honored, employed in building of his Temple. Yea this as
the express word of the Lord to Zerubbabel, when Gods House was to be rebuilt,
and his Kingdom propagagated; not by ARMY, (so the Hebrew and Margin render it)
nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts, is this work to be
done) Zech. 4.6. Our Savior Christ is both the Heb. 7.2. Isaiah 9.6. 1 Pet.
4.9.
King, and Prince of peace: his Gospel the Romans 10.15. Ephesians. 6.16. c. 2.17.
Gospel of peace: his Apostles and Ministers 2 Cor. 5.20. c. 14.32. Ephesians. 2.17.
Ambassadors of peace: and his Kingdom consists Romans 14.17.
in Righteousness and peace. Now nothing is more Isay 59.7, 8. 2 Chronicles. 15.5,
6. Ier. 4.10, 19, 20, c. 8, 15, 16.
directly opposite, destructive to, inconsistent with this Peace, to the King,
Prince, Gospel, Ambassadors, and Kingdom of peace, as Armies, Soldiers, War,
Arms: And therefore it is observable, That when our Savior sent forth his
Disciples to preach the Gospel, and set up his kingdom, he did not make choice
of Captains of thousands, or hundreds, nor yet of Soldiers, or Armed men: but
of mean Mat. 10.9, 10. Lu. 9, 3. c. 22.35. Mar. 6, 8, 9.
Fishermen, and others altogether averse from war; commanding them in express
terms, Mat. 10.9, 10. Lu. 9, 3. c. 22.35. Mar. 6, 8, 9.
to take neither Gold, Silver, nor Brass in their purses, nor scrip, nor two
coats, nor yet Staves, (much less Swords, Pikes, Horses, Pistols) nor any
thing else belonging to a Soldier, no offensive or defensive Arms, at the most
but a single Genesis 32.10. Exodus 12.11. c. 21.19. 2 Kings 4.29.
walking staff, like Travelers, to help, support them: Yea Christ expressly
resolves, That his Ministers are and must be no Fighters, no Strikers, nor
Strivers, (much less then professed Warriers) John 18.36. 1 Timothy 3.3. 2 Timothy
2, 24. They have no Sword, but that of the Spirit and their Mouth, the word of
God, and fight with it only against men's Sins, Lusts, not Persons, Ephesians. 6.17.
Heb. 4.12. Rev. 19.15, 21. Yea when Peter once did but draw his Sword to defend
King Jesus against the Soldiers, who came with Swords and Staves to apprehend
him, he said unto him, Mat. 26.52. Put up thy Sword again in to its place, for
they that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword: Nay the state of the
Gospel is so inconsistent with Soldiers, Arms, War, That upon the sincere
profession of it, God requires the Professors thereof, to beat their Swords
into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, Nation shall not lift up
Sword against Nation, Neither shall they learn War any more; but to live in
peace with all men, and keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Isay
2.4. Mich. 4.3. Luke 2.14. 1 Cor. 7.15. c. 14.53. Gal. 5.22. 2 Cor. 13.11. Ephesians.
4 3. Col. 3.15. 2 These. 3.16. Heb. 12.14. Never was the Kingdom, Gospel, Church
of Jesus Christ promoted, advanced in any Age or place by war, and Swordmen;
but many See Knolls Turk^sh History, Pauli Orosii Historia. The History of the
Arbigenses.
Churches have been utterly destroyed, extirpated, depraved, corrupted; none
ever edified, planted enlarged, much less reformed by them. Our present
Armie-Saints, and new Military-Apostles by their fighting, praying, preaching,
fasting, instead of promoting the Gospel, Protestant Religion, and Church of
England, have almost totally subverted them, by See Mr. Edwards Gangraenaes.
broaching, countenancing, protecting all sorts of Heresies, Blasphemies, Sects,
Schisms, Errors, Opinions, Religions, setting up new Conventicles of Sectaries,
Seducers in all places, opposing, slighting, traducing the very Church,
Doctrine, Ministry of England; the very Function, Ordination of Ministers, by
decrying, detaining their Tithes and former maintenance, as litigious, Jewish,
Antichristian; by swallowing up all the Lands, Revenues of Bishops, Deans,
Chapters, Archdeacons, and a great part of our Ministers maintenance by
sequestrations, and monthly Contributions to maintain their Army Evangelists,
now ready to swallow up the remainder that is left, and continuing in a body
for that purpose, by the very Jesuits instigation, who not only professedly
teach in their public University at Madrid, the Art of War by Land and Sea,
the making of Guns, Gunpowder, fireworks, all manner of Military Engines, of
which they read Lectures, as most agreeable to the Name, Profession of their
Martial Father Ignatius, as Relatio de stratagematis and Sophismatis Iesuitarum
c. 4.
Alphonsus Vargas a Spanish Priest records; but boast, Lud. Lucius, Hist.
Jesuit. l. 1. c. 7. p. 156. Cornelius Cornelii, Epist. Com. in Minores
Prophetas: And his Epistle to his Historical and Legal Vindication, etc.
That the General of the Jesuits, can bring into the Field more Soldiers, of
his own order, in a shorter time than any Christian King whatsoever: and
likewise expressly affirm, That their Gopsel and Religion is to be propagated,
set up; the Heretics, and Evangelical Sectaries, who resist them, refuted,
extirpated, abolished with Fire, Armies, Sword, and War, in England and
elsewhere, as Jacobus Cruciger (Rector of the Jesuits at Lansperg) in his
explication of the Rules of their Order, Parlus Windeck, De extirpandis
Heresibus Antid. 10, 11. p. 404, 412, 480. Thuanus, Hist. l. 65. p. 238. l. 66.
p. 299. Franciscus Verona. Apol. pro Johanne Castle. par. 5. c. 13. Hospinian,
Hist. Jesuitica. l. 4. p. 212, 213, 214. Hasenmullerus, Hist. Jesuit c. 1. and
Spec. Jesuiticum, p. 61. unanimously attest. O then discern at last whose
Gospel, Kingdom, you are now propagating by your Army, Arms, and Westminster
Conventicle, not Jesus Christ's, but the very Jesuits, his greatest Underminers.

Many of you (especially Millinaries, and Fifth Monarchy-men,) pretend, that
Jesus Christ is now coming to reign personally on Earth a thousand years, and
that you shall all reign together, as Joynt-Kings with, or Vece-royes under
him. But the setting up of a New Republic and Aristocracy, is wholly
inconsistent with this Kingdom and Monarchy of Christ you now expect; which
suites only with a Temporal King and Kingdom. How this Opinion will accord with
Christ's own description of it, John 18.16. My Kingdom is not of this World, or
Paul's, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, (nor yet Arms and
Armies,) but Righteousness^ and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, (which
Soldiers, Armies usually destroy, not produce, or propagate) let those who
maintain it, consider. When Mr. Prynne was kept close Prisoner in Pendennis
Castle by John Bradshaws and our New Republicans illegal warrant in July, 1651.
some four days after his imprisoment there, diverse Officers and Soldiers of
the Garrison, who had long debated every day for sundry Months before, their
present expected personal reign of Christ on Earth, repaired to him, to know
his Opinion conce^ning it, as he was taking fresh Ai^ in the Bowling-Alley,
standing in a ring about him: Upon which he first demanded their Opinions of
it: when they had all fully utte^ed their Conceits in the Affirmative with much
considence; M. Pryn briefly answered, That now they had beheaded one of our
Kings, and almost conquered another, and o^r 3. Kingdoms, they tho^ght, talked
of nothing but being all Kings themselves, and of reigning person^lly on Earth
cheek by joll with Christ himself, as his Fellow-Kings, no Earthly King being
fit to be a Companion for such transcendent s^blinated Saints as they thought
themselves. But they were all most grossly mistaken: for that very Text of Rev.
20.4, 5. (which he read out of one of their Bibles) whereon they principally
g^ounded their Opinions and Reign, was pointblank against them. And I saw the
Souls OF THEM THAT WERE BEHEADED, (not of them who took off their own Christian
Protestant Kings and Nobles Heads) for the Witness of Jesus, and the word of
God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, neither had
received his mark upon their foreheads, nor in their hands, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years: (is it not added on the Earth, and Chap.
22.5. rather proves their reign to be in the New Jerusalem in Heaven.) But the
rest of the dead, (who were not thus beheaded) lived not again,) (much less
then reigned with Christ,) till the thousand years were past. By which it is
most apparent, That if Christ shall reign personally on Earth for a thousand
years, as they all conceived, and that this time was now at hand: yet not one
of them should, or possibly could reign with him, if this Text be Vmpire: For
the words are most positive, that none else shall thus reign with Jesus Christ
a thousand years, but only the souls of those who were beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, etc. It being expressly averred in the affirmative;
then in the Negative, But the rest of the Dead lived not till the thousand
years were past. Upon which account, the late King, and other Protestants whose
Heads they had cut off, and those Godly Christians they had slain, murdered in
the Wars; and perchance himself and others who had lost their Ears, Liberties,
Estates, and were shut up close Prisoners, for the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
and had not worshipped, but opposed the Beast of Rome, his Image,
Superstitions, innovations, Proceedings against the late King, Parliament,
Religion, nor received the mark of the Beast in their Foreheads or hands, might
peradventure reign with Christ a thousand years. But as for themselves and
other Army Saints, who made it their business, and reputed it their honor,
Saintship, to cut off the Heads of their own Christian Kings, Nobles, Brethren;
to destroy Kingdoms, Parliaments, and their Privileges; secure, imprison, close
imprison their Members, worshipping the very beast and his Image, and visibly
receiving his mark in their Foreheads, hands, by these their Jesuitical
practices; keeping up an Army and Iron-Sword still drawn amongst us, to the
great oppressing, undoing of their Native Country, of purpose to keep off the
wooden Cross of Jesus Christ, which he Mat. 16.24. Mar. 10.21. Lu. 9.23. c.
14.27.
expressly enjoined them with self-denying Spirits to take up daily, and follow
him, and that other Cross, their own Consciences tell them, these perfideous,
treacherous practices of theirs justly demerit, they could have no ground at
all from this or any other Text to reign with Christ in his Heavenly or
earthly Kingdom, out of which these their seditious, unrighteous, and bloody
practices did eternally exclude them, as the 10, 14, 15. verses of this very
Chapter, Rev. 22.11, 15. 1 Cor. 6.8, 9, 10. Gal. 5.20, 21. resolve. Therefore
if ever they desired or expected thus to reign with Christ, they must all
presently repent of these their former Exorbitances, put off their Swords from
their sides, take up Christ's daily cross, lay down their own heads upon the
Block, and then willingly cheerfully lose them, not for their 7 reasons and
Rebellions, but for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and the word of God, and
opposition of their former treasonable Plots of the Beast of Rome; then they
might expect to reign with him, otherwise they had no hopes by the resolution
of this Text, and that paralleled place, 2 Timothy 2.11.12. which excellently
explains it; If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him: If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him: If we deny him (by refusing to suffer
with or for him) he will also deny us. With which words these formerly
confident Swordmen were so non plassed, that they had not one word to reply,
and gave over all future discourses of this subject ever since, being as
unwilling to lose their Soldiers pay or Heads for the testimony of Christ, as
the Mat. 19 21, 22.
young man in the Gos^el was, To sell all he had and give it the poor, to gain
eternal life and Treasures in Heaven

Lastly, consider, That as it is the highest glory, excellency of God himself,
the greatest comfort, felicity, security of his Church, Saints, that he is the
living God steadfast for ever, Dan. 6.26 That he is the Lord and changes not,
Mal. 3.6. That with him is no variableness, or shadow of change, James 1.17.
That he is the same immutable God for ever, from everlasting to everlasting:
That his Counsels, thoughts of heart, purposes, truth, faithfulness, commands,
loving-kindnesse, Covenant stand fast, firm, unalterable to all generations,
for ever and ever, Psalm. 3 11. Psalm 90.1, 2. Psalm 100.5. Psalm. ^02.16, 17
Lam. 5.19. Hebr. 8.13 Psalm 110.4. So it is the most transcendent Honor,
Dignity, Glory of God the Fathers, and Jesus Christ's Kingship, Kingdom, and the
chief consolation, exultation, Beatitude of their Subjects and chosen Saints;
That the Lord is, and fitteth King for ever; That he is an everlasting King,
which reigns and shall reign for ever and ever; that his Kingdom, Dominion,
Throne, are all everlasting, established, and enduring for evermore, for ever
and ever, throughout all Generations; that they cannot be moved, and shall have
no end, Psalm 10.16. Psalm. 29.10. Psalm. 9^.8 Psalm. 45.6. Psalm. 145.13. Psalm.
146.10 Isay 19.7. Dan. 4.3.34. c. 7.14, 27. Jer. 10.10. Mar. 4.7, Lu. 1.32, 33.
2 Pet. 1.11. Rev. 11.15. Hebr. 12.28. Lam. 5.19. So also it is the praise,
honor, glory of all Nations, Churches, People, Kingdoms, Governments, and
every particular person, both as a man, Christian, Counselor, or public
Minister of State, to be constant, steadfast, fixed, resolute, immoveble, and
unchangeable in their Oath, Religion, Worship, Faith, Principle^, Co^nsels,
resolution^, con^^^^, when true, ju^^, honest, upright, ^incere, commendable,
and in their Kingly, public Government, evidenced by its Antiquity, the
experiences of many successive generations to be beneficial, safe, ju^t,
profitable, honorable for the gegeneralitie of the people, and firmlie
established by Laws, Oaths, Covenants, prescription, with all other civil and
sacred ratifications: as is most apparent by Josh. 24.15, 16. to 28. P^al. 15,
4.1. Chron. 28.7, 8, 9. Prove. 24.21. Psalm. 57.7. P^al. 46.1, 2, 3. Ps. 27.1, 3.
Jer. 2.11. Romans 8.35, 36, ^6, 37, 38, 39. 1 Cor. 15.58. cap. 7.37. Heb. 6.18,
19. Col. 2.5, 6, 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. c. 3.3. Ephesians. 6.13, 14. Col. 1.23. Acts
20.24. c. 21.13, 14. Romans 13 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Tit. 3.1. 2 Chronicles.
13.5, 6. c. 11.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. c. 23.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. c. 26.1. c. 33.24,
25. 2. Sam. 7.13, 20, 29. 1 Chronicles. 17.13, 14, 22. to 28. c. 22.10.2 Chron. 9.8.
c. 21.7. Ez. 37.45. Prove. 29.14. worthy special observation. But it is the
sin, shame, reproach, infamy, dishonor, r^in of any Nation, Church, people,
kingdom, State, Counsel, person, to be addicted to changes, unstable, variable,
unconstant, fickle, mutable, t^ss^d to and fro, backward and forward, upward
and downward, this way and that way, like children, fools, reeds, Vanes,
weathercocks, empty, clouds, wandering stars, the restless sea and its waves,
t^ssed and turned about with every wind and storm; like wild asses,
dromedaries, traversing their ways; or whorish women gadding about to change
their lovers, ways, and doting upon every Novelty or New lover they meet with,
as Genesis 49.4. Ps. 78.8, 9, 10. to 40. Ezech. 16.25. to 60. Jer. 2.11. to 37.
Pro. 7.11.12. Jam. 1.6.8. Hab. 1.14, 15. Pro. 24.21, 22. I^ay 24.5. Ps. 106.20.
Mat. 11.7. Romans 1.23.25. Acts 28.6. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 14. to 22. c. 3.17. 2 Timothy
3.6, 7. Ephesians. 4.14. Jude 6, 12, 13, 16, 24. resolve. Why then are you always
ringing the changes in our Churche^, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Government,
Religion, modelling, unmodelling, chopping, changing, altering, building them
up and pulling them down again from day to day, against all Oaths, Vows,
Covenants, Laws, Establishments, Policy, Prudence, Justice, Safety, Settlement,
by which you become the highest transgr^ss^rs, Gal. 2.18? Is this to show your
selves Saints, men of God, or prudent Senators or Statesmen? No, no: but to be
that generation of spoylers and treacherous men, (no more to be believed,
trusted by any, though you speak fair words, may swear and vow) who have
spoiled and dealt very treacherously with your brethren and the House of your
Fathers, (who raised, entrusted you for their defense and preservation;)
against whom God denounces a Woe, and answerable retaliation in conclusion: to
be spoiled and dealt treacherously with your selves, (as some of you, your new
Protector, and those now sitting have been already dealt with, and others who
made them treacherous) Is. 33.1. Jer. 12.1, 2, 6. c. 3.4. Yea such Neighbors,
brethren as will utterly supplant, deceive, slander their very nearest, dearest
relations, whose habitation is in the midst of Deceit; whom God himself
commands us to take heed of, and not to trust, for they are all an assembly of
treacherous, double-minded men, unstable in all their ways; empty clouds
carried about with a tempest; raging waves of the sea which cannot rest,
foaming out their own shame, casting out mire and dirt; wandering stars, to whom
are reserved the Hackness of darkn^ss ^or ever, as three Prophets, and 3
Apostles resolve in express terms, Isay 57.20, 21. Jer. 9.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Mich.
7.5, 6. Jam. 1.6, 7.2 Pet. 2.17. Jude 12, 13. O therefore now at last repent,
repent with greatest grief, shame, horror of this you. Treachery, Inconstancy,
and Psalm. 95.8, 10, 11.
harden not your hearts as in the day of temptation and provocation, (December.
6. 1648. and May 7. 1659.) when you erred in your hearts, and wandered out of
the way of G^d, peace, truth, justice, righteousn^ss, hon^sty, piety, duty,
into Isay 59.8.
such J^s^itical paths, wherein there is nothing but wasting and destruction
(as God resolves, and all men find by 11 years sad experiment,) else he will
swear in his wrath, you shall never enter into his rest.

If these Evangelical, Scriptural Expost^lations will not persuade you, to
sound a present retreat, and sue out a Bill of divorce from your false Good Old
Cause for our future public safety, peace settlement; M. P. shall then entreat
you to believe your own Declarations: In your last, May 6. 1659. you truly
declare to the world That the only wise God in the course of his providence,
has disappointed; all your endeavors, and rendered all (your) means to
obviate the dangers and settle these Nations in peace and prosperity, UTTERLY
INEFFECTVAL. Will you know the true reason of it? It is because ever since you
have interrupted and forcibly dissoved the Treaty of Peace between the late
King and his Parliament, December. 6. 1648. you have walked in such crooked
counsels, paths of iniquity, blood, violence, Treason, destruction, as
whosoever goes therein shall NOT KNOW PEACE, and have neither known nor
pursued the true way of Peace; as God himself resolves you, if you dare credit
him, Isay 59.2. to 16. which you may do well to study. If you will not believe
God, nor Mr. Prynne herein, pray then believe your own selves, whiles in your
right senses, before the good spirit of God departed from you, and now pursue
that only way to our peace and settlement you then at least 4. times
successively prescribed. In your humble Remonstrance from his Excellency and
THE ARMY under his command, presented to the Commissioners at St. Albans, 25
June 1647. p. 12. these are your own printed words: We do f^rther clearly
confess, We do not see how there can be any peace to the Kingdom from or
lasting* Nota.
without a due consideration of and provision for the Righ^s Quiet* and
Immunity of His Majesty's Royal Family and late partakers. And herein we think
that tender and equitable dealing (as supposing their case had been ^^rs) and a
Spirit of Common love and Justice diff^sing it self to the good and
preservation of all, will make up the most Glorious Conquest over their hear^s
(i^ God in mercy see it good) to make them and the whole people of the Land
lasting friends, The like words, expressions to the same effect you use in your
Representation of the Army, 14 June 1647. and in your Generals Letter to both
Houses of Parliament, 6 July 1647. Declaring it the General sense of all or
most of the Officers of the Army, to avoid all Harshness, and afford all kind
usage to his Majesty's person, Family, and late Party; as the most honorable,
prudent, and Christian way and the most hopeful course* to take away the
present and future seeds of War amongst us to posterity* and to procure a
lasting Peace and a Government in this distracted Nation: And in your Proposals
1 A^g: 1647. for The settlement of a firm peace, you have the like expressions
again: as Mr. Prynne in his Speech in Parliament, Dec. 4. 1648. (p. 79, 80, 81,
82.) evidenced to the House of Commons, persuading them to pursue this only way
of Peace, and not your quite contradictory Remonstr: 20 Nov. 1648. (when
debauched by the Jesuits, the only way to unsetlement, tumults, wars,
desolation) as experience has now sufficiently demonstrated. O therefore now
at last embrace, pursue this true and only way to safety, peace, settlement by
your own quadruple Resolutions: and then we shall soon have peace, quietness
safety, and assurance for ever.

Mr. Prynne having thus discharged his Conscience toward the Army Officers and
Swordmen; the Primum mobile of all our late, present motions and commotions,
wheeling about all the rest, he shall in the second place address himself to
their subordinate, selected Westminster Conventicle, now fitting under their
force and lure, to act, vote what they prescribe them; forcibly Lu. 6.22.
separating their old fellow Members from their company; and himself above all
others, who has lost, suffered, spoken, written, acted more from time to time
for God, Religion, Laws, Liberties, Properties, Parliaments, and their
privileges, against all Jesuitical underminers, than all of the^ put together,
notwithstanding all discouragements, ingrate requitals from them and others. He
shall only desire them in relation to the old and newly secluded Members, to
answer than one expost^larie Text, Mal. 2.9. Have we not all one Father? Has
not one God created us? (yea one Mother, Church, Country engendered, nourished,
entrusted us all alike:) Why then do ye deal treachero^sly every man against
his brother by profaning the Covenant of our Fathers? As for your New erected,
revived Republike; you so much dote on; 1 Cor. 4, 8.
Wherein ye have reigned as Kings without (yea against) us, and we would to God
ye did reign, that we also might reign with you; He shall desire you for your
own, our Churches, Religions sake, safety, honor, to consider its Papal,
Jesuitical, Antichristian, Spanish, French originals, and its sad effects, to
their advantage, and the ruin of our Religion, already discovered, which you
cannot gain say: To weigh his former expostulations with the Army Officers,
Soldiers, and these few Scriptural (to omit many other Political, Historical
considerations, beyond all refutation, and more to be valued than all Politics
of carnal heads or hearts,) to enamor you again with hereditarie Kings and
Kingship, which you have so rashly, brutishly, persidiously abjured, out of
mere self ends and interests, having not the least syllable in Scripture to
justify either the forcible bloody manner of erecting, new modelling your
Illegitimate Commonwealth, or your adopting it in the place of our old Kingdom
and Kingship.

First of all consider, that as Jesus Christ himself is a King by birth and
inheritance, Mat. 2.2. Lu. 1.32, 33. So it is also his supremest, royallest
Title, Attribute in the very Gospel, that he is Dan. 2.47. Col 1.16, 17. c.
2.10. 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Rev. 17.14. c. 19.18. Ephesians. 1, 21.
King, and Lord of Kings, Lord of Lords, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth,
and the head of all Principalities and Powers: Now the abolishing of Kings,
kingship, Princes, Lords, divests Jesus Christ himself of these his most royal
Titles and Soveraigntie; Because he is thus styled only in relation to earthly
Kings, Princes, Lords, who rule and reign over Kingdoms, Nations, by, for,
through, under him, as his Ministers, Officers, Viceroyes, Deputies, and are
appointed, commissioned, accountable to, judged, removed by him alone; as
subordinate Kings were by the Emperors, Kings of Babylon, Assyria, Parthia, and
our Edgar, who were styled, King of Kings, because Kings were Subjects to them,
held their Crowns by, from, and under them, and did homage to them as their
Subjects, as you may read at large in Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, part 1. chapter
3. sect. 2. and Dan: 2.21.37, 38.47. c. 4.17.25. many of these Kings losing
this Title of King of Kings, when their subordinate Kings and kingdoms
revolted, ceased, or escheated into their own hands: In relation to these
Titles of Christ, it is expressly prophesied, Ps. 72.10.11. The KINGS of
Tarshish, and OF THE ISLES shall bring presents, (principally intended,
ve^ified of this our Island of Great Britain, which Ep. Vshers Eccles. Brit.
Antiq. c. 3 4, 5, 6, 7.8. Spelmanni Council. Tom. 1. and Epist. Ded. to it. Fox
Acts and Mon. in H. 8. E. 6. Qu. Eliz. and their Statutes to this purpose.
had the first Christian King we read of in all the world, Lucius; the first
Christian Queen, Helena; the first and most glorious Christian Emperor,
Constantine the Great; the first Christian King who opposed, abolished the
Popes Supremacy, Henry the 8. the first Protestant King who by public Acts
of Parliament abolished both the Pope and Popery, and established the reformed
Protestant Religion; and the first Protestant Queen who did the like; to wit,
King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth; and more devout pious Kings, Queens,
martyred for religion, canonized for SAINTS, and reputed such in the Churches
of Christ and Kalendars of Saints, than any other Kingdom or Country in the
world, how great or populous soever, as our own and foreign Histories record to
our immortal Honor.) It then follows, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer
gifts: yea, ALL KINGS shall fall down before him (in way of adoration, and by
their president and leading example) all Nations (under them) shall serve him.
How can, how dare you then abolish Kings, Kingship, Lords (especially in our
Island) without committing the highest Treason, not only against our Kings and
Lords; but the Lord Jesus Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Since
REGNUM ANGLIAE EST REGNUM DEI, and IPSE SIBI REGES PROVIDEBIT: as our Malmsb de
Gestis Regum l. 3 c. 13. Mat. Westminster. Anno 1055. Polycbron. l. 6. c. 18 Sim
Dunelm col 136.

Bromton, col. 909.955. Ael^edus de Vita and Mirac. Edw. Confess.


Historians inform us:) And can you Rom 9 19. 1 Cor. 10.22.
resist his power with all your armed forces? are you stronger than he, when he
shall enter into judgment with you for depriving him of these Title?

2ly. Consider, It is Gods special promise, covenant made to Abraham the Fat^er
of the Faithful, Gen: 17.6. I will make thee exceeding fruitful, I will make
Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee; And his extraordinary
blessing on Sara, v: 16. I will bless her, and she shall be a Mother of
Nations, and Kings of People shall be of her. 3ly, It was Judah his blessing,
Prerogative, Genesis 49.8.10. Thy Fathers children shall bow down before th^e: The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet
until Shiloh come. 4ly, When Balaam prophesied of the happiness and prosperity
of Israel, he uses these as the highest expressions thereof, N^m. 23.21. etc.
24.7. The sho^t of a KING is among them: and his KING shall be higher than
Agag, and his Kingdoms shall be exalted: 5ly, It is recorded by the Spirit of
God, 2 Samuel 5.12. David perceived, that the Lord had established him King over
Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Isreal's sake. And
when God (after he made him King over them) had promised by the mouth of the
Prophet Nathan, 2 Samuel: 7.10. Moreover I will appoint a place for my people
Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and
move no more, neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them, as before
time, under their Judges: How did God effect this promise? but by establishing
an hereditarie kingdom amongst them in David, during his life, whom he caused
to rest from all his Enemies round about: And when thy days be fulfilled, and
thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which
shall proceed out of thy bowels, and will establish his Kingdom. And thine
House and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, and thy Throne
shall be established forever, Ver: 11, 12, 16. How much holy David was
transported, yea ravished with this News from heaven, and with what enlargement
of Spirit he bl^ss^d God for, and prayed for the accomplishment of it, as the
greatest blessing and confirmation of his people Israel by God himself, v: 23,
24, and the highest honor, blessing, to his own house, you may read to the end
of the Chapter. Thus again amplified by him in his Speech to his Princes, to
his Captains of thousands, of hundreds, Officers, and other mighty men, 1 Chronicles: 28.4. to 10. The Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my
Father to be King over Israel for ever; and he has chosen Judah to be Ruler,
of the house of J^dah the house of my Father; and among the sons of my Father
he liked me, to make me King over all Israel; and of all my sons he has chosen
Solomon my son to sit upon the Throne of the Kingdom of the Lord over Israel.
And he said unto me, I will be his Father; Moreover I will establish his
kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my judgments,
as at this day. Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the congregation of
the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the
commandments of the Lord your God, that you may possess this good Land; and
leave it for an Inheritance for your children after you for ever. An
hereditarie Kingdom being the chiefest means and blessing under God to preserve
the inheritances not only of the Princes, Nobles and mighty men, but even of
Colonels, Captains, and Soldiers themselves, in Gods and David's computation;
who lost all they had, by 2 Kings 17 20, 21, 22, 25.
^orsaking their lawful Hereditarie Kings, and were carried into captivity.
6ly, The accomplishment of this Promise to David, and his seed, was reputed an
extraordinary blessing to the Israelites, not only by King David, Solomon, God
himself, the people o^ Jerusalem and the whole Land, as you may read in the 1
of Kings 1.36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 45, 46, 47, 48. c. 2.4.12. c. 3.6, to 15. c.
8.20, 25, 26, 27. worthy perusal: but even by foreign Kings and Queens: Witness
that memorable Letter of Hiram King of Tire to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 2.11, 12.
Because the Lord has loved his people, he has made thee King over them.
Bl^ss^d be the Lord God of Israel that has made heaven and earth, who has
given to David the King a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding,
that might build an House for the Lord, and an house for his kingdom. And that
speech of the Queen of Sheba to him, 1 King^ 10.9. 2 Chronicles: 9.8. Blessed be the
Lord thy God which delights in thee to set thee on his Throne to be King for
the Lord thy God: Because the Lord thy God loved Israel to establish them for
ever, therefore made he thee King over them to do Justice and Judgment. And
the Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed
such royal Majesty, Honor, and such riches on him and his people too, as had
not been bestowed on any King or people before him, 1 Chronicles: 29.25, 28, 30. 2 Chronicles: 1.9. to the end. Chap. 9.9. to 30. Neh. 13.26. 7ly, God himself records
by King Solomon, Prove. 20.8.26. A King that sateth in the Throne of Judgment
scatters away all evil with his eyes, and brings the wheel over the wicked,
Prove: 29.4.14. The King by Judgment stablisheh the Land; Yea the King that
faithfully judges the Land, his throne shall be established for ever: And he
resolve definitively against all Opponents, Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou o
Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles. 8ly, God himself does specially
promise the Succession and Continuance of Hereditarie Kings and Princes as a
blessing, reward to his people for their obedience to his Commandments, and
chief means of their perpetual continuance in honor, peace and prosperity,
Jer. 17.24, 25, 26. etc. 22.4. And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently
hearken unto me says the Lord, to hallow the Sabbath day, and do no work
thereon, then shall there enter into the Gates of this City, (mark it) Kings
and Princes sitting upon the Throne of David, riding in Chariots, on Horses,
they and their Princes the men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
this City shall remain and flourish for ever.

9ly. It is very remarkable, that though diverse of the hereditarie Kings of
David's posterity were very wicked and idolatrous, yet God himself (though 1 Timothy 6.15. Dan. 2.21. c. 4.25, 35, etc.
King of Kings, who sets up Kings, and pulls them down, and disposes of
the Kingdoms of the earth to whom soever he pleases) by reason of his Oath and
Covenant made to David, would neither remove, nor disinherit them, though he
did very sorely afflict and punish them for their iniquities, Ps. 89, 3, 4, 20.
to 38 2 Samuel 7.11. to 18. 1 King. 11, 12, 13, 39. Of this we have a memorable
Scripture-Presidents 1 King. 15. 3, 4, 5. Abijam King of Judah walked in all
the sins of his Father, which he had done before him, and his heart was not
perfect before the Lord his God, as the heart of David his Father.
Nevertheless for David's sake did the Lord give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set
up his Son after him, and to establish Jerusalem; Because David did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, So 2 Chronicles. 21.5, 6, 7. Jehoram reigned 8
years in Jerusalem, and he walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, like as
did the House of Ahab, for he had taken the Daughter of Ahab to wife, and he
wrought that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. Howbeit the Lord would
not destroy the House of David, because of the Covenant he had made with David,
and as he 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 Kings 11, 36. 2 King. 8.19. Psalm, 132.11.12, 13, 14.
promised to give a light to him and to his Sons for ever Which Texts compared
with Psalm. 132.1, 12, 13, 14. infablibly ratify these thtee conclusions. 1.
That as Gods Covenant and Oath made to David, and his Royal Posterity, did not
determine by David's death, but extended to all his Posterity after him; so our
Oaths of Fealty, Supremacy, Allegiance, and Solemn League and Covenant, made to
the late King, his Heirs and Successors in precise terms, determined not by his
death, but remain to his Royal Posterity, and are perpetually to be performed
to them, under pain of highest perjury, guilt, punishment, as is most apparent
if compared with Genesis 50.25. Exodus 13.19. Josh. 24.32. Josh. 9.15, 18, 19, 20,
21. 1 Samuel 20.16, 17, 23, 42. c. 24.21, 22 2 Samuel 9.1, 3, etc. c. 21.1. to 10.
2ly. That the Sins and wickednesses of David's posterity, did not cause God
himself to break his Oath and Covenant with them, or judicially to deprive or
disinherit them of their Crowns and Kingdom, contrary to his Oath and Covenant,
which he held inviolable and immutable, Ps. 89.3, 4.34 Psalm. 132 11, 12. Heb.
6.17, 18. Much less then may we or any other Subjects, who are but men
infringe our Oaths, Covenants to our sacred hereditarie Kings and their
posterity for their sins or wickedness, nor disinherit the^ of their
Crowns, Scepters, Lives, Realm, Ps. 15.4. Ec. 8 2. 3ly. That a hereditarie
succession of Kings in the Royal Line, though many of them be wicked, is yet a
special means ordained by God for the establishment, peace, perpetuity of their
kingdoms and people: which else would be unsettled, distracted, consumed,
destroyed by civil wars, distractions, and Usurpers of the Crown, destroying,
murdering one another, as the kindom of Israel was after the revolt of the ten
Tribes from the house of David, whose See Bishop vshers Annal. vel Test. p. 133.
hereditarie kingdom continued at least 134 years after the total destruction
and captivity of the Kingdom of Israel: whose revolt from the House of David
produced naught else but a Succession of very wicked, idolatrous Kings and
Usurpers, endless wars, miseries, public Idolatry, Apostacy from God, all
sorts of Sins, rapines, and perpetual Captivity, as the books of Kings and
Chronicles resolve, especially 2 Kings. chapter 17. In which revolt and rebellion,
it is observable, that all the Priests and Levites, and all the Godly men
throughout the revolting Tribes of Israel, who set their hearts to seek the
Lord God of Israel, left their possessions and went to Jerusalem, and
strengthened the kingdom of Rheboboam the Son of Solomon against the Usurper
Jeroboam, as the Scripture records for their honor, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15,
16. 10ly. Upon this very reason God himself records, that when 2 Chronicles. 23 2
Kings 11.
Athaliah had slain all the seed Royal but Ioash, and usurped the Royal Throne
for six years space, Ioash being but an Infant, Iehojadah the High Priest hid
him from this Usurper till he was seven years old, and then entering into a
Covenant with the Captains of Hundreds, Rulers, and Levites, they all assembled
at Jerusalem, and entered into an Oath and Covenant, That the Kings Son should
reign as the Lord has said of the House of David. Upon which they presently
brought out the Kings Son, Crowned, and anointed him their King, and said, God
save the King. Which Athaliah the Usurper hearing, run out to the people, and
cried, Treason, treason; upon which Iehojadah the Priest commanded the Captains
of the Host presently to seize upon her, and carry her out of the Temple, and
slay all that should follow her; whereupon they laid hands on her, and carried
her forth and slew her: After which Iehojadah made a Covenant between the King
and the people, that they should be the Lords people; and all the Captains,
Governors, Nobles, and people of the Land brought down the Kings Son from the
House of the Lord to the Kings House, and set the King upon the Throne of the
kingdom. And all the people of the Land rejoiced, and the City was quiet, after
that they had slain Athaliah with the Sword, 2 Kings, 11.4 etc. 2 Chronicles. 23.
This 2 Chronicles. 24, 25, 26. c. 25.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Kings 14. to 7.
Ioash being afterward slain by the conspiracy of his Servants against him,
Amaziah his Son, reigned in his stead by hereditarie Succession, who when he
was established in the kingdom slew his Servants that had slain the King his
Father, but not their Children, according to the Law of Moses. After this 2 Chronicles. 33.20, 21, 22.23, 24, 25. 2 Kings 19 to 26.
Ammon the Son of Manasses succeeding his father, worshipping his Idols,
following his Sins, and trespassing more and more without humbling himself;
his Servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own House. But the
People of the Land slew all that had conspired against King Ammon, and made
Josiah his Son King in his stead, (not disinherited him for his Fathers and
Grandfathers crying Sinner,) as the only means ordained by God for their
safety, peace and settlement. Which sacred Presidents of Gods own registring,
and his peculiar peoples making in obedience to his Commands, for our imitation
in like cases, are a more real, sacred means to our present peace, safety,
establishment, than any the Army-Saints, Sectaries, Jesuits, and Westminster
Conclave can prescribe, and the Parliament, Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 1. have
declared, enact^diit to be legal, as well as scriptural. 11ly. When God himself
promised restitution from Captivity, and resettlement, re-establishment to his
people, he does it by promising the restitution of their lawful hereditary
King and kingdom to them, and the re-uniting of their kingdoms (formerly
divided by rebellion against, and revolt from the House of David and hereditary
Royal line into one, Mich. 213. c. 4.8. Their King shall pass before them, and
the Lord on the head of them) even the first Dominion, the Kingdom shall come
to the Daughter of Jerusalem. Zech. 9.9. etc. Rejoice greatly Oh Daughter of
Zion, behold thy King comes unto thee: be is just and having Salvation, etc.
and his Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and to the end of the Earth, Isaiah
32.1, 2. Beho^d a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall rule in
Judgment; And he shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a Covert from
the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock
in a weary Land, Ezech. 37.22, 24. And I will make them one Nation in the Land,
upon the Mountain of Israel, and one King shall be King to them all, and they
shall be no more two Nations, neither thall they be divided into two Kingdoms
any more. And David my Servant shall be KING over them, they shall all have one
Shepherd over them: they shall also walk in my Judgments, and keep my
Statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the Land that I have given to
Jacob my Servant, even they and their Children, and their Childrens Children
FOR EVER, and my Servant David shall be their Prince for ever. Which is
likewise repeated and amplyfied Ezech. 39.23, 24 Zeph. 3.13, 14. Jer. 23.4, 5
c. 33.14, 15, 16. Which Texts, though mistically meant of our King and Savior
Jesus Christ, hereditary Son of David, according to the flesh, sitting upon his
Fathers Throne, and ruling for ever over his mystical Kingdom and Church, as is
evident by comparing them with Isay 9.6, 7, 18. Dan. 7.27. Lu. 1.32, 33. yet
since King David, Solomon, and other pious Kings of Israel,, and their
hereditary kingdom, were types of our Spiritual King Jesus, and of his
everlasting, spiritual kingdom, And Christ Jesus under the very Title, Name,
Notion of an hereditary King alone (not of an Optimacy, Oligarchy, Popularity,
Democracy, or elective King) is thus prophesied to be a Savior, Redeemer,
Restorer, Establisher, Preserver, Defender of his captivated, oppressed,
inthralled, dissipated, divided, unreformed Subjects, Kingdom, Church, People;
and his perpetual presence with and reign over them, is made the only ground of
the restoration, unity, felicity, prosperity, safety, perpetuity of his
kingdom and people, as David, Solomon, and other good Kings of Israel were to
their Subjects during their successiive Reigns: and seeing Christ's mistical
Church and Saints, are always thus styled his Kingdom, a Kingdom, but never a
Free State, or Common wealth, at least but once, Ephesians. 2.12. the only Text
throughout the whole Bible, where this word is mentioned in any kind, and that
not in opposition, or contradistinction to a Kingdom, but as the very same
thing with it, (as our Kingdom in 9 E. 2. c 8.1 Mar. ses. 2 c. 1. 7 H. 7 c. 1.
some Statutes is styled a Common wealth) as being the Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c.
12. l. 4. c. 2 l. Case Sphaera Civitatis l. 3. c. 5. p. 238. l. 4. c. 3. p. 324.
excellentest, honourablest, durablest, freest, happiest, of all other forms of
Republic, under which general name it is comprised. It thence infallibly
follows, that an hereditary Kingship, kingdom, is the best, happiest,
durablest, securest, honourablest, desireablest of all other Governments
whatsoever, being the very Government of Jesus Christ himself, who according
to the flesh was born King of the Jews and sits upon the Throne of David his
Father, Mat. 2.2. Lu. 1.32, 33. and was not chosen King by his Saints, like an
Elective King; but elected them to be his Subjects; as he expreslie resolves,
John 15.16. 1 Pet. 1, 2.9. Rev. 17.14. And that the restitution of this our
ancient Kingly Government, (not of a new Jesuitical, Spanish; Outlandish
Republic) is the true and only way to our restoration, redemption, peace,
settlement, safety and future prosperity; as the Parliament and most excellent
preamble of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 22, (worthy perusal) resolves. Wherein
after many long intestine civil wars for the Title, succession of the Crown,
and Soveraigntie of our Realm, The Nobles and Commons assembled in Parliament,
calling to mind, That the unity, peace, and wealth of this Realm, and the
Succession (and Inheritance) of the Subjects in the same, most specially and
principally above all worldly things, (let our Republicans, and Westminster
Juncto observe it well) consists and rests in the certainty and surety of
the procreation and posterity of the Kings Highness, in whose most Royal person
at this present time is no manner of doubt nor question, (as the Statutes of 1
Jac. c. 1, 2. resolve, there was none at all in King James or King Charles) did
thereupon by this special Act, and a strict Oath, declare aad establish the
surety, title or succession of the Crown of England in him and his Heirs for
ever, upon which depends all our joy and wealth, as they more at large
express. 13ly. God himself in direct terms declares, that it is a matter and
badge of honor and prosperity for any Nation to be advanced from a
Commonwealth or Principality into a Kingdom, Ezech. 15.13, 14. Thou did
prosper into a Kingdom. And thy renown went forth among the Heathen for thy
beauty, for it was perfect through my comeliness, which I put upon thee says
the Lord: which compared with Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the
Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God, the Powers that are ordained
of God, Col. 1.16. For by him are all things created that are in Heaven, and
that are in Earth, visible or invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions,
or Principalities, all were created by him, and for him Tit. 3.1. Put them in
mind to be subject to Principalityes and Powers, to obey Magistrates, 1 Pet.
2.13, 17. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake,
whether to the King as Supreme: Fear God, Honor the King; are infallible
demonstrations, That as kingdoms and Kings are of Divine institution and
planting, so they are reputed, instituted by God and Jesus Christ, as the most
prosperous, happyest, divinest, honourablest, supreamest of all other forms of
Government and Governors whatsoever, created by and for Jesus Christ, and have
been the very Governments and Governors alone, in and by which he has
precisely promised, declared, that he will most advance his own Spiritual
Kingdom, Church and Glory, (as is undeniable by Worthy serious particular
perusal.
Psalm 68.32. Psalm. 102^ 22. 2 Kings 19.19. Isay. 37.20. Rev. 11.15. Psalm. 2.10,
11. Psalm. 68.29. Psalm. 72.10 11. Psalm. 102.15. Psalm. 138.4. Ps. 144 10. Ps.
148.11. Ps. 149.8. Isay 49.7, 13. c. 52.15. c. 60 3, 10, 11, 16. c. 62.2. Rev.
21.24.) the express lively Images of Christ's own Spi-Spiritual Kingdom,
Kingship, on whose Throne alone they sit, as his Vicegerents, 2 Chronicles. 9.8.
Col. 1.16 and therefore are styled Kings, Kingdoms, not Optimacies, or
Republics) yea not only Kings but Gods, and Gods Anointed, as well as Christ
himself, Exodus 22.8. Josh. 22 22. Ps. 82.1, 6. John 10.34. 1 Cor. 8.5. 2 Samuel
12.3, 5. c. 22 52. Psalm. 20.6. Isay 45.1. Lam. 4.20. 1 Samuel 16.6. c. 24.6, 10.
c. 26.9, 11, 16, 23 2 Samuel 19.21. 14ly. God himself in sundry Scriptures
positively declares, and denounces the plucking up or rooting out of a
Kingdom, and making it no Kingdom, or a base or viler Kingdom than it was
before; and the leaving of an ancient Kingdom without a King, or hereditary
Successor or Heir to sway the Scepter, to be a most severe, sad, grievous
Judgment and Punishment on them for their crying, heinous offenses and Sins
against him; yea an immediate concomitant or Forerunner of their utter
desoiation, and a matter of present and future lamentation, not of mercy,
blessing, or cause of rejoicing, as our seduced Bedlam-Republicans,
Army-Saints, and Pseudo-Politicians repute it, as all these Texts infallibly
resolve, Judge. 17.6, etc. c. 18.1. etc. c. 17.1. etc. c. 21. 25. Hos. 3.4. c.
10.3.7.15. (a notable Scripture) Is. 9.2, 11, 12. c. 7.16. Amos 1.8.10.13, 14,
15. c. 2.2.5. etc. Mich. 4.9.10. Jer. 17.25.27. c. 22.5. to 30. c. 25.8. to 38.
Ezech. 19.14, 15. (a signal Text) c. 17.12, 13, 14. c. 29.14, 15. Lam. 1.6. c.
2.6.9. c. 4.20. c. 5.16. Hab. 1.10.14, 15. Nah. 3.17, 18, 19. Hag. 2.22. Ezech.
21.26, 27. Against which Scriptures (worthy your particular perusal) no one
Text can be produced, to prove it a blessing, benefit, honor to any kingdom or
Nation whatsoever.

15ly As for your new magnified Commonwealth and Aristocracie, preferred by
you before our Kings and Monarchy,

1. Consider that of Prove. 28.2. For the Transgression of a Land many are the
Princes (or Governors) thereof but by a man of understanding and knowledge the
State thereof shall be prolonged: And compare it with Hosea 10.3. For now they
shall say, We have no King because we feared not the Lord what then should a
King do to us: Lam: 5.16.8. The Crown of our head (to wit, our King, c. 4.20.)
is fallen: woe unto us that we have sinned: Servants have ruled over us, there
is none that delivers us out of their hand. And then you must needs confess;
that your subversion of our Kingly Government by one single person, to set up a
Polarchie and New Republike under many Prove. 19.10^. c. 30.21, 22. Eccl. 10.5,
6.7.
Servants and Governors, is in Gods own, his Churches, peoples account, an
heavy judgment, vassallage, bondage on them for their transgressions, sins,
and a matter of great lamentation, woe, Ezech. 19.12, 13, 14. not a blessing,
ease, liberty, means of their happiness or establishment.

2. Consider, that you cannot derive the Pattern of your New Commonwealth from
the Scripture, Gospel, Church, or presidents of God and Jesus Christ; but only
from the Dion. Cassius, Dionys. Halicar. Polybius, Livy, Justin, Eutropius,
Godwins Roman Antiquities, Bodins Commonwealth.
Old Heathen, bloody Romans, after their Regifugium; who were always altering
their Government from one new form to another, continuing not long in any one
condition, till settled in an Emperor, and Empire; and at last in a Regal Roman
Pontiff; in which state it has continued almost 1700. years; and the new
Jesuitical models of Parsons, Campanella, Richeliev, Mazarine, Spain, France,
recommended to you from Antichristian Rome to work our ruin; Or at leastwise
from the old seditious Graecians and Athenians; who are thus branded in
Historians, Aelian Var. Historia, l. 5. c. 53.
Omnino ad commutandos Reipublicae Status erant versatiles, et omnium
propensissimi ad vicissitudines; (as you and the Army Officers now are) which
proved their utter ruin; and caused endless wars and tumults between
themselves, till they were subdued, enslaved by the Macedonians, Persians,
Romans, and other foreign Kings; as you may read at leisure in Thucidides,
Diodorus Siculus, Xenophon, Plutarch, Arrianus Justin, Bp. Vshers,
Annales-Veteris Testamenti; whence Heniochus an ancient Greek Comaedian,
compares Aristocracie, and Popularitie unto two scolding Women, who coming
amongst the Grecians, put all things into tumult and disorder, making them
bedlam mad against each other to their utter desolation. Grotius de Jure Belli,
l. 3. c. 15. p. 537.
Tum geminae ad illas accesserunt Mulieres
Quae cuncta conturbarunt: Optimatitas
Est nomen alteri: alteri Popularitas
Quarum incitatu pridem externatae furunt.
And have they not produced the self-same Madness, Fury, and sad effects among
the Army, yea and our 3. kingdoms? How then can you, or any wise men, but
only TOM OF BEDLAMS, be any longer in love with either of them, and prefer
them before Kings and Kingship: when as your selves, as well as other Members,
declared, resolved in two See my Speech, p. 102 103, 104.
Declaratoins of 12 April 1646. of 17 December. and in the Votes of November: 9.
and 23. 1647. That the Agreement of the People for a Representative and
Republike (without a King and House of Lords) are not only Seditious, but
destructive to the very Being of Parliaments, and the Fundamental Government of
the Kingdom, by King Lords and Commons. And is this then the way to peace or
settlement? Psalm. 11.3.
If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do to save or settle
us? O therefore let not that brand of the Holy Ghosts own imposing rest^anie
longer on you, Ps. 82.5. They know not, neither will they understand; all the
Foundations of the earth are out of course: And although you say, think you are
Gods, and are all the children of the most high in this pursuit, yet you shall
die like men, and fall like one of the Princes: yea be buried in your own and
your Republikes ruins again, with greater infamy, shame, loss, than you were
on April 20. 1653. when you were shamefully turned out of House and power
together by those who now recall you, and yet will not take warning.

Mr. Prynne is in good hopes, that all these undeniable, unanswerable
Scriptural considerations will fully convince and convert our Republican
Conventicle, (and Army Officers too) from their Jesuitical destructive modle of
A Commonwealth, unto the love and restitution of our ancient hereditary Kings,
Kingship, as the only Divine, Saint-like, Gospel, safe, probable way to our
future lasting peace and settlement, which he intended to have propounded to
them.

Finally, if you are resolved, notwithstanding the premises, to Act as a
Parliament without your secluded fellow Members, King, or House of Lords, then
follow the Presidents of all your Protestant Predecessors in these particulars.

1. Take into your saddest considerations the great increase, disguises of
dangerous Jesuits and other Romish vipers now amongst us, which A. B. a Jesuit
in his Mutatus Polemo: Or, The Horrible Stratagems of the JESUITS lately
practiced in England, during the Civil Wars, and now discovered by him, a
RECLAIMED ROMANIST, employed before as a Workman of the Mission from his
Holiness; dedicated by him to your own President Bradshaw; published by SPECIAL
COMMAND of your New Republike ( London Printed for Rob. White 1650.) thus
relates to your selves and the world, p. 3, 4. That he could bring in to your
COUNSEL-TABLE a horrible long Catalogue of more perniciously damnable Actors of
JESUITICAL Devils in men's shapes, yea in MINISTERS too, crept in (from foreign
Seminaries) to undermine our Church and State, then was in the year 1605. in
that infernal Powder Plot: That there was one Regiment, or more of them, under
Sir John Kempsfield, a Commander of the Horse in the late Kings Army: who
discerning the Kings inclination to close with the Scots and Presbyt^rians, and
expecting no advantage to their Cause by siding with him, held their private
Conventicles and Councels at Oxford, wherein they resolved to desert, and draw
off all their own and all his other Forces from him, and close with the
prevailing Parliament party, which they accordingly effected: Ibid. p. 10, 11.
That upon the Kings departing to the Scots Army, and surrender of Oxford, the
Jesuits, Priests and Popish party under him, not only changed the habits of
their minds, but bodies also: turning from upside Cavaliers and High Royalists,
and God-dammees, holy Converts and Parliamenteers: nothing but the Holy
Covenant being heard in their mouths. For our bodies, Proteus is less than a
fiction to us. Nota.
He that ere while was a Commander in a ranting equipage, is now slinking into
a Cobblers stall, or Weavers loom, or Tapsters Apron, or Coachmans box, or
Beggars weed, or Horsemans frock, or Serving-mans liverie, or Tailors shop, or
Pulpit-thumping Presbyters Gippo, into what not. It is not unknown what trade
we drive beyond Sea, when no Trade comes amiss to us. To make this good, our
Governors the States of this Commonwealth (if they will deign to hear me now
their true Servant) shall be e^tsoon able to call out many a
sheep-clothed-wolf from their stations, stalls, looms, aprons, weeds, liveries,
shops, yea and Bust coats; what say you to Pulpi^s too? Let not Engl. (now like
a bird (ah me!) pursued by several fierce flying Falcons, and too too near the
intended hard gripes of their cruely sharp tallons) either out of a dull or
drowsy sottishness, or a fantastical humor of contradiction, suppose I ^peak
what I know not: if I should tell them I can, and (now being about to do it)
will (but privately before Authority) produce a Catalogue of Catholics, (
Fathers* so we will be called) of several Orders* and others that are Natives,
gone into remote Counties, who duly go to Church too, and of an incredible
number now living in this Commonwealth under several Notions, whcih I my self
can point at with a dry singer. I tell thee in general, there is scarce a Town
or City, but in few miles of it I can furnish the Reader ( to thy Amazement be
it spoken) with some who have lived in England 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 20, 40, 50
years ( I. B. of Ne. in Es.) unknown, unsuspected, but taken for clean
contrary; let them avoid me if they can: They are his own words, Page 26. to
37. he shows how Mons. Mintril (the French agent) trepand the poor Cavaliers of
the Kings party, in transporting them out of Scotland into France; how they
were there butchered by the French: Such is their love to the Royal party of
England: what endeavors were used by Card: Mazarine, Father D. and le M. to
seduce and corrupt Prince Charles in his Religion both before and after his
Fathers death; and what promises were made both by the French and Spaniard,
that all Catholic Princes should be invited and consulted with for an
unanimous invasion of England, if he would turn Catholic. Page 32, 33. he
has this memorable passage: During these Solicitations, news comes aloft upon
the wings of the wind, That the People and State of England had summoned his
Father to an High Court of Judicature, to bring him to a trial for all the
innocent blood he had spilt, and the hideous devastations he had caused. This
was no little good News to the Cardinalitical party, (I mean the Iesuitical,)
(this Jesuit himself being then at the French and Princes Court in Paris) For
in my next I shall satisfy thee, concerning their cunning workings; how even
those who pretend so much charity to the Son, See here, p. p. 43, 46, 62, 63.
did seek by all Machinations to expedite and accelerate this high piece of
Justice upon the Father: And now, say his Tutors to him, If they proceed to
death with your Father, it will prove the better for you; for it shall utterly
alien the hearts and affections of the people from them, and you shall find
them to be more eagerly violent for your reinvestment, not considering the
change of your Religion, which by any means shall not be known, but to your
good Catholic Subjects of England, till such time as you have vested power
enough into your own hands to protect it, and your self in it. But indeed the
Lad had somewhat of his Fathers astutiousnesse in him; and presently asked the
CARDINAL the same question as his Father once did the King of Spain, when he
was almost easily entreated to have turned to the Faith Catholic: How shall I
(said he) ever expect to be King of England, if once the English should
understand I have turned Catholic? To which they easily gave a sati^factorie
resolution, telling him; That (as the case now stood) he must never look to be
admitted, but by fire and sword: the main force of Arms must make way for him,
neither could he in the least atchieve that, or put it in execution without the
aid of Catholic Princes, which they will never be brought to act in without a
firm assurance of your real and faithful conversion. What impressions the News
of his Fathers decollatio^ made upon him; what use the Cardinal and Jesuits
made of it, to induce him and others to Popery; and what endeavors were used
by the Jesuits to make up a peace between the Spanish and French to invade
England, and make it their prey if he would turn Papist, under pretext of
restoring him to his Crown, you may read in this Jesuit, p. 33, 34, 35, 36. and
in Militiere his Victory of Truth, dedicated to King Charles after his Fathers
death, to pervert him in his Religion, as the only means of his restitution.
These Passages of this Jesuit, (who styles himself, p. 39. The faithful Servant
of the Commonwealth of England. ^ dedicated to President Bradshaw himself, and
printed by his SPECIAL COMMAND, and our Republican Governors now sitting, Ann.
1650. (when Mr. Prynne was committed close Prisoner by them without hearing, or
accusation) will justify the truth of all his See my Epistle to a Seasonable
Vindication, etc. Edit. 2. 1655. My Quakers Unmasked, and A New Discovery of
Romish Emissaries, 1656. The Plots of the Jesuits, printed 1653. And the
Jesuits undermining of parliaments and Protestants, By William Castle, 1642.
former Discoveries; That your beheading the King, and degrading our Kingdom
into a New Free State, was the very French Cardinals, Spaniards, Popes, and
Jesuits plot, to ruin both our Protestant Kings, Kingdom, Church Religion, even
by your own confessions, and that it gave unto them strong arguments, to
persuade the Kings posterity and party for ever to abominate our Religion, as
many of them have done upon this very account, though the King himself, and
his Brothers yet continue constant (through Gods mercy) against all
provocations; to their eternal honor, but your perpetual infamy, who have put
them upon such direful Temptations.

2. Before you engage in any other Business, peruse all former Acts and Printed
in my Hidden Works of Darkness. etc. and Mr. Rushworths Historical Collections,
p. 41. to 44.121, 129, 185. to 190, 140, 141, 510, 568. Exact Collection, p. 5.
to 20.
Petitions of our Protestant Parliaments since 1 Eliz. to this present against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Papists, Popery; the manifold mischiefs, dangers
accrewing by their increase, toleration, and s^spe^sion of our Laws against
them; the causes of their growth amongst us, and remedies to prevent the same:
Then put them all (with the Oath of Abjuration, and 5. Bills against them,
assented to by the late King in the last Treaty) into immediate, impartial
vigorous execution.

3. Employ faithful, knowing, stout, active persons, with sufficient power,
and encouragements to discover, detect, apprehend them, under what ever
disguise and shelter they now secure themselves: Especially take diligent care
to ferret these Romish Vermin and Troublers of our Israel out of all your
Armies, Garrisons, Camps, and all Sectarian separate Congregations, the
Boroughs wherein now they lurk securely, by putting them all to the Test of the
Oaths of Abjuration Supremacy and Allegiance.

4. Permit no Seminary Priests, Friars, Romish Emissaries of any Nation, but
especially no Jesuits of Romes Masterpiece, p. 14.15.
any their 4. ranks to remain in our Realms, or Dominions: it being impossible
to enjoy any peace, settlement in Church or State, or to expect any dutiful
obedience, quiet in or from the Army, whiles these Ludovicus Lucius, Hist.
Jesuit. l. 3. c. 2. p. 271, 2^4, 374. l. 3. c. 2. p. 607, 609, 610, 611, 614
639, 671, 673, etc. Hospinian Hist. Jesuit. l. 3. and 4. Speculum Jesuiticum.
firebrands of Sedition, Treason, remain within our coasts: upon which account
they have been by sundry Proclamations of Queen Elizabeth, King James and King
Charles, not only banished out of England, Scotland, Ireland, and all their
Dominions; but likewise out of France, Germany, Poland, Bohemia, Austria,
M^ravia, Transylvania, Hungary, Venice, and other Popish Kingdoms, States, as
well as out of the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, and Protestants Territories:
as the Authors of all their Wars, Troubles, Tumults, Insurrections, Rebellions,
Treasons, Regicides, and the public P^sts of Church and State.

5. Put no arms into Anabaptists or Quakers hands, (formerly See Lucas Osiander
contra Anabaptistas.
decrying them, as unlawful) lest London become another Munster, and England
another Germany, in few months space.

6. Since Christ Jesus, who is truth it self, has laid down these 3.
Gospel-maxims of infallible verity: Mat: 7.15. to 21. Lu. 6.43. etc. That
Ravencus wolves in sheeeps clothing, as well as trees, are and shall be known
by their fruits. John 8.44. You are of your Father the Devil, for his works ye
do. Romans 6.16. That to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey. If all the premises infallibly convince your
Consciences, Judgments, as they will and must do, That all the forementioned
fruits you have produced since December 4. 1648. are the proper fruits of
Jesuits and Romish wolves in sheeps clothing; yea the very worst, sowrest of
all their Fruits and Powder Treasons: That the works you have done in murdring
our Protestant King, destroying our Parliaments, Kingdoms, Government, Laws,
secluding your fellow-M^mbers and Lords House by force, erecting your New
Republike, and Parliamentarie Conventicle, etc. are the Works of the Jesuits
and Devil; That you have yielded up your selves as obedient servants unto them
in every of these, against your own former Oaths, Protestations, Vows,
Covenants, Declarations, Commissions, Principles, Professions, Judgments,
rightly informed consciences: the Votes, Obsecrations, Disswasions of your
Fellow Members, and most indeared Protestant Friends, Ministers, Relations: the
Indentures, Desires of those Counties, Buroughs you represent: And that the
very Principles, by which you have acted since Dec. 1648 and now again, a^e the
very Jesuits principles; as you may read at leisure in Johannis Mariana, De
Rege and Regum Institutione, l. 1. c. 6. Creswels Philopater, Franciscus Verona
Constantini, Apologia pro Johanne Castellio et Jesuitis; Jesuitae Reinaldi
liber, De Iusta Reipublicae Christianae in Reges Impios et Haereticos
authoritate, etc. published under the name of William Rosse, in Ludovicus
Lucius Historia Jesuitica, l. 2. c. 3. Hospinian Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. and 4.
and Speculum Jesuiticum, printed 1644. wherein you may truly view your
Jesuitical Physiognomies, heads, perrewigs, instead of your old genuine
Protestant complexions, brains, notions, hair. And if the present fresh
Address^s, Petitions of Anabaptists, Quakers, Sectaries, from Southwark,
Warminster, Hertfordshire, Kent, and other places to the Army Officers, and
your selves, with their late listings in the Army, affronts to Ministers in
their Churches, ejection of some of them to intrude themselves, already
budding forth, sufficiently discover whose Servants you are, and whose
drudgerie you must execute. O then immediately abjure, rescinde, and null them
all with highest indignation, and persist no longer in any such destructive
ways, counsels, projects, under any pretext, consideration, interest or
persuasions whatsoever: But rather remember Mr. Oliver Saint-Johns words (now
sitting amongst you) in his Argument at Law against the Earl of Strafford
(printed by the Commons house special Order) p. 64. In this I shall not labor
to prove; That the endeavoring By Words, Counsels and Actions, to subvert the
fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom is Treason by the Common Law:
If there be any Common Law Treasons left, nothing Treason if this he not, to
make a Kingdom no Kingdom: And then consider Sir Edward Cooks memorable
Observation (published by the Commons Order) 3 Instit. c. 2. p. 35, 36. It
appears in the holy Scripture, That TRAITORS never prospered, what good
soever they pretended, but were most severely and exemplarily punished (in
conclusion:) which he proves by the examples of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Number.
16.31, 32. c. 27.3. Athaliah, 2 Kings 1.1.16. Bigthan and Teresh, Esth.
2.21.23. c. 6.2. Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.9.14. Abiathar, 1 King. 2.26, 27. Shimei, 2 Samuel 6.5, 6. 1 Kings 2.8.46. Zimri 1 Kings 16, 9.18. Theudas, Acts 5.36, 37.
and Judas Iscariot, the Traitor of Traitors, Acts 1.18. Mat. 27.5. Peruse over
all our Books, Records, Histories, and you shall find a principle in Law, a
rule in Reason, and a trial in experience, That Treason does ever produce fatal
and final destruction to the Offender, and never attaineth to the desired end
(two incidents inseparable thereunto.) And therefore let all men abandon it as
the most poisonous Bait of the Devil of Hell, and follow the precept in holy
scripture: Prove. 24.21. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, honor the King, and have no company with the Seditious Felix quem
faciunt aliena pericula cautum. So he.

Now because M.P. finds some Grandees of his own Profession sitting in the
House to countenance and make up this Vnparliamentary Juncto, he shall desire
them in the first place seriously to consider, how much they have formerly and
now again dishonored themselves, and the whole profession of the Law, in
sitting in, complying with acting under, such illegal Anti-Parliamentary
Conventicles, Powers, Changes, Changers; yea crying them up for legal English
Parliaments, Powers, obeying, executing all their illegal new Knacks, Orders,
Ordinances, as Acts of Parliament in civil, criminal, real or personal Causes,
against all Records, Law Books, presidents of former Ages, their own Judgments,
Oaths, Science, Consciences, to the intolerable scandal of their Robe, the
injury, abuse of the whole Nation, the prejudice of all their lawful
Superiors and the Public, the encouragement of usurping Traitors, Tyrants,
Oppressors, in their ways of wickedness, the ill example of most others, and
their own just reproach.

2ly. To observe, How God in his retaliating Justice, has recompensed this
their wilful prevarication upon their own heads, by turning many of them out
of their respective places of Judicature, honor, profit, (the ground of this
their sinful compliance) with infamy, dishonor, reproach, even by the very
Persons with whom they unworthily complied, and those especially in present
power, who had neither been an House of Commons, much less a mock Parliament,
without their presence and compliance.

3ly. That the base unworthy, unchristian compliance of the Lawyers and Clergy
of England, with our late traiterous Innovators, Usurpers, out of base fear,
sordid covetousness, ambition, self-saving, or self-seeking, to the prejudice,
ruin of King, Kingdom, Parliament, Lords, Law, has brought an universal odium
upon them, with those with whom they most complied, as well as others, the Army
Officers and present Juncto, under a pretext of Reforma^ion, designing both
their ruins through the Jesuits Politics, who now bear greatest sway, having
turned many of them with scorn and contempt out of their former places of
Judicature, beyond their expectations, and reviled both their persons and
professions, to their faces, as a Generation of sordid Temporizers, and
useless, faithless persons, not fit to be entrusted any more, but discarded out
of their new lawless Republic, which hates both Law and Gospel, as warranted
by neither, and repugnant unto both.

4ly. That the only way now to regain their lost Honor, and preserve both our
Laws, Liberties, Religion, establish future peace, settlement, and prevent
impendent ruin, is, to endeavor to restore our ancient, hereditary, just,
legal Kingship, Kings, Governors, Government, with all their necessary invaded
Prerogatives, Lands, Revenues, Rights, Jurisdictions, and inviolably to
preserve them with their lives and estates against all conspiracies of Popes,
Jesuits, and foreign enemies to subvert, and undermine them in any kind; as the
several memorable Parliaments and Statutes of 29 H. 6. c. 1. 31 H. 6. c. 1. 39
H. 6. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 2 E. 6. c. 26. 7 E. 6. c. 12. 1 Eliz. c. 3.4.20. 5
Eliz. c. 1.29.30. 13 Eliz. c. 1.2. 23, 24 18 Eliz. c. 21.22, 23 Eliz. c.
1.13.14. 27 Eliz. c. 1, 2.28.21. 29 Eliz. c. 7, 8. 31 Eliz. c. 14, 15. 35 Eliz.
c. 2.12, 13. 39 Eliz. c. 26, 27. 43 Eliz c. 17, 18. 1 Jac. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 1,
2, 4, 5, 25, 26. 7 Jac. 6, 22, 23. 21 Jac. c. 32, 33. and 3 Car. c. 5, 6. in
their respective preambles and bodies (worthy our most serious review in the
Statutes at large) resolve, being more to be credited, pursued, than all the
rash Jesuitical suggestions, votes, and inconsiderable resolutions of any
unparliamentarie Conventicle, or upstart Pseudo-Polititians, advancing
themselves to the helm of our new Republic, by color of the Statute of 17
Car. 7. Which Bill by the Commons House resolution in their Exact. Collection,
P. 17.
Remonstrances of 15 Dec. 1641. seems to be some restraint of the Regal power
in dissolving of Parliaments, not to take it out of the Crown, but to suspend
the execution of it for the time and occasion only, which was so necessary for
the Kings own security, and the Public peace, that without it they could not
have undertaken any of those great things, but must have left both the Armies
to disorder and confusion, and the whole Kingdom to blood and rapine,
Therefore the Parliament must needs determine by the Kings death, as he has
infalliby evidenced beyond contradiction.

In the last place, Mr. Prynne shall most importunately beseech all the ancient
Nobility, secluded Members, well-affected Gentry Clergy, Commonalty of the
English Nation (which had never so many effeminate, false heads, and hearts as
now, many Iud. 18.7.27.
Jesuit, Priest, Monk, lurking under the disguise of womanish Perewigges
brought into fashion by them) as they now tender their own private, or the
public safety, weal, settlement, and preservation of our endangered Church,
Religion, Kingdom, Parliament, Laws, Privileges, Properties, and prevention of
their impendent ruin. First of all seriously to consider, lament, cast off,
reform, their own late, present, monstrous sottish stupidity, sleepiness, Mat.
16.25.
self saving, self-seeking Spirits, and most unworthy, un-manly, un- English,
unchristian pusillanimity, cowardice, Prove. 29.25. Isay 8.12, 13. c. 7.4. c.
41.14. c. 44.8. Mat. 10.28.
fear of a few contemptible Mercinary mortal men, who shall shortly dye, and
become as dung upon the earth; and their gross breach of all public Oaths,
Protestations, Leagues, Covenants, in not opposing, resisting them manfully in
their several places and callings; Which has been the principal cause of all
the public Changes, Innovatons, Oppressions, Grievances, Exorbitances,
Insolences, they have hitherto suffered by their own armed hirelings, and are
the Isay 13.6, 7.8. c. 27.11. c. 24.17. Judge. 20.41, 42, Is. 3, 4. Ier. 48.43,
44. c. 49.24, 29. Lam. 3.47. Ezech. 30.13, 14.
saddest symptoms of our approaching imminent desolation: if not speedily
repented, redressed, redressed, ere it be over late. 2ly. To pursue these
Gospel advises, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit ye like
men, be strong. Gal. 5.1. Phil. 1.27, 28. Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith
Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of Bondage;
in one Spirit, striving together with one mind for the Faith of the Gospel,
(the fundamental, Laws, Liberties, Government, Privileges of the Nation) And in
nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which will be to them an evident token
of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. 3ly. Do you all now
publicly, resolutely, constantly, unanimously, (according to the Collect. of
Ordinances, P. 420 to 427.
tenor of the Solemn League and Covenant) claim, assert, vindicate, and
endeavor to preserve with your Lives and Fortunes, the Reformed Religion,
Worship, Doctrine of the Churches, the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliaments, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
and the Kings Majesty's Person, Authority and Posterity, in the defense and
reformation of the true Religion, and Liberties of these Kingdoms. And with all
faith fullness endeavor, the discovery of all such as have been, are, or shall
be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the Reformation
of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or one of the Kingdoms from the
other, making any factions or parties among the People, contrary to this League
and Covenant, that they may be brought to public Trial, and receive condign
punishment; assisting, defending each other in the maintenance and pursuit
thereof, without any division, withdrawing, defection, or detestable
indifferency, or neutrality whatever. For which end, in a brotherly, friendly,
christian, yet stout and resolute manner, demand publicly of the General
Counsel of Army Officers, and their Westminster Conventicle.

1. By what lawful Commission, Authority, or Warrant from God, our Laws, or
the generality of the people of England (whom they have voted the Supreme
Authority, and whose Servants they pretend themselves) they have formerly and
now again, forcibly secluded the whole House of Lords, and Majority of the
Commons House, from sitting in our Parliamentary Counsels, or the Old
Parliament if yet in being, and made themselves not only a Commons house, but
absolute Parliament without a King or them, contrary to the very Letter, scope
of the Act of 17 Car. c. 7. by which they pretend to sit?

2ly. By what Authority they presume to turn our most ancient, glorious,
famous, honorable, first Christian Kingdom, into an infant, base, ignoble,
contemptible Sectarian Free State or Commonwealth, and disinherit our
hereditary Kings and their Posterity, Mat. 21.23.
against all our Laws, Statutes, Declarations, Remonstrances, Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Leagues, Covenants, Customs, Prescription time out of mind,
Liturgies, Collects, Canons, Articles; Homilies, Records, Writs, Writers, and
their own manifold obligations to the contrary for their inviolable defense,
support, and preservation, only in pursuit of the Jesuits, Popes, Spaniards,
and French-Cardinals forecited plots; And who gave you this Authority? The
rather because the whole English-Nation, and High Court of Parliament, wherein
the whole Body of the Realm is, and every particular Member thereof, either in
person or representation, (by their own Free-elections) are deemed to be
present by the Laws of the Realm, did by an express Act, 1 Jacobi c. 1.
(worthy most serious consideration) with all possible public joy and
acclamation, from the bottom of their hearts recognize, and acknowledge, (as
being thereunto obliged, both by the Laws of God and Man) that the imperial
Crown of this Realm, with all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to
them, immediately after the death of Queen Elizabeth, did by inherent
birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession descend and come to King
James, as next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm, And thereunto (by
this public Act of Parliament, to remain to all Posterity) they did humbly and
faithfully submit and oblige themselves, their Heirs and Posterity for ever
until the last drop of their bloods be spent, as the First fruits of this of
this High Court of Parliament, and the whole Nations Loyalty and Faith to his
Majesty and his Royal Posterjty for ever: upon the bended knees of their hearts
agnizing their most constant Faith, Obedience, and Loyalty to his Majesty and
his Royal Posterity for ever. After which the whole English Nation, and all
Parliaments, Members of the Commons House ever since, and particularly all
Members of the Parliament of 16 Caroli, continued by the Statute of 17 Car. c.
7. pretended to be still in being, did by their respective Oaths of Allegiance,
Fealty, Homage, and Supremacy, (containing only such Duty, as every true and
well-affected Subject not only by his duty of Allegiance, but also by the
com-mandement of Almighty God, ought to bear to his Majesty his Heirs and
Successors, as the Parliament, Exact Collection, and a Collection of them. The
Good Old Cause truly stated.
and Statute of 7 Iac. c. 6. declares) jointly and severally oblige themselves,
'To bear Faith and true Allegiance not only to his Majesty, but his Heirs and
Successors, and him and them to defend to the uttermost of their power against
all Attempts and conspiracies whatsoever, which shall be made against his or
their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, See the Letany, Collects, for the King,
Queen, and Royal Issue: Canons, 1605. Can. 54.
or any of them, and to maintain all Jurisdictions, Preheminences, Authorityes,
justly belonging, united, or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; Which
all Members of the long Parl. and those now sitting ratified, not only by
hundreds of printed Declarations, Remonstrances, Ordinances, but likewise by a
Religious Protestation, Vow, and Solemn National League and Covenant,
(publicly sworn and subscribed with all their hands, in the presence of God
himself, and by all the well-affected in these three Kingdoms) but by all our
ordinary public Liturgies, Collects, Directory Articles, Homilies, Prayers
before Sermons, in all or most of their Families, Closet-Prayers, yea Graces
before and after meat, wherein they constantly prayed to God, (according to the
Tertulliani Apol^g Eusebius. de Vira Constantini. l. 4. c. 19, 10. Cassiador.
Hist. Tripartira, l. 5. c. 22. Athanatius Apologia ad Constantinum Imp. Sozomen
Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 18. l. 4. c. 13. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 617. Tom. 2.
p. 670, 737.738.739, 740, 762, 853, 869, 871.875, 880, 891, 925, 926, 1022,
1024, 1039. Tom. 3. p. 8.238. Cl. 1 E. 1. d. 17. Cl. 24 E. 1. d. 10. Cl. 34 E.
1. d. 9, 16. Cl. 35, E. 1. d. 15. cl. 9 R. 2. d. 11. cl. 15 R. 2. d. 56. cl. 16
R. 2. d. 11. cl. R. 2. d. 35.
practice of the Saints in the Old and new Testaments, the Primitive Church of
God, and Heathen Nations, and of the Church, Parliaments of England themselves,
in all Ages,) not only for the health, life, wealth, safety, prosperity,
preservation, salvation of our Kings and their Realms, but likewise of their
Royal Issue and Posterity. That there might not want a man of that Race to sway
the Scepter of these Realm, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure, or to the
like effect And if they cannot sufficiently satisfy your judgments,
consciences, in this particular, nor answer the precedent reasons in defense of
our hereditary Kings and Kingship, against their Vtopian Republic, Then take
up the peremptory resolution of all the Elders, and Tribes of Israel, when
oppressed by Samuels Sons Mis Government, turning aside after filthy lucre,
and perverting Judgment, 1 Samuel 8. and say resolutely to them, We will have no
New Commonwealth nor Vnparliamentary Conventicle to rule over, oppress, ruin
us, Nay, But we will have a KING (our own lawful hereditary King) to reign
over us, that We also may be like all other Nations, (yea like our selves and
our Ancestors in all former Ages) and that our King may judge us and go out
before us, and so put a speedy end to all our present and future Changes, Wars,
Troubles, Fears, Dangers, Oppressions, Taxes; and restore us to our pristine
Peace, settlement, unity, amity, security, prosperity, felicity, upon the
Propositions assented to by his beheaded Father in the Isle of Wight, whose
Concessions the Ho: of Commons without division, after 3. days and one whole
Nights debate, (4 Dec. 1648. notwithstanding all the Armies menaces) Resolved
upon the Question, to be a sufficient Ground for the House to proceed upon for
the settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom: upon better terms, and greater
advantages, than ever they have yet enjoyed, or can possiibly expect from any
New Free State, or other New Army Government or Governors whatsoever. The old
Parliaments, Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 3. and 1 Eliz. c. 5. (the
most impartial Judges in this case) long since resolving, that it is, and of
very right and duty ought to be the natural inclination of all good people,
like most faithful, loving, and obedient Subjects, sincerely and willingly to
desire and provide for the supportation, maintenance and defense of the Person,
Crown, Royal estate and succession of their dread Sovereign King, upon and in
whom all their worldly Joy and wealth, and the surely of them all, next under
God, does principally depend; as we have experimentally found by all the
miseries, Oppressions sustained under our late New forms of Governments and
Governors, whose 2 Chronicles. 10.6.101^. See My New Discovery of Free State
Tyranny; And Englands New Chains.
little fingers have been heavier than our Kings whole loins; and the counsels,
proceedings, of our young raw Statesmen, more pernicious, exorbitant than the
old ones under our Kings. Which should engage all to return to their old Kingly
Government.

4ly. If they will not upon any terms be served up to such a degree of
Christian, or old English Resolution, as thus to expostulate with their
servants, hirelings, and fellow Members, after so many high and bloody
contestations with their lawful Sovereign in Parliaments, and the field, when
their Laws, lives, liberties, Church, Religion, Kingdom, and all earthly
comforts were less endangered than now in their own judgments; Mr. Prynne
shall then entreat them only to take so much courage, as over-timerous 2 Chronicles:
28.2.3.22. to 36.
King Jehoshaphat and his cowardly people did, when three confederated foreign
Nations came up to invade and destroy their kingdom; and to act as they did
then. First, let them appoint a public Fast throughout the Kingdom, City,
Country, and use the self-same prayer as they used. O our God, will thou not
judge them! for we have no might against this great company, (no nor that
little Conventicle, inconsiderable handful of Armie-men and Sectaries now
combined against us) but our eyes are unto thee; Annexing t^ it this prayer of
David, Ps. 140. Deliver us O Lord from the evil man, preserve us from the
violent men, which imagine mischief in their heart, continually are they
gathered together for war. Grant not, O Lord, the desire of the wicked; Further
not their wicked devices, lest they exalt themselves, Let the mischief of their
own lips cover them; let them be cast into deep pits, that they rise not up
again: Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth; Let evil hunt the
men of violence to their overthrow: Then pursue the Prophets advice from God
unto them. Hearken ye all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, thus says
the Lord God, Be not afraid nor dismayed, by reason of this great multitude
(much less of this small Conventicle) for the battle is not yours, but Gods. To
morrow go out against them, ye shall not need to fight in this battle: only set
your selves (in array against them) and stand still: (keep your ground, fear
not, submir not to their power, usurpations, impositions in any kind) and the
Lord will be with you; Whereupon they rose early in the morning, and went out
against them with their Priests before them, singing praises and Psalms of
thanksgiving to God. And when they began to sing and praise, the Lord set
ambushes against the children of Ammon Moab, and Mount-Seir, which were come
against Judah, and they smote one another; For the children of Ammon and Moab
stood up against them of Mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them; and when
they had made an end of them, every one helped to destroy another. And when
Judah looked upon the multiude, behold they were dead bodies fallen to the
earth, and none escaped. Whereupon Jehoshaphat and his people gathered up their
spoils for 3. days space together, they were so great; and on the 4 th day
they blessed the Lord, and returned with joy to Jerusalem, (without the loss
of any one man's life, or one stroke struck by them) because the Lord fought
against the enemies of Israel. Imitate but their example herein; go out only
courageously against these Invaders of your Countries Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, without fear or dispondencie; Own not their incroached
Parliamentarie power, Acts, Impositions, Edicts, Taxes, Excises in any kind;
Keep fast your purse-strings, and part with no farther pay to your
Armie-Saints, till they obediently submit to your commands, as their Masters,
and acknowledge themselves to be your mercinarie Servants, not your sovereign
new Lords, Masters: Then without any more fighting, bloodshed, danger to your
persons or estates, you shall soon behold hold the Mungrel multitude of
Anabaptists, Quakers, Sectaries, Republicans, Vanists, Cromwellists, Jesuits,
Papists, now combined against you, divided against each other (as you see they
are pretty well) and every of them will help to destroy one another, as they
begin to do; and their Westminster new-convened Vn-Parliamentarie Conventicle
thrust out of doors by themselves again, with greater scorn, infamy, derision,
damage to them, than heretofore: as Obad. 10.15. Ezech. 35.15. Deuteronomy. 32.35,
36.41, 42. Ps. 7.15, 16. Ps. 9.15. Ps. 140.11. Prove. 12.2, 3, c. 24.21, 22.
Mich. 3.9^ to 13. Hab. 2.12, 13. Rev. 13.10. c. 17.6. c. 16.4, 5, 6. Mat. 7. 2.
Judge. 1.6, 7. may assure both you and them, compared with Gods late wonderful
providence of this kind upon all sorts of Innovators: So as you may sing,
Psalm. 20.8.
They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand upright. But if
you neglect or refuse to follow this advice; beware lest through your unworthie
cowardice and negligence in this kind, you become not a speedy prey to these
ravening wolves, now likely to transform London into another Chytrai Chron.
Sax^nia l. 14. p: 411, to 414. Munsteri Cosmog. l. 3. c. 142, Sleidan Comment.
l. 10
Munster, and England into a second G^rmanie; as in the year 1534.

Mr. Prynne having thus fully, faithfully, sincerely discharged his duty, and
satisfied his own conscience; is resolved to Psalm, 4.8. Psalm. 11^, 41,
lie down quietly, to take his rest, and hope for the salvation of his God;
concluding with the words of St. Paul in a like case, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.16, 17,
18. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day. At my first answer no man stood by me, but all men forsook me: I pray
God that it may not be laid to their charge: Notwithstanding the Lord stood by
me and strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that
all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion,
And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me to his
heavenly KINGDOM; to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Isay 8.9. to 16. Associate your selves O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; gird yourselves and ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel
together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word and it shall not stand:
for God is with us. For the Lord spoke thus to me with a strong hand, and
instructed me, that I should not walk in the way of the people; saying, say not
a Confederacy, to whom this people shall say a Confederacy, neither fear ye
their fear, nor be afraid. But sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him
be your fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be for a sanctuary.

Ps. 26.3, 4, 5. O Lord, I have walked in thy Truth; I have not sat with vain
persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers. I have hated the Congregation
of evil doers, and I will not sit with the wicked.

Pro. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare, but he that puts his trust in
the Lord shall be safe.

Ps. 18.46, 48, 50: Ps: 144.10. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock, and
let the God of my salvation be exalted. He delivers me from mine enemies, yea
thou liftest me up above those that rose up against me; thou have delivered me
from the violent man: Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the
Heathen, and sing praises unto thy name. It is he that gives Salvation unto
Kings, that delivers David his servant from the hurtful sword. Great
deliverance gives he unto his KING, and shows mercy to his anointed; To
David and to his seed for evermore.

Thomas Campanella De Monarchia Hisp: c. 30. Omnis haeresis cum ad Atheismum
delapsa est per sapientem Prophetam in veritatis viam reducitur; habent enim
haereses periodum suam ad modum Rerumpublicarum; quae a Regibus in Tyrannidem;
a Tyrannide in Statum Optimatium, et inde in Oligarchiam, atque tandem in
Democratiam, See Polybii Hist. lib. 6. p. 521 to 527.
and in fine rursus in statum Regium revolvuntur.

William Prynne.
From my Study in Lincolns Inn May 18. 1659.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 34. l. 15. dele it; p. 35. l. 4. Melston, r. Millington, p. 41. ^. 18.
Precope; p. 48. l. 10. r. 1648. p. 49. l. 38. erecting, r: exciting; p. 69. l.
16. both, r. does; p. 75. l. 7. as, r. was.


