John Newling
IN HOC SIGNO VINCES

^p^^ome Mona^^^^ ^^^a^^c^

OR, A BRIEF CRONOLOGY OF THE British Kings, From the first Original of
Monarchial Government, To the Happy Restoration of King CHARLES the Second.

WHEREIN Many remarkable Observations on the Civil Wars of England; and
General Monks Politic Transactions, in reducing this Nation to a firm Union,
for the resettlement of His Majesty, are clearly discovered.

By HAMLET PULESTON, Master of Arts, and late Fellow of Jesus College in
OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed, for Philemon Stephens the Younger, Stationer, at the Kings
Arms over against the Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar ^683.

Reader,
AMong the manifold Discouragements, which have so long prorogued, and had well
nigh altogether stopped the Publication of this Treatise; one is, the multitude
of Errata's (too many for so small a Pamphlet) it is accompanied withal, most
of which thou shall find here amended; and for the remainder, as mis-placing or
omitting of Comma's, and some other few literal mistakes, I leave them to thy
Candid and favorable correction.

Page 2. line 30. for Normandy read Norway. p. 6. l. 2. for Prince r. King. p.
10. l. 27. dele and. p. 12. l. 23. dele too. l. 24. for and r. and. p. 13. l.
14. for my r. our. p. 22. l. 14. dele his. p. 33. l. 15. r. though not. l. 19.
dele Sister. p. 35. l. 25. r. beginner. p. 36. l. 11. for as yet r. as if. p.
43. l. 23. for yet r. if. p. 44. l. 21. dele been. p. 46. l. 1. for by r. buy.
p. 48. l. 29. r, unto. for Practisers r. Practices. p. 51. l. 12. r. But Bruise
urging. l. 18. r. upon the Popes. p. 53. l. 26. add Mary the Daughter and Heir
of James the fifth. p. 55. l. 10. for divert r. direct.

IT is observed by Edmond Howes a diligent Compiler of our Countries Annals,
That in this Island there has happened five remarkable alterations, and each
of them always about the period or revolution of five hundred years, whereof
in his Historical Preface, he gives this ensuing account.

1. The first alteration, says he, was presently upon the death of Gorboduc,
seventeenth in descent from Brute, Founder, according to him, of the British
Monarchy. This Gorboduc had caused his youngest Son Porrex to be jointly
crowned with his eldest Son Ferrex: These two fall at difference among
themselves; the younger kills the elder, him the Mother, her the Multitude,
hence Civil Wars; at length Malmutius Danwallo Duke of Cornwall, having subdued
all Competitors, translates the Kingdom to another line, which continues
without any memorable interruption, until

2. The second grand alteration, in the Reign of Cassibeline, forty fourth
Successor of Malmutius, begun by the invasion of Julius Caesar, General of the
Romans in Gaul, but not perfected before Claudius the Emperors time, from
which date the Era or computation of the Romans absolute Dominion here is to
commence, whose departure, recalled by their Domestic dissentions, and Foreign
inundations, carrying with them also the ablest of the Britains, was the
occasion of

3. The third famous alteration; for the Britains bereaved of their own proper
strength, and destitute of the accustomed aid of their Champions the Romans,
were necessitated to implore the asistance of the Saxons, a people of Germany,
against the Picts and Scots, who grievously infested the Northern borders.

To these Saxons Vortigern, the late elected King, and Author of these
Strangers employment, in contemplation of their service, most improvidently
allots, first the Isle of Thannet, then all Kent, afterward more to inhabit;
besides his marriage with Rowena the Daughter of Hengist, one of their principal
leaders, gave them so firm a footing, that they not only could not be removed,
but even forced their Landlords the Britains into the least, most desert, and
most mountanous parts, whilst these new intruding guests enjoy the greatest,
the best, and richest share, which they portioned into an Heptarchy, or seven
petty Principalities, who contending among themselves for superiority, and
wearying out one another with mutual discord, administered opportunity unto

4. The fourth, and indeed a twofold alteration, (but in regard of its
immediate connection is reckoned but as one) first by the Danes, a people
likewise of Germany, who after many conflicts obtained the Sovereignty, but did
not long retain the same. But the second (which took its original almost, where
the other determined) and chiefest mutation, both for its continnance and
universality, was that by the Normans, a Nation primarily issued out of Norway,
but then possessing the South of France, who introduced a general innovation in
all things but Religion, which also suffered its vicissitude or turn in

5. The fifth and last alteration under Henry the eighth, who gave the first
blow unto it, by his withdrawing his obedience from the Romish Sea, in whose
communion England had persevered since its first conversion, and by suppressing
Monasteries who were the main Pillars and Supporters thereof. But his Son
Edward the sixth, proceeds further to the abolition of the Rites and Doctrine
of that Church, which were yet again restored by his Sister Mary, and again
excluded by her Sister Elizabeth, who was therein imitated by her Successor,
James, conjoyner of the two separated Kingdoms, England, and Scotland, which
our Author makes a parcel of this last alteration, and where he concludes his
general History of the several revolutions of this Island, from the first
foundation of a Monarchy here, until the time wherein he wrote.

But since there has happened another alteration no less, if not in some
respect more considerable than any of the former, when not only the Person but
the Office, not only a King, and that in an unparalleld manner, but even
Kingship it self was destroyed, (a design that was never so much as attempted
by our Ancestors) and instead thereof, an unheard of kind of Commonwealth
erected, which was soon suppressed by an insolent Usurper, who thought under a
different title to have established the whole power to him and his; But by Gods
providence, and the perfidiousnesse of his own Relations, his purpose was
defeated, his Son dethroned, a shadow of a Commonwealth retrived, once more
dismissed, again revived, and finally dissolved, the old Government renewed,
and lawful Heir recalled; and all this came to pass within the space of
twelve years, yea most of it within the circuit of one year, whereof we can
only say with the Psalmist, This is the Lords doings, it is marvelous in our
eyes.

And truly, if we consider things impartially, there is great cause of
admiration, that God should not only preserve among us for so many ages a
Monarchy, (the best of Regiments in general, and in particular most agreeable
to the situation of this Country, and constitution of the people,) but even
continue it, maugre all the Plots and policies of men to the contrary, in that
very blood and Family, which as far as creditable Genealogy will extend, has
been first known to have been invested there-withall.

For we may safely affirm, that our present King Charles the second, (in whose
posterity we trust it will remain as long as the Sun and Moon endures) deduces
his pedigree in an indisputable line, from all that ever did or could pretend a
title or interest to the Crown, which we think can hardly be verified of any
Prince besides, this day in the Christian world.

For proof whereof we appeal to such of our Chronicles only as are undoubted
and beyond exception. Passing by therefore the Catalogue of British Kings from
Brute to Cassibeline, not as altogether untrue, but as very uncertain; passing
by those likewise we find mentioned during the Romans abode here, whose custom
it was to permit native Kings indeed in their Conquered Provinces, but only as
instruments of Tyranny, and wholly depending on the authority of the Empire and
its Prefects: We shall take our rise from the Saxons rule, and especially at
that time, when from a multiplied Estate it grew toward an Union; And yet we
cannot omit one passage we find Recorded of Cadwallader last King of the
Britains on this side Severn; who at his death prophesied that his Race should
recover the Dominion of this Isle again, which was fulfilled in the days of
King Henry the seventh, and more completely of King James, as will appear when
the series and progress of the Story does bring us thereunto.

The Saxons, as has been already hinted, made a sevenfold partition of the
Land they had wrested from the Britains, but the Kingdom of the West Saxons
(whose first stone was laid by Cerdic) did so increase in superstructure, that
in the end it overtopped all the rest.

Ina, the fifth descendent of Cerdic, was the first advancer of it to this
prehemenency; but he dyed without issue, and the due order of the succession
was somewhat disturbed, by the intrusion of four or five one after another, of
the Blood Royal indeed, but not in such a propinquity, as was Egbert Nephew but
once removed from Ina, of whose right and promising forwardness, Britric, the
last of the Usurpers, had so quick a sense, that he contrived the destruction
of young Egbert: Which to avoid, he was enforced to retire unto the Court of
Offa King of Mercia or Middle England, but finding small security there in
regard his Enemy had married Offas daughter, he escapes thence into France,
whence after the Tyrants death, he returns to the enjoyment of that Kingdom,
which had been so long, and so unjustly detained from him.

This Prince (which we the rather note because of the affinity he has with the
Condition of our Sovereign that now is) had by an exiles experience attained
such a measure of prudence, and all other perfections, that he much improved
the West Saxon Empire, which was now well near arrived to its Meridian and
height, when it suffered a most terrible Eclipse by the interposition of the
Danes, who made their first irruption in his predecessors days; and though
they were valiantly resisted, and frequently repulsed by him and his
Successors; yet did they never after cease from afflicting one part or other,
till they had reduced the whole to their subjection, in which posture they held
it but a little while, as has before been intimated, and shall be more amply
showed in its due and proper place.

Egbert being dead, Aethewolph his Son of a Bishop became a Prince, and though
his Education and Profession had rendered him a greater Votary than Warrior,
yet did he give the Danes a most memorable overthrow. He had four Sons, who
were all Kings in their turns, but the glory of the rest was Alfred, the
youngest, no less famous for Arts than Arms; in the first his Son Edward
surnamed the Elder, is reported to have been inferior, but in the last did
equal, if not exceed his renowned Father.

This Edward often worsted, but could not totally extirpate the Danes, who
rcruited with fresh supplies from their own Comntry, made daily more and more
encroachments upon the already-tired English Nation, whose case at that time
especialy required some strong prop or stay to sustain and keep up its
declining and tottering estate.

And upon this account it was that Athelstane Edwards bastard Son, being at
full maturity and ripeness, was preferred before his legitimate one Edmond
then in minority (the reason also that some succeeding Princes were for some
time laid aside) but Edmond being now come to Age, after his Brother
Athelstanes death (the nobleness of whose life recompensed the blemish of his
birth) was admitted to his Fathers Throne, which he did wisely and courageously
manage, but was too soon deprived of it, and his life together, by a villainous
Affassinate, in his own house at a festival, whilst he went about to rescue his
Sewer from the violence of that barbarous hand.

The more than ordinary hopes conceived of this brave Prince being thus
untimely nipped in the bud, his no-lesse-deserving Brother Eldred was elected
King, notwithstanding Edmond had left two Sons behind, whose tender years in
those troublesome times were thought incapable of so weighty an employment.

But upon the death of Eldred, the Scepter (which is a thing to be taken notice
of in precedent and subseqent ruptures of this nature) reverted to the right
Heirs, viz. the Sons of Edmond: And first to Edwin the eldest, whose dissolute
and degenerate courses made sudden room for Edgar the youngest, who matched any
of his Predecessors in worth, and excelled them all in power, for he quieted,
and kept under, Danes, Welsh, Scots, insomuch as he is accounted, at least from
the Saxons entrance, the first absolute Monarch of this entire Island.

In a word, he was happy in his life, and Reign, but most unhappy in his Issue,
for having two Sons, Edward and Ethelred, by several venters; the Stepmother
Elfred made Edward a Saint to make her own Son Etheldred a King; and though now
by this removal of his Brother, whereunto possibly he might not be privy, none
had any nearer title to the Crown than himself, yet did that innocent blood lie
heavy upon him and his seed, nor could it, according to St. Dunstans
predictions, be expiated, but by a long avengement.

In promoting of which divine justice, the Danes were the principal
instruments, who had layn still under Edgar, but taking advantage of Ethelreds
unsettled condition, who by reason of this fore-stalling the Crown was termed
the unready, forced him first to purchase an ill-kept peace, and then to
relinquish his ill-gotten Kingdom, of which death only prevented Swayn, his
expeiler, to take actual possession, and accumulate this to the Danish Crown.

But Cnute the Son of Swayn perfected his Fathers design, and afforded Ethelred
now returned out of Normandy, whither to avoid the storm he had betook himself,
so sharp an entertainment that oppressed with grief for his bad success, he
quitted this, and made another world his second place of refuge, leaving his
Son Edmond Inheritor of little else, but the miseries of an unfortunate house.

Yet did Edmond, for his valor, and hardiness in War, surnamed Ironside, hew
himself out with his Sword the moiety of a Kingdom. For after the effusion of
much blood on both sides, and to stop the shedding, of more it was agreed
between the two Competitors (Cnute and Edmond) to try their right by single
combat, in proper person, and the over-commer to take all. But there proving
equality in the sight, there was likewise made equality in the command between
them; yet did not Edmond long enjoy his share, being circumvented by the
practice of Edric Earl of Stratton, the Arch-Traytor of those times, whose
falsehood had ruined the Father, and now his ambition destroys the Son, for
which Cnute invents a suitable reward, causing his head to be set upon the
highest place of the Tower of London, therein performing his promise of
advancing him above any Lord of the Land, which was the mark that this
faithless wretch aimed at, and now attained, but in a far different sense from
that which he had vainly proposed to himself.

Cnute being thus rid of a Rival, denied copartnership to the Sons of Edmond,
as pretending the whole to appertain to the Survivor, and for fear they might
prove thorns in his side, he sent them far enough out of the way, into
Swedeland, say some, there to be murdered, but they were mercifully preserved,
and conveyed to the Court of Hungary, where Edmond dyed without issue, but
Edward had by Agatha Daughter to Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany, a Son
named Edgar, and a Daughter called Margaret, who was the cause, as hereafter
shall be showed, that the Saxon stem which now seemed withered, does once more
reflourish, though inocculated we confess, upon another stock.

Notwithstanding this transportation of Edmonds Sons, yet did not Cnute hold
himself sufficiently assured of his new accquired Kingdom, till he had married
Emma widow of Ethelred, whereby he gained the love of the English: but the
promise he made in marriage, that the Children begotten on her should succeed,
was for some time frustrated by the preoccupation of Harold, (surnamed
Harefoot,) the eldest son of Cnute by a Concubine; but his reign was brief, as
likewise was that of his Brother Hardi Canute, the lawful Son of Cnute and
Emma, with whom expired the Danish Dominion here, which had been but of a short
duration, though their incursions and molestations had continued for a longer
space.

Edward styled the Confessor, to distinguish him from Edward the Elder, and
Edward the Saint, was next King, being the Son of Emma also, but by her first
Husband Ethelred the Unready, and did in some sort restore the Saxon blood: For
in truth there was a nearer relation to the Crown extant, though not so near at
hand for the present, to wit, Edward, surnamed, by reason of his Foreign
education, the Outlaw, the Son of Edmond Ironside, the eldest Son by his first
Wife of the above mentioned Ethelred the Unready, who ought by the Law of
Nature and Nations to have preceded. Yet did the Confessor, wanting Issue
himself, do his Nephew the Outlaw so much right, as to recall him with his
Children out of their Banishment in Hungary, and designed him his Successor,
but the Outlaws death before the Confessors, prevented that determination.

Nevertheless the Confessor without delay pronounced Edgar the Outlaws Son,
and his own Grand Nephew Heir apparent, and gave him the surname of Etheling,
which in those days were only peculiar to such as were in hopes and
possibility of a Kingdom. And more than so, this poor Etheling never was: For
first he was debarred by his own Guardian Harold the Son of Goodwin Earl of
Kent, who disdaining the title of Regent (which he was only constituted)
assumed that of King; Afterward by William Duke of Normandy, who though he
pulled down Harold, yet did he not set up Edgar, laying claim himself to the
Crown, by virtue of a pretended Donation from his Cosen Edward the Confessor,
which had been too weak a plea, had it not been justified by a long sword,
which has ever since given him the appellation of William the Conqueror.

Robert the eldest Son of the Conqueror should by right of primogeniture have
succeeded his Father in all his Dominions, but having proved a Rebel at the
French Kings instigation, he had only the Dukedom of Normandy assigned to him,
and the Crown of England was bequeathed to his Brother William surnamed Rufus,
who dying without any legitimate offspring, and Robert being absent in the
Holy Land, Henry the youngest Son of the Conqueror as Duke of Normandy, but
eldest as King of England, seized upon it, and to ingratiate himself with the
Natives, and to corroborate his Title, he Married Maud, Daughter of Margaret by
Malcolme King of Scots, Sister to Edgar Etheling, Son of Edward the Outlaw, Son
of Edmond Ironside, Son of Ethelred the Unready, Son of Edgar the peaceable Son
of Edmond, Son of Edward Senior, Son of Alfred, and by which means the Royal
seed of the Saxons became to be replanted in the English Soil.

For this Henry the first had (not to mention his Son William who perished by
water whilst he was young) by the foresaid Maud, a Daughter of the same name,
whom he first espoused to Henry the fifth, Emperor of Germany, afterward to
Jeffrey Plantagenet Earl of Aniou, by whom she had a Son called Henry, in whom
did fully concur the Norman and Saxon Race.

But the true hereditary succession was somewhat intercepted by Stephen Earl of
Bologne Son of Adela the Conquerours Daughter, from whom he could derive but a
slender title: For had the Conquerours line Masculine failed, then ought
Theobald Earl of Bloys, Stephens Eldest Brother by the same Adela, to have been
prelated; And therefore his surest Tenure proceeded from his Election by the
Nobility, who notwithstanding their natural Allegiance, and twice repeated Oath
(and among them Stephen himself is reckoned to be one that had sworn Fealty) to
Maud and her Heirs in the Reign of her Father Henry, admitted this stranger,
and that for no other reason, though other were alleged (as that Maud was a
woman, and consequently incapable of anointing; that she was married out of the
Realm, without the consent thereof, which if of any moment should before their
solemn engagement have been taken into consideration) than that he being a
Creature of their own erecting, was more obliged to them, and would upon all
occasions be more ready to gratify their aspiring humor.

Yet wanted not the Empress and her Son adherents both within and without the
Kingdom, to assert their right, who raised such a cloud of trouble to, Stlphen
that he could not dispel it during his whole reign, so that at length he came
to a composition, and his own Son Eustace whom he had designed his Successor
being already dead, he adopts Henry fitz-Empresse, and proclaims him heir
apparent, with this Proviso; That he himself should enjoy the Crown as long as
he lived, which was not a full year after this peaceable agreement.

Henry the second of that name is now possessed of the Throne, (in process of
time adding the Lordship of Ireland to it) and that upon a treble account.

First by virtue of the late Treaty with King Stephen, Secondly by title of
conquest, as being great Grandchild to William the Norman; but Thirdly, and
chiefly, by the equity of his Mothers claim, who was the true descendent of the
long-rejected but now restored Saxon lineage.

He took to wise Elenor, the repudiate of Lewis the seventh King of France, by
whom he had large Dominions in that Kingdom: but notwithstanding it augmented
his estate, yet was it the occasion of much trouble and vexation to him; For
the French King jealous of his growing fortunes, and his own Queen of his
fidelity to his marriage bed, incited his Sons, Henry, Richard, Jeffrey, and
John, to frequent rebellions, to whom nevertheless upon their submissions he
was entirely reconciled.

Henry Sans issue departed this life before his Father. Richard succeeded in
the Throne but dyed childlesse also; Jeffrey, though extinct himself before it
came to his turn, had yet left a Son in being, Arthur Duke of Britany, who
ought to have been considered of; but him John prevented more too, by power and
favor of the Nobles, than by any color of Justice, and whilst the young
Prince endeavors the recovery of his right, he is taken prisoner as he
besieged the Castle of Mirabell in France, conveyed to the Tower of Roan, and
there killed, if not by the hands, yet at least by the command of his inhumane
Uncle.

However the course taken to be thus rid of a Competitor was utterly unlawful,
yet being gone, John becomes the lawful proprietor of the Crown, but pays dear
for the manner of this his amiss procured purchase. For the Pope
excommunicates him, his Subjects forsake him, the French King invades him, and
bereavs him not only of his large Territories in France, but also of the
greatest part of his Kingdom of England, and he dies miserably, not without
suspicion of Poison; a just judgment upon him for his enormous Acts, especialy
the murder of his innocent Nephew.

Now though God showed himself a severe inquisitor for blood, yet did he seem
appeased with the punishment of the person that was guilty of it: For he so
disposed the hearts of the English Nation, that they generally withdrew
themselves from the French party, and notwithstanding the iniquity of the
Father, most willingly embrace the Son, then a minor, as naturally inclined,
says my Author, to love and obey their Princes.

Such this Prince Henry the third found his Subjects at his first admission,
whilst he was governed by a wise and faithful Council, but afterward
suffering himself to be ruled by strangers, that more intended their own than
the public good, he so alienated the English affections, as that they are as
ready now to revolt from him, as they were earnest at first to promote his
interest. To the former he adds new grievances, to wit, reiterated breach of
Charters granted by his Predecessors, and himself, whence such discontents are
engendered, that at length there is begotten between the King and his people an
actual (commonly known by the name of the Barons) war. Hereof Simon de Monfort
Earl of Leicester, on the Barons side was head, who in a set Battle takes King
Henry and his Son Edward prisoners, but Edward escapes, collects an Army,
defeats and kills Leicester, and redeems his Father, the beginning of whose
reign was overcast with a French mist, the middle was very tempestous by reason
of the Barons commotions, but the Catastrophe or latter part was serene, and
concluded in a perfect Calm.

Edward the first of that name since the Norman conquest, having proved the
deliverer of his Father from captivity, makes an expedition into the Holy Land
to perform the like office to the Christians there, that were grievously
afflicted under the Turkish servitude: but the news of his Fathers death
quickly recalls him from further prosecution of that honorable enterprise,
wherein he had no less honorably demeaned himself.

And as he had increased his own and Countries reputation abroad, so does he
likewise enlarge their power and jurisdiction at home, by subduing most of
Scotland, and totally reducing of Wales, of which last, because it was then
first annexed to this Crown, it will not be impertinent to afford the Reader a
brief and summary relation.

Wales (the small remnant of this Island that was left to the Britains the
ancient possessors of the whole) had hitherto, though not without much
difficulty and struggling, continued under their own proper Princes: But the
fatal period of their liberty, which they had so long, so stoutly maintained,
against so potent a Kingdom, as this, is now arrived. Llewellin the then
Prince of that Cnuntry, being summoned to our Kings Coronation, refused to
appear, saying, He too well remembers the end of his Father Gryffin, who came
in safety to London, but never returned thence.

This neglect, Edward makes the ground of a quarrel, enters into hostility
against Llewellin, forces him to a submission, whereof he soon repents, flies
out again, is overcome and slain in fight, his head cut off, and that Merlins
Prophecy might be fulfilled or eluded, which, as he interpreted, had promised
him the Diadem of Brute, it is Crowned with Ivy, and set upon the Tower of
London.

After the death of Llewellin and his brother David, (whose head was shortly
sent to accompany the others in the same place) Edward contrives the perpetual
union of these two, too long divided, Nations. And though he found the Welsh
Nobles very cautious how they brought their necks under a Foreign yoke, yet does
he accomplish his ends by this neat and Artificial devise.

He conveys secretly into the Castle of Carnarvon, his Queen great with Child,
whom when he understood to be delivered of a boy, he Assembles the Welsh
Nobles, and proposes to them, whether they would accept of a Prince of his
Nomination, that was born in their own Country, could speak nere a word of
English, and against whom for Life or Conversation no objection could be made:
Whereunto when they had assented, he produces his own little Son Edward, to
whom the aforesaid qualifications did exactly agree; Hence the custom took its
original of investing our Kings eldest Sons in the Principality of Wales: but
because there may here seem to have been a mixture of force and fraud, we shall
endeavor, when order brings us to it, to find out a more unexceptionable
Title, whereby our Kings lay claim to that Dominion.

Edward the second (called Edward of Carnarvon for the cause but even now
rehearsed) much degenerated from his Fathers Nobleness, and lost not only
Scotland, which his Father had well-nigh gained, but ever England it self,
being deposed by his own Wife Isabel, having only this comfort left him, that
his Son Edward was to succeed in the Throne.

Edward the third of that name, Son of the late deposed and shortly after
murdered King, was, when he came to years of Discretion, Gods Instrument to
revenge his Fathers death, even upon his own Mother the Queen and her Minion
Mortymer, who was the Author and Procurer of the same.

But the chiefest passage of this Princes Reign, and that of nearest Alliance
to our Subject in hand, which is to declare the Titles our Kings have to the
Kingdoms they possess or challenge, was his claiming and almost obteining the
Crown of France. The occasion and State of the difference was briefly thus.

Phillip de Valois the then King of France, had with somewhat too much rigor
demanded, and with too much Imperiousness received the Homage of our Edward
for some pieces which he held in that Kingdom. But Edwards high Stomach could
not digest the indignity, as he conceived of this humiliation, considering but
somewhat of the latest, that he had a better right not to fragments only, but
to the whole, than the person to whom he had so lowly abased himself: For
Edward was the Son of Isabell, Daughter of Philiple bell or the fair, formerly
King of France, whereas Philip, the present injoyer, was Son to Charles of
Valois but younger Brother to the foresaid le bell, only there is one frivolous
impediment in Edwards way, to wit, the French Law Salique, which debars Females
and their Descendents from the Crown: but this entail Edward is resolved to cut
off with a good Sword; And to this purpose he enters France with a strong Army,
and gave the French two such famous overthrows at Cressy and Poictiers, that
they put that State into a dangerous Consumption, which without all doubt would
have turned to an Hectic Feavour, had the War been prosecuted with the same
heat wherewithal it was begun.

A great allay to these prosperous proceedings, was the untimely death of
Edwards eldest Son (Edward) Prince of Wales, but better known by the name of
the Black Prince, to whose prowess the former Atchievments in France were
chiefly owing, who having made an inroad into Spain to rein throne their K.
Peter, brought thence Victory and a mortal Disease, which quickly made an end
of him, leaving behind him a young Son, Richard of Bourdeux, to whom Edward the
Grandfather, yet living, confirmed the succession by Parliament, lest his
aspiring Son John Duke of Lancaster, Richards Uncle, should, as one observes,
have supplanted him, as King John did his Nephew Arthur in the like case.

But what John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster failed in, his Son Henry of
Bullingbrook Duke of Hereford effected: By deposing his Cosen German Richard
the second, who is rather noted to be an unfortunate than vicious, a seduced
than of himself Tyrannical Prince.

It will be no deviation from the matter, but rather requisite in regard of the
light it yields to the clearer and more distinct knowledge of the following
confusions, to speak somewhat more particularly of the manner of this Henryes
compassing the Crown, the claim he laid to it, and the course he took to settle
the succession in his own house, this being the Fountain from which flowed the
most bloody and most tedious Civil Wars that ever England endured, this being
the great ball of contention between the White Rose and the Red, between the
Yorkish and Lancastrian Family.

Henry the fourth of that name among the English Kings, was, as has been noted
before, the Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son of King Edward
the third; His Father was suspected, but he is detected, of higher thoughts
than it became a Subject (he being then but Duke of Hereford) to entertain.

For justification of himself, Hereford appeals to his Sword, and offers combat
to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk his Accuser, who courageously accepts
thereof: But as they were about to join issue, King Richard interposes and
banished them both, out of the Realm, Norfolk for ever, Hereford for ten years;
four of which the King struck off as of special favor, when he came to take
his solemn leave of him. But Hereford himself does much more abbreviate the
time, and does long anticipates even the last indulged date of his return: For
he re-lands the very same day twelvemonth he departed, and found many Abettors
of his quarrel (which at first he only pretends to be the recovery of his
Dukedom) especially the Earl of Northumberland, whom King Richard at his late
going into Ireland, where now he is, because the Earl demurred to accompany him
in the Voyage, had caused to be proclaimed Traitor, and so made him that, which
otherwise perhaps he would not have been. But Henry's Power more and more
increasing, and Richards daily decreasing, till at length it languished into
nothing, Henry discovers, that it was somewhat more than a bare Dukedom that he
aimed at: A Parliament is called, in which King Richard as is pretended, not
only voluntarily surrenders, but is also violently degraded, and Henry, both by
his and the peoples appointment, installed in his Room, who upon the day of his
Coronation, caused it to be proclaimed, that he claimed the Crown of England,
First, by right of Conquest; Secondly, because King Richard had resigned his
Estate, and designed him his Successor; Lastly, because he was of the Blood
Royal, and next Heir Male to King Richard. Heir Male, rather Haeres Malus,
says Edmond Mortimer Earl of March to some of his Familiars, as knowing the
lawful right to be inherent in himself, though for the present it must give
place to a stronger possessor. For this Edmond was the Son of Roger, the Son of
Edmond Earl of March, by Philip Daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, who was
elder Brother to John Duke of Lancaster, King Henryes Father. Hereof Henry is
very apprehensive, and having dispatched Richard to Heaven before his time,
wished Mortimer there also, and in order to his hastening thither, refused to
procure his liberty and enlargement, but suffered him to continue in a
loathsome Dungeon, though he had been taken Prisoner in defense of his Country
against Owen ap Glendower, the famous Revolter of Wales, who therefore the more
hardly used him, that thereby his Kinsman King Henry might be moved to redeem
him, but therefore King Henry would not redeem him, because he well hoped by
this hard usage to be rid of him, who was like to prove the greatest prejudice
to his crazy and counterfeit Title. For it was obvious to all, however for fear
dissembled by most, that the issue of Lionel Elder Son of King Edward the
third, ought to have preceded John of Gaunts the younger Son of the foresaid
Edward; And hence it was, that Henry does not solely rely upon his Fathers
right, which he knew to be infirm, as long as any of Lionels offspring
remained, but joins to it that of his Mother Blanch, Daughter and Heir to Henry
Duke of Lancaster, Son of Edmond, nicknamed Crook-back, eldest Son, as was
alleged, of King Henry the third, but by reason of his deformity put by the
succession, which was for that cause conferred upon King Edward the first,
though but the younger Brother; But the truth is, in this pedigree there is an
Error in the very Foundation, for though our Henry were so descended as is
specified, from Edmond, yet the said Edmond was neither oldest Son to Henry the
third, nor yet a deformed person, but a proper Gentleman, and a great
Commander, therefore entitled Crook-back, or rather Crouch-back, because he had
took upon him the Cross, and according to the Custom of those days warred in
the Holyland.

Thus appears the invalidity of Henryes claim, whether from the Father, as
unsound, or the Mother, as suspicious, and deceitful, or from King Richard
receding, as extorted by force in restraint, and so of no force, or of consent
of the many, there being no Custom in the English Nation for popular elections,
or by Conquest, which in a Subject against his Sovereign is Insurrection, and
Victory high Treason, as was well observed by the Bishop of Carlisle in his
speech in that very Parliament, where this business was agitated and transacted.

Nay further, there is a tradition, that John of Gaunt (Father of this Henry)
was not at all the Son of King Edward, but that the Queen being delivered of a
female child, knowing how unacceptable it would be to her Husband, exchanged it
for a boy with a Dutch woman, who had been brought to bed about the same hour:
This the Queen at her death confessed to William of Wickman Bishop of
Winchester, who acquainted none with it but John of Gaunt himself, and that
when he perceived John to affect the Crown, in which case the Mother had left
the Bishop free: But this being but a report, and grounded on uncertainties,
would have been no bar to Henry's title, had it been clear in all other
respects.

Henry, as he had injuriously obtained a Kingdom, so does he laboriously
preserve the same; for the manifold conspiracies against him testify that
quiet is not a Concomitant of usurped greatness; and was in a manner bereaved
of his Crown, before he was of his life: For he being seized upon by a deep fit
of the Apoplexy, his Son Henry seized upon the Crown, whereof, when the Father
reviving demanded the reason, his answer was, That in his and all men's
judgment there present, he was dead, and then says he, I being next Heir
apparent to the same, took it as my indubitat right; Well said the King, and
sighed, Son, what right I had to it, God knows; but says the Prince, If you
dye King, I doubt not to hold it, as you have done, against all opposers.

Which expression this incomparable King Henry the fifth did make good even to
supererogation: for abandoning his youthful extravagancies, whereof he is
severely taxed, he embraces more solid courses, and to vent any discontented
humors at home, which by standing still might corrupt, and gather
putrefaction, he meditates a war with France, and awakens the English title to
it, which had lain dormant ever since his great Grandfathers days.

But whilst he is in preparation for this great affair, he either makes or
discovers a plot against his life, by Richard Earl of Cambridge, who had
married Anne Sister and Heir of Edmond Mortimer, Earl of March, before
remembered, who was the true their of the Crown, and was the true cause of Earl
Richards execution: for it cannot be imagined that money alone would induce so
noble a person to so foul an undertaking. And the event shows that there was
somewhat more than Bribery in this attempt, when we shall find the Son of this
late executed Earl, dispossessing his Son, who was the Author of his Fathers
Tragedy.

Henry having thus eased himself of a great Pretender, proceeds to his intended
design on France, where he so prosperously speeds, that he is constituted
Regent, and declared Heir apparent of the doting French King, whose Daughter
Katherine he marries, and by her has a Son named Henry, of whom the King is
said to have thus prophesyed; I Henry born at Monmouth, shall small time reign
and much get, and Henry born at Windsor shall long reign and lose all.

And so indeed it came to pass through the secret operation of all-disposing
Providence, which is seldom propitious to the owners (how good in themselves
soever they be) of ill-gained inheritances beyond the third succession. And
hereof our present Henry the sixth is a great example, who was the meekest and
most religious of all our Kings that had been before, and yet for no other
transgression that we know of, than the original Sin of his Grandfather, Henry
the fourth, meddling with the forbidden fruit of a Crown his ere it was ripe for
him, is he chased out of the terrestial Paradise of all his Kingdoms, and sent
to be a partaker of a Celestial one, somewhat more early than the due course of
nature had designed him for it.

For that covert fire which had a long time burned in the breasts of many, to
see the Lancastrian race enjoy another right, does now break forth into open
combustion, of which Richard Duke of York is the prime incendiary, the Son of
Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was beheaded in King Henry the fifths reign, for
supposed Treason, the Son of Edmond Duke of York, the fifth Son of King Edward
the third.

But Duke Richard waves all pretensions by the Fathers side, as not being
ignorant, that John of Gaunt (from whom our present Henry is directly
descended) was elder brother to his Grandfire Edmond, and therefore in
Parliament only produces his title by the Mother, as being the Son and Heir of
Anne, Sister and Heir of Edmond, Son and Heir of Roger Mortymer Earl of March,
Son and Heir of Philippa, the sole Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke of
Clarence, the third Son of Edward the third, and elder Brother of John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaester, Father of the Usurper Henry the fourth, Grandfather
of Henry the fifth, who was Father to him, who now (says Richard) untruly
styles himself King Henry the sixth.

Besides his holding forth his claim to the Crown in this demonstrative, and
undeniable manner (which yet the judicious could only penetrate) the Duke
adds many Rhetorical aggravations, which were more suitable, and intelligible
to vulgar ears; As that the King was simple, and of weak capacity; that he was
Governed by the Queen a stranger, and Woman of an unsufferable ambition; that
the Privy Counselors were naught and corrupt, through whose faithlessenesse
and inabilities, France was lost, and England disquieted, and that greater
judgments were to be expected, if the true Heir were any longer debarred from
his lawful right.

The Duke by these plausible arguments had so engaged the multitude unto him,
that he is able to dispute his Title in the Field with the King, whom he takes
Prisoner, and calling in his name a Parliament, it is there concluded, that
King Henry during his life, should retain the name and Honor of a King; that
the Duke of York should be Proclaimed Heir apparent to the Crown, and Protector
of the Kings Person and Dominions; that if at any time King Henry's Friends,
Allies, or Favorites, in his behalf should attempt the disannulling of this
Act, that then the Duke should have present possession of the Crown.

But this was more than what his destiny had allotted for him, for he was
shortly after slain at the Battle of Wakefield by Queen Margaret, who was of a
more Masculine Spirit, than to acquiesce in the forementioned dishonorable
Conditions; and because it was a Crown that the Duke of York chiefly affected,
She caused his Head to be cut off, set upon a Pole, and Crowned with Paper: but
the death and disgrace of the Father, Edward Earl of March, his Eldest Son does
speedily revenge to the utter ruin of the Lancastrain party.

Nor will this Edward, as did his Father, await another leisure, and prove
expectant of a Crown in reversion, but immediately assumes it by the actual
deposing of King Henry, whom he takes Prisoner, and commits to safe custody in
the Tower of London.

But there was an accident which had well-nigh nipped the white Rose in the
bud, and restored the red Rose to its pristine vigor.

Edward the fourth, late Earl of March, now King of England, sends his great
General the Earl of Warwick to treat a Match between him, and the Lady Bona
Sister to the Queen of France. But our youthful King in the mean time
consulting only his own affections, takes to Wife, the fair Lady Gray, Widow
of Sir John Gray of Groby; which so incenses Warwick, that he Rebels against
his Master, beats him not only out of the Field, but also out of the Kingdom,
delivers King Henry from his Prison, and reseats him in his Throne; but all
this is but as Lightning before Death; Edward returns from beyond Seas, fights
with, defeats and kills the Earl of Warwick, routs also Queen Margaret newly
landed, and the relicts of her Lancastrian Associates, takes her and her Son
Edward Prisoners, which last is stabbed by Richard Duke of Gloucester, King
Edwards Brother, and not long it is, but the Father Henry is dispatched by the
same hand in the Tower of London, whither he was remanded by King Edward after
this fortunate and victorious success.

The cruelty of Richard Duke of Gloucester, whose nature was more crooked than
his body, did not terminate in the blood of his Enemies, but begins to practice
on his Friends and nearest Relations: For perceiving that King Edward by reason
of his incontinency, whereunto no English Prince was ever more subject, was not
long lived, he secretly plots the attaining of the Crown for himself; And for
the more expedite compassing this ambitious design, he first incenses King
Edward against their common Brother George Duke of Clarence, not only
exaggerating the heinousness of his former disobedience (which had been
pardoned) but insinuating a blind Prophecy, that one whose name began with the
letter G. should prove fatal to Edwards posterity.

Hereupon the Duke of Clarence is committed to the Tower, and there, by Richard
drowned in a Butt of Malmsey, however it was given out that he dyed of a
discontented passion.

But the Ominous G. which the King so much dreaded, was found in the sequel to
appertain to Gloucester himself, who was the Contriver of this mischief, and
Butcher of Edwards innocent Sons, of whom, after the Kings decease, he was made
Protector.

The young Prince (Edward the fifth) was at Ludlow, when his Father, Edward the
fourth dyed, from whence his Mother was over desirous to have him forthwith
conveyed to London.

But his Uncle the Duke of Gloucester meets him by the way at Stony-Stratford,
and having secured all his faithful Attendants and Kindred by the Mothers side,
takes into custody the person of the young King, which was the game that this
mighty hunter did mainly intend.

Yet was there one obstacle to his aspiring ends still behind, to wit, Richard
Duke of York the Kings Brother, in Sanctuary with his Mother at Westminster,
whom to allure thence (for to do it by Violence, was accounted Religion in
those days) he imploys the Archbishop of Canterbury to persuade the Mother,
and in case she proves obstinate, to interpose his Authority, to part with her
Son, under color, that he might be a companion, and great lenitive of the
Melancholy disposition of his disconsolate Brother.

Gloucester having thus compassed the Wardship of both his Nephews, makes show
as if he would proceed to the Coronation of the Elder, but whilst the Lords of
the Council are debating of the time and manner of it, he arrests, and on a
sudden makes shorter by the Head the Lord Chamberlain Hastings, whom though he
had used as a forward Coadjuter in depressing of the Queens Relations, yet knew
him to be altogether averse from yielding any Countenance to the disinheriting
of his Masters King Edwards Children.

Hastings thus removed, the Duke of Buckingham (who had received several
disgusts from his Brotherin-law Edward the fourth) is pitched upon as the
fittest agent to carry on this Devilish attemot; who having prepared the Mayor
and Citizens of London, comes in their name, pretending Bastardy, and
insufficiency of Edwards race, to make a tender of the Crown to Protector
Richard, and in case of refusal, with threats to elect some other worthy and
deserving Person. Richard in seeming amazedness makes strange at first of this
by himself-devised proposal, but after some importunity, grants his, forsooth,
unwilling consent, not without a dissembled regret of his Nephews condition,
whose murder in the Tower does immediately ensue.

Buckingham (supposed not privy to the making away of the harmless Princes)
upon this and other distasts, retires from Court to his Castle of Brecknock,
where, with his prisoner Morton Bishop of Ely, he contrives the Match between
Henry Earl of Richmond, and Elizabeth Daughter of Edward the fourth, which
proves Richards downfall, and the union of the Yorkish and Lancastrian line.

Henry Earl of Richmond, was the Son of Margaret, Daughter of John Duke of
Somerset, Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by Katherine Swineford,
relict of Sir Otes Swineford; and though this John, and other Children, were
born before espousals, yet was the issue made legitimate by Act of Parliament,
and confirmed by a Bull from Rome.

Of this Henry there goes a tradition for current, that in the heat of the
Civil Wars between the House of York and Lancaster, Henry the sixth having
espied him in the presence, laid his hand upon his head, and in a Prophetic
manner said, Behold this youth, who is to enjoy that for which we now contend.

Which his Mother observing, and treasuring up in her heart, sent him into
Britany in France, as into a safe Harbor, to be there educated and preserved
till the fury of the tempest were over, which then did so terribly rage
throughout the Land.

Richard the third earnestly Solicites the Duke of Britany to deliver up
Richmonds person to him, which was well-nigh effected, by the treachery of
Peter Landoys, the Dukes especial Favorite; But Richmond having timely notice
of this Clandestine negotiation, flies to the French Kings Court, (for at that
time the Dukedom of Britany was a distinct Principality) from whence having
sworn to consummate the projected marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, he hastens
to redeem poor England from the jaws of an usurping Tyrant.

Richmond Lands at Milford Haven in Pembrokeshire, where he was heartily
welcomed, and readily assisted by the Welsh, from whose Princes he was
descened, as being the Son of Edmond of Haddam, the Son of Owen Ap Teudor, who
could in a direct line derive his pedigree from the Noble Race of Cadwallader,
last King of the Britains on this side Severne, as has been before touched;
though a modern Writer, more for the jest sake, than out of reality, says he
was a Gentleman of no extraordinary lineage, but lineaments, which he makes to
be the motive that induced Katherine of France, Dowager of England, after the
death of Henry the fifth, to take him for her second Husband.

Richmond having much increased his Army among his Countrymen, marches forward
as far as Bosworth in Leicestershire, where King Richard meets him, and there
the great controversy is finally decided in Battle; Richard is slain, and
Richmond by a kind of military election saluted, and in a manner Crowned King
in the Field.

Henry the seventh (for so must we now call him, that was but lately Earl of
Richmond,) sensible that the tumultuary approbation of Soldiers did of it self
give him neither just or durable possession, knowing likewise the weakness of
the Lancastrian plea in opposition to that of York, mary's, according to his
solemn preingagement, Elizabeth eldest Daughter of Edward the fourth, which
brought security to his estate, and happiness to the Kingdom, the two Roses,
whose divisions had put the English to much expense of blood, being thereby
concorporated, and for ever after linked in a most firm and indissolvable knot.

But as in a body, that has been troubled with a Cronique Disease, though
recovered, yet are there still some peccant humors to be purged out: so,
notwithstanding this Union and Reconciliation, there remains dregs of
discontents, whereof the Queen Mother was the supposed Parent, and Margaret
Duchess of Burgundy the known Nurse; the first, because she thought her
Daughter not sufficiently respected (for King Henry is not accused to have been
over uxorious or indulgent to his wife) the other, being Sister of Edward the
fourth, bore an endless hatred to any of the Lancastrian Race.

The first Spirit they raised to disturb King Henryes quiet, was one Lambert
Symnell, a stripling, but so instructed by Simon a Priest, who had higher
directors, that he could well personate the young Earl of Warwick (Son of
George Duke of Clarence) whom the credulous Irish greedily entertain and
acknowledge for their King: And when Henry to detect the forgery, had publicly
shown in London the very Earl of Warwick whom he kept his Prisoner, they retort
the fiction upon himself, and give out he had suborned a counterfeit on purpose
to delude the simple multitude.

But this Pageantry quickly vanished, the Conspirators are dispersed, and
Lambert taken, who had the honor to be first made a Turn-spit in the Kings
Kitchen, but was afterward preferred to be one of the Kings Falconers.

This was but the Prologue as it were to a more deep contrived Comi-Tragaedy
that was to follow, whereof the restless Duchess of Burgundy was the
Inventer, and one Perkin Werbeke the principal Actor. But the Name and Scene is
somewhat altered: His Cue assigned him, is to play the part of Richard Duke of
York, second Son of Edward the fourth, who is feigned to have miraculously
escaped the hands of his bloody Uncle.

Perkin was so good a proficient, and had learned, and could repeat his lesson
so exactly, that not the silly Irish alone, but the French, and Scottish Kings,
with many of the Nobility and Gentry of England, were, or would be deceived.

Nay, Sir William Stanly himself, Lord Chamberlain, the Kings especial
favorite, is so far trepanned, as to utter this improvident Speech (which was
construed high Treason) that if he certainly knew that the young man was the
undoubted Son and Heir of King Edward the fourth, he would never fight, or bear
Arms against him; for which he became headless, though he had been the chief
help and setter of the Crown upon King Henryes head.

Perkin at length is taken, and committed to the Tower, where soliciting the
Earl of Warwick to make an escape, he hastens both his own merited, and that
poor Earls undeserved execution.

Henry having thus composed his affairs at home, seeks honorable matches for
his children abroad; and marries his eldest Daughter Margaret to the Scottish
King, providently foreseeing, that in case his issue Male failed, this
conjunction might be a means to associate the separated Kingdoms, (as his own
had the Roses) and so remedy the inconveniences of two distinct estates in one
single Island.

Arthur his eldest Son, Prince of Wales, was espoused to Katherine Infanta of
Spain, but he dying before consummation, we mean as to conjugal duty, his
brother Henry by dispensation from the Pope, takes her to wife, who on the
wedding day was attired all in white, in token that she was a pure and
spotless Virgin.

It is conceived that the young Prince (who henceforward is to be styled Henry
the eighth) had never any great fancy to the Lady, as somewhat his Superior in
years, but did rather comply with his Fathers will, than his own inclinations:
However for a long time he lived with her in an outward loving and seeming
respectful manner.

But at length satiated with her company, whom from the beginning he had not
truly affected, he meditates a divorce, and hopes by money and Cardinal
Woolseys interest in the Court of Rome, with speed to effect the same. Woolsey,
(who by his obsequiousness to the Kings pleasure in all things, had from a
mean condition mounted to the highest degree of favor and power that a Subject
is capable of) is reported to be the first that injected the scruple into the
Kings head, touching the unlawfullnesse of his marriage with his Brothers Wife,
which once in, could not in haste be put out again. But in the prosecution the
King and Woolsey had different ends: Woolsey to revenge himself of Charles the
fifth, Emperor of Germany, and Nephew to Katherine, who had been a back-Friend
to Woolsey in his attempted advancement to the Popedom, and by proposing a
match to the King out of France, he thought to ingratiate with that Crown,
which might be more auspitious in promoting his towering designs. But the King
had another, though not so deep a reach, which more concerned his own private
satisfaction, than policy or reason of State.

For he desired to be unyoked from his old Queen, that he might make a new one
of one of her maids of honor, Anne of Bolen, with whom he was desperately in
love: which the Cardinal smelling out, proves cold in the business, delays to
exercise his legantine power, instigates the Pope to recall the cause to
himself, and proceeds slowly therein; all which is performed accordingly, but
it concludes with the ruin of Woolsey's and the Popes Authority. For impatient
of these procrastinations, Henry discards the one, and renounces the other,
rejects Katherine, marries Anne, grows weary of her, impeaches her of incest
with her own Brother, cuts off her head, in whose room the very next day
succeeds Jane Seymour, who dies in Childbirth; And so he continues shifting
and putting away, or to death, his Wives, as well as other Subjects, till his
own appointed time came, a little before which it is recorded that in great
Agony he should say unto Archbishop Cranmer, Is there any mercy for him, who
never spared man in his wrath, nor woman in his lust?

In his life he little regarded, but rather endeavored to defeat by
Parliament, the titles of his Daughters, Mary by Katherine of Spain, and
Elizabeth by Anne of Bolen, with both whose Mothers he had been grievously
displeased, and seemed more inclinable to the offspring of his youngest Sister
Mary, (Dowager of France) by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, but at his death,
by his last Will and Testament, he constituted his Son Edward by Jane Seymour,
his next immediate heir, and then in case they dyed issulesse, the Lady Mary
and the Lady Elizabeth to succeed in their order.

Henry the eighth being dead, Edward the 6th. of that name, his Son, is at nine
years of age proclaimed King, and Edward Duke of Sommerset by the Mothers side
ordained his Protector, whose candid nature exposed him to the cunning wiles of
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, which at last brought Sommerset, his Brother
Thomas Marquess of Hertford Admiral of England, and even the King himself to
their untimely ends.

The Fox (Northumberland) observing the difference between the Protector and
the Admiral, begun by the womanish emulation of their Wives, does underhand so
foment it, that the Admiral is brought to the block, and the Protector not long
after follows' which renders the Pupil King, more obnoxious to Northumberlands
ambitious practices, now that his two faithful Uncles, who should have
supported him, are removed out of the way.

Northumberland taking advantage of the Kings weakness of mind and body,
(whereunto he is shrewdly suspected to have contributed) advises him to make a
Will, wherein the King declaring that he was past his minority, (thoughot above
sixteen years of age) and that it appertained to him to dispose of the Kingdom
as he pleased, does disinherit his Sisters Mary and Elizabeth, as Persons of
whose legitimation there was a question as likewise the issue of his eldest
Aunt Sister Margaret married to the Scottish King, as foreiners and aliens,
bequeathing the Crown to his Cosen Jane Granddaughter to the Duchess of
Suffolk, the youngest Sister of his Father King Henry the eighth.

Guilford (Duke Dudleys Son) was husband to this Lady Jane, who upon the death
of Edward was proclaimed Queen, but Mary the eldest Daughter of King Henry, by
the assistance of the Norfolk and Suffolk Gentry, recovered that which both by
birth and her Fathers appointment, was her undoubted though for a small time
detained right.

Notwithstanding Mary by the Protestants aid attained the Crown, yet her
Education in the contrary profession, and the memory that for her Mothers sake
it suffered its first detriment, obliged her to recall the Catholic Religion
that had been banished in her Predecessors days, keeping, as one wittily
observes, the Kingdom by Pater noster, which she had gained by Our Father which
art in Heaven.

Her zeal and over-ardent desire to extinguish that which she thought Heresy,
kindled many fires in this land, for which she hears ill among the vulgar to
this day, and bears the brand of tyranny, though of her self she was of a mild
and merciful disposition.

Among other passages, her severity to her Sister Elizabeth is much taxed, of
whose sincere devotion, though outwardly conformable to the Romish Church, the
Queen much doubted, and fearing a relapse of things after her own death, could
have been content that her Sister Elizabeth, though the youngest, had had the
Precedence therein; But Philip King of Spain, Queen Maryes husband, had other
thoughts of and intentions toward Elizabeth, whom he preserved from her
Sisters violence, and designed for his second, we would say, third wife, for he
was a Widdower, when he married Mary, by whom he now begins to despair of
issue, and by reason of her Dropsy, perceives she was in no wise immortal here.

Queen Elizabeth at her first entrance makes show as if she would tread in her
Sister Maryes steps, whereby she so charmed the Catholic Clergy and Nobility,
that they created her no disturbance: And she did further so temporize with
King Philip, that he was a great favourer of her admission, hoping shortly to
be a Copartner with her both in Bed and Kingdom.

But the fancy which Philip, though no Babe, had builded in his brain, quickly
appears to be but an aerial Castle; for Elizabeth soon undeceives him, and
other Romanists, who had promised themselves other matters, by declining
Marriage, disowing the Popes Jurisdiction, and reducing Ecclesiastical Affairs
to the same state and condition her Father and Brother had left them in.

The averseness of this Queen to Matrimonial Bondage, as she accounted it,
gave occasion to that great and by her always disliked dispute about the
Succession: That it belonged of right to Mary Queen of Scots, Daughter of
James, the fifth Son of Margaret eldest Daughter to King Henry the seventh,
none could reasonably deny; but Mary, say the State Politicians of those times,
will ptove another Mary, and our Religion will be depressed, if she be advanced
to the English Throne: Her own Subjects have expelled her upon that account;
and shall we accept of her for our Princess, whom we have so much disobliged
by detaining so long a Prisoner?

For this unfortunate Queen, having been educated in France, did after the
decease of her first Husband, the Dolphin, return into Scotland, of whose
fashions, by reason of her foreign breeding, being somewhat ignorant, she could
not consequently but be guilty of some miscarriages, which her Enemies so
aggravate, that they stir up the people to a sedition, seize upon her Person,
force her to resign to her Son James (by Henry Lord Darly, Son of the Duke of
Lenox) not full eighteen Months old, of whom Earl Murray (her Bastard Brother)
is made Regent, who was the beginning and continuer of all her troubles.

Mary, late, and by right still, Queen of Scots, after this extorted and
therefore invalid resignation, fearing further attempts against her life,
escapes out of the loathsome Gaol where she was secured, and betakes her self
into England for succor, sending news to her Cozen Queen Elizabeth, imploring
not only present protection, but also such convenient aides, as might restore
her to her Kingdom, of which she had been forceably deprived by her Mutinous
and Rebellious Subjects.

Elizabeth at first gives good words, and sends her large attendance, which
were yet but in the quality of an honorable Guard, but afterward more and
more abridges her liberty; at which hard and unworthy usage of a suppliant and
Heir apparent of the Crown, some English Lords and Gentlemen conceiving a just
disdain, project and propose to her means of deliverance, whereunto she (as all
other living creatures are) most greedy of natural freedom, does readily
assent; but these are prevented; and her Actions interpreted as yet tending to
the destruction of Queen Elizabeth, for which she is tried by certain delegated
Commissioners (who much resembled a late thing called an High Court of Justice)
is by them found guilty, and shortly after beheaded at Fotheringham Castle in
Northamtonshire; but the true cause why she suffered, was expressed to her self
by the Earl of Kent, (one of her Judges,) a little before her reputed
Martyrdom; Madam, says he, if you live our Religion is in danger, of which
words she desired the Auditors to take special notice, that confessedly it was
not Treason, but Religion for which she was to dye.

James the 6th. King of Scotland, Son of the late executed Mary, now come to
years of discretion, expostulates with Queen Elizabeth about his Mothers death,
but the Queen puts it off upon the precipitation of her Secretary Davison,
intimating, that if he stirred in the least manner to revenge, it would
irrecoverably hazard his hopes of the Succession, of which yet she gives him
but a very faint assurance. But in her declining age, some about her, who had
been shie before to intermeddle with so ticlish and unpleasing a point, grow
more peremptory, and press her to a positive declaration, to whom her answer
was, It is the King of Scots due, and let him have it.

Conform whereunto James King of Scotland, immediately after her death is
proclaimed King of England, both which he converts into the name of Great
Britany; and now is Cadwalladers Prophecy, before remembered, exactly
completed, that his Race should recover the sole Dominion of this Island; for
King James, besides his direct descent from King Henry the seventh, brought
another, but higher title, if the former had not been sufficient, from Banco a
Nobleman of Scotland, whose Son Fleance fled from the tyranny of Macbeth the
Usurper, into Wales, and there married the Prince his Daughter, by whom he had
Walter the first of the renowned Family of the Stewards: but for the
particulars of that conjunction, we refer you to the British and and Scottish
Historians.

King James arose in this our Horizon with much clearness, notwithstanding
Rawleighs mist, and the smoke of the Gun-powder-plot, which were soon
dispelled: but his setting was obscured by a little Cloud which shortly did
overspread the whole Land.

He had married his eldest Daughter Elizabeth to Frederick Prince Palatine of
the Rhene, who unadvisedly gaping after the Kingdom of Bohemia, lost not only
it, but his own patrimonial possession.

King James who had more of Solomon than David in him, sollicites restitution,
rather by Treaty than Arms, and as the most conducing means to his peaceable
ends, entertains an overture of a match betwixt his Son Charles Prince of Wales
and the Infanta of Spayn, to whose King, the Palatinate was by the Emperor
consigned over.

But the English Parliament takes exception at this intended Spanish affinity,
and as if Religion were at the Stake, declaims against it; Notwithstanding the
King sends his Son into Spain, who returns thence without a wife, yet in his
passage thither, had an accidental sight of her in France, who was by Heaven
his designed Spouse.

As soon as James was dead, Charles his Son is proclaimed King, who immediately
marries Henrietta Maria youngest Daughter to Henry the great King of France, of
whom, as was just now hinted, he had a transient view in his voyage to Spain,
which when this Princess understood, she is reported to have said, That he
needed not to have gone so far for a wife.

But now the seed of discontent, which had been sowed in his Fathers time, did
begin to bud forth; Scotland yields the first fruits, which also too much
thrives in the English Plantation. The Scottish Nobility enter into Combination
against Episcopacy, and the Service Book, which they allege to be obtruded upon
them.

For redress of these imaginary grievances, the Scots with swords in their
hand approach his Majesty to present a Petition, as is given out: A Parliament
in England is called to compose differences, which rather increases them, for
which it is soon dissolved: The Scots Invasion continues, but at length a
Pacification is made; another Parliament is convened, which working so far upon
the Kings necessities, extorts from him an inseparable jewel of his
Prerogrative, to wit, a privilege, not before asked or granted, not to be
discharged without their own consent.

In strength of this concession they proceed to other unseasonable demands,
which together with the tumults of the City, occasioned the King to retire
Northward, and being denied entrance into Hull, (for which Sir John Hotham did
afterward receive his reward from those that employed him) he repairs to
Nottingham, where, understanding that an Army was formed under the Earl of
Essex at London, and then on their March to bring him back, as it was given
out, to his Parliament, he sets up his Standard Royal; but the appearance not
answering expectation, he directs his course toward Shrewsbury, where by the
confluence of the loyal Welsh, his small forces are so increased, that he is
able to confront the Earl of Essex, then at Worcester, who retreats into
Warwickshire, and is overtaken at Edgehill by his Majesty, where the first
signal battle is sought, in which both sides were great losers, and yet both
sides assume the victory to themselves.

The war continues doubtful for three years, but the Battle at Naseby in
Northamptonshire proves fatal to the Kings affairs; for after that succeeds
little else, but the ruin of his party in all places, and surrender of most of
his Garrisons, till he was necessitated in disguise to leave Oxford, his prime,
and well-nigh alone remaining hold, then in a manner beleaguered, and betake
himself for Protection to the Scottish Army.

The Scots, though they had received all possible satisfaction as to their own
concernments, yet could not refrain from intermeddling in the English
distempers, and were at that time besieging Newark upon Trent.

They at first received the King with all seeming promises of security as to
his Person, but having carried him with them to Newcastle, do there barter him
with the English for 200000 l. a price, which, as the French Ambassador
observed, did far exceed that which Judas received for betraying of our Savior.

From Newcastle his bought and sold Majesty is conveyed, by Commissioners
deputed for that purpose from the Parliament of England, to his house at
Holdenby in, Northamtonshire (perhaps that he might be within prospect of that
uncomfortable place Naseby, where was given him his irreparable overthrow)
there to reside during the pleasure of the two Houses: But not long it was ere
Cromwell (whose pulse at that time says a then penman, began to beat a Lordly
pace) by his instrument Joyce surprises him in his bed, and when Joyce told
Cromwell that he had the King in his Custody, then, quoth Cromwell, I have the
Parliament in my pocket.

Cromwels end in seizing on the Kings person, was not only for countenance of
his Independent proceedings against the opposite Presbyterian faction; but
after their depression the better to be enabled to destroy the King himself for
his own advancement.

For having once entrapped this Royal Lion, he does daily more and more
entangle him within his toils, and never thinks him fast enough, till he had
got him in his pit-fall of the Isle of Wight: whether he had allured the good
King, who thought others as free from guile, as he knew himself to be, by
setting before him the danger he was in, while he remained at Hampton Court,
how he lay open and exposed to the wicked machinations of the Agitators of the
Army, who intended to Act that, which he poor Soul did even tremble to utter.

But what the King hopes to find a temporary Sanctuary, proves to him a
constant prison, from whence he is not to be delivered but in order to his
Trial and Execution, the Barbarity of which fact, as we cannot, so neither need
we aggravate, the whole world both then, and still detesting the Authors and
Actors of that abominable Tragedy.

Charles the first being thus execrably murdered, his eldest Son Charles the
second ought to have succeeded; but the wicked Regicides not only disavowed his
Title, but proceeded to abolish even Monarchical Government it self,
introducing in its place a Free State, or Commonwealth (empty notions to delude
the Vulgar,) and leaving no course unessayed to debar the Right Heir, whom God,
Nature, and the Law of the Land had designed to; yea, and the Peoples wishes
(notwithstanding the forementioned popular pretenses) had already seated in
his Fathers Throne.

And as they are careful to secure themselves at home, so are they no less
active to defeat His Majesty's preparations abroad: Cromwell is sent into
Ireland, who but too soon brings under that almost happily recovered Kingdom.

From thence he is recalled to invade Scotland, where an Agreement (such an one
as it was) had been made with His Majesty: Thither Cromwell comes, ere it was
sufficiently provided to entertain so troublesome and unexpected a Guest.

This, with some intestine feuds among the Scots themselves, yielded Cromwell a
cheap Victory at Dunbar, and was the cause of the overhasty rendition of the
impregnable Castle of Edinburgh, (not without suspicion of Treachery in the
Governor, thereby facilitating Cromwels passage into Fife, which necessitated
His Majesty, before His Affairs were fully settled there, to a disadvantageous
March into England, where coming as far as Worcester, he was so surrounded,
that a Battle was imposed upon him upon most unequal terms, there being no
proportion between the multitude of the Rebels, and paucity of the Royal Army.

Notwithstanding the loss of the Day, numerousness of the Pursuers, eagerness
in the pursuit, large promised Reward to the Taker or Discoverer, great
threatened punishment to the Harbourer, or Concealer, His Majesty most
miraculously escapes, which opened a Door of Hope to his Friends, that he was
not in vain thus wonderfully preserved, but that there was some greater future
Good intended to Him and these Nations than the present face of things did seem
to promise or portend.

For, though His Majesty's Person, by His safe getting beyond Sea, was somewhat
more secure, yet was there but small visible appearance of strength, either
foreign or domestic, whereby He might be suddenly enabled to re-gain His lost
Kingdoms; nay, those very slender presumptions which remained of better times,
did daily more and more lessen and decrease, till Divine Providence (which is
never wanting to afflicted innocence in its greatest extremity, but always
makes choice of such seasons to manifest its power and goodness in) was
pleased to interpose, when all other means had failed, and were vanished into
nothing, and bring that to pass by an unthought of Instrument, which humane
considerations had rendered improbable, if not impossible to be effected.

It would be superfluous to dwell long upon particulars, which are so fresh in
all men's memories, and the only Theme of all Tongues and Pens; how cold a
Reception after this great Deliverance His Majesty met withal in the Court of
France, how unworthily he was dismissed thence; how not invited into the
Spanish Territories, till the breach with Cromwell was unavoidable, and there
rather afforded succor to them, than procured any from them; how His
Well-wishers were totally subdued in Scotland, and constantly upon every rising
betrayed and suppressed in England: All which misfortunes, with many others,
being laid together, to believe that His Majesty should so soon, and so easily
obtain the quiet possession of His Dominions, required a greater portion of
Faith, than the World at that time for the Majority was stocked withal.

But among all the Wounds given to the Royal Cause, none pierced deeper than
that it received in Cheshire, which though it might seem but as a slight scar
in regard of the small quantity of blood that was then drawn, yet by reason of
that far greater effusion that was feared would ensue, it was concluded little
less than mortal, for it is not to be doubted that yet those merciless
Empiricks (who had once more undertaken the Cure of the Body Politic) had
continued in any longer practice they would have so exhausted the vital
spirits (we mean the Nobility and Gentry of the Land, who were for the most
part engaged in the design, though not in the particular Action) that it
should have pined away in a most desperate Consumption, and never have been
able to have held up either head or hand again.

Matters being thus in a manner grown helpless, and most men heartless, it is
high time for God himself to appear in the Bush; which he does, but not in
such a fire as he appeared in unto Moses in the Wilderness, which consumed not
the Bush, but in such a fire as in Jothams Parable, went out of the Bramble and
devoured the Cedars of Lebanon; that is, God sent a spirit of division between
Lambert and the rump-Parliament (for by that contembtible appellation was it
commonly called;) so that they are now no less earnest to destroy, than they
were lately zealous to build up each others fallen and decayed Interest.

For Cromwell had long ago cashiered that infamous Conventicle, and though
Lambert for a long while after remained an especial Creature and favorite, yet
perceiving, that that office of Protectorship, which he, out of hopes to have
been old Nol's second, had in its primitive institution been contrived
elective, was converted to hereditary, he became discontented thereat, and was
discharged of all Civil and Military Employment: But Oliver being laid in the
dust, and his son Richard, like a Puppet, set up in his room, Lambert full of
indignation and ambition awaited but his first opportunity, to pull down this
painted and Counterfeit Idol, which opportunity soon offered it self in a
Parliament of Richards calling, where, the Elections having been somewhat freer
than formerly, much more of the old English courage was to be discovered, than
in any of Olivers Juntos, that is, they would not suffer themselves to be
overruled by the dictates of an Imperious Army, whereat the Great Officers
took much offense, first Remonstrating against and then compelling Richard to
dismiss that comparatively honorable Assembly.

But Richard's own Obsequies (as to his mockdignity) immediately attended this
their funeral Pile; and the Relicts of the long (and long forgotten) Parliament
were conjured out of the Grave, whither Oliver had sent them packing, to be as
it were his Administrators, whom all thought so surely dead, and safely buried,
that there had been no danger of this no less unlooked for, than unwelcome
Resurrection.

This Skeleton, or Carcass of a rotten Parliament, did so stink in the nostrils
of all people, that there was a general inclination to be rid of it, but the
good intentions for that purpose were in most Counties blasted before they were
ripe for execution, only in Cheshire, as has been hinted, a competent Party
embodied themselves, against whom Lambert was sent with treble their force,
whose puny Conquest over a few forlorn Gentlemen, disheartened through the
disappointment of Friends in other places, was termed by one of Lambert's
Parasiticall Officers in his own presence A Crowning Mercy, alluding to
Cromwell's expression, which he used in his letter to the Speaker after
Worcester business: This being passed over by Lambert with a kind of an
assenting silence, compared with antecedent and ensuing Actions, did clearly
evidence that he had the like aspiring project in his pate, and that he
accounted not the thousand pound bestowed on him, to by him a jewel, by his
Masters (in which capacity he was resolved they should not long abide) a
sufficient reward for the great pains he had taken in gaining this in it self
little, and, abating the consequences, inconsiderable victory.

But General Monck, Commander in chief of Scotland, had far other and more
generous Resolutions, which found a success answerable to the prudence
wherewithal they were managed, for making it the Ground of his proceedings to
restore the now a second time ejected Rump-Parliament, and afterward to
complete their imperfect number by readmitting the long ago secluded members;
he does first by Independent assistance dissipate the Anabaptisticall and
fanaticall Crew, and then by Presbyterian concurrence overthrow the
Independents themselves; dexteriously applying the several factions in their
order to one another ruin, till at last by an inverted Method, as it were, he
reduces us to that most happy posture we were in before the beginning of this
causeless and unnatural Rebellion.

And now this Hydra-Parliament, which had been once before legally by the
King's death, and twice violently by tumultuous Soldiery, is now at last
finally dissolved by themselves, (a privilege they had long before extorted,
though till now unwilling to make use thereof) and a better chosen in their
stead, who at the time appointed (notwithstanding Lamberts flash in the
interval, which proved but as lightning before death) convened, and according
to their duty did forthwith proclaim their undoubted Sovereign, and sent
Commissioners to invite him home to the Exercise of his Regal Government; which
has filled our mouths with laughter and our hearts with mirth, and occasioned
the composing of this little Treatise, the Author having no other mite whereby
he might testify his particular contentment in the midst of so public and
universal rejoicing.

But the Reader is to be advertised that this unfortunate Embrio (conceived
between His Majesty's being voted and coming in) labored far longer under the
Press than under the Pen, and when with much a do it had been produced, it was
so deformed and misshapen, that a resolution was once taken to have stifled it
in the birth, and never to have permitted such a disfigured brat to have seen
the light; but upon second thoughts it has liberty to wander abroad, not out
of any follish fancy that it will find acceptance, but out of a consideration
that it will be no greater cruelty to expose it to the wide world, than to
suffer it to perish in a private Study.

And yet to make some satisfaction for former errors and delay, we shall now
add what has hitherto been wholly omitted, or but superficially glanced at; to
wit, His Majesty's extraction from the Scottish, and what is chiefest, from the
British Race, that of the Saxon and Norman having been the principal, if not
sole subject of the precedent discourse.

The Scots, according to their best Historians, came originally out of Ireland
about 300 years before the Incarnation of our blessed Savior, under the
conduct of Fergus the first, who was also King there (which if so, then has
our King, lineally descended from that Fergus, a better Title than that of bare
modern Conquest, even unto that Kingdom) and possessed themselves of the
Northwestern parts of Brittany: And it is remarkable, that notwithstanding a
Custom begun in the very Infancy of their State, and continued about a
thousand years, that if the Son, which frequently happened, were under age at
the Fathers death, the next of the Blood Royal should be, not Guardian, but
King, not only during the minority of the Orphan, but even during his own
natural life, whereby these Tenants pur vie had too fair, or rather too foul,
opportunities to change their manner of hold into fee-simple; yet did the true
Proprietor, though for a while disseised, still recover his patrimonial right,
as may be made evident out of Buchanan himself, who was yet a greater friend to
an Elective, than Hereditary succession.

Kenneth the third, and Malcolm the second were the first Alterers of this
suspicious Custom, Ordaining, that from thence-forward Children should succeed
their Parents immediately, and have only Governors (such as the Parents in
their life time should appoint) to oversee them and their Kingdom, until they
attained their maturity, whence it came to pass, that for the future
interruptions were much rarer, the regular course of Nature more duly observed,
and a greater restraint put into the Practisers of aspiring and ambitious
kindred.

Nevertheless, Machbeth, Grandson to Malcolme the second, though but by his
youngest Daughter, invaded the Sovereignty, and having murdered the lawful
King Donald related to the said Malcolm in an equal propinquity, and that by
the eldest Daughter (Beatrice,) did for a while usurp, but he was expelled and
slain by Macduffe Thane, or Earl of Fife, and Malcolm the third, Son of Donald,
installed in his Fathers Throne. This is that Malcolm, who as he found refuge
in the English Court, under the Protection of Edward the Confessor, when he was
forced to withdraw himself from Macbeth's persecution, so did he afford the
like succor in the Scottish to the Confessor's Nephew Edgar Etheling, when he
was driven out of his Country by William the Conqueror, and took his Sister
and Heir Margaret to Wife, by whom he had a Daughter named Maud, who being
married to Henry, the Conquerors Son, was, as has been before declared, the
Bond whereby the Saxon and Norman Line were connected and entwisted together.

But we cannot dissemble what few take notice of, to wit, that the better, that
is, the more Masculine Bloud-Royal of the Saxon Race (which in comparison of
the Norman, though both founded in Conquest, was much to be preferred, by
reason of its much elder prescription) did still reside in the House of
Scotland: For, Margaret bare to Malcolm (besides that Daughter Maud) three
Sons, Edgar, Alexander, and David, who (to pass over the Intrusion of Donald
the Brother, and Duncan the Bastard of Malcolm, because each did soon expire)
were all Kings in their Order, but only David had Issue, from whom the Kings of
Scotland have ever since, however they have always abstained from their claim
to the English Crown upon that account, derived an undoubted and not to be
disputed descent.

Henry (David's only Son) departed this life before his Father, but left three
Sons behind him, Malcolm, William and David, (which last was Earl of Huntington
in England) whereof Malcoim the 4. succeeded his Grandfather, him being
childless his Brother William, him his Son Alexander the second, him his Son
Alexander the third, and him should have his Grandaughter Margaret, who was
bred in, and sent for out of Norway, but that she died before her arrival on
the Scottish Coasts.

And now (the rest being extinct) recourse must be had to the Offspring of the
late mentioned Earl of Huntington, when, lo, two Grand Competitors appear, John
Baliol, who fetches his stock from the eldest Daughter (Margaret,) and Robert
Bruise who confessedly came from the younger (Isabell;) but alleges, that he is
in a nearer degree of Consanguinity to Earl David, than the other either did,
or could pretend himself to be.

The Controversy, in regard of the Potency of both Parties, being not capable
of a decision at home without the danger of a Civil War, it was referred to
Edward the first, King of England, who rather brought Oil to increase, than
Water to quench the flame, and was resolved to bestow it on him only, who would
profess homage, and swear fealty unto the English Crown.

To this Imperious demand, Baliol, though conceived superior in Title, yet
proving meaner in Spirit, did readily condescend, which Bruise, whose Plea was
thought weaker, but Courage found greater, did utterly refuse to assent unto.

Whereupon Edward pronounces sentence on Baliols side, who is acknowledged King
by many of the Scottish Nobility, but rather out of fear of Edward's power, than
any satisfaction or delight they took in this dishonorable, and as they
esteemed it, unworthy submission.

Yea, Baliol himself does soon repent of it, and bids defiance to Edward, who
now afresh cajols Bruise, urging the performance of promises; he returned a
scornful Negative: As if, says he, we had nothing else to do, than to conquer
Kingdoms for you to enjoy.

Baliol at last surrenders himself unto Edward, and is by him sent Prisoner
into England, and there detained until the Pope's Intercession and Engagement
that he should create no further trouble in Scotland, he is released, and
retires into France, where having resigned his whole right to his Cousin Bruise,
he spends the remainder of his days in a more quiet and contented estate.

But Robert Bruise (Son of Robert the Author of the Contention, which he lived
not to see finished) was little pleased with Eeglish Edward's fishing in
disturbed streams, and therefore he sets up trading for himself, at first with
small probability of thriving, but afterward he caught the prey whereat he
aimed, which was almost ravished out of the mouth of his Infant-Son David, by
Edward Baliol, Son of that John, who had once renounced it; but it was again
rescued by Robert Stuart the Viceroy; and Baliol with his Issue, if he had
any, failing, the Brusians became legal Owners of that Kingdom, whereinto at
the beginning they seemed to have made but a violent and foreible entry.

Robert Stuart (even now remembered) was David's Sister's Son, and consequently
his Heir, he having no Children of his own; but David, notwithstanding old
benefits, upon some new displeasure, was inclinable to have put him by, had he
not been over-perswaded by tbe Nobility, who were as well sensible of Robert's
worth, as that his Grandfather Robert the first had, before his Son David was
born, designed him to the Kingdom; Nay, the Fates themselves, if credit be to
be given to some Scottish Chronicles, had long ago destined no less: for, they
report, that Macbeth (the after Tyrant) and Banco (one of Robert's Progenitors)
walking in a Wood, encountered with three Women of more than humane aspect, who
saluted Macbeth, then a private person, King of Scotland; whereat when Banco
showed himself aggrieved, they told him that Macbeth should only be King
himself, which presently came to pass, but that the succession was reserved for
his Posterity, which, though somewhat with the slowest, is now at length
exactly fulfilled.

For, this Robert was the Son of Walter, the Son of John, the Son of Alexander,
the Son of Walter, the Son of Alexander, the Son of Alan, the Son of Walter
Stuart, (the first of that Surname and Office in Scotland) the Son of Fleance,
the Son of Banco, whom Macbeth, to defeat the Prediction, slew, and sought to
do the like to his Son Fleance, who prevented his bloody intentions by fleeing
into Wales, and there, as it has already been touched in gross, he married
Nest (by whom he had that first and famous Walter) the Daughter of Giffith ap
Llewelyn, the Son of Angharad, the Daughter and Heir of Meredith, the Son of
Owen, the Son of Howel Dha, the Son of Cadelh, the Son of Rodri Mawr, the Son
of Esylht, the Daughter and Heir of Conan Tyndaithwy, the Son of Rodri
Moelwynog, the Son of Edwall Ywrch, the Son of Cadwallader, last King of
Brittany, and first of Wales, beyond whom, in point of pedigree, we dare not
wander; but must here erect our Pillars, and fix our Ne plus ultra, lest by
wading further we should be swallowed up in the vast Abyss of an unbounded and
fathomless Ocean.

And here we might likewise put a period to the whole Tract, as having traced
this Robert's lineage in the British Story, as far as with any confidence we
can well proceed; and being able with much more ease and assurance to resolve
our present Sovereign's into his (for Charles the second is the Son of Charles
the first, the Son of James the sixth, the Son of Mary, the Daughter and Heir
of James the fourth, the Son of James the third, the Son of James the second,
the Son of James the first, the Son of John, whose name upon the Assumption of
the Kingdom was converted into Robert the third, the Son of the aforesaid
Robert the second, etc.) but that it is demurred by some:

First, Whether Nest (Walter's Mother) were an Heir, or no?

2. Admitting that she were, whether her Ancestor Cadelh were the eldest Son of
Rodri Mawr, who being King of all Wales, was the first that did make a
partition thereof?

George Owen Harry in a Book entitled [The Genealogy of the high and mighty
Monarch James by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, etc.) Printed 1604.
favors Cadelh with the first Colume among Rodri's Sons; but D. Powel in his
Chronicle written before, and taken out of most Authentic Records, is
peremptory in vindicating the Birthright to Anarawd Prince of Northwales, and
maintaining, that though his two Brothers, Cadelh Prince of Southwales, and
Mervyn Prince of Powis were sharers in the Inheritance, yet did they hold from
him and his Children (or ought so to have done) as from Lords Paramount; and
therefore we must only adhere to Anarawd's line, and wave his Majesty's descent
from all other Princes of Wales, which were either but Usurpers, or at the best
but of the youngest House, and Vassals and Homagers to the Princes of
Northwales.

In doing this we shall begin before the Fraction, even with Cadwallader
himself, and so by Anarawd come down to his Majesty, not meddling with
Intruders upon any other score, than as we have hitherto done; to wit, to show
that sometimes such there were by God's permission, but never intended for
perpetuity, the succession always in the end (these Imposters notwithstanding)
revolving to the genuine and legittimate Heir.

Cadwallader, then surnamed Bendigaid, or the Blessed, having lost the greatest
part of his Kingdom to the Saxons, did, by the persuasion of his Cousin Alan
King of Little Britain, betake himself to Rome, and there lived and died in
God's Service, bequeathing to his Posterity the fore-recited Prophecy, That
they should one day be Masters of his whole Isle again: But Ivor the Son of
Alan governed next after him, his own Son Edwall Ywrch, that is, the Roe, being
unable, or unwilling to divert the Helm in such turbulent and tempestuous
weather.

Yet did his Son Rodri-Moel-Wynog undertake it, and left it to his Son Conan
Tyndaithwy, whose Daughter Esylht was his Heir; but she knowing how unfit
feminine shoulders were to sustain so great a burden in those Martial times,
took to Husband a Noble Prince Mervyn Vrych, by whom she had Rodri Mawr, or
Roderick the Great, who more consulting private affection than Reason of State,
made that unpollitick Division of Wales, which being united, was scarceable to
defend it self against the Invasions of the Saxons, their implacable and
continually encroaching Neighbors.

Now though much of the Demean were defalcated from Anarawd by his Father
Rodri, yet did the Fee and Chiefeship remain to him and his, which his Brother
Cadelh did sparingly enough acknowledge, and his Son Howel less; for he not
only withdraws his Allegiance for Southwales, but after the death of Edwal
Voel, the son of Anarawd, seizes upon Northwales it self: yet is he commonly
styled Dha, or the Good, not certainly for such undue acquisitions and unjust
detentions, but for the excellent Laws he made, a thing not unusually practiced
by those who have less of equity on their side to warrant their ill-gotten and
unlawful Possessions.

Howel Dha being dead the Principality returned to Jevaf and Jago, the Sons
indeed, but yet but the youngest Sons of Edwal Voel, no respect being had by
them of their elder Brother Meyric, whose Son Edwall nevertheless obtained it,
having waited the leisure not only of Howel and Cadwalhan, the sons of Jago,
but also of Meredith ap Owen ap Howel Dha, who followed his Grandfathers steps,
and committed a second Rape upon Northwales, herein the more excusable, that he
took it from one who had himself no other plea, than that of force and
extortion thereunto.

But Edwall ap Meyric having, after the exercise of some patience, gained what
his Father was injuriously deprived of, left both his bad and good Fortune to
his son Jago, or James, viz. to the defrauded for a while, by an Abator, or two
(Aedan ap Blegared and Llewelyn ap Sitsylht) but afterward to recover his
Paternal Right; which yet he does not long enjoy, but loses it, with his life,
to Gryffith ap Lewelyn ap Sitsylht; and his Son Conan (to preserve his life) is
forced to flee into Ireland, where marrying with Ranulht, Daughter of Alfred
King of Dublyn, he had by her a Son called Gryffith, who will be found another
Medium, besides that of Fergus, whereby more of the Irish Bloud-Royal is
transmitted into His Majesty's most Princely veins.

And if, as doubtless it will be, it be objected, that neither of these
foundations are of sufficient strength to build a claim to a Kingdom upon, it
not appearing that Fergus or Alfred were Kings of Ireland entirely, but
supposed to be of parcels only; or that Ranulht, Alfred's Daughter was also his
Heir: Our Answer is, that we do not lay the whole stress of our King's Interest
to that Kingdom upon such weak and infirm undersetters; but affirm, that the
most considerable part of the Inhabitants, as English, Scotch, Welsh, are
undoubtedly His Majesty's natural Leiges; and as for the original Natives, whom
Conquest has made Subjects; this however seemingly imperfect Title joined with
that, obliges them to continue so; especially seeing it is such a Conquest as
has been confirmed by more Centuries of years, than those within the compass
of which Jephtha demanded of the Ammonitish King, why he had not all that while
recovered his now too late challenged Land: And as concerning the Title it
self, as bad as it is, a better it is presumed cannot be produced by any
pretender whatsoever.

But to return from our digression (Ireland lying somewhat out of our Road,
which is principally confined to Great Britain) Prince Gryffith ap Conan ap
Jago, with the assistance of the Irish, reprieves that Country which properly
belonged to him, out of the Talons of Trahern ap Caradoc, the last of the
Usurpers, there having been since Jago's death no fewer than four, to wit,
Gryffith ap Llewelyn ap Sitsylht, he that ejected and killed Jago, Blethyn ap
Convyn, his Brother Rywalhan and this Trahern, whom Gryffith the lawful Heir
slew at the battle of Carnarvan, and after a long and prosperous Reign had this
felicity superadded to his former, that his eldest Son Owen was his Successor,
which happened not to Owen himself, but his firstborn Jorwerth Drwyndwn, upon a
pitiful Cavil that he had a deformity in his nose (which his surname does
import) was laid aside, and his younger Brother David preferred before him.

Yet did that most noble and valiant Prince Llewelyn, the Son of Jorwerth
Drwyndwn dispossess his usurping Uncle David, and not content to have repaired
late losses, proceeds to resume former alienations, by reannexing to his
Territories those several fragments of Wales, which the weakness or
improvidence of his Predecessors had suffered to be pared away from their
already too slender and scanty Dominions.

And here two ways offering themselves to bring us to our journeys end, we are
at a stand which to elect, that of Mortimer's, or of Owen Tudyr's Race: We have
indeed engaged in the beginning of the progress to prosecute that of Sir Owen
Tudyr's; but an unexpected rub has fallen out in our passage, which we did not
foresee when we made that promise, viz. that Gryffith ap Llewelyn (the Father
of Elewelyn ap Gryffith, the last Prince of Wales, the Father of Catherine, the
Mother of Eleanor, the Mother of Margaret, the Mother of Meredith, the Father
of Sir Owen) was but the base Son of Llewelyn ap Jorwerth ap Drwyndwn, and
therefore his attempt to drive out his lawfully begotten Brother David, was
altogether lawless, as likewise was his son Llewelyn's keeping out Gulladys Dhy
(or the Black) the Sister and Heir of David, because she was married to an
English man, namely, Sir Ralph Mortimer, Lord of Wigmor, by whom he had Roger
Mortimer, the Father of Edmond the Father of Roger, the Father of Edmond, the
Father of Roger, the Father of that Edmond who married Philippa the Daughter
and sole Heir of Lionell Duke of Clarence, third Son of King Edward the third,
and by her had that Roger, from whom to make another deduction to His Majesty,
would be but an idle repetition of what has been already declared, and is
obvious to every one that has but heard of the great Controversy between the
Yorkish and Lancastrian House.

But be it how it will, whether Mortimer, or Tudyr's Right be the firmest,
certain it is, that both these different lines do center in the same point,
wherein the Roses met, and from thence, like Rivolets that have formerly been
divided, do unitedly flow unto His Majesty; so that he need not (as the French
do) sodder up a broken Title with a devised Law salique repugnant to the Law of
Nature, or use so poor an evasion, as the King of Spain is said to do, when the
Duke of Medina Sidonia once in a generation tenders a Customary Petition to
have the Kingdom delivered up unto him as his due, the Answer is, that the
place is already full; but may dare the whole World to show a more
unexceptionable claim than his, unto the Imperial Crown he now wears: And long
may it flowrish upon his head, and the head of his Posterity, even unto the end
of the World. And let all the People say Amen.

FINIS.

