The Sword of Christian Magistracy Supported: OR A VINDICATION OF The Christian
Magistrates Authority under the GOSPEL, To punish Idolatry, Apostasy, Heresy,
Blasphemy, and obstinate Schism, with Corporal, and in some Cases with
Capital Punishments. Wherein this their Jurisdiction is cleared by Proofs, and
Arguments, from the Old and New Testament; by the Laws, and Practice of Godly
Christian Emperors, Kings, States, and Magistrates; The Common and Statute Laws
of England; the consent of the best Ancient and Modern Authors of all sorts;
and the most material Objections to the contrary, made by Donatists,
Anabaptists, etc. fully Answered and Refuted.

By WILLIAM PRINNE of Lincolns Inn, Esquire.

Augustine. Epist. 48. Vincentio and Gratian: Causa. 23. qu. 4. Melius est cum
severitate diligere, quam cum lenitate decipere: Si quisquam Inimicum
poriculosis febribus phreneticum factum currere videret in praeceps, nonne tunc
potius malum pro malo redderet, si sic eum ire permitteret, quam si
corripiendum ligandumque cur aret? Et tamen tunc ei molestissimus and
avertissimus videretur, quando utilissimus et misericordissimus extit isset?
Sed plane salute reparata, tanto ei uberius gracias ageret, quando minus sibi
pepercisse sensisset. Donatistae nimium sunt inquieti, quos per ordinatas a Deo
potestates singulares, cohiberi atque corrigi, mihi non videtur inutile; nam de
multorum jam correctione gaudemus.

Zech. 13. 3. Thou shall not live, for thou speak Lies in the name of the
Lord: and his Father and Mother, shall thrust him through when he prophesies.

Levit. 24. 16. He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall surely be put
to death; and all the Congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the
stranger, as he that is born in the Land, when he blasphemeth the Name of the
Lord, shall be put to death.

Dan. 3. 29. Therefore I make a Decree, that every People, Nation, and
Language, that speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their Houses shall be made a dunghill.

Rev. 17. 16. The ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, are ten Kings,
these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

LONDON Printed by R. I. for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Three Golden Lions in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1653.

The Sword of Christian Magistracy Supported: OR A FULL VINDICATION OF
Christian Kings and Magistrates Authority Under the GOSPEL, To punish
Jdolatry, Apostasy, Heresy, Blasphemy, and obstinate Schism, with Corporal,
and in some Cases with Capital punishments, from many late Cavils and
exceptions against the same.
THE authority of Christian Magistrates under the Gospel having of late years
been most audaciously oppugned both in Press and Pulpit, in sundry particulars,
especially in points of Church Government, Church Reformation, and this
principal branch thereof; the restraint and punishment of obstinate seducing
Idolaters, Heretics, false Teachers, Schismatics, and Blasphemers, by civil
sanctions and corporal punishments; I thought it not only seasonable, but in
some sort necessary, to debate this question in a plain and plenary manner.

Whether Christian Kings, States and Magistrates under the Gospel, may and
ought, by the Word of God, to restrain by Civil Sanctions all Idolatries,
Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies, and to Mulct with corporal,
pecuniary, and in some cases, with banishment and capital punishments, such
obstinate seducing Idolaters, Apostaces, Heretics, false Teachers,
Schismatics and Blasphemers, who disturb the Peace of Church, State, and draw
down judgments upon both; when Admonitions, Exhortations, and disputes will
not reclaim them?

I shall maintain the Affirmative, that they may, nay ought to do it. To avoid
mistakes and state the question aright; I shall first of all lay down these
conclusions as indubitable.

1. That there are such sins as Idolatry, Apostasy, Heresy, damnable Errors,
obstinate Schisms and Blasphemies in Christian Kingdoms, States, Churches, and
persons guilty of them.

2. That those who are guilty of them, are, or may be certainly known,
discovered to and by Christian Princes and Magistrates.

3. That these sins draw down Gods Judgments, not only on the persons who are
guilty of them, but likewise on the Christian Rulers, States, and places which
permit, tolerate, or not severely punish and suppress them.

4. That it is the duty of Christian Princes, States, Magistrates, to use all
possible diligence and lawful means to keep their Kingdoms, States, People,
from being infected with all, or any of these dangerous wrath-provoking sins,
yea, a grand sin and neglect in them, not to do it.

Secondly, I shall propound and agree what is not in controversy, as.

1. That the preaching of the Word, Christian Exhortations, Reprehentions,
Conferences, and Disputes, are the most proper and effectual means to convert,
reform Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics, False Teachers, Schismatics, and
Blasphemers.

2. That such as these are first of all to be gently admonished, instructed,
confuted, and if possible, reformed by the Word, or other spiritual and gentle
means, before the civil Magistate proceed to corporal or capital punishments.

3. That the present question is only of Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics, False
Teachers, obstinate Schismatics, and Blasphemers, not mere tender consciencis
in matters of Church Discipline and the like; neither yet are all these always
to be proceeded against with the self-same rigor and severity; but as their
obstinacy, Idolatries, Apostacies, Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies, are
more or less heinous and pernicious, so the proceedings against them ought to
be more mild or severe.

These things premised, I shall now proceed to some Arguments to make good my
Assertion: The first shall be this.

That which godly Kings and Magistrates in the Old Testament, under the Law,
Argum. 1.
were enjoined to do by Gods own express command, and did accordingly execute
with Gods special approbation: Christian Kings and Magistrates under the
Gospel, may and ought to do and execute, by virtue of the self-same commands.

But godly Kings and Magistrates in the Old Testament, under the Law, were
enjoined by Gods own express command, to restrain all Idolatry, Apostasy,
Heresy, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies; yea to punish with corporal, and in some
cases with capital Punishments, such obstinate seducing Idolaters, Apostates,
Heretics, False Teachers, Schismatics, and Blasphemers, who disturbed the
Peace of Church, State, and drew down Gods Judgments upon either, and did
accordingly execute the same command with Gods special approbation, when
admonitions, exhortations, and Disputes would not reclaim them.

Therefore Christian Magistrates under the Gospel may and ought to do the like.

The Major Proposition I shall make good by these undeniable reasons.

First, because See the Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 19. and Calvin's Instit.
l. 4. c. 20.
God has ordained and continued Kings and Magistrates under the New Testament
as well as under the Old, and enjoined obedience to them; ROMANS 13. 1. to 6. 1 TIMOTHY 2. 1, 2, 3. TIT. 3. 1. 1 PET. 2. 13, 14. c. 4. 15. which none but
professed Anabaptists do deny.

Secondly, because Christian Kings and Magistrates under the Gospel, have the
self-same authority as godly Kings and Magistrates had under the Law; even as
Parents, Masters, Husbands (natural Magistrates) have the self-same authority
over their Children, Servants, Wives, under the Gospel, as they had under the
Law; ROMANS 13. 1. to 6. TIT. 3. 1. 1 PET. 2. 13, 14, 15. c. 4. 15. compared with
EPHESIANS. 6. 1. to 8. c. 5. 21, 22. COL. 3. 18. to 25. 1 TIMOTHY 6. 1, 2. 1 PET. 3. 11.
12. 13. c. 2. 18. there being no one text in the New Testament which restrains
either Kings or Magistrates power given them by God in the Old.

Thirdly, because the ends and uses for which Magistrates were instituted are
the Sea Zuinglius Explan. Artic. 35. 37. 39, 40. and De utraque Justitia.
same under the New Testament and Old, ROMANS 13. 1. to 6. 1 TIMOTHY 2. 1, 2, 3. 1
PET. 2. 13. 14. c. 4. 15. ISA 1. 49. 23. therefore their power and rule the
same.

Fourthly, because the precepts given to Magistrates under the Law, for
punishing Idolaters, Apostates, False Prophets, Heretics, and Blasphemers, are
not Ceremonial or Judicial, but moral and perpetual: and so of equal obligation
under the Law and Gospel, as well as the Decalogue and Moral Law of God.

Fifthly, because godly Kings and Christian Magistrates ought to be as zealous
for God and his truth (if not more zealous) under the Gospel, as they were
under the Law; REV. 3. 19. c. 2. 14, 15, 16. 20. 23. compared with NUMBER ^. 15.
11, 13. 2 KING. 10. 16. etc.

The Minor I shall ratify by this particular Induction.

First, for Idolatry, Idolaters, Apostates, False Prophets, and Seducers of men
from the true God and Religion, to Idols and Idolatry, we have these express
precepts, warranting, if not commanding, the civil Magistrate to inflict
corporal and capital punishments on them.

^. Levit. 20. 2. to 6. Whosoever of the children of Israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn in Israel, that gives any of his seed to Molech, (that
is, sacrifices any of his children, or makes them pass through the fire to
that Idol; LEVIT. 18. 21. 2 KING. 21. 10.) He shall SVRELY BE PVT TO DEATH; the
people of the Land shall stone him with stones; and I will set my face against
that man, and will cut him off from among his people, because he has given of
his seed to Molech, to defile my sanctuary and to profane my holy Name. And if
the people of the Land do any way hide their eyes when he gives his seed unto
Molech and kill him not, then I will set my face against that man and against his
family, and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him to commit
wh^rd^me with Molech, from among their people. From which text we may observe
these particulars.

First, that not only such stranger Idolaters, who constantly worshipped Idols,
and never adored the true God were to be put to death by the Israelites; but
even such of the Israelites themselves, and of the sojourners among them who
turned Idolaters and sacrificed unto Molech (to whom they offered their
children) were to be surely put to death, and stoned with stones by the people
without m r y; being first convicted and condemned by the Magistrate. Secondly,
that the Magistrates and peoples hiding of their eyes and sparing such as
these, contrary to this precept, was a grievous sin. Thirdly, that where the
Magistrates and people winked at such an Idolater, and hid their eyes from him,
God himself, in their default, would set his face against him, and cut him off
from among his people; and not only so, but would set his face against his
family; and cut off all them that went a whoring after him, from among his
people: whereas if the Magistrate had punished him, his family had not been
thus cut of by God. Fourthly, that it is not sufficient to leave Idolaters,
Heretics, and Blasphemers to Gods own vengeance and execution, who will
certainly cut them and their families off, if they* repent not; but themselves
must likewise cut them off, as God commands, before God proceeds to do it, they
being his Romans 13. 3, 4, 5^
Ministers and Executioners appointed for this end, who must not put off the
Execution of such to God the supreme Judge, no more then the Hang^^ man amongst
us may transfer the Execution of a Felon or Traitor to the Judge who condemns
them: which answers and refutes one main objection of our opposites, that we
must leave Idolaters, Heretics, and False Teachers unto Gods Judgment and
Execution, if we cannot convert them by the Word, and let such Math. 13. ^
tares to grow til the harvest, amongst the Corn.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of
dreams, and gives thee a signor a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to
pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, let us go after other gods (which
thou have not known) and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of dreams, for the Lord your God proves
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with
all your soul: ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep
his Commandments, and obey his voice; and you shall serve him and cleave unto
him: And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death (because
he has spoken to turn Note.
you away from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt,
and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way
which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in) so shall thou put the evil
away from the midst of thee. If thy brother, the son of thy mother* or thy son;
or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other gods (which thou
have not known, thou nor thy fathers), namely of the gods of the people, which
are round about you, or nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from one end of
the earth even unto the other end of the earth: Thou shall not consent unto
him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou
spare, neither shall thou conceal him: But thou shall surely kill him, thine
hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and Note.
afterward the hands of all the people; And thou shall stone him with stones
that he dye, because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: And
all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as
this is among you. If thou shall hear say in one of thy Cities, which the Lord
thy God has given thee to dwell there, saying, Certain men, the children of
Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the Inhabitants of
their City, saying, Let us go and serve other gods (which we have not known);
Then shall thou inquire and make search and ask diligently: And behold if it be
truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought amongst you:
Thou shall surely smite the Inhabitants of that City with the edge of the
sword, destroying it utterly and all that Note.
is therein, and the cattle thereof with the edge of the sword: And thou shall
gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shall burn
with fire the City and all the spoil thereof, every whit, for the Lord thy God;
and it shall be an heap for ever, it shall not be built again: And there shall
cleave naught of the cursed thing to thine hand, that the Lord may turn from
the fierceness of his anger and show thee mercy, and have compassion upon
thee, and multiply thee, as he has sworn unto thy fathers: When thou shall
hearken to the vo^c of the Lord thy God to keep all his Commandments, which I
command thee this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the Lord thy
God.

Which is thus seconded Deuteronomy. 17. 2. to 8. If there be found among you within
any of thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee, man or woman that has
wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his
Covenant, and has gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the
Sun, or the Moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded; And
it be told thee, and thou have heard of it, and enquired diligently, and behold
it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel:
Then shall thou bring forth that man, or that woman (which have committed that
wicked thing) unto thy gates; even that man or that woman, and shall stone them
with stones til they dye. At the mouth of two witnesses, shall ^e that is worthy
of death be Note.
put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death:
The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterward the hands of all the people; so thou shall put the evil away from
among you.

From which two Texts I shall deduce these undeniable Conclusions.

First, That false Prophets and Dreamers of dreams may arise among Gods own
people, and do signs, wonders, and predict things which may come to pass: which
is more, I suppose, then any of our pretended New-Lights, Dreamers, or false
Prophets now can do.

Secondly, That the end of such Dreamers and false Prophets, is but to draw
people to go after other gods which they have not formerly known, and to serve
them, or to worship the true God in an undue newfangled manner.

Thirdly, That God suffers such false Prophets and New seducing Lights to arise
among his people, of purpose to prove them; to know whether they love the Lord
their God with all their heart and with all their soul.

Fourthly, That Gods people must not hearken to such false Prophets, Dreamers,
and New-Lights, though they do signs and wonders, but walk after the Lord their
God, and fear him, and keep his Commandments, and obey his voice, and serve and
cleave unto him; and that those that follow such false Prophets and Dreamers,
do neither truly love, fear, serve, obey, nor cleave to God.

Fifthly, That such false Prophets and Dreamers were by Gods express Command
Note.
to be PUT TO DEATH, by the Magistrate and people, though they actually seduced
none from God; even because they had spoken revolt against the Lord their God,
to turn them away from him, to thrust them out of the way; which the Lord their
God commanded them to walk in.

Sixthly, That the putting of such to death, is so far from being an evil, or
sin of persecution; that it is the only way to put away the evil of Idolatry,
False-Worship, sin, plague, and punishment, from the midst of them, ver. 5.

Seventhly, that if not only such false Prophets and dreamers; but even any
man's own natural brother, son, daughter, wife, nighest bosom and most endeared
friend, which is as his own soul, should entice him secretly to go and serve
other gods (or the true God in a new and false manner) which he and his fathers
had not known; be it what falls god soever, he must neither consent nor hearken
to them, neither shall his eye pity them, neither shall he spare, nor conceal
them; but Note.
he SHALL SURELY KILL THEM (without mercy) and his own hand shall be first upon
them to put them to death; and afterward the hands of all the people, and they
shall stone them with stones that they dye; not because they actually seduced
him or others; but because they sought to thrust him away from the Lord his
God: If then the nearest and dearest of all others to us must be put to death
without mercy, in such a case, then much more others who are not so nearly
related to us. Gods glory and our zeal to preserve his sincere Worship, must
admit of no respect of persons, no toleration, connivance or compassion in such
a case as this.

Eighthly, That exemplary capital punishments, upon private or open enticers to
Idolatry and False-Worship, is a special means appointed by God to preserve and
convert others from Idolatry, and Apostasy, Verse 11. And all Israel shall hear
and fear and do no more any such wickedness as this is among you: The Sword of
Justice will by Gods own Institution suppress, prevent, yea reform Idolatry,
Apostasy, False-Worship, and Heresy, as well as the Word, the Sword of the
Spirit; and prevails herein many times when the Word it self is ineffectual.

Ninthly, See Lucas Tudensis adv. Albigenses ^. 22.
That Magistrates are to make diligent search and inquiry after False-Teachers,
Apostates, Seducers of men* to serve new gods, embrace new religions; and if a
whole City be thus seduced, and such abomination certainly wrought among them;
they must surely smite the Inhabitants of that City (especially of obstinate
and impenitent) with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that
is therein, and the cattle thereof, and burn all the spoil and City, and every
parcel thereof with fire, and make it an heap for ever. By which it is apparent
that not only private Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics, but even whole Cities,
Churches, and Congregations of them are so far from being tolerated, that they
ought to be destroyed utterly if they continue obstinate.

Tenthly, That the tolerating of Idolaters, Apostates, and Heretics is a means
to provoke God to pour out the fierceness of his anger against his own people;
but the utter exterpation of them without mercy, is a special means (of divine
institution) to cause the Lord to turn from the fierceness of his anger, to
show them mercy and compassion; and multiply them as he has promised: And is
so far from being against the Word of God and displeasing to him, that it is a
keeping of what he commands, a doing of that which is right in his eyes:
Certainly it was so under the Old Testament, I doubt not but it is and will be
the like under the New, which no ways contradicts nor revokes this text, or the
severe proceedings enjoined by the Old.

Thirdly, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. to 22. I will raise them up a Prophet from among their 3.
brethren like unto thee, and I will put my words into his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall commond him etc. But the Prophet which shall
presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak; or
that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that Prophet SHALL DYE: he has
spoken presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him.

From whence I infer: First, that false Prophets who presume to preach any
dangerous Errors, or Heresies contrary to the Word of God, to draw men unto
Error, Heresy, or False-Worship, are by the express Command of God to be put
to death by the civil Magistrate, as well as such prophets who speak in the name
of other gods: For this phrase SHALL DYE, here, is not intended of a NATURAL
DEATH Heb. 9. 27.
COMMON TO ALL MEN; for then it were no special Punishment, threatened unto, and
to be inflicted upon such; but a PENAL DEATH judicially inflicted by men, as is
clear by comparing it with Deuteronomy, 13. 5. c. 17. 5. Zech. 13. 3. and Ier. 26. 8.
11. 16. 23. Exodus 21. 12. 14. Number. 35. 30. Secondly, this precept relates
principally to false Teachers, and Prophets under the Gospel, and is not
confined only to the times of the Law, since Note.
the next Verses preceding, to which it is subjoyned, relate only to Christ
himself and his Prophesying in the Flesh, as is evident by comparing them with
Ioh. 1. 45. Act. 3. 22. and 7. 37. and because it is seconded by Zech. 3. 2, 3
etc. which relates only to the times of the Gospel (as I shall prove anon) under
which False Prophets are to be put to death as well as under the Law. These
three Examples.
Precepts we find seconded with exemplary Executions approved and commanded by
God himself.

The first Example, is that we read of Exodus 32. viz. That when the Israelites
1.
had committed Idolatry in worshipping the golden calf* Verse. 26, 27* 28* 29.
Moses stood in the Camp and said, who is on the Lords side? let him come unto
me; and all the sons of Levy gathered unto him. And he said unto them, thus
says the Lord God of Israel, put every man his sword by his side, and go in
and out from gate to gate throughout the Camp, and slay every man his brother,
and every man his companion* and every man his neighbor; And the children of
Levy did according to the word of Moses, and there fell of the people that day
about three thousand men: For Moses had said, consecrate your selves to day to
the Lord: every man upon his son, and every man upon his brother, that he may
bestow upon you a blessing this day: Whence observe these two Conclusions:
First, that three thousand Idolatrous Israelites for worshipping the golden
calf, were upon Gods special command slain by the direction of Moses the chief
temporal Magistrate, in one day, even by the sons of Levi for want of other
Executioners, and that they spared neither son, nor brother, nor neighbor
guilty of this sin. Secondly that this severe execution of Justice upon these
Offenders, was so pleasing unto God, that it pacified his wrath, and procured a
blessing upon the Executioners and residue of the people, as this Chapter, and
Deuteronomy. 33. 8, 9. 10. infallibly evidences.

The second Example is registered in Numb. 25. 1. to 15. where we find, That 2.
the Daughters of Moab called the people of Israel unto the sacrifices of their
gods and that the people did eat and bowed down to their god; And Israel joined
himself unto Baal Peo^r, and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel;
and the Lord said unto Moses* Take all the heads of the people and hang them up
before the Lord against the Sun; that the fierce anger of the Lord may be
turned away from Israel: And Moses said unto the Judges of Israel, slay ye
every one his men that were ^jo^ned unto Baal Peor; And behold one of the
children of Israel (even Zimri the son of Salu a Prince of the chief house
among the Simionites) came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman
(to wit Co^bi the daughter of Zur, head over a people and of a chief house in
Midian) in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the Congregation of the
children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation; And when Phineas the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
saw it, he rose up from among the Congregation, and took a Iavelin in his hand,
and he went after the man of Israel into his tent, and thrust both of them
through, the man of Israel and the woman through the belly (for Peors sake
Verse 18.) So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel: And those that
dyed of the plague were about twenty four thousand; And the Lord spoke unto
Moses saying, Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has
turned away my wrath from the children of Israel (when he was zealous for my
sake among them) that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy;
wherefore, behold I give unto him my Covenant of peace, and he shall have it,
and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, because
he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel:
The first part of this history is thus amplified, Deuteronomy. 4. 3. Your eyes have
seen what the Lord did because of Baal Peor; for all the men that followed
Baal-Peor, the Lord thy God has destroyed them from among you: to wit by the
plague, and the Sword of Justice too in the Magistrates hand.

From which memorable history there are these considerable observations
naturally deduceable. First, that Apostates from Gods true Worship to Idolatry
and false Worship, are to be executed, slain, and put to death by the Judges
and Civil Magistrate, by Gods own special Command. Secondly, that the Apostasy
of Gods own people to Idolatry, and the Magistrates connivance thereat, is an
immediate cause of provoking Gods wrath, and bringing down public plagues and
other judgments upon that whole Nation or Kingdom wherein they are not
punished. Thirdly, that Gods own immediate punishing and cutting off Idolaters
with a plague, is no argument nor excuse at all for the temporal Magistrates
sparing or not punishing such with death (whose execution is here said to be
and styled Gods own act, since they are but his Ministers herein) but rather an
argument to excite them to the more speedy exemplary punishing of them even
with death it self: which answers and refels one grand objection against
punishing Heretics, and Blasphemers with death, because God himself will punish
them if they repent not, and we must wholly leave them to his judgment.
Fourthly, that the best and speedyest course to remove Gods judgments brought
upon a Nation for Idolatry, Apostasy, Heresy, or Blasphemy, is for the
temporal Magistrates to execute speedy and exemplary capital punishments on
those who are notoriously guilty of them; and that fasting and prayer without
such exemplary executions upon the most eminent Malefactors in this kind, will
never pacify Gods wrath, nor remove his judgments inflicted for these sins.
Fifthly, that the executing of capital punishments upon such, is an argument of
true zeal to GOD: And therefore it seems strange to me, that those in this age,
who pretend themselves the only Saints, Zealots, faithful ones, paramount all
others by head and shouldiers in grace and piety, should be so void of
Christian zeal for God, as to plead, preach, write, and print against the
corporal and capital Punishment or Apostates, Idolaters, Heretics, and
Blasphemers by temporal Magistrates, and for a free Toleration of all Sects,
Heresies, and Religions whatsoever, under the pretense of Liber^^y of
Conscience: Certainly this extreme want of holy zeal for God against Apostates*
Idolaters, Heretics; Blasphemers, and pleading for their impunity, at least
with capital Censures, argues them to be no real Saints, because they have no
true love to, nor zeal for God, which would make them as forward to thrust
their Javelins, or the sword of Justice through the Bowels of such transcendent
offenders, as Phineas was to thrust his Javelin through Zimri and Cozbi,
without any question or dispute. Sixthly, that the exemplary capital punishing
of such, is so far from being a persecution of the Saints, or against the
Clemency of God under the Law or Gospel, that it is a most acceptable service
to God, and procures a special Blessing upon the persons and posterities of
those who are most zealous and active in this service, as appears by this
example of Phineas, registered for his eternal honor and our future imitation
and encouragement in this kind.

The third Example is JOSH. 22. 10. to 34. Where we read, that when the
Children 3.
of Ruben, Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh had but built an Altar at the
side of Jordan, the children of Israel no sooner heard thereof, but the whole
Congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh,
to go up to war against them, to destroy them, and the Cities wherein they
dwelt, as guilty of Idolatry, Apostasy, and False* Worship; apprehending the
very building of this Altar to be a trespass committed against the God of
Israel, to turn them away from following the Lord, that they might rebel
against him, and that it would prove like the sin of Peor, and bring Gods wrath
on the whole Congregation of Israel and not on themselves alone: when as in
truth they built it only for a memor^^l, but not to rebel against and turn from
the Lord, or to be an Altar for burnt o^^^^^gs, for meat offerings or for
sacrifices, like as the Altar of the Lord their God which was before the
Tabernacle.

From which history I collect: First, that the whole Congregation of Israel
when they were most sincere and best affected toward God* deemed this supposed
guilt of Apostasy, Idolatry, and Schism in these two Tribes and an half, by
building this New Altar, a just ground of making a public war against them, to
destroy both them and their Country for this crime (though they were their dear
brethren, who assisted them to conquer the Land of Canaan) by virtue of Gods
Command forecited DEUTERONOMY. 13. 11. to 17. Secondly, that the Apostasy, Idolatry,
and obstinate Schism of a few, will draw down Gods Judgments upon a whole
Nation and Kingdom, in case they tolerate or connive at them, and do not
speedily cut them off by the sword of Justice. Thirdly, that in such a case,
there is no way to prevent Gods wrath on all, but to cut off the Malefactors by
speedy execution of corporal punishments and death upon them.

The fourth Example is recorded in the 1 KING. 18. 40. etc. 19. 1, 2. Where 4.
Elijah commands all the people (after he had convinced them by a miracle from
heaven that the Lord was God) ^o apprehend the Prophets of Baal, and not let
one of them escape; whereupon they took them, and Elijah brought them down to
the brook Kishon, and SLEW THEM there with the sword* upon which ^eze^el
threatened to make his life as one of them. By this it is apparent: First, that
this holy, zealous Prophet and all the people were of opinion, That false
Prophets and Idolaters ought by the Law of God to be put to death without any
mercy; and that Gods Judgment of drought then upon the whole Kingdom, could
not be removed before their execution: as the History there manifests.
Secondly, that the execution of those Idolatrous false Prophets, was so
necessary, that rather then they should want capital punishment the Prophet
Elijah himself would be their executioner. His zeal then should shame our
lukewarmnesse now.

The fifth President is in JUDGES 6.30. Then Ioash said unto all that stood 5.
against him, Will ye plead for Baal? Will ye save him? he that will plead for
him, LET HIM BE PVT TO DEATH whiles it is yet morning. Compared with the second
of KINGS 10. 18. to 29. Where Iehu by Proclamation having gathered all Baals
Priests, and worshippers into his temple, appointed foursoore men without, and
said, if any of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape, he that
lets him go, his life shall be for the life of him. And he said to the guard
and to the Captains* go in and SLAT THEM, let none come forth; and they smote
them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the Captains cast them out,
and went to the City of the house of Baal, and they brought forth the Images
out of the house of Baal and burnt them; and they brake down the Image of Baal,
and the house of Baal, and made it a draught house unto this day; so Jehu
destroyed Baal out of Israel. Here the supreme temporal Magistrate puts all the
Idolatrous Priests and worshippers of Baal throughout the whole Kingdom, to
death at once, without mercy; for which God himself commends him saying, That
he had done well in executing that which was right in his eyes: And by this means
he destroyed Baal out of Israel, to his eternal honor.

The sixth Example is thus recorded in the 2 KING. 11. 17, 18. and in the 2
CHRO. 6.
23. 16, 17. And Jehoiada made a Covenant between him and between all the
people, and between the King, that they should be the Lords people; And all the
people of the Land went into the house of Baal and brake it down, his Alars and
his Images brake they in pieces thoroughly; and And Idolatrous Athalia too.
SLEW Mattan the Priest of Baal before the Altar, A memorable example of zeal
and reformation after their solemn Covenant; And should not we be as zealous
after our Covenant, against Idolatrous Priests, False Prophets, Heretics,
Apostates, Blasphemers, as they were against the Priests of Baal?

The seventh President is enrolled in the 2 CHRONICLES. 15. 9, to 17. where godly 7.
King Asa, having gathered all Juda and Benjamin, and the strangers with them
out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon to Jerusalem, in the fifteenth
year of his reign, they all entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of
their Fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul; That whosoever
would not seek the Lord God of Israel, SHOULD BE Deuteronomy. 13. 9. is quoted in
margiu of our Bibles.
PVT TO DEATH, WHETHER SMALL OR GREAT, MAN OR WOMAN: And they swear unto the
Lord with a loud voice, and with shoutings, and with trumpets, and with
cornets; And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their
heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them; and
the Lord gave them rest round about: And also concerning Maachah, the mother of
Asa the King, he removed her from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in
a grove; and Asa cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
Kidron. Whence we shall observe.

First, that this godly King and all his people bound themselves by a solemn
Oath and Covenant (much like to ours) TO PUT ALL Idolaters, Apostates,
Heretics, and Blasphemers, and whosoever would not seek the Lord (of what
quality or sort soever) TO DEATH.

Secondly, that this Oath and Covenant was so well pleasing to God and agreeable
to his Law, that whereas immediately before their entering into it, here was no
peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were
upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation,
and City of City (as they are now among us) for God did vex them with all
adversity, Vor. 5, 6. Yet no sooner was this Oath and Covenant taken, but the
Lord was found of them* and gave them rest round about, Verse 15. as no doubt
he would do to us, were we as zealous against Apostates, Idolaters, Heretics,
Blasphemers against God and the sacred Trinity, as they; and would put the
Ringleaders of such to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman, as
they did.

Thirdly, that Asa did depose his own Queen mother from being Queen, for her
Idolatry, and cut down and burnt her Idol and her grove. A memorable example
both of zeal and justice, to shame the luke warmness, the partiality of our
times, which have connived at, and countenanced, Queen mother, and Queen
daughter too in their Idolatries, yea erected public Gro^es and Chapels for
their Idols and Idol-worship.

Eighthly, to these I might accumulate EXODUS 23. 23, 24. 32. 33, c. 34. 12, 8.
13, 4, 15. NUMBER. 21. 2, 3. c. 31. 8. 17. DEUTERONOMY. 7. 2, 3 4, 5. c. 12. 2, 3. JOSM.
23. 5. to 14. JUDGE. 2. 2. Where God commanded Moses, Joshua, and the Israelites
his own people, when he should deliver the Hittites, Gergasites, Amarites,
Canaanites, Per^zites, Hivites, Iebusites, and Midianites into their hands, to
smite, utterly destroy, and slay them with the sword, and to make no Covenant
with them, nor show mercy unto them; and to destroy, break down, and burn their
Altars, Groves, Images, and to make no marriages with their sons or daughters,
least they should turn them away from following him, to serve other gods, and
so should the anger of the Lord be kindled against them, and destroy them
suddenly: Whereupon they did utterly destroy all the Idolatrous Inhabitants of
the Cities they took, with the edge of the sword, without sparing any, but
Rahab and her family; JOSH. 6. 21, 22, 24. c. 8. 20. to 30. c. 9. 24, 26. c.
10. 1. 10. to the end; specially v. 40. c. 11, 12. NUMBER. 21. 2, 3. c. 31. 16.
17. 2 CHRONICLES. 31. 1, 2. as the Lord commanded them.

From all which Precepts and Presidents, as also from JOH 31. 26, 27, 28. EXODUS
22. 20. He that sacrifices unto any other god save unto the Lord only, HE SHALL
BE UTTERLY DESTROYED; that is by the Magistrates and people, or in their
default, by God himself, it is undeniable; that godly Kings and Magistrates
under the Law, were by Gods own special command to punish obstinate Idolaters,
Apostates, False Prophets and Teachers, who seduced (or endeavored to seduce
the people from the ways, truth, and true worship of God, were they Jews or
Gentiles, Israelites or Heathens,) with death and capital punishments, to
prevent or remove Gods wrath, procure his favor and blessing, and keep others
from pollution and seduction, to the ruin of their souls.

Secondly, That they had power to punish Blasphemy and Blasphemers of God even
with death, by an express Commission from God himself, is as clear as the
Noonday Sun, by these ensuing Texts: LEVIT. 24. 10. to 17. and the Isra^litish
woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord and cursed; and they brought him
unto Moses and put him in Ward, that the mind of the Lord might be showed them:
And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, bring forth him that has cursed without
the Camp, and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all
the Congregation STONE HIM. And thou shall speak unto the children of Israel,
saying, whosoever shall curse his God shall bear his sin: And he that blasphemeth
the name of the Lord SHALL SURELY BE PUT TO DEATH, and ALL THE CONGREGATION SHALL
CERTAINLY STONE HIM: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the Land, WHEN
HE BLASPHEMETH THE NAME OF THE LORD, SHALL BE PUT TO DEATH. A most punctual
Law, extending to all blasphemers of God and his name, be they Natives or
Forraigners, of what sex or quality soever; coupled in the next Verse with this
penal Statute, Ver. 17. AND HE THAT KILLS ANY MAN SHALL BE PVT TO DEATH: so
that those who at this day question or deny the Magistrates power to put
Blasphemers (or gross Heretics who deny Christ's Divinity etc. whose very
assentions are direct blasphemies) to death: may upon the self-same grounds,
and with equal reason deny the Magistrates power to put Murderers to death:
the one Law being as moral, as perpetual, as the other: Yea the equity of that
other Law, EXODUS 21. 17. and LEVIT. 20. 9. Every one that curses his father
and mother shall SVRELY BE PVT TO DEATH* his blood shall be upon him; must hold
more strongly of him that shall curse and blaspheme his heavenly, then his
earthy Father; in as much as the one is infinitely greater, and more to be
reverenced, feared, honored, obeyed then the other. This Law was so obligatory
and Authentic among the Israelites even in the reign of King Ahab, and
Jezebel; that the Nobles and Elders upon Jezebels Letter, and the witnesses
testimony suborned by her; condemned Naboth, for that he did blalpheme God*
whereupon they carried him forth out of the City, and STONED HIM WITH STONES
THAT HE DYED, 1 KING. 21. 5. to 15. Yea the wicked Jews, Elders, and
Highpriests who put our Savior to death, were so zealous in punishing whatever
they reputed blasphemy, by coulor of this precept, that JOH. 10. 31, 32, 33.
The Jews TOOK UP STONES TO STONE CHRIST HIMSELF for BLASPHEMY (which they
pretended he had spoken) AND FOR THAT HE BEING MAN MADE HIMSELF GOD; And at his
arraignment before his passion MAT. 26. 64, 65, 66. Christ saying, that he was
the Son of God; thereupon the High Priest rent his clothes, saying, He has
spoken BLASPHEMY, what further need have we of witnesses? Behold now ye have
heard his BLASPHEMY, What think ye? They answered and said. HE IS GVILTY OF
DEATH. An unanswerable proof, that Blasphemy even in our Saviors time, was a
capital crime punishable with death among the Jews: and all by virtue of this
forecited express Law of God. Those then must be more unjust then Ahab or
Jezebel, more impious and less zealous then the wicked Jews, High Priests, or
Elders who put Christ to death, that dare plead for the exemption of
Blasphemers of God, or the Trinity from death and capital punishments, when God
himself has thus positively commanded, That they shall surely and certainly be
out to death.

Thirdly, For seditious and obstinate pernicious Schismatics from the Unity
both of the Church and Faith, though we find no express precept in the Old
Testament against them; yet we read, that God himself sent out a fire and
devoured Nadab, and Ab^hu, so that they dyed before the Lord, because they
offered in their censor^ strange fire before the LORD, which he commanded them
not, LEVIT. 10. 1, 2* NUMBER. 3. 4. c. 26. 60. 1 CHRO. 24. 2. and that God
exemplarily destroyed and made the earth to swallow up Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram with their, company and families, for raising a public Schism, NUMBER. 16.
1. to 41. c. 26. 9, 10. PSA. 106. 17, 18. And such Heretics and Schismatics
as those fall directly within the Verge and meaning of the forecited Texts,
against Idolaters, False Prophets, False-Teachers, Apostates from the truth or
true worship of God, and Blasphemers; Heresy it self (properly so called)
being either DOCTRINAL BLASPHEMY or MENTAL IDOLATRY: therefore punishable by
godly Princes and Magistrates under the Law, by virtue of the precedent Texts:
and so by necessary consequence under the Gospel. As for Schismatics and
separate Independent Congregations, the Israelites neither knew nor permitted
any, since they all unanimously met together in one place upon all public
Feastivals, Fastings, Passeover^, and other occasions of solemn worship. from
which none ever separated upon pretext that all those present were not visible
Saints, and those who separated from the public ordinances, WERE TO BE CUT
OFF; as is clear by EXO. 23. 17. c. 35. 1. 4. LEV. 8. 3, 4. etc. c. 9. 5. c.
16. 33. c. 19. 2. etc. NUMBER. 15. 24. c. 27. 1. DEUTERONOMY. 31. 30. c. 5. 1. etc. c.
16. 16. JOSH. 8. 35. c. 23. 2. etc. c. 24. 1. to 28. JUDGE. 2. 5. c. 20. 1. to
26. 1 SAMUEL 7. 3. 5, 6. 1 KING. 18. 1. 2. to 66. 1 CHRO. 13. 1. to 9. c. 15. 3.
to 29. c. 25. c. 29. 2 CHRO. 5. 2, 3. c. 7. 3, 4. c. 15. 9. to 16. c. 20. 3, 4,
5. 27. 28. c. 23. 7. 16, 17. c. 24. 9. 10. c. 29. 28. 36. c. 30. 1. to 27. c.
34. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. c. 35. 1. to 20. EZRA 10. 1. etc. 5. 9. 12. c. 3. 1.
NEH. 8. 1. etc. cap. 9. 1. JOEL 2. 15. 16. ZEPH. 2. 1, 2. which I wish all
Separatists and Independents would well study and consider.

My second Argument is this.

Godly Kings and Magistrates under the Law and Old Testament had power to
Argum. 2.
punish Sabbath Breakers, Sorcerers, Witches, Murderers, Adulterers, Wicked
doers, and disobeyers of the Law of God, with temporal and capital punishments.

Ergo. Christian Magistrates and Princes now have power under the Gospel to
punish Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics, False Teachers, obstinate Schismatics
and Blasphemers with corporal and capital punishments.

The sequel is firm, because the same reason holds a like in all, and because
it is an argument a Minori ad Maju; sins against the first second third fourth
Commandments (as Divines generally accord) being more heinous then sins against
the second Table, because more immediate against the very nature, essence, and
name of God himself; and spiritual Sorcerers, Witches, Murderers, Adulterers
(such as all Idolaters, Heretics, Apostates, False Teachers, obstinate
Schismatics and Blasphemers are) being worse and more dangerous then corporal,
because they hurt and destroy men's souls, and because the forecited and
subsequent texts warrant their punishing of these with death, as well as those.

The antecedent I shall ratify by these Authorities; That Sabbath Breakers
WERE TO BE PUNISHED by the Civil Magistrate WITH DEATH, is evident by EXODUS 31.
14, 15. NUMBER. 15. 32. to 37. That Sorcerers and Witches were to be put to death
and not suffered to live, is apparent by LEV. 20. 27. DEUTERONOMY. 18. 10, 11. 1 SAMUEL
28. 9. That adulterous and incestuous persons were to be put to death by Gods
command by the Magistrate, is clear by GENESIS 26. 11. c. 38. 24. 25. LEVIT. 8. 6.
to 30. c. 20. 10. to 19. c. 21. 9. DEUTERONOMY. 22. 20. to 28. JOH. 8. 4, 5. That
Murderers were to be put to death without mercy, is clearly resolved in direct
terms, GENESIS 9. 5, 6. EXODUS 21. 12, 13, 14. LEVIT. 24. 17. NUMBER. 35. 15. to 35. 1
KING. 2. 31. to 35. In fine; godly and zealous King David, a man after Gods own
heart, writes thus of himself; PSALM. 101. 8. I will early destroy ALL THE WICKED
of the Land, that I may CVT OFF ALL WICKED DOERS FROM THE CITY OF THE LORD. If
David then as a King (yea a type of Christ) would thus destroy and cut off with
the sword of Justice all the wicked of the Land, and all wicked doers from the
City of the Lord: then certainly he would cut off and destroy all Idolaters,
Apostates, Heretics, False Teachers, Blasphemers and obstinate Schismatics
who disturbed the tranquillity, and obstructed the felicity of the City of the
Lord. And why all Christian Princes, Magistrates, should not do the like under
the Gospel, as he did under the Law; and punish Idolaters, Heretics,
Apostates, Blasphemers, etc. now with corporal and capital punishments, as well
as Sorcerers, Murderers, and other Malefactors, as yet transcends my
understanding to conceive.

My third Argument follows.

Those things, and Persons which Heathen Kings, Magistrates, Nations and Argum.
3.
Idolaters themselves, by the very light of nature, though fit to punish with
corporal and capital punishments; all Christian Kings, Magistrates, Nations,
ought much more to censure in this kind.

But Heathen Kings, Magistrates, Nations, and Idolaters themselves, by the very
light of nature, have thought fit to punish with corporal and capital
punishments, such as adored not those Idol-gods which they worshipped and
reputed for the true; and such as they deemed Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics,
Schismatics, Blasphemers, and open Rebels against God.

Therefore Christian Kings, Magistrates, Nations under the Gospel, ought much
more to do it.

The Major is evident by its own light, and ratified by ROMANS 2. 14, 15. The
Minor I shall make good by Scripture testimonies. I shall begin with King
Artaxerxes his Commission to Ezra, c: 7. 15; 26. And thou Ezra after the wisdom
of thy God, that is in thine hand, set Magistrates and Judges which may judge
all the people which are beyond the river; all such as know the Law of thy God:
And whosoever See the 1 Esd. 8. 23, 24.
WILL NOT DO THE LAW OF THY GOD, and the law of the King, let judgment be
executed speedily upon him, WHETHER IT BE TO DEATH, OR TO BANISHMENT, OR TO
CONFISCATION OF GOODS, OR TO IMPRISONMENT. Shall a mere Heathen King be so
zealous as to enjoin the Judges and Magistrates under him, to inflict these
corporal and capital censures upon such as will not do the Law of God; in which
number all Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics, Blasphemers, etc. are included; and
shall not Christian Princes, Magistrates, Judges much more exceed him in their
zeal and justice against such transgressors of Gods Law? But that Decree of
Nebuchadnezzer against blasphemers of God, is more emphatical, and pathetical:
DAN. 3. 28, 29. Then Nebuchadnezzer spoke and said, blessed be the Lord God of
Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his
servants that trusted in him etc. Therefore I make a Decree, that every people,
nation, and language WHICH SPEAK ANY ERROR (or any thing amiss) AGAINST THE
GOD of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, SHALL BE CUT IN PIECES, and THEIR HOUSES
SHALL BE MADE A DUNGHILL, because there is no God that can deliver after this
sort. If this Pagan King out of his transcendent zeal, upon the sight but of
one miracle, was stirred up without any debates or delay, to make such a severe
decree as this, against all those of every people, nation, and language that
did speak any Error or Blasphemy against the true God, whom these three
worthies then, and we now worship: shall not this decree of his rise up in
Judgment against all those Christian Princes, Parliaments, Magistrates, Judges
under the Gospel, who profess themselves the worshippers, servants, children
of this true God; and yet shall refuse, or neglect to make such strickt and
severe Decrees against such Heretics and Blasphemers, who maliciously belch
out most execrable blasphemies, and Errors against God himself, and openly
maintain them in discourse and writing? but especially against those who
pretend and style themselves the ONLY SAINTS and SERVANTS OF GOD (how truly let
this one act alone declare) who professedly plead, preach, and write against
the Corporal and Capital Punishment of such damnable Heretics, Blasphemers,
and the enacting of any severe Laws against them by the Parliament and civil
Magistrates, when as this Pagan King by his Decree commanded such, to be
instantly cut in pieces and their houses to be made a dunghill, without any
pity or pardon? Were Pagan Nebuchadnezzer now alive amongst us, he would new
heat his Fiery Furnace to warm the kay-cold frozen zeal of such heatlesse
New-Lights, and zeal-lesse Saints as these; or shame them into an emulation of
his zeal against such Heretics and Blasphemers.

I shall close up this with that saying of Super Joannem Tract. 11.
Augustine recorded by Causa. 23. qu. 4. fol. 450.
Gratian:

Quando vult Deus concitate potestatem adversus Haereticos, adversus
Schismaticos, adversus dissipatores Ecclesiae, adversus exsufflatores Christi,
adversus Blasphematores Christi, blasphemi non mirentur, quia Deus concitat ut
a Sara verbaretur Agar; cognoscat se Agar, supponat cervicem, etc. Ad hoc ergo
affligitur ut revertatur.

Nebuchadnezzer Rex decrevit, dicens; Quicunque dixerint blasphemiam in Deum
Sidrac, Misac, and Abednago, in interitu erunt, and domus eorum in dispersione.
Ecce quomodo Rex alienigena sevit, ne blasphemetur Deus Israel, qui potuit tres
pueros de igne liberare, and nolunt ut seviant Reges Christiani quia Christus
exsufflatur, a quo non tres pueri, sed totus orbis terrarum, cum ipsis regibus
a gehennarum igne liberantur? Quomodo ergo istireges non moveantur, qui non
tantum tres pueros attendunt liberatos de flamma, sed seipsos de flamma
Gehennae, quando vident Christum, a quo liberati sunt, exsufflari a
Christianis? quando audiunt dici Christiano, dic te non esse Christianum? Talia
facere volunt, sed talia pati nolunt. Nam videte qualia faciunt, and qualia
patiuntur: occidunt animas, affliguntur in corpore: sempiternas mortes faciunt,
et temporales se perpeti conqueruntur.

So in the 1 ESDRAS c. 6. 23. to 34. It is recorded, that King Cyrus and Darius
by their Royal Decrees commanded the Temple of Jerusalem to be built unto the
Lord, and offerings and prayers to be there made to the most high GOD for the
King and his children; and commanded that whosoever should transgress, yea or
make light of any thing before written, out of his own house should a tree be
taken, and HE THERE ON TO BE HANGED and ALL HIS GOODS TO BE SEIZED FOR THE
KING. O the transcendent zeal of these Heathen Princes against the obstructers,
or oppugners of Gods true worship! and shall not Christian Kings and Magistrates
be as zealous against Heretics, Blasphemers, Schismatics, Seducers,
Idolaters, who oppugn, corrupt his truth, and withdraw men from his worship?

I proceed to Presidents of another Nature.

We read JUDGE. 6. 28. to 32. That when Gideon in the night time had thrown down
the Altar of Baal, and cut down the Grove that was by it, in Ophrata; the men
of the City (who worshipped Baal) said one to another, who has done this
thing? and when they had enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash
has done this. Then the men of the City said unto Ioash, bring out thy son
THAT HE MAY DYE, BECAUSE HE HAS CAST DOWN THE ALTAR OF BAAL, because he has
cut down the Grove that was by it. Whence it is evident, that these very
Idolaters deemed this afront to their Idol-god, whom they believed, adored as
the true, to be no less then a capital offense, deserving death: So in the 1
KING. 18. 13. c. 19. 2. 10. 14. and ROMANS 11. 3. 4. we find, that Idolatrous
Queen Iezabel who worshipped Baal as the true God, and drew Ahab her husband
and his subjects to her Idolatry, did slay the Prophets of the Lord with the
sword, and threw down his Altar, and seek the Prophet Elijahs life, who was
enforced to fly to save it, because she deemed him and the Prophets she slew
to be Heretics, False Prophets, Blasphemers, Opposers of her Idol-Baal, and
his Idolatrous worship, then generally received as the true. So DAN. 3. 1. when
King Nebuchadnezzer erected an Image of gold, as his god, which he made choice
of for him and all his people to worship, he made a public Proclamation by an
Herald, that all people, nations, and languages assembled to its dedication,
should fall down and worship this golden Image, and that who so fell not down
and worshipped it, SHOULD BE CAST INTO A BURNING FIERY FURNACE, And for
disobeying this Proclamation, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were cast into
his furnace as Malefactors: Thus ACTS 16. 16 to 35. The Idolatrous people of
Thyati^a, after that Paul and Sylas had preached against their Idols, and
dispossessed the damosel there possessed with the spirit of divination, rose up
against Paul and Sylus and caught and brought them to the Magistrate, saying;
These men being Jews do exceedingly trouble our City, and teach customs which
are not lawful for us to receive nor observe, being Romans: whereupon the
Magistrates rent their clothes and commanded to beat them, and when they had
laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailer to
keep them safely; who having received such a charge, cast them into the inner
prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks: reputing them Heretics,
Schismatics, Opposers of their false Deities and Religions: So ACT. 19. 21. to
46. Demetrius the silver-smith, who made shrines for Diana, stirred up the
people at Ephesus against Paul and his Associates by these speeches. Moreover
ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus but almost throughout all Asia; this
Paul has persuaded and turned away many people, saying, that they be no gods
which are made with hands; So that no only our craft is endangered to be set at
naught, but also that the Temple of the great goddess Diana should be
despised, AND HER MAGNIFICENCE SHOULD BE DESTROYED, whom all Asia and the world
worshippeth. And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and
cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; And the whole City was
filled with confusion; and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, Paul's
companions in travel, they rushed with one accord into the Theater, (and no
doubt would have murdered them, and Paul too, could they have caught him) as
BLASPHEMERS of their Goddess, had not the Town Clerk appeased the multitude,
and told them, the matter should be dee^rmined in a lawful assembly: So the
Jews, out of their blind zeal, stoned Stephen as an Heretic and false Teacher,
for reproving them, for persecuting and slaying the Prophets, who had showed
before of the coming of the Holy One; of whom they had been the betrayers and
murderers, ACT. 7. 7. Thus Paul before his conversion, out of the like falls
zeal, made havoc of the Church, entering into every house and hailing men and
women, committed them to prison: And yet breathing out threatenings and
flaughters against the Disciples of the Lord, he desired letters of the High
Priest to Damascus, to the Synagogues, that if he found any of this way man or
woman, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem, ACT. 8. 1. 3. c. 9. 1, 2. Yea,
he did shut up many of the Saints in prison, and when they were put to death,
gave his voice against them, and punished them often in every Synagogue, ACT. 26.
9, 10, 11, 12. Thus the seduced Jews out of a blind zeal apprehending Paul to
be an Heretic and Schismatic, ACT. 21. 28, 29. etc. stirred up all the people
and laid hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel help, this is the man that
teaches all men every where against the people, and the law, and this place;
and farther, brought Greeks into the Temple, and has polluted the holy place;
And all the City was moved; and the people ran together, and they took Paul and
drew him out of the Temple and beat him; And as they were about to kill him,
tidings came unto the chief Captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an
uproar: who immediately took Soldiers and Centurions and ran down, and took
Paul and commanded him to be bound with two chains, and brought him into the
Castle; After which he was brought before the Council, accused before Felix by
the Jews and Tertullus, for a mover of sedition among the Jews throughout the
world, and a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, whom they took and would
have judged according to their law, but that the chief Captain Lysias rescued
him out of their hands, ACT. 24. 5, 6, 7, and all this for worshipping God
after the way which they called HERESY, ACT. 24. 14. So ACT. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. we
read, that Herod the King stretched out his hand to vex certain of the Church,
and KILLED James the brother of John with the sword, and took and imprisoned
Peter too, intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people: Yea our
Savior himself tells his Disciples, JOHN 16. 2. The time comes that WHOSOEVER
KILLS YOU shall think he does GOD GOOD SERVICE: as the Sea Eusebius de vita
Constantini. l. x. c. 11. 45. to 52 l. 2. c. 1. 2. 5. 57.
Pagan Roman Emperors, and other Heathenish Princes, Magistrates, Nations, did
in the Primitive persecutions, recorded in all ancient and modern
Ecclesiastical histories. Now, what was the ground of Nebuchadnezzers, and
these other Pagan Idolaters: and seduced Jews corporal Censures, and capital
Proceedings against the Servants, Apostles and Saints of God, but this? they
deemed them Heretics, false Teachers, Opposers, and Blaspheme^s of their
Idol-gods, and false Religions, which they emb^aced, believed as the true: For
as the very light of Nature instructs Cic de natura Deorum c 1. Caelius Rhodig.
Antiq. Lect. l. 22. c. 1.
all Nations that there is a God, and instigates them to elect and adore some
Deity or other as their God and Savior: So it farther instructs them, that that
Deity they adore, and that Religion they embrace is no ways to be openly
blasphemed, reviled, oppugned, contemned, under pain of the most severe capital
punishments, because such offenses against the supreamest Majesty of God
transcend any Treason against an earthly Sovereign: whence most Laws and
Nations have made them capital, and by the light of Nature in all ages punished
such whom they esteemed Atheists, Heretics, Blasphemers of their gods, or
oppugners of their established Religion, with no less then capital Punishments
and the severest Censures, as is evident by these Scripture instances, and
sundry other. Hence is that notable saying of De Beneficiis l. 3. c. 6.
Seneca Violatarum Religionum aliubi atque aliubi diversa poena est; SED VBIQVE
ALIQVA; as well as of homicide, parricide and poisoning: Hence the Philosopher
Plato in his 10. Book de Legibus, condemns those to be put to death, who are
Violaters, or Corrupters of Religion: Hence the Amphictions by the advice of
Plutarchi Solon.
Solon, raised a War against the Tirrhaeans for offering violence to the Temple
of Delphos; and Philip of Macaedon levied War against the Phocians for their
Sacrilege, in spoiling the Temple of Delphos, quod orbis viribus expiari
debet, writes Hist. lib. 8.
Justin. This War continued eleven years, til all who were guilty of this
Sacrilege were utterly destroyed, which Demophilus and Diodorus Siculus
styled, Diodorus Sic. Bibl. Hist. lib. 16. sect. 14. etc.
Bellum Sacrum, an holy War, because waged in defense of Religion (though
Idolatrous) to punish the contemners of it: Yea this was one cause of the
Poloponesian War between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, as Hist. lib. 1. De
jure Belli. l. 2. c. 20. sect. 51.
Thucidides and Grotius record: who assert, Justius illi punientur, qui in eos
quos Deos putant irreverentes atque irreligiosi sunt. Hence the Caelius Rho.
Antiq. Lect. l. 22. c. 1. Diogen. Lacit. l. 1. and Cic. de Nature. Deorum, l. 1.
Athenians banished Protagoras out of their City and territories, and burned
his Books in a public assembly, because he had written in the beginning of his
Book, De diis neque ut sint, neque ut non sint habeo dicere. Hence Justin.
Flist. p. 269. See p. 227.
Antiochus attempting to rob the Temple of Dodona in Syria, was together with
his whole army slain by the Inhabitants. Hence we read in Variae Hist. l. 5. c.
16.
Aelian of a child condemned to death for Sacrilege and offering injury to the
Heathen Goddess Diana, in taking away a Golden Plate, which had fallen from
her Crown. And upon this ground Numa Pompilius (as Hist. l. 1. p 16
Livy, Numa Pompilius fol. 21.
Plutarch, and Dionysius Hali^arnasseus record) instituted a Pontifex Maximus
(or chief Priest at Rome) eique omnia ex scripta ex signataque attribuit,
quibus hostiis, quibus diebus, ad quae templa sacra fierent, etc. Pontificiis
scitis subjecit, vt esset quo consultum plebs veniret, ne quid divini juris
negligendo Patrios ritus* PEREGRINOS-QVE asciscendo, turbaretur; and ne quid
praeter LEGITIMA fiat: And upon the like reason, when the Romans in the time of
Tit. Live. Hist. l. 4. p. 162.
Manlius had their bodies infected with diverse diseases, and their minds with
manifold erroneous Religions and Superstitions; this public shame coming to
the knowledge of the chief of the City, Cernentes in omnibus vicis sacellisque
peregrin^ atque insolita piacula pacis Deum exposcendae; they thereupon
commanded the Ediles to take care, Vt animadverterent, ne qui, nisi Romani Dii,
NEV QVO ALIO MORE QVAM PATRIOCOLERENTVR, to preserve Uniformity and avoid all
Innovations in their public worship, which they deemed true: Whence I
conclude, that what Pagan Kings, Magistrates, Nations have usually punished
with corporal, or capital punishments, and restrained by Civil Laws in all ages
out of the light of Nature; that Christian Kings, Magistrates, and Nations
under the Gospel may lawfully punish in like sort, even by the principles of
Nature too, had they no other Divine Law to warrant them, as they have: It Is
true, most of these erred in the object, in deeming that Heresy, Schism,
Blasphemy, Error, which was not; not in the punishment, had the object been
such as they really deemed it, and such as we here dispute of.

My fourth Argument is this:

God has prophesied, That Idolaters, Heretics, and False Prophets under the
Argum. 4.
Gospel shall be put to Death.

Therefore Christian Kings and Magistrates under the Gospel, may lawfully put
them to death, else these Proph^sies should be frustrated and not fulfilled.

The Antecedent I have already made good in part from DEUTERONOMY. 18. 15. to 21.
(which relates to the times of the Gospel), But the Prophet which presumes to
speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall
speak in the name of other gods, EVEN THAT PROPHET SHALL DYE: to wit, by the
sword of Justice; which is thus repeated, ACT. 3. 22, 23. And it shall come to
pass, that every soul that will not hear that Prophet SHALL BE DESTROYED FROM
AMONG HIS PEOPLE: even under the Gospel, as well as under the Law; either
immediately by the hand of God himself; or mediately by the Civil Magistrate
and Sword of Justice, as The despisers of Moses Law were to be destroyed; HEBR.
10. 28, 29. compared with this text: Whereto I shall now subjoyn ZECH. 13. 1, 2,
3, etc. which speaking thus of the time of CHRIST and of his passion: In that
day shall a fountain be opened to the house of David for sin and for
uncleanness: Awake O sword against my shpherd, and against the man that is my
fellow; says the Lord of hosts: Smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be
scattered etc. (applied to Christ and the times of the Gospel in the New
Testament, MAT. 26. 32. MARK 14. 27. 1 PET. 1. 6, 7.) he adds, And it shall come
to pass IN THAT DAY (of the Sea Gualther in Locum; and Hom. 44. in Epist. ad
Gal. fol. 121.
Gospel) says the Lord of hosts, I will cut off the names of Idols out of the
Land, and they shall no more be remembered; and also I will cause the Prophets and
unclean spirits to pass out of the Land; And it shall come to pass that when
any shall yet prophecy, that HIS FATHER and mother which begat him, shall say
unto him THOU SHALL NOT LIVE, FOR THOU SPEAK LIES IN THE NAME OF THE LORD:
and his FATHER and his Mother that begat him, SHALL THRVST HIM THROVGH WHEN HE
PROPHESYETH: And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Prophets shall be
ashamed every one of his vision when he has prophesied, neither shall he wear
a rough garment to deceive.

This Prophesy relates This Master Buroughs himself confesses, in his Hearts
divisions, p. 20. 21
wholly to the times of the Gospel: The first part thereof concerning the
destruction of Idols and Idolaters, was in part fulfilled by the Apostles and
others preaching, and by Constantine the great his subverting of all Idols
Temples, Groves, Statues, by his enacting Laws against their worship, and
putting Lycinius and his accomplices ( qui praelii CONTRADEVM SVSCIPIENDI
authors fuerunt) to death, being first condemned by Martial Law, for waging
war against God and the Christians, as we may read at large in De vita
Constantini l. 2. c. 18. 43, 44. l. 3. c. 52. to 57.
Eusebius. The latter part concerning Heretics and false Prophets, who speak
lies in the name of the Lord, relates likewise to the times of the Gospel:
wherein two things are considerable; First, their judgment and punishment;
Thou shall not live; and they shall thrust him through when he prophesies. A
capital sentence and execution, to the very taking away of their lives.
Secondly, The parties who are to pronounce and execute this Judgment; his
Father and Mother that begat him: (an expression borrowed from Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7,
8, 9.) This may have a threefold interpretation: First, His natural Father and
Mother shall do it, if living, upon lawful conviction before the Christian
Magistrate. Secondly, His Civil or Ecclesiastical Father and Mother (especially
if his natural Parents be dead) to wit, the Christian Magistrate, Church, and
people where he lives. Thirdly, his very nearest, dearest friends and kindred,
who must cast aside all affection in the cause of God. And this part of the
Prophecy was fulfilled under the Gospel, by the manygodly Laws of Christian
Emperors, Kings, States in all ages, for the punishing of Heretics, and
seducing false Teachers with Banishment, Imprisonment, Burning, Death, and
other corporal censures, of which more anon.

Thirdly, the good effect of these corporal censures and punishments upon
Idolaters, Heretics, and False Prophets, is thus expressed in the Text. First,
The name of Idols shall no more be remembered. Secondly, The false prophet and
unclean spirit shall pass out of the Land. Thirdly, Every other false prophet
shall be ashamed of his vision, and no more wear a rough garment to deceive, but
give over his false Teaching. So that the Magistrates and others severe
proceedings by corporal and capital censures against Idolaters and False
Prophets, is a principal means predicted and ordained by God even under the
Gospel, to extirpate Idolatry, Heresy, Errors, False Prophets, and reclaim
such as have been seduced by them. I wonder therefore how any man who pretends
himself a Chistian, a SAINT, much more a transcendent NEW LIGHT, should dare
publicly oppose or privately deny the exercise of such corporal and capital
censures against Heretics, Fals-Teachers, Blasphemers, etc. by Christian
Princes and Magistrates under the Gospel (which this prophecy so plainly both
allows and prescribes) upon mere whim^icall crotchets of their own, warranted
by no text. We read Josh. 1. 18. That the officers of the people, with the
Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh spoke thus to Joshua, when God
had appointed him to succeed Moses in the Government, Whosoever he be that does
rebel against thy Commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words, to do all
that thou command him, HE SHALL BE PVT TO DEATH. If he who thus wilfully
rebelled against the command of Joshua, was to be put to death, by the verdict
of all the people, much more then may such Idolaters, Heretics, Apostates,
Blasphemers, and obstinate Schi^maticks be put to death, who rebel so
publicly against the Command and Word of God himself, by warrant of all the
forecited Texts.

But some perchance will object that these Arguments are all drawn from Object.
texts in the Old Testament to satisfy them.

I answer, that all the Texts forecited are still in force under, and some of
Answ.
them relate only to the times of the New: and so the objection is but
frivilous, yea exceeding derogatory to the Old Testament, of which it seems
they make no more account then of See Mr Edwards Gangraena, part* 2: p. 162.
an old Almanac out of date. Therefore to take away this cavil, ( Page 2. 3.
Argum. 5.
formerly Answered) I shall propound this fifth Argument.

Apostasy, Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy, obstinate Schism, False Teachers,
together with false Prophets, who are guilty of them, are as odious unto God,
as execrable to all godly Christians, as infectious, dangerous, destructive to
peoples souls, as apt to provoke Gods wrath, and bring down his severe
judgments upon whole Churches, Nations, Kingdoms, where they are tolerated,
perpetrated, and are as carefully to be suppressed, prevented under the Gospel,
as they were under the Law: Yea Christian Princes, Magistrates, Republics
power under the Gospel is the same, or as large as the authority of godly Kings
and Magistrates under the Law.

Therefore consequently they are to be as severely punished with corporal, if
not capital punishments under the Gospel by Christian Princes, Magistrates,
Republics, as they were by godly Kings and Magistrates under the Law.

The sequel is clear from its own light; for where there is the self same
reason, there is ever the self-same law and equity, both under the Law and
Gospel. See Mat. 7. 11, 12. Luke 6. 30. to 35. Jam. 2. 10, 11. as I have
formerly proved, p. 2. 3. 5.

The Antecedent is undeniable: First, because the Gospel does no ways mitigate,
but rather aggravate the hainousnes of these sins, as being committed against
greater light and mercy; therefore certainly they are as odious, as provoking
unto God, as execrable, damnable, destructive unto men, as pernicious unto
whole Churches, Nations, Kingdoms now, as then, and in some sense more now,
then formerly under the Law, as is clear by Romans 1. 18. to the end, 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10. cap. 10. 7. 9. 11. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. Heb. 2. 2, 3. cap. 6. 4. to 9. cap. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. 2 Pet. 2.
1, 2. 12, 13. 17. Romans 2. 10. to 28. Rev. 2. 14, 15. 21, 22. cap. 17. 16. c.
18. 4. c. 19. 20. compared together. Secondly, because that Heretics, False
Prophets and Teachers, Schismatics, Seducers, are as diligently to be avoided,
suppressed under the Gospel, as Law, they being alike, nay more infectious,
dangerous, seducing and pernicious to men's souls now, then under the Law, as is
apparent by all these serious admonitions to beware of them and their
seducements, which deceive the greatest part of the world, and if possible
would seduce the very Elect, as you may read at leisure in these ensuing texts,
Mat. 7. 15. cap. 11. 14. cap. 24. 11. 23, 24, 25. Mar. 13. 21. Luke 17. 23, 24.
Romans 16. 17, 18. Acts 20. 28. to 32. 2 These. 2. 3. to 16. EPHESIANS. 6. 13. to 19.
PHIL. 3. 2. COL. 3. 18, 19. 1 TIMOTHY 4. 1. to 7. 2 TIMOTHY 2. 15. 16, 17. c. 3. 1.
to 10. TIT. 1. 9. to the end. HER. 4. 1. 1 PET. 5. 2. 8. 2. COR. 11. 13, 14,
15. 2 PET. 2. 1. to 22. c. 3. 2, 3. 17, 18. 1 JOHN 2. 18, 19. c. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 JOHN 8. to 12. 3 JOHN 10. 11. JUDE 3. to 24. REV. 13. 1. to 18. c. 16. 13, 14.
c. 17. throughout. cap. 18. 9. to 24. c. 19. 20. c. 20. 8. 9. 10. 1 COR. 11.
19. TIT. 3. 10, 11. These notable Texts so frequently, so earnestly admonishing
us to beware of Antichrists, Heretics, False Teachers, Wolves, in sheeps
clothing, as also forewarning us of their extraordinary diligence, power,
cunning, stratagems to deceive and seduce men to their damnable Errors; of the
multitudes of men they shall seduce; and of the extraordinary perilousnesse of
the last times under the Gospel, when many more erroneous spirits and seducing
Heretics (transforming themselves into the Angels of light) should arise and
spring up every where, then did in all former ages under the Law, (where we
read of no such See Epiphanius, Irenaeus, Augustine, Alfonsus de Castro and
others, Advers. Haereses.
variety of Heresies, Blasphemies, Errors, and dangerous Schisms as have
sprouted up and overspread the whole world under the Gospel) is an
unanswerable Argument to satisfy all men's consciences, who have any care of
their own or others souls, that not only all godly Ministers, and Christians,
by instruction, and admonition, but all Christians Princes, Magistrates,
States, by severe Laws, yea corporal and capital Censures, where need is,
should more diligently suppress and cut off Heresy, Heretics, False
Teachers, Blasphemers, obstinate Schismatics, and Apostates, under the Gospel,
then ever godly Magistrates, Princes, People did under the Law, when these were
not so dangerous, so numerous, so contagious, and pernicious, as now: For as
God in the Old Testament is most copious in admonishing men, to beware of
Idolatry, and such False Prophets, and Idolaters, who would seduce them to
worship Idol-gods, which then abounded; and as godly Princes, Magistrates were
then most diligent in punishing Idolaters and seducers, even with death,
according to Gods Law, which frequently enjoins them to punish such with death,
because the sin of Idolatry (which then overspread the heathen world) was at
that time most common, most dangerous, and that to which Gods own people most
frequently revolted by reason of the multitudes of Idolaters round about them;
of the many strong enticements, and their own proneness thereunto. So upon the
like reason, the New Testament is far more frequent in exhorting Christians
under the Gospel to beware of Heretics, Schismatics, and False Teachers, then
of Idolaters; and of Heresy and Errors in Religion, then of Idolatry, because
Idolaters under the Gospel (when most Idolatrous Nations should be converted,
and the vanity, the false-hood of Idolatry fully discovered) should be nothing
so dangerous, so infectious, so numerous, so diligent and cunning to seduce men
as Heretics, Schismatics, False Teachers; and Idolatry, nothing so apt to
seduce men to it as heretical and erroneous Tenets, which have a more specious
show of truth, and greater color of warrant from the Scriptures, then
Idolatry. Wherefore godly Kings, Magistrates, States should be more severe and
vigilant against obstinate Heretics, Seducers, False Teachers, Heresy, etc.
then against professed Idolaters or Idolatry, wherewith their people are seldom
endangered, seduced; and the many reiterated Caveats against them in the
Gospel, will warrant them to proceed against such as capitally, as severely
under the Gospel, as godly Magistrates and Princes proceeded against Idolaters
and False Teachers under the Law. That Christian Kings, States, Magistrates,
under the Gospel, have the self-same Power and Commission as godly Kings,
States, Magistrates had under the Law, I have formerly manifested, and is
undeniably proved by See Gualther Hom 76. in Epist. ad Romans
ROMANS 13. 1. to 6. 1 TIMOTHY 2. 1, 2. TIT. 3. 1, 2. 1 PET. 2. 13, 14, 15. compared
with 2 SAMUEL 23. 3. 1 KING. 10. 9. PSALM. 101. 8. PSALM. 78. 71, 72. ISA. 16. 5.
c. 32. 1. PROVE. 20. 2. 8. 20. c. 24. 21, 22. c. 25. 5. c. 29. 4. 16. and other
texts. Yea it is a Maxim under the Gospel as well as under the Law, That a
right hand must be cut off, and a right eye pulled out, and any member
(especially the corrupt Members of a Christian Church or State) destroyed by
the Magistrate, rather then the whole body infected, endangered, destroyed,
MAT. 5. 29. 30. c. 18. 8. MARK 9. 45. JOH. 11. 50, 51, 52. c. 18. 14. ROMANS 5.
7, 8. GAL. 5. 12. As therefore pious Kings and Magistrates under the Old
Testament might lawfully cut off one or more Idolaters, Seducers, Blasphemers
Apostates, to preserve the whole Church and State from destruction, infection,
ruin, and avert Gods wrath, DEUTERONOMY. 7. 2. 4. c. 13. 7. 9, 10, 11. 15, 16, 17.
NUMBER. 16. 26. c. 25. 4. to 14. So by like reason may Christian Kings, States,
Magistrates under the Gospel off rotten Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers, and
the like putred Members from the body of their Churches and States by capital
punishments, to ward off Gods Judgments from the rest; as well as Traitors,
Murderers, Thieves, and other Malefactors, as the forequoted texts, together
with the 1 COR. 5. 6, 7. 13. ROMANS 13. 3. 4. fully evidence.

But lest this should not fully satisfy, I shall next proceed to Arguments
drawn Argum. 6.
from the New Testament only, wherein I shall thus argue in the sixth place.

Magistrates, Kings, Rulers, and the Higher powers under the Gospel it self are
ordained, continued by God and men for this very end among others, to be a
terror to evil doers and workers; to be Gods Ministers, Avengers to execute
wrath upon them that do evil, and not to bear the sword in vain, being sent FOR
THE PUNISHMENT OF EVIL DOERS: Nay, Christians themselves are to obey, submit
unto them, and enjoined to pray for them, that under them they may live a
peaceable life IN ALL GODLINESS and HONESTY, they being the Ministers of God
for their good, ROMANS 13. 1. to 6. 1 PET. 2. 13, 14. TIT. 3. 1. 1 TIMOTHY 2. 1, 2,
3. Yea Christ himself commands his disciples when they should be brought before
them, nay SCOURGED, KILLED and PUT TO DEATH BY THEM, not to dispute their
power, as some do now, but to submit unto it (as he did to Pilates) MAT. 10.
17, 18. 21. LUKE 22. 12. 17. JOHN. 16. 2, 3. Upon which grounds, Paul being
brought before Festus, Felix, and Agrippa, and accused by the Jews of HERESY,
stirring up of sedition among the Jews throughout the world, teaching against
the Law, and defiling the Temple, justified himself, and denied these
accusations, but demurred not to their Jurisdiction; using this notable speech,
ACT. 25. 10. IF I BE AN OFFENDER, OR HAVE COMMITTED ANY THING WORTHY OF DEATH,
IREFUSE NOT TO DYE: BUT IF THERE BE NONE OF THESE THINGS WHEREOF THEY ACCUSE
ME, NOMAN MAY DELIVER UNTO THEM, I APPEAL UNTO CAESAR: Where Paul appeals not
from, but to the Supreme Civil Magistrate from the Jews, even in a case of
Religion, yea of Heresy, Schism, Superstition, as it was then accounted; not
refusing to dye, IF HE HAD DONE ANY THING WORTHY OF DEATH, and were guilty of
this charge.

Therefore by these Gospel Texts and Presidents, Christian Magistrates, Kings,
Rulers, and the Higher Powers under the Gospel, have right to inflict corporal,
pecuniary, and capital Punishments upon notorious dangerous Idolaters,
Apostates, Heretics, Blasphemers, False Teachers, and obstinate Schismatics,
who are evil doers in the highest degree, dishonoring and blaspheming God,
undermining Religion, subverting the faith of many, bringing upon themselves
and others swift damnation; disturbing the Peace, Order, Doctrins of the
Church, and bringing down Gods Wrath, Judgments on the Churches, States,
Kingdoms wherein they live, and destroy the very stock and faith of Christ as
much as in them lies, Romans 16. 17, 18. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Phil. 3. 2, Mat. 7.
15. cap. 23. 14. 26. 27. 28. Acts 20. 29, 30. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.
Tit. 3. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2* 3. Romans 1. 18. to the end. Revel. 2. 15. to 24.
1 Cor. 5. 6, 7. 13. Heb. 12. 15.

I suppose our Oppositers are not so impudent to deny, but that Christian
Princes, States, Magistrates under the Gospel may punish Traitors, Murderers,
Thieves, Witches, and other Idolaters, with corporal and capital punishments,
because they are evil doers; even by virtue of the forecited Texts; then by
the self same reason they must likewise punish all obstinate seducing
Heretics, Blasphemers, Schismatics etc. with the self-same punishments, who
are guilty of High Treason and Blasphemy against God himself, the Father, Son,
Spirit, Gospel, Christian Faith; Destroyers, Murderers of men's very souls; and
greater disturbers of the States and Churches wherein they live, then any
Thieves, Felons, Witches. Can any rational Christian think, that God would so
severely punish Idolaters, Blasphemers, and seducing Prophets under the Law
with inexorable death; and yet let them and Heretics escape unpunished under
the Gospel, Jam. 1. 17.
there being no variableness nor shadow of turning in him? That he would
appoint Magistrates to punish only the smallest offenses between man and man,
and not to correct and punish the most heinous offenses and Treasons against
himself, being his own Romans 13. 3, 4.
Avengers, Ministers, Vicegerents? Would it not be deemed a grand absurdity in
earthly Kings and Princes to give their Judges power only to enquire of, and
punish offenses against their Subjects, but not at all to enquire after, or
punish Treasons, Conspiracies, and Rebellions against their own Persons,
Crowns, Kingdoms? and shall we deem the most wise and just God guilty of such
a Solecism? Doubtless, as God himself under the Old Testament commanded
Idolaters, Blasphemers, Seducing Prophets, and Achan himself to be stoned to
death by all Israel, and after that burnt with fire, for breaking his covenant,
and meddling with the accursed thing; and thereby troubling and bringing Gods
wrath upon all Israel, so as they fled and fell before the men of Ai; Josh. 7.
25. 27. So by the like reason, justice, equity, commands Christian Princes,
Magistrates and people under the Gospel, to punish obstinate Heretics,
Idolaters, Blasphemers, False Teachers, and pernicious Schismatics, who
dishonor his name, despite his Spirit, subvert his Truth, corrupt, seduce and
destroy others, trouble the States and Churches wherein they live, and bring
Gods wrath upon them, with like capital punishments, when milder remedies will
not prevail; and these recited Texts will be a sufficient Commission to justify
such their proceedings; as all the subsequent Authors as well ancient as modern,
Protestants as Papists, assert.

My seventh Argument shall be from our Saviors own words Math. 12. 3^, 32.
Argum. 7.
Whosoever speaks a word against the son of man it shall be forgiven him, but
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, and the BLASPHEMY against the Holy
Ghost, SHALL NOT BE FORGIVEN IN THIS WORLD, nor in the World to come. I have
formerly proved from Levit. 24. 10. to 17. and other Texts* That Blasphemy was
to be punished with death by the Civil Powers under the Law: Our Savior by this
Expression; Shall not be forgiven in this World (which cannot be thought
superfluous) implies, if not asserts, That Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
should be thus punished by Christian Magistrates under the Gospel even in this
world: whence some conceive S. John in his first Epistle c. 5. v. 16. phraseth
it, in this respect among others: A sin UNTO DEATH: that is* a sin to be
punished with temporal, as well as eternal death. And that our Saviors words:
Shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world etc. imply, that the Christian
Magistrates must not pardon such Blasphemy, but punish it with death in this
world; as is clear by the next words, Neither in the world to come. So as the
plain sense of these words is: That Blasphemy and speaking of words against the
Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven by the Magistrates, nor Ministers, but
punished by temporal death, and 1 Timothy 1. 20*
delivery over to Satan, (the case of Hymenaeus and Alexander in part) in this
world: nor yet pardoned by God, but punished by him with eternal death in the
world to come. Which being the soundest Exposition of these Words in learned
men's opinions: (which no ways prove a Popish Purgatory, as the Papists dream)
will sufficiently warrant the punishment of such Blasphemy by the Christian
Magistrate, even with death, under the Gospel, as well as under the Law.

My eighth Argument is drawn from Hebrews 10. 26. to 31. For if Argum. 8.
we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversary. He that
despised Moses Law DYED WITHOUT MERCY under two or three witnesses (and that in
case of Idolatry, Apostasy, and Blasphemy, to which this Text relates,
Deutronomy 13. Verse 6, 7, 8, 9. Chap. 17. 8, 9, 10. Leviticus 24. Verse 10. to
17.) OF HOW MVCH SORER PUNISHMENT suppose ye SHALL HE BE THOUGHT WORTHY, Who
has TRODDEN UNDER FOOT the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant, where with he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace? For we know him that has said, Vengeance is mine, I
will recompense says the Lord: And again; The Lord will judge his people. It is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. From this text (as
likewise from Heb. 2. 1, 2. and cap. 6. 1. to 9. which are in some sort
paralelled with it) it is most apparent:

First, that the sins of Apostasy, Blasphemy, Heresy, contempt of Christ and
his blood, and despiting of his Spirit, by Christians, are far more heinous,
great, and more unpardonable under the Gospel then they were under the Law.

Secondly, that they are worthy of much sorer punishment under the Gospel, then
under the Law: Wherefore since those who were guilty of them and despised Moses
Law dyed without mercy (by the hand of the Magistrate and people) under two or
three witnesses under the Law; those who are guilty of them under the Gospel,
deserving much sorer punishment, may likewise be put to death by the Christian
Magistrate without mercy, and punished with more severe temporal punishments
then any were under the Law; because their sin is more heinous, and deserves
much sorer punishment, as the text expressly resolves; which I wish our
Opposites, and all Christian States, Magistrates would seriously consider, who
deem the times of the Gospel times of greater indulgence, connivance, and mercy
toward such capital Transgressors, then the times of the Law.

Thirdly, that if Magistrates and others neglect, or refuse to punish such
enormious Transgressors under the Gospel, God himself will take vengeance on,
judge, and recompense them, and they shall fall into the hands of the living
God; which is a more fearful thing then to fall into the hand of men.

Now if any should hence infer (as our Opposites do) that such must be left
Object.
wholly to the hands, judgment and vengeance of God himself, who reserves such
for his own Tribunal, and has exempted them from the inferior Magistrates
Jurisdiction by this text.

I answer, that the text will warrant no such inference: For first, it is but a
bare Answ.
recital of Gods own Words in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. 39, 40, 41, 42,
43. Now in the Old Testament, the vengeance, punishment inflicted by God
himself upon Apostates, Idolaters, as on the Israelites, Midianites,
Canaanites, and others, did not exclude but include the Temporal Magistrates
Censures, and the use of secondary Instruments; as is most apparent by Exodus
32. 26. to the end; Where Moses SLEW about three thousand men for worshipping
the Golden calf, and yet God plagued the people for the same sin too: and
Numb. 25. 3. to 16. Where Moses for the sin of Peor hanged up the heads of the
people before the Lord against the Sun; the Judges of Israel slew every one his
men that were joined unto Baal Peor, and Phineas slew Zimri and Cozbi with a
Javelin; and yet God himself at the same time slew twenty four thousand more of
the people with the Plague for the same sin. And by Josh. chap. 9. to 13. and
Acts 13. 19. Where God himself uses the Israelites to destroy his enemies the
Canaanites, and other Idolatrous Nations. Therefore this sentence under the New
Testament, Vengeance is mine, etc. no more exempts such Malefactors, as the
text speaks of, from the capital punishments of the Magistrates and others,
under the Gospel, then it did under the Law.

Secondly, The Gospel informs us, Romans 13. 4. That every Christian Ruler and
Magistrate, is the Minister of God, and his REVENGER, to execute wrath upon him
that does evil: And their Vengeance and Judgment is not their own but Gods, on
whose Tribunal they sit, and whose Person they represent, as is evident by
Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment, for THE JUDGMENT IS
GODS. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. And Jehoshaphat said to the Judges, take heed what ye do;
for ye judge not for men, but FOR THE LORD, who is with you in the Judgment.
Prove. 29. 26. Many seek the face of a Ruler, but every man's Judgment COMES
FROM THE LORD. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in
thee, to set thee ON HIS THRONE to be KING FOR THE LORD THY GOD, because the
Lord loved Israel, therefore made he thee King over them, to do Justice and
Judgment. Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign, and Princes DECREE JUSTICE. And Dan.
4. 24. The most high RULES IN THE KINGDOM OF MEN, and gives it to whomsoever
he will: As God and Christ are said to preach the Gospel in and by the
Ministers of it; as our Antagonists themselves will grant: So they are likewise
said to execute wrath and vengeance in and by the Magistrates. Therefore this
fond Objection (whereon our Opposites much insist) must needs evaporate into
smoke; and this Text remain an unanswerable proof for the Christian Magistrates
power to punish Apostates, Heretics, Blasphemers, Contemners of Christ, his
blood, his Covenant, and the Spirit of Grace, with more grievous corporal and
capital punishments under the Gospel, then under the Law.

My ninth Argument shall be from the 2 Pet. 2. 1. to 14. But there were false
Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you,
Argum. 9.
who privily shall bring in DAMNABLE HERESIES, even denying the Lord that bought
them; and shall BRING UPON THEMSELVES SWIFT DESTRUCTION. And many shall follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken
off. And through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise of
you; whose judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation
slumbreth not: For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down
into hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
Judgment: And spared not the old World, but saved Noah the eight person, a
preacher of righteousness, bringing in the Flood upon the world of the
ungodly: And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned
them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should
live ungodly, etc. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished;
But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and
despise government; presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to
speak evil of dignities: Whereas Angels, which are greater in power and might,
bring not railing accusations against them before the Lord: But these, as
natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things
they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption: And shall
receive the reward of unrighteousness, etc. The very same expressions in
substance, if not in words, we have repeated in Jude, v. 4. to 23.

From these considerable texts I shall Observe: First, That False Teachers under
the New Testament are in the same rank and condition as false Prophets under
the Old; therefore liable to the like Capital Punishment under the Gospel, as
false Prophets under the Law, which I have formerly proved. Secondly, That
these False Teachers shall privily (at first, but more openly afterward) bring
in Damnable Heresies; or as the Greek phrase renders it, Heresies of Perdition
or Destruction (...) that is, Heresies deserving a Sentence of Destruction,
because they bring Perdition to the souls and bodies of those who broach and
embrace them, yea to the Churches, States wherein they are vented and
tolerated, Rev. 2. 14 to 24. Thirdly, That such false Teache^^ shall bring upon
themselves SWIFT DESTRUCTION; The word (...), which we English Destruction; is
often times in the New Testament ^ied for the cutting off or destruction of a
man's person by a violent and unnatural death, by men or other creatures,
through the just Judgment of God* a^ Luk* 17. 27. 29. The flood came and
destroyed them all; It rained fir^ heaven and destroyed them all: 1 Cor. 10. 9.
They were (...) Matthew. 21. 41. He will miserably destroy those wicked (...)
Barrabas and destroy Jesus: And sometimes for a j^ way of Censure: as Jam. 4.
12. There is one Lawgiver who (...) save, and to DESTROY: Matthew. 10. 28. Fear
him who is able (...) both soul and body in hell. From this acception of the
word (...) destroy, in the New Testament, I conceive the meaning of Peter (...)
false Teachers who bring in damnable and destructive Heresies ^n themselves (by
these their Heresies when detected) SW^JCTION, in a twofold sense: First, from
the Christian) (...) out of zeal to God and the peoples souls whom they would
seduce, shall (...) proceed against, and destroy their persons with capital
punishments: Secondly, From God himself in man's default, who by some exemplary
Judgments will destroy their persons here, yea their souls and bodies in hell for
ever hereafter: 2 These. 1. 8, 9. Fourthly, That such false Teachers Destruction
by the Magistrate, cannot be called Persecution, no more then a Traitors or
Murderers, because they bring it upon themselves by their Damnable Heresies,
and obstinate perseverance in them. Fifthly, That many shall (in the last times)
follow the ways and damnable Heresies of False Teachers: and therefore it is no
wonder that such multitudes follow after such seducing New-Lights and false
Teachers now. Sixthly, That by reason of these false Teachers calumnies and
Heresies, the very way of truth shall be evil spoken of, and cried down among
their followers; as now it is more then ever in our memory by New-Lights and
Sectaries; who style all others but themselves; See M. Dels Epistle and Sermon;
and Mr Edwards Gangraenaes.
The carnal and Antichristian Church; The Clergy*Antichristian, etc. and
themselves; The Saints; The Faithful; Gods peculiar Portion, the anointed ones
etc. Seventhly, That false* Teachers are for the most part exceeding covetous,
and make Merchandise of men's souls. Eighthly, That they are very Lascivious,
and usually walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, as See M Edw.
Gangraenaes.
many of our Anabaptists, and Dippers of naked women, both in the night and day
time, proclaim themselves to be. Ninthly, That they are presumptuous,
self-willed, despise Government, speak evil of dignities, and bring railing
accusations against them; never so really verified as by our false Teachers,
See Lilburnes and Overtons Libels; The Arraignment of Persecution; Englands
Birthright etc and Mr Edw. Gangraennes.
Separatists, Anabaptists, and New-Lights at this present, who despise and
speak against all Church Government in a most presumptuous manner; speaking
evil and bringing railing accusations against our Parliament, Assembly,
Magistrates, Ministers, Church, Laws, Covenant, Directory; and what not, both
in Press and Pulpit. Tenthly, That these false Teachers damnation and their
followers judgment now of a long time lingreth not, and their damnation
slumbreth not: and that these as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed, shall utterly perish in their own corruption, and receive the reward
of unrighteousness at the last, either from the hands of the Christian
Magistrate, who justly may, yea ought to destroy and cut off such with the
Sword of Justice, or else by the avenging hand of that just God, who spared not
the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell: drowned the Old World with a
Flood, and turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes; who is as just,
as severe now as ever.


If any hence Object from Verse. 9. That the Christian Magistrate has no
authority Object.
to punish such false Teachers who bring in damnable Heresies, etc. because God
reserves the wicked to the day of Judgment to be punished.

I Answer, that the Argument holds not.

First, Because God forbearing his own immediate punishing of men till the Answ.
day of Judgment, is no supersedeas to the Magistrates punishment of them
here: for then no kind of impenitent Malefactors should be punished by the
Magistrates in this life, because God reserves his own punishing of them till
the day of Judgment: So that this position, if admitted, would wholly take away
the Civil Christian Magistrates Judicatory and Power, contrary to Romans 13. 4.
and 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. and condemn Gods proceedings against Idolaters, etc. in
the O. Testament.

Secondly, Because Gods own punishing of such here with Plagues and other
temporal punishments, no ways impeacheth nor hinders the executions of the
Magistrates Censures on them; as I have formerly proved.

Thirdly, The Apostle here informs us; that such men's damnation slumbreth not,
and their Judgment lingreth not, and that they bring upon themselves swift
destruction: Therefore their punishment is not always to be respited to the
general day of Judgment, but to be executed speedily on them here.

Fourthly, The reserving such to the day of Judgment to be punished, is not to
be understood here of the general day of Judgment to come hereafter; but of the
day of their particular Judgment here; as is clear by the preceding Verses; The
day of Judgment to the Old World was the day when God brought the Flood upon
them; the day of Judgment to Sodom and Gomorrah, was the day God turned them
into ashes, and condemned them with an overthrow: and the day here meant to
which God reserves such Falls Teachers, is the day wherein he brings swift
destruction upon them by the Magistrates Sword of Justice, or his own immediate
Judgments; not the general day of Judgment; for then their destruction so long
deferred, would not be swift, and their Judgment and Damnation would justly be
said to linger, to slumber, contrary to the Text*

Fifthly, Admit it meant of the general day of Judgment, yet God reserves not
False Teachers and damnable Heretics till that day to be punished with eternal
damnation and destruction, but where Magistrates neglect to punish them with
temporal damnation and destruction, which through Gods blessing might be a
means to free them from eternal. So that this Text duly considered, is in my
apprehension a sufficient warrant and commission for all Christian Magistrates
under the Gospel, speedily to punish all falls Teachers, who privately or openly
bring in damnable Heresies with swift destruction, and capital censures
inflicted by them upon conviction, in a way of Justice.

My ninth Argument is this:

Heretics, False Teachers, Seducers, and obstinate Schismatics are styled,
not Argum. 9.
only in the Old but New Testament, Foxes, little foxes, Wolves in sheeps
clothing, ravenous, grievous Wolves who spoil and devour the Flock; yea,
Thieves and Robbers, who come only to steal, kill, and destroy Christ's sheep,
and the like. Cant. 2. 15. Math. 7. 15. John 10. 8. to 14. Acts 20. 29, 30. And
not only Ministers, but likewise godly Magistrates are the Shepherds and
Pastors of Christ's flock, to preserve, defend them from, and chase away, take,
and if need be, destroy and kill these Foxes, Wolves, Thieves, Robbers, 2 Chronicles.
18. 16. Psa. 78. 76. 71, 72, Isa. 49. 23. Cant. 2. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 2.

As therefore Shepherds lawfully may and ought to drive away Foxes, Wolves,
Thieves, Lions, Bears, and other beasts of prey from their sheepfolds, and take
and kill them too, for the preservation of their flocks, as David did kill the
Lion and the Bear that devoured his Fathers sheep, 1 Samuel 17. 34, 35, 36. Cant.
2. 15. Jer 31. 4. John 10. 12, 13. So doubtless godly Christian Magistrates
and Shepherds under the Gospel, may, yea ought to chase away and banish these
pernicious Foxes, these ravenous grievous Wolves, Bears, Lions, Thieves which
devour their flocks, and apprehend and kill them too where they see just cause,
to preserve Christ's sheep from being devoured, and his flock from being
destroyed by them: These very Titles wherewith the Scripture brands them, being
a See here p. ^42.
sufficient warrant for such proceedings. We read Exodus 21. 28, 29. If an Ox
gore a man or woman, that they dye, then the Ox shall be surely stoned, and the
owner quit: But if the Ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it
has been testified to his owner, and he has not kept him in, but that he has
killed a man or woman, the Ox shall be stoned, and the OWNER ALSO SHALL BE PUT TO
DEATH. Certainly if an Ox that kills the body but of one man or woman with his
horn must thus be stoned to death, and his owner too, for not restraining him,
if he formerly used pushing; then much more may seducing Heretics. False
Teachers, Blasphemers, Schismatics, who gore the souls of hundreds to death,
and those Magistrates who willingly countenance and keep them not in by Laws
and Punishments from goring the souls of others that they dye, be punished, and
put to death.

My tenth Argument shall be this: The Apostle informs us Gal. 5. 19, 20. Argum.
10.
That Idolatry, Schisms, Heresies are works of the flesh, not Spirit; and
couples them with Witchcrafts and Murders; adding, that those who do such
things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: Yea he informs us Romans 1. 32. That
those who commit such things ARE WORTHY OF DEATH. And 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. The Law
is not made for the righteous man (that is, to restrain and punish him) but for
the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy
and profane, for murderers of Fathers and murderers of Mothers, for
man-slayers, etc. and ANY OTHER THING CONTRARY TO SOUND DOCTRINE: Whereas
against the fruits of the Spirit there is no Law, Gal. 5. 22, 23. that is to
punish them, or any Christians for them. Whence I thus argue.

If Heresies, Idolatry, Schisms, and Blasphemies too, (as Christ resolves Mat.
15. 19, Mar. 2. 22.) be works of the flesh, not Spirit, as well as Witchcraft,
Murders, deserving death as well as they; and the Law of God is made for the
punishment of the disobedient, ungodly, unholy, and profane, and whatsoever is
contrary to sound doctrine, as well as for Murderers of Fathers and Mothers, and
Man-slayers; then the Christian Magistrate under the Gospel, when he sees just
cause, may and ought by the Law of God to punish men with corporal, and capital
punishments for Heresies, Idolatry, Blasphemies, and dangerous Schisms, being
works of the flesh, as well as for Murder, Witchcraft; and such as murder and
destroy men's souls, as well as those who only murder their bodies; since no
reason can be rendered out of Scripture, why they should punish some works of
the flesh only, and not others.

But the Supposition is true, and ratified by the forecited texts.

Ergo, the Sequel cannot be gainsaid, but must be granted. Object.


If Mr Dells Right Reformation, p. 20, 21, 22, 23. comparedwith p. 1, 2.
any Object, That the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom are a spiritual people, born
of the Spirit, and therefore without the reach of any outward force, and beyond
not only the power, but cognizance of the Magistrate and secular powers, which
are but a carnal and worldly Institution.

I answer, First, that the Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies of such as
are pretended to be a spiritual people and Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, born of
Answ.
the Spirit, are merely carnal and works of the flesh, not Spirit, as Paul
expressly resolves; therefore admit the Magistrate and secular power to be but a
carnal Ordinance, they are yet within the reach and cognizance both of their
power and censure, as well as Treasons, Murders and other Felonies of such
Saints and spiritual people.

Secondly, The Argument is but a mere fallacy: Flesh and blood and the Civil
Magistrate has nothing to do with them that are born of the Spirit, in things
of the Spirit. Ergo, It has nothing to do with them in the fruits and works of
their flesh, which deserve both punishment and censure.

Thirdly, This Objection casts a scandal and reproach upon Magistrates and
their Authority, in calling them, the power of the world, flesh and blood, a
car^^l Ordinance, outward and secular power; as if they were not Gods
Ordinance, as well as Ministers of the Word, for the good of men, and punishment
of all Malefactors, as well Saints as others, as is resolved Row. 13. 1. to 6.

Fourthly, It is a mere Popish Argument used by the Pope and Popish Clergy in
former times to exempt themselves from all secular power, abusing that text of
1 Cor. 2. 15. But he that is spiritual judges all things; yet he himself is
judged of no man: (which I wonder Mr Dell forgot to quote;) as those who now
object it may read at large in Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. p. 245. and sundry
Popish Authors De Immunitate et Exemptione Clericorum. So that these New-Lights
who pretend themselves most opposite to Popery, do but in truth revive it among
us in an higher degree then ever, by giving to all those they please to style
Saints, spiritual people, or the faithful, the very same, yea a greater
exemption from the civil Magistrates power, then ever the Papists gave unto
their Clergy only, and no others.

My eleventh Argument is this: Argum. 11.


Private Christians are strictly and frequently enjoined to beware of, avoyde,
turn away from, and not to receive, or admit into their houses, any Heretics,
Apostates, Schismatics, or false Teachers: Matthew. 7. 15. Romans 16. 17, 18.
Phil. 3. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 16. 17. c. 3. 5, 6. c. 4. 15. 2 Pet. c. 3. 17. 2 John 10.
11. Yea when and where there were no Christian Magistrates to restrain and
punish them, the Apostles themselves delivered them unto Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 19,
20. Wished Fromwhence Ferom, Gualter Beza, Bellarmine, and many others, infer;
the lawsulness of punishing Heretics with death.
that they were even cut off for troubling the Church, Gal. 5. 12. Willed
Ministers to stop their mouths, rebuke them sharply, and after the first and
second admonition to reject; because they subverted whole houses, and overthrew
the faith of many, Tit. 1. 11. 13. c. 3. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 18.
And the Churches of Pergamus, Thyatira, and the Angels of them, when they had
no Christian Magistrates, are particularly blamed by God, for suffering such
who held the doctrine of Baalam and of the Nicholaitans which Christ hated: and
for SUFFERING that woman. Jezebel, who called her self a Prophetess, to teach
and seduce his servants to commit fornication and to eat things sacrificed unto
Idols. Threatening to cast her, and those that committed fornication with her,
into great tribulation, unless they repented; Yea, saying, I WILL KILL HER
CHILDREN WITH DEATH; and all the Churches shall know, that I am he which
searches the reins and heart; and I will give unto every of you according to
your works, Romans 2. 14. to 24.

Therefore when and where there are Christian Magistrates; they may and must by
like reason, expel, reject, banish such out of their Dominions; not admit them
into their territories; cut them off for troubling the Church: stop their
mouths; and not suffer them to teach and seduce their people: yea, kill them
and their children (where there is just cause) with death: since Christ himself
threatens to do it (not only immediately by himself, but also mediately by the
Magistrates, who are his Ministers, Avengers, and must not bear the Sword in
vain, but punish such evil doers with it, Romans 13. 3, 4.) and to render to them
according to their works.

The Argument holds undeniably, because Christian Princes and Magistrates are
the Nursing fathers of the Church, to defend, protect it against these Seducers
and devouring wolves, to preserve the peace, the unity of it, and the purity of
Doctrine and worship in it, as the Scripture warrants, and Divines have ever
asserted in all ages of the Church, til some New-Lights and Sectaries of late
opposed it in others, to procure impunity to themselves, to vent their Errors
without control.

My twelfth Argument shall be deduced from these following Gospel Texts, Argum.
12.
Luke 19. 27. Where Christ, after the Parable of the Talents, concludes thus:
But those mine Enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither AND SLAY THEM BEFORE MY FACE. Christ does not slay them immediately
himself, but the Magistrates who are his Ministers; servants Romans 13. 4.
revengers; they are to bring and slay them before his face, for their Treason
and Rebellion against him. Mat. 21. 33. to 44. Mark 12. 1. to 12. Luke 20. 9,
to 19. Where the Lord of the Vineyard, who let it out to husbandmen; who stoned
his servants and killed his Son, when he comes; he will miserably DESTROY those
wicked men and let out his Vineyard to other husbandmen, which shall render him
the fruits in due season; (which Parable was experimentably verified in the
destruction of Jerusalem and the Jews by the Romans.) And it is added:
Whosoever shall fall on this stone (Christ) shall be broken; but on whomsoever it
shall fall, IT SHALL GRIND HIM TO POWDER. Mat. 22. 2. to 8. The Kingdom of Heaven
is like unto a certain King which made a marriage for his son; and sent his
servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding, but they would not come,
etc. And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew
them: But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth his armies,
and DESTROYED THOSE MURDERERS, and burnt up their City: Really verified in the
Jews too. To which I shall subjoyn Rev. 11. 17, 18. We give thee thanks, O Lord
God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken
unto thee thy great power, and have reigned: And the time is come thou
should DESTROY THEM WHICH CORRUPT THE EARTH. Compared with Rev. 17. 5. 16.
where it is thus prophesied of the destruction of the whore of Babylon the
great, the mother of fornications, and abominations of the earth. The ten horns
which thou sawst upon the beast (which are 10. Kings) these shall hate the whore,
and make her desolate and naked, and SHALL EAT HER FLESH and BURN HER WITH FIRE;
for God has put it into their hearts TO FULFILL HIS WILL. And Rev. 19. 19, 20,
21. And I saw the beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their armies gathered
together to make war against him that sat on the horse: And the beast was
taken, and with him the false prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that
worshipped his image. These both were cast into A LAKE WHICH BURNS WITH FIRE
and BRIMSTONE. And the remnant WERE SLAIN WITH THE SWORD of him that sat upon
the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fouls were
filled with their flesh. From all these Parabolical Expressions in the New
Testament it self, of things to be acted by God the Father, by Jesus Christ
himself and his servants (the Magistrates) under the Gospel, I shall draw these
Conclusions necessarily flowing from them.

First, That God the Father and Jesus Christ are altogether as rigorous and
severe (if not far more ridged and merciless) against their professed Enemies,
Antichristian Opposers, Persecuters, and false Prophets under the Gospel, as
they were under the Law, which these Texts, together with Heb. 2. 1, 2. and c.
10. 26. to 32. and Rev. 6. 10. to the end; undeniably manifest.

Secondly, That such as those shall be punished with capital and corporal
punishments even under the Gospel by Christ his Ministers, Soldiers, Revengers,
who bear his Sword; (who are principally, orthodox Christian Kings and
Magistrates) as these several expressions manifest; Slay them before my face*
He will miserably destroy these wicked men, and murderers, burn up their City,
grind them to powder; thou shall destroy them which corrupt the earth: The ten
horns shall make the whore desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn
her with fire; And the beast and false prophet were taken and cast into a lake
which burns with fire and brimstone (the ground of the ancient Writ De
Haeretico comburendo, and of burning Heretics;) and the rest were slain with
the sword, and all the fouls were filled with their flesh.

If any Object, Mr Dells Right Reformation, p. 25.
that the sword wherewith those last are said to be slain, is nothing Object.
else but the sword of the Spirit and preaching of the Word; because it is
said, that this sword proceeded out of the mouth of him that sat upon the
horse: which they further confirm by Isa. 11. 4. He shall smite the earth with
the rod of his mouth, and by the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked: 2
These. 2. 3. And then shall that wicked one be revealed whom the Lord shall
consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his
coming; concluding hence, That God does all by the power of his Word, even his
punishments and destructions he executes by the Word.

I answer: That the Sword proceeding out of the mouth of him that sat upon
Answ.
the horse, in this Text; is not the mere preaching of the Word and Gospel, as
is pretended; but Christ's denouncing of Sentence, of Judgment, and executing
the same upon them, not as a Preacher, but as a Judge: this is clear by Rev.
17. 2. Come hither and I will show thee the Judgment of the great whore etc.
Rev. 18. 8. She shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord who
JVDGETH her: Rev. 16. 21, 22. Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy
Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged you on her. And a mighty Angel took
up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying; Thus with
violence shall the great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more
at all etc. Rev. 20. 1, 2, 4, 5. I heard a voice of much people in heaven,
saying; Allelujah, salvation, honor, and power unto the Lord our God (That SAT
ON THE THRONE as a Judge,) For true and righteous are his JVDGEMENTS; for he
has JVDGED the great where, which did corrupt the earth with her fornications,
and has avenged the blood of his Saints at her hands etc. It follows (in the
very next words to those objected) And I saw an Angel come down from heaven,
having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand: And he
laid hold on the Dragon, the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and
bound him a thousand years; and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him
up etc. And I saw THRONES and they sat upon them, and JUDGMENT was given unto
them, etc. And Verse 10, 11, 12, etc. And the Devil that deceived them was cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophet are,
and shall be tormented day and night, for ever and ever. And I saw a great white
Throne, and him that sat on it etc. And I saw the dead small and great stand
before God: And I saw the Books opened; and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the Books, according to their works etc. By all
which it is undeniable, that the sword of the mouth wherewith those were slain;
was only Christ's Sentence of Judgment and Execution passed upon the whore, the
false Prophet, beast, etc. by himself, sitting as a Judge, or King upon his
Throne of Judgment, and his executioners; not the preaching of the Word by
himself or his Ministers, as a Prophet preaching out of a Pulpit: And in this
sense Judges and Magistrates when they pass sentence of death upon Traitors,
Rebels, or other Capital Malefactors, are, and may properly be said, to slay
them with the breath of their lips, with the sword that goes out of their
mouth: because this their sentence makes them liable to death, and brings death
upon them by the hand of the Executioner, who has no power to slay or behead
them, but only by the Judges sentence, the original cause of their execution.
And in this sense are the other objected Texts to be taken, By the breath of
his mouth shall he slay the wiched: Not by the preaching of the Word and Gospel,
as Mr Dell mistakes it: but by passing, inflicting a sentence of Death and
Destruction upon them as a Judge, sitting upon his Throne: In which relation,
the Christian Magistrates, rather the^ the Ministers, are his Vicegerents, to
whom he has delegated the condemning and executing power of capital
Malefactors of all sorts, Romans 13. 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Hence Rev. 17.
10. The ten horns (interpreted to be ten Kings v. 12.) are those that shall hate
the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire; and the Army of him that sat on the Throne are said, to take the
beast and false prophet, and cast them into a lake of fire and brimstone. From
these Texts therefore Christian Princes and Magistrates have sufficient warrant
to punish Apostates, Heretics, False Teachers, Blasphemers, and other open
Enemies of God and his truth, with corporal and capital penalties under the
Gospel, as well as anciently under the Law.

Many other Arguments might be deduced from Acts 5. 1. to 12, Mat. 21. 12. Joh
2. 13. to 18. Neh. 13. 23. 24. Gal. 5. 12.
other Texts of Scripture to this purpose; but these, I trust, are sufficient
to give satisfaction for the present.

I shall only add to these Arguments, the constant practice of many godly
Emperors, Kings, States, who, in all ages, since they became Christian, have
enacted Laws, and prescribed several pecuniary, corporal and capital
Punishments, and sometimes banishment against Heretics, false Teachers,
obstinate Schismatics, Apostates, and Blasphemers. To recite all their Laws at
large, would swel this Pamphlet into a large Volume, I shall give you, for the
most part, but an Epitome of the chiefest of them, which the studious may
peruse at leisure in the Authors out of which I quote them.

I shall begin with Laws and Punishments only against Heretics, Apostates,
false Teachers, or obstinate Schismatics, and then proceed to Laws, and
Punishments against Blasphemy and Blasphemers.

Ruffinus l. 1. c. 5. Socrates Schol. Hist. l. 1. c. 9. Cent. Magd. 4. c. 7.
545, 546.
Constantine the great (the first Christian Emperor) banished the grand
Heretic Arrius and his six followers: burned his Books, commanding those who
concealed them to be put to death; and protested he would banish all those who
would not subscribe the Decrees of the Council of Nice made against him. After
which he made a notable Edict against the Novatians, Valentinians, Marcianists,
Paulians, Phrygians, with all other Heretics and Schismatics of his time:
which being the first formal Law against Heretics that I find, and very full
and seasonable for our present time and Isle (wherein this Emperor was usserius
de Eccles. Brit. Primordiis c. 8. p. 172, etc.
both born and crowned) I shall transscribe Verbatim out of De vita Constantini,
l. 3. c. 61, 62, 63, 64
Eusebius, who records it, and informs us of the good effects it then produced.
VICTOR CONSTANTINUS MAX. AVG. HAERETICIS.
COgnoscite jam per legem quae a me sancita est, o Novatiani, Valentiniani,
Marcionistae, Pauliani, quique Cataphrygum nomen usurpatis, and omnes omnino,
qui per conspirationes a vobis conflatas, haereses and sectas etiam atque etiam
augere conamini: cognoscite inquam, quibus mendaciis vestrae doctrinae inanitas
implicata teneatur, and quatenus pestiferis quibusdam venenis vest^d usque eo
inficiatur disciplina, vt per eam integri ac valentes ad morbum, vivi dutem ad
sempiternum interitum abstrahantur. O veritatis inimici, hosts vitae,
internecionis authors and conciliarii, omnia apud vos veritati contraria,
turpibus consentientia maleficiis ineptiis and commenticiis fabulis exultantia.
Quibus certe mendacia struitis, premitis insontes, fidelibus, veritatis lucem
denegatis. Nam falsa visione et specie pietatis semper delinquentes, omnia
contagione vestra contaminatis, conscientias integras and labe vacuas
lethalibus plagis vulneratis: ipsum diem, poen^ dixerim, hominum oculis
adimitis. At quid attinet singula persequi, cum de vestris flagitiis, sicut
eorum natura postulat dicere, neque temporis angustia, neque occupationes,
quibus districti sumus, sinunt. Nam scelera vestra adeo grandia, adeo immensa
sunt, adeo etiam turpia and omni crudelitate redundantia, ut dies integer ad ea
explicanda non sufficeret; Imo vero ad hujusmodi rebus aures abducere,
oculosque avertere convenit, ne singulorum explanatione syncera and incorrupta
fidei nostrae professio commaculetur. Quid ergo? partiemurne ejusmodi malorum
contagionem longius serpere, praesertim cum longa dilatio faciat, ut sani ac
valentes ea tanquam pestifero morbo inficiantur? Cur igitur non cum maxima
celeritate ejusmodi pravitatis, ut ita dicam, radices animadversione and poena
publica amputamus?

Atque quo ista vestrae pestis pernicies longius grassari impediatur, per hanc
legem mandamus, ne quis vestrum posthac conventus cogere audeat. Et propterea
Note.
etiam jubemus, vt universae aedes vestrae, in quibus congressus illos
celebrare consuevistis, penitus evertantur, and haec cautio eo vim suam
porrigat, vt non modo non in publicis, sed ne in privatis quidem aedisiciis,
aut in locis ullis separatis, hujus vestrae superstitiosae amentiae factiones
coeant: At vero quod multo praestabilius est, si qui vestrum verae and syncerae
religionis curam habeant, ad Catholicam Ecclesiam revertantur, and ejus
sanctitatis sint participes, per quam poterunt ad veritatem pervenire:
fraudulenta vestrae perversae mentis astutia: hoc est, scelerata and perdita
Haereticorum and Scismaticorum seditio, omnino ab hac prospera temporum
nostrorum condition sejungatur. Nostrae enim prosperae ac beatae vitae
rationi, qua dei benificio frumiur, est admodum consentaneum, vt qui aetatem
bona spe sustentatam degant, ab omni vago and caeco errore ad rectam viam, a
tenebxis ad lucem, ab inscitia ad veritatem, a morte denique ad salutem
traducantur, ac quo provisio haec in curandis erroribus robur and firmitatem
sibi necessariam assequatur, mandavimus ut supra dictum est, ut omnia
superstitionisvestrae loca, in quibus convenire soleatis, omnia dico
haereticorum templa (si modo templa appellare convenit) sine recusatione aut
controversia diruantur, et diruta absque mora catholicae tradantur ecclesiae:
reliqua loca publico Reip. usui addicantur, ne ulla in posterum vobis conventus
celebrandi relinquatur faoultas. Sit igitur hoc ratum statumque ut post hunc
diem in nullo loco vel publico, vel privato nefarii vestri conventus in unum
coire audeant. The effects of this Decree are thus expressed by Eusebius. in the
next Chapter

Ad hunc modum occultae quasi latebrae and recessus eorum, qui alienam ab
Ecclesia catholica doctrinam and opinionem tenebant, Imperatorio edicto evoluti
patuerunt; bestiae etiam immanes, quae hujus erant impietatis authors,
exactae. Ex illis ver^ qui essent istorum impulsu in fraudem and errorem
inducti, alii Imperatoris minis perterriti, fallaci and fucata specie in
ecclesiam obrepere coeperunt, temporum conditioni callide and dissimulanter
cedentes; ac quoniam lex hominum libros perscrutari jusserat, tandem manifesto
deprehensi fuerunt hi, qui vetitas and interdictas illas arts ad hommum
perniciem comparatas consectati fuissent, qua de re omnibus ut dicitur opibus
viribusque claborant, ut simulatione sibi salutem adipiscerentur; Alii forte ad
spem, quae in deo Opt. Max. poni debet, vere and ex animo se transfer quos
cum ecclesiarum praesides accurate internoscere studerent, alteros ovium
pellibus obtectos, adumbrata specie se insinuare conantes, procul amandarunt;
alteros vero qui idem integra and incorrupta mente instituerent, ubi temporis
longinquitate explorando; de illis satis exquisite periculum fecissent, in
multitudinem ascititiorum ascripserunt. Hoc modo cum illis qui alienam ab
ecclesia opinionem, and doctrinam sequebantur, actum est, alios autem, qui, dum
in eorum dogmatum disciplina versabantur, nihil concepissent impietatis, sed
scismaticorum culpa se temere a communi Ecclesiae congregatione and frequentia
sejunxissent, abiecta omni cunctatione in Ecclesiam receperynt. Hi igitur
gregatim, tanquam ex colonia revertentes suam recuperarunt patriam, and
Ecclesiam matrem agnoverunt. A qua diu aberrantes, cum gaudio and laetitia ad
eam redierunt, membraque co^munis corporis fuere in unum coagmentata, and
concordiae quasi compagibus firm copulata; solaque catholica Dei Ecclesia in
so coalescens, tum resplenduit, cum nusquam Gentium vel Haereticae vel
Scismaticae factionis, vestigium reliquum quidem esset. Cujus praeclari
facinoris causam, Imperatoris Deo (cui solus ex omnibus Imperatoribus qui
aliquando extitissent curae erat) acceptam plane retulit.



This was the good effect of this Emperors Edict, a sufficient encouragement to
others to imitate his Example, who likewise Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 18. l.
11. c. 30. Sozomen, l. 7. c. 24. Justinian l. 1. Cod. Tit. 12. de Judaeis.
Chrysostom Orat. 2. Cont. Judaeos. Cent. Mag. 4. Col. 345, 346.
suppressed the seditious tumults and attempts of Heretics, by banishing them
into remote parts, and punished the Jews with severe corporal punishments for
their attempts against Christians and Christian Religion, and endeavoring to
repair the Temple at Jerusalem.

The Sozomen l. 3. c. 17. Cent: Magd. 4. Col. 546.
Sons of Constantine the great prohibited under pain of death, that none should
be circumcised after the maaner of the Jews.

The ^heodoret. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 2. 16. Socrates Schol. l. 5. c. 7.
Sozomen l. 7. c. 6. Ruffinus l. 1. c. 19. August. Epist 48. et de Correctione
Donatist. ad Bonifacium. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 12. c. 15. l. 13. c. 37. Surius
Council. Tom. 1. p 484. Tom. 2. p. 136. 215, 216. 1029 Cent. Mag. 4. Col, 545,
546. Cent, 5. Col. 770, 771. Cent. 6. Col. 444, 445
Emperors Gratianus, Valentinian, and Theodosius the Elder and Younger, as they
expelled the Arian Bishops and Ministers out of their Churches and placed
orthodox Bishops and Pastors in their stead; so they made Laws against them,
prohibiting their meetings, banishing them the City, and interdicting their
Ministry: Which Laws are recorded by Justinian Codicis lib. 1. Tit. 4. Lex. 1,
2. Yea, the Emperors Arcadius, Gratianus, Valentinian, Theodosius, Anastatius,
Marcianus, and Justinian, made sundry Laws against the Manichees,
Apollinarians, Novatians, Eunomians, Valentinians, Montanists, Priscillianists,
Marcionists, Eutichians, Donatists, Paulians, Euchratists, AND OTHER HERETICS,
TO THIS EFFECT: That they should neither preach, nor speak of their Heresies,
nor exercise their Ministry, nor vent any thing against the orthodox truth, nor
keep any assemblies in Churches or private houses, under pain of confiscation
of the places where they assembled; and they were to forfeit an hundred pounds
of gold to the Emperor, and fifty to the President; that all their goods,
Liberties, Offices, Titles, should be forfeited; that they should inherit no
lands, nor have power of buying, selling, or contracting after conviction, nor
to make any Will or Codicil: IN MORTEM QUOQUE Inquisitio TENDATUR: And that
they should likewise be put to death, their crime being greater then treason
against the Emperor: That the believers, receivers, defendors, and favorers of
Heretics be excommunicated for the same, and not conforming within one years
space should be accounted infamous, and not be admitted to any public offices,
Councels, Elections; nor to give testimony in any case, nor have power to make
a Will, nor to enjoy Lands as heirs and successors to any person, nor have
power to implead any man in any Court, nor to be Advocaters or Registers: That
those Heretics should enjoy no Military nor Civil Office; that all their
Heretical Books ( Mox flammis dedendus est; and cum omnibus suis
parti-CONCREMANDUS. Codex Theodosii l. 16. Tit. 4. Lex. 57.
some of their Persons to) should be publicly burnt: and that the Manichees
VLTIMO SVPPLISIO traderentur, quoniam his nihil relinquendum loci est, in quo
ipsis etiam elementis fiat iniuria: And they further Codex Theodosii l. 16.
Tit. 1. Lex. 4. and Tit. 3. Lex. 1.
Enacted, That if any condemned Heretics, gathered Churches, or raised any
tumults to the disturbance of the public peace: Vt seditionis auctores,
pacisque turbatae Ecclesiae ETIAM MAIESTATIS CAPITE AC SANGVINE SINT SVPPLICIA
LVITVRI: They were to be punished as authors of Sedition, disturbers of the
public peace and guilty of Treason, with the loss of their heads, and blood:
These several Laws are more largely recorded in Justinian Codic. lib. 1. Tit.
8. De Haereticis and Manichaeis, and Codex Theodosij lib. 16. Tit. 1. 4. The
self-same Emperor, together with the Emperor Constantius Enacted the like Laws,
and inflicted the self-same punishments upon Apostates from the Orthodox Faith
to Paganism, to Heresy and Judaism, registered at large by Justinian Cod. lib.
1. Tit. 10. De Apostatis, where you may peruse them, and in Codex Theodosii
lib. 16. Tit. 6, 7, 8. These Emperors likewise Enacted severe Laws for the
suppression of Idolatry and Pagan Religion: and the Emperors Constantius and
Julian Enacted this capital Law; PAENA CAPITIS subjugari praeeipimus eos, quos
operam sacrifitiis dare, vel colere simulacra constiterit; Codex Theodosii lib.
16. Tit. 8. lex. 6. These Edicts of theirs, suppressed, destroyed the
Eutichian, Nestorian, with other of these Heresies, as the historians of that
age relate, and Leo. Epist. 38. and 39. to the Emperor Marcianus and Pulcheria
the Empress, testify, and Epist. 91. The good effects of these Laws, that they
reclaimed, converted De multorum jam correctione guademus Non illos aut illos
homines, sed MULTAS CIVITATES, videmus fuisse Donatistas, nunc esse catholicas,
detestati vehemen ter Diabolicam seperationem, etc. August. Epist. 48.
many from their Heresies and Errors, and made them real converts, is at large
recorded by Saint Augustine in his 48. and 50. Epistles: this experimental good
fruit of them inducing him thus to retract his former opinion against punishing
Heretics with corporal punishments: Retractat. l. 2. c. 5.
Sunt duo libri mei, quorum titulus est, Contra partem Donati; in quorum primo
libro dixi, non mihi placere ullius secularis potestatis impetu Scismaticis ad
communionem violenter vehementerque arctari. Quod vere tunc mihi non placebat,
quia nondum expertus eram, vel quantum mali eorum auderet impunitas, vel
quantum eis in melius mutandis confer posset diligentin disciplina. Epist. 48.
Sed haec opinio mea nec contradicentium verbis, sed demonstrantium superabatur
exemplis: Primo mihi opporrebatur civitas mea, quae cum tota esset in part
Donati, AD VNITATEM CATHOLICAM TIMORE LEGVM IMPERIALIVM CONVERSAEST, quam nunc
videmus ita hujus vestra anim^fi^a^i^ perniciem detestari, vt in ea nunquam
suisse credatur. Ita aliae multae quae mihi nominatim commemorabantur, vt ipsit
rebus agnoscerem etiam in hac causa rest intelligi posse quod scriptum est. Da
sapienti occasionem, and sapientior erit, etc. which he seconds in the same
Epistle, and Epist. 50.

Optatus Contr. Par. lib. 3. Augustine Contr. Epist. Parmen. l. ^. c. 6, 7. in
Io^. Tract. 11. and Epist. 48. 50. 56. Retract. l. ^. ^. 5. ^ c^nt. (...). 5.
c. 9. col. 847, 848. Baronius An. 418. sect. 19, 20* usserius ^ de Brit. Eccl.
Primordiis 271, to 275.
About the year of our Lord 430. Divert of the Schismatical Dotatists were
slain and put to death for their Sedition, Schism, and Violences; which Saint
Augustine deemed lawful, and justified at the last when he perceived their
Schism and mischeifs could not else be suppressed, though he were formerly of
another opinion.

The Emperors ^ Honorius and Theodosius made a Law, for the Ganishing and
Punishment of Pelagius and C^lestius, the Broachers of the Pelagian Heresy and
their followers: wherein there is this notable claus: Hos ergo reper^^^
ubicunque de hoc tam nefando scelere conferentes, a quibuscunque jubemus
corripi, deductosque ad audientiam publicam, promiscue ab omnibus accusari; ita
vt probationem convicti criminis stilus publicus insequatur, ipsis inexerati
exilii deportatione damnatis. Decet enim originem vitii a conventu publico
sequestral; nec in communi eos celebritate consistere, qui non solum facto
nefario detestandi, verum etiam exemplo venenati spiritus sunt cavendi: Juvat
autem per omnem pene mundum, qua Imperium nostrum extenditur, hujusmodi
pro^^^lgata diffundi: Ne scientiae fortasse dissimulatio pastum praestet
errori: atque impune se quisque putet audire, quod condemnatum rigore publico
sese finxeret ignorare. Datum pridie Callendas Maiias, Ravennae, D D. N N.
Honorio XII. and Theodosio VIII. Augustis Consulibus.

Whereupon Palladius in pursuance of this Law made this Edict.
Exemplar Edicti propositi a Palladio Praefecto Praetorio.
Junius Quartus Palladius, Monaxius and Agricola, iterum Praefecti Praetotorio,
edixerunt.
In Pelagium atque Coelestium, Catholici dogmatis fidem scaevis tractatibus
destruentes, sententia principalis invalnit, vt venerabili Vrbe submoti,
bonorum concilio mulctarentur. Hoc igitur omnes admoneri oportet Edicto, ne
quis sinistrae persuasionis erroribus praestet assensum. Et si sit ille
plebeius, ac clericus, qui in caliginis hujus obscaena reciderit; a quocunque
tractus ad Judicem, sine accusatricis discretione personae, facultatum
publicatione nudains, irrevocabile patietur Exilium. Number super^a Majest as, vt
colligit ex secreti ignor atione reverentiam, it a ex incepta disputation^
injuriam.

Epiphanius contra Haeres. l. 2. Tom, 1, Haer. 66. Nicephorus Callist. Eccl.
Hist. l. 6. c, 31, 32.
Manes the Heretic, a Persian born, the first author of the Heresy of the
Manichees, about the fourth year of Aurelion the Emperor, grew to that madness
at last, as to style himself Christ, and the holy Ghost: and chose him twelve
Disciples, with whom he traveled over the Kingdom of Persia: from whence being
expelled as a manifest contemner of God: he was at last apprehended by command
of the King of Persia, and subjected to a Persian punishment, having his skin
flayed off his body, and then cast unto the dogs naked, to be devoured of them:
An end suitable to his damnable Heresies and Blasphemies: his skin was
afterward stuffed with Reeds, and kept for a monument to deterr others.

Enagrius l, 4. c, 11. Cent, Mag. 6. col. 445.
Justinian the Emperor condemned Severus by a promulged Law, and appointed most
grievous Punishments for his Followers: The Emperor Justin caused the Arian
Heresy and Arians to be extirpated and gave their Churches to the Orthodox
Christians. And the Heretic Jerome De Viris Illustri. bus.
Priscillian was slain by Maximus the Emperor.

Theodorus collect l. 2. Cent. Mag. 6. col. 445.
Theodoricus Apher inflicted Capital punishment upon his Deacon, (who being
Orthodox at first, Apostatized to the Arian Heresy, hoping to gratify his
Lord), saying; If thou have not kept thy faith to God, how shall thou keep a
sincere conscience to man?

Joannes de Oppido Cent. Mag. 7. col. 237. Paulus. Diac. Rerum Romans l. 18.
Constantine the Nephew of Constantius severely suppressed and punished both
the Clergy and Laity; Princes and Prelates infected with the Heresy of the
Acephali and Monothelites. And the whole Senate and City of Constantinople,
about his time, banished Pirrhus, a wicked and Heretical Bishop.

Surius Council Tom. 2. p. 676
King Reccaredus and the third Council of Toledo in Spain, Decreed; that if any
Clergyman violated the Decrees of that Council (which settled all the Churches
belonging to the Arians upon the Orthodox, among other things) that he should
be excommunicated, if a Bishop or a Clergyman, by all the Council; if a
Layman of any rank or quality, that he should forfeit half his goods to the
King: if a person of mean quality, that he should forfeit all his goods and be
banished.

King Surius Council tom. 3. p. 2. 9. Fridcricus Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiq.
p. 210.
Eringius in his Edict for the confirmation of the thirteenth Council of
Toledo, Enacted, That the enfringer of the Constitutions thereof should be
excommunicated, and likewise forfeit the tenth part of his goods; and if he had
not goods sufficient to pay his fine, then he was to be publicly whipped, and
receive fifty stripes, and to be ever after reputed infamous. In the
Fridericus Lindeb. Codex Legum Antiq. p. 210.
Code of the Laws of the Wisigothes, lib. 12. (collected and published in the
first year of the reign of King Eringius) I find many Laws to suppress Judaism,
the impiety of the Jews and their contempts against Christian Religion, under
diverse Corporal and Capital Punishments besides Confiscation of their goods;
and among other of these Laws, there is this capital one against such
Christians as shall be circumcised and apostatize to Judaism, Tit. 2. Lex. 17.
De Judaizantibus Christianis.

Frid. Lindeb. Codex Legum Antiq. p. 219, 220.
Sicut deflendum est a Christianis eorum scelus, qui in Christo praevaricatores
existunt: ita modis omnibus decernendum, ut nullus omnino veniam mereatur, qui
a meliori proposito ad deterius declinasse convincetur. Quia ergo crudelis est
stupenda praesumptio, crudeliori debet extirpari supplicio: ideo legis hujus
edicto decernimus, ut quicunque Christianus, and praesertim a Christianis
parentibus ortus, sexus scilicet utriusque, circumcisionem vel quoscunque ritus
Judaicos exercuisse repertus est, vel (quod Deus avertat) potuerit ulterius
reperire, conspiratione and zelo Catholicorum, tam novis and atrocibus poenis
afflictus, turpissima morte perimatur, quam horrendum and execrabile malum est,
quod ab eo constat nequissime perpetratum. Eorum vero bona sibi proculdubio
fiscus adsumat: si haeredes vel propinquos talium personarum facri hujus error
consentiendo commaculet. And Tit. 3. Lex. 4. Frid. Lindeb. p. 223.
Si quis Judaeorum ritu suo Pascha celebraverit, centenis verberatur flagellis,
and turpiter decalvaetus Exilio diutino mancipetur, and ejus res fisco
adsociandae sunt: Illis vero qui carnis circumcisiones in Judaeis vel
Christianis exercere praesumpserint, quisquis haec aut intulerit alteri, aut
fieri ab altero permiserit sibi; veretri ex toto amputatione plectetur, and res
ejus fisci juribus sociandae sunt. Mulieres tamen quae aut circumcisiones
exercere praesumpserint, aut circumcidendos quisque cuiliber circumcisori
obtalerint; naribus abscissis, and rebus omnibus in principis potestate
redactis, lugebunt facinus suae praesumptionis: Simili quoque and illi poena
plectendi sunt, qui Christianum vel Christianam a fide demoverit Christi, vel
ad titum Judaicae praevaricationis adduxerint.

And Tit. 2. DE OMNIUM HAERETICORUM atque JUDAEORUM cunctis Erroribus
amputandis Lex. 2. There is this general Law against Heretics, De omnium
Haeresum Erroribus abdicandis, made in King Reccaredus his reign, punishing all
Heretics with loss of their dignities, honors, goods, and perpetual banishment.

Fridericus Lindeb. Codex Legum Antiq. p. 211, 212.
Divinae virtutis aeternum consilium, and in ultimorum ferie seculorum pietatis
ejus revelatum arcanum, per retro-actorum dierum tempora omnem, ut cerminus, a
cunctis nostri regiminis finibus, and perfidiam dissipavit errantium, and
dogmatum abdicavit commenta pravorum: Veruntarnen ne dum nostris consistimus in
diebus, tempus illud occurrat, de quo vas electionis olim protulit, dicens:
Erit tempus, quo sanam doctrinam non sustinebunt: sed secundum sua disideria
coacervabunt sibi Magistros prurientes aurihus, and a veritate quidem auditum
avertent, ad fabulas autem convertentur. Convenit and ea quae in luce fidei
manent, a tenebris contradictionum edicto legali defendere; and ea quae exori i
obvia forsan error impulerit, gestis legalibus propulsare. Nullus ita que
cujusllibet gentis aut generis homo, proprius and advena, proselytus and
indigena, externus and incola, contra sacram and singulariter unam Catholicae
veritatis fidem quascunque noxias disputationes, eandem sidem impugnans, palam
pertinaciter aut constanter vel proferat, vel proferre silenter attemptet.
Nullus Evangelii decreta convellat: Nullus Apostolica instituta decerpat:
Nullus antiquorum patrum impugnationibus suis sacras definitiones irrumpat:
Nullus modernorum discernentium congruentes fidei tractus spernat: Nullus
contra omne sanctum dictum and factum, vel verae fidei sacramentum, aut
cogitationes ruminet cordis, aut verba patuli proferat oris: Non in
contradictione controversiam perfidus excitet pervicacis, non improbitatis
contentione litem statuat adversantis. Nam quaecunque persona ex his in cunctis
istis vetitis extiterit deprehensa, si quidem ex quacunque religionis potestate
vel ordine fuerit, amisso loci and dignitatis honor, perpetuo reatui erit
obnoxious, rerum etiam cunctar^m amissione multatus. Si vero ex laicis
extiterit, and honor solutus and loco, omni rerum erit possessione nudatus,
ita vt omnis transgressor sanctionis istius, aut eterno Exilio mancipatus
intereat, aut divina miseratione respectus, a praevaricatione convertatur, and
vivat.

Rode^ici Santii Hist. Hispaniae l, 3. c. 3. The general History of Spain in
his life, Cent, Mag, 8. Col. 519.
Alfonso the first, King of Spain* about the year of our Lord, 710. by his
severe Laws, extirpated the Arian Heresy out of Spain and the West, as the
Emperor Constantine rooted it out of the East, and the Emperor* Gratian out of
Italy; Whence he was styled (and his successors after him) the Catholic King.

Frid, Lindebrogus Codex Legum Antiq, p. 959.
The Emperors Charles the great, and Jews, Capit. lib. 5. Tit. 183. and l. 6.
Tit. 65. Enacted, That no man suspected of Heresy, should be a firm witness;
that those who were Heretics ought not to be admitted to be witnesses: And
that none should receive a Benediction from an Heretic.

Paulus Diac. Rer. Romans l. 24. Cent, Mag, 9. Col. 342.
Michael the Emperor punished the Manichees and other Heretics in his time,
with banishment and capital punishments.

Annalium Tom. 3. in his life, f. 179.
Zonaras records, that the Emperor Alexius Comnenus, caused Basilius the chief
Doctor and Apostle of the Sect of the Bogomilli, after he had publicly vomited
out the poison of his pestilent Heresy, TO BE PUBLICLY BURNT in the Theater,
by common consent; about the year of our Lord, 1212.

About the same time the Lucas Tudensis advers, Albigens. Errores l. 3. 15. 21,
22. Antoninus Hist Pars 3. Tit, 1^ c, 1, sect, 4, f, 26. Jacob^ Gretseri
Prologom. in Scriptores contr. Sectam Waldensium Bibl, Patr, Tom, 13, P, 290,
291. Reynerus cont. Waldenses c, 11, 12.
Pope and Popish Prelates caused diverse of the Albigenses to be apprehended and
burnt as Heretics; and not content therewith raised up a bloody war against
them, wherein their Friar Saint Dominick was a great stickler; and Simon
Montefort General of the Army: who taking the Town Minerbra by force, and
diverse of the Albigenses Prisoners in it, commanded on hundred and eighty of
them, who obstinately refused to abjure their [ pretended] Heresy, TO BE
BURNED, which was accordingly executed: as Antoninus records. After which time
the burning of Heretics grew common in most places.

Herman contractus in Chr, Cent, Mag, 11 col, 393.
Henry the third celebrating Christ's Nativity at Gosla^ia, by the general
consent of all there present, commanded some Manichees, (who condemned the
eating of all living creatures) to be hanged upon a gibbet, lest this scab of
their Heresy spreading farther should infect and murder more.

Super Cantica Sermon, 66.
Saint Bernard Abbot of Clareval records, that certain Heretics in his time
(about the year of our Lord 1130.) who denied the lawfulness of Marriage, and
Baptism* of Infants, among other things; being Rusticani homines and Idiotae,
and prorsus contemptibiles (as our Anabaptists and Sectaries generally now are)
were so obstinate in their Errors: that Mori magis eligunt quam converti:
whence the common people after their errors were detected and publicly
maintained by them, ran upon them and slew them: which he thus expresses:
Itaque irruens in eos populus, novos haereticis suae ipsorum perfidiae martyrs
dedit. APPROBAMUSZELUM, sed factum* non suademus; quia fides suadenda est, non
imponenda: Quanquam melius proculdubio; GLADIO COHERCERENTUR, illius videlicet,
Rom, 13.
qui non sine causa gladium portat, quum in suum errorem multos trajicere
permi^tantur: Dei enim Minister ille est, Vindex in iram ei qui male agit.
Wherein he asserts the lawfulness of the Civil Magistrates restraining and
cutting off obstinate Heretics with the Sword.

Vincent. spec, Hist, l, 29, c, 26. Cent, Mag, 12, col, 853.
In the year of our Lord 1183. there were many Heretics burnt in ^^anders by
Philip Earl of Flanders, and Guilerne Archbishop of Rheemes: And then the Writ
De Haeretico comburendo began to be in use in most Christian Realms, by Popes
and Popish Prelates, which the Prelates generally abused afterward, by
condemning and burning the true Saints of God for defending the truth against
their Antichristian Errors, as Mr Fox his Acts and Monuments, and the French
Book of Martyrs evidence.

The Emperor Constit. Sicularum l, 1, Tit, 1, 2, 3, apud Frid. Lindebrogum
Codex Legum Antiq. p. 700, 701, 702
Fridercick the second, made these Laws against Heretics, their receivers, and
Apostates; condemning Heretics to be burnt, and their goods to be confiscate.

Inconsutilem tunicam Dei nostri dissuere conantur Haeretici, and vocabuli
vitio servientes, quod significationem divisionis enuntiat, and ipsius
indivisibilis fidei unitati conantur inducere sectionem, and oves a Petri
custodia, cui pascendae a Pastore bono sunt creditae, segregare. Hi sunt lupi
rapaces intrinsecus, and eo usque mansuetudinem ovium pratendentes, quousque
possint ovile subintrare dominicum. Hi sunt angeli pessimi. Hi sunt filij
pravitatum, a patre nequitiae, and fraudis autore ad decipiendas simplices
animas destinati. Hi sunt colubri, qui columbas decipiunt. Hi sunt serpents
qui latenter videntur inserpere, and sub mellis dulcedine virus evomunt, vt dum
vitae cibum ministrare se simulant, cauda feriunt, and mortis poculum, velut
quoddam durissimum acoritum immiscent. Horum sectae veteribus legibus, ne in
publicum prodeant, non sunt notatae nominibus, vel quod est forte nefandius,
non contentae, vt vel ab Arrio Arriani, vel a Nestorio Nestoriani, aut a
similibus similes nuncupentur: sed in exemplum Martyrum, qui pro fide
Catholica, martyria subierunt, Patarenos se nominant, velut expositos passioni
hujusmodi. Miseri Patareni, a quibus abest sancta credulitas Trinitatis
aeternae; sub uno contextu nequitiae in simul tres offendunt, deum videlicet,
and proximos, and seipsos. Deum, cum Dei filium and fidem non agnoscunt,
decipiunt; proximos, dum ipsis sub specie spiritualis alimoniae, haereticae
pravitatis oblectamenta ministrant. Crudelius etiam saeviunt in seipsos, dum
praeter animarum dispendium, corpora denique saevae mortis illecebris, quam pet
agnitionem veram verae fidei possint evadere, vitae prodigi, et necis
improvidi, sectatores involvunt, and quod est ipso dicto durissimum,
superstites etiam non terrentur exemplo. Contra tales itaque deo and hominibus
sic infestos, continere non possumus motus nostros, quin debitae ultionis in
eos gladium exeramus, et tanto ipsospersequamur instantius quanto in
evidentiorem injuriam fidei Christianae, prope Romanam Ecclesiam, quae caput
aliarum Ecclesiarum omnium judicatur, superstitionis suae scelera latius
exercere noscuntur; adeo quod ab Italiae finibus praesertim a partibus
Longobardiae, in quibus pro certo perpendimus ipsorum nequitiam amplius
abundare, jam usque ad Regnum nostrum Siciliae suae perfidiae riv^los
derivarunt. Quod acerbissimum reputantes, statuimus in primis, vt crimen
Haereseos damnatae sectae, cujuslibet quocunque nomine censeantur sectatores,
prout veteribus legibus est distinctum inter caetera publica crimina numeretur:
imo crimine laesae Majestatis nostrae debet ab omnibus horribilius judicari,
quod in divinae Majestatis injuriam dignoscitur attentatum, quamquam judicii
potestate, alter alterum non excedat. Nam sicuti perduellionis crimen personas
adimit damnatorum, and bona, and damnat post obitum etiam memoriam defunctorum:
sic and in praedicto crimine, quo Patareni vocantur, per omnia volumus
observari vt ipsorum nequitia, quia deum non sequuntur, ac in tenebris
ambulant, detegatur. Nemine etiam deferente diligenter investigari volumus
hujusmodi scelerum patratores, and per officiales nostros, sicut and alios
malefactores inquiri ac inquisitione notatos, etiam si levis suspitionis
argumenta tangantur a viris Ecclesiasticis and Praelatis examinari jubemus; per
quos si evidenter inventi fuerint a fide Catholica saltem in uno articulo
deviare, ac per ipsos pastorali more commoniti, tenebrosis diaboli relictis
insidiis, noluerint agnoscere Deum lucis, sed in erroris concepti constantia
perseverent, praesentis nostrae legis edicto damnatos, mortem pati Patarenos
decernimus, Nota.
quam affectant: vt vivi in conspectu populi comburantur, flammarum commissi
judicio. Nec dolemus, quod in hoc ipsorum satisfaciamus voluntati, ex quo
poenam solummodo, nec fructum aliquem alium consequuntur erroris: Apud nos pro
talibus nullus intervenire praesumat: quod si fecerir, in ipsum nostrae
indignationis aculeos non immerito convertemus.

Patarenorum receptatores, credentes and accomplices and quocunque modo fautores,
qui ut a paena possint alios eximire, de se velut improvidi non formidant,
publicatis bonis omnibus, relegandos in perpetuum esse censemus. Et ipsorum
filii ad honores aliquos nullatenus assumantur, sed infamiae perpetuae nota
laborent: vt nec in testes, nec in causis, quibus repelluntur infames,
aliquatenus admittantur. Si tamen aliquis de filiis receptatorum vel fautorum
detexerit aliquem Patarenum, de cujus hujusmodi manifest probetu perfidia, in
fidei praemium, quam agnovit famae pristinae de Imperali clementia,
restitutionis in integrum benificium consequatur.

Apostatantes a fide Catholica penitus execramu^, insequimur ultione, bonis
omnibus spoliamus, and a professione, vel voto naufragantes legibus coarceamus,
successione tollimus, and omne jus legitimum abdicamus.

The Pauli Gescbinii Majestas Carolina; Rub l. 2, 3, 4, 5. p. 3, 4.
Emperor Charles the fourth, King of Bohemia, made the like Laws almost in
terminis for the burning of Heretics, and banishing their receivers out of the
Kingdom of Bohemia; differing from them in these few expressions: Quod in
religionem divinam committitur in omnium fertur injuriam. Quid enim potest ab
hominibus gravius existimari quam divinae potentiae copiosam clementiam in
proprio filio humano generi attributam, miserorum latrantium dentibus percipi
lacerari? etc. Praesentis nostrae sanctionis edicto, damnatos, mortem pati
HAERETICOS decernimus quam affectant, VTVIVI IN CONSPECTV POPVLI COMBVRANTVR,
flammarum commissi judicio, qui sacris flaminis lumen agnoscere, and Patris
aeterni perennem gloriam quaerere unigenitique Filii passionem; redemptionem
humani generis credere denegarunt. Dementes, atque vesani, Catholicae sidei
sacro dogmati repugnantes praeter divinae vltionis aeterna supplicia infames
facti, Maiestatis nostrae indignationem multiferam se noverint incurrisse.

Omnis sectae Haereticos a quoquam iuxtalimites Regni nostri Boemiae in domibus
aut agris, aut aliter quoquo modo indifferenter receptari prohibemus omnino:
Receptatores vero si qui fuerint, scienter, aut credentes, aut accomplices, aut
alias quocunque modo consentientes eis, sive fautores; bonis eorum omnibus
confiscatis, relegandos a Regno praedicto in perpetuum censemus.

To these I could add sundry other Laws and Edicts made by the whole Kingdom of
Bohemia, and Senate of Prague, for the Imprisonment, Banishment, Punishment
with the loss of goods, of life, and burning the Books, persons of Heretics,
and Blasphemers, with their proceedings accordingly upon these Laws under the
reign of King Lodovicus about the year of our Lord, 1523. and afterward,
recorded at large by Georgius Bartholdus Pontanus, in his Bohemiae Piae. lib.
7. throughout; as likewise the Laws of sundry other Popish Kings and States
against such they esteemed Heretics, though in verity professors of the
Orthodox Truth; but because these Laws were made by Papists and the bloody
execution of them by imprisoning, tormenting, banishing, burning, destroying of
many godly Christians, under the name of Heretics, is at large recorded in Mr
Fox his Acts and Monuments, and the French book of Martyrs; I shall wholly
pretermit them, and proceed to some Presidents of Protestant Stares in foreign
parts.

Ar^tius Valentini Gentilis histotia, at the end of his Problemata Theolog. p.
569. to 586.
Valentinus Geutiles born in Campania, for his execrable Blasphemies, violent
expressions, and damnable Heresies against the Trinity and Christ's Divinity,
was first imprisoned by the Magistrates of Geneva, and upon his Recantation
released: Afterward coming to Berne, and there broaching the Errors and
Blasphemies formerly abjured by him at Geneva, he was imprisoned by the
Magistrates, An. Dom. 1556. After which his Blasphemous and Heretical Books
were perused by the Senate of Bernes appointment, and Articles drawn out of
them against him; to which he was put to answer: After many conserences and
disputations, he continuing obstinately in his Heresies from the 5. of August
to the 9. of September, he was then condemned to death by the Senate, to
prevent dissentions, and exterminate such horrid Errors, Blasphernies, and
thereupon beheaded; and so by Gods just Judgment at once ceased both to
blaspheme and live.

The Heretical, Schismatical, and Seditious Anabaptists and Dippers, (who now
swarm every where among us, yea, dare boast publicly in See a Confession of
faith of 7. of the churches of Christ in London. Mr Edwards Gangraenaes 1 2.
and 3. Part.
Print of their multitudes and numerous congregations, publishing their
Confessions in Print and tendering them openly to the Parliament,) have been
imprisoned, banished, nay corporally and capitally punished in former times in
sundry places, as a most dangerous unsufferable Sect, as these Presidents
demonstrate.

Epist. Zuin. and Occolampedii, l. 2, f, 84,
The Protestant Senate of Zuricke made a Decree against the Anabaptists after
they had been dealt withal by ten public and private Disputations, and
continued obstinate, that whosoever dipped any a new, who had been formerly
baptized; he should himself be dipped and drowned in the waters, for this
offense. A fit punishment for our new lustful Dippers.

In the General History of the Netherlands l. 6. p. 159.
year of our Lord 1531. Certain Anabaptists coming out of Germany into the
Netherlands to Amsterdam, the Proctor General of the Hague caused nine of them
to be apprehended, who afterward by Sentence given against them lost their
heads.

Davidis Chytraei Chron. Saxoniae l. 12. p. 363, 364.
An. Dom. 1528. The Anabaptists creeping into Embden in Frisia, and there
increasing and lifting up their heads, Melchior Hoffman being their Teacher*
proceeded so far as to profess their Anabaptism in a public place; whereupon
the Magistrates banished Melchior and some of his followers.

Chytraei Chro. l. 13. p. 403. l. 14. p. 413, 414.
An. Dom. 1533. The Senate of Breme commanded all Anabaptists and prophaners of
the Sacraments to be banished the City by a public Decree, which they
presumptuously contemned. The Senate of Osnaburge did the like, An. 1543.

Chytraei Chr. l. 14. p. 411, 412, 413, etc. Sleidan Com. l. 510. Pontan.
Catal. Haereticorum. Mr Bailey his Ana. baptism c. 2, 3, 4, 5.
An. Dom. 1534. The Tragedy of the Anabaptists began at Munster, which gave
occasion to all the Cities of Saxony to make public Laws against the
Anabaptists, and to appoint certain Senators to take care that no Anabaptists
or persons infected with fanatical opinions of the like kind, should privily
creep into their City: and if any did, that they should presently be sent away
and banished. And good reason: for these Munster Anabaptists putting themselves
suddenly into arms, seized and fortified the Marketplace; and breaking their
faith with the Prince, Townsmen, and Country People, who came against them, as
soon as they retired home and laid up their arms, they presently demanded and
received the keys of the City-gates: which done, they domineer over the City at
their pleasure, banish all good and honest Citizens that were not of their
faction out of the City, seize upon all their goods, fortify the City (fearing
a siege) and call it the New Jerusalem; they desie the Churches, profane all
sacred things, cast out the Consuls and Senators, and set up most wicked
wretches of their own in their places; and soon after removing them likewise,
they chose twelve Judges for emergent causes whom they called Elders in Israel,
to whom the power of all things was committed: After which they changed the
form of Government into a Monarchy, John Beakly of Leyden a crafty companion
making himself their King, and Knipper Dolling his Vicar: which done, he
invades and seises on all the wealth of the City, introduces polygany and
defends it: coyns gold and silver money, sends forth preaching Emissaries nto
diverse parts of the world to propagate his sect, who were all slain. At last
fearing the City would be betrayed, he created twelve Captains between whom he
divided all the Bishoprics and Principalities of Germany before they were,
ained, and made them keepers of the City gates. At last the City being
besieged, they were driven to that extremity, that all their provisions being
spent they did eat dogs, cats, rats, froggs, mice, yea those things which
human nature abhorrs, and their own children, so as many dyed of famine. After
a long siege the City being entered and taken on Saint John Baptist day An. Dom.
1535. all the Anabaptists besides women and children were slain without
distinction: The heads of this their faction, Bernard, Knippor Dolling, Bernard
Br^chiting, and John of Leyden himself with his royal Ensigns, Crown, Scepter,
Spurs, Rings, and golden chains are all taken. Bernard Rothman the Author and
Ringleader of this Sect was slain and cut in pieces with a pollax: The
Anabaptists goods were all confiscate and sold, to recompense the damages they
had done. John of Leyden, their King, Knipper Dolling, and Bernard Creehcing,
the heads of the Sedition, were brought to a Scaffold in the midst of the
Marketplace, and there in the sight of the people had their flesh torn from
them with hot pinchers for an hours space or more, and then stabbed and run
through with swords, and their carcasses put into new cages, and hanged upon
the top of Saint Lamberts steepl^, the King according to his royal dignity,
hanging higher then the Consul and the Prophet. After which 150000. of this
seditious and pernicious Sect were slain through Germany, Alsatia, and Stiria,
and rebaptized in their own blood by the just hand of divine vengeance executed
by men, as Gods instruments. Histor. de morte Serveti.
Servetus an Anabaptist, and an Arian, as an Arian, received the sentence of
death at Geneva; Phifer at Mulhus: Thomas Muncer was put to the rack by George
Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave of Hesse, where he roared most fearfully, and
in the end had his head cut off, and put upon an high pole in the field. Three
hundred Anabaptists that rifled the Monastery of Bilsund in Frizland, were all
but sixty two that fled, either killed in the ruins of the Monastery, or put
to death by the hangman. Into what most execrable practices, cruelties,
outrages, Tyrannies, Murders, impious and detestable opinions, Heresies,
Blasphemies of all sorts, these Anabapcistical Sectaries out of a pretended
Zeal and Separation fell into by Gods just Judgment for their Schism,
Hypocrisy, and Spiritual pride, and what dismal ends the Ringleaders of them
came unto by the hand of public Justice, their followers and all others may
read at large in Chytraeus Chron. Saxoniae l. 12. 14. Sleidans Comment. l. 5.
10. Joan. Witlingius, de Anabaptistis: Bullinger advers. Anabaptistas: Guide
Bres, Contre les Anabaptists: Jo. Gastius de Exordio Anabaptistarum, etc.
Pontanus; Catalogus Haereticorum: Doctor Daniel Featly his Dippers Dipped: Master
Robert Bailey his Anabaptism, etc. and his Disswasive from the Errors of the
times: Mr Edwards his Gangraenaes: Spanhemius Diatribe Historica, De Origin
Progressu, Sectis etc. Anabaptistar: Joannes Assuerius Ampsingius,
Disputationes advers. Anabaptistar: Hartmannus Springelius, de Hodiernis
Haeresibus and Haereticis: Conradus Shiressime Vergent, Haereticorum Catalogus.
Conradi Haeresbachii: Historia Anabaptistica: Una cum Notis Theodori Strackii,
and Lamberti Hortensii: Cloppenburgii Gangraena Anabaptistica. Nicholaus
Blesdikius Historia Davidis Georgij: with others who have written of and
against the Anabaptists; the ignorance of whose abominable Errors,
Dispositions, Blasphemies, Seditions, Heresies, Vices, and their late impunity,
is the only cause of their dangerous increase. Theodoret. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5.
cap. 7. Mustering up the names of the Ringleaders of the Arian Haeresy, and the
Seedsmen who sowed its tares in the Eastern parts, and then watered and fostred
them: adds this as the main reason of this Heresies dangerous growth: His malis
Agricolis subsidio fuit CUM NIMIA CONSTANTIJ FACILITAS, tum improba Valentis
nequitia: I pray God, the overmuch connivance and indulgence of most, and
underhand countenanceing of some in Authority of the Ringleaders of this
dangerous faction do not nourish such a venomous Cockatrice in our bosom as
may sting our Church, State, Parliament, Magistracy, and Ministry to death ere
long; and may yet be crushed (though not in the shel) by speedy and just
severity; as it was in former times, not only in Germany and other foreign
parts, but even in ENGLAND; some of this Sect of Anabaptists being burned in
Fox Acts and Monuments vol. 2.
Henry the eighth and Hollinshed and Stow An. 17. and 2. Eliz.
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and the rest banished; of which more anon. These
severe prosecutions against them heretofore, and many other of like nature
since, even by Protestant Princes, Magistrates, shows how dangerous this Sect
is now, and may make all wary how they revolt unto them.

To pass from these and come somewhat nearer home: I find among the Statutes
of Scotland sundry Acts made against Idolatry, Popish Masses, Apostasy,
Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and Noncommunicants, punishing them with pecuniary
and other corporal, and capital punishments, and with banishment, as James 8.
Parl ament 1. c. 2, 3. 5. Parl. 3. c. 1. 45, 46. 53. Parl. 7. c. 106. Phrl. 10.
c. 24. 27. Parl. 12. c. 120. Parl. 13. c. 60. Parl. 14. c. 193. Parl. 16. c.
17, 18. Parl. 19. c. 1. and the 2. Parliament of King Charles, Session. 1. Act.
4. which you may find in Regiam Maiestatem, and their Statutes at large: Their
recital I omit for brevity sake; having more largely insisted upon them in my
Truth triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty: Wherein I have fully
vindicated the Parliaments Legislative Power in all Ecclesiastical matters, by
Presidents in all ages both foreign and domestic; to which I shall refer the
Reader for full satisfaction in that particular Controversy, there copiously
debated; and therefore shall not here insist upon it.

I now proceed to Domestic Presidents, and Laws of our own, which are very
full to the point in question: in which I shall be a little more copious for the
informing and satisfying others of my Profession, and the encouraging of them
to put the very ancient Common Law of England in execution for the future
against Heretics, Apostates, Blasphemers, Anabaptists, and other obstinate
Separatists.

I shall for my more methodical proceeding herein, in an historical manner begin
with the first proceedings and punishments against Heretics in this our own I
sland, long before Popery crept in upon it; and then proceed to Laws and
Punishments in succeeding times as well under our Popish as Protestant Princes:
And shall likewise clear it to every man's judgment; That Heresy, Apostasy,
Blasphemy, and Schism, as they are Criminal and Capital, are properly tryable
only by way of Indictment at the Common Law in the Kings temporal Courts;
before his Temporal Judges; not in Bishops Consistories, (who usurped the sole
Jurisdiction and Cognizance of Heresy by degrees at last, whereas they were
only consulted with by godly Princes by way of advice, counsel, or assistance,
at first; to help inform their consciences and judgments, what ought to be
reputed Heresy, or Blasphemy; and that usually in general or National
Councels); and that those who are guilty of these may as legally be tried
before our Judges now, as Seminary Priests and Jesuits, against whom the
Convocation and Bishops in their Consistories never as yet Criminally
proceeded, as they did formerly against Heretics; but only the Common Law
Courts, which both convict, arraign, condemn, and execute them too, as such.

How Heretics have been heretofore and may now be proceeded against in our
own Realm, I shall give you a breife Account.

The first Heresy I read of that infected and infested this our Island was the
Gildas. Beda Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 8. Vsserius de Brit. Eccl. Primordiis. p.
19^ 198. H. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. p. 38, 39.
Arrian, quae, corrupto orb toto, hanc etiam insulam, extra orbem tam long
remotam, veneno sui infecit erroris: Et hac quasi via pestilentiae trans
Oceanum patefacta, non mora, omnis se lues Haerescos cujusque, Insulae NOVI
SEMPER ALIQVID AVDIRE GAVDENTI, ET NIHIL CERTI FIRMITER OBTINENTI, infudit,
writes our venerable Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Beda. This Haeresie sprung up in the time of Constantine the Great, (who was
crowned Emperor* in Britain,) and was condemned in the Council of Nice: And
it, together with the Heresies of Novatian, Valentinian, Paulus, the
Marcionists, Cataphrygians and others which crept in with it, were punished by
this Eusebius de vita Constant* in l. 3. c. 71, 72, 73, 74.
Emperor Constantine with BANISHMENT, and by his Edict all their meeting^were
suppressed, and the places wherein they met, confiscated: after which Cambdens
Brit. p. 81.
the Arrians in Britain were removed from their stations by the Emperor
Constantine.

The next Heresy (which grew up at home among us) was that of Beda Eccles.
hist. l. 1. c. 10. Balaeus Cent. 1 c. 38. Centur. Magd. 5. c. 9. col. 847, 849.
B. Usher de Britan. Eccles. primordiis. cap. 9. Spelman Council. p. 46, 47. Mat.
West. An. 404
Pelagus (alias Morgan) a Britton, Abbot of Bangor, in the reign of Arcadius
and Honorius; which spreading it is poison far and near; Honorius and
Theodosius the Emperors by their Edict, commanded Pelagius and Celestius his
companion, to be apprehended where ever they should be found by any man
whatsoever, and to be accused and brought to public audience by any, and by
public sentences to be condemned to INEXORABLE BANISHMENT, to preserve others
from infection: And our learned Cent. 1. c. 38.
Bale out of Walden, affirms, that Pelagius was BANISHED this Island by his
Britons for his Heresy and heretical Books.

This Beda Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 17, 18. Mat. West. An. 446. Usserius de Brit.
Eccles Primordiis. c. 11. Spelm Council. p. 48, 49.
Heresy of his reviving again in Britain, there was a Synod assembled at
Verolam Anno 446. whereunto a multitude of men and women resorted; where
Germanus and Lupus (two French Bishops) so refuted Agricola and his
confederates, that they silenced them quite. Whereupon the people could hardly
hold their hands from pulling them in pieces: Et post diem illum, it a ex
animis omnium praestigiosa illa superstitio deleta est, vt sacerdotum and
ipsorum orthodoxorum Doctrinam, sitientibus desiderijs amplexerentur. After
which this Beda Eccles. ^ist. l. 1. c. 21. Mat. West. An. 449. Usserius and
Spelman qua supra.
heresy sprouting up again in the year 449. Germanus and Severus coming hither
out of France to suppress it, there was another Council assembled, wherein
the Authors of this revived heresy were inquired after, and being found, were
condemned and BANISHED the Island by the general sentence of all. Omniumque
sententia pravitatis auctores qui erant EXPVLSI INSVLA, sacerdotibus adducuntur
ad medeterranea deferendi, ut and regio absolutione, and illi EMENDATIONE
fruerentur: factumque est ut in illis locis multo ex eo tempore fides INTE
MERATA PERDVRARET. This was the happy issue of these Heretics banishment, that
religion from that time continued uncorrupted, and this Island was thereby
freed from the Pelagian heresy for many ages after.

Anno Dom. 630. Beda l. 4. c. 17. Huntingdon. hist l. 4. Spelm. Council ^om. 1.
p. 168. to 172. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 15* 16*
Theodor Archbishop of Canterbury being a Grecian borne, hearing that the
Church of Constantinople was very much troubled with the haeresy of Eutiches,
to preserve the Churches of England free from that infection, assembled a
Council at HEDTFELD, of many Priests and learned men, wherein they made a
Confession of their Faith concerning the Trinity and Unity, and declared their
assents to the general Councels of Nice, Constantinople the first and second,
Ephesus, Calcedon, and of Rome under Martin; whereby he prevented the heresies
condemned by them from springing up in this Isle. A good effect of this
Synodall Assembly.

Rerum Anglic. l. 2. c. 13.
Gulielmus Nubrigensis records, that in the reign of King Henry the 2. (about
the year of our Lord 1161.) certain erroneous persons, commonly called
Publicanes, came into England. These having their original heretofore out of
Gascoygne from an uncertain Author, infused the poison of their misbeliefes
into diverse Countries; for in the most ample Provinces of France, Spain, Italy
and Germany, so many were said to be infected with this pestilence, that they
seemed to be multiplied more then the sand on the Seashore in multitude.
Finally, whilst the Prelates of Churches, and the Princes of Provinces
proceeded more REMISLY against them, the most wicked foxes creep forth Note.
out of their dens, and by seducing the simple with a pretended show of piety,
demolish the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, TANTO GRAVIUS QVANTO LIBERIUS, so
much the more grievously by how much the more freely: but when as the zeal of
the faithful is kindled against them with the fire of God, they lie hid in
their Dens, and are less hurtful, but yet they cease not to hurt by
scattering their hidden poison. They were rusticall and illiterate men, and
therefore dull to reason; but having once drunk down that poison, they were so
infected, that they grew stiff against all discipline; whence it very rarely
happens that any one of them, when being discovered they are drawn out of their
dens, is converted to piety. Verily England always continued free from this
and Note.
all other haereticall plagues, when as so many heresies sprung up in other
parts of the world. And truly this Island whiles it was called Britain from
the Britons who inhabited it, banished out of it Pelagius, who became an
Arch-heretick in the East, and in process of time admitted his error into it
self; for the destruction whereof the pious provision of the French Church*
directed St. Germane once and again hither. But since the English Nation, the
Britons being expelled, possessed this Island, so as it was no more called
Britannia, but England, the poison of no heretical plagues has sprung out of
it, nor yet so much Note.
as entered into it, so as to propagate and spread it self, until the time of
King Henry the 2. Then also by Gods mercy, the plague which had there crept in
was so withstood, that from thenceforth they fear to enter into it. Now there
were little more then thirty both men and women, who dissembling their error,
came in hither as it were peaceably, for to propagate there plague, one Gerard
being their Captain, upon whom they all looked as their Teacher and Prince; for
he alone was somewhat learned, but the rest were without learning and idiots,
mere impolished and rustic men, of the Teutonic Nation and language. Abiding
some little space in England they gathered to their congregation only one
little girl, circumvented with their poisonous whisperings, and bewitched (as
was said) with certain enchantments. But they could not long lie hid, for some
curiously discovering, that they were of a strange sect, they were thereupon
apprehended and kept in the public prison. But the King not Note.
willing either to release them or condemn them without examination, commanded
a Council of Bishops to be assembled at Oxford; Whereupon they were solemnly
convented concerning Religion: He who seemed to be learned taking upon him the
cause of all, and speaking for all, answered, that they were Christians and
embraced the Apostles Doctrines. Being interrogated in order concerning the
Articles of holy faith, truly they answered rightly concerning the substance of
the Supernall Physician, but spoke perverse things concerning his remedies,
whereby he vouchsafes to heal humane infirmity, to wit, of the divine
Sacraments, detesting holy Baptism, the Eucharist and Marriage, and derogating
from THE CATHOLIC UNITY in a nefarious bold manner, which those divine helps
do make up. Being admonished to repent, and TO UNITE THEMSELVES TO THE BODY OF
THE CHURCH, they contemned all wholesome counsel: Threats also, that they
might repent even for fear, they derided, abusing that saying of the Lord;
Blessed are they who suffer porsecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Then the Bishops taking care that their haereticall
poison should spread no further, pronouncing them publicly to be heretics,
and corporali disciplinae subdendos Catholico Principi tradiderunt, delivered
them over to the Catholic Prince to be punished with corporal punishment: Who
commanded an heretical character to be branded on their foreheads, and being
publicly whipped in the sight of Note.
the people, to be expelled the City; strictly charging, that no man should
presume either to lodge them in his house, or give them any solace. The
sentence being pronounced, they were led to the MOST JUST PUNISHMENT,
rejoicing; not with a slow pace, their Master going before and singing; Blesed
shall ye be when men shall hate you: so much did the seducers then abuse the
minds deceived by him: Truly that girl they had deceived in England, departing
Note.
from them for fear of punishment, confessing her error, obtained
reconciliation: but that detestable College with cauterized foreheads was
subjected to JUST SEVERITY; he who was the chief among them, for the honor of
his Masterslip, suffering the infamy of A DOUBLE BRANDING, to wit IN THE
FOREHEAD and ABOUT THE CHIN: and their clothes being cut off unto the girdle,
they WERE PUPLIKELY WHIPPED and cast out of the City with resounding stripes,
and miserably perished with the intolerablenesse of the cold (for it was
Winter,) no man showing them so much as the least pity. The PIOUS RIGOR OF
THIS SEVERITY not only Note.
PURGED the Kingdom of England of that Plague which had already crept into it,
BUT ALSO PREVENTED, THAT IT SHOULD NO MORE CREEP INTO IT, BY THE TERROR STRUCK
INTO THE HERETICS. So our Nubrigensis, whose words I have faithfully englished.

The foreign Sectaries thus severely punished, were no other then professed
Anabaptists and schismatickes; pronounced heretics for their obstinacy. Their
punishment was harsh, yet deemed just and necessary in those times; and it had
this good issue, (which may induce us now to a fitting and just severity
against obstinate Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, Anabaptists) it
suppressed the spreading of their pestilent Errors for the present in England,
and preserved it safe from their infection for the future; Timely and discreet
Flebotomie is ever the best cure against this Gangraene of obstinate Schism
and Heresy. Only this I shall observe by the way, that these Anabaptists (for
ought I find) never pretended, that the King and civil Magistrates had no
power to punish them for matters of Religion, as our Anabaptists and Sectaries
now plead and write.

The sins of Heresy and Apostasy were so odious in this our Realm, that by
the very ancient common Law of England they deserved and were punishable with
death, yea the soarest death of all others, BURNING; as being no less then
Horns myrrour of Justices. c. 4.
High Treason against the King of heaven; and Cooks 3. Institutes. cap. 15. of
heresy, p. 43.
Gravius est aeternam quam temporalem laedere majestatem.

That these were thus punishable by the very common Law of England before the
Statute of 5. R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 5. Fullers Argument. Fox Acts and Monuments.
vol. ^. p. 575, 576. Cooks 3. Institutes. p. 40, 41.
surreptitiously procured without the Commons assent, and repealed the next
Parliament) or the Statutes of 2. H. 4. c. 15. and 2. H. 5. c. 7. is apparent
unto me, by the Authority of our ancient Law Books.

I read in Bracton: l. 3. c. 9. f. 123, 124. (who writ in King Henry the 3. his
reign,) That if a Clergy man be convicted of Apostasy, he shall be for it
deprived, and afterward, per manum laicalem COMBVRATVR, he shall be burnt by
the hands of Laymen, as it happened in the Council of See Antiq. Eccles. Brit.
p. 152. accordingly; flammis absumptus est.
Oxford under Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, to a certain Deacon, who became
an APOSTATE for a certain Jew, who when he bad been degraded by the Bishops,
statim fuit JGNI TRADITUS per manum Lai^^lem* he was presently delivered to the
fire by Lay hands: And c. 23. f. 144. b. The Jews may circumcise their own
sonns, but not a man of another religion for if they do it, they shall be gelt,
by way of punishment.

I read, that in the Matthew. West. An. 1122. Mat. Parker. Antiq. Eccles. Brit.
p. 152. Walfingham Y^o dig: Neustr. An. 1222 Speeds Hist, p. 596. Polychron. l.
7. c. 34 Holinshed, Stow, and others, An. 6. H. 3.
Council held at Oxford An. 1222. in the 6. year of Henry the 3. under Stephen
Archibishop of Canterbury, an execrable Impostor was convented before him, who
suffered himself to be wounded in his hands, feet and side, that by the
resemblance of these bloody impressions he might persuade the people he was
their Savior: who being condemned by the Council was immured between two
walls, as a Monster too impious and unworthy to dye by humane hands: and
another who pretended her self to be Mary the mother of Christ, and a third
who pretended her self to be Mary Magdalen, were immured with him; Matthew
Paris, Matthew Parker and others write, that they were crucified. And Hist.
Angl. p. 846, 847.
Mat. Paris, relates, that Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln lying on his deathbed
An. 50. of Henry the 3. pronounced the Pope to be an Heretic, and the Friars,
Nuns and Preachers also to be Heretics, for not opposing, but favoring him;
and concluded thereupon with R m. 1. verse last, qui talia agunt and
consentiunt DIGNI SUNT MORTE. Therefore in those days Heretics were deemed
worthy to dye, (as well temporally as eternally) which confirms, that in his
time Heretics deserved to be put to death.

John Britton Bishop of Hereford, Doctor both of the civil and canon Law, who
writ a Book of the Laws of England then in use, about the 5. year of King
Edward the first, by the Kings command, lib. 1. cap. 9. De Arsouns; (or persons
that were to be burned by judgment of Law) informs us; That such who burned
houses in times of peace, fol. 16. b.
and were thereof convicted, shall be burned; so as they shall be punished by
the selfsame thing wherein they offend: And THE SAME JUDGMENT have Sorcerers,
and Sorceresses, and Sodomites, and MISCREANTS (or HERETICS) openly attainted;
who are to be enquired after. And this was no new Law, as appears by the
preamble of the King to this Book, but fol. 1. 2.
, les leys que len ad use en nostre Royalme AVAUNT SES HOVRES: Therefore it is
clear by this Authority, that the burning of Heretics was in use before this
Kings reign, (though we find few or no presidents of it) and inquirable by the
Justices, and other temporal Officers of the King, as Britton writes in this
chapter, but not by the Bishops and Clergy, further then to Excommunicate them.

Andrew Horn in his Myrrour of Justices, written in the end of King Edward the
first, or at least in King Edward the second his reign; has these several
passages concerning Heresy and its punishment, as Chap. 1. Sect. 4. p. 21, 22,
23. where speaking of Crimes and their Division, and of the Crime of Treason;
he writes thus: Crime of Majesty (or Treason) is an horrible sin done to the
King; and this is either to the KING CAELESTIAL, or Terrestrial, Against the
King of heaven in three manners, by HERESY, Sorcery, Sodomy: HERESY is an evil
and false belief arising from Error in the right Christian faith: In this
sin is Sorcery and Divination, which are members of heresy; and arise from an
evil belief. After which he enumerates the several sorts of Sorceries and
Divinations, contrary to the Law of God and the Church, and to the right faith,
for which they are to be apprehended and removed from among the people of God,
that so no good Christian may be taken with their act, nor partner with their
sin. Chap. 2. Sect. 22. p. 141, 142. he writes thus. Of the Crime of Treason
or Majesty, there is no especial or large Enditement, but OF HERESY, and
Sorcery: Of which if any be indicted and drawn into judgment, this is the
Indictment, pronounceable for the King by any of his people in this manner,
according as it is found IN THE ROLLS OF ANCIENT KINGS. The form of an
Indictment against an heretic and sorcerer in ancient times.
I say Sebourge here is defamed by good people of the THE CRIME OF HERESY, for
this, that from an ill art and belief forbidden, and by charms and
enchantment, he took from Brightient by name, on such a day, etc. the flower of
his bear, by which he lost the vent, etc. Or thus: Molling, who is here, is
defamed by good men, that on such a day, etc. he renounced his baptism, and
caused himself to be circumcised and became a Jew or Saracen; or offered or
sacrificed unto Mahomet in despite of God, and in damnation of his soul, and
this sin he did FELONIOVSLY, etc. And if he will deny it, I am ready to prove
it for the King, as belongs to the King to do; Chap. 4. Sect 11. p. 42. he
defines, that deadly sins are to be punished with death: and mortal pain;
and that such punishments are warranted by the old Testament, and to be
inflicted to prevent eternal death. After which Sect. 14. p. 252. Of the
punishment of Treason; he determines thus: That Sodomy is to be punished, with
burying the party alive under ground; Sorcery by burning in the fire. The
JVDGEMENT OF HERESY is fourfold; The 1. is Excommunication; the 2. Degradation:
the 3. Disinherison: the 4. dee' ARSE en Cinders; TO BE BVRNED TO ASHES.

By this punctual Authority of Horn, it is most clear to me. First, that
Heretics and Apostates, as well as Sodomites and Sorcerers, even as they were
Heretics, were inditable and triable at the Kings suite in the King Courts by
the very common Law of England, without any precedent conviction of Heresy See
Cooks 3. Institutes. cap. 5. of Heresy, p. 41, 42. and ^^^^ar and VVarners
Cases there cited. 10. H 7. 17. Old book of Entries. f. 264. 340. accordingly.
by the Ordinary of the Diocese, or by a National or Provincial Synod, and
that the Judges of the common Law, when any Heretic or Apostate was to be
proceeded against criminally and capitally for his life; were to judge, what
was Heresy and what not, not the Bishops, or Synod only, as well as in the
case of a ( r) Prohibition or Habeas Corpus. 2. That such Inditements were
usual, and a set form of them used and pursued in Edward the first his
reign, and were then to be found in the Rolls of ancient Kings, long before
him: therefore were then of long, of ancient use, and warranted by the ancient
common Law of England before his reign: 3. That the Bishops and Clergy could
punish heresy only with Excommunication and Degradation, not with death ^. 4.
That by the ancient Common Law of England in Edward the first his reign, and in
the reign of ancient Kings before him, Heresy as heresy; and Sorcery only as
Heresy and a branch thereof, and under the name of heresy, was inditable in
the Kings Court at the Kings suite, and punished with burning to death: and so
the writ De Haeretico Comburendo, (if necessary when grounded upon the Judges
sentence) warranted by the common Law, and the judgment of burning given by
it, long before any Statute made against Heresy in the reign of Richard the
second, or Henry the fourth. 5. That Heretics and Apostates who are such
indeed, may at this day be indicted for their heresy and Note.
Apostasy in the Kings Bench, or at the Assizes, by the very common Law of
England; and upon sufficient proofs be there convicted, condemned and adjudged
to be burnt; this power of the Judges at common Law to try and condemn
Heretics, being not now restrained by any Statute, nor taken away by the
Statute of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. which repeales all former Statutes against
Heretics, or Heresy, which only concerned Bishops, Ordinaries, and their
proccedings in case of Heresy grounded on them, not the King or his Judges.

The next Authority I shall cite, is that of Fleta, written by a learned Lawyer
imprisoned in the Fleet (as ( Preface to the 10. Report
) Sir Edward Cook informs us, in Edward the third his reign, and taken for
the most part out of Bracton) lib. 1. cap. 3. Christiani Apostatae, Sortilegii,
and hujusmodi, DEBENT COMBVRI: Contrahentes vero cum Judaeis vel Judaeabus,
pecorantes, and Sodomitae, in terra vivi confodiantur, per testimonium legale
vel public convicti. A clear Authority, that Apostates, (which comprehends
all such as fall into Heresy, Judaisme, or Paganism, after they have embraced
the true Christian orthodox faith.) South-sayers, and such like (which
comprehends Heretics likewise) OUGHT TO BE BURNT, even by the common Law then
in use; and that Christian; who turned Jews, and Sodomites, were to be buried
alive.

After this Wickliffe and his followers (called Lollards) infesting the Pope
and Prelates with their Doctrines and invectives against their Antichristian
Tenets, and impostures, they being greatly favored by some Nobles and eminent
Knights, about the end of the reign of King Edward the 3. and beginning of
Richard the second, the Prelates bearing then great sway in the Kingdom, not
daring to trust the Judges with the Trial of these New Heretics (as they
styled them) taking hold of the President in the Council at Oxford in King
Henry the seconds reign, forecited, and of the practice of the Pope, and
Popish Prelates in foreign parts took upon them in their Synods, Convocations,
and likewise in private Consistories to condemn these Lollards for heretics,
and upon their sentence there passed, without any Indictment or trial at the
common Law, procured a writ (which they might easily do being then Lord
Chancellors and Lord Privy Seals for the most part) De Haeretico comburendo,
to be directed in the Kings name to the Sheriffs of Counties and Mayors of
Towns, to burn such for Heretics whom they alone had thus condemned (before
there was any Statute) chiefly upon this ground, that heretics by the judgment
of the common Law, upon Inditements and Convictions in the Kings Courts, were
to be burned. This is evident not only by the Bishops proceedings in their
Consistories against ( Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 1. Edit. ult. p. 564. to
680.
) John Wickliffe, John Aston, Philip Repington, Nicholas Harford, William
Swinderby, and Walter Brute, but also by that form of writ, de Haeretico
Comburendo mentioned in ( See Cooks Preface to the 10. Report.
) Fitzherberts Natura Brevium, f. 269. c. which was made ( See 2. H. 4. Rot.
Parl. n. 28.
) in Parliament by the King and Lords, for the burning of William Sautre, a
godly Martyr, condemned of heresy in the Convocation at the earnest
solicitation of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, in the 2. year of
King Henry the fourth, and burned by virtue of this writ; the first Martyr we
read of burnt by virtue of such a writ, granted, merely upon a sentence given
by the Prelates themselves, without an Indictment and Judgment at Common Law.
This writ for his burning (made without the Commons) is thus translated into
English by ( Acts and Monuments. vol. 1. p. 675.
) Mr. Fox. The King, etc. to the Mayor and Sheriffs of Loadon, greeting; ( y)
Whereas the reverend Father Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England
and Legate of the Apostolic Sea, by the assent, consent and counsel See M.
Foxes Acts and Monuments the oldest Edition. 142. 1676. the like Writ in Latin.
of other Bishops and his Brothers Suffragans, and also of all the whole Clergy
within his Province gathered together in his provincial Council, the DUE
ORDER OF LAW BEING OBSERVED in all points in this behalf, has denounced and
declared by his definitive sentence, William Sautre, sometimes Chaplain fallen
again into damnable heresy the said William had abjured, thereupon to be A
MOST MANIFEST HERETIC, and therefore has decreed, that he should be degraded,
and has for the same cause degraded him from all prerogative and privilege of
the Clergy, decreeing to leave him unto the secular power, and has really so
left him, ACCORDING TO THE LAWS AND CANONICAL SANCTIONS SET FORTH IN THIS
BEHALF. ( Nos igitur zelator Justuiae, and Fidei Catholicae cultor, etc.
) We therefore BEING ZEALOVS IN RELIGION, and REVEREND LOVERS OF THE CATHOLIC
FAITH (and of Justice) willing and minding to maintain and defend the holy
Church, and the Laws and Statutes of the same, TO ROOT ALL SVCH ERRORS and
HERESIES OUT OF OUR KINGDOM OF ENGLAND (as much as in us lies) and the
heretics so convicted to punish WITH CONDIGN PUNISHMENT: and considering that
such heretics convicted and condemned in form aforesaid, both ACCORDING TO
THE LAW OF GOD AND This relates to our ancient Common Law. Note.
MAN, AND THE CANONICAL INSTITUTIONS IN THIS CASE ACCUSTOMED, OUGHT TO BE
BURNED WITH FIRE; We command you as straightly as we may or can, firmly
injoyning you, that you do cause the said William being in your custody, in
some public and open place within the Liberties of your City aforesaid (the
cause aforesaid being published to the people) TO BE PVT INTO THE FIRE, and IN
THE SAME FIRE REALLY TO BE BVRNED, to the great horror of his offense, and the
manifest example of other Christians; and this upon the peril that will fall
thereupon, you may by no means omit. Test Rege apud Westminster. 26. Febr. Anno
Regni sui 2. This condemnation of Sautry and writ for his burning was in time
before the Statute of 2. H. 4. passed in Parliament, and was made, by advise of
the Lords Temporal in Parliament only, without the Commons, as the Parliament
roll demonstrates. Soon after which one ( See Fox Act. and Monuments Vol. 1.
p. 681.
) John Badby was likewise burned by virtue of a like writ; and sundry others
after him.

From this writ I shall observe: First, that by the Canonical Law and
Sanctions generally used and received in England and in foreign parts, Bishops
both in their Synods and Consistories usurped authority to convict and condemn
Heretics, and deliver them over to the secular power to be corporally
punished; which is further cleared by the express words of the Statute of 2.
H. 4. cap. 15. but they could neither attach nor imprison them before that Act
in this Kingdom. 2. That the burning of Heretics with fire, was not
introduced by the Statute of 2. H. 4. or this writ then first made by advise of
the Temporal Lords, but was a punishment accustomed in this case, according to
the Law of God and man, and canonical institutions used in this Realm, long
before this Act made, as the very words of the writ, compared with this Statute
of 2. H. 4. made in Parliament in the same year, soon after this Writ,
attest. 3. That this writ framed in Parliament for Sautry only, not others
(made in time somewhat before this Statute, the same Parliament) makes no
recital at all, of this Statute, as it ought to do, if grounded on it:
therefore not ordained by it. What alterations then did this Statute make of the
Law in former times used in this case? only these. First, it gave power to
Ordinaries and Diocesans to cause to be arrested and kept in safe custody such
who were suspected or defamed of Heresy, or keeping heretical Books and
writings; till they did canonically purge themselves, or abjure their heresies:
2. It gave them power to fine such persons to the King: 3. If any person
convicted before them of heresy refused to abjure his Heresy, or relapsed
again into it after abjuration, it gave them Authority to turn him over to
the sec^lar Court, and after sentence of Heresy passed against him, in the
presence of the Sheriff of the Shiere, or Mayor or Sheriffs and Bailey of the
Corporation, where such Heretic was proceeded against (whom this Act enacted
the Diocesan or his Commissary to summon to be personally present at the
sentencing of Heretics) it enjoined these secular Officers to give assistance
to the Diocesan of the same place and his Commissaries in this case, and
without any further Indictment, trial or judgment at common Law (formerly
used in cases of heresy when capitally proceeded against) after such sentence
pronounced (without any writ de Haeretico Comburendo) to receive the same
person so sentenced into their custody, and to cause him to be burnt in an high
place before the people, that such punishment might strike fear into the minds
of others, to deter them from such wicked Doctrines and heretical erroneous
opinions; and the said Sheriffs, Majors and Bailiffs of Counties, Cities,
Buroughs and Towns, were to be attending, ayding and assisting to the
Diocesans and Commissaries in such cases; which they were not bound to be
before, as appears by the express words of the Act.

4ly. It gave every Bishop and his Commissary power, to question and condemn
Heretics in their Consistories, and then to deliver them over to the secular
powers to be burned, which none but a Synod or Convocation (for ought appears
by any Presidents) could do before. So as the maine alteration wrought by this
Act was, That these temporal Officers were to be ^ending, ayding, and
assisting to the Ordinaries and their Commissaries, and present at their
sentence given against Heretics; and after sentence passed by them alone,
without any indictment, Judgment, verdict at Common Law, or Writ of the Kings,
to burn them to Ashes; by which the lives of all were made subject to the
Convocations, yea to every Ordinaries and Commissaries power alone, and that
without and before any lawful trial by their Peers, or any legal indictment
or conviction according to the Law of the Land, contrary to Magna Charta, chapter
29. 5. Ed. 3. ^. 9. 25. E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3. 15. E. 3. Stat. 1.
c. 3. 4. 37. E. 3. c. 18. and 42. E. 3. c. 3.

This was the great grievance introduced by this Act, and the cause of its
repeal, and of all other Statutes of this kind; by 1. Eliz. c. 1. So as this
Statute of Hen. the fourth was no ^^t^oduction of a new Law, but only a
confirmation of the Common Law, as to the punishment it self of burning
Heretics, as is evident by the premi^e; though introductive of a new Law in
the manner of proceeding and other precede^t re^pect: And in this sense ( Acts
and Monuments p. 575. 576.
) Mr. Fox his words are t^^e; That hithe to, (^. till the making of 5. R. 2.
and 2 H. 4. The Popish Clergy had not authority sufficient by any Politic Law
or Statute of this Land, to proceed unto death against any person whatsoever in
case of Religion, but only by the usurped tyranny and example of the Court of
Rome.

But yet the King and his Judges had power to proceed against; imprison and
burn Heretics to death, by the Common Law, though the Ordinary had not (as I
have proved) This law gave the Ordinaries and Clergy a new power in this
respect, to condeme and burn such as they held Herticks, which they had not
before: Hence ( Walsing* h. Hist Angl. p. 201* to 220. Fox Acts and Monuments.
p. 564. to 582.
) the Pope sent his Letters to King Richard the second to suppress Wiccliffe
and his followers, and bring them to condign punishment, and to be assistant
to the Bishops herein, qui in prosecutione istius negotij noscuntur favore and
AVXILIO TVAE CELSITVDINIS INDIGERE; Whereupon the King writ Letters to the
University and Chauncellor of Oxford, to apprehend, imprison, and convict them
for their tenants, which they could not do but by this royal command, by any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction then in use.

Fitzherbert a learned Judge in his Natura Brevium (written in Henry the 8. his
Reign,) fol. 269. determines thus. Note it appears by Britton in his Book,
that Heretics shall be burned, and it appears by that Book, THAT THIS IS THE
COMMON LAW. But Note, that the person who shall be burnt for Heresy, ought to
be first convicted thereof by the Bishop, which is his Diocesan, where he
abides, and abjure the same, and after if he relapse into this Heresy, or any
other, and be condemned thereof in the said Diocese, then he shall be delivered
to the secular power by the Clergy, to do with him as the King shall please;
and then it is like the King may pardon him, if he will, or grant a Writ De
Haeretico comburendo to burn him. Then reciting the ancient form of the Writ
forecited, he proceeds thus: And by this Writ it appears, that a Man ought to
be convicted of Heresy by the Archbishop and all the Clergy of his Province
and abjured of the same, and after newly convicted and condemned by the Clergy
of his province, and that in their general Council of Convocation; But now by
the Statute of 2. H. 4. c. 15. it is ordained, that any Bishop in his Dio^ may
convict a man of Heresy and adjure him, and after relapse newly convict and
condemn him thereof, and warn the Sheriff or other Officer to take and put
him into the fire, etc. and this the Sheriff or other Officer ought to do by
the Bishops precept, and that Without any Writ to be directed to them By the
King to do i^. And this is the cause (as it seems) that this writ is not put
in the new Registers, because this writ will not serve, nor ought to be sued at
this day: but it is void, and null in Law, by reason of this Act. But now by the
Statute made in 25. H. 8. c. 14. this Statute of 2. H. 4 is repealed and made
void, and now it is ordained by this last Statute, that he who is abjured of
Heresy and after falls in relaps, and is convicted of it before the Ordinary,
that yet the Ordinary ought not to commit him to the lay power to burn him,
without the Kings writ, De Haeretico comburendo, first purchased thereupon, as
appears by the said Act more at large.

Sir Ed. Cook in the 3d. Part of his Institutes, c. 5. p. 39. 40 41. writes,
that it appears by Bracton, Britton, Fleta, Stamford, and All our Books,
that he that is duly convict of Heresy, shall be burnt to death (even by the
Common Law:) That the Dio^ae an has Jurisdiction of Heresy; and so it has
bin put in are in all Matthew Hamond An. 21. Eliz. Ho^ 1579 Stow. p. ^^61.
Queen Elizabeth's Reign; and accordingly it was resolved by Fleming Chief
Justice; Tanfield chief Baron; Williams and Crook Justices, Hill. 9. Ia^. R.
in the care of Legate the Heretic, that upon a conviction before the Ordinary
of Heresy, the writ De Haeretico comburendo does lie. The Ecclesiastical
Judge at this day cannot commit the person that is convict of Heresy to the
Sheriff, albeit, he be present, to be burnt, but must have the Kings writ, De
Haeretico comburendo, According to the Common Law; For now all Acts of
Parliament are repealed. And the reason why Haeresie is so extrea^l^ and
fearfully punished is, for that, Gravius est aeternam quam temporalem ledere
majestatem. The party duly convicted may recall and abjure his opinion, and
thereby save his life, but a relapse is fatal. For as in case 'of a disease of
the Body, after a recovery recidiuation is extremely dangerous; So in case o^
Heresy (a disease of the soul) a relapse is incurable. And as he who is a
L^per of his body is to be removed from the society of men, least he should
infect them, y the Kings Writ, De Leproso amovendo: So he that has Lepram ^
Levit. 1^. N^. 5. 2 2 C^. 26, (...)
animae, that is, to be convicted of Heresy, Shall be cut off, least he should
poison others, by the Kings Writ, De Haeretico comburendo. But if the Heretic
will not after conviction abjure, he may by force of the said Writ, be burnt
without abj ration. He adds; that when an Act of Parliament is made concerning
matters merely spiritual, as Heresy, yet that Act being part of the Laws of
the Realm, the same shall be construed and interpreted by the Judges of the
Common Law, who use to confer with those that are learned in that profession;
which he proves by the resolution in John Keysers case, Mich. 5. E. 4. rot.
143. Coram Rege, and Hillary Warners case, M, 11. H. 7. rot. 327. in the Common
Pleas Apud Joan. de Aton. Constit. Legit. s. 152. 154.
This is clear by the Authority of the Council at Oxford under Tho. Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno Dom. 1448. for the punishment of Heretics, and
suppression of Heresies, In uberiorem fortificationem juris communis in hac
part, as the Constitutions of it determine: which likewise inform us; Quod
licet inter crimen Haeresis and lesae Majestatis in legibus diversis quaedam
paritas reputetur, est tamen dissimilis culpa, paenamque exigit GRAVIOREM
divinam quam humanam offendere Majestatem. By which Authorities it is clear to
me.

First, that our Kings in ancient times did at first make use of Synods, and
Convocations only to Marsilius Patavinus Defensor Paci^ pars 2. c. 9, 10, 21.
advise them what was Heresy, and Apostasy, what not, not to convict and
condemn Heretics to be burnt: and that Heresy and Apostasy are offenses
inquirable, inditable, and triable in a criminal way at the Kings suit in the
Kings Courts before his Justices, by the ancient common Law of this Realm, and
punishable after indictment and conviction, by BVRNING, death, if not
forfeiture of Lands, as in case of Treason against the King himself.

2ly. That the Writ De Haeretico comburendo, is grounded and warranted by the
common Law, not introduced by the Statutes of 2. H. 4. c. 15. or 2. H. 5. c. 7.
(which neither prescribe nor make mention of it) the Statute* of 25. H. 8. ^.
14. being the first Act that names it; as well as the writs De Excommunicato
capiendo, and Apostata Capiendo (introduced by the common law withoutany Act of
Parliament) with the writ; ad deliberandum Clericum Ordinario, and the like.

3ly. That the Statutes of 2. H. 4. c. 15. 2. H. 5. c. 7. and 25. H. 8. c. 14.
during the time they were in force, took away this power from the Judges to
condemn He, reticks, giving them authority only to enquire after them and
return their Inquisitions to the Ordinaries by way of information, not
conviction or evidence, vesting all the power of condemning Heretics in the
Convocation, Ordinaries and their Commissaries, during their continuance; which
Statutes being repealed by 1 Eliz. c. 1. the common Law is thereby revived;
Therefore the Judges at this day by the ancient common Law of Engl. may indict
and condemn Heretics and Apostates to be burnt (the rather because the
Bishops power is abolished) cortrary to the opinion of 27. P. 8. 14. (delivered
when those Laws were in force) and of Sir Edward Cook in his third
Institutes, p. 40. That at this day no person can be indicted or impeached for
Heresy, before any temporal Judge, or other that has temporal Jurisdiction;
as upon the perusal of the Statutes of 5. R. 2. c. 5. 2. H. 4. c. 15. 2. H. 5.
c. 7. 25. H. 8. c. 14. 2. Phil. and Mary c. 6. appears. For these Acts being
repealed, as he there grants; the old common Law of England is thereby revived
as to Heretics and Apostates; and so at this day, any person may be indicted,
impeached, condemned, before the temporal Judges of the Kings Courts for
apparent real Heresy (contrary to the Word of God, and 4. first General
Councels) in such sort as they were and might be, before these Statutes.

4ly. That since the repeal of these Statutes, no man upon a bare conviction
of Heresy before the Ordinary, or Commissary, justly may or ought to be put to
death or burnt, by the Writ De Haeretico comburendo, unless he were likewise
first legally indicted and convicted by a Jury in the Kings Courts, as all
other capital Malefactors, Felons, and Traitors are. My reasons are, F^^st
because it is directly contrary to Magna Charta: c. 29. the Petition of Right;
5. E. 3. c. 9. 25. E 3. c. 4. and other forecited Statutes of Edward the 3d.
and contrary to the right order of Justice, good equity, and the Laws of the
Realm, as is resolved in the Stat. of 25. H. 8 c. 14. 2ly. Because the
Sheriff could not execute any man by virtue of this Writ, or without it,
before the Statute of 2. H. 4. c. 5. nor after it without this Writ, unless he
were actually present at the sentence, as is resolved, 2. Mariae, Brook,
Heresy, 1. Therefore this Statute and all others in pursuance of it, being
totally repealed, this Writ and the proceedings on it upon a bare sentence of
the Ordinary is (as I humbly conceive) merely void in Law and contrary to
Magna Charta: And therefore it is considerable, whether the resolution of the
Judges in Legates case, forecited, be not erroneous, though seconded by Sir
Edward Cook. For though the Ordinary of every Diocese both before and after
these Acts might convict any person for Heresy, and excommunicate or degrade
him by the common Law; yet the Sheriff could not execute him by any such
convictions either without or by virtue of a Writ De Haeretico comburendo: but
by power of those Acts now all repealed, as is resolved by 25. H. 8. c. 1. 4
Yet that an Heretic or Blasphemer convicted and condemned of Heresy or
notorious Blasphemy by a whole National Synod or Convocation, may by Ordinance
of both Houses of Parliament without any previous Indictment, be lawfully
executed by a Writ De Heretico comburendo, even at this day, seems probable to
me, since it was usual before any Statute made, by the connivance of the common
Law.

5ly. That an Heretic and Apostate legally indicted and convicted in the
Kings Courts before the Judges for Heresy or Apostasy, and adjudged to be
burnt, may at this day by the common Law be executed without such a Writ, by
virtue of the judgment only, by the Sheriff (who is an Officer to the Court)
as well as other Felons may be and are usually executed in other cases without
a Writ. And if the Parliament will be pleased by a Law to declare, what are
Heresies in particular, and what Heretics and Apostates in special shall be
indicted and proceeded against at the common Law: as they did heretofore in
case of Treasons by the Stat. of 25. E. 3. c. 2. there will be as great
benefit, and no more danger of Tyranny or Persecution, in permitting,
commanding the Judges to proceed against Heretics and Apostates (who are
Traitors unto God and Religion) according to the ancient Rules of the common
Law, then there now is in their proceedings against Traitors to the King and
Kingdom, upon the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. a very good president (as I
humbly conceive) for framing a new capital Law against Heresies and
Blasphemies.

Now the reasons which confirm me in this opinion, That all Heresies,
Blasphemies, Schisms, Apostacies, Idolatries are triable and punishable in a
criminal or Capital manner, only by an indictment and legal Trial at the
common Law, but not upon any sentence given by the Clergy in Convocation, or
the Bishops in their Consistories, are these: First, because the Priests under
the Law, were neither appointed to condemn nor execute such (unless upon
extraordinary occasions in default of the Majestrat) but only the Majestrates,
and people; as Deuteronomy. 13. with other precepts and precedents forecited,
manifest: especially Job. 31. 26. 27. 28. If I behold the Sun when it shined,
or the Moon walking in brightness; or my heart has been secretly enticed
(to worship them) or my mouth has kissed my hand: this also were an iniquity,
TO BE PVNISHED BY THE IVDGE: for I should have denied the God that is above.
Secondly, Because all such under the Gospel since Christ's time, were anciently
punished with imprisonment, confiscation of goods, disinherison, banishment,
death, only See Augustine Epist 48 50. 159 to 174.
by the civil Laws, Edicts of Godly Emperors, Kings, and civil Majestrates,
and by their sentences and Judgments in pursuance of them; as is apparent by
the premised and subsequent Laws and Histories; No Prelates, Counsels, Synods,
anciently having power to pass any such civil, corporal or capital sentence
against them; but the civil Judges and Majestrate only. Hence Adversus
Albigenses l. 3. c. 15. 22. Bibliotheca Patrum Tom. 13. p. 283. 287. See
Antonini Hist. part. 3. Tit. 19. c. 1* Sect 4.
Lucas Tudensis about 350. years since, writing of the Albigenses reputed for
Heretics, records, that a judice Regionis capti sunt, Et ut digni erant
flaminum ignibus traditi; confessing it to be the civil Magistrates duty, both
to restrain and punish them; concluding thus. Regum and Principum est hoc
ministerium, scilicet, fidei rebels occidere, per se, vel per ministros suos.
Quod nisi solicit fecerint, rationem reddent Domino de his, quae eorum
dissimulatione, vel negligentia ab impijs perpetrantur; Remunerabuntur autem,
si illorum ministeriocultus fidei conservetur. Hence De errore Propbanarum
Re^igionum, Bibl. Patrum Tom. 4.
Julius Firmicus writes thus to the Emperors Constans and Constantius; vobis
sacratissimi Imperatores, ad vindicandam and puniendam Idololatriam necessitas
imperatur, and hoc vobis Dei summi lege praecipitur: 3ly. Because See Augustine.
Contr. Lit Potiliani. l. 2 and contra Cresconium Gram l. 3. and Epist. 48. 50.
Gratian Cause. 23. qu. 3. 4. 5. Leo Epist. 38. 39. 71. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p.
616. 617. See Truth triumphlng over Falsehood. Bernardus super Cant. Ser. 66.
Gregor. lib. 1. Epist. 31. 72
all the godly Counsels, Bishops, Fathers in former ages, yea Popes
themselves, have written to, and importuned Godly Emperors, Kings, Magistrates
to apprehend, suppress, punish Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers and
Apostates, informing them it was their duty to do it; to which all Orthodox
Protestant Churches, Writers at this day subscribe, yea and the Papists too:
From whence On Rome 13. hereafter cited more largely.
Paeraeus, Dr. Willet, De Judice and Norma fider, p. 72, 73, 74
Bishop Davenant, and generally all Protestant Divines, thus argue against the
Popish Prelates and Clergy, who will not admit of Christian Princes and
Majestrates to be the Judges of Heretics, Schismatricks, etc. but only to be
executioners of them, when condemned first by them for Heretics, and delivered
over as such unto them to burn or punish. Every one has the supreme
Jurisdiction, Power or Authority of judging, in those things wherein he has
the supreme Power of punishing, condemning, and executing Offenders, because
all punishment and execution without a preceding Judgment, knowledge and
conviction of the truth and reality of the crimes for which the party is
punished or executed, is rash and unjust; and no Prince or Majestrate can
justly punish another for opposing, or not embracing that Faith and Religion
which himself is not able and has no jurisdiction to judge, whether it be
Heresy, or Truth agreeable to Gods word; it being contrary to ^ohn 7. 51. Acts
25. 15. 16. 17. the course of all Laws both Divine ^ Humane: But in the
business of Faith and Religion Christian Princes and Majestrates have the
supreme Jurisdiction, Power Authority of condemning, punishing and executing
Heretics, Schi^maticks, Blasphemers, Apostates, and Idolarers criminally or
capitally; as all ancient Fathers, Counsels, Protestant Churches Marsil.
Pat^w^inus Defens. Pacis pars 2. c. 9. 10, 21
writers accord: Therefore they only have the proper Jurisdiction and Conusance
of their Crimes, and are to try them as they do other Malefactors by way of
Indictment and Jury only.

4ly. Because Sixfold Com^entary on Romans 13. Contr. 4. 5. 6.
Dr. Willet, De ^udice and Norma Fidei p. 72. etc.
Bishop Davenant with other of our own and Marfilius Patauinus Defensor: Pacis
pars, 2: c 9, 10, 21
^orraign Protestant Divines, accord; That the Clergies encroaching of the
power of judging and condemning Heretics, dolaters, Schismatics, Apostates
Blasphemers further then to excommunicate or degrade them only, and denying the
Christian Majestrate power to indict, arraigne, try, and condemn them
criminally, to inflict pecuniary, corporal or capital censures on them, is a
mere Papal encroachment and innovation; usurped See Reynerus Contr. Waldenses
c 8. 9. 10. compared with Lucas Tudensis adversus Albigenses l. 3. c. 15. 16.
17. 18. 19 20. 21. 22.
about some three hundred and forty years since by the Pope and Popish Clergy,
by the connivance of Christian Princes, to suppress the Albigenses and
Waldenses, whom they feared the Civil Magistrate, who favored them, would not
condemn, burn or put to death as Heretics, it left to their Tribunalls, and
thereupon appointed their own special Inquisitors to proceed against them.
Therefore being a mere Papal usurpation and Encroachment upon the Kings
Royal Prerogative, and lawful Power, it is certainly abolished for ever by
the Statute of ^ Eliz. c. 1. and other Acts against the Popes usurpations.

5ly. Because foreign Protestant States and Princes condemn no Heretics to
suffer losseof Liberty, Goods, life, or banishment, but such as themselves upon
trial and conviction before them, judge such, as appears by the case of See
Aretius Valentini Gentilis Historia, Joan Calvini libellus, Quod Hertici Iure
Gladij coercendi sunt. Theod. Beza. De Haereticis Capitali supplicio
afficiendis, and Bellarmin, de Laicis l. 3. c. 21.
Valentinus Gentilis, Servetus and other Heretics, condemned and executed by
them. Therefore our Judges also doubtless ought to enjoy and exercise this
Jurisdiction here in England, as well as those in foreign parts; the rather,
because they have legal Conusance of Heresy, and the like, in case of an
Habeas Corpus or Prohibition, as our See Cook Iustitutes part. 3. p. 41. 42.
Law-Bookes resolve; and so by like reason in case of an Indictment too; the
rather, because the clauses in the very Writ See here p. 55 Cook ^3. Instit p.
44.
De Haeretico Comburendo admit them such a power, and the ancient common Law of
England directly gave it them, as I have already manifested: which I hope will
fully satisfy such who have been hitherto doubtful, or contrary minded in
this point.

And thus much for proceedings by the Common Law of England against Heretics
and Apostates, which I thought fit to clear, because either not known to, or
mistaken by most; and may be useful for the future. I come now to our own
Statutes against Heresy and Heretics, of which very briefly, because all now
repealed, and touched upon before.

In the times of Popery there were several Acts of Parliament made against [
m] Fox Acts and Monuments vol. 1. Edit 1640. p. 575. 576. Fullers Argument,
Cooks 3 Instit p. 40 Rot Parl. 6. Ricn. 2. n. 52.
those the Prelates and Clergy then pretended to be Heretics, to wit, John
Wickliffe and his followers, whom they styled Lolards, who were no Heretics at
all in verity, as also against others really such, though not principally
intended in those Laws.

The first Law was only a pretended Act, fraudulently obtained by the Prelates
without the Commons consent, and published as a Law assented to by them ((...)
what manner you may read in the Marginal n Authors) to wit, the Statute of 5.
R. 2..5. Stat. ^. The effect of it was, that the Kings Commissions be made and
directed to Sheriffs and other Officers, and other persons learned, upon the
Bishops certificat made in Chancery, from time to time to arrest all Lollard
Preachers [whom they styled Hereticks] and also their fautors, Abettors, and to
hold them in arrest and strong prison till they should justify themselves
according to the Law and reason of Holy Church: But this pretended Act upon the
Commons Petition, in the next Parliament was revoked, because they never
assented to it: nor was it granted by them, for it was never their meaning to
be justified by, and bind themselves and their successors to the Prelates,
more then their Ancestors had done before them.

The next Statute against Heretics is that of 2. H. 4. chapter 15. procured as the
former, which was made only upon the Petition of the Prelates and Clergy of
England, who in their Petition desire, that it may be ordained 2. H. 4. l 0.
Parl. nu. 48.
per dictam Regiam Majestatem ex assensu Magnatum and aliorum Procerum in dicto
Parliamento existentum, And the Answer is, Rex de consensu Magnatum and aliorum
procerum Regni sui; without naming the Commons, as appears by the Parliament
Roll; yet the Prelates cunningly foisted this clause into their written and
printed Copies, (which they inserted into their Constitutions in the Council
at Oxford, An. 1408. some six years after this Law, though not in the
Parliament Rolls) Super quibus quidem Novitatibus, and excessibus superius
recitatis, Praelati and Clerus supradicti Ioanis de Acon Constit Legit. f. 154.
AC ETIAM COMMVNITATES DICTI REGNI in eodem Parliamento existentes, dicto
Domino Regi supplicaverunt, ut sua dignaretur Regia celsitudo in dicto
Parliamento providere de remedio oportuno. Wherein the Commons consent is
included, who neither joined in the Petition nor consented to the Act: yet this
clause continued in all our Printed Statutes, both in the Latin and English
Copies, to give it the color of an Act of Parliament, as Mr. Fox truly
observes in his Acts and Monuments vol. ^. Edit. 1640. p. 773. upon which
ground among others, this Statute was repealed by 25. H. 8. ^. 14. being
practiced as a Law till there: Whence Hist. Angl. An. 1401: p. 405. ypodig.
Neustriae. p. 158.
Walsingham styles it a Statute, and affirms, that William Satry a Presbyter,
burnt in Smithfield in the sight of many, had this Law practiced upon him;
Practizataque fuit haec lex in P^eudo presbytero, qui apud Smithfield, multis
aspectantibus EST COMBVSTVS; though in truth he was burned before this Law
passed, upon a Writ made by the King and temporal Lords, without the Commons
or Prelates.

This Statute [if I may so call it] ^^flicts not only imprisonment and fines
upon Lollards, and such as they then deemed Heretics, but death it self, in
case they abjured not their Heresy, upon a Conviction and sentence of Heresy
before the Ordinary or his Commissary, to whom all Sheriff, Majors, and other
Civil Officers were enjoined to be assistant, and present at their Sentences
of condemnation, if required, and upon their Sentence alone, without any Writ
de Haeretico comburendo, or Order from the King, they were to burn the persons
condemned and not abjuring in a public place, to terrify others: as you may
read in the printed Act it self, which differs something from the record.

7. H. 4. Rot. Parl. nu. 62. there was a like Petition exhibited by the
Prelates for a new and severer Law against the Lollards, and that all might
apprehend and enquire of such, and no Sanctuary might be granted to them,
wherein the name of the Commons was used, by means of Sir John Ticketoft and
others; but this, i^ seems, miscarried, and was never printed or published by
the Prelates, as the former was.

The next law against Heretics is 2. H. 5. c. 7. which ratified the former
Acts, prescribed an Oath to Sheriffs and other Officers, to assist and attend
the Ordinaries in prosecution of Heretics, and Lollards; Added a confiscation
of the lands Goods, and Estates of such as were convicted of Heresy, and
delivered over to the secular power, whether they were executed or burnt, or
not; and of all hereditaments of Lands in others for their use, and ordered
Judges of Assise and Justices of Peace in their Sessions to enquire after
Heretics, their fautors, maintainers, Books, Writings, Sermons, Conventicles,
and to apprehend them, to transmit their inquiries to the Ordinaries or their
Commissaries, to inform them, but not to be used as evidence, the Ordinaries
being left to proceed according to the laws of Holy Church. This Act
restrained the Judges and Justices power to punish Heretics unpon Indictment
by the Common Law, and made Heresy no civil, but an 27. I^. 8 13 14. B^.
Action Sur le case 2. 10. H. 7. 17. Dr. and Student l. 2. c 29.
ecclesiastical offense only, for the present; as some of our Law-Bookes style
it.

After this, the Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 14. repeales the Statute of 2. H. 4.
for these four reasons mentioned in the Preface of it. First, because that Act
does not in any part thereof declare any certain cases of Heresy, contrary to
the determination of Holy Scripture, or the Canonical Sanctions therein
expressed, whereby the Kings loving and obedient Subjects might be learned to
eschew the dangers and pains in the said Act specified; or to abhor and
detest that foul and detestable crime of Heresy.

2ly. Because these words, Canonical Sanctions, and such other like contained
in the said Act, are so general, that the most expert and best learned man of
this Realm, diligently lying in wait upon himself, cannot e^chew and avoid
the penalty and dangers of the said Act, and Canonical Sanctions, if he
should be examined upon such captious interrogatories, as is and has been
accustomed to be ministered by the Ordinaries of this Realm, in cases where
they will suspect any person or persons of Heresy.

3ly. For as much as it stands not with the right order of Justice or good
equity that any person should be convict and put to the loss of his life, good
NOTE
name or goods, unless it were by due accusation and witnesses, or by
presentment, verdict, confession or Outlawarie, since by the Laws of the
Realm for Treason committed to the peril of the Kings most royal Majesti;
upon whose surety depends the wealth of this whole Realm, no person may or
can be put to death, but by presentment, verdict, confession or process of
Outlary.

4ly. For that there be many Heresies, and pains and punishments for Heresies,
declared and ordained in and by the said Canonical Sanctions, and by the Laws
and Ordinances made by the Popes and Bishops of Rome, and by their Authority,
for holding, doing, preaching or speaking of things contrary to the said
Canonical Sanctions, Laws and Ordinances, which be but Humane, being mere
repugnant and contrarious to the Prerogative of the Kings imperial Crown,
regal jurisdiction, Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of this Realm; by reason
whereof his people of the same, observing, maintaining, defending, and due
executing of the said Laws, Statutes and Prerogative Royal, by Authority of
that Act of 2. H. 4. may be brought into slander of Heresy, to their great
infamy and danger and peril of their lives. Nevertheless, for as much as the
most foul and detestable crime of Heresy should not go unpunished, but be
utterly abhorred, detested and eradicate, nor that any Heretics should be
favored, but that they should have condign and sufficient punishment, for the
repressing of Heretics and such erroneous opinions in time coming; It enacts,
That the Statutes of 5. R. 2. and 2. H. 5. c. 7. for the punishment, and
reformation of Heretics and Lollards, and every provision therein, not
repugnant to this Act, shall stand in full strength: and that Sheriffs in
their Towns, and Stewards in their Leets, Rapes, and Wapentakes shall have
power to inquire of Heretics, as of common Annoyances, and to certify their
inquiries to the Ordinary, in such manner as the Justices of Assise and of the
Peace might do, by the Statute of 2. H. 5. c. 7. and that the Ordinaries after
such presentment and indictment, proved by the Oath of two lawful witnesses at
the least, and not otherwise, or by any other means, might convict, convent,
arrest and apprehend such persons presented or indicted of any Heresy. And
that he that happened to be lawfully convicted before the Ordinary in his open
Court, and in open place, of the Heresy whereof he was accused or presented,
shall abjure the same, and if he refused and renounced the same, then he should
do such reasonable penance for his offense as shall be limited by the discretion
of the Ordinaries. And if he refused to abjure, or after abjuration fall into
relapse, and were duly accused, or presented and corvict thereof as aforesaid,
that then in such cases he shall be committed to Lay power, TO BE BVRNED in
open places for example of others, as has been accustomed: the Kings Writ, De
Heretico comburendo, first had and obtained for the same: And it likewise
provides, that no manner of doing, speaking or communication, or holding
against any Laws made by the Bishops of Rome, or by their Authority, for the
advancement of their own worldly glory and ambition given them by humane Laws
or Policies, and not by Holy Scripture, contrariant and repugnant to the Laws
of this Realm, and the Kings Prerogative Royal, shall be deemed, reputed,
accepted or taken to be Heresy.

After this in 31. H. 8. c. 14. 34. H. 8. c. 1. and 35. H. 8. c. 1. several
Laws were made to punish certain particular points of Doctrine [commonly
called the Six Articles] with death and the loss of Goods, as you may read at
large in the Acts themselves* the last whereof somewhat mitigates and explaines
the former.

These Laws proving very See Mr. Fox Acts and Monuments vol. 2.
boody to the true Professors of the Gospel, thereupon the Statute of 1. Ed.
6. c. 12. repeald and utterly made void all Laws and Statutes formerly made
concerning Heretics, or opinions in Religion: and so they continued repealed,
during all King Edward the sixth his Reign. But Queen Mary coming to the
Crown, and restoring the Popes and Prelates exploded Jurisdictions, thereupon;

The Statute of 1. and 2. Phil. and Mary ^. 6. revived them all, in whose Reign
they were put in vigorus execution, to the destruction of many Godly
Christians; as we may read at large in Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, vol. 3.
But she deceasing, and Queen Elizabeth ^^cceding; The Statute of 1. Eliz. c.
1. repealed all these Laws again* rev^ed by Queen Mary; and leaves Ord^ and
the High Commissioners liberty to proceed against Heretics, only by
Ecclesiastical Censures, with these provisoes.

Provided always, and be it enacted as is aforesaid, that no manner of Order,
Act, or determination for any matter of Religion or cause Ecclesiastical, had
or made by the Authority of this present Parliament, shall be accepted, deemed,
reputed, or adjudged at any time hereafter, to be any Error, Heresy, Schism,
or Schismatic opinion: any Order, Decree, Sentence, Constitution or Law
whatsoever the same be to the contrary notwithstanding: Provided always, and be
it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that such person or Persons to whom your
Highness, your Heirs, or Successors shall hereafter by Letters Patents under
the Great Seal of England, give Authority to have or execute any Jurisdiction,
Power or Authority, Spiritual or Temporal, or to visi, Reform, Order or
Correct any Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses or Enormities, by virtue of this
Act, shall not in any wise have Authority or power to order, determine, or
adjudge any matter or cause to be Heresy, but only such as heretofore have
been determined, ordered or adjudged to be Heresy, by the Authority of the
Canonical Scriptures, or by the first 4. General Counsels, or any of them,
or by any other General Counsels, wherein the same was declared Heresy, by
the express and plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures, or such as
hereafter shall be Ordered, judged, or determined to be Heresy by the High
Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in their
Convocation: any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
So as this Act defines; what shall be adjudged and punished as Heresy by the
High Commissioners, and may serve for a good Rule to the Judges and Parliament
now to proceed by, in judging what shall be reputed* real Haeresie and
Blasphemy in future times.

But this clause of this Act is now repealed by an Act of this present
Parliament, which takes away the High Commission; and so all Statutes
concerning Heretics or Heresy are now wholly repealed; and the Ordinaries
power to punish them, totally abolished by the Ordinances abolishing Episcopacy.

Yet this is observable, that both before and after the repeal of all Statutes
concerning Haeresie by 1 Eliz. c. 1. some real Heretics and Anabaptists were
condemned and burnt for Haeresie, by virtue of the Common Law of England.

I read if Fox Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p. 315.
Fox his Acts and Monuments, that in King Henry the 8. his Reign in the year
of our Lord 1535. ten Datch men, accounted for Anabaptists, were put to death
in sundry places of the Realm: and that other ten repented and were saved,
and two of the said Company pardoned by the King, albeit the definitive
sentence was read. And well might they deserve this sentence, if our learned
Martyr John Philpot, may be credited; who writes in a godly Letter to a friend
of his: Fox vol. 3 p. 607
That Axentius, one of the Arrian Sect, with his Adherents, was one of the
first that denied the Baptism of Children; and next after him Pelagius the
Heretic, and some others that were in See Bernard sermo 66. sup Cant. Cant. [
o] Holinshead p. 46.
St. Bernards time; and in our days the Anabaptists, an inordinate kind of
men, stirred up by the Devil to the destruction of the Gospel. So he o An.
1538. Two Anabaptists were burned in Smithfield; three then bore fagots, and
abjured the Realm: but this was before these Acts repealed.

After their repeal, in the 17. year of Holinshead p. 1260 1261. Stow. p.
678. 679.
Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1575. A congregation of Anabaptists, being Dutchmen,
was discovered in a House without the Bars of Aldgate LONDON: 27 of them were
taken and sent to Prison: 4. of them bearing Fagots recanted their Haereticall
opinions at Paul's Cross the 5th. day of May: The 21. of May, one man and two
women Anabaptists, Dutch, were in the Consistory at Paul's condemned to be burnt
in Smithfield; after great pains taken with them, the Women were converted,
and the Man banished.

Nine Women of them and a Man were publicly Carted and whipped by the Sheriffs
Officers on the first of June, and then carried to the Water side from Newgate,
and shipped and banished, never to return more into England.

The 22. of July two Dutchmen Anabaptists were burned in Smithfield, who died
with great horror roaring and yelling. And by this means England was then
preserved from their infection.

Holinshead p. 1299. Stow. p. 685. Camden Eliz. p. 285.
Anno 1579. being 21. Eliz. Matthew Hamant for execrable Haeresie and Blasphemy
(not fit to repeat) against Christ and the Holy Ghost, and denying their Deity,
and the use of Baptism and Sacraments in the Church: was on the 13. day of
April condemned at Norwich, by the Bishop of the Diocese in his Consistory, as
an Haeretick: and on the 20th. of May, burned publikly in the Castle of
Norwich, his Ears being first cut off in the Market place, for horrible
blasphemy against the Queen.

[ r] Anno. 25. Eliz. on the 18. day of September, one John Jews, who named
himself Abdeit, an obstinate Haereticke, denying the Godhead of Christ, (*)
Holinshead p. 1354. Stow. p. 697.
and holding diverse other damnable Haeresies [much like his Predecessor Hamant]
WAS BVRNED AT NORWICH.

Cook 3. Instit. p. 40.
Hill. 9. Jacobi one Legate was juditially convented, convicted and condemned by
the Bishop of the Diocese for his Heresy, and it was resolved by the Judges
of the Kings Bench, that a Writ De Haeretico comburendo lay upon the judgment
[and some say he was burnt accordingly.]

9. Jacobi 19. Novembris, Anno Dom. 1611. one Edward Wrightman of Burton upon
Trent, was convented before Richard Neale Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
for denying the Trinity the Deity of Christ and of the Holy Ghost, and
affirming himself to be Christ and the Holy Ghost; and the Scriptures spoken
of them to be meant of himself; all which he affirmed and justified in his
Answers to his Articles, and persisted in the same after many conferences:
whereupon on the 5th. of December following, he was condemned for an obstinate
and incorrigible Haereticke and excommunicated with the great Excommunication,
and adjudged by the Bishop, to be delivered over to the secular power, to be
capitally punished, according to the Atrocity and haynousnes of his crimes and
Blasphemies; whose Articles and sentence, I have in my custody. Whether he were
actually burnt, or reprived as one frantique and distracted as some esteemed
him, I cannot certainly determine. All these were thus censured, and some of
them put to death by the common Law, since the Statutes against Heretics, were
repealed; why any scruple of putting such obstinate gross Haereticks and
Blasphemers to death, upon a legal Indictment and Conviction before the Judges
after the ancient course of the Common Law, should now be made. I can see no
color, unles our love to, our zeal for God, Religion, be far less, far
colder then our Predecessors, or those very Lordly Prelates whom we have
suppressed, and our solemn Covenants, Protestations to make a through
Reformation of all corruptions in Doctrine, Discipline, life, an engagement to
us to tolerate such most execrable Heresies, Errors, and open Blasphemies
which the most unreformed times persons, would by no means suffer without
speedy condign corporal and capital punishments.

I shall only add to this, that by the Statutes of 5. Eliz. c. 1. 23. Eliz. c.
1. and 3. ^7. Eliz. c. 1. 28. Eliz. c. 6. 35. Eliz. c. 1. 2. 39. Eliz. c. 18.
43. Eliz. c. 9. 1 Jac. c. 4. 3. Jac. c. 4. 5. 7. Jac. c. 6. and 3. Car. c. 2.
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Monks, Friars, who receive Orders by any power
derived from the Sea of Rome, if borne within the Kings allegiance, are to be
indicted in the Kings temporal Courts, and condemned, yea, executed as
Traitors, if they do but say Mass, exercise their Priestly sanctions, or
endeavor to seduce any of the Kings Subjects from their Religion and
Allegiance; though they do it [as they conceive] merely out of conscience and
duty to God and their Ecclesiastical Superiors; upon which Statutes many of
them have been executed as Traitors, and some of late by the present
Parliaments special direction, when the King himself would have reprived
them. The voluntary Harborers of them, knowing them to be such, are by the
Laws to be indicted and executed as Fellons; and the late See Canter^artes
Doom ^. 25. 26 27. 39 ^. ^. etc.
Archbishops familiarity, correspondence and confederacy with Priests and
Je^uites to introduce Popish Superstition, and subvert the established
Protestant Religion, was charged against him by the whole House of Commons, as
a Treasonable and Capital offense, for which, among other things, he lost his
head by the unanimous Judgment of both Houses of Parliament. Such Popish
Recusants or others who bring in any of the Popes Bulls or Excommunications
into this Realm, or publish them here, though out of a seduced Conscience, are
to be executed as Felons; by these Laws; or at least attainted in a
Praemunire, to the loss of their Estates and Libertyes. Such Popish Recusants,
who are convicted for not repairing to Church and receiving the Sacraments
among us, are to forfeit two parts in three to be divided, of their whole real
and personal Estates, to the King; to pay an hundred pounds for every Mass
they hear, and forfeit twenty pounds a Month for absenting themselves from
Divine Service and Sermons, in some Church or Chapel, which lest e^alty, of
twenty pounds a Month for absence from the public Ordinances, all Schismatics
and Separatists incur by these Laws, as well as Papist. All such Recu^ants
or Separatists who resuse the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, incur a
Praemunire, are to be imprisoned, and made incapable of any Office. The
importers of Popish Books, Pictures, Relics of any kind, are subject to
diverse pecuniary Penalties; Recusants themselves to be confined to their
Houses, disarmed, secluded from the Court, and all places of trust; disabled to
practice Law or Physic and in some cases to inherit Lands, to sue any Actions,
to be Executors or Administrators, and to forfeit all their goods, estates,
Dowers, Iointures during their natural lives; as these Statutes declare at
large: And besides this, they are to be excommunicated ipso facto, and so
utterly disabled to bring any action at Law; and all this in relation to their
false, heretical and detestable Religion, which often incites them to sedition,
Rebellion, Treason, against the King, Kingdom, Parliament. And are all to be
indicted and tried in these cases in the Kings Courts only according to the
Rules of the Common Law.

These Laws are still in force and executed to the full against them now; and
it was a See A Necessary Introduction to the Archbishop of Canterburies Triail
p. 3. to 70. An exact Collection of all Remonstrances, etc. 1643. p. 1. 2. 3.
4, 5, 10. etc.
great complaint, yea charge against the King and his ill Council in this and
former Parliaments, that they suspended or mitigated these Laws against Popish
Priests and Recusants. And shall we then tolerate other dangerous Heretics,
Schismatickes, Blasphemers and Enemies of our established Religion, yea and
plead for a common tolleration of them, when our Laws are so justly rigorous,
and our selves so vehement against these? God forbid.

As for obstinate Schismatics, who wholly separate from our Churches or public
Assemblies, and are no Papists, as they forfeit twelve pence for every Lords
day, and twenty pounds for every month they absent themselves from our public
Congregations, by the Statutes of 1. Eliz. c. 2. and other recited Acts: So by
the Statute of 35. Eliz. c. 1. [yet unrepealed] they are to be imprisoned
without Bail or mainprise upon conviction, until they conform themselves and
repair constantly to our Churches; and if within three months after their
Conviction they refuse to conform, and to repair duly to our Churches or
Chapells they are thereupon to take an Oath of Abjuration to depart the
Kingdom in the open Quarter Sessions or Assizes, before the Justices, within
such time as shall be limited; and in case they refuse to abjure or shall not
depart the Realm after such abjuration made, or return into it, or into any
the Kings Dominions again, without special license of the King first
obtained, then in every such case, the person so offending Shall be adjudged A
Felon, and suffer [death] as in case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy. And
every person who shall knowingly relieve, harbor, maintain, or keep in his
house or service any such obstinate Separatist or Schismatic, who shall-refuse
to repair to our Churches, or Chappells, shall after notice thereof by the
Ordinary or any Justice of Peace, or the Minister, Curate or Churchwardens of
the parish where such person shall then be, forfeit ten pounds for every Month,
that he shall so relieve, maintain, retain or keep any such person so
offending.

Which Act alone, if now duly executed, would speedily suppress, ot quit our
Church, our State of all those dangerous Anabaptists, Sectaries, and seperating
Enthusiasts who now so much infest, and threaten tuine unto both. I wish all
such would seriously read, Ephesians. 4. 1. to 7. Romans 16. 17. 18, 1 Cor. 1. 9. 10
14. 2 Pet. 2. Jud. 19. Ardeant licet flammus, et ignibu^ tradi^i, vel objecti
bestijs animas suas ponant, non erit illa fidei Corona sed paena perfidiae, nec
religionae virtutes exitus gloriosus, sed desperationis interitus. Occidi tali^
potest co^oneri non potest. Gyptian' de Vnitate Ecclesiae Ine ^^^a isles et
gravis culpa di, cordiae ^ec passtone purgatur, Exhi bear se non pefest
Martyrem, qui sraternam non tenuit Chai^atem Ibid.
St. Cyprians Book, de Vnitate Ecclesiae, and St. Augustins Books and Epistles
against the Donatists, which would teach them to renounce their dangerous
Schism and prevent the execution of this good Law against them.

How variously Heretics themselves [with their Fautors and Followers] are to
be punished by the Canon Law, to wit with excommunicution, loss of trading and
commerce with others, confiscation of their goods, depriving them and their
Children from all Ecclesiastical preferments, disinheriting of their Children,
loss of Dower by their Wives, disability to appeal, or give testimony;
absolution of their vassalls from all services, Tenures, Obligations by which
they are obliged to them; deprivation of all Sacraments of the Church and of
Christian burial; That no Register may write any thing, nor Advocate plead for
them witho^t loss of Office and public infamy; and delivery of them, after
sentence given, to the Secular Powers To be burned to Ashes: and what other
punishments Apostates and Schismatics are to undergo by the Canon Law, you
may read at large in Gratian: Causa 23. 24. Hostiensis Summa lib. 5. Tit. de
Haereticis, Schismaticis, Apostatis, and Iterantibus Baptisma. Summa Angelica,
Tit. Haereticus, Apostatia, Schisma: Summa Rosella, Tit. Apostatia, Haereticus.
L^ndwood Provin. Constable. l. 5. De Haereticis, Schismaticis and Apostatis [where
he writes,] sunt damnandi ad mortem per seculares potestates and per eas DEBENT
COMBVRI VEL IGNE CREMARI, ut patet in quadam constitutione Frederici]
Franciscus Zerula, his Praxis Episcopalis, pars 1. Tit. Haeretici fol. 109,
etc. Alfonsus a Castro adu: Haereses, and de justa haeret: punitione. Antonij
Corseti Repertorium. Tit. Haereticus and Apostatia, Claudius De Sanctes ad
edicta and de methodo Contr* sectas, veterum Principum. Lucas Tudensis, advers.
Albigensium errores l. 3. c. 15. 20. 21. 22. Bellarmin; de Laicis l. c. 21. 22.
Antonini Hist. pars 3. Tit. 19. c. 1. sect. 4. Reynerus contr. Waldenses c. 11.
12. Iacobi Gretseri Prologom: in scriptores contr. sectam Waldensium c. 6.
Bibl. Patrum Tom. 13. p. 290. 291. Concilium Oxoniense, Anno 1408. under Thomas
Arundell, for the suppression and punishment of Haereticks, apud Joan. de Aton,
Constitutiones Legit. f. 152. 153. 154. And in See Paulus Grillandus de
Haereticis and little Paenis.
sundry other Canonists, Tit. de Haereticis et Apostatis, whose names I
pretermit.

And thus much for the punishment of Heresy, Apostasy, and obstinate Schism
by corporal and capital censures in all ages, both at home and in foreign
patts.

I shall next present you with like Laws against, and punishments inflicted
Punishments of Blasphemy.
on open Blasphemers And profane Cursers and swearers.

Blaspemy is defined to be Summa Angel. and Rosella Tit. Blasphemia.
contemptuous scoffing, or malicious speech or word uttered in dishonor,
contempt, or dispight of God himself, or any person of the sacred Trinity: and
the more contempt, malice, dispite and rancor there is in the expression or
words spoken, the greater and more execrable is the Blasphemy, which crime
extends even to profane Oaths, curses, and execrations, falling under the
Title of Blasphemy.

For corporal and capital punishments inflicted by Christian Princes and
Magistrates against Blasphemers, and execrable Cursers and swearers, I shall
trouble you only with these instances.

The Cent. 4. cap. 7. Col. 545
Century Writers record, That Constantine and other Godly Emperors in the 4.
Century after Christ, did by civil edicts and punishments repress the
Blasphemies of Haeretickes.

Authent. Col. 6. Tit. 5. and Novel. l. 2. Tit. 29. Cent. Mag. 6. c. 6. col.
444.
Justinian the Emperor punished such with death and capital punishments, who
swore by any Member of God, or by Gods Hairs, or blasphemed God.

Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 6. Leges Wisigothorum l. 12. Tit. 3. lex v^apud
Frid. ^indeb^ogum ^* 22^.
The 12. Council of Toledo in Spain. Can. 9. confirms the Laws published by
King Eringius, whereof this was one, de Blasphematoribus sanctae Trinitatis,
which runs thus.

Sicut veritas sacri Evangelij praedicat, prolatum in fratrem contumeliae ver*
bum, judicio reum adsignat, quanto magis peccantem in Spiritum sanctum divina
animadversionis sententia dampnat, quod irremissibile hic and in futuro
Salvator ipse denunciat. Et ideo si quis Christi filij Dei blasphemaverit
nomen, ejusque sacrum corpus and sanguinem aut contempserit sumendum percipere,
aut parceptum visus fuerit rejecisse, vel quamlibet injuriarum blasphemiam in
sactam dixerit Trinitatem, id est in Patrem and Filium, and Spiritum sanctum:
tuncinstantia sace dotis vel judicis, in cujus civita^e, ^^stro vel territorio
hoc malum exortum fuerit, blasphemator ipse centenis decalvatus flage^^^
s^^j^ceat* et ardua in vinculis constitutus; perpetui exilii conteretur
aerumna: Res tamen eius inpotestatem Principis redacte manebunt, qualiter in
iure eorum, cui eas potestas confer elegerit inconvulse persistant.

The Emperors, Charles the Great and Ludovicus Pius, promulged this Law [ z]
Bochell^^ Decret. Eccles. Gal. l. 8. Tit. 13 c. 12. p. 1205. Capit, Car. and
Ludovici lib. 6. Tit. 10^ apud Frid. Lindeb p 995.
against Blasphemers; z Si quis quolibet modo blasphemiam in Deum jactaverit,
ab Episcopo vel comite pagi ipsius carceri usque ad satisfactionem tradatur,
and publica paenitentia mulctetur, donec precibus proprii Episcopi publice^
reconcilietur, Ecclesiaeque gremio canonice reddatur.

And the Emperor Ludovicus made this more severe and capital Law against
Blasphemers. Ludovici Imper. Capit. Additio. 3. Tit. 52. apud Lindebrogum. p.
1164.
De Blasphemia in Deum. Si quis quolibet modo blasphemiam in Deum iactaverit, a
prafect^ urbis ultimo supplicio subiiciatur; qui vero talem cognoscens non
manifestaverit, similiter coerceatur. Si praefectus urbis haec punire
neglexerit, post Dei iudicium nostram indignationem incurrat.

The Emperor Frederick the 2d. enacted this Law against Blasphemers, that
their Tongues should be cut out. Constit. Sicularum l. 2. Tit 8 apud Frid.
Lindebrogum. p 811.
Blasphemantes Deum and Virginem gloriosam linguae maliloquae mutilatione
punimus.

St. Gaguinus l. 7. Cent. Magd. 13 c. 6. Col. 672
Lewis King of France when going out of the Palace he heard a^ Blasphemour
filthily abusing the name of God, commanded his lips to be branded with an hot
Iron.

King Bochellus, Decreta Eccles. Gal. l. 8. Tit. 13. c. 24.
Philip the 6. of France called Valoyes, enacted this Law against Swearers and
Blasphemers; An. 1347. Volumus and ordinamus, ut ille vel illa quae Deo vel
beatae Mariae virgini malidicere presumpserit, aut turpe seu vile iuramentum
fecerit, pro prima vice ponatur in pilorio, inibi ab hora prima usque ad nonam
permansurus; ad cuius oculos proiici valiant lutum and alias inmunditias,
absque tamen lapidibus, vel aliis rebus eum laedentibus; deinde vero ad panem
and aquam absque quavis alia re per mensem demorabitur. Si autem ipsum secundo
ricidire contigerit: volumus quod in die mercati solemnis rursus in pilorio
constituatur, ipsiusque labium superius cum ferro calido taliter scindatur,
quod dentes eius apareant: Tertia vero vice; labium inferius, and quarta vice
totum bilabium. Quod si per miseriam eius quinto id sibi contigerit, volumus
quod in totum sibi lingua praescindatur, ut Deo and alteri deinceps maledicere
non valeat. Ordinantes insuper, quod si aliquis praedicta mala verba audiverit*
and incontinenti Iusticiae revelare noluerit, super eum possit emenda usque ad
summum 60. librarum levari; Si tamen talis adeo pauper fuerit, quod pecuniam
antedictam non possit exolvere, in carceribus, donec sufficere debeat ad
satisfaciendum emendae predictae, detineatur.

Charles the 7 of France. An. 1460. Henry the 2. of France An. 1546. Charles [
e] Bochellus Decreta Eccles. Gal l. 8. Tit. 13. c. 25. p. 1207.
the 9. and the Estates of Orleans. Artic. 35. An. 1585. and King Henry the
4th. of France, An. 1534. enacted these several Laws against Swearers and
Blasphemers. We inhibit and defend all persons of what estate, quality and
degree soever they be, to renounce, grieve, dispight or blaspheame, or use any
other villainous and detestable speeches against the honor of God and his holy
Mother, upon pain to be condemned for the first offense at such a fine as the
Judge shall think fit to assesse, one part whereof shall accrue to the King,
the other to the fabric of the Church* the third ^^ the enformer; and for the
second, third, and fourth offense* ^^^ ^^e shall be doubled, trebled, and
quadruplied, and for the ^^^^ o^^ence he shall be imprisoned eight hours, and
there be liable to all the crimes, villainies and obloquies that any will cast
upon him, and shall make such further amends as the Judge shall arbitrate: and
for the sixth offense he shall be set on the Pillory and there have his upperlip
branded with an hot Iron, so as his Teeth may appear. And for the 7. offense
he shall be brought and set on the Pillory and there have his lower lip branded
with an hot Iron. And if he swear and offend any more, he shall have his
Tongue cut off.

The Council of Lueran under Leo, the ninth Sess. Tit. Reformationes curia et
aliorum; to abolish execrable blasphemy which then out of measure prevailed [
f] Sairus Council. Tom. 4. p. 634. 635.
to the greatest contempt of Gods name, and of his Saints, ordained: That
whosoever should openly or publicly curse God, or blaspheame the name of Jesus
Christ, or of the Glorious Virgin with contumelious and obscene words, if he
were a public Officer or had jurisdiction, he should for the first and second
offense, forfeit all the profits thereof for three Months, and for the third,
be deprived of it. If a Clergy man, he was to forfeit one whole years profits
of al his Ecclesiastical livings for his first offense: For the second, to be
deprived of his Living if he had but one benefice, and of which benefice the
ordinary pleased if he had more then one: And for the third offense upon
conviction, to be deprived of al his dignities and benefices, and made
incapable to retain them. But a Layman blaspheming, if he be a noble man,
shall for the first offense pay 25. Ducats, and for the second offense fifty,
to be bestowed on the fabric of the chief Church in the City: and for the
third offense shall loose his Nobility: If an ignoble person or plebeian, he
shall for the first offense be imprisoned; if he shall above twice publicly
blaspheame, he shall stand for an whole day together before the Doors of the
principal Church with an infamous Miter on his head: If he shall lapse again
into the same sin, he shall be condemned unto perpetual prison, or to the
Galleys at the pleasure of the Judge. In the Court of Conscience, he that is
guilty of Blasphemy cannot be absolved with out Grievous penance. And we
further ordain, that secular Judges who shall not as much as in them lies
punish those who are convicted of Blasphemy with just punishments, shall be
subject to the same punishments as the Blasphemers themselves, as guilty of the
same sin. And all that shall hear any to blaspheame are enjoined to inform
against them, by this Counsels decree. Holmshead p. 1299, 1354. S^ow p. 635.
697. C^^ndems Elizabeth p. 285.
Hamant and Jews, as well for their execrable Blasphemies, as Heresies, were
By the very common Law, without any Statute, condemned and burnt in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign at Norwich; and no doubt Blasphemers may be indicted and
punished by the common Law, with death, as well as Heretics and Apostates,
for open execrable blasphemy.

By the Statute of 21. lac* ^. 20. all profane swearers and cursers shall
forfeit twelve pence for every Offense and Oath, to be levied by distress for
the use of the poor; and sit in Stocks for three hours, if no distress be to
be had if the Offender be above twelve years old; and to be whipped publicly
if under. Too small a punishment (as some conceive) for so execrable a sin*
By the late Article. 1. 2
Articles of War for the conduct of our Armies under the Earl of Essex and
Sir Thomas Fairfax, All Blasphemers of the Trinity, or any of the Articles of
the Christian faith are to be boared through the tongue with an hot Iron; and
some have been so punished in our Armies for their Blasphemies; which Articles
likewise punish swearing with loss of pay, and the like.

I shall close up these Laws with some further examples of ancient, Godly,
politic Laws for the punishment of Swearing and Blasphemy, gathered out of
diverse Authors by our learned Thomas Becon, printed cum privilegio at the end
of his In his Works, vol 1. ^. 224. 225.
Invective against swearing.

King Waldenus in quodam s^^mone.
Henry the 5th. made a Statute for Swearers in his own Palace, that if he
were a Duke that did swear he should forfeit for every time 40. s. to the
ayding of the poor people. If he were a Lord or a Baron, 20. s. If he were a
Knight or an Esquire 10* s. If a peasant or mean man, then to be scourged
naked either with a Rod, or else with a Whip.

King Edward made this Law, that they which were proved once falsely forsworn,
should for ever be separated from Gods Congregation.

Hector Boethius in historia Scotorum.
Donaldus King of Scots made this Act, within his Land, that all Perjurers and
common swearers should have their lips seared with a burning hot Iron.

This Law aforesaid did Saint Lodouicke King of France enact also and put it
once into prosecution at Paris upon a Citizen there, for blaspheming the name
of Christ unto the example of other, and so caused it to be proclaimed
throughout the Realm for a general punishment.

Vincentius in speculo historia^ 1.
Phil. King of France whomsoever he perceived to blaspheame the name of God
either in a Tavern or any where else; yea although he were a great man of
dignity, commanded, that he should be drowned, And caused a strong act to be
made of it a little before his death, and left it unto his successors.

Iac^bus Majerus ^a^ ch^^n cis Flandriae
Philip Earl of Flanders made this constitution with in his Earldome, in the
year of our Lord M. l. xxiij. that he that did forswear himself should loose
his life and goods.

In Paralip re^um mem^rabi^ium.
Maximilianus the Emperor made also a decree, that whosoever he were that was a
common swearer, should for the first time lose a mark; And if he were not
content with that, he should loose his head: which act he and the Nobility of
the Empire, commanded to be published four times in the year, at Easter,
Whitsunday, Assumption of our Lady (as they called it) and Chr^stm^s. The Law
of the Lex Scy^^-Iohannes ^^^mus Hist^riarum. l. 1
Egyptians was, that no swearing should be used among them at all, except it
were for a weighty cause, if any were found to be perjured, the same should
loose his head.

The Law among the Sythians was, that if any among them could be proved to be a
notable swearer, or such a one as would forswear himself, the same being
convict thereof, should without tarriance not only loose his head, but his goods
also, which they should have that proved him perjured.

The Lex Romanorum in Lege 12. tabularum.
Romans had a Law, that all such as were found to be perjured, should be
thrown down headlong from the top of a high Rock called Tarpejus.

Exodus 20.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Eccle. 23.
Let not thy mo^th be accustomed with swearing, for in it there are many
faults, etc. like as a servant which is often punished cannot be without some
sore, even so whatsoever he be that swears and names God [in vaine] shall
not be clean purged from sin; a man that uses much swearing shall be filled
with wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house.

The words of the swearer brings death [God grant that it be not found in the
house of Iacob] but they that fear God, eschew all such and lie not weltring
in sin.

The Council of Josephus is this, that he which blasphemeth God and
unreverently uses his name should be stoned unto death, and then hanged up by
the space of one day, and so taken down, and buried without all manner of
honor: Diverse other most noble Princes made diverse other most holy Laws, for
the eschewing of Cus^omable swearing and perjury. Would God that these their
most Godly Acts might either be renewed among Christian men, or else some other
devised for the abolishing and putting away of the most wicked and detestable
custom of swearing, every Prince as he shall think most convenient for the
state of his Realm^: Laws are made, and penalties appointed for diverse mean
things which only concern worldly matters, why then do not Christan Princes
also make Laws, Acts, and Decrees for the glory of God, that his name may be
had in honor and reverence, as most worthy of all it is? Worldly matters may
not so be esteemed, that things pertaining to the glory of God and the
salvation of Christian men's souls shall be neglected; For Rulers are appointed
of God, not only to look upon mundaine and worldly, but also divine and
spiritual matters. And it is their duty no less to tender NOTE
the glory of God, and to make Acts concerning the same, then to see to the
public tranquillity, ^ that all things decent and comely for an honest outward
Order be maintained, preserved and kept. And as they are the supreme head and
chief Rulers both of the spirituality, and temporaltie, so ought they to
travail no less in Spiritual then in Temporal matters. Look what
enormities wickednesses, ungodly Customs, superstitious and unrighteous
manners, etc. reign in Realms, all these ought to be abolished and put away
by the worldly Potentates and carthly Rulers. God grant that we may see it
shortly, not only in this Realm, but in the Kingdom of so many as profess
Christ.

He concludes thus.

Let the Rulers of the Common Weal find (...) against swearing ^^ 21, 2^6.
some honest remedy, that the nam^ of God be no more blasphemed among their
subjects: Let them consider how loath they are, that they themselves should be
evil spoken of and blasphemed. Let them we^^h with themselves, how much God
excels them, and how far his dignity excels their dignity. If any man
defaceth their renown, they are punished st^aightwayes, and not without a
cause. But how chances it that the Lord of a^ Lords, and King of all Kings is
no more feared? How comes it to pass that his most holy, and blessed name is
so universally blaspheamed, yea and that freely and without punishment? Were it
not think you, convenient, that the Civil Majestrates should earnestly
provide, that the name of God might have his due honor, and that it might no
more be abused with abominable and unlawful Oaths in their Realms, but
praised and magnified, seeing that by it we obtain all our health and
salvation? God by his holy spirit might vouchsafe to breath into the hearts of
all Princes, Kings, and Rulers, that when they be Godly assembled together for
matters concerning the glory of God and the public weal, they may also
entreat of this thing in their Synods, Congregations, Parliaments, Counsels,
etc. That God may be glorified, and his most blessed name exalted of all
Nations from the East to the West; By this means shall they not only expulse
vice and make their Realms to fluorish with virtue unto the great glory of
God, and the high consolation of all the faithful, but also they shall acquire
and get to themselves a Crown of immortal glory for ever and ever.

How Blasphemy and profane swearing, and cursing have been punished by the
Decrees of Councels and the Canon Law, with excommunication, penance, deprivall
of Christian Burial. and the like, you may read at large in Bochellus, Decreta
Ecclesiae Gallicanae lib. 8. Tit. 13. throughout: Summa Angelica and Summa
Rosella Tit. Blasphemia, Lyndewode, Provi. Constable. lib. 1. de Officio
Archipresbyteri, cap. 1. f. 40. ^. Gratian: Did. 22. Sylvester, Tit.
Blasphemia. Tho. Zerula Praxis Episcopalis Pars. 1. verbo Blasphemia f. 38. ^.
pars. 2. f. 15. Antonij Corset Repertorium in Abbatem, Tit. Blaspemans,
Hostiensis Summa lib. 5. Tit. de maledicis, fol. 460. etc. who all accord
likewise, that this sin may and ought to be punished not only by the
Ecclesiastical, but also by the temporal Magistrate, and that with
imprisonment, confiscation of goods, fines, branding, and capital punishments,
which sundry Councills and Canonists earnestly importune the temporal
Magistrates to inflict upon Blasphemers. Sir Ed. Cook in his 5. Report, f. 8.
9. of the Kings Ecclesiastical Law, concludes: That Blasphemy, Apostasy from
Christianity, Heresies, and Schisms, are to be decided and determined by
Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Realm; and no doubt they may be punished by the very Common Law it self by
way of indictment, as in the case of Hamant and Lewis forecited.

I shall close up this, with the words of Isychius; in Levit. l. 7. c. 25. x
Audivimus, quemadmodum de castris eduxit eum, qui Blasphemavit, lapidibus que [
x] Bibl. P^trum Tom. 7. p. 109.
eum opprimi praecepit: Propterea indignationi et opus addidit, et legem tibi
etiam experimento ipso confirmatam ostendit, ut et tu-blasphemare Deum timeres,
illam timens peccati magnitudinem, cum non solum Principes, sed et omnem
multitudinem vindicatio praecepit. Communis enim debet omnibus contra
Blasphem^s pugna, quia communi nostro benefactori, communi nostrae NOTA*
vitae, ex quo omnes esse, et been esse habemus, detrahere tentant; ejus quidem
gloriae nihil nocentes, nos autem ab eo seperare et expellere volentes.

You have now heard how Herely, Apostasy, Blasphemy, Schism and such who are
guilty of them, have bin restrained, punished by Temporal Jews and
punishments in all ages. I shall only add these few considerations to set the
greater luster and authority upon the recited L^ws, Punishments* and
proceedings against obstinate seducing Heretics, (...), and Blasphemers.
First, that they were generally made and seve^rely executed by the most pious,
Religious and zealous Emperors, Kings, Princes, states in the ages when they
lived, out of their piety, great zeal, love to God and Christian Religion; not
by such as were irreligious, profane, careless of Gods worship, or of a
persecuting disposition.

2ly. That they were made at the desire and earnestrequest of the most godly,
pious, Orthodox Counsels, Bishops, Ministers and zealous Christians living in
the times wherein they were enacted: witness the Epistles and Decrees of the
second Sozomen Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 13 Socra^es l. 5. c. 8. 10. Surius Council.
Tom. 1. p. 483 484 617 Nicephrorus Eccl. Hist. ^ 12. c. 13.
general Council of Constantinople to Theodosius the Elder, of the council
of Surius Council. Tom. 1 p 434 435. Nicepho. ^^l. 9 c. 40. 41.
Ariminum to the Emperor Constantius, of the Surius Tom. 1. p 616. 617.
council of Africa to the Emperor Honorius Can. 25. to 61. of the c Bishops
and Clergy in the third general Council of Ephesus to Gallimar King of
^ersia, and Theodosius the Emperor. The Epistles of Lev the first, to the
Emperors Theodosius, Martianus and others. Epist. 9. 13. 14. 38. 39. 23. 44.
50. 58. 91. Augustine Epist. 48. 50. Gratian cause. 23, ^. 3. 4. with sundry
others:

3ly. That they were generally See August Contr. lit. Petil l. 2. Contr.
Cresconium Gram. l. 2 Epist 48. 50. 15^. to 170 Gratian Cause. ^3. q. 3. 4.
Eusebius. de vita Constan l. 3. c. 6^.
applauded by all, opposed and writ against by none for ought we find, as
contrary to the word of God, and the Government under the Gospel, but only by
the ^actious and seditious Donatists.

4ly. That Gods blessing on these Laws and the severe putting them in
execution, was the principal means to See Euse^^^^ de vita Constantinil. 3 ^.
64. Nubri^ l. 2. c. 13 ^^^ 1. Epist. 39. August. Epist. 48 50.
suppress, extirpate the Heresies and Schisms of the Arians, Pelagians,
Maniches, Donatists, Euticbeans, and the like, which abounded in those times,
when preaching and disputations would not do it: yea, that which stopped the
propagation of them to posterity, with the growth and spreading of them for the
present, in those ages, as all Ecclesiastical Hystoriaens evidence.

And although it be most certain that all the Laws and punishments in the
world Psalm. 2. Act. 4. and 5^^. 8. 4. etc. Daa. 2 4^. ^5. c. 4^ 34. ^^. 14. 27.
Mich. 4. 7. Lue. ^. 3^. 33.
cannot suppress the true faith and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, nor hinder the
prevailing progress of it, which commonly spreads fastest under the hottest
persecutions; yet it is most true, that execrable Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies
and Schisms contrary to Gods word, may be and always have been suppressed,
yea extirpated by temporal Laws and punishments in all Ages, when no other
means could prevail to do it; and where such Laws are most severely executed,
there Heresies, Errors, Schisms, blasphemies, either break not out at all, or
are soon suppressed, and never grow Epidemicall, or of long continuance.

From all which Laws and considerations, I shall deduce this Argument, as
auxiliary to the former.

Those things which the most pious, zealous, and devout Emperors; Kings,
Magistrates, States, even at the prayer or request of the most holy, Orthodox
learnedest Counsels Bishops, Clergymen, and with the general approbation,
and desire of the best and most Zealous Christians, (with very good success to
the public tranquillity, peace of the Church, and preservation of the Christian
faith in purity) have by their Laws and sanctions punished with corporal, or
Capital punishments in all, or most Ages and Realms where there were any
Christian Emperors, Kings, States, Magistrates, all* Christian Princes,
Magistrates, Republikes may with safe consciences and good success punish' yea
censure now, and ought to do it.

But the most pious, zealous and devoutest Emperors, Kings, States,
Magistrates, at the prayer and earnest request of the most holy, Orthodox,
learnedest Counsels, Bishops, Clergymen, and with the general approbation,
desire of the best and most zealous Christians, (with very good success to the
settlement of the peace of the Church, and preservation of the Christian faith
in purity,) have by severe Laws and sanctions punished Heretics, Apostates,
seducing false Teachers, Blasphemers, and obstinate dangerous Scismatiks, with
corporal or capital punishments, in all or most Ages, Realms, States where
there were any Christian Emperors, Kings, States, Magistrates, as the premises
manifest.

Therefore Christian Princes, Magistrates, Republikes may doubtless with safe
conscience and like good success, punish them in like manner now; yea, and
ought to do it, unless they will be reputed less pious, zealous or devout
then they, or less careful of the public peace and peoples souls then they
have bin.

And thus much for the affirmative part. I now come to Answer the chief
Objections lately made in Press or Palpit to the contrary, especially Mr.
Dels, which are freshest in memory, and much relied on by his Independent party.

An Answer to the contrary Objections.

The Objections made to the contrary by our Opposite dissenting Brethren,
Libertins, Sectaries, Anabaptists, are deduced partly from Scripture, partly
from reason. Some of those from Scripture I have already answered in the
premises, as they lay in my way. I shall now propound and answer those only
which remain, taken almost verbatim from the Donatists and old Anabaptists.

The first Objection is, from the Augustine de Baptism. contr. Donatum l 4.
Contr. Literas. Petil. l. 2 c 90. Contr Cresconium Gram. l 2. c. 3. 4*
Parable of the Tares, Math. 13. 24. to 31. and 36. to 43. Where when the
Servants would have gone and gathered up the Tares out of the Wheat, before
the Harvest, the houshoulder said, Nay; least whiles ye gather up the Tares, ye
root up also the Wheat with them: Let both grow together Until the Harvest,
and in the time of Harvest, I will say to the Reapers, gather you first the
Tares together, and bind them in bundells to burn them, but gather the Wheat
into my Barn: Which Harvest Christ interprets to be the end of the World, and
the Reapers to be the Angels, v. 39. Whence they infer, that Heretics,
Schismatics, false Teachers and Blasphemers being Tares, must be let alone to
grow among the Wheat, and not pulled up nor rooted out by the Majestrate, till
the Harvest at the end of the World; and then only to be gathered by the
Angels into bundells, and ^^st into Hell fire, but notto be burnt or punished
here by the civil Powers. So the Lucas Ohander Enchirid Contr. cum
Anabaptistis. c. 9. q 4. p. 220
Donatists and Lucas Ohander Enchirid Contr. cum Anabaptistis. c. 9. q 4. p. 220
Anabaptists.

To this, I answer, First, that this being but a parable, the whole scope of it
must be observed, else no lolid Argument can be deduced from it: Now the whole
drift of this Parable, is only to show, there shall not be a total separation of
all the Tares from the Wheat, all the sheep from the Goats, all the Reprobate
from the elect, all the Children of the wicked and the Devil, from the
Children of the Kingdom, till the day of judgment at the end of the World; as
is undeniable by Christ's own exposition of it, v. 27. to 34. by that other
Parable of the net, v. 47. to 50. and by Math. 25. 31. to the end 2 These. 1. 8.
9. 10. Jude 14. 15 Re. 20. 12. 13. 14. 15. c. 22. 14. 15. compared. The only
argument then which can be properly deduced from this Parable is this. God will
not make a total separation of al wicked men from the good, of all Tares and
Children of the Devil, from the Wheat and children of the Kingdom in this
world; nor gather together all the wicked, and cast them into a Furnace of
fire, where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, till the end of the World.

Ergo, Christian Princes and Magistrates must tolerate all Heretics,
Scismaticks, false Teachers, Apostates, Idolaters, and execrable Blasphemers in
the Church, and not punish, extirpate, burn or cut them down with the sword
of Justice, till the general day of Judgment at the end of the World.

If this Argument hold good, mark then the necessary absurd consequenses which
will likewise follow from it. First, that no Traitor, Murderer, Robber,
Thief, Sodomite, nor heinous Malefactor whatsoever, must be once meddled with,
punished, or put to death by the Magistrate in this world, but all tolerated
and let alone till the end of the World, and reserved only to Gods Judgment,
and eternal punishments in Hell; because the Tares here See Chrisostom
Theephila^t. Hyero nimu^, Cyprian, Augustine, Beza Luther Bu^er Marlorat. Mr.
Rutherfords, due right of Presbyteryes p. 359. 360. Belarmin lib. 3. De. Laicis
c. 22. Pamelius in Epist. 52. Cyprian Aunot 78.
are all the Children of the Devil, and wicked one of whatsoever kind (not
Heretics, Schismatics, Apostates false Teachers and Blasphemers only) as is
clear by v. 38. 39. 40. 41. And if no Tares must be pulled up, no offenders
whatsoever punishedby Kings and civil Majestrates till the worlds end, then
what will become of the Magistrates Office, power, of humane society it self,
of all States, Republikes which cannot possibly subsist, when all capital
offenders of all sorts must be left unpunished, unrestiained. If this be our
opposites real position let them speak it out in plain English, and then the
world will easily discover what Libertines, what ill Statesmen, and black
Saints they are.

2ly. Then Parents must not correct their Children, Masters their Servants,
Schoolmasters their Scholars, Superior military Officers, or a Council of
War, their Inferior Soldiers (which I hope they do, or should do in all
Armies,) but they must be let alone till the day of Doom, or the worlds end
without punishment; and then what will become of all Families, Schools,
Armies: yea what Monsters of impiety would Children, Servants, Soldiers prove
in a very few years space?

3ly Then it will necessarily follow, that the Objectors of the Separation have
See Cyprian Epist. l 4. Epist. 2.
no ground at al to separate from us, because some Tares grow in our Churches,
and we have mixed Congregations and Communions, the things they so much declaime
against; and must be really guilty of obstinate Schism: for if the Tares and
Wheat must grow together till the Harvest, and not be separated till the end
of the world, and that by the Angels, then why or how can they separate
themselves from our public Congregations now, because they have some Tares
which grow among the wheat? Yea, why will they (as they pretend at least)
suffer no Tares to grow within their separate fields and Congregations here,
but gather and cast them quite out of their Congregations, Troops, Regiments,
who must all consist wholly of visible Saints and Children of the Kingdom? If
both must and will grow together till the Harvest, why do they not permit them
to grow together in their Conventicles, where I fear more Object.
T^^^^ do grow and are ^own then in our publik Assemblies? If they Object, they
^^st grow together in the field, which Christ interprets to be the world v. 38.
not in the church, which is not the world: I answer, First, that the world here
ANSWER.
is not put in opposition to the church, but for it, as including it; for it is
put for the world, and field wherein there are Tares mingled with the Wheat,
and the Children of the wicked intermixed together with the Children of the
Kingdom; Now if you take the world here in opposition or contradistinction to
the church, then there can be nothing but Tares in it, and no Wheat nor
children of the Kingdom, which grow only in the church, not in the world as
distinct from it. Therefore this evasion will not avoid the objection, nor
justify their separation, no more then the Donatists of old, as Augustine
proves at large against Cresconius, the Donatist, out of Cyprian and others;
concluding thus. Contr. Cresc^^ium l. 2. c. 34, 35, 36, 37. 38.
Si videntur in Ecclesia esse zizania, non tamen impediri debet, aut fides, aut
charitas nostra, ut quoniam zizania esse in ecclesia cernimus, ipsi de ecclesia
recedamus, Nobis tantummodo laborandum est, ut frumentum esse possumus, ut cum
caeperit frumentum dominicis horreis condi, fructum pro opere nostro and labor
capiamus. Apostolus in Epistola sua dicit, In domo autem magna, non solum vasa
sunt aurea et argentea, sed et lignea and fictilia, et quaedam quidem honorata,
quaedam inhonorata: nos operam demus, ut quantum possimus laboremus, ut vas
aureum et argenteum sumus.

2ly. The Church is in the field of this world, and there noware, have bin, and
ever will be in the most pure and perfectly reformed churches, chafe and
Tares, as well as Wheat; Gotes, as well as Sheep; yea, more children of the
wicked one, then children of the Kingdom, and they neither can nor shall be
totally severed till the Harvest at the worlds end; wherefore your separation
from our parochial churches, because they are mixed, and are not all real and
visible Saints but have some Tares among them, is point blank against your own
argument from this parable, and to the text it self.

3ly. If your separation from our churches, because there are Tares growing in
them with the Wheat, and your casting out from your separate congregations,
^uch as you deem Tares and Gotes, be justifiable, then the civil Majestrate
may and must, by the same reason, punish, banish, root, and cast such out of
their christian Republiks; there being no ground why the Majestrate should
admit such to grow together with the wheat in the field of the christian State
or church, when as the Ecclesiastical Officers ought not to suffer them in
their particular churches; so as this Parable contradicts your own practice of
separation, and this your objection from it, against the civil Magistrates
power.

2ly. To answer more particularly: the Objectors may with better probability
ague hence, that Husbandmen must not weed their corn nor pluck up the Tares
that grow together with it before the Harvest corn (which would be strange
new-light, new doctrine to all good Husbandmen living in the country,) because
this Husbandman bid his Servants here, let the Tares alone till the Harvest,
least they should pluck up the wheat together with them; as conclude hence,
that Heretics, Schismatics, Idolaters, Blasphemers and the like, are to be
tolerated, and not punished, nor rooted out by the civil Magistrate, but let
to grow until the end of the world when the general Harvest comes. First,
because the Tares here spoken off, are all sorts of wicked men whatsoever, and
all Children of the Devil living in the world collectively considered; not
such or such particular pestilent Heretics, Schismatics, false Teachers,
Apostates, or Blasphemers, who are more mischievous and notoriously obnoxious
then others* so that the argument hence is only this.

All Tares and wicked men shall not be rooted out and severed from the wheat
till the end of the world and the last Judgment.

Ergo no pestilent seducing Heretics, Schismatics, false-teachers, or
execrable Blasphemers are to be punished and rooted out by the Christian
Magistrates now, but must all be left unpunished till then, though they do
never so much present mischief.

Thirdly the Servants here, that would have gathred up those Tares before the
Harvest, were not the civil Magistrates, but rather the Ministers of the
Gospel, who have no power to root them up with civil censures, and capital
punishments, but only by the word of God: so as the Argument hence can be no
other then this, if truly propounded. Ministers of the Gospel must suffet the
Tares and wheat to grow together till the Harvest, because they have no power
to root them out by civil punishments.

Ergo Magistrates and Christian Princes, who by Gods appointment have the sword
and Sickle of Justice in their hands, must also suffer them to grow until the
Harvest at the worlds end, and not root any of them out, or cut them down till
then.

Fourthly there is a double Harvest and cutting down of Tares; First, a
particular Harvest here; and that is when men's Rev. 14. 15 16 Joel. 3. 13. Genesis
15. 16 Ier. 24. 2, 3, 8, 9. 10 Nah 3. 12
sins are ripe and grown to maturity, crying out for the Majestrates sword,
and sickle of Justice to root up and cut them down. And in this Harvest the
christian Magistrates are, and ought to be the reapers, in cutting them off
with corporal and capital punishments. Secondly a general harvest at the
last day, when all the Tares and Reprobates shall be cut down and gathered
together, and thrown into hell fire for all eternity; and in this harvest,
Math. 13. 39. 41. 49. c. 24 31.
the Angels only are the reappers not the civil Magistrates, which harvest
only is here intended: So as the argument hence must be only this.

God does not cut down, gather nor bundle up together, nor cast into hell fire
for all eternity by his Angels, all the Tares and wicked men in the world,
till the general harvest and judgment day at the worlds end. Ergo Magistrates
must not cut down or r^ot out any particular Tares: nor any seducing pestilent
Heretics, Schismatics, Apostates, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Malefactors by
corporal punishments here in this life.

Fifthly the reason here given for this letting the Tares alone, lest whiles ye
gather the Sea Pamelius Annotat* in Epist. 52. Cyprian 1. Annot 78. p: 63
tares, ye pull up also the wheat with them, intimates, only thus much to us:
That when and where the Tares cannot be weeded out, without rooting up the
wheat together with them, there both must grow together till the harvest,
otherwise not, where the Tares may be rooted out, without rooring See Calum
Mulorat, Bucer and Luther in Locum.
up the wheat too. This rule holds good both in Husbandry, policy, and
Divinity. Men will not weed their corn when and where they must of necessity
root up all their wheat together with the Tares: yet when and where the weeds
may be rooted up, without any hurt to the Corn, there none but very ill
Husbandmen will suffer them both to grow together till the Harvest, for fear
the weeds should spoil or overgrow the wheat. The argument then deduced from
hence can be at most, but this

Magistrates must suffer the Tares of Heresies, Scismes, and Blasphemies to
grow together with the wheat, only where they cannot root them out without
pulling up the wheat together with them.

Ergo they must not extirpate them, when and where there is no danger of
rooting up the wheat together with them, as now there is no such danger.

When as the contrary conclusion follows; Ergo they ought now to root them
out, for fear the Tares should corrupt the wheat, or turn it into Tares too,
as Annot. in Epist. 52. Cyprian Annot. 78.
Pamelius well observes, and others on this place. I hope the objectors see by
this time, how much this Parable makes against them, and that they will never
object it for the future to so little purpose as hitherto they have done.

The 2. Objection is from Acts 5. 25 to 41. which because Mr John Goodwin,
Object. 2^
in his Theomachia, and See the Reply of two of the Brethren to A. S. p. 60.
others in print, and Master Hugh Peter's in sundry of his roving Sermons in the
Pulpit, have of late so much abused, perverted to prove a toleration of all
Sects, Heresies, and eclipse the Authority of the Christian Magistrate in
suppressing Heresies, false Doctrines, Scismes, by imprisonment, banishment,
Interdictions, Fines, or any such heterogericall means, (as they style them) I
shall recite and answer at large.

The Apostles being brought before the Council for filling Jerusalem with
their Doctrine contrary to the Councels strict command, not to teach in Christ's
name, Peter thereupon replied; We ought to obey God rather then Man, etc. when
they heard this they were cut to the heart, and took counsel TO SLAY THEM. Then
stood there up in the council, a Pharesee named Gamaliell, a Doctor of Law, had
in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the Apostles forth a
little space; and said unto them; Ye men: of Israel, take heed to your selves,
what ye intend to do as touching these men, (mark his reasons and examples
whereon our Antagonists rely.) For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting
himself to be some body; to whom a number of men about four hundred joined
themselves; WHO WAS SLAIN, and, AS MANY AS BELIEVED HIM WERE SCATTERED and
brought to naught: After this man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the
taxing, and drew away many people after him: HE ALSO PERISHED. and ALL, even as
many as obeyed him WERE DISPERSED. And now I say unto you REFRAIN FROM THESE
MEN, AND LET THEM ALONE; for if this counsel or work be of men, it will come
to naught; bu^if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, least happily ye be
found, even to fight against God. And to him they agreed; And when they had
called the Apostles, AND BEATEN THEM, they commanded that they should not speak
in the name of Jesus, and let them go, From the latter part of Gamaliels
advise, ou^ Mr. John Goodwins Theomachia. p. 11. 37. and Mr. Peter's in sundry
Sermons.
opposites conclude; That Christian Magistrates ought to forbear the
oppression, suppression and restraint not only of such persons, Doctrines,
ways which men have any reasonable cause at all to think, or judge, that they
may be from God; but even the suppression and restraint of Heresies, Errors,
Blasphemies, etc. by imprisonment, Banishment, finings, and the like: and that
ordinarily the smiting of the Shepherd or head of any Sect or Error, is the
gathering together, ye^, the multiplication and increase of his sheep: and so a
grand Charter for the toleration of all Heresies, Errors, Schisms,
Blasphemies, Heretics, and Seducers, by the civil Magistrate.

To which I answer, that this Text, which the Anabaptists make use of to the
Answer.
same purpose as the objectors, warrants neither of these conclusions. For
first, I might quarrel with the words themselves, being not the speech of any
of the Apostles inspired with the Holy Ghost, nor of any professed Christian,
but of a Pharisee, a grounded wicked man and enemy of Jesus Christ (as Mr.
Peter^ usually styles him, though he highly magnifies him afterward) yea, of
one who believed not in Christ, and doubted whether his counsel, work, and way
were of God or not, as is evident by Verse. 38, 39. and so no part of canonical
Scripture though recorded in it, no more then Rabshekah his blasphemies and
railing speeches, 2 Kings 28. 17, etc. 2 Chronicles. 32. 9. to 21. or the High
Priests and Jews false testimonies and invectives against Christ, Paul, and
the other Apostles, Mat. 11. 9. c. 12. 24. c. 26. 60. 61. etc. c. 27. 63. c.
28. 11. to 16. Acts 2. 13. c. 24. 1. to 10. And although God in his providence
made use of this advice for the present, to rescue the Apostles from death, as
he did of the Centurions and others to save Paul's life, Acts 21. 31. 32, etc.
c. 22. 12. to 32. c. 27. 42. 43. yet it is no canonical Scripture nor solid
ground to raise any divine argument from, especially to control the express
commands of God, and the undubitable canonical Scriptures forecited.

Secondly, I answer, that both Gamaliels examples are contradictory to his and
the objectors conclusion. The first example he instanceth in is, that of
Theudas, who had about four hundred men of his separate Congregation* (more
then most of our Independent Ministers have in their flock;) But what became of
him? was he permitted to go on in his schism and seducement? No, for he was
slain, as the Text expresses: And was the smiting of this false shepherd, or
head, the gathering together or multiplication of his flock, as Mr. John
Goodwin observes from hence? No such matter, for the text is express* That
all, as many as believed him, were scattered and brought to naught. Antiq.
Judaeorum, l. 20* c. 4.
Josephus, Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. ^^. ^ Meredith Hammer ^ Chr^^^logy.
Eusebius, and others from them relate, that this Theudas was a Sorcerer, who
styled himself a Prophet (or Newlight) making his followers believe, that the
river Jordan would divide it self at his command: but he was met with and
encountered with a great force at unawares, by Fadus, Lieutenant of Judea, who
slew many of his followers, took diverse others of them alive; beheaded Theudas
himself, and brought his head to Jerusalem; not letting him, nor his seduced
Proselytes alone to God himself to destroy o^ suppress. What then must be the
natural inference hence, but this?

Theudas the false Prophet, who had raised four hundred followers, was slain by
the hand of Justice, and all that believed him were scattered and brought to
naught, by Fadus Lieutenant of Judea, and his forces.

Ergo, Heretics, false seducing Prophets, obstinate Schismatics, and
Blasphemers, must be tolerated, and their congregations freely permitted, but
not suppressed, dispersed by the christian Magistrate, nor punished with any
corporal or capital punishments. Whereas the quite contrary follows from it.

The second instance is that of Judas of Galilee, who role up in arms against
King Herod, and made an open rebellion, wasting the country with fire and
sword, as Antiq. I^daeorum, ^^. (...) c. 12.
Josephus relates, and drew much people after him. Now what became of him? was
he let alone? No, he also perished, and all, even as many as obeyed him, were
not gathered together, and multiplied by the smiting of this Prophet and head
(as Mr. Goodwin inferres point blank against his Text) but dispersed by the
Roman forces. So, that Egyptian Sorcerer, who styled himself a Prophet, and
drew 4000 men after him into the Wilderness, Acts 21. 38. had like success.
De bello judaico, l. 2. c 12* Eccl. Hist. li. 2. c. 22.
Josephus and * Eusebius write, that he drew at least 30000 after him to Mount
Oliver, intending to surprise Jerusalem and exercise tyranny in it, both upon
the Roman watch and the inhabitants; who thereupon was * encountered and routed
by Felix, and all his followers slain, taken or scattered. What then can be the
Argument from this example? only this.

Nototious Traitors, Rebels, False Prophets, who rise up in arms seditiously
against Authority, are sure to perish, and all that obey them shall be slain or
dispersed by their Princes forces at the last, as Judas and his confederates
were.

Ergo, Rebels, Murderers, as well as Heretics, Schismatics, and Blasphemers,
must be let alone and not suppressed, punished with corporal or capital
punishments; or if they be, it will gather them together, and multiply them
ordinarily, not disperse and bring them to naught.

This is Gamaliels, Mr. Goodwins and Mr. Peter's new mysterious Logic and
Divinity, from this instance, and example in this text.

Thirdly I answer, that Gamaliels conclusion, And now I say unto you, forbear
these men and let them alone: as it is no necessary consequence from the
premised instances, so the reasons whereon it is grounded, will no ways
warrant the opposite conclusion from it. The first of them is this; For if this
counsel or work be of man, it will come to naught; to wit, of it self, without
slaying the Apostles; for that must be the meaning. But this is no solid reason
even in point of Divinity and civil Policy, as will appear by these ensuing
instances. Job 8. 22. The dewlling place of the wicked shall come to naught:
will it therefore necessarily follow thence, Ergo, The civil Magistrate ought
not with good King David, Early to destroy all the wicked of the land, and cut
off all evil doers from the city of his God, Psalm. 101. 8. but forbear and let
them alone till God himself destroy them? So Amos 5. 5. Seek not Bethel (that
is, the calves and Idols there) for Bethel shall come to naught: Will it thence
follow, Ergo, the good Kings of Israel were to forbear the Altar and high
places at Bethel, and let the Calves and idolatrous worshippers of them there
alone? Then good King Josiah did very ill, In breaking down the Altar and high
places that were at Bethel, which Jeroboam the son of Ne^at, who made Israel to
sin, had made; in stamping the High Places to powder, in burning the Groves,
and in taking away all the Houses of the High Places that were in Samaria,
which the Kings of Israel had made to provoke the Lord to anger, and in doing
to them as he did ^n Bethel, and* IN S^^YING ALL THE PRIESTS OF THE HIGH PLACES
that were there UPON THE ALTARS, and burning men's bones upon them (for which he
is for ever chronicled as a pattern of zeal and imitation to posterity) 2 Kings
13. 8. to 21. If this new Policy and Divinity had bin known to the godly Kings
and Prophets in the Old Testament, not one Idolater must have been put to
death, according to Gods commands forecited; nor no one Idol, Image,
High-place, Altar, or Grove destroyed by the Prince, Magistrate, People, but
all of them must have been forborne and let alone, because being but the carnal
works of men, they would have come to naught of themselves. But this Gamaliel
was not then a D^* either of Law or Divinity to these good Kings, as he is now
to our New-lights, who would rather live under Gamaliels government, were he
now alive (as Mr. Peter's has often openly protested in the Pulpit) then under
the best Presbyterian government or Governor in the world. Again, It is
written, Psalm. 33. 10. The Lord bringing the counsel of the people to naught,
he makes the devices of the people of no effect: (which is likewise seconded,
Isay 8. 10. cap. 19. 3.) as he brought the counsel of the enemy to naught
against Jerusalem, Nehem. 5. 7. to 19. Will it thence follow? Ergo, Nehemiah
and Gods people did ill, in setting a watch, in arming themselves and fighting
against them, to frustrate and resist their counsels, as me read they did. Will
any prudent Prince or State neglect to apprehend and execute the Heads or
Ringleaders of a new-plotted Treason, or fresh Rebell^on, and forbear and let
them alone, because at last they would come to naught of themselves? Will any
man be so foolish, as not to put out a fire which may endanger his whole house,
or an whole City, because peradventure it will at last go out of it self, when
the whole house or City is consumed? Doubtless no. Gamaliels atgument
therefore, and our opposers from his reason, is neither agreeable to the rules
of Divinity or Policy, as these instances manifest, and right reason to. For
though Heresies, Blasphemies, False-teachers, Schismatics, and the like, will
at last come to naught of themselves, yet this is no argument at all to forbear
and let them alone. First, because it may be very long before they will come to
naught of themselves if let alone: whereas the Magistrate by his censures will
speedily suppress them. Secondly, because they may spread very far, do much
hurt, and seduce diverse, if let alone; but not so, if speedily suppressed, and
severely punished by the Magistrates, as soon as broached and discovered.
Thirdly, because the letting of them alone will breed much disturbance and
schism for the present, discontent the most pious, zealous, religious; yea,
bring judgments on the Churches, States, Magistrates, people, that permit them,
which a timely suppression and execution of justice on them might prevent, as I
have proved in the premises. Fourthly, it is a received Maxim, both in
Politics, Ethics, and ^ (...) ob^^^ sero medicina paratur, Cum mala per
^ongas invaluere moras. Ovid. De R^^ amo^^^.
Physics, To withstand the rise and first beginnings of evils, though at last
they may come to naught of themselves. It is the advice of agraver Doctor then
Gamaliel, Prove. 13. 24. He that spares his rod hates his son; but he that
loves him chastises him BETIMES; yea David would EARLY destroy all the wicked
of the land, Psalm. 101. 8. and the reason is rendered, Eccles. 8. 11. Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed SPEEDILY, therefore the hearts of
the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. The longer evils and evil
men are tolerated, the more obstinate, the more pernicious, and incurable they
grow: and therefore Ezra 7. 26. King Artaxerxes gave this charge to Ezra and
the Judges, Whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and of the King, let
judgment BE EXECVTED SPEEDILY AGAINST HIM, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. If Dr. Gamaliel,
Mr. Goodwin, or Mr. Peter's, had been of this good Kings, or of David's and
Solomon's Privy Counsel, or Clerks of their convocations, or Burgesses in their
Parliaments, we should never have heard of such precepts, Laws and Texts as
these, against Idolaters, and other Malefactors, but Gamaliels absurd Counsel;
Forbear these men and let them alone, must have controled their more sacred
and sage advises. If Gamaliel, Mr. Goodwin or Mr. Peter's should advise
Gardiners, or Husbandmen, not to pluck up the weeds in their Gardens and
cornefields whiles they are green and young, but to let them alone till they
wither of themselves: or counsel sick men, when their diseases are but
breeding or creeping upon them, not to take Phisike to prevent or remove them,
but to forbear and let them alone till they wore away of themselves: or advise
Shepherds not to drive any Wolves and Foxes from their flocks as soon as ever
they come near or entered the folds, but to let them alone till they had filled
their bellieson their flocks, and then they would depart of themselves: they
would certainly deride, reject them as most absurd impolitick Doctors,
Physicians, Shepherds, rather to be hissed at, then followed. The case of
tollerating and letting alone Heretics, Scismaticks, false Teachers,
Blasphemers, is just the same, who are as badde, nay worse then any weeds,
Pests, sicknesses 2 Timothy 2. 17
Cancers, Wolves, and therefore not to be tolerated or let alone, but speedily
suppressed. Hence St. John who was a better Doctor then either Gamaliel; Mr.
Goodwin, or Mr. Peter's, commanded Christians, not so much as to receive false
Teachers into their houses, nor yet bid them good speed, 2. John 10. And Paul
himself, Gal. 2. 4. 5. when false brethren came to spy out his NOTA*
liberty in Christ, and bring him and others into bondage, writes thus of
himself and them. To whom we gave place by subjection NO NOT FOR AN ^OVRE,
that the truth of the Gospel MIGHT CONTINVE WITH YOU which else would have
been soon corrupted. And v. 11. 12. 13. 14. when Peter came to Antioch, and
separated himself from the Gentiles fearing them of the Circumscition, Paul
presently withstood him to his face, because he was to be blamed, and rebuked
him before all. Yea, he gives this rule concerning Heretics to Titus himself.
Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an HERETIC AFTER THE FIRST AND SECOND ADMONITION,
REJECT: etc. He must no^ be forborne and let alone, till he perish and come to
naught of himself, but convicted and cast out presently after a first and
second Admonition, at furthest. Wherefore Gamaliels reason and advise with
reference to Heretics, Idolaters, Schismatics, Seducers, and Blasphemers, (to
which our opposites apply it,) is certainly most absurd in point of Divinity,
of Policy, and not worthy so grave a Doctor of the Chair. His second reason
is not much better then it, if seriously considered, as applied to known
Heretics, false-Teachers, Schismatics, Idolaters, or Blasphemers, (the
subjects now inquestion) But if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, lest
happily he be found to fight against God. Therefore Magistrates must forbear
to punish Idolaters, Heretics, false Teachers, obstinate Schismatics and
Blasphemers, who for certain are not of God, but fighters against him, and let
them alone, (only upon this ground,) is a strange Nonsequitur.

Indeed where Magistrates are certainly persuaded in their consciences that any
Doctrine, way or counsel is of God himself, or have sufficient grounds to
incline their consciences to believe that such persons, Doctrines, ways are,
or most probably may be of God, there it is safest to forbear the oppression
or suppression of them, if it may stand with public peace and safety; and this
advise will warrant as much: But when there is no such certain or fair
probability, but a clear conviction, that such Persons, Doctrines, ways,
Schisms are not of God, but against him; then this advice, and reason of
Gamaliel, holds not in the least proportion; but in such cases the Temporal
Magistrate ought to proceed to corporal, and in some cases, to capital
punishments.

And this I shall clear from the Text it self beyond contradiction: This
Council, whereof Gamaliel was a Member, being cut to the heart with Peter's
Speech, took Counsel to slay the Apostles, as obstinate Heretics and
Schismatics. Gamaliel doubting, and not being resolved that they were such,
dissuaded them from it upon this ground, because their way and Counsel (in
respect of the extraordinary miracles they had wrought and other particulars in
the foregoing Chapter) might very probably be of God, and then they could not
overthrow it, and if they opposed it, might hapily be found to be fighters
against God* whereas if he had deemed them absolute Heretics, Schismatics,
and had not heard or seen their extraordinaty Miracles, he would have readily
consented with the rest to put them to death; and not advised them, to refrain
from them and let them alone. Therefore the application of this advise to
undoubted Heretics, Idolaters, false-Teachers, Schismatics, and Blasphemers
(who never wrought such extraordinary Miracles, as Gamaliel and the Counsel
saw and knew the Apostles did:) is neither consonant to Gamaliels reason nor
advise.

Finally, it is observable, that though upon Gamaliels advise the Council
spared the Apostles lives, and set them free; yet they left them not altogether
alone, or unpunished. For first, they did publikly beat them, v. 40. a corporal
punishment. 2ly. They laid a strict command upon them, that they should not
[after that] speak in the name of Jesus, v. 40. Therefore there is direct
warrant from this very Text, to restrain such as we repute Herericks, and
false Teachers from preaching and private meetings, and to punish them with
corporal punishments, though we doubt and conceive that hapily they may be
right in some things. Wherefore, this Text is so far from ayding, that it
utterly refutes and confounds the Objectors.

The 3. Objection is this, in Esaias 11. 9. God has said concerning his
Kingdom: OBJECT: ^
Mr: D^^l, Right Reformation p: 22, 25
There shall be none to kill or hurt in all my holy Mountain: And again Isay
60. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Streets, wasting nor destruction
within thy borders: Ergo the Temporal Christian Magistrate must use no outward
force, nor imprison, kill, banish Heretics, Blasphemers, or obstinate
Schismatics.

I answer, that this is a strange Independent Argument [borrowed from the
ANSWER:
Luca^ Osiander Enchirid Contro. cum Anabaptistis ^. 9. qu. 3. Argument 7.
Anabaptists] no ways waranted by the objected texts, here miserably
perverted. For in the first of them; Isay 11. 7. to 11. there is a Prophecy,
that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid, and the Calfe and the young Lion, and the suckling together, and a
little child shall lead them: and the cow and the Bear shall feed together,
and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox, and the sucking child shall play upon
the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall put his hand upon the
Cockatrice den: They ( to wit, the Wolf, Leopard, young Lion, Bear, Aspe,
Cockatrice, all hurtful and ravenous Creatures) shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy Mountain. Which is again repeated, Isay 65. 25. Now who are meant
by these hurtful creatures? and who are they whom they shall not hurt nor
destroy, and in what manner? is the only question. Mr. Dell intimates that
christian Princes, States, Magistrates are the Wolves, Leopards, Lions, Bears,
Aspes, and Cockatrices meant in the Text; let him then speak it out plainly,
and prove it from the Text, which no ways warrants such an Anabaptisticall or
Anarchicall Interpretation, both scandalous and destructive to christian
Magistracy, and directly contrary to Isay 49. 23. And Kings shall he thy
nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers. But if it be intended only of
persecuting Saul's converted into Paul's; of men of Wolvish, aspish, cruel and
ravenous dispositions, like to these destructive or poisonous creatures,
converted and quite transformed from their natural dispositions by the power
of Christ, and of the great peace and amity that shall be between all sorts of
men of contrary humors and tempers, (when converted and brought into Christ's
holy Mountain,) as all Expositors generally accord; then it is nothing to
purpose, and miserably perverted by Mr. Dell, the form of whose argument must
then be this.

Men who before their conversion were as contrary to Christ's Sheep, Lambs
Oxen and little Children, as the Wolf is to the Lamb, the Leopard to the Kid,
the young Lion to the Calfe, the Bear to the Cow, the Lion to the Ox, the Aspe
and Cockatrice to the little Child that plays upon its hole shall after their
conversion lie down, feed, and converse together without hurting or destroying
one another, and live in a blessed sweet peace and unity together under the
Gospel.

Ergo, Christian Princes, States, Magistrates under the Gospel, must not
restrain, imprison, banish, hurt, destroy, nor put to death notorious
Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers, Scismaticks, Apostates, as bad as Wolves,
Aspes, etc.

Ridiculous Logic and Nonsense Divinity. But whom shall not these hurt nor
destroy in all Gods holy Mountain? the Lambs, Kiddes, and little Children of
Jesus Christ, not Lions, Bears, Aspes, Cockatrices, wolves, (such as
Heretics are), Se Bellarmin De Laicis l. 3. c. 22
here put in contradistinction to them: Ergo Christian Magistrates must not
hurt, banish or destroy damnable obstinate Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers,
Schismatics, etc. is as strange an inconsequent as the former; yet this is all
Mr. Dell can truly infer from the genuine meaning of these words. I shall
only add, that this parabolicall Text says, the Wolves, Lions, Leopards,
Bears, Aspes, Cockatrices shall not hurt Christ's Lambs, Sucklins, and little
Children, in all his holy Mountain; but he adds not on the contrary, that if
they come, as such, to hurt and destroy his flock (as Heretics,
false-Teachers, Schismatics, and Blasphemers do) that then the Shepherds and
Civil Pastors of Christ's Lambs, Sheeps, may by no means hurt or destroy
them; the point in question. This Text therefore is strangely misapplyed in all
particulars by the objector.

Finally, if this text be meant of the times of the Gospel, and of that sweet,
peace and amity that shall be between all converted members of Christ's Kingdom
* See Cyprian de unitate Ecclesiae.
one toward another, that they shall all feed, eat, and lie down together one
with another, and not hurt nor destroy in all Gods Holy Mountain: then how
comes it to pass, that the Objector and those he frequently styles, the
faithful, the Spiritual people, the Saints, the Anointed ones, etc. do not
come to this Mountain, the Church, but separate themselves from our
Congregations, and will not lie down, feed, play, eat nor pray together with
those they deem Wolves, Lions, Leopards, Aspes and Cockatrices, contrary to
this prophecy, to the great disturbance of Christ's Kingdom? yea why do they
all generally betake themselves to the Wars, to kill, hurt, and destroy in
all the holy Mountain? contrary to the very letter of this Text, and Isay 2.
3. 4. parallel with it. Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn War any more, etc. Let him therefore give over pressing
this Text any further, contrary to its scope, or if he will have it really
verified, let him now retract his Petition to the Parliament, to suffer Right
Reformation, p. 28. and Epistle Dedicatory.
separate assemblings of the Saints both publicly, and privately as occasion
serves, etc. directly contrary to this prophecy, and persuade his Armedsaints
no more to destroy, hurt, or kill Cavaliers, much less any godly Ministers,
(whom some of them have threatened, hurt and thrust out of their Pulpits)
unless they will likewise permit the Christian Majestrate to hurt and destroy
obstinate seducing Heretics, Schismatickes, false Teachers, Blasphemers,
notwithstanding this objected Text.

As for the Second quotation, Isay 60. 18 Violence shall no more be heard in
thee, etc. I answer, it is meant of the Church Triumphant, not Militant; as is
clear by the three next verses, compared with Rev. 21. and 22. parallel to
this Chapter, Job. 3. 17. 18. 19. and Rev-14. 13. And if so, then the Argument
hence, truly Stated, stands thus.

There shall be no violence, wasting and destruction heard in the Church
triumphant in heaven, which shall be above the reach of force or Enemies.

Ergo, Christian Princes, States, Majestrates, may not make Laws to punish,
suppress incorrigible Heretics, Seducers, Schismatickes and Blasphemers in
the Church militant here on earth.

But grant it meant of the Church Militant under the Gospel: Is the punishment
of men with temporal or capital punishments for their damnable Heresies,
Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies, Idolatries, violence? or ever so called reputed
in Scripture phrase? which uses it only, for Gen 6. 11. 13. Psalm. 1^. 5. Psalm.
55. 9. Psalm 58. 2* Psalm. 72. 14. Psalm. 73. 6. Prove. 28. 17. ^say 53. 9. c. 56
6. Ier. 6. 7. c. 20. 8. c. 22. 3. 17. Ezech. 7. 11. 23. c. 18. 7. 12. 16. 18.
Hab. 1. 3. Lu. 3. 14.
Tirany, Oppression, and Rapine: or is it not rather Justice, and Deutr. 33.
21. Prove. 8. 15. Ier. 31. 30. c. 17. Psalm. 106 30. 2. Sam 8. 15. compared with
Psalm. 101. 8*
executing Justice and Judgment, in all Scripture language? Is the
confiscation of the goods, imprisonment, banishment, or putting to death (in
some cases) of the persons of such, any wasting or destruction, intended in
this Text? If so, let Mr. Dell aver it, at the utmost hazard of his Science,
and Conscience, since no sober, nor learned man can or dares assert it: If not,
then let him confess his error in thus wierdrawing and wilfully perverting
Scripture in so shameful a manner, before so juditious an Auditory as those to
whom he preached, and that upon a Fast day unfit for strife and debate, as this
very Prophet will inform him, Isay 58. 4. 5. and for such new Logic as this.

There shall be no violence, wasting, nor destruction heard in the Church, when
God shall convert or subdue her Enemies, and give her peace at the last.

Ergo, obstinate Heretics, Schismatics, Seducers, Blaspemers, (yea Traitors,
Murderers, Fellons, by like consequence) must not be corporally nor capitally
proceeded against, but let alone without any molestation by the Christian
Magistrate, and the Parliament must by no means make any Laws to restrain
them now.

Can any man but admire that such strange Logic and Theology, so purely
Independent, should dare fly abroad in print to gull poor silly people, and
be so confidently averred, to be Mr. Dells Epistle Dedicatory.
the Lords voice, the truth of Christ, the mind of God, etc. as Mr. Dell
asserts.

The 4th. Objection from Scripture, is this, which seems more co^lerable,
Object. 4
but is no more substantial then the former, Mr. Dels Right Reformation p 25.
Christ never used the power of the world, but did all by the power of the
word. Neither did Christ command his Disciples to use any such outward power,
but he sent his Desciples to preach, and bid them, say, into what house soever
they entered, Peace be to this house: And if men would not receive peace, and
the Doctrine of Peace, not to force them, but to depart thence, and to shake
off the dust of their feet as a witness against them, that they had been
there, according to the will of Christ and the Father, and offered them mercy
and Salvation, which they refused. And this is all that the Ministers of the
Gospel can do to any that refuse their Doctrine, and not to go to the secular
Magistrate to ask power to punish them, or imprison them, or sell their goods,
as now is practiced in some parts of the Kingdom, EVEN UPON THE SAINTS: And if
men be wicked, is it not misery enough for them to refuse eternoll life, except
also they inflict on them temporal death? Is it not misery enough for men to
refuse the good things of Heaven, except they also deprive them of the good
things of this present life? And yet as Luther, says of the Clergy: Quando non
invocat brachium seculare? and morte utraque terret mundum? when Se^^^
Excellent answer to his cavil in St. Augustine Epist 48 50* ^^ the Donatists
who ^^st made it.
does it not call upon the secular power, and terrefies the world with both
deaths? Surely Christ and the word approve not these ways. For Math. 18.
Christ sets no other punishment on them that would not hear the Church, then
that he should be reconed as an Heathen. And Paul, Titus 3. teaches us, after
once and Answer.
twice admonition, to avoid an Heretic, but not to imprison him, or kill him,
or banish him: And again, those that do these things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God: And again, he that beleiveth not shall be damned: but not one
word of outward or corporal punishment in all the Gospel.

I answer, that here is a hotch-potch of many Arguments, and Scriptures jumbled
together, (commonly objected by the August. Epist 48 50. Contr. Lib. P^^il^^t
Contr. Cresconium, Gram.
Donatists, and Bul^^^^^^ Contr. Anabaptist. O^^nder (...). Cont Cum An^b^^^
qu* 3. ^. c 9.
Anabaptists to amuse or delude the simple Auditor and Reader; I shall
therefore sever and answer them in order.

The first of them is this. Lu. 1. Christ never used the power of the world,
but did all by the power of the word, even his punishments, and his
destructions Object. 1. ^
were executed by it. Ergo, Kings and temporal Magistrates must not punish
Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers, obstinante Heretics, nor use external force
in matters of Religion. This was the Argument of the Donatists, largely
answered by St. Augustine in his 48. and 50. Epistles, from whom Mr. Dell
transcribes it.

I answer, First, that Christ in the Old Testament, did make use of the power
Answer.
and sword of Godly Kings and Magistrates to punish Idolatrous and false
Prophets, as I have largely proved; yea, he makes use of the ten horns (who
are ten Kings,) to punish, burn and destroy the whore of Babylon, under the
New Testament, Rev. 17. 16. Besides, the Scripture is express, that Christ is
the Head of all Principallity and Power. Col. 2. 10. that the powers which are
are ordined of God, and the sword to be used by them for the good of his
Church, People, who are to obey and submit unto them, Romans 13. 1. to 6. 1 Timothy
2. 1. 2. 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. Tit. 3. 1. Hence is that of De consideratione ad
Eugenium lib. 4.
Bernard to Pope EVGENIVS: Vterque ergo Ecclesiae, and spiritalis scilicet
gladius and materialis; sed is quidem pro Ecclesia, ille vero et ab Ecclesia
exercendus est. Ille Sacerdotis, is militis, sed sane ad nutum Sacerdotis, and
jussum Imperatoris: which Augustine largely asserts in his 48. and 50.
Epistles. Wherefore this Position; that Christ never used the power of the
world (towit of Christian Kings and Magistrates) is directly contrary to these
Texts, and to Psalm. 78. 70. 71. 7^. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. c. 18. 5. 6. 7. Exra. c. 4.
and 5. 6. and 7. Isay 44. 28. c. 45. 1, 2, 3, 4. c. 49. 23. Act. 22* which
expressly resolve, that Kings are Gods Deputies and Instruments by which he
acts, rules, judges, protects, his own people, but suppresseth his enemies
and evil doers, and seems monstrous unto me. 2ly. If the objector intends;
that Christ whiles he was on earth, in the flesh, did not make use of the
civil Magistrates power, but only of the word to convert men from Iudaisme and
Paganism to embrace the Gospel: This is true: but will it follow thence, Ergo
Ministers and Christians must not make use of the power of Christian Kings and
Magistrates to suppress or punish Heresies, Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers,
or obstinate* Schismatics? certainly no: For then I may argue in like manner:
Christ didnot make use of their power while on earth, to punish any Murderer,
Traitor, Adulterer, Drunkard, Swearer, Thie^e, etc. Ergo no Minister nor
Christian may now use them for such ends. Yea, then I may further argue, Christ
did not make use of any Soldiers, Captains, or Colonells, to preach the
Gospel, nor yet to dip and rebaptise any whiles he was on earth; Ergo we ought
not to make use of any such preaching, dipping, rebaptising Soldiers,
Captains, Col. now, who yet run up into our Pulpits, preach their own errors
in private corners, yea dip or rebaptise in Rivers every where. If Mr. Dell
deny not, but grant this last conclusion: I fear most of his Saints and
anointed ones for whom he pleads, will renounce or casheire him; If he deny
it, he must by the selfsame reason deny his own objection.

Thirdly, the Kings and supreme secular powers of the world; in Christ's time
See Augu^^ Epist. ^3. 50.
were in open hostility against Christ, and none of them Christian, but all
Antichristian, Acts 4. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. and Psalm. 2. No wonder then if
Christ made no use of their power. But since that, many of them have been and
yet are truly Christian and religious; as some Kings of Judah and Magistrates
were truly pious before Christ's time: Therefore he may well make use of their
power now (being for and from him) though he did not whiles he was on earth; as
he made use of Moses; Joshua, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Nehemiah, Cyrus, with
others heretofore: yea of Nebuchadnezars power to make laws to punish
blasphemy, after his conversion Dan. 3. 29. who formerly enacted laws and
punishments to enforce the adoration of his golden Idol, and cast Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, into the fiery furnace, for transgressing them, though
afterward he promoted them for their constancy and sufferings in Gods cause.
Fourthly, Christ whiles he was on earth, did notmake use of the books of the
New Testament, nor of the gift of tongues to convert men. I hope Mr. Del dare
not thence maintain. Ergo, we ought not to make use of these books now for
this purpose, as some of our See Mr. Edwards Gangraenaes, and Mr. Baillier
Anabaptisme chapter 1. 2* 3. 4.
Sectaries now and Anabaptists heretofore have taught. Fifthly, Christ's main
work on earth was, to preach the Gospel as a Minister, Luke 4. 18, 19, 20. 43.
Mark 1. 14 c. 8. 1. not to punish Malefactors as a Judge or Magistrate. To
argue then as Mr. Dell does; Christ did not use the power of the World, or
Magistrate, as he was a Preacher, but of the Word alone. Ergo, Magistrates
under the Gospel have no power to punish Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers,
and such like Malefactors; is rather to speak Nonsense then Reason or Divinity.
And so much for his first Argument.

The second is this: Christ commanded not his Disciples to use any such outward
Object. ^
power, but commanded them to preach: Ergo, they may not go to the secular
Magistrate, to ask power to punish, imprison, or sell the goods of Heretics,
Blasphemers, Seducers, and obstinate Schismatics; neither may Christian
Magistrates punish such with corporal or capital punishments.

I answer first, that Christ sent his Aposcles only [ Math. 10. and 28. 19. 20.
Mar. 16 15. 16. 17. 1 Cor. 1. 17.
] to baptize and preach Answer.
the Gospel, as Apostles; not to punish. Malefactors, as Magistrates. Therefore
the Argument is merely Independent. Secondly, the Magistrates then were Jewish
and Heathenish, not Christian; [ Acts 4 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. c. 5. throughout c.
9. 1. 2* c. ^ 2. 1. 2. 3.
] against Christ and Religion not for them. And to argue thus: The Apostles
prayed not aid from Jewish or Heathen Magistrates against Heretics, false
Teachers, Schismatics, Blasphemers, or any other Malefactors: Ergo, Ministers,
and good Christians, may not pray in aid from Christian Kings and Magistrates
against such; nor have they right to inflict corporal or capital censures on
them, ex officio; is a most independent inference. Thirdly, the Apostles had
such a power in defect of Christian Magistrates, that they miraculously by the
power of Christ, punished Ananias and Saphyra with sudden death, for lying unto
the Holy Ghost, and tempting God, Acts 5. 1. to 12. Yea, Paul struck Elymas the
Sorcerer (when he would have perverted the strait ways of God, and hindered
Sergius Paulus the Deputy his conversion, seeking to turn him from the faith,)
with sudden blindness, that he could not see the Sun; whereupon, the Deputy
when he saw what was done, believed. Therefore Ministers may in an ordinary way
make use of the power of Christian Magistrates to punish or cut off Heretics,
Seducers, and Blasphemers against the Holy Ghost. Or if not, yet Magistrates,
ex officio are bound to do it, without their entreaty. Fourthly, Paul himself,
though an Apostle, Rom, 13. 3, 4. and Peter too, in the 1. Peter. 2. 13, 14.
pray in aid from Kings and the higher civil powers for the punishment of
evil doers, as being Gods Ministers and revengers, to execute wrath upon them
that are evil, as well under the Gospel as Law: and S. John informs us, that
the ten horns ( who are ten Kings) shall make the Whore ( of Babylon) desolate
and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, Revel. 17. 16.
Therefore Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and False teachers, being evil
doers, the Ministers of God by warrant from these very Apostles, may ^
Ho^tensius Cavaleanus de Brachio regio Rutgerus Ru^^nsde invocatione utriusque
Brachii.
pray in aid of the Secular powers against them, what ever Mr. Dell, (who
prays in aid of the Parliament against the Presbyterians in his Epistle
Dedicatory, in a forceable manner) has fancied to the contrary; whose
assertions certainly are no Oracles.

And whereas he adds (to the scandal of our Parliament, and present
Government) that the secular Magistrates do now in some parts of the Kingdom *
See Mr Edward's his Gangraena. part. 3. p. 148: to 220. Mr. Bailies Anabaptisme
chapter ^ 4.
even practice their power upon the SAINTS, in punishing or imprisoning them,
and selling their goods. I dare aver it a most gross slander, and desire him
to define, who and where those SAINTS are, and what their names? If he mean by
this, St. John Lilburne (that impudent Liar, Slanderer of both Houses of
Parliament, of the eminentest Members in them, and all sorts of men besides: a
most pestilent firebrand of sedition, deserving a Tiburn-Saintship, as well,
as Jack Straw, or Jack Cade) most justly censured, imprisoned by the House of
Peers, for his unparalleled Insolences, Contempts, and Libels, deserving a
severer doom: or his Disciple St. Overton, imprisoned for the like offenses,
and his Anti-Parliamentary Libels, or any other of his seditious sect: it is
the Parliaments lenity that they enjoy their lives, and a man (I fear) may
find far better Saints in Newgate, if not in [ Rev. 22. 15 Gal. 5. 20. 21. Iam
5678. 1 Cor. 6. 10. 2. Ie^. 2. 10. 11. 12
] Hell, then these: If he mean S. Best (that horrible, execrable Heretic and
Blasphemer) for whose impunity some of the [ John Goodvvins modest and humble
Quecries upon the late Ordinance against Heresies. O^^rtons and some
Independent weekly Diurnall vvriters.
] Independent saints have both written and pleaded, to the very amazement of
all true Saints,) its certaily a greater crime to suffer such an impenitent
blaspheming Atheistical saint to live so long, then to imprison him: and if any
New-lights account him for a Saint, I may without any breach of Christian
charity repute them (in this particular) to be little better then Devils, and
no real saints at all. If he intend by Saints, S* Paul Hobson (a preaching,
but never a fighting Captain, formerly a Tailor, now an Anabaptist) imprisoned
by Sir Samuel Luke, for his schismatic and seditious preaching contrary to
the Ordinance of Parliament, or his blasphemous Surgeon John Boggis, or his
companion S. Oats, (who [ Mr. Edward's 2 part of Gangrena, p 161. 162.
] openly defended, maintained, that there was no such power in any Christian
Magistrate over any member of a Church, unless first cast out and delivered
over by the Church to the secular power, to inflict any capital punishments
upon him, whatsoever his offense was, though MVRTHER OR TREASON:) o^ S. Lamb,
S. Kiffin, or any of that Anabaptisticall Dipping lewd fraternity, mentioned by
Mr. Edwards in his Gangraenaes; who have enriched, advanced themselves by their
gainful Schisms, Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies: fear our Magistrates (who
have already law and power enough to restrain^ and punish such, without praying
aid from both or either Houses) will deserve more blame from God, the
Parliament, and all good men, for suffering such black saints as these, to
ramble abroad from County to County, preaching their Errors, Blasphemies, and
re-baptizing seduced Proselytes without restraint, then demerit any censure,
for any short restraint of their persons, or selling any of their goods; who
were lately worse then nothing, and had no goods to sell, yet now are grown
brave and wealthy. And if our Magistrates imprison, fine, banish such Saints as
these, I am confident both Christ and his Apostles will justify, not condemn
them for their doings. Object. 3.


His third Argument is this, [ Right Reformation. p. 25
] Is it not misery enough for men to refuse the good things of heaven, except
they also deprive them of the good things of this present life? If there be any
Logic or Divinity in this rhetorical argumentation, it is but formally this.

It is misery enough to wicked men (his words are general, and extend to all
wicked men of all sorts, not Heretics only) that they refuse the good things
of Heaven and Eternal Life. Therefore the Magistrate ought not to deprive any
wicked man whatsoever of the good things of this life, nor to inflict upon him
temporal death.

I answer, that if this Argument be solid, then the Magistrate must punish
Answer.
no wicked men for any offense whatsoever against God or man, no not for
Atheism, Treason, Rebellion, Murder, Sodomy, and the fowlest crimes; because
the loss of the good things of heaven and eternal life, is a sufficient
punishment for them, as well as for Heretics, Schismatics, and Blasphemers:
And then how will it stand with his own concession (I fear not from the heart,
since the whole scope of his Arguments contradict it) p. 27. As for those that
are outwardly wicked (as open professed Heretics, Schismatics, and
Blasphemers are) the Magistrate is to keep them in order for the quiet of the
State he having power over their persons, estates, LIVES. If so, then he may
deprive them for their wickedness of the good things of this life, and inflict
upon them temporal death. Let M. Del therefore assoyl his own contradiction
here, which he thus seconds, p 40. Did you ever hear me say, or hint, that the
Magistrate should not punish outward wickedness? Yes, here you hint, intimate,
and argue it too; and therefore need to reconcile these your contradictions, or
renounce this Argument.

Secondly, God himself, the Fountain and Rule of justice, does many times
punish wicked men, who refuse the good things of Heaven and eternal life, with
the loss of the good things of this life, and infliction of temporal and
eternal death to boot; witness Deuteronomy. 28. 15. to 68. Levit. 26. 14. to 44. and
Rev. 18, 19, instead of many other texts. If God then, the [ Genesis 18. 25. Psalm:
89: 14.
] standard of justice, does usually this, and threatens all wicked men that
they shall thus be punished; why may not Christian Princes and Magistrates (who
are his [ 2 Chronicles. 9 18: c. 19. 6.
] Deputies, Ministers, Revengers) do the like, without the least injustice or
cruelty? Thirdly the Laws of all Kingdoms and of our own, do punish
Malefactors (as Traitors, Murderers, and Heretics among* others) with
confiscation of goods, imprisonment, banishment, and death too; not thinking it
punishment sufficient, that they refuse the good things of heaven and eternal
life: M. Del then must be wiser then God, then al States, Lawgivers whatsoever,
then our own Laws, Parliaments, Judges; and tax them both of cruelty,
injustice, and adding misery to the miserable, if he dare maintain this absurd
Paradox, which has neither reason, nor Religion in it.

His 4th. Objection is much of the same strain, Right Reformation p. 25
Christ imposes no other Object. 4.
punishment on those that will not hear the Church, then that he should be
reckoned as an heathen: Math. 18. And Paul. Tit. 3. teaches us, after once and
twice admonition to avoid an Heretic* but not to imprison him, or kill him, or
banish him: Ergo the christian Magistrate must neither imprison, nor kill, nor
banish Heretics.

Here Mr. Dell speaks plain English, and out of his abundant zeal,
professedly Ans^er.
pleads for the impunity even of Heretics themselves, by the civil
Magistrate: and if we compare this with his p. 29. Take heed you do nothing to
the prejudice of the faithful, Gods own people, as he has warned you by the
spirit, saying; Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, etc.
These anointed ones are the Lords Prophets, and the Lord Has no Prophets but
such as are anointed with the Spirit: Thus And therefore they all presume to
preach and Prophecy.
Christ was made the Lords Prophet: and thus are All his Brethren made
Prophets, being fellows with him in his unction. And therefore take heed how
you meddle with the Lords anointed ones, and with the Lords Prophets, etc. The
Lord has still the same care of the same people, and will suffer no man to do
them wrong but will reprove Kings, and Parliaments, and Kingdoms, and Cities,
and Counties, and Committees; he will reprove them all, for their sakes, and
say; touch not mine anointed and do my Prophets no harm, etc. We must either
conclude, that the Prophets and anointed ones he here pleads for, not to be
touched, are none else but Heretics etc. who must neither be imprisned, nor
killed, nor banished, nor touched, nor harmed, by Magistrates, Parliaments,
Kings, Kingdoms, Cities, Counties, or Committees (who now meddle with none but
such*) or else, that he assigns the self same privileges even to Here*
ticks, as to Gods faithful anointed ones, Prophets, Sts. since Kings,
Kingdoms, Parliaments, Cities, Counties, Committees, Magistrates, must no
more touch, harm, imprison, kill, banish the grossest Heretics (by Mr. Dells
express Doctrine) then these. And then where is that grand privilege which
these anointed Saints and Prophets enjoy above the veriest Heretic,
Schismatic, Atheist, Apostate, Blasphemer in the world? Is not this, my
Brethren, strange Newlight from such a Comet as he is? But to let this pass,
and come to a punctual answer. As this text of the Psalmist; Touch not mine
anointed and do my Prophets no harm, will prove no Sanctuary at all for
Heretics, Schismatic, or Blasphemers (who are neither Gods anointed, nor his
Prophets) against the power of Kings and Christian Magistrates, so will not the
objected texts of Matthew and Titus. For the first of these, is spoken only of
Math. 18. ^^. Lu. ^7. 3.
private crimes and trespasses between Brother and Brother, not of public
scandalous Heresies, Schisms, Blasphemies; and by the Church there intended
(as many think) is not meant the Ministers of the Gospel, but the Jewish
Sanhedrin or civil Magistracy* or if the Ministers, or Church-Elders, then it
is confined only to their Church Censures, not meant of the Magistrates
punishments, as others assert. But let it be one or other, the Argument thence
is but this Nonsequitur.

He that refuses to give his brother, against whom he has privately and
personally trespassed, Satisfaction, upon the admonition of the Magistrate,
Church, or Minister; is to be esteemed as a Heathen, by him to whom he did the
injury: and the church may duly excommunicate him for his obstinacy.

Ergo, Christian Kings and Magistrates, by Christ's own appointment, can
inflict no corporal punishment, fine, imprisonment, banishment* or death upon
open obstinate Heretics, Blasphemers, Schismatics, or Seducers, who disturb
the peace both of Church and State, and seduce the souls of many.

Whether this be a solid Argument let all wise men judge.

For that of Titus 3. Paul teaches us, after once or twice admonition to avoid
an Heretic, not to imprison, kill, or banish him: Ergo, Heretics must only be
avoided, not imprisoned* killed or banished by the christian Magistrate; it is
a most childish Argument and inconsequent. For first, Paul writs this to Titus
a Minister as a Minister, no^ a Magistrate, to avoid (or reject) an
Heretickeafter the first and second admonition, and to treat with him no
longer: who then as a Minister could by no Law of God or man, imprison, kill or
banish Heretics, nor can our Ministers or Classes do it now, nor claim they
such a power: Wherefore the Argument thence must be.

Ministers of the Gospel, as such, have power only to avoid and reject
Heretics, after the first and second admonition, not to imprison, kill, or
banish them. Erge Christian Kings and Magistrates have only authority to avoid,
reject, but cannot imprison, kill or banish them.

If this be good Logic or Divinity, then by the selfe^ame reason they must
neither imprison, kill, nor banish Murderers, Traitors, Sodomites, Thieves,
Fellons, (nor our Army imprison, kill, plunder any Papists or Cavaliers)
because Ministers as such, cannot do it, but only admonish and avoid them.
Besides; if this be granted, then it wholly takes away the Magistrates Sword,
Office, Power, and makes him no more, no other then a Minister; first to
admonish, and then to avoid and reject Heretics, and other Malefactors, not to
punish them. And how will this agree with his own contradictory assertion, p.
40. The Magistrates power has under it the whole outward man: if an Heretic,
or Schismatic by his professed practical Heresy or Schism, (which are
outward offenses and works of the flesh) may exempt himself from the
Magistrates power? aly, the scope of the Text is not, that Heretics should
only be avoided by Ministers even as such, as Mr. Dell presses it, for
certainly Paul himself proceeded further against Hyminaeus and Philetus, even
to deliver them over unto Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 17. 18. which is
more then barely to avoid them, as all accord; And Peter informs us, 2 Pet. 2.
1. That false Teachers who bring in privily damnable Heresies, shall bring upon
themselves swift destruction, even by the hand of humane and divine Justice
too: Deuteronomy. 17. 16. But his scope is, that some Heretics are so obstinate, so
dangerous, that after the first and second admonition, he should deal with
them no longer, but presently avoid them; as the very next words imply Tit. 3.
10. 1^.
Knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of
himself, compared with the 2 Timothy 2. 16. 17. 18. This being the genuine scope
of the Text, let us turn it into a formal Argument, and then it will be no
more but this.

Ministers must not so much as treat with obstinate Heretics after a first
and second admonition, but forthwith A void, and treat with them no more.

Ergo Magistrates must neither imprison, nor Banish, nor put them to death
after such admonitions, but only punish them by avoiding them, neither may the
Church so much as excommunicate, but only avoid them.

Excellent New-light, new Logic; in good earnest, an Ignis Fatuus might yield
as good.

Thirdly, the same Apostle Paul in 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. informs us. That
in the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their
own selves, etc. blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affection; truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high minded, lovers
of pleasures more then lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof (and then concludes thus of these as he does of an Heretic)
from such turn away, or avoid such. Will Mr. Dell infer hence, as he does from
Titus, that blasphemers, obstinate and disobedient children to their parents
(punishable with death, by an express law, Exodus 21. 17. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. 19, 20,
21.) Truce Breakers, Traitors, are only to be avoided and turned from, but not
whiped, imprisoned, banished, fined nor put to death by the Magistrate, because
Paul here writes to Timothy and others, only to avoid, or turn away from such:
but not to whip imprison, kill, fine* or banish them? Or will he argue from
Prove. 1. 10. to 17. that murderers and thieves who lie in wait and make haste
to shed blood, are not to be imprisoned, banished, or put to death, because
Solomon advises men not to walk in the way with them, and refrain their feet
from their path; but commands the^ not to be put to death? If yea, this
proclaims him a professed Anabaptist, denying all Magistracy and the power of
the sword under the Gospel, yea contradicts his own concession, p. 27. That the
Magistrate has power over the persons, estates, and lives of those who are
outwardly wicked, (as open Heretics, Schismatics, and Blasphemers, ar^.) If
no, then his argument for not punishing Heretics with imprisonment,
banishment* death, from Titus, will no more hold nor satisfy, then my
objection for the not punishing of Traitors, Blasphemers, Murderers, Thieves,
with corporal or capital punishment, from Timothy and the Proverbs: since the
word avoiding, is used in all three Texts alike, without any mention of
corporal or capital punishments, fines, death. Wherefore they may inflict
such punishments on them, if they see cause, as Tit. 3. 1. will sufficiently
warrant, compared with Romans 13. 3, 4.

Fourthly, there is no inhibition to Magistrates in any of these texts, not to
punish obstinate Heretics with imprisonment, fines, death, and express
warrant to do it in others. Therefore this objection is a mere absurdity.

His fifth Objection is more absurd. Again, Those that do these things shall
Object. 5
not inherit the kingdom of God: And again, He that believes not shall be
damned: but not one word of outward or corporal punishment in all the Gospel:
(I shall add, nor yet one word against it.) Ergo, Heretics, Schismatics,
Blasphemers are not to be punished by the Christian Magistrate with outward or
corporal punishment, but only with the loss of Heaven and eternal damnation.

Learnedly argued. Had Mr. Dell cited his first text fully and thus applied Ans.
it, his auditory might well have hissed him out of the Pulpit, and his very
Saints, if they had any Saintship or Sanctity in them, blushed at such
licentious and profane Divinity: wherefore to right the Truth, and shame him
out of his absurd wrestings of Scripture, I shall quote the first text
entirely, and then apply his inference to it. The text (though it seems he was
afraid to quote it) is Gal. 5. 19* 20. 21. Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, uncleanesse, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, variance, emulations, Wrath, strife, seditions,
Hoereses Pau^us inter carnalia crimina enumerat. T^^ tullianus aduersus
Haereser. lib.
HERESIES, Envyings, MVRDERS, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like, of which
I tell you before, as also I told you in times past, (here comes in Mr. Dells
quotation) that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. Here (says Mr. Dell) is not one word of outward or corporal punishment,
nor in all the Gospel: Therefore Ministers must not go to Magistrates, nor
ought Magistrates ex officio, nor upon any complaint, to punish all or any of
these works of the flesh, with imprisonment, sale of goods, death, banishment,
or any outward or corporal punishment, but they must be punished only with the
loss of the Kingdom of God. This is the formal Argument in Blessed God, what
strange Divinity and New-light is this to be preached on a Fast day before a
religious and learned Parliament, and then printed and So is the Title Page.
published (after a manifestation of the house of Commons dislike) FOR THE GOOD
OF THE FAITHFVLL AND AT THEIR DESIRE; and averred in his Epistle Dedicatory to
the Commons house, with infinite confidence and artogance to be The epistle
Dedicatory.
the mind of God, the doctrine of Jesus Christ, the true Doctrine of the
Gospel, etc. Will Mr. Dell with his Saints, his faithful and anointed ones,
GODS PECVLIAR PORTION IN THE KINGDOM (so he most arrogantly styles them, as if
God had no portion, Saints, faithful ones, Church, amongst us but those alone)
now proclaim to all the world in print, even in a Fast Sermon; that none of
all these works of the flesh* No not Adultery, Fornication, uncleanesse,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Seditions, Heresies, Drunkenesse, Murder, nor any other
(suppose Sodomy, Treason, Rebellion, Atheism, Blasphemy or the most horrid
outrages especially if the offenders therein think any of them lawful in point
of conscience) are so much as once to be punished with any outward corporal or
Capital punishment whatsoever, by any Christian Magistrate, Master, Tutor, or
Parent but only with the loss of heaven? Is this the Reformation that these
Newlights intend? the Liberty of Conscience they preach for, write for, fight
for? the Kingdom and Discipline of the Lord Jesus Christ which these Saints'
these faithful ones, this peculiar portion of the Lord, will set up among us'
as Mr. Dell (at their desires and for their benefit) here proclaims it is,
without blushing? If so, then it is high time for us to look after these
Black-Saints designs, to See Mr. Edwards Gangraena part. 3. Lilburns Londons
Liberty in Chai^es discovered, Mr. Bailies Anabaptisme Chapter 1. 2. 3. 4.
blow up all Magistracy, Parliaments, Laws Divine and humane, to introduce
Anarchy, Libertinisme, impunity of all Heretics, Blasphemers, Seducers,
Malefactors, how pernicious soever, to let corrupt Nature and graceless
Heresies loose to take their full swing* and plung men into all sorts of
wickednesses, crimes, villanyes* outrages with impunity in this world; which
could not once have entered into my heart to believe, had not Mr. Dells words
and Arguments enforced me thereunto. Certainly if this be the Liberty of
Conscience they desire, plead, fight for, the blessed Reformation they intend,
Heaven and Earth may judge what Saints they are, and I may without breach of
charity aver, that the very worst of Presbiterians, nay of Heathens are in
this particular better Saints then they, who never pleaded for, out always
against the impunity of such works of the flesh as these, and have severel*
punished them with outward corporal punishments from the very light of nature
only. But to let this pass, (which I could not but take notice of, ou^ of
zeal to God and our distracted Republike,) the force of Mr. Dells argument
hence, is only this. Paul, and all Ministers by and from this Text, are to
warn and inform men, that those who do the works of the flesh
forementioned, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, since they name no
outward punishment in this text, he cites, (though he does in sundry others
forecited.)

Ergo, Magistrates under the Gospel cannot punish Heretics, Schismatics,
Seducers, Blasphemers, or any work of the flesh with any outward or corporal
punishment.

Did ever any man so confidently propound such shallow Independent Arguments,
before a most juditious Parliament in a Pulpit, and then dedicate the same to
them with such boldness in print, before Mr. Dell? What if Paul writing as an
Apostle to the Galathians (only as private Christians) to beware of these
works of the flesh, because those who commit them shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God; will it therefore follow, that Magistrates may not punish any
for these works with corporal or capital punishments? If so, then they must
Since all works of the flesh all be and ^^u^l^^ together ^^ this text: and
we are warned to b^vvare of them to, because such vv^o commit them shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God.
not punish Murder, Witchcraft, Sedition, Adultery, Drunkenness, no more then
Heresy, Schism* or Idolatry. Had Paul writ this Epistle to Christian Kings
Magistrates, and told them, that these works of the flesh must, ^er the
Gospel, be punished only with loss of Heaver; the objection had ^in
considerable; but writing here neither of, nor to Kings or Magistrates, no^ of
their temporal power to punish such works as these: the argument is must
absurd, and Childish. The rather, because though Paul* and the Spirit of God in
this Text speak not of inflicting outward punishments on those who commit the
carnal works here specified, yet they clearly enjoyne Magistrates thus to
punish them, in other Texts both of the Old and New Testament, and that both
corporally and capitally, as I have proved in the premises: And Paul himself
in terminis asserting, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. That the Higher Powers are ordained
of God, and are his Ministers for the punishment of evil doers, and his
revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil; prohibiting them neither in
this, nor any other Text to punish such corporally, or capitally, overthrowes
this warlike disputant, horse and man, and lays his Argument in the D^st for
ever.

His 2d. Scripture and Argument from it: He that believes not shall be
damned: Math. 16. 16. not one word of outward and corporal punishment, nor of
imprisonment, banishment, loss of Goods, or life: receive the selfsame
answers as the former: only with these further additions to manifest the
absurdity of the inference from it: First, that Christ in this Text, speaks
only to his Apostles, what they should preach to Heathens (who had then no
Christian Magistrates) to convert them to Christianity, not what they should
preach to Christian Magistrates, to instruct them, how and with what censures
they should punish Heretics, or other malefactors; a subject of a quite
different nature. To argue then from hence: Magistrates must not punish
Malefactors by virtue of other Texts, because Christ tells the Apostles in
this, what they are to preach to such as would not believe, is a gross
absurdity. 2dly. Christ speaks here only of ^agans and others who believed not
the Gospel when preached, not of Heretics, Schismatics, or Seducers [whon
Epist Dedicatory.
Mr. Dell reputes and styles THE FAITHFVLL, etc. though publicly and
shamefully called Heretics, and Scismaticks,) and of their eternal
punishment, merely for unbelief, not for Heresy, Schism, Blasphemy, nor of
the temporal punishment of such, nor yet of unbelievers, by the civil
Magistrate. Therefore to argue from mere Infidelity, to Heresy, Scisme or
Blasphemy* [which are crimes of a different nature,] and from the eternal
punishment* of the one, to deny the corporal or capital temporal punishment
of the other, as Mr. Dell does, is a most illogicall senseless manner of
dispute, yea transitio a genere ad genus, exploded by the Schools: And thus I
have routed Mr. Dells maine Battalia, and broken every squadron of it quite in
pieces.

I now proceed to the 5th. Objection, which is thus: and it is Right
Reformation P 29.
Mr. Dells Object 5.
too; Christ reproves his Disciples for discovering such a Spirit of Tyrany,
as to punish men for not receiving him, Lu 9. when the Apostles out of a Mark
how this insolent man, blasts and censures the very Apostles themselves.
Prelaticall and Antichristian Spirit in that particular, desired fire to come
down from Heaven upon them, that would not receive him, Christ did severely
rebuke them, saying, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are: not of Christ's Spirit,
which is meek, but of Satan's, who was a murderer from the beginning, and of
Antichrists, his first begotten in the world; and he adds, the Son of man came
not to destroy men's lives but to save them: And therefore to go about to turn
the Gospel, not to save men's lives, but to destroy them, and so to change
Christ himself from a Savior to a Destroyer, this is Antichrist triumphant.
All these things show, that worldly power Has no place at all in the
Reformation of the Gospel: So he most Magisterially determines, more
confidently then ever the Sea Lucas Osiander Enchirid: Contro: cum Anabaptistis
cap 9. qu. 2 arg: 10. a^dqu 4. arg 4. Mont^orcius apud B^z^^ d^ Haereticis a
Magistratu civili puniendis
Anabaptists did, to whom he is beholding for this New-light and Argument, who
press it with more earnestness, the^ judgment or success.

I Answer, that Mr. Dells confidence is far stronger then his Arguments,
which in truth are weakness, and this Argument as weak as any, when examined,
and the objected Text set right. The place quoted is Lu. 9. 51. to 57. (wherein
he brands the Apostles themselves as infected with a Prelaticall and Ans.
Antichristian spirit, before Prelacy or Antichrist were risen up in the world
an unparalleld abuse and absurdity,) where we read That Christ steadfastly set
his face to go to Jerusalem, and thereupon sent Messengers into a Village of
the Samaritans to make ready for him; (not to preach to them:) And they refused
to receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem; (the
Jews being then at great emnity with the Samaritans and having no dealings
with them, John 4.9.) And when his Disciples, James and John saw this, they
said; Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and
consume them, even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them, and said; ye
know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; For the Son of man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them. This is the full story. In which it is
observable.

First, That there was here no refusing of Christ's own nor of his Messengers
Doctrine, preaching, but only of their Persons.

2ly. That this refusal was not out of any disaffection to Christ or them, as
Christ, or Christ's Messengers, but because they were going up to Jerusalem,
which was then at emnity with the Samaritans.

3ly. That for this bare refusal to receive them only upon this ground, James
and John, out of a fiery rash zeal and spirit of revenge, (not a Prelaticall
or Antichristian spirit, not then in being) would presently have a miracle
wrought, and a miraculous punishment suddenly inflicted upon them, even to
their destruction, for such a small neglect.

4ly That themselves would take upon them the powet to work this miracle, not
leave the manner or honor of it to Christ (a very great presumption in them)
as this clause Lord will thou that WE command fire to come down from heaven to
consume them? fully intimates.

5ly. That they vouch the president of Elias (even as Elias did) whose case was
no ways parellell; for the 2. Kings. 19. to 14.
Captains and their fifties, whom he destroyed with their fifties, were sent
with an expres command from the King, to apprehend him by force, or offer
violence to his person if he refused to com down, without any just cause at
all; and they did it in an imperious manner. But here was no violence at all
intended nor offered to Christ or his followers, only they would not receive
them, because they were bound for Jerusalem: Therefore they were justly checked
by our Savior for it.

6ly. They did it merely out of private revenge; Non ^elo justitia, sed
amaritudinis odio, ob injuriam suae expultionis vindicandam^, as Caus^. 23. qu.
4 fo. 45.
Gratian De Magestratn Polit. ^. 9 qu. 2. 4.
Osiander Stesla. Mar^^rat and other*
Epositers generally observe, on the place; which is contrary to the Scripture
and concerns not the Majestrate. Turn this then into a formal Argument, and
it will be only this Inconsequent.

James and John are rebuked by Christ, for that they, being his Disciples not
Magistrares, would themselves have commanded fire to come down from heaven, in
a miraculous way, to destroy the Samaritans, only for not receiving his person
as he was traveling to Jerusalem, because he was going up thither, and for
none other cause, and that out of private malice and reveng. Ergo Christian
Kings, Magistrates, and the Powers of the world, have no place at all in the
Churchesreformation under the Gospel, and may not parish any H^ri^ick,
Schismatic, Blasphemer, or Malefactor with death, or corporal punishments:
and to do it, is to change Christ from a Savior to a Destroyer, and is
Antichrist Triumphant.

Was ever such a crasy Argument propounded by any man in his right senses,
before such a presence, the conclusion having not the least Coherence with the
Premises on which it is grounded? When Ma. Dell can prove; that these very
Disciples then had as much power to punish Malifactors, as Majestrates; that
there was the same ground for them to use miraculous corporal punishments, as
for Majestrates to inflict ordinary ones upon offenders; and the same reason
for these Disciples to punish the least neglect of Christ's person as a
Traveller only, with fire from heaven and extraordinary death, (for which there
was no written Law of God at all,) as there were and are for Majestrates to
punish Herisie, Idolatry Blasphemy obstinate Schism, and other offenses with
ordinary corporal and capital punishments, for which there are written
precepts; then I shall give further answer to this objection; till then I shall
forbear, and proceed to answer that which is most considerable, in this
text; to wit, Christ's speech to these furious Disciples. Whence the Argument
stands thus.

The Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives but to save them. Lu. 9. 56.

Ergo* Christian Kings, Majestrats under the Gospel must not destroy the lives
of Haeretickes, Blasphemers, nor yet of Traitors, Murderers, or any Malefactors
whatsoever, (as well as of Heretics, Blasphemers, etc. as the Anabaptists
usually press it) nor yet punish Heretics or Blasphemers with any outward or
corporal censures; and if they do, this is to make Christ no Savior, but a
Destroyer, and is Antichrist Triumphant.

Surely Mr. Dell is an excellent Chemist, who can extract quodlibet ex
quolibet, and draw any conclusion out of whatsoever premises even by head and
shoulders, as here: For first, will it follow; that because Christ himself in
his own person, as a Savior, came not to destroy men's natural lives, but to
save them; Ergo the civil Christian Magistrate, who is Gods own avenger, and
is often expressly commanded by Gods word, Deuteronomy. 13. Exodus 21. 12. 13* 14. 2 King
23. 10. to 2^. Math. 26. 52. Dute. 17 2. to 14. c. 19. 12. 1^. Levit. 24. ^1.
to 17.
to put Idolaters, Blasphemers, Murderers, and other Malefactors to death, is
to punish no Malefactors at all with death now under the Gospel? If Mr. Dell
should preach such Doctrine in our Armies, might not all our Soldiers of his
New-way* by like or better Logic conclude thus from this Text: Christ came not
to destroy men's lives but to save them: Ergo we who are christian Soldiers,
(who must imitate our Hebr* 2. 10 ^. Tim* 3. 4.
Capt. Jesus Christ) must now lay down our Arms, repent of all the blood we
have shed, of all the Cavaliers lives we have already destroyed, and hence
forth kill no more public Enemies, destroy no more Irish Rebels in the field,
neither by way of Defense, nor Offense, because Kings and Magistrates
themselves, [who have more authority then we Souldiers] cannot inflict any
corporal, or capital punishment of death, on any Malefactors (by Mr. Dells
Argumentation hence) though legally convicted of capital Crimes; especially if
they fight for defense of their Religion, as the Papists and Irish Rebels
pretend they do, and Cavaliers too heretofore.) If Mr. Dell dare propose or
press no such Argument from this Text unto our Soldiers in the Camp, I
wonder he durst so boldly enforce the like, with so much earnestnes, upon our
Parliament and Magistrates in the Church, and present it to them in the
Parliament house in print.

2dly. Will it follow hence, that because Christ used this Speech, as a
Prophet, a Savior only, not a Magistrate; Ergo he came not to punish or
destroy men's lives at all, as a King, when there is just cause for him to do
it? How then will M^. Dell reconcile or answer this express text to the
contrary, in the same Evangelist? Luke 19. 17. But those mine Enemies that
would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither AND SLAY THEM
BEFORE ME: together with Psalm. 89 23. Psalm. 110 5. 6. Rev. 17. 16. 17. c. 19.
17. 18. Math. 21. 41. to omit other quotations. Or how can he justify Peter's
extraordinary miraculous killing and destroying the Lives of Ananias and
Saphyra, under the Gospel, only for lying to the Holy Ghost. Acts 5. 1. to 12?
If then Christ himself as a King, will slay and destroy his Enemies lives when
they give him just occasion, though he came to destroy no man's life, as a
Savior; may not Christian Kings and Magistrates, by like reason, kill and
destroy the lives of capital Heretics and Malefactors in a legal manner,
though Christ as a Minister or Savior came not to destroy their lives, but
save them? If so, then this grand argument is a mere inconsequent from this
Text. Hence the Rhemists in their Annotations on the New Testament, have this
Note on this very text. Notjustice, nor al rigorous punishment of sinners is
here forbidden, nor Elias fact reprehended, nor the Church, nor Christian
Princes blamed, FOR PVTTING NOTE.
HERETICS TO DEATH; but that none of these should be done for desire of
particular revenge, or without discretion or regard of their amendment, or
example to others: Therefore Saint Peter used his power upon Ananias and
Saphyra, when he struck them even to death, for defrauding the Church: which
Doctor Fulke and Mr. Cartwright both approve, and reply not thereto. 3ly. If
the objected words of our Savior, be rightly qualified in his own sense
(far different from that Mr. Dell would thrust upon them) the absurdity of
the Argument will more visibly appear. To clear therefore their true meaning,
I shall compare them with a like speech of his, John 12. 47. For I came not to
judge the world, but to save the world: and Math. 18. 11. Luke 9. 10. For the
Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost: From whence it is
evident: First, that these words of Christ were principally meant, of
destroying and saving men's lives, in a spiritual, not Natural sense; and that
for all eternity: For, to make the end of Christ's coming only to save men's
lives from temporal destruction, and preserve men from temporal death by the
hand of humane Justice, especially when they offend, (as Mr. Dell interprets
it) is infinitely to derogate from the prime end of his coming; the rather,
because Christ saved only a few diseased persons lives, (not any Malefactors,
no not the penitent Theefes crucified with him) from temporal death, but saved
all his Elect from eternal death and destruction. 2ly. They must be thus
understood, that the principal end of Christ's coming, was not to destroy men's
lives with temporal or spiritual destruction, but to save them: or at least,
not to destroy them without just grounds: or, not in any extraordinary manner,
with fire from Heaven, or upon so slight an occasion as the Apostles would have
him here: but not his only end; For Christ hhmselfe is a Rock of offense, a
stumbling block, yea a savor of death unto death, unto many, and will grind
some unto powder. 1. Pet. 2. 7. 8. 2. Corinthians 2. 15. 16. Lu. 2. 34. Math. 21.
44. yea, the very Angel of the Lord smote Herod, that he was eaten up of
Worms, and gave up the Ghost: Acts 12. 23. And Christ by Peter's ministry
smote Ananias and Saphyra with temporal death, Acts 5. 1. to 10. Since then
this Text is to be understood in these senses; and like that of Paul, 1 Cor. 1.
17. For Christ sent me NOT to baptize (that is, not simply not to baptize any,
for that he did, v. 14, 15, 16. but chiefly and principally) but to preach the
Gospel (which is my principal and main business:) it will no ways warrant
Mr. Dels Anabaptisticall sense of, or conclusion from it: to wit, that Christ
came so to save^mens lives as that he exempts the lives and persons even of
Heretics, Blasphemers, yea all malefactors from the power of Kings and
Christian Magistrates, so as they may not justly put them to death for any
offenses, though most capital. Finally, admit that Christ came to preserve the
natural lives of Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and the grossest
malefactors from the sword of justice, and the Christian Magistrates power; yet
this extends not to secure them from imprisonments, fines, banishments, and
such other corporal punishments which are not capital, as Mr Dell here
infers. Therefore it no ways warrants his conclusion against all corporal and
outward punishments. And so I have scattered this Brigade of his for ever
rallying again.

The 6 Objection is this, A Reply of Two of the Brethren to. A. S. p. 56. 57.
58. Mr. Dells Right Reformation p. 14. 15. 16. 19. 20. 22.
made by Mr Del and others. God has appointed Obj^ct. 6.
his Word and the Ministry of it, to be the instruments of converting men and
stopping the mouths of gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. 11. for the casting down of
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
Christ, and for bringing every thought into captivity, and into obedience to
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. Yea, God has appointed the Ministers, in meekness to
instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. and to edify
the body of Christ, till they all come in the unity of the Spirit unto a
perfectman, unto the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.
11. 12. Yea Christ (adds Mr Dell) does ALL THAT EVER HE DOES in his Kingdom
by his Word: and Christ sent forth his Apostles not with any power of swords or
guns, or prisons, to reform the world, or with any power of States or Armies;
but sent forth poor illiterate mechanic men, and only armed them with the
power of the Word, and behold what wonders they wrought by that power alone.
They turned the world up-side down; they changed the manners, customs,
religions, worship, lives, and natures of men, etc. And all this they did, not
with any earthly or secular power, but by the ministry of the Gospel alone,
Christ's great and only instrument for the conquering, subduing and reforming of
the Nations. By it, and his Spirit, he reformes not only all sins in the
Church, but Heresies, Errors and False-doctrines (which it seems he counts no
sins, because not included in the former general ALL SINS.) Ergo, Heresies,
False religions, Sects, and Schisms, ought to be tolerated by the Magistrate,
and reformed only by the Word, but not suppressed and punished by a strong
hand, as by fining, imprisoning, disfranchising banishment, death, or the like;
which being outward, cannot reach to reform or convert the inner-man, which is
beyond not only the power, but cognizance of the Secular powers. This was the Sea August. lib: 2. Contt Liter: P^tiliani^ and Lucas Osiander de Magistratu
civili: c. 9. ^^ 2, 4.
Donatists and Anabaptists objection of old, from whom Mr Dell has borrowed it.

To this I answer. 1. that though the word and Ministry of it, be the
principal means of converting, reforming and convincing Heretics,
Blasphemers, Errors, Schisms, as is objected; yet it no ways justles out or
destroys the coercive power, the corporal and capital punishments of the
Christian Magistrate for suppressing Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies,
and punishing those who are guilty of them under the Gospel, no more then it
did their suppressing and punishing of Idolatry and Blasphemy under the Law
with temporal death and censures, as I have formerly proved. To make this
apparent, I shall lay down these Positions.

First, that the greatest part of such who profess themselves Christians, and
converted to the outward embracing and profession of the Gospel, are yet not
really nor inwardly converted to the saving obedience and practice of it.

Secondly, that inward embracing or outward profession of the Gospel, does [ s]
Romans 13. 4. c 16. 17. 18. 2. Pet. 2. 1. 2. Phil. 3. 2.
not exempt Christians either from the This he seemingly graunts. p. 27. 40.
and in his Epistle Dedicatory.
power or punishment of the Magistrate for any evil deeds, nor from committing
such crimes or evil actions as may deserve the Magistrates censure, and fall
under his coercive and [ t] Gal. 5. 19. 20.
avenging power, as is clear by Romans 13. 1. to 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. Tit. 3. 1.

Thirdly, that obstinate Heretics, false Teachers, Blasphemers, Schismatics,
are evil doers; and Heresy, Blasphemy, Errors, Schisms, ( Gal. 5. 19. 20.
21. 2 Pet. 2. 1. etc. Romans 16. 17. 18.
mere works of the flesh,) are under the proper jurisdiction and subject to the
censures and coercive power of the Magistrate, as well as other malefactors,
and carnal crimes.

Fourthly, that conversion of Infidels and Pagans to christianity, and the
reclaiming of Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Seducers, or
other Malefactors from their evil ways, is one thing; usually wrought by one
kind of instrument, to wit, the Acts 26. 17. 18. See Mr. Rutherfords due Right
of Presbyteries. p. 353. 354. 362. 363.
Word and ministry of it; and the punishing, suppressing, restraining of such
as these, from the public practice or venting of their Heresies, Errors,
Schisms, Blasphemies, Idolatries, or other crimes, to the provoking of Gods
wrath, the hurt, infection, disturbance of others, a quite other thing, wrought
by different means and instruments; to wit, by the civil Magistrates Sword
and corporal censures. To argue then as the Objectors do, That the word and
Ministry of it, are the usual and principal means appointed by Christ
inwardly to convert men from Paganism, Heresy, Idolatry, Error, Schism, unto
the orthodox truth and to inward piety and Sincerity. Ergo the Magistrate may
not punish nor suppress these crimes, sins, to hinder their outward
spreading, infecting of others, or to prevent or remove Gods judgments, or
preserve the peace of Church, State, is a most gross Non sequitur, since both
of them are coordinate and consistent together, not jusling out one another.

2ly. I answer, That the Apostles were no Magistrates, but Preachers; nor yet
illiterate mechanics, as Mr. Dell scandalously terms them; but endued with the
extraordinary Acts 2:1. ^^ 12*
gift of all Tongues, and infallibly John. 16. 13.
guided into all truth by the Spirit, and that to Acts 26. 17. 18.
convert Pagan Nations to Christ, not to inflict corporal or capital
punishments on them for their Idolatries, Heresies or other crimes. Therefore
Christ sent them out armed Math: 28. 19. 20 Mat: 16 15. 16.
only with his word and Spirit, not with the power of swords, gunnes, Prisons,
or any power of States or Armies, who were then all Psalm. 2. ^ Acts 4. 25. to
31.
Jewish or Heathenish and professed Enemies to Christ: Wherefore, to argue from
this practice, or nonfesance of the Apostles, the unlawfulnes of the
Magistrates coercive power, or of corporal or capital punishments to
suppress obstinate Heretics, False Teachers, Blasphemers, Schismatics,
Idolaters, is a strange absurdity; and they may as well infer from hence,
that Magistrate may neither restrain nor punish Traitors, Murderers, Thieves,
Rebels, because the Word is as able, as powerful, as apt by Gods own
institution, to reform, reclaim all kind of sinners; and Malefactors, as
Heretics, Blasphemers, Schismatics, false Teachers or Idolaters.

3ly. If Christ did not send out his Apostles armed with any power of swords,
Gunnes, States or Armies to convert and reform the world, but did it by the
word alone: then what warrant have any of Mr. Dells new anointed Prophets, or
any See Mr. Edwards Gangranaes.
Reformado Captains or Soldiers of his way, (contrary to an express
Ordinance of both houses) to go preaching, reforming or rather deforming,
disturbing and rushing every where, into our Pulpits, with their Swords,
Pistolls, Gunnes, Troops, Troopers, to convert and reform men, to style
themselves not only the Reformed, but reforming Soldiers too, as usually they
do? Certainly if Mr. Dells objection be true, they have in this much
transgressed against the Gospel, and Christ's institution of late, and must
hence forth cease to be such Preachers and Reformers, or else lay down their
Arms before they may or can be such. The rather, because Page 13. 14.
Mr. Dell himself tells the Parliament from that speech of Nathan to David.
Thou shall not build an House unto my name, for thou have been a man of War,
and have shed much blood, etc. So I say unto you touching this work of
Reformation: You did well in that it was in your hearts to reform the Kingdom
of God, and the spiritual Church, which is Christ's own dear body:
Nevertheless, You shall not reform it, for you have been Mon of War; that
is, you have managed a great and mighty War, against great and mighty
Enemies, and have shed much blood Therefore you shall not do this work having
been men of War, For this is not a work of Men of War, but of the Prince
of Peace etc.

If this be the truth of God, and mind of Jesus Christ (as Mr. Dell asserts it)
I hope it will both inform and reform, Epistle Dedicatory.
our preaching reforming Soldiers, and men of War, who have been formerly
peccant against this Doctrine, and a special Ordinance of both Houses, since
they have been actually, but the Parliament only Virtually, engaged in this
present bloody War. And so much the rather, because we read in Scripture
Luke. 3. 14. That when the Soldiers came to John the Baptist, and demanded of
him, what shall we do? He said unto them. Do violence to no man, neither
accuse any falsely: and be content with your wages He bid them not, go and
preach the Gospel: this was a proper work for Ministers, and Apostles, not
for Swordmen: So Acts 10. 12. We read of Cornelius a Centurion of the Italian
band, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, that he gave
much Alms to the people, and prayed to God always; but yet we never find
that he publicly preached: yea, he was so far from this, that the Angel of
God appearing to him, commanded him to send to Ioppa and call for Simon Peter:
and he shall tell thee what thou ought to do: whereupon he called two of
his Servants and a devout Soldier; (yet no preacher that we read of, no not in
nor to his own Family, Regiment or Troop,) and sent them to Ioppa for Peter:
who coming unto his house, he found many that were come together; who were all
there present before God, (not to preach but) to HEAR all things that were
commanded him of God: Whereupon he opened his mouth and preached to them; and
whiles he spoke the Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the word, so that
they spoke with Tougues and magnified God; whereupon they were all Baptized in
the name of the Lord. If these devout Soldiers then, were only Auditors, but
no preachers in the Apostles days, it were well those Soldiers, who now
pretend to reduce all things to the Model of those primitive times, would be
so modest and Christianly wise, as to imitate Cornelius his example, who was as
devout, as charitable, as frequent in prayer, and one that feared God with all
his house as much, as any of our preaching Ceuturions or Soldiers now; and not
usurp the Ministers office, no more then the Magistrates or their superior
Commanders; which they may do with as much reason; being sent forth and hired
by the Parliament, not to preach the Gospel, but to fight. However, Gods
speech to David, and Mr. Dells strange application of it to the Parliament, must
no ways hinder the Parliament or our Magistrates from drawing out the rusty
Sword of Justice against all Heresies, Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies, which
they are to punish, suppress, or at least endeavor to reform by outward
punishments and coercive Laws.

4ly. Whereas it is mainly insisted on, that outward punishments can no ways
reach, nor reform the inward man, and that the word is the only instrument
which must do it: I dare boldly aver, and shall evidently approve it, to be a
most false and dangerous position, directly contrary to the mind and word of
God. For first of all, not to argue, that as the very body and outward man
infect the created soul infused into it, not only with [ Ps^* 51. 5 Genesis 6. 5.
] original and actual sin; [being free from both when first infused] and
therefore by like reason may be a means of its reformation and repentance: And
as the soul and inward man are by the Eyes and Ears [ Genesis 3* 6. ^osh. 7. 21.
Math 5. 28. 2* Pet. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 33.
] often times infected with sin Lust, and likewise instructed, ^converted many
times by those ensible object which it hears and sees; the [ Lam 3. 51. Lu.
23* 48. John 2. 2^. ^ (...). ^ 18. 39*
] eyes and ears affecting the hear. So likewise it may be affected, reformed
by the sense of pains or punishments inflicted on the outward man, by the
Magistrate; I answer 2dly, that if Mr. Dells assertion were true, then all the
outward afflictions which God send upon particular Persons, Places, Nations, of
purpose to reform and bring them to Repentance, should be altogether useless,
fruitless to reform and convert the inward man; yea God him el^e should be
over-seene (by Mr. Dells Divinity) ^n inflicting them for this very end, which
they cannot possibly effect whereas the Scripture is express, that outward
corporal afflictions work inward reformation, conversion, by Gods sanctifying
of them to that use; this being one maine end why God inflicts them, and that
these often times work outward, nay inward reformation too, when the word and
other Ordinances will not prevail. Witness Psalm. 119. 67. 71. 75. Before I
was afflicted I went a stray; but now have I kept thy word. It is good for me
that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes; and in thy
faithfulness thou have afflicted me. Gods Rod reformed David, when his word
would not prevail. Hence is that of Dan. 11. 33. 35. And some of them of
understanding shall fall by the sword, and by ^lame, and captivity, and by
spoil many days, to try and to make them white: I say 27. 7. 29. Has he
smitten them, as he smote those that smote them? etc. By this therefore shall
the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, To take away his
Sin: 1. Cor. 11. 32. when we are chastened of the Lord, it is, that we should
not be condemned with the world. Hebr. 12. 5. to 12. My son despise not the
chastisement of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the
Lord loves he chastises, and scourges every Son whom he receives. If ye
endure chasticeing: God deals with you as with Sons, for what Son is he
whom the Father chastneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all
are partakers, then are ye Bastards and not Sons: Furthermore we have had
the Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall
we not much more be in subjection to the Father of Spirits and live? For they
verily for a few days chastned us after their own pleasure, but he For our
profit, that we might Be made partakers of his Holiness. Now no chastisement
for the present seems to be joyous, but grevious: nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them that are exercised
thereby. That outward corporal afflictions work inward conversion and
Reformation, appears most eminently in the example of King Manasseth; who
though he had the instructions of a godly Father, of religious Tutors and
Prophets to reclaim him, ran into all excess of wickedness; and became a
Monster of impiety, yet when these and other means would not reform, nor
convert him, his captivity and fetters did it, as is expressly recorded of him.
2 Chronicles. 33. 12. to 18. And when he was in affliction he besought the Lord his
God, and humbled himself greatly before the Lord God of his Fathers, and
prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and
brought him again into his Kingdom: And then he took away the strange Gods,
and the Idols out of the House of the Lord, and all the Altars that he had
built, and repaired the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace
offerings and burnt offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of
Israel. So that his affliction wrought an inward and outward reformation upon
him, and set him on work to make a general Reformation in his Kingdom. So
Neh. 9. 36* 37, 38. Behold we are servants at this day, etc. and we are in
great distress: And because of all this we make a sure Covenant and write it;
and our Princes, Levites and Priests seal unto it. Their present afflictions
then made them enter into a solemn Covenant for an inward and outward, a
personal and National reformation. Thus we read, that proud Nebuchadnezars
dethroning from his Kingdom, and driving out to eat Grass with the very
beasts; was the means of his humiliation, ^^^ Dan. 4. 28. to the end.
conversion and of bringing him not only to the knowledge of himself but of
the true God, and to bless, praise, and honor him who lives for ever, and to
exalt and honor the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways
judgment; and to acknowledge, that those that walk in pride he is able to
abase, even by his punishments, when no means else will prevail. Thus our
Savior Christ himself, by a certain kind of external violence and force,
when other means were ineffectuall converted Paul in the midst of his
persecutions of him and his Members; ( Acts 9. 1. to 23. c. 22. 4 to 21 c. 26.
12. to 21.
) A light shone round about him from Heaven, which made him fall down to the
ground; and he heard a terrible voice from Heaven; saying, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: which struck him into a
fit of trembling and astonishment, for the present, and made him cry out, Lord
what will thou have me to do? After this he was three days without sight, and
neither did eat nor drink. And by this way of terror and violence, not by
preaching Peace and the Gospel, did Christ himself convert him: whence (
Augustinus Vincentio Donatistae, Epist. 48 and Gratian Causa 23 qu. 4.
) Augustine writes thus to Vincentius the Donatist. Put as neminem debere cogi
ad justitiam, cum logas Patrem familias dixisse servis, Quoscunque cogite
intrare? cum legas et ipsum Saulum, postea Paulum, ad veritatem cognoscendam et
tuendam Magna violentia Christi cogentis esse compulsum, etc. By these examples
it is evident, that Gods and Christ's rods, yea, judgments convert men, as*
well as their word, or Gospel of Peace: And that they do so indeed, is
clearly resolved by this express text: Isay 26. 9. to 18. Yea, in the way of
thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee, the desire of our Soul is to
thy name, and to the remembrance of thee: with my soul have I desired thee in
the night, yea with my spirit within me, will I seek thee early: FOR when thy
IVDGEMENTS are in the earth, the Inhabitants of the world Will learn
righteousness. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness, in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly* and will
not behold the Majesty of the Lord. etc. Lord, in trouble have they visited
thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastisement was upon them. Gods
judgments will teach even wicked men righteousness, and make them pray and
seek to him earnestly, yea early with their souls, spirits; when his favors
and ordinances will not do it. From all these texts* as likewise from Exodus 2,
23. 24 25. Judges c. 3 and 4. and 6. 2 Chronicles 6. 26. to 32. Hos. 5. 15. Isay 48.
10. 11 Zeph. 3. 12. Iam. 5. 13. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Jonah. 3. 4. 5. with sundry
others, it is apparent. That outward judgments and afflictions sent upon
persons or Nations, do work a real change and reformation in the inward man, as
well as the word, and that God does send and appoint afflictions [having a
preaching, a reforming voice in them, as well as his Word, Mic. 6. 9.] for this
very end and purpose upon men, to reform them; as all Divines accord in their
writings and Sermons of Afflictions. 3dly. As outward afflictions sent by God,
so outward punishments and chastisements inflicted by men, Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, (as his Ministers) do the like. This is clear by Prove. 23. 13.
14. withold not correction from the Child, for if thou beatest him with the
Rod, he shall not die; Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his
Soul from Hell, Pro. 22. 15. Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a Child,
but the Rod of correction shall drive it far from him, Prove. 29. 15. 17. The
Rod and reproof give wisdom, but a Child left to himself brings his Mother
to shame. Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest, yea he shall give
delight unto thy soul, Prove. 20. 30. The blewnesse of a wound is a purging
medicine against evil, ( or cleanses away evils) so do stripes the inward
parts of the Belly. By all which it is evident, that the outward correction of
Parents (who are natural Magistrates) inflicted on their children, or of
Masters on their Scholars and Servants, is an ordinance of God himself, not
only morally, but really to cleanse and reform the inward man, yea to save men's
souls from Hell, and make them truly gracious: And, experience manifests, that
the severe and due corrections of Parents on their Children: Tutors on their
Scholars, Masters on their Servants, have been a means, not only of their
moral reformation, but inward repentance and real conversion, being
appointed, sanctified for this very end by God himself. As the corporal
punishments or corrections of these natural Magistrates, so likewise of the
civil, are designed and blessed often times by God, to work, not only a moral
but Spiritual Reformation in men's souls and inward Man, when other, means
are ineffectuall. Whence was that notable sentence of Scorp i^uum, ^du:
Gnosticos.
Tertulian about 200. years after Christ, hereafter cited. Ad officium
Hereticos compelli, non inlici dignum est. Experience informs us, Quod non
praevalet Sacerdos efficere per Doctrinae sermonem, potestas regia hoc imperat
per disciplinae tenorem, Council* Parisiense sub Ludovico Pio. Council. Tom. 3
that the Godly exhortations, Reprehentions of Judges in their Charges and
Sentences of condemnation passed upon open Malefactors, seconded with their
corporal and capital punishments, have not only morally, but really*
reformed, converted thousands unto God, whom the word would not convert: and
lesser legal punishments of whipping, Stocks, Bridewell, burning in the hand,
etc. have reformed and saved thousands from the Gallows, yea many souls from
Hell it self, being prescribed by our Laws of purpose to prevent greater
punishments and reform the parties punished. We read, that one of the Thieves
crucified with our Savior, was converted on the Cross, his very crucifixion,
being the means and cause of his conversion, as [ Augustine: Contra Cresconium
Gram. l. 2. c. 9. Doctor Willets Sixfold Comentary on Romans 13. Quest. 11. p.
587.
] Divines observe, and his own words import Lu. 23. 29. to 44. One of the
Malefactors which were hanged, rayled on him, saying, if thou be Christ save
thy self and us. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou
fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed Justly, for
we receive the Reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And
he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom: His
passion wrought in him both a confession of, and contrition for the crimes for
which he suffered, with an invocation upon Christ for mercy and salvation,
which he then obtained: Christ hereupon said unto him: verily I said unto thee
Eo die, ex eo ^^gno ta^siret ad immortale fide^ praemium* in quo excep^^at
mertis pro iniquitate supplicum Augustine: Cont Crescon. Gram. l. 2. c. 9.
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In Romanos. c* 13.
St. Chrysostom, Contr Cresconium Gram. ^^. c. 8. 9 Contra Lit. Petili^ni. l.
2. Epist. 48.
Augustine Epist. 39*
Leo, Causa. 23. proem and qu: 4.
Gratian, Coment. in Roman 13. 5.
Peter Martyr, Aretius Problematum Locus 59. de Schismatibus. Coment in Epist
Iudae verse: 23
Sibelius, and Enchirid. Contr. Cum. Anabapt. c 9 qu 4. P. 28 ^.
Lucas Osiander, assure us upon their experiences; that many Haeretickes and
Malefactors have been reformed, converted from their Haeresies and evil
courses even by their corporal and Capital punishments, and that the
Magistrates sentence of death against, and admonition^ to them to prepare
themselves for death have made many Malefactors to depart out of this life more
blessed, then if the Magistrate had released them, as themselves often times have
ingeniously confessed, and thereupon given God thanks, quod ad supplicium
pertracti, beat mori dedicerint, that by being drawn forth publicly to
punishment, they have learned to die happily, and to fit themselves for a
blessed departure, which else they would never have done. Yea, this experience
made Epist 48. and 50. Retractation. lib 5. c 2 Aretius Prob. lem: Locus 56.
Peter Martyr Coment in Romans 13. Bellarmin de L^icis. c. 21.
St. Augustine to retract his first opinion, that Heretics were not to be
punished corporally by the Magistrate, and to assert the contrary, because he
saw their punishment proved an experiment all means of the reformation,
conversion of many whole Cities, Families, as well as private persons infected
with Heresy, Scisme, and Donatisme. Whence thus he writes. Sed Donatistae
nimium inquieti sunt, quos per Ordinat as a Deo potestates cohiberi atque
corrigi, mihi non videtur inutile. Nam de MVLTORVM jam correctione gaudemus,
qui tam veraciter unitatem catholicam tenent, atque defendunt, and a pristino
^rrore se liberatos esse laetantur, ut eos cum magna gratulatione miremur. Qui
tamen nescio qua viconsuetudinis nullo modo mutari in meli^s cogitarent, nisi
hoc terrore perculsi solicitam mentem ad considerationem veritatis intenderent,
ne forte non pro justitia, sed pro perversitate et praesumtione hominum ipsas
temporales molestias, infructuosa et vana tolerantia paterentur, and apud Deum
postea non invenirent nisi debitas paenas impiorum, qui ejus tam lenem
admonitionem, and paterna flagell^ contempserint: Ac sic ista cogitatione
dociles facti; non in calumnijs et fabulis humanis sed in divinis libris
promissam per omnes gentes invenirent Ecclesiam, quam suis oculis reddi
conspicerent, in quibus et Christum praenuntiatum, etiam non visum, super
caelos esse minime dubitarent, and. Cur ergo non ab omnibus pax amatur? Haec
facillime cogitare possetis, aut fortasse etiam cogitatis. Sed melius erat ut
amaretis possessiones terrenas, quas timendo perdere cognitae veritati
consentiretis, quam ut amaretis vanissimam hominum gloriam, quam vos putatis
perdere si cognitae veritati consenseritis. Vides itaque jam (ut opinor) non
esse considerandum quod quisque cogitur, sed quale sit illud quo cogitur, utrum
bonum an malum: non quo quisque bonus possit esse invitus, sed timendo quod non
vult pati, vel relinquit impedientem animositatem, vel ignoratam compellitur
cognoscere veritatem, et timens vel respuat falsum de quo contendebat, vel
quaerat verum quod nesciebat, and volens teneat jam quod nolebat. Superfluo hoc
fortasse diceretur quibus^ibet verbis, si non tam MVLTIS ostenderetur EXEMPLIS.
Non illos aut illos homines, sed MVLTAS CIVITATES videmus fuisse Donatistas,
nunc esse Catholicas, detestati vehementer Diab^licam seperationem, diligere
ardenter unitatem. Quae tamen timoris hujus qui tibi displicit, occasionibus,
Catholicae factae sunt perleges Imperatorum a Constantino, apud quem primum
vestri ultro Caecilianum accusaverunt, usque ad praesentes Imperatores, qui
judicium illius quem vestri elegerunt, quem judicibus Episcopis praetulerunt,
justissime contra vos custodiendum esse decernunt. His ergo exemplis a collegis
meis mihi propositis, cessi, etc. Therefore I am of Enchirid. C^n^r. Cum.
Anabaptistis: c. 9: qu. 4 p. 214.
Osianders and Praelectiones. in Dan. c. 4.
Mr Calvin's mind, that none do plead against the Magistrates coercive power
and sword of justice, but such who out of a consciousnesse of their own
Heresies, Errors, Schisms, or misdeeds, are in danger and afraid of suffering
by it; and therefore would wrest the sword out of the Christian Magistrates
hand, that they might persevere in their Heresies, Errors, Schisms,
Blasphemies, and offenses, without any punishment or remorse. Add to this,
that if the Apostle by Christ's direction commands men to be 1. Cor. 5. 5. 1.
Tim. 1. 20.
delivered over to Satan himself to afflict and torment them, for the
destruction of the flesh, that their spirits may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, and that they might learn not to blaspheme; when the very Gospel
and other means would not reform them* Then certainly, Gods delivery over of an
Heretic, Schismatic, Blasphemer, or other malefactor to the hand of the
christian Magistrate, and his transferring him after sentence to the hands of
the Executioner to be punished according to Gods command, may, and oft-times
does by the self-same reason, effectually tend, not only to the destruction of
his flesh, but to the saving of his soul in the day of the Lord Jesus, and
present reformation of his Heresies, Blasphemies, Errors, crimes, as well as
his delivery over unto Satan, the very worst and vilest of all Gods
instruments, as Augustinus Epist. 48. Vincentio Do^atistae (apud Gratianum.
Causa: 23. qu: 4) Contr: Lit. Petilian. l. 2. c. 9 Epist: 50.
Augustine and Gratian thence conclude: which is largely proved in Gratian,
Causa 23. qu. 4, 5. by many authorities of the Ancients: by Hugo Grotius, de
Iure belli and pacis, l. 2. cap. 20. de poenis, by Alexander ab Alexandro,
Genialium Dierum, l. 3. c. 5. and by most Commentators on Deuteronomy. 13. and Romans
13. And as punishments often work a reformation in the persons punished, so
likewise upon others who behold or hear of them, as the forenamed Authors
assert. Hence was that speech of De Legatione ad Caiu^
Philo Iudaeus, Poena SEPE CORRIGIT ET EMENDAT EVM QVI PECCAVIT, quod si id non
eveniat, CERTE ALIOS quorum ad notitiam pervenit: MVLTOS enim MELIORES FACIVNT
ALIENA SVPPLICIA paris mali formidine. And that excellent saying of Seneca, De
Clementia l ^. c. 22.
In vindicandis injuriis haec trialex secuta est, quae Princeps quoque sequi
debet: ut aut eum quem punit EMENDET, ut aut poena ejus CETEROS MELIORE^
reddat, aut ut sublatis malis, securiores caeteri vivant: who seconds it
elsewhere [ a] De Ira. lib. 1.
thus. Omne poenae genus remedii loco admoneo: varia in tot animis vitia video,
and civitati curandae adhibitus sum; pro cuiusque morbo medicina quaeratur.
Hunc sanet verecundia, hunc dolor, hunc egestas, hunc perigrinatio: And if men
become incorrigible, that neither ob^^rgation, nor infamy, nor pain, nor
public imprisonment, nor banishment will reform them, then says he in such a
case, Optimum misericordiae genus est occidere, it is the best kind of mercy
to put such an one to death: and he gives his advice to the Magistrate to
observe this double use of punishments, ut sciat alterum ^dhiberi ut EMENDET
MALOS, alterum ut tollat; one to reform evil men, another to cut them off,
when they will not be reformed themselves, that others may be reformed and
amendeded by their example. Now that exemplary punishments as they often times
reform the parties themselves; do likewise amend and convert others who are
spectators or hearers of them, is evident by Deuteronomy. 13. 11. and 1^. 12, 13. And
all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do NO MORE any such wickedness as
this is, among them. And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously; even by reason of the exemplary justice and corporal
punishments inflicted on others. Upon this very ground, Romans 13. 1, 2, 4. The
Magistrate, is called Gods ordinance, and the Minister of God to thee FOR GOOD,
(as well moral and spiritual, as natural and civil good) even as he is a
revenger to execute wrath on those that do evil: as Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Haymo, Lyra. Paraeu^, Peter Martyr, Soto and will^^ on Romans 13. See Babing*
tons Notes on Exodus: 18. and Number: 15. Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis l. 2 c. 20
de Paenis. Alexander ab Alexandro. Genalium Dierum. l. 3. c. 5. Tert: ad
Martyrs. lib.
sundry Commentators observe: And that in these respects. First, if he inflict
corporal or capital punishments on thee for thy own evil doings, he is a
Minister to thee for thy good, in bringing thee by this means to an open sight,
repentance, loathing, and forsaking of those sins for the future, which have
brought judgment, shame, and open punishment on thee for the present: Whereas,
if the Magistrate had not punished thee, thou would have persevered
impenitently in these sins: And if he punish thee wrongfully (as ungodly
Persecutors did the Martyrs) yet he is an instrument for thy good by increasing
thy graces, weaning thee from the world, and honoring thee with the Math. 5.
10. 11. 12. 1. Pet. 3. 14. c. 2. 20 c. 4. 12. to. 17. 2. Cor. 4. 4. 17. 18.
Crown of Martyrdom, which else thou had not obtained. Secondly, he is a
Minister of God for thy good, by inflicting punishments upon thee for the
profit and good of others, or on others for thy good, whose exemplary
punishments God does or may sanctify to Deutr. 13. 11. c. 17. 13.
make thee forbear the self same or the like offenses, to avoid the like
infamous punishments. Thirdly, he is an instrument of God for thy good, in
Deuteronomy. 13. 3. c. 17. 7. Psalm. 106. 30. Number. 15. 7. etc.
keeping off and removing Gods public judgments from the kingdom and place
wherein thou live, by punishing those open scandalous sins and sinners,
which would bring destruction and Gods wrath upon thee and them. Fourthly, By
his godly exhortations, reprehensions to them and others, like those of Exodus:
32 Deutr. 5. 2 7. and 30 and 31. and 32. and 33.
Moses, Josh: 7. and 23. and 24.
Joshua, 1. Chron. c. 28. and 29.
David, 2. Chron* 31 and 32.
Hezekiah, 2. Chron: 15.
Asa, 2. Chron: 18. 19. and 20.
Ichosaphat, 2. Chron: 34. and 35.
Josiah, Neh: 9. and 13.
Nehemiah, Eusebius de Vita Const^nti^^ and O^^^io ad Sanctorum coet^m.
Constantine the great, and others, to their people, which seconded with their
corrections, may, and do no doubt, reform and convert many, as well as the
ministry of the Word. Therefore in these respects, it is most clear and
undeniable, that Magistrates outward and corporal punishments do both much
reform and convert the inner man, soul, spirit, even morally and divinely too,
as well as the outward, and stop the current of men's sins. So as Mr Dels bold
assertion to the contrary, is most false and dangerous, contradicted by
Scripture, the testimony and experience of all times, ages, and (if we may
believe his fellow Chaplain Mr Peter's) by some late experiments in the Army it
self, where many Soldiers by severe martial discipline, and censures at the
Counsel of War, have been not only outwardly reformed, but inwardly converted.
And therefore I shall adjure him to recant this wicked Paradox, or else make it
good by better proofs then any he has yet produced, his own bare averment
only being no infalible Oracle, nor of weight enough to overpoise all the
pre^es.

The seventh Objection (much pressed and insisted on) is this; A Reply of two
of the Bre thren to A. S. p. 58, 59. Mr. Dels Right Re formation, p. 23, 24.
External Object. 7.
(...), and the Magistrates coercive power to suppress Schisms* Heresies,
etc. is of proper and direct tendency to make men twofold more the children of
sin (and so of wrath) then they were before; in making men direct Hypocrites
and Dissemblers before God, contrary to their consciences, and not Saints; and
leaves the heart as it was, which cannot be forced with outward power, but by
the inward efficacy of the truth: now the hearts of men being corrupt, what are
all outward duties they are forced to, but so much hypocrisy? So that
forceable reformation is none of Christ's reformation; it makes all Hypocrites
and Gilded Sepulchers, but none Saints, putting a form of godliness upon the
outward man, when as there is no power of godliness in the inward man: Call
you this a Reformation of the Church of Christ? Therefore no such coercive
power is to be used, nor no corporal or capital punishments inflicted on
Heretics, Schismatics, etc. in the Church of Christ. This is an Argument,
learned by Master Dell from the Anabaptists; from Master Robinsons
Justification of Separation, p. 222, 224. and from Gregory de Valentia, Tom. 3.
Disp. 1. pun^. 6. qu. 10. de in^^delitate, Arg. 4.

I answer, First, That this Objection is a mere Chymera, forged in the Answer.
brain of the Objectors to affront the Scripture and Magistracy it self,
having not the least color in it from the Word; and may be objected against
all Gods Ordinancs, as well as the Magistrates coercive power. For first, it
might be objected against the Deuteronomy. 27. 26 Gal. 3. 10, 13.
Moral Law it self, and all the Texts of Scripture, which enjoyne or threaten
the infliction of any temporal or external punishments upon any kind of
sinners Luke 13. 3, 5 Romans 2. 7, 8, 9 1 Cor. 6. 4, 5. Gal. 5. 21. Ephesians. 5. 6.
for all these do often make men Hypocrites, they make them forbear only the
outward acts of sin for fear of punishment, but neither abate nor kill the
power and life of sin in their hearts for the most part; they force men to
outward duties, and to an outward form of godliness, without the inward
power: so the Antinomians and Socinians argue; therefore we must wholly exclude
and delete them out of the Book of God, and banish them out of the Church, as
well as the Magistrates coercive power and punishments. Secondly, it fights
against the express Texts of Deuteronomy. 13. 10, 11, etc. 17. 12, 13. where
Idolaters and Seducers to it, how dear soever, are expressly commanded to be
killed, and publicly stoned to death with stones, for this very end, That all
Israel and all the people might hear of it, AND FEAR, and do no more
presumptuously, and DO NO MORE any such wickedness as this is among them; to
restrain them from the outward practice of evil, and reform their lives,
though it did not always change their hearts. Thirdly, against the 2 Chronicles.
15. 12, 13, 14. where King Asa and all his Subjects entered into a Covenant, to
seek the Lord God of their Fathers with all their heart, and with all their
soul; that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel SHOULD BE PUT TO
DEATH, whether small or great, whether man or woman: And they swore unto the
Lord with a loud voice. Which Covenant, no doubt, made many outwardly to
conform and reform, who were not inwardly reformed, converted, and so made
many Hypocrites: Contrary to the ^ Chron. 23. 16. cap. 29. 10, etc. cap. 34.
31, 32. cap. 33. 16. Ezra 20. 3, etc. Nehem. 9. 18. where the like Covenants
were entered into, and pressed on the people by Jehojada, Hezekiah, Manasseh,
Josiah, Ezra and Nehemiah, with Gods own approbation, though no doubt they
made many Hypocrites and Dissemblers in the objectors sense. Fourthly, against
the very Gospel it self, and the preaching of it, which civilize and restrain
many, and transform them outwardly into Angels of light, into true Shepherds
and Sheep of Christ, who yet inwardly are incarnate Devils and ravenous Wolves,
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, as is apparent by
Matthew. 7. 15, 16. John 2. 23, 24, 25. cap. 6. 26. 27. 70. 71. Acts 8. 13, to
25. cap. 20. 29, 30. John 7. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 12. cap. 11. 12, 13, 14, 15. 2 These.
2. 9, 10. Matthew. 24. 24. 1 John 2. 18, 19. cap. 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.
1, to 22. Fifthly, against Prayer and Fasting, which make some Hypocrites, and
wherein many play the Hypocrites, as the Scripture expressly resolves, Matthew. 6.
2, to 7, 16. cap. 15. 7, 8. cap. 23. 14, 15, 25 to 29. Isa. 29. 13. Mark 7. 6.
Isa. 58. 2, to 8. cap. 1. 11, to 19. Jer. 42. 20. James 1. 22. Sixthly, against
Parents correction of their children, prescribed by Prove. 13. 24. cap. 19. 18.
cap. 20. 30. cap. 22. 15. cap. 23. 13, 14. cap. 29. 15, 16. and Masters of
their Servants, warranted by the 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20. which, no doubt, make
many Hypocrites, in the Objectors sense, by reforming and civilizing many
outwardly, who are not inwardly, changed or co^verted. Seventhly, against the
ordinary Genesis 20. 6. c. 31. 24, 29. Psalm. 19. 13. ^ Sam. 25. 5, 6, 32, 33.
restraining grace of God himself, which restraines men from those coxrbitant
outward actual sins and lusts, into which they would otherwise run and rush
with greedines; did not this his grace restrain them, which yet does not always
truly sanctify and reform them. Eighthly, against the external judgments of
God, which as they reform and convert some really, as I have proved, and is
evident by Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea,
with my spirit within me will I seek thee early; for when thy judgments are in
the earth, the Inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness; so they
make many Hipocrites too, Hos. 7. 12, to the end. If then the making of some
Hypocrites, in the Objectors sense, does not nullify all, or any of these
particulars, which make Hypocrites too (as I doubt Master De^s Sermons have
made some likewise;) then certainly it cannot nullify the office, the coercive
power and punishments of Christian Kings and Magistrates, to punish Idolatry,
Herefie, Schisms, gross Errors, Blasphemies, under the Gospel, as the
Objectors vainly surmise.

Secondly, I answer, That the coercive power, the corporal and capital
censures of Magistrates, backed with their admonitions and reprehentions, are
an Ordinance of God, not only outwardly, but inwardly to reform and convert
men, by the concurrence of Gods spirit and blessing with them, and many times
work a real, as well as a formal change in the lives and hearts of men, as I
have undeniably proved: therefore this assertion, that they make All
Hypocrites, and none Saints; and work only an outward reformation and form of
godliness, without the inward power thereof, is a groundless and false
position, which the Objectors can never make good by Scripture, and is
contradicted by experience and the Word of God it self. Thirdly, admit the
Octjection true, that they wought no inward reformation at all in the hearts of
men, but only an outward form of godliness and conformity, in outward
duties, or a restraint of actual sins, when the heart is full of Atheism,
Adultery, Pride, Error, ignorance, (which outward restraint, reformation, form
of godliness, practice of outward duties, outward order, conformity, and
reformation of external and gross sins, Master Dell in the objected
passage, and Page 7, 8, 9, 39.
elsewhere confesses it does work, and ties up mad Dogs, Bears and Tygars,
etc.) must they therefore be cast aside as useless, and have no use at all
among Christians, in reforming them and the Church of God? God forbid; for this
very bringing of men to a constant outward conformity in the practice of holy
duties, and attendance on Gods Ordinances, is a greater honor to God, a
greater benefit and credit to a Christian State, and far better in it self,
then open contempt, or neglect of the outward Ordinances, or professed impiety,
atheism and profaneness. Is not a moral outward reformation of men's lives,
the restraining of them from gross enormities, sins, errors, heresies,
schisms, blasphemies, and chaining them up from infecting others, by severe
Laws, and corporal or capital punishments, far more beneficial to the
parties restrained, to the Churches, States wherein they live, and less
dishonorable, offensive unto God and all good men, then the open,
unrestrained, unpunished, licentious practice of all sorts of wickedness and
actual villainies, or the lawless preaching, printing, writing all kind of
damnable heresies, errors, blasphemies, whimsicall and scismaticall Tenets,
without any check? Yea, is not a general external reformation of men's lives
and outward actions, without an inward conversion of their hearts, more
pleasing to God, more advantageous to men, then open profaneness, impiety and
unreformednesse, both in life and heart? Yea verily: witness 1 Kings 21. 27,
28, 29.
Ahabs mere outward humiliation, and reformation, without inward; which pleased
God so well, that he did not bring the evil threatened against him and his
house, in his days; and the mere outward moral reformation of the Heathenish
Jonah 3.
Ninevites, which caused Cod to spare, and not to destroy the City within forty
days, as he had threatened. If so, as the very Objectors and all rational men
must grant; then the civil Magistrates coercive power, his corporal and
capital censures are necessary and useful, at lest, to work such an external
reformation in the Church, though it should make no real Saints or Converts.
Fourthly, the inward change of the heart, and conversion of the soul to God,
is neither in the power of the Minister nor Magistrate, the Word or Sword, but
of God, and his Spirit alone; the preaching of the Word by Ministers, and the
welding of the Sword by Magistrates cannot change the hearts and spirits of
men, of themselves, but God alone by them, as is clear by the 2 Tim^. 2. 25.
Psalm. 51. 10. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. Jer. 31. 33, 34. Ephesians. 2. 1, 4, 5, 8. John
3. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 3. 4, to 10. Shall we then deny the use of the Word and
Ministry (as Master Dell and his confederates deny the use of the Sword and
Magistracy) in the reformation of the Church, because they commonly reform the
outward man in some measure (and that hardly too without the Magistrate) but
not change and convert the inward man of themselves, no more then the Sword or
Magistrate, without Gods own blessing on, and concurrence with them? The
Objectors certainly will answer, No: Therefore I may say, and they must grant
the same of the Sword and Magistracy. What then must be done? I answer, both
must do their bounden duties: Ministers must preach down sins, heresies,
errors, schisms, blasphemies with the Word, though they inwardly reform and
convert few or none, or make some Hypocrites by it; and Magistrates must beat
and cut them down with the sword of Justice and corporal punishments, though
they really convert none, but only restrain their outward exorbitances and
See Bishop Babing^ons Notes on Exodus 18. part 2. p. 272, 273.
spreading infection, or make some Hypocrites and dissemblers, and leave the
issue of their endeavors to God, whose only work it is to reform and convert
men's souls in sincerity from sin and error, and unite them to himself; God
neither requires nor expects that they should inwardly reform men's spirits, or
infuse saving grace into their souls, that is his own and his spirits proper
work, not theirs; wherefore they must do what God enjoynes them, and not
neglect their several duties, because they cannot effect what he requires not
of them, even reform men's inner parts, as the Objectors themselves confess;
and therefore would reject the Magistrate and his Sword, as having no place at
all in the reformation of the Gospel. Fifthly, there is a double reformation
under the Gospel, which Master Dell confounds, to delude his Auditors, Readers,
and if distinguished, would have rendered most of his Sermon impertinent to his
drift. The first, private and personal, consisting in Col. 3. 5. Gal. 5. 24.
Acts 26. 16. Psalm. 51. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 17, 16.
mortification of men's sinful lusts, renewing of their depraved natures, and
turning the whole frame of their souls and spirits from sin and Satan, unto
God 5 not, a destroying and utter abolishing out of the faithful and the
Elect, ALL THAT SIN, corruption, lust and evil that did flow in through the
fall of Adam, as Right Reformation, p. 4, 5.
Master Dell defines it; since no Saint 1 John 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Romans 7, 11,
to the end.
is, or can be so exactly reformed in this present world, much less no Church,
how pure soever: Now this, as it is wrought by God alone, so it is peculiar to
the Elect alone, after their effectual calling and conversion, which is still
accompanied with many remainders of sin and corruption whiles they live.
Secondly, a public outward reformation of a visible society of men professing
the faith of Christ, consisting in the purity, due, decent and orderly
Administration of Gods Ordinances, Sacraments, Word, Worship among them,
according to his revealed Will; and the external holiness, unblamablenesse of
their lives, and outward Christian deportment one toward another, in all
peaceablenesse and honesty. This Reformation is common to all Members of any
Christian Church, State, as well Elect as Reprobate, Sheep as Coats, and
belongs properly to the Romans 13. 1, to 6. 2 Timothy 2. 1. Ti^* 3. 1, 2. c. 2. 12,
13. 2 These. 3. 10, 10 15. 1 Cor. 5 1. 1 Timothy 5 29 1 Cor. 11. 13, to 34. c. 14.
40
Magistrates and Ministers to effect, according to their respective callings;
to the one, by preaching, catechizing, admonitions, repoofs and Ecclesiastical
Censures, where established; to the other by rewards and encouragements to the
good, and admonitions to, reprehentions of, and outward corporal or capital
punishments inflicted upon evil doers, as I have formerly proved at large, and
is clear by Romans 13. 1, to 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Revel. 17. 16,
17. Isa. 49. 23. Now the number of the Elect being Mat, 7. 14. Luke 13. 23, 24.
very few, in comparison of the Reprobate, and by far the smallest number
even in the most reformed Christian Church or State, be it never so small or
separate from others; no reasonable creature can expect the first kind of
reformation (peculiar to the Saints) to be ever wrought in the major part of
any Christian Church or Society whatsoever, much less in a whole Christian
Congregation or Kingdom: yet because no Magistrate, no Minister, nor other
person knows who or what number of any Church or Christian Society are
predestined to eternal life, or are already actually, or hereafter may be
inwardly converted, reformed; therefore the Mark 16. 15 16. Heb. 6. 4, to 9.
Acts 13. 48.
Word must be preached, and the means of salvation dispensed unto all, though
they convert but few, even those only who are elected, and only civilize
others, and perchance make many of them Hypocrites; and because, the very Elect
themselves, even after their conversion, may fall into 2 Samuel c. 11 and 12.
Psalm. 51 Job 31. 5. to 35.
scandalous sins and capital offenses (though not fall finally nor totally
from their state of grace) which Magistrates have power and authority as well
from God as man to punish, (both to reform them, deter and keep others from
infection, preserve public peace, justice, and keep off Gods judgments;) they
and all others who externally embrace the Gospel, are in that regard Fit. 2.
12. 13 1 Timothy 2. 1.
enjoined to live soberly and godly in this present world, to avoid all sins
and wickednesses whatsoever; yea 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2 etc. Tit 3. 12, 13, 14. Gal. 5.
19, 20, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1, to 7. 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 6. Romans 16. 17, 18 Jude 1. to
20. Acts 20 29, 30.
heresy, idolatry, blasphemy, schism, erroneous Doctrines, as well as Murder,
Adultery, and the like offenses; and likewise subject to the Magistrates
censures, corrections, in case they actually or openly transgress in any kind,
they being Gods Romans 13. 3, 4
avengers, to execute wrath on those that do evil; Therefore the civil
Magistrate may, ^ay must and ought to use his utmost endeavors to make an
external public reformation both in Church and State, and a total purgation
of all sins, offenses, heresies, blasphemies, errors and corruptions whatsoever
out of both, for the welfare and peace of both, and diverting of Gods wrath
from both, though he cannot work an inward reformation in all, no more then the
Minister, or Christ himself whiles he was here on earth. And therefore this
Objection, That Christian Princes and Magistrates ought not to restrain or
punish Heretics, Schismatics, etc. or to intermeddle in the outward
Reformation of the visible Churches within their Territories, because they
cannot inwardly convert and reform all members of them, is a most absurd and
ridiculous Objection. Sixthly, to civilize, moralize or restrain Christians
from the outward acts of sins, from which they are not inwardly purged, by
penal Laws and corporal Censures, as Magistrates often do, is not to make
them Hypocrites, and twofold more the children of hell then before, as is most
falsely objected; but to make them actually better, and less sinful, less
hurtful then otherwise they would be, were they not restrained: for the fewer
actual sins men openly commit, the less is their condemnation, the more their
Romans 2. 5, to 10. James 5. 3. Revel. 18 6, 7
commendation; the less they infect others, the less they dishonor and
provoke God, the less they disturb the public peace; the more exorbitant,
excessive, numerous, audacious their transgressions are, the more is their
guilt, the heavier their judgment, the more pernicious, dangerous their
example, and the more they provoke Gods public judgments against the places
where they live, and increase the guilt of those Magistrates who suffer them to
go unpunished: Master Dell p. 39. confesses it. See 1 Pet. 5. 8. Job 1. 7.
Rev. 20. 1, to 10. c. 12. 11,
witness Foxes, Bears, Lions (yea the Devil himself) who chained ap, are
nothing so hurtful, as those that run at large, though they retain their
natures still: the like we may say of chained Heretics, Schismatics,
Blasphemers, Seducers, and all kind of restrained sinners, by coercive Laws or
Punishments. Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae, Neither makes ill men
formal Hypocrites, nor worse then if they were unrestrained; yea their
pretending of an inward reformation, or dissimulation of their heresies,
blasphemies and heretical opinions, is nothing so sinful, so dangerous, so
hurtful, so damnable, as the open practice, spreading and profession of them
with impunity. Seventhly, The Magistrates and Gods intention in punishing and
restraining Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and other Malefactors, is not
to make them Hypocrites, but really to reclaim or make them better at least,
if not inwardly to convert them: If See Gregor. l. 7. epist. 40. Antonius 2.
par. Tit. 12. c. 2. Master Ruthersurds Due Right of Presbyters, p. 354, 355.
their restraint or punishment make any formal Hypocrites (as the very Gospel
preached does more frequently then the sword of Justice) it is not the fault of
the Magistrate, or the punishment inflicted, which are good, but of the parties
punished, who pervert them to a contrary end then they were intended: Their
abuse therefore of them must not nullisie them, neither as to themselves, nor
others who may profit by them, and make better use thereof. Eighthly, Saint Paul
has most fully refuted this Objection in a like case, Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Some indeed preach Christ, even of envy and strife, and some also of good will:
The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds: But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the
defense of the Gospel. What then? Notwithstanding every way, whether in
pretencee or truth, Christ is preached, AND I THEREIN DO REJOICE, YEA, AND
WILL REJOICE: compared with the 1 Cor. 1. 18, 23, 24. For the preaching of the
Cross is to them that perish, foolishness; but unto us that are saved, it is
the power of God, etc. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and unto the Gentiles foolishness; but unto them which are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God:
and 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. For we are into God a sweet savor of Christ, in them
that are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are the savor of death
unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life; and who is
sufficient for these things? Though some men preach Christ for good ends,
others for bad; some in pretense, others in truth; and though the preaching of
the Gospel be a stumbling block to some, foolishness and a savor of death
unto death to others, aggravating and increasing their sins and condemnation
in an high degree (which is worse then outwardly to reformeor make them
Hypocrites) and the power of God to salvation but to a few, working such
contrary effects; yet it must be preached, because God commands it, has glory
by it, even in those that perish, and some are converted thereby, though others
hardened and damned; so, though the Magistrates coercive power and punishments,
inwardly convert not many, yet because they restrain most Heretics,
Schismatics, Sinners from doing more mischief to others, and committing more
actual sins in themselves, yea make an outward conformity and reformation
where Justice is duly executed, they must be still continued, and conscionably
used in the Church, though they should make many men Hypocrites, and worse then
they were before, being God's Ordinance for good, not ill. Ninthly, admit the
Magistrates punishments and coercive power should actually convert and reform
none in a Gospel way of themselves; yet they compel them to resort to the Word
and Ordinances, and to the use of those means which God has specially
appointed to convert and reform them, both in heart and life, yea, the
suppressing of all private meetings and conventicles of Heretics,
Schismatics, Anabaptists, Papists, Blasphemers (which confirm and settle them
in their damnable heresies, errors, schisms) and constraining them to resort
conscionably to our public Congregations, where the Word of God is truly
preached, expounded, and the Sacraments duly administered (all former grounds
of their Separation and Schism fromour Assemblies being fully removed, so as
there is nothing but obstinacy which now makes them separate) would be a ready
means, through Gods blessing, to reduce, reclaim, convert and unite such both
to God and us, and put a speedy period to all our desperate schisms,
occasioned merely by the cowardice or negligence of Magistrates in not
censuring, and of the people in not informing against, and prosecuting such
offenders. With this kind of compulsion, to force men to our public Ordinances
and Assemblies, from which there is no just ground of conscience now to
separate, is no forcing of their consciences, nor compelling them to believe,
nor prosecuting of men for conscience (as is maliciously objected) no more then
a Physicians compelling of a Patient to take a bitter Potion against his will,
to recover his health, and save his life; or a Parents constraining his Child
to go to Church or School; or a Masters compelling his Servant to do his
work, or learn his Trade; or a Commanders enforcing his Soldiers to fight
against their wills; or the putting of a lame person into a Bath against his
mind to recover his limbs; and has been practiced in all Ages by the most
religious Princes; being warranted by Gods own dealing with us in our
conversion unto him; who Mat. 22. 3. Luke 14. 15. to 25.
compels us to come in, yea, John 6. 44. Mat. 23. 37. Luke 13. 34.
draws us to and after him, against our corrupt wills, hearts, natures, lusts:
and at last, through the use of Means and Ordinances by little and little, of
unwilling makes us willing, Phil. 2. 12.
working in us both the will and the deed of his good pleasure: Upon this
ground the good Kings of Judah, Nehemiah, and others, 2 Chronicles. 12. to 17. c.
34. 30 31, 32. Neh. 9 and 13. c. 13. 11 to 23. Ezrac. 9. and 13.
compelled and commanded their Subjects to enter into Covenant with God, yea to
destroy the Idols, Altars, Groves, Prophets, Priests and Temples of their Idol
gods, and put away their Idolatrous Wives; which they would no ways tolerate:
and those that separated from the public Ordinances and Congregations, through
negligence or schism, were to Levit. 23. 27, 29, 30. Numb. 9. 13.
be cut off from the people by the hand of public justice, as the marginall
Scriptures evidence. All which considered, this great Objection (much
magnified, pressed by our Opposites) will be fully cleared, dissipated and
vanish into nothing.

The eighth Objection is this, Master Dels Right Reformation, p. 23.
The coercive power and punishments of the Object. 8.
Magistrate in matters of Religion, brings men into Blind Obedience, and makes
men obey what is commanded on pain of punishment, though they know not whether
it be right or wrong, with the Word, or against the Word; so that a man shall
say, That what I do, I am constrained to do, and therefore I do it because I
am constrained to do it: When a man shall see prisons and banishments, and
loss of Goods walking up and down the Kingdom for the reformation of the
Church, you shall have men say at last, We will believe, and do as the State
pleases, or as the Counsel pleases: and hove acceptable such faith and
obedience is to God, all spiritual Christians know.

Ergo, Magistrates must not punish Heretics, Schismatics Seducers or
Blasphemers with capital or corporal censures. This Argument is borrowed from
Master Robinson his Justification of Separation, page 224.

I answer, first, that Master Dell here confesses, That corporal punishments
Answer.
prisons, banishments, loss of goods, and death walking up and down a
Kingdom, is a ready means to bring men to unity and conformity in Gods
worship, when no means else will prevail; therefore it is fit to make use of
this means, when there is occasion; and certainly there was never more
occasion then now, when many of his Saints are grown so Naster Edward his third
part of the Gangraena.
audacious, insolent, domineering, exorbitant in their Heresies, Blasphemies
and open affronts used to our Ministers every where, disturbing and pulling
some of them out of their Pulpits. Secondly, i^ the thing commanded be good,
agreeable to the Will and Word of God (as to repair constantly to the public
Ordinances and Assemblies, to hear, pray, and worship God,) it is obstinacy
and wickedness to disobey, and no blind, but just and conscientious obedience
to submit: if the thing commanded be simply evil, and the party commanded be
convinced of it by clear evidences out of Scipture, it is his honor and duty
to Acts 4. 19, 20. c. 5. 29. Dan. 2. 5. 1017 c. 38, to 30. c. 6. 1, to 28. Mat.
5. 10, 11, 12. 1 P^t 3. 14. c. 4. 13, 14.
obey God rather then men, and cheerfully to suffer for disobeying: if the
thing commanded be merely doubtful to him that is commanded, but not to him
that commands, who deemes it just; there the command of the superior Power
ought to poyse the scales of obedience, especially in things not apparently
sinful. Thirdly, Obstinacy, Heresy, Error, Schism, really make men blind in
a spiritual sense, and those who follow them are more guilty of Mat. 15. 19.
c. 23. 16, 24, 26. Luke 6 39 John 9. 33, 40* 2 Pet ^ 9. Romans 3. 1^. Romans 11. 7.
^ Cor. ^. ^. ^ (...) 2. ^1.
blind obedience then the Magistrate, who by mulcts and punishments would open
their wilfully closed eyes, and reduce them to the way of truth and unity.
Fourthly, a Blind Seducers are more guilty by far, of leading men into blind
obedience, then the coercive Laws and Punishments of Christian States and
Magistrates: Witness Christ's Speech of the Pharisos and Jewish Priests, Marth.
15. 14. They be blind Leaders of the blind* and if the blind, ^^^d the ^^^^d
^^^^ shall fall into the Ditch: And Matthew. 23. 16, 24, 26. Were ^^^^ you ^^
Scribe^, Pharisees Hypocrites* ye blind guides, ye fools and blind (thrice
repeated in one Chapter; and Luke 6. 39.) witness the 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. There
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, etc. And many shall (blindly) follow their pern^cidus ways. 1 Timothy
4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of
Devils: compared with the 2 Timothy 3. 1, to 6. cap. 2. 14. Acts 5. 36, 37. cap.
20. 30. together with Matthew. 24. 11, 24. Many false Prophets shall arise and
deceive many, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. Revel. 13. 4, 8, 15, 15. Antichrist, the
Beast, and the false Prophet shall deceive and seduce all that dwell on the
earth, whose names are not written in the Book of life: In all Ages blind
Priests, Sectaries and false Teachers have been the greatest seducers, and most
led people into blind obedience; witness the blind obedience of the Papists to
their Priests and Confessors, and of most Sectaries and Independents to their
blind Teachers, who follow them blindly in an Independent Church Government,
which their chief Leaders have not yet agreed on, and either cannot or dare
not plainly publish to the world, though earnestly pressed thereunto by their
Opposites and public authority: which Government Master Right Reformation. p.
5, etc.
Dell now professedly denies, averring, That there is no other Reformation
under the Gospel, BUT ONLY that of the inward man; and other Reformation, be
and the Gospel knows not any. Yea, this is the misery of miseries in this
seeing Age (as is pretended) that many people zealously affected, as if they
were all Quick silver, Weathercocks, s Ephesians. 4. 14. Rom 1. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 17.
Jude 12, 13.
or waves of the Sea, blindly wheel about with every wind of doctrine, running
after every idle crochet of their Independent wavering Pastors, without
examination, believing it as an Oracle sent from Heaven, because they vent it,
though there be no ground in Sctipture for it, and cry it up for NEW LIGHT,
when in truth it is only OLD HERESY revived, or NEW BLASPHEMY or Error,
gilded over with the name of Gospel Light: How many poor souls See Master
Edwards his Gangraenaes especially the third put.
Master John Goodwin, Master Peter's, Master Dell, Master Saltmarsh, Paul Hobson
the Tailor, (now a shining light) and their Confederates, have thus captivated
and led away with blind obedience, is too well known to the world: Ergo, by
Master D^i's own Doctrine, since they have brought men with their New light
and Crotchets, ^^ believe and do even what they please or prescribed, though
they know not whether it be with the Word or against the Word, they must be
from henceforth quite exploded out of the Church, as well as the Magistrates
coercive power* prisons, banishments, loss of Goods, or death; or if they deny
this consequence, they must still admit of these in the Church, to suppress
and punish Herefies, Heretics, Schisms, Blasphemies, though they bring some
into blind obedience, as Ministers, and their erroneous New lights daily do,
who produce more, and far worse blind obedience, then the Magistrates
coercive Laws or Punishments. Fifthly, it is most evident, that there always
has been, and ever will be much blind obedience in the Church of God, arising
principally from the Ephesians. 4. 1^. Rom 1. 21, 2^ 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 4.
4. 1 ^^ha 2. 11.
Ignorance, Idleness, want of love to the truth and inconstancy of men; and
till God himself by his Spirit shall fully open the Ephesians. ^. ^^. (...) 1^.
eyes of men's understandings to behold, and their hearts to receiv^, love and
hold fast the Truth (the happiness of few or none but Acts 13, 48. 2 Pet. 1. 9.
the Elect) they will be still possessed more or less with such a Blindness.
This therefore being the misery and punishment of mankind (for their original
disobedience to God in Adams sin) of two inevitable blind obediences, it is
far better, fafer for people to believe, as the State and Council shall
please, and what the Parliament and Assembly (after much fasting, prayer,
seeking unto God, studying and searching of the Scriptures) settle, then what
Mr Dell shall decree (who understood not the very meaning of his Text, as Mr
Love Animadversions on Master Del's Sermon, p. 2.
has proved, and scarce of any one Scripture he quotes, as I have evidenced;)
or what Master Goodwin, Master Peter's, Master Saltmarsh, Paul Hobson, or any
other New light shall prescribe and set up of themselves, without and against
Authority; especially since they believe and prescribe all with a See the
Apology of the five dissenting Brethren.
S^epticall Faith and reserve, to change and alter at their pleasure, and not
to be bound by their present judgment or practice: which for ought men know,
may always ring the changes till their knels be rung; they having been so
variable heretofore, and yet not fixed at the last: certainly such a blind
obedience to the Parliament, State, Council and supreme Powers, to Romans 13.
1. 2 1 Pet. 2. 12, 13 14. Tit. 3. 1. Josh ^ 18.
whom God enjoynes Obedience in all lawful and indifferent things, will be
far more acceptable to God and all good men, and freer from the brand of
Popish Obedience; then blind obedience to Master Dell, or any other New Comet
whatsoever, with wilful disobedience both to our Church, State, Parliament,
Laws, established Religion and Government, the practice of the best and purest
Churches of ancient and latter times, from which these New lights vary, out of
affected singularity, Acts 20. 29, ^0 Romans 16. (...), ^8.
or to maintain a faction to bring about their own worldly designs. Finally,
the blind obedience of Heretics, Schismatics, false Teachers, Sectaries, and
the like, to Laws and Punishments, which would both restrain and reclaim
them, is far more acceptable to God, more profitable, less hurtful, less
damnable to themselves, less pernicious to others, less hurtful, scandalous
to the Church and State wherein they live, and more pleasing unto both, then
their obstinate Heresies, Errors, Schisms, blasphemies, are or can be; and may
(through Gods blessing) prove an effectall means of their reformation, if not
of their real conversion to the Truth: therefore ex duobus malis minimum; the
danger of ^lind obedience, must neither exempt such from the Magistrates
jurisdiction, nor from his corporal or capital punishments, which are just
and lawful in themselves, and may prove beneficial, or at lest, less
hurtful to them of the two. Finally, See Master (...)'s Due Right of
Presbyters, p. 355, 356 Aug. Epist. 48, 50.
the Magistrates compelling Heretics and Schismatics (seduced to blind
Obedience by their blind Leaders) to come to the public Ordinances, where they
may be truly informed, instructed and converted to the truth, is so far from
working blind obedience in them, that it brings them to true and solid
obedience, upon just grounds of Scripture, reason, conviction, and so is quite
contrary to what is here objected: And thus I have blown up this strong Hold
of this great Man of War, as well as the former. His next Objection is this:

(...) Reformation (or suppressing Heresies, false Doctrines, Blasphemies,
Object. 9
Schisms, by external Censures) Right Reformation, p. 3
causes disturbances and tumults in the world: when men are caused by outward
power, to act against their inward principles, in the things of God; what
disturbances this has bred in States and Kingdoms, who knows not? So that
they who lay hold on the power of men, and go about to reform hearts and
consciences by outward violence, are never the cause of Reformation, but
always of tumult: And this renders the cause of the Gospel grievous and odious
to the world, rather then commendable: and therefore let all that love the
Gospel of Christ, abstain from outward violence; for they that use the Sword,
in this kind, shall in the end perish by the Sword.

This Argument and misapplication of our Saviors words, is borrowed from the
old Donatists and late Anabaptists; as is evident by August. Cont. Lit.
Petilian. Donatist. l. 2. c. 88. Epist. 48, 50. and Lucas Osiander Enchirid.
contr. cum Anabaptistis c. 9. qu. 1. p. 188.

I answer, first, That this Argument is grounded on, deduced from no Answer.
Text of Scripture, but merely on, and from worldly policy, which Master Dell
tells us, must have no place in the Church of God, no more then worldly power.
Secondly, as we Romans 3. 8.
must not do evil that good may come of it, so the Magistrate must not neglect
to do justice, and punish Heretics, Schismatic Seducers, Idolaters and
Blasphemers, though outward mischiefs, seditions, tumults ( Haerefis in
Republica bellum, and seditionem concitat, Tho. Beauxannis Har. Ilvang. Tom. 2.
s. 630.
which they cause) may ensue thereupon: Master Dell, I hope, never preached
this Doctrine, either to our Victorious General, or the Army, that the taking
up Arms against the King and his Malignant Forces in defense of our
Parliament, Religion, Laws, Liberties, would cause very great disturbances,
tumults, murders and distractions in the Kingdom, far more, far greater then
the suppression of obstinate Heretics or Schismatics; Ergo, it was utterly
unlawful for them to take up Arms, or fight, or draw blood in this cause, as
Appeal to thy Conscience. See the Grand Rebellion; The Necessity of christian
Subjection; The state of our Affairs, etc.
Doctor Fern, and other Royallists argue from this very ground; if he had
preached any such Doctrine to them, no doubt they would have casheered and
sequestered him longere this for such Malignant Divinity, as some Cavalierish
Divines have been, even by Independents themselves, as well as by
Presbyterians. If then his Argument holds not at all, by the Generals and whole
Armies real acknowledgment and practice; by the whole Parliaments, and their
Adherents joint Resolutions, in case of our present wars, much less will it
hold in the case of the Magistrates suppressing, punishing real Heretics,
Schismatickes, and Blasphemers, according to his duty. Thirdly, this reason
might be urged against the apprehending and punishing of potent Malefactors, of
a strong party of thieves, plunderers, riotors, rebels and the like; yea,
against the relieving of our distressed brethren in Ireland against the bloody
Irish popish Rebels; or suppressing the Pirates of Dunkirk, Tunis, Algiers:
yea, against populer Elections of Knights and Burgesses for Parliament, which
many times cause Tumults and commotions; yet it holds not weight in any of all
those cases; therefore not in this objected. Fourthly, Master Dell might object
thus against the express Text of Deuteronomy. 13. 13. to 18. where God commands the
Israelites to make War against an whole City that Apostatized to Idolatry,
and to smite all the Inhabitants thereof with the edge of the Sword, and
destroy it utterly; because it could not be done without great disturbances and
tumults; against the whole Congregation of Isreal's warring against the Tribe of
Benjamin, and Inhabitants of Gibeah, for not delivering up into their hands
those wicked men of Gibeah, who ravished the Levites Concubine to death, that
they might put them to death, and so put away evil from Israel, Judges 20.
because it cost many deer-bought Battles, much bloodshed, yea, the lives of
many thousands, and brought the Tribe of Benjamin almost to utter ruin;
against the reformation of most of the godly Kings of Judah; against 2 Kings 9.
and 10.
Jehu his proceedings against the house of Ahab and wicked Jezabel; against
Gods own miraculous punishing of Corah, Dathan and Abiram for their Schism,
which bred much murmuring and tumult against Moses and Aaron Number. 16. 41
among the discontented multitude; Yea, against the very preaching of the
Gospel it self, by Christ and his Apostles at first, and his godly Ministers
since, which occasioned, engendered many tumults, commotions, seditions,
persecutions, Wars in the Christian world, as all Ecclesiastical Histories
evidence, and Christ himself predicted they should, Matthew. 10. 34, 35, 36.
cap. 24. 6, to 14. Luke 12. 51, 52, 53. cap. 21. 8, to 18. John 16. 1, 2. yea,
against the private Conventicles of Master Dels Saints, the Anabaptists and
other Sectaries Dippings, secret meetings, and See Master Edwards Gangraena,
part 3. p 251, 252, 253, 254, etc.
violent invading of our Pulpits against the Ministers and Peoples wills, in
many places: Therefore Master Dell must certainly disclaim this idle,
childish argument. Fifthly, these Disturbances and Tumults, are but contingent,
not necessary consequences of Magistrates forcible reformation and punishments
on obstinate Heretics and Schismatics, who are commonly punished, suppressed
(if the Magistrates proceed dis^re^tly) without any great tumult or resistance,
and not a See August. Epist. 48, 50.
necessary concomitant: and when such tumults happen, through the Heretics
potency, obstinacy and wilful resistance of the Magistrates lawful power or
censures, it is not the Magistrates fault or sin, but the Heretics,
Schismatics, Malefactors; and ever, or for the most part 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2 etc.
Acts 5. 36 37, 38 Romans 13. 1, 2* 3, 4.
ends in their destruction and damnation, if not total extirpation: witness
the tumultuous August. cont. Crese. Gram. ^* 3. c. 42, etc.
Donatists Example of old, the Sleidan com l. 10. Span. hemi^. Diatr. Hist.
Germane Anabaptists Tumults and Rebellions since, and those who have trod in
their wicked paths, as the Rebels in Cornwall, Devonshire and the North, in
King See Holinshead, Speed, Stow, Grasion Cambden's Elizabeth.
EDWARD the VI. and Queen ELIZABETH'S Raigns, opposing their godly Reformations
by open force; to whom that Text of Mr Dels is most justly appliable; Those
that use the Sword in this kind (against the Magistrate) shall in the end
perish by the Sword; spoken by Christ to Peter himself when he drew his Sword
to rescue Christ himself from the high Priests violence, Mat. 26. 51, 52, 53.
not of the high Priests Servants, who came out to apprehend him, with swords
and staves, ver. 47. 55. So that this Text makes point blank against tumultuous
resistance of the Magistrate, by those whom he would reform by coercive laws
and punishments but nothing at all against the Magistrate; whom, those who
resist in his lawful calling, resist the very Ordinance of God, against Gods
own express commands in the Gospel it self, and shall bring upon themselves
swift damnation and destruction too, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. 2
Pet. 2. 1. Sixthly, whereas he objects, That forcible reformation by coercive
Laws and Punishments, and the civil Magistrates coercive power, are NEVER THE
CAUSE OF REFORMATION, but ever of tumults, it is a most bold and false
assertion, contrary to all the express precepts of God, for the corporal and
capital punishments of Idolaters, Apostates and Seducers, in the old
Testament, and all the Presidents of the Reformation of godly Kings and
Magistrates, therein recorded for our imitation, already cited; of far more
credit then Master Dels bold assertion; contrary to the 1 Cor. 5. 5. which
resolves, that the punishment of men, and delivering them to Satan, to afflict
and torment them, to the destruction of the flesh, is a means that their souls
might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; compared with the 1 Cor. 11. 32.
contrary to the experience of all former Ages, of the Reformed Churches abroad,
and our own Laws, Statutes against Recusants and Sectaries at home; there
being few Heresies, Errors or Schisms in any Age or Church that were ever
totally suppressed and reformed, but by the Magistrates power; which if duly
executed, would quickly quell all Heresies, Errors, Schisms, that now infest
our Church, without any considerable stir or tumults. Pope Epist. 38, 39*
Leo the first, in two Gratulatory Epistles to the Emperor Martianus and the
Empress Pulcheria; writes, That by their coercive Laws against Heretics, the
Heresy of Eutiches was twice suppressed, and at the last, extirpated
throughout the world, to their double Crown, Honor; and those Heretics
brought to public Repentance, reconciled and admitted into the Catholic
Church: Quia devotionis utrumque and Christianae, ut pertinaces SEVERITAS JUSTA
COERCEAT, and conversos Charitas non repellat. August. contr. Lit. Petil. and
Epist. 48, and 50. affirms of the Donatists; that very many, yea, whole Cities
of them were converted in his time for fear of punishment, by the laws against
them; and our own Nubrigensis, l. 2. c. 13. and Eusebius, de Vita Constantini,
l. 3. c. ^4. forecited, inform us of the like effects, and Gratian more fully,
Causa 23. qu. 1, 4, 5. The like course now, would no doubt produce the same
effects, and keep others from infection and falling into Heresy, Blasphemy,
Schisms, to the public prejudice, whatever Master Dell pretends to the
contrary. Finally, I answer, that this Objection made by a Chaplain to the
Army, who have now the sword and power in their hands, might receive a very
sower construction, if compared with his late See Master Edwards Began graena,
the part 3. p. 63, 64, 213.
Doctrine in the Army; but I know the integrity and fidelity both of our
incomparable General, and the generality of our Soldiers, to be such, that
they would rather lay down their Lives and leave the Kingdom (as Master
Peter's has often averred in the Pulpit on their behalf) then raise the least
tumult or disturbance to oppose the Church Government and Reformation which the
Parliament in their wisdoms shall establish. And so I have routed Master Dels
chief Arguments; that from henceforth (to use his own words to Master Page 36.
Love) Babes and Sucklings, you shall come forth and answer this Master in
Israel.

The tenth Objection is this, Right Reformation, p. 21*
Forcible Reformation is unbeseeming the Gospel, Object. 10.
for the Gospel is the Gospel of Peace, and not of Force and Fury; Civil,
Ecclesiastical Reformation, reformes by breathing out Threatenings,
Punishments, Prisons, Fire, death; but the Gospel by Preaching Peace; And
therefore it is most unbeseeming the Gospel to do any thing violently for the
advancement thereof, etc. So the Sea August. lib. 2. contr. lit Petiliani, and
contr. Cresconium Gram. l. 2. and Epist. 48.
Donatists and Lucas Osiander, Enchirid. contr. cum Anabaptistis, cap. 9. qu.
2, 3, 4.
Anabaptists argued heretofore, and Master Dell out of them now.

I answer, first, though the Gospel be a Gospel of Peace to those who obey it,
and offers Peace to all at first; yet it always reforms not only by preaching
peace to men, but War, Hell, Death, Damnation and loss of Heaven, Peace
being but one branch thereof. This is clear by Matthew. 10. 11, to 16. Luke 10.
5, to 16. Mark 6. 11. where when Christ sent forth his Disciples to preach; he
bids them, At their first entrance into any house or City, to say first, Peace
be to this house: But if they received them not, then he commanded them to go
into the streets, and say: Even the very dust of your house, or City, we do
wipe (or shake off) against you; and that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom
in that day, then for that house or City. So after his Resurrection, when he
sent forth his Apostles, to preach the Gospel to every Creature, he gives them
this disjunctive Commission; He that believes and is Baptized shall he saved;
here is peace: But he that believes not, shall be damned; here is war,
threats, violence: Mark 16. 16. So John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son
has everlasting life; (here is peace;) and he that believes not the Son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him: here is war: and ver. 18. He
that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not is condemned
already, etc. So Luke 13. 3, 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.
Here Christ proclaims War as well as Peace, Threats as well as Promises,
Damnation as well as Salvation, even to work Gospel-reformation: The like did
John Baptist, his forerunner, Matthew. 3. 10, 12. and Saint Paul in sundry
places; as Romans 2. 5, to 11. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 21. (quoted by Master
Dell himself) Ephesians. 5. 6. Phil. 4. 18, 19. Col. 3. 5, 6, 25. 1 These. 5. 3. 2
These. 1. 6, to 12. cap 3. 8, 12. Heb. 2. 2, 3. cap. 4. 1. cap. 6. 4, to 9. cap.
10. 16, to 31. cap. 12. 21, 29. Hence in the 2 Cor. 5. 11. he uses this
expression; Knowing therefore the TERROR of the Lord, we persuade men: Saint
James does the like, James 5. 1, 2, 3. Saint Peter the like, 2 Pet. 2. and cap.
3. 7, 10, 11. Saint John the like, 1 John 5. 12. 16. and Jude the like, ver. 5.
17. who concludes thus, verse 23. And others SAVE WITH FEAR, PULLING THEM OUT
OF THE FIRE: So Revel. 20. 14, 15. cap. 22. 15, 19, 20. and Matthew. 25. 31. to
the end, we have the like Threats and Punishments in Hell fire, propounded to
scare men by fear unto Repentance, which work upon men's hearts to convert
them, as well as the promises of peace: Yea, Paul assures us, That the Law
(which is full of terror and menaces) is our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ, that we might be justified through faith, Gal. 3. 24. And Christ
himself under the Gospel, converted Paul the Persecutor in the midst of his
persecution, not by the Gospel See August. Epist. 48.
of peace, but by a shining Light, and terrible voice from Heaven, which struck
him unto the earth, astonished him and his whole company, yea, by smiting him
with blindness for a time, and by this forcible means made him a Preaching
Paul, building that which he formerly destroyed, Acts 9. 1, to 17. cap. 22. 4,
etc. Therefore its false which Master Dell avers, That the Gospel reformes and
converts men only by preaching Peace, and that it breaths not out threatenings,
punishments, fire, death, as Church-Ecclesiasticall reformation does, which
misbeseems the Gospel: For Christ, though he be a Lamb, yet he has Psalm. 2.
5, 12 Rev. 6. 16, 17.
wrath in him too, as well as meekness, which wrath is exceeding terrible; yet
he converts men by it, and by threats of eternal torments, fire, death, as
well as by preaching peace.

Secondly, we read Psalm. 2. 8, 9. this Prophecy of Christ himself under the
Gosple, Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheretance and
the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession: Thou shall BREAK THEM v Id
est, Conteres in eis terrenas cupiditates, and veteris hominis lutulenta
negotia, etc. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 2.
WITH A ROD OF IRON, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel; recited
and applied to Christ in the new Testament, Revel. 2. 27. and 19. 25. So Psalm
110. 2, 5, 6. The Lord shall send the ROD of thy strength out of Sion; rule
thou in the midst of thine Enemies: The Lord at thy right hand shall strike
thorough Kings in the day of his wrath; He shall judge among the Heathen; He
shall fill the places with dead bodies; He shall wound the heads over many
Countries: Yea Page 27.
Master Dell himself asserts; That Christ shall punish sinners more severely
then any powers of the world can punish them, for he shall smite the Earth with
the ROD of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked,
Isa. 11. 4. If then Christ does thus subdue and break in pieces with a Rod of
Iron, and the Rod of his wrath, the Heathen which God gives unto him for his
possession, and wound the heads over diverse Countries, yea slay the wicked
(that is, their wickedness and sins, not persons) by the Rod of his mouth,
that is, by threats and terrors, and converts some in a forcible manner, as he
did P^ul from Heaven; then certainly the Gospel and Christ do not always
convert by preaching peace, and forcible Reformation is not unbeseeming the
Gospel, since Christ himself does thus use it, as th^se Texts import; yea,
Christian Magistrates may breath out prisons, fire, death, threatenings,
punishments against Heretics, Blasphemers, and obstinate Malefactors, to
restrain and reform them, as well as Christ, the Gospel and his Ministers,
breath out Rods of Iron, Damnation, a Lake of fire, Hell, chains of darkness,
and everlasting death, torments, to reform and turn men from their sins.

Thirdly, If it be most unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ to do any thing
forcibly for the advancement of it, then why do not Master Dell, Master
Sal^marsh and Master Peter's reprove, reform their preaching Soldiers and
Captains, (as Master Edward his third part of the Gangraena. p. 252, 253, 254
etc. and 2 part passim.
Colonel John Hewson, Lieutenant John Web, and others) who violently intrude
into our Ministers Pulpits against their wills, and in a most tumultuous manner,
interrupt them forcibly in their Sermons, preach in their places, and offer
violence to their persons; threatening not to sheath their Swords, till they
have rooted out all the Priests, and left never a Black-coat in England, and
teach them this good Doctrine: May these thus tumultuously, forcibly against
the Ordinances of Parliament, use open force and violence, without any check or
exemplary punishment by a Counsel of War, and yet must not the Magistrate
use the Sword of Justice to punish such seditious riotous Schismatics and
Heretical Sectaries, without dishonouring the Gospel of peace? Yea, why have
Master Dell, Master Peter's and Master Sal^marsh themselves in some places
endeavored forcibly to intrude into the Ministers Pulpits (as Master Bodens at
Bath, and elsewhere) against their wills, and convented them for denying to admit
them, till they had recanted their erroneous Doctrines? Let them then for shame
renounce this Objection, which their own practice re^utes as heterodox; or else
reform these their violent practices, or deny this power to our Magistrates,
which themselves and their Saints usurp, as peculiar to themselves.

Fourthly, If this be true, Why have the godliest Christians and most zealous
Ministers of God in all Ages, Churches See Aug^ Epist. 48^. (...) Causa ^3 qu.
1, 4, ^. S^^ Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Cent. Magd. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. cap 1. De
Haeresibus, etc. 7. De Officio Politici Magistratus in (...) and conservanda
Guber^ and Disciplina Ecclestica, Aug l. 2. (...) P^^^ O^^^us l. 3
invoked the Laws, Power, Sword of Christian Magistrates, Kings, Emperors,
against obstinate Heretics Schismatics, Blasphemers, as I have already
proved? Yea, why did the Christians in the (...) Church (...) Ecc. Hist. ^ 7. c
^4. N^^^ph^rus Ec^t. l 6. c. 24. Ita Paulus ab Ecclesia non tantum a sancta and
Ecclesiastica, verum etiam a (...) and Mundana potestate turpi and ^st pull sus,
Cum summo (...) secularis imperii a^ (...) ab (...).
desire the Heathen Emperor Aurelianus, to suppress, expel* correct that
gross insolent lascivious Heretic Paulus Samosatenus; which he accordingly
did at their request? and why do the Se^^^^ mo^^ of Confessions, Sect. 19. of
the Civil Magistrate.
Confessions, the (...) (...) cap. d^ Magistratu.
Di^^nes of all reformed Churches beyond the Seas, incite the Christian
Magistrates to such a restraint and punishment of Heretics, Schismatics,
Blasphemers, asserting i^ to be not only lawful, but their duty too, or why
do some Independents confess as much in print? Either therefore all these were
utterly mistaken (as I am sure they were not) or Master Dels Objection is
absurd, without any shadow of solid reason; the rather, because this forcible
conversion of Heretics and Schismatics takes not place, but when and where
the Gospel of peace is first preached, tendered, refused; and admoni^^^ns, with
other milder means, will not prevail.

Fifthly, if forcible Reformation and violence be contrary to the Gospel of
peac^^ ^^en surely Wars and Arms are much more, and utterly unlawful, ^^
Master Dels Masters, the Master (...) of (...) Divi^* (...)* ^ See^ (...), ^um.
An^* ^. ^* (...). ^ ^. etc. ^0. (...) ^* ^. ^ ^ (...)* ^* ^* ^*
Anabaptists hold; why then is Master ^ell a Chaplain to and in our Army, and
so many of his Saints, men of War and Blood, of Force and Violence? They must
either renounce their Military Employments now, or Master Dels Divinity,
unless they love the gain of the ^^arres, more then the truth of Master Dels
Gospel of Peace.

Sixthly, if the Gospel be a Gospel of peace, then it is most just the Christian
Magistrate should forcibly suppress and punish Heretics, Schismatics,
Blasphemers and Seducers, who make War against the Truth and Peace of the
Gospel, with corporal and external punishments, to preserve the Peac^* Unity
and purity of the Gospel, when other means will not^ we shall neither enjoy
the peace nor purity of the Gospel, nor so much ^^ outward peace. Hence Paul
commands us to pray for Kings and^ Authority, that under them we may live quiet
and PEACEABLE LIVES. See Fi^^-Her^^^^ Cromptons, and (...) of (...).
in all (...) and honesty: As therefore those who break the civil Pea^e ^
the^^ King and State, may be justly indicted, imprisoned and bound to the Pea^e
with sufficient sureties (and sometimes to the good behavior) for it, by the
Justices of Peace and Civil Magistrate, to preserve peace for the future: so
doubtless may those Heretics, Schismatics, Seducers, Blasphemers, who
disturb the peace of the Church and Gospel, be thus indicted and punished by
them, to preserve the peace of the Church, the puriy of the Gospel, and our
Kingdoms peace thereby.

The eleventh Objection is this, Right Reformation, p. 21, 22.
The Faithful, the Subjects of Christ's Object. ^1.
Kingdom, are a willing people, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power: The very day of Christ's power, is not to force men
against their wills, but to make them willing; and what needs outward power to
force a people, made willing by the Spirit? etc. And to back this reason, he
(to show his great reading) quotes the sayings of Melancton, in Psalm. 110. 3.
of Polanus, Tyndall, Luther and Vlri^hus ab Hutten, in his Margin, to this
effect: That Religion is not to be forced with the Sword, nor Nations or People
to be compelled to the Faith of Christ; but men's hearts are to be drawn to the
true Faith of Christ; through preaching the Word of Truth: Adding a saying of
Luther (but not citing the place, nor yet of any of his other Authors, but
Melancton only, having taken them upon hearsay from others) Christus non
voluit vi and igne, cogere homines ad fidem; And, Hereticos comburere, est
contra voluntatem spiritus. His other sentences touching the Popes worldly
pompous Kingdom, are like his arguments, nothing to purpose; and he prefaceth
his quotations thus; So you may see the Truth, though it has BUT FEW
FOLLOWERS, yet it has SOME.

To this I answer, first, That Heretics, Blasphemers, false Teachers and
Answer.
obstinate Schismatics, are no true Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, nor yet of
the number of those people, who shall be willing in the day of his power* and I
hope Master Dell dares not aver nor style them such, since they are a most
obstinate, refractory, seditious, stiff-necked and rebellious Generation,
opposite and contradictory to the Faith and Truth of Christ, as is clear by the
1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2. 2, etc. Jude 5. to 20.
Tit. 3. 11, 12. Romans 16. 17, 18. Whence Sermo 66^ super Can^.
Bernard asserts of them, mori magis eligunt quam converti: Therefore this Text
and Argument cannot be applied to them; and is but this in substance: The
Faithful, (the proper Subjects of Christ's Kingdom) are a willing people, and
so need no forcing.

Ergo, Obstinate Heretics, Schismatics, false Teachers, Blasphemers (who are
neither Gods people, no^ a willing people) ought not to he punished with
corporal or capital punishments by the civil Magistrate, for their heresies,
schisms, errors, blasphemies; and Heretics ought not to be burnt. He might as
well argue; boys that are willing to go to School and learn their books,
need not the rod to force them to it; Ergo, boys that loyter and are unwilling
to go to School or learn their books, need not the rod, and must not be
whipped. A mere loytering School-boyes argument, which deserves no answer but
the whip.

Secondly, no Church nor Congregation in the World consists only or
altogether of Saints and willing people, but the major part of them at least,
are unregenerate, backward and unwilling to all that is good; yea need upon
occasion, by Laws and outward punishments, to be constrained to resort to the
pnblick Ordinances, and to forsake their errors, schisms: To argue therefore
against the coercive power of the Magistrate in Christian Churches, States,
because the Saints are a willing people, when as the most in the Church are
neither Saints nor willing, and so need coercive Laws and punishments, is most
absurd; Yet this is Master Dels Logic and Divinity; He might as well conclude,
the Saints are a willing people, Ergo* the Magistrate cannot punish Traitors,
Murderers, Thieves, Rebels, as; Ergo, they must not punish Heretics,
Schismatics, Blasphemers.

Thirdly, Admit the Saints to be a willing people, and that some of them may be
Heretics and Schismatics for a time, will it therefore follow, they need no
Rods nor Spurs to stir them up, reduce or punish them, when, or where they are
dull, negligent, erroneous, or do amiss? Will you argue thus? Christ's Saints
and People are a willing People: Ergo, they need not the exhortations,
preaching, or instructions of Ministers, of private Christians, the exercise of
holy duties, the threats and terrors of the Law or Gospel, to excite and stir
them up. Do not the willingest Christians, Saints, need Rods, Spurs sometimes,
as well as others, to quicken them? and does not God himself many times
scourge, excite them with outward and inward afflictions and chastisements of
all sorts, to make them mend their pace? Did Master Dell, or his Saints in the
Army, never spu^re nor whip their free Horses? or do Schoolmasters never whip
or ferrula their Scholars that are most forwards to learn, because they are
willing Boys? No verily: Their willingness at one time, will not excuse their
deadness, dullness, laziness, much less their deviations at another:
Therefore though people be willing, yet they need the Spurs, the Rods both of
the Minister and Magistrate to quicken, or mend their speed, and reclaim them
when they err, and ubi desinit Theologus ibi incipit Magistratus, where the
Ministry of the Word will not quicken and reform Christians, the Magistrates
Sword must do it: Christ's Power must make men willing when his Mercy and
Gospel will not prevail; and Magistrates Laws duly executed must bring
Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers to conformity, and our public
Congregations, when the Word will not effect it: And thus much for his Argument.

Fourthly, for his Authorities cited, That Faith is not to be forced, but
persuaded by the Word; I grant it true in the Authors sense, but not in Master
Dels* For first, their meaning is not like his, that Christian Magistrates may
not by coercive Laws and punishments suppress obstinate seducing Idolaters,
Heretics, false Teachers, Schismatics or Blasphemers, which they all
unanimously grant they may (as I shall prove anon;) and is farie different from
enforcing faith* but their sense la, that Christian Princes or Magistrates
ought^ o^ by force of war or outward violence to compel Pagan Nation^* who
never embraced the Gosple, to baptism and external profession of the Gospel,
against their wills, without any previous instructions, God having appointed his
word, not sword to convert such* Matthew, 28, 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. Acts. 7.
8. This is all that Melanctons, Master Tindi^^* or Polanus objected words
import: Which opinion I readily subscribe to, asserted by Hugo Grotius, De Jure
Belli, l. 2. c. 20. sect. 48. where he affirms, Bella just non inferri iis,
qui Christianam Religionem complecti nolunt: to which he adds, sect. 50. Nec
etiam his qui circa legis divinae im^erpretationem ballu^inantur: This he
illustrates and proves by the Authorities of Tertullian, Clemens Romanus,
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Lactantius, Augustine, S^^viarlus, a French Synod,
Josephus, Cyprian, Gregory Nazianzen* Antonius, Valen^tinian m In 2^. qu. 10
Art. 8. part 6.
the Emperor, Ammianus Marcellinus, and the Council of Toledo: with whom, as
touching the enforcing of Pagans in this manner to the Christian Faith, Chron.
Sax. I. 1. p. 17, etc.
Chytraeus, ^ilgrimage lib. 9. c. 17.
Purchase, and Master Due Right of Presbyter^^s, p. 252, 253, 354, 361, 362 363.
Rutherfurd concu^^e, though they all maintain the Magistrates power to
suppress Heretics, Schismatics* Blasphemers, by coercive laws, and civil
punishments; ye^* the very popish Doctors and Jesuits themselves, who are most
violent ^o^ the Magistrates suppressing and punishing Heresy, Blasphemy and
Schism with severest laws and punishments, even to death it self, assert it,
to be unlawful for Christian Princes, by war and outward force to compel
Pagan Nations to embrace the Christian Faith against their ^^ls: w^^nesse
Josephus Acosta, De procuranda Indorum salute, cap. 3. Vega de Fide s Due Right
of Presbyteries, p. 352, etc.
and Operibus, qu. 3. Bartholomaeus ^e las Casas, de Hispan* Crudelitate, ^
Cova^^vias in Reg. Peccati, p. 2. sect. 10. In 22. qu. 1^ Art, 8. Dub. 1.
Tannerus the Jesuit, Comment in 12. qu. 10. c. 3
Gregory de Valentia, De Virtutibus Theolog. qu. 10 Art. 8.
Ga^^achous, De Pun. Haeret. l. 2. 14.
Malderus, and Alphonsus a Castro; H^nce, In Arcan. Hist.
Procopius blames Justinian, for compelling the Samaritans by outward power to
Embrace the Christian Religion; and Chron. Sax. l. 1. p. 15, etc.
Chytraeus ^^xeth the Archbishops of ^iga, and Knights of the Teutonick Ord^^
(instituted for that purpose) for o^deavouring rather*with force and Arms, to
compel the Pagan (...) and Laplanders to embrace the Christian Faith, then* by
the Word and good Example to induce them to it: Yet Master Rutherfurd, Ge
Artib. supernat. Disp. 18. de Infidelit. Dub. 18. number. 226.
Aegidius ^o^^^ck, In 2^* qu. 10. Artic. 8.
Lorca, 2, 2. qu. 10 Art. 8.
Aquinas, In 2, 2. qu. 10. Art. 8.
Cajetan and others, assert, That a Christian Pr^^^^ subd^ing a heathen Nation,
may compel them ^o de^^st from blaspheming and dishon^^^^g Christ, from
exte^^all false ^o^ship of Idol*go^s, offering up their Children to (...)* and
from ^pposing and himdring Ministers to (...) the Gosp^^ to such among them,
who are destrous ^^ bear them, as the In Lege Nemo. Cod. de Paganis.
(...) Consta^ (...) ^^^ ^^^ Temples of that P^g^ng^ds to be closed u^, or
(...), and Idols*dem^l^shed^: which Act is commended both by De Vita
Constantini, l. 3. c. 52, to 58.
Eusebius* Epist. 30.
Ambrose and Epist. 48.
Augustus; yea* General History of Span.
^^Wpan^^ and commanded all the Je^^^ who ^^^ld ^^^ (...), to be ^^^^shed and
removed out of Spa^* and* we ^^ad in the Sp^ H^sto^^ds, that diverse Jews,
Mo^^es have been compelled* to be (...) in (...), and many Purchase Pilgrimage,
l. 9^ c. 15.
Ind^an^ ^^ the West Indies, even by (...), which diverse of their Massaeus and
other^*
W^i^^^s approve as lawful, though others (...) i^: However, that act of
Zonaras Annal. Tom. 3. ^. 19^* Grim^^on* I^p^^^al History, p. 245. ^ut^^pius l.
11. p. 15^
Jovi^^^n was most Christian and Heroical, who being elected Emperor after the
death of Julian the Apostate, by the unanimous consent of all the Captains,
Soldiers and People, he absolutely refused the Empire, saying, Tripart. Hist
l. 7. c. 1.
That he being a Christian would not be an Emperor over Infidels: But all were
so well pleased with his election, that they presently cried out, We are
Christians, and for his sake those who were not so before, resolved to become
Christians, upon condition he would accept the Empire; which thereupon he
accepted: Whereupon they all turned Christians, and were by this means
converted to the Christian Faith.

Secondly, I answer, that the Christian Magistrates may indirectly force men to
believe in some sense, though not directly: As first, they may enforce them to
the outward Ordinances and means of Faith, even against their wills (as Parents
sometime enforce their children, and Masters their Servants) which by Gods
blessing may work a right faith and belief in them by degrees, and convert
them from their errors: Forced Physic and Potions often timea recover sick men;
and so do forced Ordinances and Conferences, heretical, erroneous, sinful
men, as experience manifests. Secondly, they may punish them for their
obstinate heresies, schisms, blasphemies, and thereby bring them to a serious
examination, reformation and discovery of them, and so to a kind of forcible
embracing of the Truth, as Christ in a manner thus enforced Paul by outward
violence, to give over his persecution, and believe, profess the Gospel, Acts
9. Thirdly, tempests at Sea, enforce Mariners and Merchants to be willing to
cast all their Goods overboard, to save their lives; so may Magistrates
penalties enforce Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers to cast away their
errors, heresies, schisms, Blasphemies, and embrace the Truth, to save their
lives, liberties or estates, Fourthly, an erroneous judgment and conscience in
matters of Religion, is not a Christians rule of faith or practice, but the
word of God, the rule both of his judgment, Conscience, faith, life: and it is
a See Master Rutherfurds Due Right of Presbyteries, p. 378, etc*
dangerous, yea, damnable sin, for any to be led by such a conscience or
judgment contrary to the word: If then a Christian Magistrate be fully
persuaded in his conscience upon just grounds, that he is bound to restrain
and punish such Heretics, Schismatickes, Blasphemers, who follow their own
erroneous judgments and consciences against the express word of God, even to
force them from their heresies, errors, schisms, blasphemies, when no other
means will prevail, he may no doubt inflict corporal punishments on them (as
God himself often times inflicts outward judgments) thereby to enforce them to
renounce their Heresies and embrace the Truth. And in this sense, Religion may
lawfully be forced, as will appear by the examples of Manasseh,
Nebuchadnezzer, and Paul, forecited; and by Deuteronomy. 13. 11. Jude. 23. God
himself appointing this external violence, as a means to work an inward
change both of faith and life, as I have largely proved.

Thirdly, there is an affirmative and a negative belief: Though the Magistrate
cannot enforce men by external punishments or censures to believe; yet he may
enforce them to come to the public Ordinances, whereby they may be allured,
converted to the true Faith; and likewise negatively enforce or restrain them,
nor to preach, nor yet to spread or propagate such an heresy, error, blasphemy
or schismatic opinion, contrary to the Scripture, and Religion established,
to the infection of others, the disturbance of the public peace, and dishonor
of Christian Religion; yea, punish such who shall transgress, because this is
no forcing of men's faith, consciences, to believe or embrace what faith the
Magistrate pleases; but a restraining or punishing of an heresy, error,
blasphemy, which is a sin in the party who is guilty of it, punishable by the
Magistrate, and a sin in him to connive at, or tolerate the same without
punishment. Excellent to this purpose is that passage of See August. contr. lit
Petiliani, lib. 2. c. 83, 84.
Augustine, recorded, approved by Gratian qu* 23. did 4 sect. ad fidem.
Gratian, Canonists and Schoolmen. Petilian the Donatist, objected against the
Princes by whom he and other Heretics were punished, these two things among
others, which Master Dell and his Saints now object: First, That no man is to
be compelled to faith: Secondly, That good manners are not to be chosen, but
only out of Free Will; and produces all, or most of Master Del*s Arguments
and Texts alleged in his Sermon (which is but mere old Donatisme and
Petilianisme, varnished over with the title of New Gospel Light) to prove, that
Magistrates ought not to enforce any man to believe against his conscience, or
punish any Heretic or Schismatics with corporal or capital punishments, as
being contrary to, and not warranted by the Gospel. To which this Father gives
this grave answer, most suitable to our present times, and to Master Dell and
his new Donatists, who make the self same Objections, which I shall recite
more fully, because it will very much conduce to discover the practices, and
stop the mouths of our Opposites.

Petilianus dixit, Quod si cogi per legem aliquem vel ad bona licuisset, vos
ipsi miseri a nobis ad fidem purissimam cogi debuistis: Sed absit, absit a
nostra conscientia, ut ad nostram fidem aliquem compellamus. Augustinus
respondit, Ad fidem quidem nullus est cogendus invitus, sed per severitatem,
imo and per misericordiam Dei, tribulationum flagellis solet perfidia
castigari; Nunquid quia mores optimi liberate voluntatis eliguntur, ideo mores
pessimi non legis integritate puniuntur? Sed tamen male vivendi ultrix
disciplina praepostera est, nisi cum praecedens been vivenda doctrina
contemnitur: Si quae igitur adversus vos leges constitutae sunt, non eis
benefacere cogimini, sed malefacere prohibimini; dum benefacere nemo potest
nisi elegerit, nisi amaverit, quod est in libera voluntate: Timor autem
paenarnm, and si nondum habet delectationem bonae conscientiae, saltem intra
claustra cogitationis coercet malam cupiditatem. Qui tamen adversas leges
constituerunt, quibus vestra comprimatur audacia* nonne hi de quibus dicit
Apostolus, Romans 13. ^ ^
Quia non sine causa gladium portant, ministri Dei enim sunt, vindices in iram
ei qui male agit. Tota igitur quaestio est, utrum vos non male agatis, quibus
tanti Schismatis sacrilegium objecit orbis terrarum? Cujus quaestionis
discussione neglecta, superflua loquimini, and cum vivatis ut latrones, mori
vos jactatis ut Martyrs: Et quia vel ipsas leges, vel invidiam formidatis, vel
ad resistendum impares estis, non dico adversus tot homines, sed adversus tot
gentes catholicas, etiam de mansuetudine gloriamini, quod ad vestram partem
neminem cogitis: Isto modo Nota.
and milvus cum pullos rapere territus non potuerit, columbum se nominat; Ubi
enim potuistis, and non fecistis? Unde ostenditis quod plura faceretis si
possetis. Quando Julianus vobis, Christi invidons paci, basilicas reddidit
unitatis, quae strages a vobis factae sunt, quando vobiscum apertis templis
suis etiam daemones exultabant? Quis co^memorare sufficiat bello Firmiano quae
a vobis Rogatus Maurus pertulerit? Ipsa Mauritania Caesariensis interrogetur,
and tempora Gildoniani, quia unus collega vester familiarissimus amicus ejus
fuit: Viderint Maximinianistae quae senserint, nam Felicianum ipsum qui modo
vobiscum est, si ad jusiurandum liceret provocare, utrum ad communionem vestram
non invitum Optatus redire compulerit, movere labia non auderet, praesertim si
ejus faciem populus Musticanus intueretur, quo test illa tunc facta sunt. Sed
isti, ut dixi, viderint quae passi fuerint ab eis cum quibus Rogato talia
fecerant: Ipsa catholica Ecclesia solidata Principibus catholicis imperantibus
terra marique armatis turbis, ab Optato atrociter and hostiliter oppugnata est;
quae res coegit tunc primo adversus vos allegari apud vicarium Seranum, legem
illam de december libris auri, quas vestrum adhuc nullus pendit, and nos
crudelitatis arguitis. Quid autem mansuetius sit quam ut coercitione damnorum
tanta vestra scelera mulctarentur? Quis autem possit enarrare omnia illa quae
nulla amicitia judicum aut aliquarum potestatum, quisque ubi potuerit, in locis
vestris propria dominatione committatis? Quis vostrum in plebibus vestris non
aliquid tale vel a prioribus comperit, vel ipse expertus est? Nonne apud
Hipponem ubi ego sum, non desunt qui meminerint Faustinum vestrum regni sui
tempore praecepisse, quoniam catholicorum ibi paucitas erat, ut nullus eis
panem coqueret, ita ut cujusdam diaconi nostri furnarius inquilinus Nota.
domini sui panem incoctum objecerit, eique nulla exilii lege damnato,
communicationem non solum in Civitate Romana, sed etiam in patria sua; nec
solum in patria sua, sed etiam in domo sua negaverit? Quid nuper, quod ipse
adhuc lugeo, no^ne Crispinus vester Chalamensis cum emisset possessione^, and
hoc emphyteuticam, non dubitavit in fundo catholicorum Imperatorum, quorum
legibus nec in Civitatibus esse, jussi estis, uno terroris impetu octoginta
firm animas miserabili gemitu mussitantes, rebaptizando submergere? Quibus
autem nisi talibus factis etiam ipsas de quibus conquerimini leges, long
quidem infra meritum sceleris vestri, sed tamen qualescunque ferri coegestis?
An vero violentis incursibus Circumcellionum vestroru^, qui sub vestro
principatu furiosis agminibus militant, non exagris undique pelleremur, nisi
vos obsides in civitatibus teneremus, qui quoque modo ipsam faciem publicam and
honestorum reprehensionem, and si non timore vel pudore far nolitis; Noli
ergo dicere absit, absit a nostra con^cientia, ut ad nostram fidem aliquem
compellamus; * Facitis enim ubi potestis, ubi autem non facitis non potestis,
sive legum, sive invidiae timore, sive resistentium multitudine. Petilianus
dixit; Dicit enim Dominur Christus, The practice of most of nu^ present.
Sectaries and Independents, where they have any power.
nemo venit ad me nisi quem Pater attraxerit: Cur autem vos non liberum
arbitrium unicuique sequi permittitis, cum ipse Dominus Deus liberum arbitrium
dederit hominibus, viam tamen justitiae ostendens, ne quis forsitan nescius
deperiret: Dixit enim, Joan 6. ^ Eccles. 16.
Posui ante te bonum and malum, posui ante te ignem and aquam, quod volueris
elige. Ex quo vos arbitrio miseri, vobis non aquam, sed ignem potius elegistis;
sed tamen inquit, bonum elige ut vivas; qui non vis bonum eligere, vivere te
nolle damnasti. August. respondit; Si tibi proponam quaestionem, quomodo Deus
Pater attrabat ad Filium homines, quos in libero dimisit arbitrio? fortassis
eam difficile soluturus es* quo modo enim attrahit, si demittit ut quis quod
voluerit eligat? and tamen utrumque verum est, sed intellectu hoc penetrare
pauci valent: Sicut ergo fieri potest ut quos in libero dimisit arbitrio,
artrahit tamen ad filium Pater: Sic fieri potest, vel ea quae legum
coercitionibus admonentur, non auferant liberum arbitrium: Quicquid enim homo
durum and molestum patitur, admonetur ut cogitet quare patiatur; ut si pro
justitia se pati perspexerit, id ipsum bonum Nota.
eligat pro justitia talia sustinere: Si autem viderit iniquitatem esse pro qua
patitur, se infructuosissime laborare atque cruciare considerans, mutet in
melius voluntatem, simulque careat and molestia sterili and ipsa iniquitate.
Multo itaque gravius and perniciosius nocitura, and vos cum aliquid adversus
vos reges constituunt admoneri vos credit, ut cogitetis quare ista patiamini:
Si propter justitiam, revera illi persecutores vestri sunt, Matthew. 6.
vos autem beati, qui persecutionem passi proprer justitiam, possidebitis
regnum Cruorum: Si autem propter iniquitatem Schismatis vestri, quid illi nisi
correctores vestri sunt, vos autem sicut caeci diversorum scelerum rei, qui
poenas legibus pendunt profecto infaelices, and in hoc seculo and in futuro?
Nota.
Nemo ergo vobis aufert liberum arbitrium, sed vos diligenter attendite quid
potius eligatis, utrum correcti vivere in pace, an in malicia perseverantes,
salfi Martyrii nomine vera supplicia sustinere. Sic vos autem alloquor, quasi
vero aliquid dignum vestra iniquitate patiamini, cum tanta indigna faciatis,
and in tanta impunitate regnetis, ita furiosi, ut per Dei lauds amplius quam
buccina bellica terreatis: ita columniosi, ut etiam spontanea vestrorum
praecipitia nostris persecutionibus imputetis. Dicit etiam quasi praeceptor
benignissimus, qui non vis bonum eligere, vivere te nolle damnasti. Ita vero si
criminationibus vestris crederemus, benign viveremus, quia Dei promissionibus
credimus, vivere nos nolle damnamus: Been ut arbitror, meministi quid Apostoli
dixerint Judaeis, quando Christum praedicare prohibebantur, hoc ergo and nos
dicimus ut respondeatis nobis, Acts 5.
utrum Deo magis obediendum sit an hominibus? Traditores, thurificatores,
persecutores, verba sunt hominum contra homines: In sola delectione Donati
remansit Christus; verba sunt hominum extollentium gloriam hominis sub nomine
Christi, ut gloria minuatur ipsius Christi: Scriptum est enim, Prove. 14.
In lata gente gloria regis, in diminutione autem populi contritio principis:
haec ergo verba sunt hominum. At illa in Evangelio, Lucas 14.
quia opportebat Christum pati, and resurgre tertia die, and predicare in
nomine ejus paenitentiam and remissionem peccatorum in omnes gentes,
incipientibus ab Jerusalem; Verba sunt Christi commendantis gloriam, quam
accepit a Patre in latitudine regni sui. Vtrisque auditis, hanc Ecclesiae
communionem potius eligimus, and hominum verbis Christi verba praeponimus. Rogo
quis est qui nos dicat mala elegisse, nisi qui Christum dicit mala docuisse.
Petilianus dixit, Nunquid igitur caedem vel scismaticis Deus jussit inferri?
Qui si omnino praeciperit nos deberetis occidi ab aliquibus Scythis ac
Barbaris, non tamen a Christianis. Aug. respondit, Vestri Circumcelliones
quiescant and nolo nos de Barbaris terreas: Vtrum autem Schismatici nos simus
an vos, nec ego nec tu, sed Christus interrogetur ut judicet Ecclesiam suam:
Lege ergo Evangelium, and respondet tibi, Luc. 24. Act. 1.
In Jerusalem and in totam Judaeam and Samariam usque in totam terram:
Quisquis igitur in Ecclesia non invenitur, jam non interrogetur, sed aut
correctus convertatur, aut Cap. 86.
correptus non conqueratur. Petilianus dixit, Neque enim Dominus humanum
sanguine aliquando laetatus est, cum Genesis 4.
occissorem fratris Cain in vita carnificem voluerit permanere. Aug. respondit,
Si occisori fratris Deus noluit inferri mortem, sed relinqui carnifici vitam:
vide ne forte hoc sit, quod cum Prove. 21.
regis cor in manu Dei sit, unde multas ad vos commonendos and corripiendos
leges ipse constituit; nulla tamen lex regia vos jussit occidi, fortasse
propterea, ut quicunque vestrum in pertinaci sacrilegii furoris aura
persistunt, Cain parricidae supplicio and vita carnifice crucientur: Legimus
enim multos a famulo Dei Moyse misericorditer interfectos: Nam in eo quod pro
eorum nefario sacrilegio sic est dominum deprecatus, ut diceret, Exodus 32.
Domine si dimittis illis peccatum, dimitte; sin autem, dele me de libro tuo:
ineffabilis ejus charitas and misericordia satis apparet. Nunquid ergo subito
crudelis effectus est, cum de monte descendens tot milia juberet occidi?
Considerate itaque ne forte majore iracundia Dei per tot leges adversus vos
latas a nullo imperatore jussi fueritis Cap. 88.
occidi; an illi fratricidiae, non vos comparandos putatis? Petilianus dixit.
Ecce vobis plenissimum documentum, quod Christiano non liceat in pernicie
aliena versari, disciplinae autem hujus initium Petro est constitutum, sicut
scriptum est percussit Petrus auriculam servi principis judaeorum, and abscidit
eam: Dixitque illi Jesus; Matthew. 25. Master Del's very Objection in Terminis.
p. 24.
Petre reconde gladium tuum in theca; Qui enim gladio utitur, gladio morietur.
Aug. respondit, Cur ergo non tali voce compescetis arma Circumcellionum? An
praeter Evangelium vos loqui arbitremini, si dixeritis qui fuste usus fuerit,
fuste morietur? Date ergo veniam, quia nec illos a quibus Marculum
praecipitatum esse querimini, potuerint prohibere majores nostri; neque enim
scriptum est in Evangelio, qui aliquem praecipitaverit, praecipitio morietur:
Atque utinam sicut illa vel falsa vel transacta sunt, sic istorum lingua
cessaret: quanquam fortasse irascimini, quod legionibus vestris, and non
legibus, saltem verbis subtrahimus armaturam, quia eas solis sevire tustibus
dicimus. Vetus quippe ista eorum malitia fuit, nunc autem nimium profecerunt;
Nam inter vinolenta convivia, and cum faeminis maritos non habentibus, liberam
comitandi, vagandi, jocandi, bibendi, provocandi licentiam, non solum fustes
tornare, sed etiam ferrum vibrare and fundas circumagere didicerunt. Sed cur
eis non dicam quo animo dico, and illi accipiant, noverit Deus: Insani, gladius
Petri quamvis adhuc carnali motuanimi; tamen pro Christi corpore in corpus
persecutoris exertus est; vestra vero arma adversus Christum divisa sunt:
corfus vero cui illi caput est. Ipse hoc dixit and ascendit in Coelum, quo eum
furor Judaeorum sequi non potuit, and membra ejus in corpore quod ascendens
commendavit furor vester oppugnat. Pro istis membris adversus vos seviunt, and
vobis resistunt quicunque in catholica parvae adhuc fidei, eo animo sunt, quo
tunc Petrus fuit, cum ferrum pro Christo nomine strinxit; Sed multum interest
inter vestram persecutionem and istorum: Vos similes estis servo sacerdotis
Judaeorum, quia servientes principibuo vestris adversus Ecclesiam Catholicam,
id est, adversus Christi corpus armamini: isti autem tales sunt, quales tunc*
Petrus fuit; qui pro Christi corpore, id est, pro Ecclesia, etiam corporaliter
pugnavit; sed si ipsis dicitur quod quiescant, sicut Petro tunc dictum est,
quanto magis vobis dicendum est, ut haeretico errore deposito ad ea membra
pertineatis, pro quibus illi sic dimicant: Sed laesi a talibus etiam nos
odistis, and tanquam aures dexteras perdideritis, Christum sedentem ad Patris
dexteram non auditis. This and much more Augustine against Petilian and his
seditious Donatists.

I shall only add two or three more passages of his concerning the cruelty
and outrages of the Anabaptisticall Donatists, and their Circumcellioes, which
suit very patly with the practices of our Anabaptists and Sectaries, who now
cry out of persecution: in his Operum Tom. 7. pars 1. p. 709.
Opus Brevic. Collat. cum Donatistis, c. 4. He writes thus of them: Calce and
aceto humanos oculos persecuti sunt; in quo scelere Diabolum crudelitate
pervicerunt, qui hoc in sancti viri carne non fecit quem in potestatem
acceperat effligendum* Oculos in hominibus persecuti sunt, ne cruciantur
videndo vulnera sua, quae ab iis per totum corpus acceperunt. Sed cum iterum
Donatistae persecutiones quas patiuntue exaggerantes, suorum quasdam m^^tes
co^memorarent in oppido Bagaiensi, responsum est a Catholicis, eos hoc passos
esse, dum eorum violentiae resisteretur, quam and judici infer conati sunt;
in illo oppido commemoraverunt Catholici ab eis horrenda esse commissa, ita ut
etiam basilica esset incensa, and in ignem missi codices sancti, etc. And Tom.
7. pars 1. p. 742.
Contra Donatistas post Collationem c. 17. He proceeds thus: Quanta mala
nostris fecerint furiosissimi Clerici and Circumcelliones partis Donati, nostis
and vos: Incensae sunt Ecclesiae, missi in flammas codices sancti, incensae
etiam perivatae domus, rapti homines de sedibus suis, and omnibus quae ablatis
aut perditis, ipsi etiam inerant lianati and ex^aecati. Nec ab homicidio potuit
temperari, quamvis sit mitius huic luci mori, quam istam lucem auferre viventi:
Nec tamen nostros ideo justificamus quia talia perpessi sunt, sed quia pro
Christiana veritate, pro Christi pace, pro Ecclesiae veritate perpessi sunt.
Illi autem sub ^am multis, sub tam severis legibus, and sub tanta Ecclesiae
Catholicae, quam Dominus ei tribuit potestate, quid tale patiuntur? Si quando
enim morte mulctantur, aut ipsi se occidunt, aut eorum cruentae violentiae dum
resistitur occiduntur, non pro communione partis Donati, nec pro errore
sacrilegi scismatis, sed pro apertissimis facinoribus suis, and sceleribus
suis, quae more latronum ruentes furore and crudelitate committunt. Pro part
autem Donati vix aliquid tale patiuntur, quale Caecilianum Do^ato instan^e
passum esse dixerunt: Aut ergo persecutio non omnis inju^ta est, aut non est
persecutio dicenda cum justa est; qua propter au persecutionem purs Donati
patitur justam, aut persecutionem non patitur, quia patitur just: Non autem
just pessus est Caecilianus, quia innocens probatus and absolutus est; quod
quidem illi negaverunt, and potius ab Imperatore damnatum esse dixerunt, and
ideo majores suos maximeque Donatum, a se tanta praedicatione laudatum,
Caeciliano persecutionem fecisse confessi sunt: Illum autem convictum atque
damnatum probare minime poterunt, imo etiam, quod nos dicebamus eum esse
absolutum atque surgatum, ipsi quoque multa contra seipsos legendo firmarunt,
and tamen liberum arbitrium sibi ab Imperatore concessum esse jactant: Victi
itaque and confusi, id sibi etiam nunc flagitabant debere concedi, quod Majores
eorum Caeciliano non concedebant, quem fic apud Imperatorem accusarunt, quem
illis accusationibus ab Imperatore damnatum isti eti^ mentiri voluerunt. Si
voluntas libera unicuique tribuenda est, Caeciliano prius tribuere ur, si haec
non homini judici permitte^da sed Deo potius dimitttenda sunt, Caecilianus
prius apud Imperatorem non accusaretur. And Tom. 7. pars 1 p 328 329 330.
Contra Cresconium Gra^. l. 3. c. 42, 43, 44. Deinde co^memorans etiam nescio
quos mortuos, quos a nostris dicis occisos, tanquam in campo facundiae
sepositus latissime exaggerans locum in quo vobis videmus similes Martyrum, cum
quotidie vestrorum incredibilia patiamur facta clericorum and Circumcellionum,
multo pejora quam quorumlibet latronum atque praedonum: Namque borrendis armati
cujusque generis telis, terribiliter vagando, non dico Ecclesiasticam, sed
ipsam humanam quietem pacemque perturbant, nocturni aggressionibus clericorum
catholicorum, invasas domos nudas atque inanes derelinquunt; ipsos etiam raptos
and fustibus tusos, ferroque concisos, semivivos objiciunt: Insuper novo and
antehac inaudito sceleris genere, oculis eorum calcem aceto permixto
infundentes and infercientes quos evellere compendio poterunt, excruciare
amplius eligunt, quam citius excaecare: Nam primo tantum calce ad hoc facinus
utebantus, sed postea quum illos quibus hoc fecerant, cito salutem reparasse
dedicerant, acetum addiderunt.

Omitto ante quanta commisserunt, quibus easdem leges adversus errorem vestrum
constitui coegerunt, magis Christiana mansuetudine temperatas, quam in tam
magna scelera congruo vigore exertas: Episcopus Catholicus a Thubursuccubure
Servus nomine, e cum invasum a vestris locum repeterit, and utriusque partis
procuratores proconsulare praestolarentur examen, repent sibi in oppido
memorato vestris armatis irruentibus vix vivus aufugit. A quibus pater ejus
Presbyter, aetate and moribus gravis, ea caede qua vehementur afflictus est,
post dies paucos excessit e vita. Maximinianus Episcopus Catholicus,
Bagaiensis, dicta inter parts judiciaria sententia, basilicam fundi
Calmanensis evicerat, quam vestri illicite aliquando usurpaverant: Hanc cum
jure perspicuo retineret, in ea ipsa sub altari quo confugerat, eodem supra se
fracto, ejusque lignis aliisque fustibus, ferro etiam crudeliter caesus, totum
illum locum sanguine opplevit: Acceperat autem and grande vulnus in inguine,
unde cruore largius effluents, continuo moreretur, nisi major eorum crudelitas
per occultam Dei misericordiam profuisset: Nam cum membris ex ea part nudatis
semivivus insuper pronusque traheretue, exundantes venas latentur pulvis
obstruxit. Inde nostrorum maenibus cum ferretur, rursus illis irruentibus
violenter extortus est, graviusque mulctatus, and de excelsa turri noctu
praecipitatus, subter cinerem stercoris molli^er jacebat, ipo^^ sensum amissum,
vix extremum spiritum tenens: Ibi enim trans^ens quidam pauper invenit, cum
ventris exonerandi causa ad eum divertisset locum. Agnovit autem, tum pavidus,
suam conjugem accersit, quam procul verecundia dimoverat lucernam ferentem:
Tunc eum ambo perexerunt domum, vel miserando, vel aliquid etiam lucelli
superando, cum sive vivis, sive mortuus, collectus tamen nostris ostenderetur.
Quid ^^ura? Mirabili curatione sanatus est, vivit, plures in ejus corpore
cicatrices quam membra numerantur. Hunc ad transmarinas terras occi^um a
vestris fama nunciaverat, and ejus facinoris immanitas, gravifque indignitas,
quaqua versum audiri potuit, dolor horrendo cuncta commoverat: Quo posteaquam
ipse secutus est, recentissimae cicatrices ejus famae illu^^ mandaic^
defenderunt: nam quem tui inspicientes vix crederent vivum, non temere illa
jactusse videbatur occisum: Hic cum illic invenisset collegam Thubursuccensem,
quem paulo ante commemoravi, and alios nonnullos similia vel non multo
inferiora perpessos, nec eis ad propria revertendi ulla facultas patere
videretur, and quia Cirumcellionum vestrorum furor nobis horrendum praebens
vestris clericis satellitium usquequaque odiosissime innotuit, ingens in vos
conflagravit invidia, atque inde factum est, ut and praeteritae omnes contra
vos leges excitarentur, and istae conderentur novae: Quarum tamen universarum
severitas, si vestrorum inordinate ac sine ulla lege grassanti saevitiae
compararetur, mira lenitas appellanda est. His enim magis tanta potestate
accepta mansuetudo catholica commendatur, quam haeretica immunitas plectitur:
imo vero in nos, caedes, rapinas, incendia, caecitates, excogitando, minando,
excercendo, audacius and insanius debacchatur: Haec enim ego commemorare volui,
per quae factum est, ut his nostris temporibus adversus vos ita imperialia
statuta ferrentur, imo adversus errorem vestrum. Nam quid jam si sapiatis
potest esse probabilius? Caeterum omnia quae vel anteriorum literis didici, vel
ipse cognovi, saeve facta vestrorum, quibus ab initio divisionis vectrae vsque
ad hoc tempus Ecelesiam catholicam persecuti sunt, si velim retexere, quae
lingua, quis stilus, quantum tempus ociumque sufficiat?

This was then, and ever since has been the turbulent carriage of feditious
Sectaries against orthodox Christians, who yet cry out for Liberty of
Conscience, and complain of persecution; as you may read more largely in the
48, 50, 159, to 173. Epistles of Augustine.

These passages of this most judicious Father, in defense of the Magistrates
coercive power and punishments, in case of obstinate Heresy and Schism,
punctual to the point in question, will overballance all Master Dels
extravagant Authorities quoted to the contrary, and discover whence he and his
Saints derived all their Objections and practices against it, almost verbatim,
even from the schismatic Donatists.

But yet to requite Master Dell, and show his Jesuiticall juggling, as well in
perverting Authors as Scriptures, pointblank against their meaning: I shall
annex some further testimonies to Saint Augustines. Not to mention any other
passages of his, and other Ancients, collected together by Gratian, Cause. 23.
qu. 1, 4, 5. where you may at large peruse them for your satisfaction: I shall
begin with Melancton himself, the first Author Master Dell quotes for him, who
writes thus, point blank against him, in his Loci Communes, (dedicated to our
King HENRY the VIII.) Printed Anno 1536. De Magistratibus Civilibus, and
Dignitate rerum Politicarum; where thus he writes against the Anabaptists, and
Master Del's fanatic Saints.

Plurimum prodest in Ecclesia, extare veram and firmam doctrinam de
Magistratibus, and dignitate rerum civilium: Saepe enim exorti sunt Fanatici
spiritus, qui negarunt Christianis licere Magistratus gerere, exercere judicia,
tenere imperia, denique interdixerunt Christianis omnia officia civilis vitae,
rerum dominia, contractus damnaverunt and leges politicas, quibus nunc
Respublica utitur: Et haec delyramenta non solum pepererunt seditiones, sed
etiam obscuraverunt Evangelium, offuderunt enim caliginem animis, quasi
Christiana justitia ac vita sit externa, ac nova quaedam Barbarica politia,
dissimilis aliis politiis humaniter constitutis; Ita confuderunt disc imen
vitae spiritualis and politicae. Adversus hujusmodi errores muniendi sunt
animi, and vera doctrina de discrimine spiritualis and politicae vitae tenenda,
and dignitas rerum politicarum illustranda est: Id prodest ad pietatem and ad
publicam tranquilitatem, etc. Celsus, Julianus and plerique alii criminantur
Evangelium, quod cum prohibeat vindictam, dissipat Respub. tollat jura belli,
judicia, poenas, confirmat latrocinia, concedat licentiam and impunitatem
omnium scelerum. Et hac criminatione mirum in modum deformarunt Evangelium:
Tenere igitur Christianos oportet, quid de dignitate civilium rerum sentiendum
sit, and and ut liberent Evangelium hac^ injustissima and venenatissima
calumnia, and ut suas conscientias de Officiis civilibus recte instituant:
Christianis licet Magistratus and imperia tenere, judicia exercere, poenas
constituere juxta praesentes leges and mores: Magistratum custodem esse, non
solum secundae tabulae, sed etiam primae tabulae, quod attinet ad externam
disciplinam. Hoc est, ad Magistratum pertinet, non solum cura tuendae
tranquilitatis civium, seu depellendi injurias, corporum and fortunarum, sed
etiam disciplinae in Religione retinendae: Etsi enim poenae corporales non
efficient in animis pietatem, tamen Magistratus Nota.
prohibere debet disciplinae causa externas Contumelias Religionis, manifestam
Idololatriam, Blasphemias, impia dogmata, perjuria; sicut vidimus IN OMNIBVS
REBVSPVBLICIS mediocriter constitutis, severis exemplis punitas esse
violationes Religionum and perjuria. Et probat hanc sententiam ipse decalogus:
Exodus 10.
Non vane usurpabis nomen Dei; and David inquit, Psalm. 2.
Et nunc Reges intelligite, erudimini qui judicatis terram, servite Domino,
etc. Prove. 25. Aufer impietatem de vultu Regis, and firmabitur justitia thronus
ejus: 1 Regum 2. Glorificantes me Glorificabo, and contemnentes me, reddam
contemptos. Et ne sumam ab Israelitico Rege exemplum, Nabogdonozor and Darius
Medus apud Danielem, proponunt edicta, in quibus vetant dici blasphemiam contra
b ^an. 3.
Deum populi Israel. Postren^o Paulus inquit, ^ Tim. 2.
Lex est pofita impiis, prophanis; hoc est, Vt coerceat homines, ne facta impia
ac sacrilega designent: Cum autem Magistratus sit custos legis ac disciplinae,
profecto maxim hanc partem tueri debet, de externa reverentia erga Deum, quod
haec pars maxim ad disciplinam pe^tinet, sicut constat omnium gentium legibus
puniri perjuria. Deinde hoc consideret sapiens Magistratus, unum hunc
principalem finem esse, quare ad societatem conditi sunt homines, ut videlicet
innotescat Deus ac glorificetur: Homo eum ideo conditus est, ut in eo
illucescat Deus, ut eum patefiat; necessaria igitur fuit societas, in qua alii
docerent alios de Deo. Constat autem Magistratum custodem esse humani
societatis: debet igitur fiuem societatis praecipuum etiam ^^eri: Et si vere
volumus judicare hujus Pulcherrimi operis inter homines antistes, and (...)
esse debet, ut optima discipline homines ad Religionem assuefiant, ut Deus
glorificetur. Hic finis precipue sapienti Gubernatori Respu^* proposi us esse
debet: Ita ve^e erunt beatae Respu^. Deus enim vi^issim defendet eas, omnibus
bonis cumulabit, sicut dixit. Glorificantes me Glorificabo; DEBENT IGITUR
MAGISTRATUS prohibere impios. cultus, and impiorum Dogmatum professionem,
DEBENT PUNIRE HAERETICOS: Sed viderint ut recte judicent, nec fiant Ministri
alienae erndelitatis aut impiotatis: Pertinet autem cognitio doctrinae ad
Ecclesiam, hoc est ad pios and recte doctos: Estque Ecclesiae membrum ipse
etiam Magistratus, quem decet suis oculis maxim videre. In hanc sententiam
extant vetusti Canones de Synodis and de cognitione doctrinae. Deus ornat Reges
honor nominis sui. Ego dixi dii estis; Videlicet, Vt sciant sui officii esse,
vt res divinas intelligant, and conservant in mundo Religionem, Justitiam,
Pacem, Disciplinam.

By this it is most evident, that Melancton is point blank against that opinion
for which Master Dell has quoted him; and for the Magistrates restraining,
punishing Heretics and all false worship.

Master Dels next quotation (in respect of Antiquity) is Luther; That Heretics
are not to be burned; but cites not the place. Indeed Luther being newly come
out of Popery, and beholding their cruelty, in burning godly orthodox
Christians, under the name of Heretics, professes his opinion to be against
making any Law to put Heretics to death, for fear it should be wrested
against those that were no Heretics, to their prejudice: But yet he would have
Heretics banished: his words are these, in answer to this question. Lutheri
Epist. Tom. 2 Epist. p. 381.
An liceat Magistratui occidere Pseudoprophetas? Ego ad judicium sanguinis
TARDUS SUM, Vbi etiam MERITUM abundat; cum in hac tausa terret me
exemplisequela quam in Papistis, and Antichristis, and in Judaeis videmus; ubi
cum statutum suisset Pseudoprophetas and Judaeos occidi, successu temporis
factum est, ut non nisi sancti prophetae and innocents truciderentur,
authoritate ejus statuti: quo impii Magistratus freti, Pseudoprophetas and
Haereticos fecerunt quosque voluerint. Idem secuturum esse timeo and apud
noctros, si semel uno exemplo probari potuit, seductores esse occidendos, cum
adhuc apud Papistas videamus hujus sta^nti innocentem sanguinem fundi pro
nocente: Quare nullo modo possum admittere falsos doctores occidi, SATIS EST
EOS RELEGARI, qua poena si posteri abu^i volunt, mitius tamen peccabunt, and
fibi tantum nocebunt. From which words it is evident: First, that Luther does
not simply condemn the putting of Heretics to death, as unlawful in it self,
but admits it lawful, and that they may deserve it: Secondly, That he speaks
here only of making a Law to put false Teachers and Seducers to death in that
Age, which he would by no means then admit of; not because it was unlawful,
but only inconvenient at that time, because it was likely to be abused to the
shedding of innocent blood: Thirdly, that he held it then sufficient and
lawful too, for the Magistrates to banish Seducers and false Teachers, though
they did not put them actually to death, and by consequence held it lawful, to
imprison and fine them too, which is less then banishment: yea, him self writ
to Sl^idan l. 5. Master Bailies Anabaptism. p. 5.
Methusum very earnestly, that they should not receive the Anabaptists into
their City, but expel them: so that Luther is point blank against Master Dell
in that for which he cites him; and for the Magistrates suppressing, banishing
Heretics, Schismatics and Seducers.

I shall only add one passage more out of Luther (point blank against Master
Dels opinion and quotation) * Postil. Dominica 5. post Epiphaniam, See Beza De
Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis, Operum vol. 1. p. 148. where part of these
words are cited.
.44. where interpreting the Parable of the Tares, he resolves, That the Masters
bidding the servants, let them alone till the Harvest, does neither inhibit nor
restrain Church Officers or the Civil Magistrate from restraining, and
punishing of Heretics and other Malefactors with Ecclesiastical and temporal
punishments; concluding thence in these words: Reliquae deinde sunt scandalorum
cohertiones poenes Magistratum, familiarum Patres, morum and disciplinae
Magistros: Hic adeo nulla phohibitio in suis officiis per hoc Christi
praeceptum statuitur, ut sunt haec omnia cum acerimis and sanctissimis mandatis
a Deo sancita. Custodit Magistratus non solum secundam, verum OMNIUM MAXIM
PRIMAM TABULAM: Idololatrias, Blasphemias, Execrationes, Perjuria, ULCISCITUR.
Oblatas HAERETICAS, Nota.
and in verum Deum contumeliosas, atque alias eas BLASPHEMIAS DOCENTES,
COERCET. Praefractiores atque in errore pertexendo contumaciores, and cum
certissimo plurimum EXITIO, pro malificiis PUNIENDOS SUSCIPIT. Neque cum boc
facit Zizania evellere intelligitur, quia cum suo officio in eo regno non
versatur, ubi interdictum de evellendis Zizaniis positum est: Non igitur
Magistratus, and hujus generis vitae corporalis Officiales, quum se scandalis
perturbantibus tranquilitatem, severa vindicatione obviam eunt, Zizania contra
Christi mentem evellunt, sed id praestant pro part sua, ut verum Triticum in
Ecclesia a Zizaniis non prorsus opprimatur, and Regnum Dei in terris non
penitus exolescat.

Master Dell therefore might in wisdom have forborne his extravagant quotation
of Luther (whose Works I presume he never read) which he tells us not where we
may find among his numerous Volumes, as he should have done.

His next quotation is a saying of Augustine out of Polanus; but Augustine is
most express against him, not only in his forecited passages against Petilian
and the Donatists, but in many others mustred up by Gratian, Causa 23. quest.
4, and 5. where you may read them at large; to which I shall add this sentence
in his 166. Epistle; where thus he writes: To whom is it said, Serve the Lord
with fear? etc. is it not to Kings? But how do Kings serve the Lord with
fear, unless it be by a religious severity, in prohibiting those things which
are done against the Lords commands? For every one of them serves him after one
manner as be is a man, after another manner as he is a King: For as he is a
man, he serves him in living faithfully; but as he is a King, he serves him in
prescribing Laws, commanding just things, and prohibiting the contrary,
CONVENIENTI RIGORE SANCIENDO, with convenient rigor and punishments; like as
Hezekiah served him in destroying Idols, Groves and high Places: And as Josiah
served him. And he adds this as a Reason elsewhere; ^nerrat. in Psalm. 44.
Rex a Regendo dicitur, non autem regat QUI NON CORRIGIT: If Kings then be
Kings of Heretics, Schismatics, Seducers, Blasphemers, Idolaters or
Apostates, as well as of other Subjects, they must not only govern, but
correct and punish them too, by enacting severe Laws against them, and seeing
them put in execution; as this Father informs us, That the devout and orthodox
Cont Epist. Parmenian, lib. 1. Tom. 7. pars 1. p. 20. 10 26.
Roman Emperors, not only made severe Laws against the Donatists and other
Heretics and Schismatics, but likewise appointed August. cont Prim. Gaudentii
Epist. lib. 1. cap. 1. p. 410.
Dulcitius, an eminent Colonel and Notary, to take special care to see them
executed. Unhappy Master Dell to quote such a Father out of Polanus, who is so
pointblank against him, and refutes his whole Sermon in his Books against the
Epistles of Parmenianus and Petilian the Donatist, Contra Cresconium Gram. and
Epist. 48, 50, as those who will take pains to peruse them may discover. I
wish this learned Gentleman hereafter to peruse and read Authors well, before
he quotes them, and not to take them upon trust, with such disadvantage to his
cause and reputation too.

His other Authority out of Master Tyndal, is nothing to purpose, who speaks
not one word against Kings, Emperors or Christian Magistrates suppressing or
punishing Heretics, and reforming the Church by outward power; but writes
expressly for it, at large, in his Books Entitled, THE OBEDIENCE OF A CHRISTIAN
MAN, and THE PRACTICE OF POPISH PRELATES, where he asserts; That Kings and
Magistrates are in the room of God; that their Laws are Gods Laws, and that
they are to punish all evil doers, and any sin that shall break out; and
though he blames them for being the Popes and Bishops Hangmen in his days, to
kill whomsoever they condemned without more ado, upon their bare commandment,
without any due examination of the cause: Yet if upon their own examination
they shall find them to be Heretecks or false Teachers, he then admits, They
may justly punish and put them to death without any danger; exciting both
Emperors and kings to reform the Church, and to shake off the Yoke both of
the Pope and Prelates, together with their Canons, Superstitions and false
Doctrines: So that this holy Martyr oppugnes Master Dels opinion for which he
quotes him, and speaks only of forcing Infidels by the Sword of war, without
instruction, to embrace the Christian Faith.

His last Authority is Vlricus Ab Hutten, but where his words are recorded he
makes no mention, neither are they pertinent, being spoken to a Council of
Priests (as he confesses) not to Christian Magistrates; which yet he foisteth
into his English translation of his words, not being in the Latin: Surely as
this foisting is unsufferable, so I must acquaint Master Dell, that this
quotation was very unhappy and fatal to his cause, since this very Author has
written a Book, DE SCHISMATE EXTINGUENDO, wherein he refutes that very opinion
he would fasten on him.

And thus I have given you a brief account of Master Dels great skill and
learning in mistaking, mis-citing, perverting every Author which he cites,
whose opinions are all pointblank against him, asserting the Magistrates
legislative, coercive and punitative power, in case of Heresy, Schism,
Seduction, Blasphemy, and all kind of open sin against God, or the Churches
peace, as well as against men; so as I believe his own words [ I Page 21. In
the Margin.
have ACCIDENTALL^ MET WITH THEM] to be true, itimating he never read the
Authors themselves; and I hope I have substantially retorted them to his shame.
He adds there, That the Truth (he means the Anti-magistraticall,
Anabaptisticall errors he maintains, against the Magistrates coercive power)
has but a few Followers; which implies, that what I assert has Many: And
indeed it has so, as many as would overswell this Treatise; I shall therefore
give you only a touch of some.

Not to mention all the godly Emperors, Kings, Princes, Republics Laws and
Proceedings, forecited to this purpose, recorded, approved by all
Ecclesiastical Histories, Divines, Ancient and Modern, as Eusebius, Socrates
Scholasticus, Theodoret, Sozomen, Ruffinus, Cassiodor, Evagrius, Nicephorus
Callistus, the Century Writers, Augustine, Epist. 48, 50. and Contr. Lit
Petiliani, lib. 2. Peter Martyr, Aretius, Paraeus, Beza, and others: Nor yet to
remember the sayings of Hierom, Ambrose, and other Ancients, to this purpose,
collected by Gratian, Gausa 23. qu. 4, 5. where you may peruse them at large,
nor of Julius Firmicus Maternus, or Chrysostom in Romans 13. nor the saying of
Amphilochus to the Emperor Theodosius, recorded by Theodoret, Eccles. Hist. l.
5. c. 16. nor of Ambrose to the Emperor Valentitian the second, registered by
Theodoret, l. 5. c. 13. or that in his Epist. 12. and 33. and his Oration ad
Auxentium; nor Chrysostomes notable speech to the Emperor Arcadius, recorded
by Symeon Metaphrastes, Ribadeniera, and others in his life, against the
toleration, and for the suppression of Heretics, all pertinent to my purpose.

I shall give only a brief account of some Fathers Opinions in this point to
satisfy the learned Readers.

Scorpia. adversus Gnosticos.
Tertullian, who lived in the days of Persecution, is of this opinion, That
Heretics ought to be forced and punished: Ad Officium Haereticos COMPELLI, non
illici dignum est; duritia, vincenda est, non suadenda, etc.

Saint De Exhortatione Martyrum, c. 5.
Cyprian, who was himself a Martyr, writes thus* Sic Idololatriae indignatur
Deus, ut praeceperit etiam eos interfici, qui sacrificare and servire Idolis
suaserint, in Deuteronomy. 13. and iterum loquitur Dominus and dicit, nec Civitati
parcendum etiam si universa consenserit ad Idololatriam: Cujus praecepti, and
rigoris memor Math. 2.
Mathathias enterfecit eum, qui ad aram sacrificaturus accesserat: Quod si ante
adventum Christi circa Deum colendum and idola spernenda, haec praecepta
servata sunt, QUANTO MAGIS post adventum Christi servanda sunt, etc. Et cum
ille passus sit pro alienis peccatis, mulio magis pro peccatis suis pati
unumquemque debere? From which place Jacobus Pamelius in his Annotations on
this Chapter, Annot. 27. and Bellarmin de Laicis, l. 3. c. 21. infer the
lawfulness of putting, not only Idolaters, but Heretics also to death, under
the Gospel; and good reason for it, if we believe Comment. in Cant. lib. Deu.
Tom. 3. p. 112
Rhabanus Maurus, for, Haeretici quot erroribus, tot Idolis sunt obnoxii.

Contr. Haer. lib. 8. Tom. 1. Haer. 66.
Epiphanius, Catech. Mist. ag^g.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, and Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 31, 32.
Others, record and approve the punishment of Manes the Heretic, who had his
skin flead off from his body, and then was cast unto and devoured of Dogs.

Saint Apologia advers. Russinum c. ^.
Jerome records and approves the edicts of the Christian Emperor: Quae de
Alexandria and Aegypto Origenistas pelli jubent: and against Priscillian the
Heretic: Qui and SECULI GLADIO, and totius Orbis i Adversus Pelagianos ad
^^siph^ntem, c 2.
Auctoritate DAMNATUS EST: And in his Commentary on Galat. 5. I would they were
cut off that trouble you; he writes thus: Certe nullam puto inveteri Lege iam
trucem, tam cruentam in aliquos esse sententiam, quam utinam abscindantur qui
vos perturbant. Si putant sibi hoc prodesse, non solum circumcidentur, sed
etiam abscindantur; si enim expoliatio membri proficit, multo magis ablatio,
(with whom Primasius and Claudius Altisiodorensis concur in terminis, in cap.
5. Epist. ad Galat.

Brevis Ennarrat. in Matthew. c. 13. Tom. 2. col. 1217, 1218. Hom. 47. in M^t.
col. 344, 345 and Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanct. l. 6. Annot. 60.
Saint Chrysostom, though he seems unwilling to have all Heretics slain and
put to death, Si enim morte plectarentur Haeretici, atrox profecto and
irreconciliabile bellum universo terrarum Orbi esset inserendum: their
multitude being then so great, dispersed over the whole world; yet he adds
even from the Parable of the Tares it self: Non autem prohibet Dominus, quo
minus impudentem Haereticorum audaciam SUFFRENEMUS SIMUL ET RESTRINGAMUS; verum
ne vita prorsus exigamus: And in his 47. Homily on Matthew, he adds; Non
prohibet autem Conciliabula Haereticorum DISSIPARE, ora obstuere, libertatem
loquendi concidere, verum interficere and trucidare: With whom Euthymius
accords, both of them agreeing, That where Heretics, who are Tares, cannot be
plucked up without danger to the Wheat, and orthodox Christians, there they are
not to be put to death; but when and where there is no such danger, they may be
executed even be death.

Retract. l. 2. c. 5. Epist. 48, 50, 156, to 173 Contr. Li. Petiliani, l. 2.
Contr. Cresconium Gram. l. 2. c. 3.
This was Saint Augustines opinion at first, That Heretics were not to be
punished by the Secular Magistrate, nor put to death: which upon consideration
he afterward retracted, asserting at last, Both the utility and necessity of
the Magistrates Coercive power, and justifying the Emperors Laws and
proceedings against them, even unto death it self; though to avoid the censure
of cruelty, he sometimes intercedes for the sparing of the lives even of those
Heretical Donatists, who had murdered some Orthodox Ministers and Christians,
out of a misguided Zeal, and offered violence to their persons, houses, goods,
and most justly deserved to be punished with death, as he acknowledges. This
opinion of his, even for the capital punishing of Heretics, you may read at
large in his lib. 1. contr. Epist. Parmeniani, cap. 7. and Tract. 11. in Joan.
where he thus writes: Mirantur quia commoventur potestates Christian adversus
detestandos dissipatores Ecclesiae: Si non ergo moverentur, and quomodo
redderent rationem de imperio suo, etc. Videtis qualia faciunt, and qualia
patiuntur; occidunt animas, affliguntur in corpore, sempeter las mortes
faciunt, ET TEMPORALES SE PERPETI QVERVNTVR, etc.

Cyrill, Archbishop of Alexandria, in his Operum, Tom. 2. p. 24.
20. Epistle determines thus concerning the Heresy and Blasphemy of the
Heretic Nestorius, to whom he held it very dangerous to indulge a Pardon: Si
enim qui vel unam contra Religiosissimos and Christi aman^i^simos Reges nostros
blasphemam ausus fuerit emittere vocem, merito quam leges praescribunt patitur
indignationem, NON MAGIS IMPIVS ILLE EAM PATIETVR, qui sacrum nostrum mysterium
universum subvertit, and Dispensationem e medio tollit, quam sanctus and
benignus Dei Patris unigenitus Filius homo fieri dignatus, nostri gratia
adimplevit, ut nos omnes servaret, and Vniversum Orbem qui sub Calo est, and a
peccatis, and morte liberaret.

De Vita Constantini, l. 3. c. 61, 62, 63 64.
Eusebius highly commends and approves the Edict of Constantine the For
sappressing and punishing Heretics, relating the good effects thereof.
Theodoret, Eccle. Hist. lib. 5. c. 2, 3. l. 1. c. 10. Evagriu^, Eccles. Hist.
l. 4. c. 11. Russinu^, Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 1^. Sozomenus, Eccles. Hist. l.
3. c. 17. l. 7. c. 6, 24. Nicophorus, Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 18. l. 11. c. 30.
l. 12. c. 15. l. 13. c. 17. Socrates Scholacticus, Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 7.
and Cassiodor, in his Tripartita Hist. l. 1. c. 7. l. 2. c. 20. l. 4. c. 13,
18, 21, 26, 31, 32, 33. l. 7. c. 4, 9. l. 9. c. 2, 4, 10, 19, 21, 27, 28, 30,
33, 36. l. 10. c. 27. l. 11. c. 3. 17. Record and commend the Laws and
Proceedings of Christian Emperors, both against Heretics, Pagans, and
Schismatics, as well for their punishment, as suppression.

Epist. 93. see Hierom. Contt Pelagianos, c 2.
Leo the first, writes thus of the Priscillianists and their Heresy: Merito
Tatres nostri, sub quorum temporibus haeresis haec n^sanda prorupit, per totum
mundum instan^er egere, ut impius furor ab Vniversa Ecclesia pelleretur: Quando
etiam mundi Princepes i^a hanc sacrilegam amentiam detestati sunt, ut Authorem
ejus ac plero que discipulos LEGVM PVBLICARVM Priscillian himself being put to
death by the Emperor Maximus, H^erom de Vi^^^ Illustribus
ENSE PRO STERNERENT: Videbant enim omnem curam honestatis auferri, simulque
divinum jus humanumque subverti, si hujusmodi hominibus US QVAM VIVERECVM TALI
PROFESSIONE LICVISSET. Et profuit diu ista districtio Ecclesiae Lenitati; quae
etsi sacerdotali contenta judicio, cruentas refugit ultiones, severis tamen
Christianorum Principum constitutionibus adjuvatur; dum ad spirituale
nonnunquam recurrant remedium, qui timent corporale supplicium: Ex quo autem
multas provincias hostilis occupavit irruptio, and executionem legum
tempestates interdixere bellorum, ex quo inter sacerdotes Dei difficiles
commeatus, and rari caeperunt esse conventus, invenit ob publicam
perturbationem secreta perfidia libertatem, and ad multarum mentium
subversionem his malis est incitata, quibus debuit esse correcta; (our present
deplorable condition:) And Epist. 7. He commends Theodosius the Emperor, for
his most pious care of Christian Religion; Ne scilicet in populo Dei aut
Schismata, aut Haereses, aut ulla scandala convalescant.

S^rius Council. Tom. 2. Pamelius Au not. pg. in Epist. ^^. Cypriani.
D^oscorus, Archbishop of Alexandria (though accused and convicted of Heresy,
and deprived for it) in the great general Council of Calcedon, Act. 1. cried
out, FLAMMIS DIGNOS HAERETCOS, That Heretics were worthy to be burned. Non
solum poenis dignus est Eutiches, sed IGNE.

Optatus Milivetanus, lib. 3. contr. Parmenianum; compares the deed of one
Macarius, who had SLAIN AND PUT TO DEATH Maradus and Donatus two Donatists, to
the deeds of Moses, Phyneas and Elijah, In slaying Idolaters and Idolatrous
false Prophets; justifying this Action of his.

Athanasius, Epist. ad Orthodoxos, determines thus, Si Acatius, Ludoxius,
Patrophilus, ^u^ talia Scribant, qui quaeso non OMNI SVPPLICIO DIGNIFVERINT.

Joannes M^^^^^ius, Resp. ad Homisd. Papam, writes thus: Nisi Christum Fi^ium
Dei qui pro nobis passus est in carne unum esse, and sancta and individua
Trinitate suerit confessus Dioscorus, PELAGO MANCIPETVR.

Gregory the first, Epist. l. 1. Epist. 72, to Gennadius, and in other places,
quoted by Gratian, Causa 23. qu. 3, 4. and Bernard, Sermo 66. Super Cantica,
approve, The suppressing and punishing of Heretics by the Sword of the Civil
Magistrate, and by death it self, though Bernard dislikes the Peoples
tumultuous murdering of them in a malicious manner; which Justine Martyr in his
Epistle Ad Zenam and Serenum; Ambrose Epist. 27. Severus Sulpitius, sacrae
Hist. l. 2. and Ivo Carnotensis Decret. pars 13. c 114. do likewise censure;
and Augustine justly blamed in the seditious Donatists and their
Circumcellioes, in his forecited passages, and Epist. 48. Yea, this Gregory the
first thanks Gennadius, for making war upon obstinate Heretics, exhorting
him to proceed therein.

Our own venerable Beda, in Cantica Cant. l. 3. Tom. 4. Col. 748. on these
words; Capite nobis vulpes pusillas, quae demoliantur vineas: determines, That
all men ought in their several places to take and beat down Heretics and
Schismatics: Ne fidem Ecclesiae, quam unam esse oporte^, eorum infestatio
scinderet, atque in parts distraheret: And he adds, that he says not capite
vobis, sed nobis vulpes pusillas, for this reason; Vt hinc magis OMNES qui
possent, ad debellandam, sive corrigendam Haereticorum nequitiam accenderet,
quo eo sibi in hoc agendo deservire monstraret, suamque esse vineam, qu^m
defenderet ipse, laborum piorum remuneratione ostenderet. And Ecclesiasticae
Hist. Gentis Anglorum, l. 1. c. 21. He both records and approves the Banishment
of the Pelagians out of this our Island for their Heresy.

Isiodor Hispalensis (quoted by Gratian, Causa 23. qu. 5.) writes thus:
Principes seculi nonnunquam intra Ecclesiam potestatis adeptae culmina tenent,
ut per eandem potestatem Disciplinam Ecclesiasticam muniant; ut quod non
praevalent sacerdotes efficere per doctrinae sermonem, potestas hoc imperet per
disciplinae terrorem. Saepe per Regnum terrenum coeleste Regnum proficit; ut
qui intra positi contra fidem and disciplinam agunt, rigore Principum
conterantur, ipsamque disciplinam quam utilitas Ecclesiae exercere non
praevalet, cervicibus superborum and potestas Principalis imponat, etc.

I could add many more Ambrose de Officiis, lib. 1. Epist 29.
Authorities of the Ancients to this purpose, but these may suffice, and you
may read more of them in Gratian, Causa 23.

If any object the Authority of Hilary, Contra Auxentium, who forced Obj^ct. 1.
men with armed power to embrace his Arrian opinions, whereupon he thus checks
him for it: Ac primum misereri licet nostrae Aetatis laborem and praesentium
temporum stultas opiniones congemiscere, quibus patrocinari Deo humana
creduntur, and ad ^uendam Christi Ecclesiam, ambitione seculari laboratur. Ac
nunc prob dolor divinam fidem fuffragia terrena c^mme^dant, inopsque virtutis
suae Christus, du^ ambitu nomini suae conciliatur, arguitur: Terret exiliis and
carceribus Ecclesia, credique sibi cogit, quae exiliis and carceribus ^redita
est, etc.

I answer with Desensoris Pacis, pars 2. c. 9.
Marsilius Patavinus, who objects it; that this was objected A^^wer.
only against Auxentius the Arrian, as he was a Bishop or Clergy man, to whom
no coercive power, nor external forcible Authority by the Sword, belonged; or
against the Clergies own using of external force; not against the Coercive and
Penal power of Christian Princes and Magistrates, to whom God has given the
Sword of Justice, to suppress and punish Heretics, as well as other
Malesactors. So as it makes nothing at all against my conclusion; and yields
our Opposites (who never cite it) but this Nonsequitur. The S^^ C^s.
Tri^^pa^^^. Hist. ^^. c. 30. l. 8. c. ^* etc.
Ar^ian Bishops are justly blamed by Hilary for using external force,
violence, prisons, banishments, death, against the Orthodox Christians, guilty
of no Heresy nor Schism; Therefore godly Emperors, Princes, Magistrates, are
blameworthy for imprisoning, restraining, or putting obstinate dangerous
Heretics to death. All other Objections from the Fathers, will receive the
self same Answer.

If any object in the second place, the 56. Canon of the fourth Council of
Object. 2.
Toledo, prohibiting the Enforcing of the Jews to believe by external
violence, in these words; Surius Council. Tom. 2, p. ^4. Gratian Distinct. 45.
De Judaeis autem praecepit sancta Synodus, nomini deinceps ad credendum VIM
INFERRI, ^^ Carnoten^^, Decretal, pars 13. c. 94. Romans 9.
Cui enim vult Deus miseretur and quem vult indurat. Non enim tales INVITI
SALVANDI SVNT, SED VO^ENLES, Vt integra sit forma justitiae: Sicut enim homo
^^en ^.
propria arbitrii voluntate serpenti obediens periit, sic vocante gratia Dei,
propriae mentis conversione homo quisque cred^ndo salvatur: Vt NON VI, sed
libera arbitrii voluntate and convertantur, ^VADENDI SVNT, NON IMPELLENDI. Qui
autem jampridem ad Christianitatem venire coacti sunt, sicut factum est
temporibus Religios^^imi Principis Sisubetis, quia jam constat ^os Sacramentis
divinis sociatos, and Baptismi gratiam suscepisse, chrismate Vnctos esse, and
corporis Dominici and Sanguinis extitisse participes, oportet, ut fidem etiam,
^uam VI, VEL NECESSITATE SVSCIPERVNT, TENERE COGANTVR, ne nomen Domini
Blasphemetur, and fides quam susciperunt, vilis and contemptibilis habeatur.

I answer, first, that the forcing and compelling of professed Jews, who ^^^^.
never embraced Christianity, to believe and be baptized against their wills, is
one thing; and the punishing of Heretics, who have once embraced, professed
the Christian Faith, and revolted from its sincerity, another thing; therefore
this Councils prohibiting the former, does no ways impeach the lawfulness of
the later: The one being an enforcement of an unbeleever; the other, a
punishment of a wilful misbeleever. Secondly, it is one thing to enforce Jews
to come to the outward Ordinances, and Means of conversion, that they may
believe, or be converted by them; and another thing to enforce them to believe
and be baptized before instruction or conviction: the first this Council
condemns not, but the later only. Thirdly, there is a difference between
compelling Jews by outward violence to be baptized, and profess themselves to
be Christians; and restraining of them by Laws and punishments, not to
exercise their Jewish Ceremonies, or vent their Blasphemies in contempt of
Christ, and Christian Religion; the later whereof this very Council restraines,
Can. 58, ^^ 66. Fourthly, this very Canon informs us, that some Jews were
compelled to be baptized and embrace the Christian Religion in the Reign of
their most Religious Prince King Sysubet; and those having once embraced the
Gospel, and received the Sacraments, though by coertion, are by like coertion
to be enforced to perservere in this Profession, by the determination of this
very Canon: Therefore by the self same reason, Heretics who have once
embraced the orthodox Faith, and revolt from it unto damnable Heresies, are by
this Councels resolution, even by outward force and punishments to be compelled
to renounce their errors, and persevere in the orthodox Faith they once
embraced, professed; or else they may be justly punished by the civil
Magistrate, least Gods name should be blasphemed, etc. Which is so far from
making against, that it is a direct determination for me, especially if we
consider the many penal, coercive Laws made against the Jews in Spain,
about and soon after the time of this very Council, recorded at large by Codeae
legum Antiquarum; Leges Wisigothorum, l. 12. Tit. 2.
Fredericus Lindebrogus, where you may peruse them. Fifthly, there is a wide
difference between natural borne Subjects, and mere Forraigners or Aliens who
are no Subjects, but Sojourners in a Kingdom, as the Jews were in Spain: A
Prince may compel the one being his Subjects, and living under his Laws, to
such things as he cannot in justice enforce the other. The King and State of
England may compel all English, Scottish, Irish Subjects to repair to our
public Assemblies, and to submit to that Chuch-government which shall be
established by common consent in Parliament; but they cannot enforce a Jew, a
Turk or Spaniard, who sojourne here as Factors, to make public profession of
our Religion, and submit to our Churchgovernment; though they may restrain
their open Idolatry and blasphemy. All which considered, there is nothing in
this Canon, nor in any other ancient Council or Father that I have met with,
which well understood, will any way contradict, but ratify and confirm my
Thesis; the contrary assertion being maintained only by the schismatic,
heretical See Joan: Malderus, de Virtutibus Theol. qu. 12. de Haeresi Artic.
3. mem. 1.
Donatists, to uphold their faction in point of Thesis, though directly
contradicted by their practice, as Augustine demonsttates, and Optatus too, who
have largely refuted this their Anti-Magistraticall error in their forecited,
and succeeding Passages.

For popish Authors, besides the Canonists already cited, I could mention
diverse who assert and prove at large, That obstinate Heretics and Blasphemers
ought to be suppressed, imprisoned, banished, yea BURNT OR PUT TO DEATH by the
Christian Magistrate. I shall give you a Catalogue of some few of them instead
of many; as namely, Vincentius Spec. Moral. Par. 3. l. 3. Disti. 31. De
Haeresi. Gulielmus Peraldus, Summa Virtutum ac Vitiorum Tom. 1. De Justitia, c.
7. p. 181, to 185. where this is largely proved. Alexander Fabritius,
Destructorium Vitiorum, pars 6. c. 4. and 39. Lucas Tudensis, Adversus
Albigenses, l. 3. c. 15, 16, 21, 22. who copiously asserts it. Reynerus, Contr.
Waldenses, c. 9, 10. Antoninus, Histor. pars 3. Tit. 19. c. 1. sect. 4. and
Summae, pars 2. Tit. 12. c. 4. Joannis Ferus, in Matthew. c. 13. and Sermo c. 3.
in Domin. 5. post Epiphan. p. 465, 467. Thomas Waldensis, Doctr. Fidei. l. 2.
Artic. 3. c. 71. Alexander Alensis, Sum. Theologiae pars 2. quest. 162, 163,
164. Lupoldus, De Zelo German. Veterum Principum, cap. 2. Thomas Beauxamis,
Harmoniae Evangelicae, Tom. 2. f. 406. (where he proves, The lawfulness of
burning Heretics from diverse Scriptures, as a prologue to their eternal
burning in Hell fire hereafter, if they repent not.) Alphonsus deCastro,
Adversus haereses, l. 5. and dePunitione haeret. Jacobus No^nera, de Ecclesia
Christi ab Haereticorum Conciliabulis Dinosc^nda, l. 1, and 2. Paulus Windeck,
de Extirpandis Haereticis. Paulus Grillandus, De Haeereticis and eorum poenis
(where this is fully proved, That Heretics may and ought to be punished and
put to death by the Civil Magistrate.) Conradus Brunus, De Haereticis, l. 3.
c. 13. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, in his, Assertionis Lutheranae
Confutatio, in his Works in folio, printed 1597. p. 272. and Artic. 33. Col.
633, to 644. where he largely argues the lawfulness of putting Heretics to
death, enforcing this argument among others, in these terms: ^^l: 633, 4.
Ego quidem Haereticos and interimendos opinor, ubi non potes aliter servare
gregem. Quam rem and Christus ipse mihi visus est aperte satis indicasse,
quandoquidem and Lupos rapaces vocaverit eos: Quis enim rapacem Lupum (ubi
gregi metuit suo) non prius occideret, quam sinat oves ab eo dilaniari? Quis
est qui nescit, quod pastori charior esse debet suarum ovium salus, quam
Luporum vita? Quamobrem cum alterutros perire necesse sit, hoc est, aut oves,
aut lupos, quid stolidius cogitari potest, quam ita lupis indulgere, ut gregis
tand^m universi jacturam patiaris? Id quod haud dubie futurum est, si lupos non
interimeris. Et ut istis lupis nemo prudens pastor ita favere debet, ut interim
oves pereant; ita nec H^reticis parcendum est, ne per eorum violenta dogmata
depereant orthodoxi. Nam Haereticorum Sermo multo perniciosius est hominibus,
^uam ovibus lupus: Sermo enim eorum ( ut ait 2 Timothy 2. 17.
Paulus) velut cancer serpit: Q^amobrem si liceat feras non arcere solum, sed
etiam interimere, ne pecudibus noceant, MVLTO MAGIS ID LICEBIT DE HAERETICIS
STATVERE, ne tantam animabus Christi sanguine redemptis inferant perniciem. Nam
qua precor alia ratione Christiano gregi contra lupos istos succurrere poteris?
Number censuris Ecclesiae? Sed has ipsi contemnunt penitus: An amissionis rerum
suarum metu? Sed isti nec Deum, nec homines metuunt: An exilio? Sea per literas
haereses disseminare suas poterunt: An carceribus? Sed custodes crebro per
illos corrupti sunt. Breviter, quocunque locorum vivere permittuntur, nunquam
ab eorum dentibus tuta fuerit Christiani gregis salus; which he prosecutes at
large. To him I shall subjoine Sixtus Senensis, Bibl. Sanctae, lib. 6. Annot
60. in Matthew. 13. 30. who proves from Chrysostom, Augustine and Euthymius,
That Heretics may be slain and pulled up as Tares, when it may be done
without danger of plucking up the Wheat together with them. Benedictus a
Benedicto, in his Jacula Ecclesiae Catholicae, ex Catholicorum, ipsisque
Haereticorum Assertionibus deprompta; Venetiis 1608. Haeresis 229, 230, 231. p.
133, to 137. (where he copiously proves, the lawfulness of Christian
Magistrates restraining and putting Heretics to death, from the Authorities of
Atha^asius, Joannis Maxentius, Augustine, Prosper, the Councels of Constans and
Lateran, the Decrees of sundry Popes, and the testimonies even of Luther,
^u^er, Manilius, Lusser, Joachimus Westphalus, Melancton, Bullinger, Brentius,
Capito, Calvin and Beza:) Joannis Langh^crucius de Vita and Honestate
Canonicorum, l. 5. c. 19. l. 6. c. 33. Jacobus Spielegius Lexicon. Jurid. verbo
Haereticus, Claudius Espencaeus Comment. in Epist. 1. ad Tim. c. 1. verse ult.
Gregorius de Valentia, Tom. 3. Disput. 1. qu. 10. Egidius de Coninck, Disput.
35. de Divortio, Dub. 4. p. 863. Suarez de Triplici virtute Theologica, Disp.
18. sect. 2. The Rhemists in their Notes on the New Testament, on Luke 9. sect.
5. and Apoc. 17. sect. 6. (whom neither Doctor Fulke, nor Master Cartwright
contradict herein, in their Answers to these Notes) Justus Lipsius, lib. 4.
Polit. c. 2. Rebuffus, Praxis Beneficiorum, pars 3. de modis amittendi
Beneficia, p. 227, 228, etc. Meyser, l. 4. De Legibus, sect. 1. qu. 10, 11, 12.
Per. Gregorius, de Republica, l. 12. c. 4. Jacobi Greseri, Prologomena in
Scriptores, Contr. Sectam Waldensium, c. 6. Bibl. Patrum. Colon. Agrip. 1616.
Tom. 13. p. 292, 293. Jacobus Pamelius Annotationes in Epist. 52. Cyprian
Annot. 78. p. 63. and Annot. 27. in Cypr. Exhortat. Martyrum, p. 198. Claudius
de Sanctes, ad Edicta Veterum Principum: and de Methodo contra Sectas, Robert:
Arboricensis, de Haereticis coercendis; and de compescenda Haereticorum
petulentia. Arnoldus Albertinus, Comment. Rubr. andC. 1. de Haereticis: Joannis
Nicholas Aulati, de Haereticis. Alanus adversus Haereticos; Arnoldus
Albertinus, de Haereticis. Joannis Gerson, de Potestate circa materiam fidei
Oper. Tom. 1. p. 422. to 430. Petri Berchorii Reductorium Morale super, Levit.
ca. 6. p. 50, 51. Georgii Wicelii Homil. Domini, 8. post Trinit. Sebastianus
Barradius Comment. in Histor. and Harmon, Evang. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 12. and Tom.
3. l. 3. c. 15. number. 46, 47, 48. Thomas Sanches, Opus morale in precepta
Decalogi, l. 2. c. 7. to 15. where this is largely handled. Florimond de
Remond; L'Histoire de la Naissance, Progress and Decadence de L'Heresie de ce
Seicle; A Paris 1610. Michael Mauclerus, de Monarchia Divina Ecclesiastica, and
seculari Christiana: Lutetiae Parisior, 1622. Secundae partis, lib. 2. c. 12.
l. 7. c. 8. Tertiae partis. l. 3. c. 9, 10, 11. l. 8. c. 10, 11. Quartae
partis, l. 1. c. 9, 10. l. 5. c. 2. where this point is most copiously handled,
asserted; Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato De Republica
Ecclesiastica, l. 6. c. 4, 5, 6. (where this is amply proved) Joannes Malderus,
de Virtutibus Theologicis, Antuerpiae, 1616. quaest. 12. de Haeresi Artic. 3.
number, 1, De PAENA MORTIS JUST HAERETICIS INFERENDA, A MAGISTRATU CIVILI, where
he copiously confirms this Tenent; affirming it, Certum esse secundum fidem,
propter consensum Ecclesiae and OMNIVM DOCTORVM, qui illud tanquam DOGMA FIDEI
TRADUNT: which he further prosecutes numb. 4. Martinus de Fano, De Brachio per
Judicem Ecclesiast. implorando; Gundisaluus de villa Diego, de Haereticis: Joan
Nicholaus Arel. de Haereticis Jac: Pamelius, de Religionibus diversis non
permittendis: Joannes de Roias de Haereticis: Dammianus Roscius, de sectis
Haereticorum: and Consilia ad Haereticorum confusionem; Zanchius Vgolinus de
Haereticis: Antonius Santorellus de Haeresi, Schismate and Apostasia:
Franciscus Pegna de modo procedendi, Contr: Inqui^itos de Haeresi: Amb: de
Vignate de Haeresi: Francis: Zabarella de Scism^tibus, Authoritate Imperiali
tollendis, Ludovicu^ Carerius, de Haereticis. The. Aquinas 2 secundae qu. 10.
8. 0. qu. 11. 3. l. 4. Distinct. 13. qu. 2. 3. Quodl. 10, 16. ob. determines
thus: Haereti^i possunt just occidi in judicio seculari; incarcerari, and
rebus suis privari, etiamsi alios non corrumpant, magis quam rei criminis
laesae Magestatis, vel quam cudentes falsam monetam: his reason is, because
they commit high Treason against the King of Heaven: And, quia haeresis
subvertit fundamentum omnium bonorum: Ideo plus caeteris peccatis nocet, and
est gravissimum omnium peceatum per se; Dominicus Bannes in 2 secundae S. Thom.
qu. 11. Artic. 3, 4. and most other Schoolmen on the second part of Aquinas,
assert the like.

And to name no more, Cardinal Bellarmine himself, de Pontifice Romano, l. 1.
c. 2. and de Laicis, l. 3. c. 21, 22. largely and learnedly proves by
Scriptures, Fathers, Protestant Writers, reasons, Imperial Laws, and other.
Authorities, That Magistrates may, yea ought to punish and put to death
obstinate Heretics: affirming, That this is the unanimous opinion of all
Catholics: And he there solidly answers the several objections made by
Anabaptists and others to the contrary, quoting Master Calvin, Aretius and
Beza, as concurring in opinion with him herein.

But passing by all these with other Romani^^s, whose long continued daily See
Master Fox his Acts and Monuments, and the French Book of Martyrs.
practice in putting such to death, and burning them to ashes, whom they
condemn for Here^^cks, is an unanswer b^ evidenc^ of their opinions herein; I
shall proceed to the Resolutions and Judgments of such Protestant Churches in
their public Confessions, and learned Protestant Writers of chiefest note,
from the very glimmerings of Reformation, until this present, which will be
more p^n^^rous and prevailing with our Opposites and Sectaries (who commonly
slight Antiquity, and now all other Authors, as of small or no account,) then
any other Authorities; and I presumewill give good satisfaction to all
ingenuous Readers, but I am certain will overballance Master D^s pretended
Authorities to the contrary, and put him to perpetual silence. I shall begin
with the Confessions of whole reformed Protestant Churches, and then pass unto
their Writers.

The Harmony of Confessions, sect. 12. p. 458 459, 460.
Reformed Churches of H^lvetia, in their former Confession, resolve thus:
Seeing every Magistrate is of God, his chief Du^y consists in this; To
d^s^nd Religion from all blasphemy, and to promote and put it in practice as
much as in him lies; and to judge the people according to just and divine
Laws, and to punish the Offenders according to the quantity of the fault, in
their Riches, Body or Life: Which things when he does, he performs a due
worship or service to God. And in their later Confession, chap. 30. of
Magistracy: The Magistrates chiefest duty is, to procure and maintain peace
and public tranquillity, which doubtl^sse he shall never do more happily, then
when he shall after the example of most holy Kings and Princes of the people of
the Lord, advance the preaching of the Truth, and of the pure and sincere
Faith, and shall ROOT OVT LIES, and all Superstition, with all Impiety and
Idolatry, and shall defend the Church of God: For Note.
indeed we teach, that the care of Religion does chiefly appertain to the holy
Magistrate; let him therefore hold the Word of God in his hands, and LOOK, THAT
NOTHING BE TAVGHT CONTRARY THEREUNTO: Let him draw forth the Sword of God
against all Malefactors, seditious persons, Thieves, Murderers, Oppressors,
BLASPHEMERS, Perjured persons, and all those whom God has commanded him to
punish or execute; LET HIM SVPPRESSE STVBBORNE HERETICS, (which are Heretics
indeed) who cease not TO BLASPHEME the Majesty of God, and to trouble the
Church, yea and finally to destroy it. We condemn the ANABAPTISTS, who deny,
that any man can justly be put to death by the Magistrate, etc.

The Ibid. p. 466.
Confession of the Reformed French Churches, resolves, That God has therefore
delivered the Sword into the hands of the Magistrates, that Offenses may be
punished; not only those which are committed against the second Table, but
also against the first, etc.

The Ibid. p. 467.
Confession of Belgia determines, That it is the duty of Kings, Princes and
Magistrates, to endeavor, that the Ministry may be preserved, that all
Idolatry and counterfeit worship of God may be clean abolished, that the
Kingdom of Antichrist may be overthrown, and the Kingdom of Christ enlarged,
etc. Wherefore we condemn the Anabaptisis, and all those troublesome spirits,
which reject the higher Powers and Magistrates, overthrow all Laws and
Judgments, etc. which God has appointed among men for honesties sake.

The Ibid. sect. 19
Confessions of Auspurge, Basil, Bohemia, Scotland, determine the like, as you
may there read at large.

I shall add some few foreign Protestant Authors of chiefest note to these
Confessions.

Defensoris Pacis, pars 2. c. 9, 10, 21.
Marsilius Patavinus, a great opposer of the Popes usurpations, asserts; That
although the Pope, Prelates and Clergy men, have no coercive power to compel
Heretics and Schismatics to believe and embrace the Gospel, or to constrain
men to keep the precepts of the Evangelicall Law; Yet Christian Emperors,
Kings, Magistrates, may by their humane Laws punish, imprison, fine, banish
Heretics; and that it belongs properly to them, not to Priests, to punish and
condemn Heretics: concluding thus; Quod poenas personales, atque reales
Haereticis infligere, ipsasque exigere, sibique applicare LICITE POSSUNT ET
SOLEBANT PRINCIPES, sive legislatores humani.

Henry Bullinger, Decadis secundae Sermo octavo, prapounding this Question then
in controversy: An liceat Magistratui sua potestate subjectos punire
Religionis vel contemptae, vel contumeliis effectae gratia? Resolves it thus:
In personis igitur magna est diversitas: Sunt enim antesignani and duces
pervicaces in erroribus, qui audaces sunt Hypocritae, and loquaces, and ideo ad
seducendum appositissimi; ipsi quidem sine emendatione in propriam ruentes
perniciem, and alios secum pertrahent. Et hi MODIS OMNIBUS SUNT COERCENDI,
veluti Ecclesiae pestes, ne contagio ipsorum, seu cancer, serpat latius: Sunt
deinde seducti quidem and damnati ab alijs qui errant, sed non malitia; nec
pertinaciter, sed resipiscunt in tempore. Hos non oportet damnare protinus, sed
orare Dominum ac sustinere, errantesque spiritu lenitatis and mansuetudinis
erudire, donec redeant ad mentem meliorem. Porro in erroneis Dogmatibus alia
alijs sunt graviora: Sunt quaedam adeo Blasphema, impia and indigna* ut ne
audiri quide^, ne dum ferri possint: sunt quae direct and palam tendunt in
subversionem Reipublicae, nisi in tempore sopiantur. Oportet autem Scripturis
and ^anifesta veritate evincere illa quae in accusationem veniunt, esse talia
qualia dicuntur: Comperta veritate and productis apertis testimonijs
Scripturae, licebit in blasphemos, and eversores Ecclesiae Reipublicaeque
gravissime animadvertere, Sed levior mitiorque poena decernatur contra errantes
in levibus, non in capitalibus erroribus. Nam errant quidam, sed ita, ut horum
erroribus Deus non blasphemetur and Ecclesia consistat. Denique, ipsa non
interturbatur Respublica. Ubi rursus occurrat illud Apostoli: Alter alterius
onera portate. Item, infirmos in fide suscipite, non ad dijudicationes
disceptationum. Jam and in suppliciis and poenis insigne est discrimen.
Pertinaciter errantes, and alios secum in errores abducere, inque erroribus
retinere nitentes, blasphemi, and perturbatores, imo subversores Ecclesiarum,
JURE CAEDI POSSUNT; ideo tamen capitis supplicio non protinus afficiendus est
omnis qui errat. Et quae minis and increpationibus curari possunt, non debent
acerbioribus elui and puniri. Modus in re qualibet optimus est: Est and multa
pecuniaria, sunt CARCERES in quos concludi possunt, ne alios inficiant qui
veneno pravae doctrinae and fidei corrupti sunt. Sunt and ALIAE CORPORUM
AFFLICTIONES, quibus coercentur errantes, and ut minus noceant aliis sanis, ut
and ^p^^ sanantur, non toti pereant, sed resipiscant. Sed timor Dei, aequitas
and prudentia judicis intelliget ex circumstantiis quomodo punienda sunt in
^^ductoribus and seductis prava dogmata, and pervicax rebellio, aut stolida and
minime malitiosa credulitas. Admonitio seria and diligens locum non habet in
sceleribus nefandis jam perperratis, ET GLADIO ELVENDIS. Curet ^go Magistratus
ut moneat in tempore monendos, etc. So he, so we conclude.

Martinus Bucerus in his Book de Regno Christi, (dedicated to our King Edward
the VI.) has many passages to this purpose, which you may there read at large,
being the subject and scope of that Treatise: And in his E^arrat. in Matthew. c.
22. he deter^ermines thus: Ex eo quod apud omnes recte sentientes pridem and
modo habetur, neminem ad fidem aut religionem compellendum; quidam Officium
Magistratus in totum a rebus fidei and Religionis alienum faciunt, nec quicquam
illum circa eas vel constituere vel emendare, aut etiam vindicare permittunt,
addicentes illum totum solis-rebus seculi: Isti vero parum pie de sublimi
potestatis munere sentire videntur. Dii in Scripturis Vocantur Principes and
Magistratus. Quare and Deos quosdam praestare inter homines debent eoque sic
mala amoliri, and bona provehere, ut quae inter bona praecipua sunt, in primis
procurand and tuend^curent, quaeque mala nocentiora, praecipuo studio avertant.
Quum itaque Religio non solum bona alia universa excellat, sed sine ea nihil
sit jam humano generi bonum and salutare, certe consequens erit, ut
Magistratus* PRIMUM DEBEAT RELIGIONI VINDICANDAE ET CONSERVANDAE CURAM
IMPENDERE, qua^doquid^m nihil potest populo accidere pestilentius qua^^^ haec
illi violetur; nihil salutarius quam si sarta-tecta persistat: Hinc in lege
Magistratibus persancte praeceptum fuit, ut praeter consultores, Levitas and
Sacerdotes, ipsi quoque legem Dei studiose legerent, nimirum ut ficut Deus ante
omnia diligi debet, ita in primis operam daret, ut illius cultus recte haberet:
Hinc CAPITALIA fecit, non solum adultera, homicidia and id genus atrociora
scelera, sed etiam si quis a cultu Dei docendo abduceret; si quis sibiipsi
tantum Idola, aut aliam superstitionem statueret, si ariolos consuleret, si Deo
convicium dicat and hujusmodi, quae proprie ad curam attinent Religionis. Jam
Deus non mutatur; quare in haec eadem hodie quoque Magistratum ANIMADVERTERE
DEBET. Nec enim minus apud priscos vera Religio cordi fuit atque hodie; and
aeque tum atque modo opus Spiritus Sancti illa exstitit: Nihilominus, quum and
Doctrinae and Caeremoniae externae sunt, and potestas publica in hoc a Deo
rebus humanis praefecta sit, ut illae optime, id est, ex sententia ejus
habeant, ac ita ante omnia ipsius cultus vigeat, neque possit nocentius
quicquam accidere impia Doctrina and superstitiosis Ceremoniis, etiam apud nos
Magistratus officium erit cavere, ne quid in his pal^m peccetur: occulta Dei
judicio relinquere oportet. Nequaquam autem huc ire decet, quoniam multi sunt
qui potestate sua abuntantur, and maxim in rebus sacris, ut propterea curam
religionis alienam a munere Magistratus faciamus, quam primum habere quicunque
potestate funguntur, non folum divinae, sed simul omnium Sapientium leges
sanxerunt.

Operum, Tom. 2. f. 2. 323.
Huldricus Zuinglius de Duplici Justitia, Divina and Humana, toward the end,
writes; That the Magistrate was instituted by God; among other ends, Ne
blasphemi reddamus, sed verbi Domini audientes: Quod si ego blasphemias in Deum
expuere non vereris, Magistratus blasphemum te poenis coercet. Religionem tuere
debet, and provehere: Quod si eos non puniat qui Deo inobedientes sunt, Dei
poenam non effugiet. Magistratus, in primis est, ut omnia ea aboleant,
tollentque a medio, quae cum divini verbi oraculis pugnant. And elsewhere he
writes thus: Explan. Articul. Artic. 29. Tom. 1. f. 79, 80.
That the Magistrate must know himself to be nothing else but a Sword,
wherewith God does cut off the worst and most hurtful members of his Body; but
he is to take heed that he cut not off a sound member for a diseased one, nor
suffer a diseased one to live for a sound one: Ibid. Artic. 40. f. 82.
That the Magistrate may lawfully put open Malefactors' to death, who are
pernicious to the Body of Christ, and hurtful to the Commonwealth: And though
he holds, Ibid. Explan Artic. 65.
That the Doctrine of Christ is not to be propagated with arms and the sword;
and blames the Papists, the enemies of Gods Word: Quod omnia vitentant, non
Scripturarum collatione: Yet he adds; Interim Magistratus officium est nihil
ominus, ut hostibus veritatis (posteaquam satis sunt auditi and verbo Dei
convicti) Note.
silentium imponant, etc. Quidam certe eorum tam blaspheme, tamque de Deo, de
Veritate, deque Scripturis sacris loquuntur, ut nihil mirum esset, si
Magistratus os ipsis comprimeret, quandoquidem Scripturis omnino nihil possunt,
nec cessant tamen reclamare, omnia vi tentare, non veritate. Praestaret,
inquam, ut his, posteaquam auditi essent and edocti, Pytagoricum imponeretur
silentium: So as in his opinion, Magistrates ongot to punish Blasphemers, to
silence and suppress Heretics and Seducers, who are obstinate, and disturb
the public peace, else God will certainly punish them for this neglect of
their duty. And in these places and elsewhere, he largely asserts the divine
institution, power, lawfulness and necessity of the Christian Magistrate under
the Gospel, against the Anabaptists.

Master Calvin does the like, Institut. lib. 4. c. 20. throughout: Where he
writes thus, Sect. 3. That the Magistrate is to take principal care to
suppress and punish Idolatry, Sacrilege, Blasphemy, and other public
offenses against Religion; and to take care, that the true Religion contained
in the Law of God, he not publicly violated or contaminated by sacrilegious
persons, without punishment. Sect. 9. he asserts, That the Magistrates are the
keepers of both Tables, as we learn not only by Scripture, but profane
Authors too; That it ought to be their chiefest care to defend and preserve
true Piety and Religion, and the honor of God, whose Vicars they are, and by
whose benefit they reign: And he concludes thus against the Anabaptists, and
our Antagonists: Hoc quoque nomine maxim laudantur Sancti Reges in Scriptura,
quod Dei cultum corruptum vel eversum resti^erunt, vel curam gesserent
Religionis, ut sub illis pura and incolumis floreret: Contra vero sacra
historia inter vitia anarchyas ponit, quod non esset Rex in Israel, ideoque
faceret quisque quod placebat: Unde coarguitur eorum stultitia, qui vellent
neglecta Dei cura, juri inter homines dicundo tantum intentos esse. Quasi vero
praefectos Deus suo nomine constituerit qui terrenas controversias deciderent;
quod vero long gravioris momenti erat praetermiserit, ut ipse pure coleretur
exLegis suae praescripto. Sed huc turbulentos homines impellit impius omnia
novandi cupiditas, vt omnes violatae pietatis vindices e medio sublatos
cupiant, etc. In his Comentary on Romans 13. and elsewhere, he asserts the like:
and that Christian Princes and Magistrates are to suppress and punish
Heresies, Schisms, Blasphemies; refuting the Anabaptists opinions and
objections to the contrary: Yea, Master Calvin caused the Anabaptisticall
Heretic Servetus to be put to death by the Magistrates of Geneva for his
obstinate Heresy and Blasphemy; for which being blamed by some Anabaptists, he
writ a particular Treatise, wherein he demonstrates to the world, Licitum esse
in Haereticos gladio animadvertere: that it was lawful for the Christian
Magistrate to put Heretics to death, as Beza records in his life, and
Bellarmine cites it too, lib. 3. de Laicis, cap. 21.

Finally, Master Calvin in his Praelectiones, in Daniel, cap. 4. ver. 1. fol.
43. asserts the lawfulness of punishing Heretics and Blasphemers even with
death: informing us what manner of persons they are, and what they aim at, who
hold the contrary, in these words: Certum est quod cupiant: Nam si quis ipsos
respiciat, SUNT IMPII DEI CONTEMPTORES [ not Saints:] Nota.
saltem nihil vellent certum esse in Religione; ideo labefactare, and quantum
in se est, etiam convellere nituntur omnia pietatis principia. Ut ergo liceat
ipsis evomere virus suum, inde tant^^ere litigant pro impunitate, and negant
poenas de Haere^icis and Blasphemis sumendas esse, etc.

Rodolphus Gualther in his 44. Homily, in Epist. ad Galatas, c. 4. from these
words of the Apostle, I would they w^^^ even cut off that trouble you; proves
at large, That Magistrates may and ought to suppress Heretics with civil and
corpor all punishments, and the Ringleaders of them with death and capital
censures, even under the Gospel, according to the Prophecy of Zech. 13. 2, 3.
meant only of the times of the Gospel. And in his 76 Homily, in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 13. he affirms the same; asserting, That the Christian Magistrates under
the Gospel ought to punish all those offenses with the Sword, which God
himself has thought worthy to he punished with capital censures: Inter quae
cum omnium gravissima sint, quae adversus primam tabulam, cum divini nominis
contemptu, cultus prophanatione, and multorum aliorum seductione designantur,
PROCUL DUBIO in eorum Authors quam severissime pro delicti ratione animadverti
debet. Minime ergo illorum sententiam probamus, qui adorandae Trinitatis
hosts, and aeternae Jesu Christi Divinitatis blasphematores, plectandos esse
negant. Dicunt illi, Fidem donum Dei esse, neque aliquem ad rect^ sentiendum
cogi posse: Sed nos vicissim dicimus, contineri posse poenarum metu impostores,
ne virus haeresium spargant, and pravis dogmatibus rudes and imperitos rerum
seducent. He adds, that by this reason, no Malefactors whatsoever should be
punished, because they commit those crimes for want of faith and grace, which
are Gods gift.

Learned Peter Martyr not only in his Common places, Classis 2. cap. 4. sect.
30, to 43* but in his Tiguri An. 1559. p. 1017 to 129.
Comentary on Romans 13. asserts the like, affirming, That many wicked men and
Heretics have been by the force of laws and punishements inflicted on them,
converted from their sins and errors, and by degrees brought to a c^^diall
love and embracing of Virtue and the true Religion; and that upon this reason,
Saint Augustine, who at first thought the Magistrate ought not to punish
Heretics; changed his opinion.

Solid Paraeus in his Heidelb. 1613. Col. 12 75, 1276, 1367, to 13^0.
Comentary on Romans 13. asserts and proves at large, That it is, and always
has been the chiefest care of godly Kings and Magistrates to abolish false
worships, take away Idols, and all instruments of Idolatry, and to preserve the
purity of Religion and Gods worship: That they ought not to suffer impurity in
Religion, or to give liberty to every one to teach and profess what Religion
he like, but only to defend, tolerate and establish the true Religion; and
that they ought, Edictis and poenis impedire Blasphemias, Haereses, Idola,
Sacrilegia, etc. by laws and punishments, to restrain Blasphemies, Heresies,
Idolatries, Sacriledges, Schisms, and the like: Which he there proves at
large, quoting the Laws of many Emperors to this purpose. And also de Jure
Principis circa Ecclesiastica.

The like in effect, if not in terminis, is asserted and proved at large by
Bullinger, Aretius, Bucer, Fayus, Brentius, Jacobus Grynaeus, Musculu^,
Oleuian, Piscator, Scultetus; and generally all Protestant Comentators on Romans
13. and Papists too, whose words for brevity I pretermit. To these I might add
Brentius, de Republ. administr. Capito, de Jure Magistratus in Religione.
Musculus Comment. in Psalm. 2. (cited by Master Beza, as concurring in opinion
with him;) Gerrardus, Loci Com. de Magistratu Polit. number. 5. and 33. who are of
the same opinion.

Benedictus Aretius, in his Historia Valentini Gentilis; asserts, That
Blasphemous obstinate Heretics may justly be put to death by the civil
Magistrate, as Gentilis was at Berne, and Problem. Locus, 59. de Scismatibus;
he asserts, That the chief Ringleaders of Schisms, and obstinate
Schismatics may lawfully be suppressed and punished by the civil Magistate,
as the Donatists were, and enforced to come to the public Ordinances by penal
laws; by which means many have been reformed and converted, as experience
manifests.

Phillip Melancton, not only in his forecited passages, but in his Council* de
Officio Magistratus in Ecclesiarum Reformatione, and Loci Com. de Sacramentorum
Numero; (where he makes the Magistracy a Sacrament, in some sense: Erit and
Magistratus hoc modo SACRAMENTUM, quia est certum genus bonorum o^erum, ornatum
verb Dei and promissionibus, Romans 13. even for the punishment of evil doers
in the Church:) Historia de Incendio Serveti, by a namelesse Author, Hartmannus
Springelius, de hodiernis Haeresibus and Haereticis: Joannis Wigandus, de
Exiliis Facinorosorum, and Pseudomartyrlis, Cl. G. Praet. de Regia potestate in
Ecclesia; Hadrianus Saravia, de Imperandi authoritate and Christiana
obedientia, l. 2. c. 52, 53, 54. Lu. Os^auder. Enchir. Contr. Com. Anabap. c.
9. assert the Magistrates coercive power to restrain and punish Idolaters,
Heretics, Schismatics with corporal censuresand death.

Learned ^n Misc^llan, cap. de Magistratu.
Zanchius affirms; Omnes fere ex nostratibus hujus sunt sententiae QUOD
HAERETICI SUNT GLADIO PUNIENDI; That in his time, almost all Divines were of
this opinion, That Heretics were to be punished with the sword, or put to
death: Of the same mind is learned Musculus Loc. Com. p. 1389. and Hugo
Etherianus de Haeresibus.

Contr. Holde^um, and Jac. Andr^^, p. 12^*
Theodor Beza writes; We teach, that christian Magistrates ought to take
special care, that the pure and sincere worship of God may flourish, and that
they should RESTRAIN AND PUNISH Heretics, CAPITALI QUOQUI PENA SI NECESSITAS
ET SCELERIS MAGNITUDO POSTU^ENT; and that with capital punishment, if the
necessity and the greatness of the crime so require, rather then the Church
should receive any damage: Which he elsewhere asserts at large, Operum Vol. 1.
p. 83, to 171. in a particular learned Treatise, De Haereticis a Civili
Magistratu puniendis.

So Junius in Defensione 2. de Trinitate adversus Samotenianos, Heidelb. 1591.
p. 40. Danaeus Ethicae Christianae, l. 2. c. 13. and elsewhere, are of the same
judgment: To whom I might add Voetius de Tolerantia Anti-Trintariorum: Becanus
Locorum Com. Locus 49. the Professors of Leyden, Censura Remonstr. c. 24. sect.
9. Spanhemius Diatribe Historica de Orig* Progressu, Sectis and Number.
Anabaptistarum: with many other foreign Divines, whose names I spare; all
reformed Churches in foreign parts concurring with me both in judgment and
practice too.

Neither do our own Authors dissent, but concur jointly with these our
Brethren; witness Bishop Defense of the Apology, ^ar^ ^. c. ^, dev^^ ^. p. ^17^
Jewel, and Master Reformed Catholic, Con^^. 2^. c. ^^4. and on (...).
Perkins himself (whose words I shall recite in the close of this Work) Doctor
Whitakers Adv. Campianum p. 234. Bishop Babington in his Comfortable Notes upon
Exodus, cap. 18. in his Works in Folio, London, 1622. p. 271, 272; 273. Doctor
Fulke in his Answer to the Rhemist Testament, on Apoc. sect. 6. where he writes
thus: Though we allow the PUNISHMENT OF HERETICS, both in our own and other
Countries (even with death) yet we abhor the cruelty of Antichrist and his
Church, which condemn the Christians, and murder them under the color of
Heretics: Doctor Robert Abbot, de Suprema Potestate Regia: Bishop Carlton of
Jurisdiction Regal, Episcopal and Papal: John Bridges of the Kings
Ecclesiastical Supremacy: Thomas Becon in his Page 73, 74, 75.
forecited works; and Doctor Willet in his Sixfold Comentary on the Epistle to
the Romans, cap. 13. Controversy 4, 5, 6. Where thus he writes.

Princes ought not only to take care about the affairs of the commonwealth,
and to be altogether careless of Religion, but even unto Ecclesiastical
affairs, and matters of Religion, they ought to extend their Princely care and
watchfulness. First, the Prince is the Minister of God for our good; but the
good of the Subject is not only civil and temporal, but spiritual
concerning Religion. Secondly, Even the Heathen did ascribe unto their Kings a
principal care even of Religion: Whereupon the Emperors of Rome were styled,
Pontifices Maximi, the high Priests or Prelates: and Aristotle writes, lib. 3.
politic. c. 10. that the Lacedemonian Kings had the command of War, and rei
divinae cultum exercuisse, and did exercise divine worship, unless they were
such Sacrifices as were necessarily to be done by a Priest; that therefore
which by a common consent of Nations was given unto Kings, ought not to be
denied unto christian Princes. Thirdly, the care of Religion otherwise
concerns the Prince, rather then private persons: these only are to wish
well unto it, and to accept of it; but the Prince ought to be an Agent, without
whose power nothing can be effected publicly for the maintenance of Religion.

Secondly, it belongs to the Imperial power to maintain true Religion, and
see that no confused mixture of Religions be admitted, for this is given as a
reason in the time of the Judges, why some followed Idolatry and strange
worship, because there was no King in Israel, but every one did that which was
good in his own eyes, Judges 17. 4. if there had been then a King, they should
not have been suffered every one to follow their own fancies.

Thirdly, Christian Princes are by their Laws and Edicts, to restrain all
Blasphemy, Idolatry, Heresy, Sacrilege, and such like, because Princes are to
be feared for evil works; their office is to restrain all evil works
whatsoever, such as these are; and they are appointed to procure the good of
their Subjects, and consequently to take out of the way all impediments which
may hinder their good, such as these are: The Romanists grant thus much, that
the Princes by their Laws should provide against Heresy, but they will
exclude the Prince from all judgment of Heresy, which must be in their opinion
determined only by the Church, etc. Which all our Divines and Protestant
Writers condemning, is a strong evidence to me, that Heretics are properly
triable only by the Judges at the Common Law, by way of Indictment, not by the
Clergy, as their Heresy is criminal and capital, as well as Romish Priests
and Jesuits.

This truth is very largely and learnedly asserted by Bishop Bilson, in his
True difference between Christian Subjection, and unchristian Rebellion; by
Bishop Davenant, De Judice and Norma Fidei, cap. 15. p. 71, to 78. and other of
the Episcopal Party, whom I pretermit: I shall conclude only with such who
have written since this Parliament: The first of them is learned Master Samuel
Rutherfurd, in his Due Right of Presbyteries, p. 352, to 370* where he
propounds this Question: Whether the Magistrate has power to compel persons
to a Church-profession? For clearing whereof, he lays down and proves these
five Conclusions.

I. The Magistrate may compel to the means and external acts of worship, and
to restrain them from external false worship of the false God, or of the true
God worshipped in a false way; he cannot compel to internal acts of faith,
love, and such like, as having no power over the conscience. II. There is one
consideration of a Heathen or Pagan Nation, which never received Christianity,
and the true Faith; and another consideration of a Nation Baptized and
professing Christ. III. A Magistrate may compel a Heathen Nation to the
negative reverence of Christ, in an indirect way, and that with the Sword,
though he cannot compel to the positive worshipping of him: If a Christian
Prince subdue a Pagan Nation, he cannot force them with the Sword to a positive
receiving of the Doctrine of the Gospel, but if it be a Nation expressly
blaspeming Christ, as the Nation of the Jews now do, he may compel them to
an abstinence from a professed blaspheming of Christ, because he is to use the
sword against Blaspemy. IIII. The compeling power of the Magistrate is
terminated upon external worship, as abstracted from either hypocrisy or
sincerity in worship. V. Though no man resist the Magistrate in a matter of
Religion, except in a hypocritical way, save only he who thinks he has
reason to resist, and is led by the judgment and indictment of conscience, yet
is not the judgment of conscience, but only the Word of God the rule of man's
obedience, or resisting in action, purposes and conversation.


These five conclusions he there proves at large; asserting, That gross
Idolaters, seducing Heretics and universal Apostales, may and ought to be put
to death; and he cites Beza, Junius, Becanus, Zanchius, Perkins, Danaeus,
Bullinger, and the Professors of Leydon, to be of this opinion, That
ringleading and seducing Heretics are to be punished to death; with many
Popish Authors who are of the self same judgment: See his Treatise against
toleration, and Master Obadia^ Sedgwicks Fast Sermon of the nature and danger
of Heresy.
Master Edwards in his Anti-Pologia, and Gangraenaes, asserts the like; with
our London, Essex, and Suffolk Ministers in their Petitions to both Houses, for
the punishing and suppressing of Heresies, Schisms Blasphemies. The
Independents in Master Bayties History of the Brownism and Iudependency.
New England it self, as Master Cotton, Master Hooker, and others, are of the
same judgment, and de facto banished Master Williams, Mistress Hutchinson, and
other Heretics and Schismatics, out of their Plantation: In few words, See
Master Loves animadversions, p. 21, ^2.
John Goodwin himself, in a Book entitled M. S. to A. S. p. ^0. Master Henry
Burton in his Vindication of the Churches commonly called Independent, p. 70.
and Master Jeremy Buroughs, of Heart-Divisions, p. 20, 21. (three grand
Independents) conclude against Master Dell, That the Magistrate may fight with,
and punish Superstition, Heresy, Schism, as well as with corruption of
manners; where there is no danger of fighting against God: And Mastor Buroughs
from Zech. 13. 3. grants, That in the times of the Gospel (of which this Text
is a Prophecy) all erroneous or idolatrous Prophets or Teachers, should be
brought before the civil Magistrate, to receive condign punishment, even to
the taking away of life, in some cases.

Finally, even the very Ringleaders of the Anabaptists themselves, who to
propagate their own errors without restraint, Bullinger, Contra Anabaptistas,
l. 1. 2. Sleidans Coment. l. 4, 5 10. Guy de Bres, contre les Anabaptists.
Cloppenburgirs Gangraena Anabaptistica. Conradi Heresbachii Historia
Anabaptistica, una cum notis Lamberti Hor trensi^ Spanhe mii Diatribe. Doctor
Featly his Dippers dipped, Master Robert Bailie his Anabapt. chapter 1, 2, 3. Joannis
Witlingius de Anabaptistis.
first cried do^me the Magistrates coercive power in matters of Faith,
asserting, That they ought not by their Laws and Edicts, to compel men to
come to the public meetings, or punish any man with corpopall or capital
punishments for any error or heresy: and at last denied Magistracy it self:
Did afterward, when they got the power into their own hands, not only make
and proclaim themselves Magistrates and Kings, exercising more barbarous,
bloody tyrannies, then the worst of Tyrants ever did; but professedly asserted
and maintained, That all those who would not be Rebaptized, and embrace their
fanatic opinions, were to be slain and put to death as wicked men and
Infidels, and their Lands and Goods to be confiscated to themselves, the only
Saints; and accordingly they murdered and put to death many of their own
Members, and thousands of others in Suaben, Munster, and other parts of
Germany, violently seizing on their Lands, Castles, Houses, Goods, till they
were themselves suppressed and dissipated by the sword, and above an hundred
thousand of them slain and executed in sundry places of Germany, as the
Marginall Authors record at large: Therefore their own pactice, See Master
Edwards Gangraenaes, and Master Bailies Anabaptisme, c. 2, 3, 4.
Doctrine subverts this their pretended Anti-Magistraticall position: It did so
heretofore in Germany, and dot^ so already even in See Master Bailies Disswa
sive from the Errors of the times, p. 31, 32 48, 49, 50* 124 to 130, 13^, etc.
New and Old England, where they have any power: and I pray God we feel not as
sad effects and symptoms hereof ere long at home, as ever they did in Germany.

All these Authorities will, I hope, overballance Master Dels opinion and
mis-quotations to the contrary.

Having fully answered and totally routed all Master Dels forces, against the
coercive power of the civil Christian Magistrate, in case of Heresy, Schism,
Blasphemy* I shall next fall upon a few Reserves of some of his Saints in the
Army, and of their Champion Master John Goodwin, which I shall quickly scatter,
and then conclude.

The twelfth Objection, made by some Sectaries in the Army, against the
Magistates punishment of Blasphemy, is thus expressed in a Letter written by a
godly Minister, June 3. 1646. who was then in the Army. Master Edwards his
third part of the Gangraena p. 46.
They would not have the old Military orders, set forth by the Earl of Essex,
observed, That BLASPEMERS should be boared through the Tongue. The Object. 12.
argument that they urged was, That sins which are directly against God,
should be punished by God: Upon which ground, they hold, that Heresy,
Atheism, etc. should not be punished by the Magistrate, because they are
sins directly against God, etc.

To this I shall answer, first, that if this ground were true, then God, Answer.
the Fountain of Justice, being as able to punish sins directly against
himself, as well under the Law as Gospel, would not have in positive terms,
commanded such who were guilty of open Deuteronomy. 13. Levit. 24. 11. to 17.
Blasphemy and Idolatry, (being sins directly against him) to be stoned and
put to death without any mercy, as I have proved he did; and those godly
Magistrates and Princes, wsto punished Idolaters with death under the Law, had
been Murderers and Delinquents: This argument therefore which taxes God
himself, and his precepts of direct injustice under the Law, must be rejected
by the Objectors as blasphemous: or else they must make it appear by
Scripture, that though these sins under the Law were by Gods own command to
be punished with death by the civil Magistrate and people, yet now under the
Gospel he has resumed the power of punishing them only to himself, and
deprived Christian Magistrates of it, which they can never do. Secondly, By
this reason, Magistrates must not punish direct Atheists, openly professing
there is no God, nor such Heretics who deny the Trinity, or the Deity of
Christ and the holy Ghost, nor such as deny there is any Heaven or Hell; since
these sin directly against God himself. O the piety of Master Dels anointed
faithful Saints! is this their zeal, their piety, their sanctity? Thirdly,
they must by this reason punish no sin at all, no not Rebellion, Murder,
Treason, Sorcery, Adultery, for these sins are Psalm. 51. 4.
directly committed against God, who prohibits, and whose Romans 4 15. c. 3. 20.
^. 15. ^3. c. 7. 7, to ^5. 1 Cor. 15. ^^.
prohibition makes them sins, but sins only indirectly against men, as
they are Gods creatures, and bear his image. Fourthly, if this paradox be
true, then by the self same reason, God himself is not to punish any sin
committed imediatly against men, as Murder, Adultery, etc. nor may God nor man
punish sins committed by beastly men with Beasts, because not directly
committed against God or man, in the Objectors sense; and then what becomes of
the truth of Heb. 13. 4. Revel. 21. 8. cap. 22. 15. Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge, and they shall have their Portion in the Lake which burns
with fire and Erimstone: And of Levit. 18. 23. cap. 20. 15, 16. If a man lie
with a Beast, he shall be surely put to death, and he shall slay the Beast: And
if a woman approach unto any Beast, and lie down thereto, thou shall kill the
woman and the Beast, they shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be
upon them. Fifthly, the Magistrates Romans 13. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
are but Gods Ministers, Avengers, Deputies, to execute wrath Exodus 22. 28
Psalm. 82. 1. 6
upon all evil doers: whence in Scripture they are called 2. Chron. 9. 8 Psalm.
138.
Gods, said to 2 Chro. 19. 6
sit on Gods Throne, and to judge for the Lord: Therefore certainly they may
and ought to punish all sins directly acted against God, whose Deputies they
are, rather and more severely then any other; as Judges and Kings Vicegerents
punish all high Treasons or Offenses (not the King alone in person) committed
directly against the King himself, and that with greater care then any
offenses against other persons: and Councels of War punish offenses against
the General himself, more exemplarily then against inferior Officers; which if
this hold good, they could not intermeddle with. We read, John 19. 12. 13. That
when Pontius Pilate would have released our Savior Christ; the Jews cried out
saying; if thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend; whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caesar. When Pilate therefore heard that
saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down on the Judgment Seat, and
delivered him ever to the chief Priests to be crucified, who said, we have no
King but Caesar: Certainly I may much more truly say, that those Princes,
Judges, Magistrates, who are Gods Deputies, and sit upon his Throne of
judgment, are no friends at all to God, and ^ettul. Apolog. p. 673.
less zealous for him then Pilate was for Caesar; if they do not with all
care and zeal punish such Atheists, Blasphemers, Heretics, most severely, who
sin immediately against that God, whose very Vicegerents and Avengers they
are, and it shall be more intolerable for them at the day of judgment, then for
any Judge or Viceroy, who wilfully refuses to punish high Treason against his
earthly Sovereign, which is no less then high Treason in himself. I shall
say no more to this Objection, but that it is fitter for Beasts, then rational
men; for incarnate Devils, Atheists, then spiritual Saints; for God-dammee
Cavaliers, then Parliament-Troopers, who deserve to be boared through the
Tongue, or rather to have their Tongues cut out, for such blasphemous
arguments, in favor of blasphemy.

The thirteenth Objection is this, A Reply of ^ two of the Brethren to A. S. p.
58 and Master Goodwins Thormachia.
Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Object. 13.
Truth being a special gift of God, and man not capable of it (nor of any
divine supernatural truth, not revealed by the very light of nature;) it is
very unreasonable that the want of it, being a judgment upon a man from God,
and which withal no way proves hurtful unto others (at lest not necessarily
or unavoydably hurtful) that it should expose him to further misery and
punishment from among men; a reasonable man will think it very hard and
unreasonable to punish a man for not doing that, which is only proper and in
the power of God alone to do.

I answer, that this is one of John Goodwins Atheistical reasons against Answ.
the Magistrates jurisdiction to punish Heretics, Schismatics,
Antitrinitarians, or Denyers of the Deity of Christ and the holy Ghost, with
corporal and capital punishments, borrowed from Aug Contr. Lit. Petil. l. 2.
Petilian the Donatist, warranted by no Text at all, and directly contrary to
the whole current of Scripture, as I shall prove by these instances. First, if
this argument holds good, then no man can in any reason be punished or damned
either for original sin, or unbelief, or want of repentance, faith, or any
other saving grace, because it it not in man's own power, industry or seeking
to avoid these sins, or procure these saving graces, but only in the Ephesians.
2. 8. 2 Tum 2. 25. Phil. 2. 13.
power of God to work them; yet God punishes these unavoydable sins, and want
of these spiritual graces, with eternal death. Secondly, the want of the grace
of God hardens men's hearts, Romans 3. 10, to 19. Genesis 20. 9.
and the defect of his fear before their eyes (which is not in their power, but
Gods) is one principal cause, why men commit or fall into any capital sins,
as Treason, Murder, and the like, as well as commit and fall into Heresy,
Schism, Blasphemy, Atheism, Idolatry; But the want of Gods grace or fear to
prevent Treason or Murder, will not excuse Traitors, Murderers, or other
Malefactors from the Gallows; nor Children, nor Servants from their Parents
and Masters due correction: therefore not Heretics, Idolaters, Blasphemers,
Atheists, Schismatics from due punishments. Thirdly, admit it would be hard
and very unreasonable for a Christian Magistrate to punish any Heathen who
never enjoyed the means of Christianity, nor professed the Christian Religion,
for not believing in Christ or the holy Ghost, or for contradicting any truths
revealed only by the light of Scripture not nature; since as many as have
sinned without the written Law, shall be judged without the written Law, only
for breach of the Law of nature, as See Pe^e Ma^^^^, Paraus, Soto, Pererius,
Willet, Marlo^^^ in Romans ^.
Divines determine from Romans 2. 12, to 17. Yet since Christians who profess
Christianity have the light of the Scripture to direct them, which by diligent
reading, hearing, prayer, meditating, conference, (to which they are obliged,
and which lies in their own power) they may fully understand, so far as to
discern between Heresy, Error, Blasphemy, and the Truth it self: it is as
great reason, justice, that the Christian Magistrate should punish them with
corporal (and in some cases with capital) punishments, as God with eternal,
for broaching damnable Heresies, Errors, Blasphemies and Schismatic opinions
against the written Word, or, as to punish Heathens or Christians for any
offense committed by them merely against the Law of nature, which is nothing so
clear and perspicuous to Heathens, as 2 Pet. 1. 19. Psalm. 119. 105 S^^ Willet
on^ Romans 2. qu. 28 ^0 ^^.
the Scripture is or may be unto Christians. Fourthly, admit the Objection
solid, yet it is nothing to purpose; since the Magistrate never punishes any
man for his mere ignorance or unbelief, as is pretended (though
Ecclesiastical Officers do by See the late Ordinances for Suspention from the
Sacrament.
suspention from the Sacrament, and I think Master Goodwin too, against this
very argument, which holds as well in Ecclesiastical as Secular punishments)
but only for actual maintaining or venting damnable ^ Pet. ^. 1.
Hetesies, Errors, Blasphemies and Schismatic practices, after admonitions
and other means used to reclaim them: Therefore the Objector might well have
kept this rover in his quiver, which comes not ^eer the mark. Fifthly, Heresies,
Blasphemies, Errors, Schisms, are exceeding prejudicial to others, and Gods
eternal punishing of them hereafter, is no supersedeas to the Magistrates
censures of them here, as I have formerly evidenced. Therefore this Argument is
both false and idle.

The fourteenth Objection is this; That A Reply of two of the Brethren to A. S.
^. 59* 60.
power is very dangerous for a Object. 14.
Magistrate to own; in the exercise whereof, he may very easily (and commonly
does) run a hazard (at lest) of fighting against God, or of plucking up that
which he has planted, or of pulling down that which God has built up: But
such is that power of punishing Heresies, Scismes, Blasphemies, etc. which A.
S. cum multis aliis, are ready to fasten upon him; Ergo. The proposition is too
much every man's sense and consent, to be A. S. his dissent: The Assumption he
proves, because those practices in Religion which the Magistrate is borne in
hand, by those whose eyes be sees with in such cases, to be schismatic,
erroneous and contrary unto God, may very possibly be the ways and truths of
God, because Synods, Parliaments and Magistrates formerly have mistaken in this
kind, and may still mistake.

I answer, first, that the proposition is not only without, but against Answ.
Scripture, and might have been made against the Magistrates and peoples
punishing Idolatry, Blasphemy, with other e^rots under the Law, as well as
under the Gospel. Secondly, it utterly subverts all Magistracy whatsoever; for
as a Magistrate may possibly fight and sin against God through ^ Exodus 23. 2,
^. Amos 5. 7. c. 6. 12. Heb. 1 ^ Eccles. 3. 16*
error and mistake, in punishing Heresy, Schism, Blasphemy, etc. so likewise
he may through ignorance, misinformation, bribes, affection, fear, hatred,
Superiors commands, and the like, wrest Judgment, and judge, punish men
unjustly, not only criminally or civilly, but capitally too, and so draw upon
him the guilt of Deuteronomy. 27. 25. Psalm. 10. 8. and 94. 21.
innocent blood: Ergo, it is unlawful for any man to be a Magistrate or Judge
between man and man, much more to be a King, whose exercise of his supreme
authority is usually liable to more dangerous sins, corruptions, manifold
temptations, abuses and dangers of fighting against God, then other inferior
Officers. Secondly, this reason militates against all other Callings and
Professions whatever, which have their proper sins, temptations that attend
them; but especially against the Ministry, who are far more apt to ^ Cor. 2.
17. Acts 20. 29, 30 2 Pet. 2. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 9. to the end.
broach Errors, Heresies, Schisms, to fight against God and his Truth, then
Magistrates, as the Objector has done for many years together, both in the
Press and Pulpit: Therefore this Cretensis (if he credit his own argument)
must henceforth give over his preaching, writing, conventicling, for fear of
fighting every day more and more against God, his Truth, People; since like 2 Timothy 3. 13.
evil men and seducers, he grow every day worse and worse, more heretical and
erroneous, and at last is like to turn either Atheist or nothing. Thirdly, it
fights against the performance of all holy duties, there being a great deal of
danger in performing them; our prayec^s Psalm. 109 7. Prove. 28. 9.
may be turned into sin, the Word it self may be the 2 Cor. 2. ^^, 16. Joh.
12. 48
savor of death unto us, and condemn us at the last; yea, we may 1 Cor. 11.
29 34.
eat and drink our own damnation at the Lords own Table, as many do: Ergo,
by Master Goodwins Argument, we must abandon all holy duties, in regard there
are such dangers in them to our souls; and then farewell all Religion and the
Scriptures too, which 2 Pet. 3. 16.
many wrest to their own confusion. Fourthly, the danger of any lawful power
or calling, must not take away nor suspend the lawful use thereof; and this
danger in the Magistrates calling must make him more cautious in doubtful
cases of Heresy, Blasphemy, Error, Schism, but not more negligent or less
zealous in such as are clear and evident to his conscience, by the light of
Scripture and consent of all Ages, Churches. Fifthly, for his assumption, it
holds only in doubtful cases, not in plain and apparent, as most cases of
Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, gros^e Error and Schism are, which the
Magistrate may boldly proceed to punish without scruple: and in doubtful
cases, the Magistrate is to resolve his own conscience fully the best he may,
and to proceed with more deliberation, mildness; and if at last he be throwly
convinced, that what the Delinquents deem to be truth, and agreeable to the
Word, be apparent Heresy, Error, Idolatry, Schism, his own conscience then,
not theirs, must be his rule to proceed by; neither must he wound his own
conscience, nor betray his liberty, trust, to spare them or their Heresies,
Errors, Schisms, Blasphemies, Idolatries, no more then he may spare Traitors,
Murderers, Thieves, Sorcerers, who deem themselves innocent, o^ pretend
conscience to justify their crimes: But I have already refuted this Argument,
more largely in my Answer to former Objections, I therefore pass to the next.
Object. 15.


The fifteenth Objection is this; A Reply of two of the Brethren to A. S. p. 6^.
That power which was never attributed to any Christian Magistrate, by any
Christian, but only by those who had very good assurance, that it should be
used fer them and on their side, is not like to be a power conferred on them by
divine right, or by God, because it is no ways credible, that within the
compass of so many Ages, as are by gone, no one man of that conscientious
generation of Saints, which has been wont so frequently to deny it self, even
unto death, should acknowledge such a power in the civil Magistrate, as did by
divine right belong unto him, only because such an acknowledgment was like to
make against himself: But that coercive power in matters of Religion for the
suppressing of Errors, Schisms, Heresies, etc. was never attributed to the
civil Magistrate by any Christian, but only by those who were very confident,
that it would be used for their turns, and effect their desires: Ergo, he
ought not to claim it.

To this I answer: first, that this very Argument is built upon mere humane
Answ.
reason, without any shadow of Scripture to warrant it, and is a mere surmise
of a crazy atheistical brain, to elude, yea contradict direct Texts of
Scripture; by which kind of argumentation both the Scripture and Deity it self
may be subverted by luxuriant wits. Secondly, this Arguer plays the hypocrite
against his own judgment and conscience tacitly confessing, that if the
civell Magistrote would be for him, to set up Independency, and not against
him, he would plead as hotly for his authority and coercive power, as any
Presbyterian; but because he conceives the Parliament and Magistra^es are
against his way, therefore he pleads against their coercive power to suppress
it, as the Coutr. Lit. Petil. lib. 2.
Donatists did of old upon this very ground, who made use of Julian the
Apostates Edicts against the orthodox Christians, to restrain them, but
condemned Constantines Laws to restrain themselves: as is evident by St
Augustines forecited passages; yea, our Independents at first seemingly pleaded
for the Parliaments and civil Magistrates coercive power, whiles they had any
hopes to make use thereof See Master Edwards his Antipologias, p. 157, 158.
for the advancement of their own Party, as the Voetius select. Disp. de
Quaest. In quibus sit potestas Eccles. These. 1. 4. and 5. Vedelius de Episcopam
Constantin. Mat. p. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Arminians did in Holland, till the States declared against them, and then they
retracted what they had written in defense of their coercive, corrective power,
and writ expressly against it: Thus the g Independents and Anabaptists do now:
God defend us from such gross Hypocrites and Turn-coots as this changling
Objector, who will be sure to strike in, and make use of the prevailing Party,
if he conveniently may. Thirdly, Thieves, Wolves, Foxes, yea all kind of
hurtful men and creatures, might make the very self same argument as this
Objector does: no Thieves, but only true men who thought the Judges sure on
their party, did ever hold it lawful for Judges to condemn and hang men for
stealing a little money or goods to supply their wants; Ergo, no Judge ought to
claim or execute such a power: No ^ See Master Bailie^ Disswasive from the
errors of the Tim. 5, c. 6. p. 124, ^^ 150.
Wolf or Fox did ever hold it lawful for any Shepherd to hunt, take or kill
them, for killing and devouring their Lambs or Sheep, because they did it by an
instinct of nature, according to their natural genious, only to fill their
bellies, and satissie hunger, but only Shepherds and Sheepmasters; Ergo, it is
unlawful for any to hunt, take or kill them: No Adulterer, Whoremaster or
Drunkard will aver; that it is lawful for the Magistrate to punish them for
Adultery, Whoredom or Drunkenness, because they committed them only to
satisfy their beloved Lusts, and please their carnal appetites; but only
chaste and sober men: Ergo, it is not lawful for the Christian Magistrate to
restrain and punish Whoremasters, Adulterers, Drunkards for these Sins,
Vices, lusts: Certainly such an Argument would quite subvert all civil
punishments whatsoever, for Vnusquisque sui ipsius iniquus Index, especially
carnal men in all cases which concern their best beloved sins. And thus
much in answer to his Major. Fourchly, for his Minor, it is a most arrogant,
false assertion, wherein the Objector (who never read one quarter of all Books
written of the Magistrates power, much less the hearts and secret thoughts of
every conscientious Christian that ever lived under the power of Christian
Magistrates) dares confidently aver, That a coercive power in Magistrates was
never acknowledged by any Christian whatsoever, but only those who were well
assured it would be used for their turn. When this pretending Omniscience can
demonstrate this over-bold assertion to be true, we may credit his Argument,
till then, we must reject both him and his argument as false and groundless.
Fifthly, Mat. 22, 21. c. 10. 18, 19.
Christ himself, together with his Apostles, Romans 13. 1, to 6. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
Tit. 3. 1. i 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 10. 11, 12.
Paul and i Peter, acknowledged such a coercive power in the civil Magistrate,
as I have proved, though they believed it would be used against themselves and
their followets, as it was: the like did Augustine, with sundry other Authors
forecited, and all Christian Churches at this very day; yea, Cyprian, Luther,
Melancton, Zuinglius, and others, who lived in the times of persecution, did
the like, as I have formerly proved: therefore the contrary groundless
assertion of this over-confident Arguer, is most false, impious, and his
Argument most infirm which is grounded principally upon it.

The sixteenth Objection is this; A Reply, etc p. 61.
That power which in the exercise of it, Object. 16.
directly tends to prevent, hinder or suppress the growth or increase of the
light of the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ in a Church or STATE, and the
reformation of such things either in Doctrine or Discipline, as are
unwarrantable therein; is not (QVESTIONLES) of any divine Right or Institution:
If A. S. deny this proposition, at the peril of his modesty and reputation be
it: But such a power in the civil Magistrate for suppressing Errors, Schisms,
Heresies, etc. in Religion, directly tends to all the mischief and
inconvenience in the world: Ergo. The evidence of the assumption is this, When
men are obnoxious to the stroke of the civil power, and in danger of suffering
deeply from the Magistrate for any thing they shall hold or practice in
Religion contrary unto him; it must needs be a great temptation and
discouragement upon them from searching and enquiring into the Scriptures,
after a more exact knowledge of the good and holy, and perfect will of God in
things, because in case he should discover any thing contrary to what the
Magistrate professes, he must run the bazard either of withholding the Truth
he so discerned, in unrighteousness, and so of having both God and his own
conscience his enemy; or else of having his bones broken by the iron red of the
civil Magistrate, for making profession of any thing contrary to that he
professes.

To this I answer, first, that this Argument, as the former, is grounded Answ.
upon false carnal reasonings and principles, warranted by no Scripture, to
contradict the coercive power of Magistrates, warranted by express Scriptures.
Secondly, the proposition may very well be denied by A. S. or any other,
without the peril of his modesty or reputation (the utmost hazard he shall
incur by the Objectors confession) I am certain without any danger to his
soul or conscience; else we must deny the very office and exercise of Kingly,
and all other Supreme Civil or Ecclesiastical powers (here secretly struck
at) because in the abused exercise thereof they usually tend, not only to
prevent, hinder, suppress the growth and increase of the knowledge of God and
Jesus Christ in a Church and State, with the reformation of such things in
Doctrine or Discipline as are unwarrantable therein; yea, commonly degenerate
into oppression, tyranny, cruelty and injustice to boot, as is evident by Psalm.
2. 2, etc. Acts 4. 25, to 30. Matthew. 10. 17, to 29. cap. 24. 9, 10. and the
Histories of all Ages: Upon which ground the Sea Melancton, Loc. Communes,
Arctius Problemata, Tit. de Magistratu civili Lucas Osiander Enchirid Cont. cum
Anabaptistis, c 9.
Anabaptists and some of our new Saints of their spawning, condemn all
Monarchy and Magistracy (as the Objectors cunningly do.) Thirdly, I answer,
that the abuse of any lawful power or institution, does not nullify the power
or institution it self, if divine or necessary (as the Magistrates is) nor the
lawful exercise thereof: therefore this accidental abuse of the Magistrates
coercive power (the sin and fault of the persons that manage it only, not of
the power it self) cannot invalid or nullify the exercise of it, no more then
the abuse of preaching and arguing abrogate their lawful use; nor the common
abuse of eating and drinking, to surfeting and drunkenness, or of apparel to
pride, make the things themselves, or the right use of them, evil. Fourthly,
the assumption is false, contrary to express Scriptures, as Isa. 49. 23. 2 Timothy 2. 1, 2. yea the punishment of real Heresies, Errors, Schisms,
Blasphemies (the only thing in dispute) by godly Christian Magistrates, can
never involve them in the objected danger, and tends only to prevent the
Objectors mischiefs, and to the remotion, suppression of those mists of
Heresy, Error, Blasphemy, which would eclipse the light, the knowledge of God
and Jesus Christ in Church, State, and helps to reform things amiss in
Doctrine and Discipline, as experience with all Ecclesiastical Histories, and
the Chronicles of the good Kings of Judah and Israel manifest. Therefore this
Objection must needs be exploded as most false and dangerous by all good men.
Fifthly, fear of punishing Heretics, Schismatics, false Teachers and
Blasphemers, will never retard nor discourage any Orthodox Christian from
searching and enquiring into the Scriptures, after more exact knowledge of the
good and perfect will of God, as is falsely alleged; but rather instigate them
to such a search: and if any accidently by such fear of punishment be deterred
from such an enquiry into the Scriptures, and induced to withold the truth in
unrighteousness, it is their own sin, not the Magistrates, nor the fault of
his coercive power rightly managed, yea no true Saints of God, but only
Hypocrites, and such false Saints as the Objectors are, will be deterred from
searching the Scriptures, and induced to with hold the truth in
unrighteousness by any humane power whatsoever, as is evident by the example
of the Apostles, Acts 4. and 5. of the three Children and Daniel, Dan. 3. and
6. of Paul himself, Acts 20. 23, 24. cap. 21. 11, 12, 13, 14. and by Cel. 1.
27, 28, 29. Hebr. 10. 32, 33, 34. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. This Argument therefore must
vanish into nothing before these Scriptures, and shame the Author of it.

The seventeenth Objection is of the same stamp, A Reply, etc p. 62.
That power which in Object. 17.
the use of it plainly and undoubtedly tends to the gratification of Satan, of
carnal and profane men, is not certainly derived from God: But that power in
matters of Religion to crush Heresies, Schisms, etc. which A. S. and many
others pinned upon the Magistrates sleeve, is a power of this tendency and
importance in the use of it: Ergo, The latter proposition shines clear enough
with its own light; first, because a very great part of those who are like to
suffer by it, are men of good conscience, and men truly fearing God; it not
being likely, that ordinarily men of loose or no conscience should delight to
swim against the streams either of greatness or plurality in matters of
Religion: therefore it cannot but be conceived a matter of solemn gratification
to Satan, who is a Murderer and bloody Enemy to the Saints, to see them
disgraced, crushed, etc. Secondly, because it is the impatient and important
desire of all ignorant, loose, luckewarme and carnal professors, to have all
religions (as they call them) all ways, sects, opinions and practices in
Religion, wholly silenced, suppressed and abolished where they live, except
only that one way and practice which shall be authorized and practiced by the
State.

I answer, first, that the Minor is both false and absurd: for the use of Answ.
Magistrates legislative, coercive and punitative power, tends to no such o 2
Pet. 3. 16.
ends as is objected, but directly to the contrary; and if any apply it to such
ends, it is merely the abuse, not use thereof; and the abuse of this lawful
necessary power must not abolish nor blemish its lawful use, no more then the
abuse of the very Scriptures, of Preaching, Food, or Ecclesiastical censures,
nullify their use. Secondly, Heretics, Blasphemers or obstinate Schismatics,
being the Hence Sa^u^
Firstborn of the Devil, and Gal. 5. 19, 20: Mat. 15. 19 Rom 16. 17, 18. 2
Pet. 2. 1 to the end.
Heresy, John told an Heretic, Sci^ te esse prim^renitum D^abel, Eusebius. Eccl.
Hist.
Blasphemy, Schism, works of the flesh, directly contrary to the Spirit and
Word of God; it is far more probable, that the not using this power of the
Magistrate to punish them, will far more gratify Satan and profane carnal
men, then the exercise of it. Thirdly, all the godly Christian Emperors,
Kings, States, Ecclesiastical Historians, Councils and Authors forecited, who
have enacted Laws against Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and have
pleaded for the use, necessity of this power, have been quite contrary minded;
yea, the very Word and Spirit of God, and God himself (who has given them
such a power in express terms in the Old Testament and New,) contradict this
Anarchicall, if not Atheistical proposition, which has neither Scripture nor
reason to back it, but the Objectors own bare assertion, point blank against
Scripture, and the concurrent suffrages of all Ages, Fourthly, I beseech you
observe the impudency of these Objectors, who deem themselves the only Saints,
what Blasphemies they dare to vent in print, That the Magistrates power to
crush Heresies, Schisms, Blasphemies, in the use of it, plainly and palpably
tends to the gratification of Satan, and carnal and profane men; and those
that are like to suffer by it, are men OF GOOD CONSCIENCE AND TRULY FEARING
GOD: Ergo, Heretics, Schismatics and Blasphemers, in their judgment, are men
of good conscience, truly fearing God; and those godly Christian Magistrates,
who out of good conscience and true fear of God, shall restrain or punish
them for their Heresies, Blasphemies, Schisms (by the rule of contraries) are
men of no conscience, nor truly fearing God, but profane, carnal men, yea
ignorant, loose, lukewarm and carnal professors, as he styles them; and none
are pleased with their punishment but Satan, and such men as these. This is
New-light indeed, deserving to be hung up at Tyburne by the hands of the
Hangman, and such absurd Blasphemy as becomes none but Tyburne-Saints. Fifthly,
I answer, that it has been the importunate desire of the true Saints and
Ministers of God in all Ages (not of ignorant, loose, lukewarm and carnal
Professors, as is falsely pretended without proof or evidence) to have all
Religions, Ways, Sects, Opinions and practices in Religion suppressed,
excepting that one true way and practice which the Scripture warrants, and the
Christian States wherein they live, upon good grounds approve, as I have
plentifully evidenced in the premises, and is manifest by all Historians, by
the proceedings and Books written against Heretics and Schismatics, in all
Ages; by the late Petition of thousands of godly People and Ministers to the
Parliament, and both Houses Answers thereunto: Therefore this bare, sottish,
false assertion to the contrary deserves no other answer, but contempt, and the
Objectors merit no other character for it then that of Titus 1. 12, 13. The
Cretians are (...) L^ars, evil Beasts: This witness is true.

The eighteenth Objection is this; A Reply of two of the Brethren to A. S. p.
62, 63
That power which in the use of it directly Object. 1^.
tends to defile and pollute the consciences of men, either by destroying the
softness, tenderness or ingenuity of them, or by disturbing the lawful peace
or comfort of them, or by bo^^, is a power from beneath, not from above: But
such is the coercive power in matters of Religion, to crush Schisms, Heresies,
etc. wherewith A. S. would feign befriend himself in the civil Magistrate:
Ergo. The truth of the Assumption appears in this consideration; when the
conscience of a man has once broke the bounds and tie of its own light, and
prosti^u^ed it self to the desires and lusts of men, against the At one of the
Objectors Mr J. O. his Conscience has often time^ done ^n his whee^ing from one
side and opinion to mother so often.
grain of its own judgment and reclamation (whereunto it is secretly tempted
and urged) when a man is threatened deep, in case he shall not comply with the
State in their Religion, his judgment and con^cience being wholly averse to it,
one of these great evils commonly befalls him: First, God takes no pleasure in
such a conscience; afterward, he withdraws himself from it, and leaves it
unto it self; whereupon it falls upon a course of hardening it self; and by
degrees contracts a boldness^, impudence and desperatnesse in sinning.
Secondly, by reflecting on what it has done in such a ^^se, and c^sting it up
between God and it self, how grievous a sin it is to trample upon its own
light, upon any consideration whatsoever, it brings it self into grievous
Ago^^es of Perplexities and Horror, out of which it never recovers afterward.

To this I answer, first, that this Argument is founded merely upon false Answ.
and carnal reason, without and against all Scripture, being of the same
strain as the former. Secondly, the Assumption is a gross falsehood, proved
neither by Scripture, nor Historical Examples, nor Experience, but asserted
only by the Objectors. Thirdly, it confounds the abuse of the Magistrates
coercive power, with the lawful use thereof (as the two former Arguments did)
and makes the abuse to nullify the use. Fourthly, it makes a casual
contingent effect of the use of this coervive power, (which seldom happens, and
that through the parties own default who is restrained, punished or only
frighted thereby) to abolish the ordinary good use and effect thereof, to wit,
the real conversion and reformation of Heretics, Schismatics and Blasphemers
(not the pollution of their consciences, a mere contingent not proper effect;)
which effect I have proved at large, it usually produces, and was ordained
purposely to produce, by Gods own institution. Fifthly, the two objected
inconveniences arising from the use of this coercive power, are produced very
rarely, and that in few or none; but the contrary effect ordinarily in many;
yea, I dare assert it, to be a less sin to the party punished, far less
dishonor to God, and less mischief to a Christian Church or State, for
Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers to embrace the true Religion and worship
of God, established by the State, to repair to, and join with our Assemblies in
all public Ordinances, contrary to the grain of his own seduced judgment,
erroneous inclination, then to persevere in damnable Heresies, Schisms,
Blasphemies, which his erroneous conscience apprehends to be agreeable to the
Truth: Therefore this pretended mischief, must vanish into smoke, and can no
ways impeach the use of the Magistrates coercive power. Sixthly, I retort, that
the first of these two pretended effects, not usually appearing in any one
restrained Heretic, Schismatic or Blasphemer, is experimentally verified in
the highest degree in many of the Objectors unrestrained, unpunished Saints,
faithful and anointed spiritual ones, whom they so much exalt in a
superlative manner, for their transcendent holiness; their very impunity for
three years space, has caused God so far to withdraw himself from their
formerly tender consciences, and to leave them so far unto themselves (as he
did the Circumcellioes among the ancient Donatists) that they have many of them
by degrees contracted such a See Master Edwards his Gangraenaes, especially the
third part. Master Bailies Anabaptisme and Disswasive
boldness, impudence and desperatenesse-in sinning, inventing most damable,
execrable horrid Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Tenets, concerning the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, and their respective Deity, Unity; the sacred Scriptures,
all Gods Ordinances almost, the immortality of the soul, the salva^ion of all
men and devils, and the like; committed such horrid outrages, maintained the
lawfulness of such prodigious sins, practices, and printed such scurrilous,
malicious, railing, slanderous Libels, against both Houses of Parliament, the
Assembly, Scots, our Religion, Worship, Directory, Minister, Churches,
Ordinances, Laws, and persons of greatest eminency and desert, as all the Ages
from Adam till 1642. are unable to paralle^; as Master Edwards has largely
demonstrated in his Gangraenaes beyond contradiction: All which such a severe
execution of our Laws against Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, Sectaries,
Anabaptists, would have prevented and crushed in the shell; from which I may
justly conclude, That God will take no more pleasure in them or their
consciences; and if he ever give them grace to reflect upon these Enormities,
their Heresies, Blasphemies, Schisms, it will bring them into such grievous
agonies of perplexity and horror, as (I doubt) they will never recover out of
them afterward; and for which they are already for ever lost in the opinions of
all truly pious and conscientious Christians, who have been made acquainted
with these their exorbitances. And thus (I trust) I have unanswerably answered
those Arguments which the Author of A Reply of two of Page 63.
the Brethren to A. S. (to wit, John Good^ in) challenges A. S. to answer
solidly and thologue-like, BY REASON (he adds not Scripture, which he
excludes) not by vote, which he professes himself unable to answer, and to
make him separate in judgment from A. S. and others in the point in hand.

There is one grand Objection more, much insisted on in former times Object. ^9.
by Donatists and Mont fortius Re^utat eorum ^^ae pro persecut. dici so^ent:
Beza de ^^retitia a. M^gistratu ^^^^ndis: pellarmine ^ Laici^, l. 3. d^ 2.
Anabaptists; and that is from the 1 Cor. 11. 19. For there must be also
Heresies (or Sects) among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest among you. Whence they argue thus; That which must needs be, that they
who are approved may be made manifest, may not, nor ought not to be punished
nor suppressed by the civil Magistrate: But such are Heresies and Sects, as
this Text defines. Therefore they are not to be punished nor suppressed by the
civil Magistrate.

I answer, first, that the proposition is merely false in sundry particulars:
I. There is no absolute necessity that there should be Heresies and Sects in
the Church of God, nor yet in this or that particular or National c. 2* Answ.
Church; but it is merely contingent, through Gods permission, Satan's malice,
Men's pravity, pride and corruption, as Epiphantus, Augustine, Iren^us, Alfonsus
^ Cast^^, and others, adv. H^reses.
Authors who have written of Heresies, and Comentators on this Text accord. II.
This Text speaks not properly of Heresies, but rather of Divisions and Sects;
as is clear by comparing it with the next preceding words; I hear there be
Divisions (or SCHISMS) among you, and I partly believe it: for there must be
also Sects (as the margin of our new Translation and others render it) among
you (not in every Church in every Age) that those who are approved, may be made
manifest among you; and with chap. 1. v. 10, to 17. Now there may be Schisms
without Heresies, properly so called (as all accord,) though seldom or never
any gross Heresy without See Thendor. E^sl. Hist. l. 4. c. 22, 23, 29, 32. l.
5. c. 5. 13 (...)
Schism. III. Admit there were an absolute necessity of Heresies in every
particular or National Church in all Ages, more or less (which this Text
imports not;) yet it follows not thence; Ergo, they must be tolerated, and not
suppressed, nor Heretics punished and put to death; for by such Logic and
Divinity, no sin nor wickedness, nor Malefactor whatsoever, should be punished
or suppressed, but all tolerated without impunity: There is as great a
necessity in regard of man's corrupt nature, since his fall, that there should
be Traitors, Murderers, Thieves, Idolaters, Sodomites, and heinous capital
offenses and offenders of all sorts in all Ages (especially in the last times)
as well as Heresies and Heretics; as is clear by Gal. 5. 19, 20, 20, 21. Romans
1. 26, to 31. 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 1. to 7. 2 Pet. 2. and daily experience: will
it therefore follow, that Traitors, Murderers, Thieves, Idoloters, Sodomites,
and the most detestable crimes and Malefactors of all sorts, must neither be
restrained nor punished, especially with death? Impudency it self dares not
assert it: If therefore the necessity of these sins and heinous Malefactors,
will not excuse nor exempt them from punishment, no more will the necessity of
Heresies or Heretics in the Church, exempt them from suppression and
punishment by the civil Magistrate; and the Objectors may as well argue: Men
must not write, preach, pray nor dispute against them, as that they must not
punish them. Our Savior himself refutes this consequence as absurd, Luke 17.
1, 2. Matthew. 18. 6, 7, 8, 9. But whos^ shall offend one of these little ones
which believes in me, it were better that a Millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea: Woe unto the world
because of offenses; for IT MUST NEEDS BE THAT (so Matthew) or, IT IS
IMPOSSIBLE BUT THAT OFFENSES WILL COME, (so Luke) but WOE to the man by whom
the offense comes: Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them
off, and cast them from thee; it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather then having two hands or two feet, to be cast into everlasting
fire, etc. If then the necessity of offenses, and impossibility but that they
will come, does not excuse those by whom they come, either from Woe,
Punishment, or Hel-fire it self, by Christ's own resolution; and therefore we
must cut off a right hand, a right foot, and pull out a right eye, in case they
offend us, to preserve the whole body from hell and destruction; then by the
same reason, the necessity of Heresies and Schisms will neither excuse nor
exempt Heretics nor Schismatics from temporal or eternal Woes, punishments,
or from being cut off and rooted out, when incurable or incorrigible, to
preserve the whole body of a Church from infection and ruin. IV. If this be no
good Argument or consequent (as all will grant) There is a necessity, that the
earth, by reason of Gods curse upon it, should bring forth Briars, Thorns and
Weeds, which will and do always spring up in our Gardens, Grounds and among
our Corn, Genesis 3. 17, 18. Mat. 13. 25, 26, etc. Heb. 6. 7, 8. Ergo, we must
not weed nor pull up such Thistles, Briars, and Weeds out of our Gardens,
Grounds, Corn, but suffer them to grow without control. Nor this: Foxes,
Wolves, Bears, and other Beasts of prey, do by a natural instinct and
necessity, devour and pray upon Lambs, Sheep, and other Cattle; therefore it is
unlawful to chase them away from the Sheep, Heard, Poultery, or kill them for
devouring them; or to kill or drive away Rats, Mice, or Vermin from our Corn,
on which nature teaches them to feed, to preserve their lives: Then certainly
the Objection by like reason must be as absurd and incoherent as these
Arguments, though there were a necessity of Heresies and Schisms: V. Admit
there were a necessity of Heresies and Schisms in general, yet there is no
necessity that such or such a particular Heresy should spring up, or that such
a particular person should either be an Heretic or Schismatic; and if any be
such, it is from their own See 2 These. 2. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 3. 1. Al^onsus
deCastro lib. 1. adver^. Haereses* Su mma Angelica and Ro^ell, Tit. Haeresis;
and all Authors generally in the definition of Herefie from the etymology of
the word.
free choice or love of Error, and through their own default, not any
inevitable necessity imposed on them by God; therefore they may be justly
punished for it both temporally and eternally, as well as those who crucified
Christ in pursuance of Gods own Council and Decree, which neither mitigated
nor extenuated their voluntary sin, Act. 2. 22, 23, 58 chapter 4. 26, 27, 28. 1
These. 2. 15, 16. VI. The necessity of Heresies and Schisms did not prohibit
nor restrain Paul himself from smiting Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness,
Acts 13. 6, to 13. nor from delivering Hymeneus and Philetus (who denying the
Resurrection, and subverted the faith of some) to Satan, ^ Tim. 1. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. nor from casting out the incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
nor from wishing those that troubled the Galathians to be cut off, Gal. 5. 21.
nor from opposing Schism and Schi^maticks, 1 Cor. 1. 8, to 17. Romans 16. 17,
18. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, ^. 2 Timothy 3. 1, to 7. Tit. 3. 10, 11. Therefore it can no
more exempt them from temporal punishments by the civil Magistrate, then
Ecclesiastical by Church Officers, and the Apostle Paul himself. Finally, the
contingent good which Heretics and Schismatics sometimes do to those that
are approved, does no ways plead for their toleration, or impunity, because it
is contingent; Al Heresies and Schisms See 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17, 18. 2 Timothy 3. 1,
107. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1, etc. (...), Epiphanius, Augustine, Alsonsus
a castro adver. Haereses
are in their own natures evil, dangerous, destructive, pernicious; If Gods
overruling providence turns them to good to some, yet they are dangerous and
pernicious to most; and therefore deserve both suppression and punishment by
Gods own express precept, Jude 3, 4, etc. Rev. 2. 13, 4, 115, 20, 21. 2 John
9, ^0; 11. Romans 16. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. The Devil himself and his
malice is sometimes an accidental occasion of good to the Saints; yet they
must resist him steadfastly, else he would devour them, James 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8,
9. Ephesians. 6. 12, 13. So ill humors, diseases* casually do the body good
sometimes, but it is by purging of them out with Physic and Phlebotomy, else
they will become mortal: so it is with Heresies and Schisms, they will prove
damnable and pernicious, if not purged out of the Churches body: All which
considered, the Argument from this objected Text, will prove a mere
inconsequent and absurdity.

As for the other Objection which the Independents and Sectaries of late
Object. 20.
cry up, See the ^loody Tenent, The compashonate Samaritane.
That no man now is guided with an infallible Spirit, so as insallibly and
certainly to define what is Heresy and Blasphemy, what not: Therefore men are
not to be capitally punished for Heresy or Blasphemy: (They might add by the
like reason, not for any other crime.)

Answ.
I answer briefly (because answered at large by Master De Hoereticis a Civili
Magi^^ratu pu^iend^s.
Beza heretofore, and by Master Edwards now, in his Treatise against
Toleration, and elsewhere touched upon here, but fully refuted in my Truth
triumphing over Falsehood, page 152, to 156.) First, that this Objection proves
our Sectaries and Independents, who object it, mere Nullifidians, who believe
not the very Principles of Religion with an infallible certainty of falth, as
indubitable Truths, but only as probable Tenets, which may be false as well as
true in which they are worse then Papists, who, though they plead for doubting
of their own salvation, yet they doubt not at all of their Religion, though
erroneous: Yea, worse then the veriest Turks and Pagans, who believe their
Idolatrous Religions to be infallibly true. Secondly, I wonder how these
Objectors dare profess or embrace any thing in Religion, Which they believe not
certainly to be an infallible truth; since whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
and he that doubts is damned, Romans 14. 23. or how they can with comfort
suffer for it. Thirdly, we have the true reason of our Sectaries and
Independents fickleness and daily changes from one opinion to another, till
they become flat Schismatics or Atheists, because they believe nothing with
certainty. Fourthly, we have here an infallible evidence, that they are neither
good Saints nor Christians, much less the only Saints and anointed ones* as
they style themselves, since the Saints are all rooted, grounded in the true
Christian Faith, and led infallibly into all divine Truths necessary to
salvation, which they both believe and have been taught, Col. 2. 7. 2 Pet. 1.
12, 19. Ephesians. 3. 17. 18. chap. 4. 14, 15: 1 Cor. 15. 58. Luke 1. 1, 2, 4.
James 1. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 16: 13. Phil. 1. 27. chap. 4. 1. John 15. 13. chapter 8.
32. ^ Tim. 4. 3. Fifthly, there are some Principles in Divinity, which all true
Saints and Christians infallibly believe and know, both concerning God the
Father, Christ, the holy Ghost, the divine Attributes, the sacred Scriptures,
and other Fundamentals of Religion; and all Heresies or Blasphemies concerning
them, are or may be infallibly known, and so corporally and capitally
punished, in some cases; but especially by such godly Magistrates and Christian
States, who certainly know and believe them, the Haeresie or infidelity of the
Heretic, Schismatic or Blasphemer, being an Argument of his obstinacy, not a
supersedeas to the believing Magistrates punishments, who is assured both of
their Heresy and Blasphemy, and of his own authority topunish them.

Having now run thorough, and satisfactorily (as I humbly conceive) refelled
all the principal Arguments (and in them all others of lesser moment
reduceable unto these, fully answered by Master Beza, de Haereticis Capitali
supplicio afficiendis; and Bellarmine, de Laicis, cap. 22.) of late produced
against the Christian Magistrates Legislative and Coercive power to suppress
or punish Idolaters, Apostates, Heretics, false Teachers, Schismatics,
Blasphemers; the most of them, if not all, being borrowed verbatim from the
Heretical Donatists heretofore, and Anabaptists of later times, and now
new-minted and obtruded upon ignorant people, under the specious title of
Master Dels Epistle and Sermon passim.
NEW GOSPEL LIGHT, AND THE VERYMIND AND WILL OF JESUS CHRIST; I shall here
openly challenge Master Dell, Master Peter's, Master Goodwin, yea the whole rout
of Sectaries, Anabaptists, Independents, to rally and re-enforce these their
routed scattered Forces, Argumeuts, by a solid Reply, or to yield the field and
cause for ever lost, past all recovery: And I shall also cordially desire all
those who have been seduced by their sophistry, seriously to ponder my Replies
to all their Objections; and if they find them satisfactory, no longer
obstinately to maintain a State-Church-Soule-destroying Paradox or
Schismatic, Anti-Magistraticall Error, to increase or support an
Anabaptisticall or Anarchicall Faction, who endeavor all they can to subvert
both our Magistracy and Ministry (and thereby our Church and State) to bring
mere Anarchy and confusion into both; at first covertly, but now professedly in
Pulpit, in Press, without a veil: Certainly afrer a serious survey of all
their Arguments, Practices, Aims, I cannot but pronounce that sentence of the
Apostle against them, Romans 3. 12, to 19. They are all gone out of the way, they
are altogether become unprofitable; there is none that does good, no not one:
Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongue their have used deceit;
the poison of Aspes is under their lips: Destruction and misery is in their
ways, and the way of peace they have not known; there is no fear of God
before their eyes: And therefore cannot but admonish all men in his following
words, To. 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses, CONTRARY TO THE DOCTRINE WHICH YE HAVE LEARNED, AND
AVOID THEM: For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts OF THE
SIMPLE.

Now because all of this rank (who pretend themselves the only Saints Object.
21.
and Gods peculiar Portion) are apt to See the Arraignment of Persecution, A
bloody Tenent, etc. and sundry such like Pamphlets.
cry out, PERSECUTION, PERSECUTION, with open mouth, when any the least motion
is made to restrain or suppress their growth or insolency, proclaiming to all
the world, their fear of persecution, in Press and Pulpit, before ever they
have suffered in the lest degree in purse or person; and perchance will term
me, a persecuter of the Saints, a Blood-sucker, etc. for publishing this
Treatise (as they have formerly done, for barely opposing them by way of
Argument, in their erroneous ways of Schism:) I shall only answer this
malicious calumny as a further Objection, and then conclude.

First then I affirm, That it is an Argument of a very bad cause, of a Asw.
base unregenerate Spirit, a carnal, unzealous heart, and self-seeking
disposition, clamorously to cry out against, and profess an extraordinary
fear of persecution, or to endeavor to prevent it by such exclamations: A
truly gracious Heroic Christian spirit disdaines all such exclamations. Never
do we read in Scripture of any such degenerous expressions of fear of
persecution made by Christ, or any of his Apostles or Saints, nor yet in
Ecclesiastical Stories or Martyrologies by any godly Martyrs: but contrarily
they all generaly accounted their Sufferings, their Torments, yea, their very
bloodiest Martyrdomes, to be not only their Crowns and Glory, but their
Option, and the thing they most desired* Mat. 16. 21, 22, 23.
Our blessed Savior foretelling his Disciples of his Death and Passion, Peter
toereupon, cut of a carnal love to Christ, took him aside and began to rebuke
him, saying; Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be done unto the^: But
he turned and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou savourest not
the things of God, but of men. And speaking of his Death, he says, Luke 22.
50. I have a Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I pained till it be
fulfilled? Yea, Christ for the joy that was set before him desired, and endured
the Cross, but despised the shame, leaving us an example that we should follow
his stepts. We read of Paul Acts 20. 22. 23. 24. That he went bound in the
spirit to Jerusalem, though the holy Ghost witnessed in every City, that bonds
and imprisonments did abide him; yea, he adds of himself. But none of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so as I may
finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And Acts 21. 11. 12. 13.
When the Prophet Agabus, prophesied, that the Jews should bind Paul hand and
foot at Jerusalem, and deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles; and
thereupon some of his followers and others of Cesarea, desired Paul, not to go
up to Jerusalem; Paul would by no means be persuaded, but answered them with
this increpation: What mean ye to weep and to break my heart? for I am
ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus. Yea, as He and Silas sung praises unto God at midnight, even when
they were scourged, cast into the inner Prison, and their feet made fast in the
stocks: never once crying out of persecution: So a little before his Martyrdom
at ROME, he brake forth into this triumphant expression, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day. It is Recorded of MOSES, Hebr. 11.
25. 26. That he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh his Daughter, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches then
the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward. And
we read of the beleiving Hebrews: That Hebr: 10 33, 34
whilst they were made a gazing stock through reproaches and afflictions, yet
even then they took it and the spoiling of their goods joyfully, knowing that
they had in Heaven a better and more enduring substance. Yea 2 Cor. 4: 17
our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Upon this ground all the magnanimous
Saints of God, not only rejoiced in the hope of the glory of God, but even Rom
5. 2 3
gloried in tribulation, and bid this public defiance to all sorts of
persecutions whatsoever.

Romans 8. 35. 36. 37.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress
or PERSECVTION, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or Sword? (as it is
written) for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep,
for the slaughter;) Nay, in all these things, we are more then Conquerors,
through him that loved us. And therefore we read of some Martyrs, who in the
midst of their tortures Hebr. 11.
would not accept deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.
Yea, the elect scattred Saints to whom Peter writes: 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6
Did greatly rejoice in their heavenly inheritance, even when 7 they were for a
season in heaviness, through manifold temptations; That the trial of their
faith, being much more precious then of Gold that perishes, though it be
tried with the fire, might be found unto honor and praise, and Glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ. It is the first lesson our Savior learnes all those
who will come after him; to ( ^ Mar. 8. 34. Lu. 9. 23.
) deny themselves, and take up his cross daily and follow him: And the
Scripture is express. ( 2 Timothy 3. 11. 12.
) That all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution; And
that it is ( Phil. 1. 29.
) given to the Saints, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him,
but al o to suffer for his sake: and this is both ( Math. 5. 10 11. 1 Pet. 3.
14 15.
) their blessedness, and highest honor they are capable of; for ( 2 Timothy 2. 14.
) if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Upon which ground Peter
thus bespeaks the Saints, [ 1 Pet. 4. 12 10 19.
] Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you,
as though some strange thing hapeaed unto you: But REJOICE, in as much as ye
are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you; on
their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified: But let
none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil do^r, or as a
busy body in other men's matters, yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf: Wherefore let them
that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him in
welldoing, as unto a faithful Creator. From all these Texts, as likewise from
this description of the Saints, Rev. 12. 11. That they loved not their lives
unto the death: it is most apparent, that the Objectors extraotdinary fear of,
and clamors against persecution, proceed from a mere degenerous, carnal,
base, unchristian spirit, and discovers them, to be none of those true hertick
faithful Sts. of God, who bid defiance to al persecutions for Christ's sake,
Acts 5 41.
rejoicing and being exceeding glad, [as the Apostles did] that they are
accounted worthy to suffer shame, imprisonment, loss of Goods, or their very
lives for his name or truth; and I doubt their consciences tell them, their
very way and cause is naught, because they are so afraid to suffer in, or for
it; [ Math 10. ^8.
] fearing those only who can kill the Body, at the utmost, and do no more: but
not him who can cast both soul and body for ever into hell. Let this their
fearefullnesse, unwillingnesse to suffer any thing for Christ, with their
whining and crying out like Swine, before the knife be near their throats, or
any Coards about their Legs, (whereas [ Isay 53. 4. Act. 8.
] Christ's sheep, like himself, are mute, not opening once their mouth before
the shearers or Butchers] convince both them and others, that for all their
vaunting of, their Saint-ship, they are no true generous Saints, nor Sheep of
Christ, but rather [ 2 Pet. 2. 12 22.
] Swine in Sheeps Clothing.

2ly. I answer, it is no persecution nor cruelty at all either in Godly
Christians to inform against, or prosecute; nor in godly Magistrates to punish
obstinate Heretics, Schismatickes, Seducers, or Blasphemers, with Fines,
imprisonments, banishment, and in some cases with capital punishments, after
all other milder and spiritual means attempted for their conversion. It is no
cruelty, but necessary Christian policy to cut of a gangrend [ Mar: 5: 29: ^0
] member, to preserve the residue of the Body even from sudden destruction;
or to cut off a right hand, [ Math. 5: 29 30.
] and pull out a right eye to save the whole body from perishing. It was no
persecution but an act of piety and necessary justice for Godly Princes to kill
and destroy Idolaters, Seducers, and false Prophets under the Law; Therefore it
can be no persecution to suppress, imprison, Fine, banish, burn, or put to
death incorrigible pestilent, execrable Heretics, false-Teachers,
Blasphemers, or Schismatickes under the Gospel* yea it is an act ( See Gratian
Cause 23. qu. 4.
) of spiritual mercy both to themselves, and others, to the States and Churches
wherein they live, and an act of cruelty, or destructive mercy to spare them.
It is an act not only of mercy but love in natural Parents, to correct their
Children when they do amiss, to reform, and amend them: it is an act of [
Hebr 12. 5. to 12. Deutr. 8. 5. Prove. 3 11. c. 13. 24. v. 2 Chronicles. 33 11. to 20.
] greatest mercy and Love in God our heavenly Father to do the like, as the
Scriptures plentifully manifest. It was an act of love and mercy, not severity
in God, to captivate and afflict Manass^th, [ u] thereby to humble him for, and
convert him from his enormious sins: So likewise to dethrone and humble [
Dan. 4. 32. etc.
] Nebuchadnezer in the very height of his pride, to bring him to the knowledge
of himself, and confession of the infinite all-disposing power of God; Yea it
was an act of extraordinary love and compassion in Christ, to unhorse and
terrify Saul [ Acts 9
] from Heaven, and strike him with astonishment and blindness, when as he was
persecuting him in his members, thereby effectually to convert and (...) him of
a bitter Persecutor, an Apostle and most active spreader of the Gospel in many
Countries; and therefore he records it as an act of Gods richest mercy and
love, 1 Timothy 1. 12. to 17. So by the selfsame reason, it is a work both of
mercy, love and piety in the Christian Magistrate, (not of cruelty and
persecution) to restrain and punish obstinate Heretics, Seducers,
Blasphemers, Schismatickes, and that in a threefold respect: First, to the
parties restrained, or punished, because it many times convertsthem from their
( 2 Pet 21.
) damnable Heresies, Errors, Schsmes, Blasphemies, which would bring upon them
swift destruction, when no means else will prevail; or if not, at least it
hinders them from doing so much mischief, and multiplying their sins so
greatly as otherwise they would, inwhich regard Paul terms the higher powrs
the Romans 13 4. See Dr. Willets Comment: on Rom 13. qu. 10 See Chrisostom:
Theophy lact, Haymo. Lvra* Peter Martyer, S^^o Marlorat and Peraeus in locum.
Ministers of God for good, even to those whom they punish for their misdoings.
2ly. It is an act of mercy and love to others, in preserving them from being
infected, seduced, destroyed by the damnable errors, Heresies, Blasphemies,
Schismatic practices of those who are thus punished and suppressed. 3ly. To
the whole state and Church where in they live, in preserving public peace and
unity among them, which their Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Schi^mes would
utterly dissolve, and in diverting Gods wrath and vengeance from them, which
the impunity of such Malefactions would justly bring upon them. On the contrary
to tolerate and connive at such, is an ( See Gratian Cause 23 qu 3. 4 5
act of cruelty and injustice, both to the parties offending, who hereby are
much encouraged, hardened, and suffered to persevere in their Errors,
Blasphemies, Heresies, Schisms, to their destruction, Whence ( De (...) 1.
(...) Causa 23* ^u 4.
) Ambros concludes: Est injusta misericordia. In ipsa Ecclesia ubi maxim quis
miseneri debet, teneri quam maxim debet forma justitiae, ne quis a consortio
a^ (...) Cause 23 qu 3
communionis vel criminationis abstractus, brevi lachrymula atque ad tempus
parata, vel etiam uberioribus fletibus communionem quam plurimis debet
pos^ulare temporibus, a facilitate Sacerdotis extorqueat. Nonne etiam cumuni
indulgeat indigno ad prolapsionis contagium provocat universos? Facilitas enim
veniae incentivum tribuit delinquendi. Yea, it is a great sin in, and a
cruelty against those who tolerate such without punishment or restraint. [
Gratian cause. 23. qu 3.
] Nam qui potest obviare and perturbare perversos and non facit, nihil est
aliud quam favore impietati ^orum: Nec caret scrupulo societatis occultae, qui
manifesto facinori desinit obviare, and qui desinit obviare cum potest, jubet.

Thirdly, I answer, that those who most cry out against persecution, when they
get any power, are commonly themselves the greatest, mercilessest, and most
cruel persecutors of all others: witness the cruelty of the Socrat. Sch^last.
Eccles. ^^st lib: 4. cap. 22. T^^pa^t. hist. l. 8. c. 3. Niceph. Eccl. hist l*
9. c. 29. 46 l. 11. c. 28.
Arians heretofore against the Orthodox Christians, who exceeded the very
Heathen persecutors in their outrages and cruelties: witness the ancient [
August. contr. (...) Gram. l. 3 c. 42, 43. (...) M^^. cont. Parm. here. p. 129,
130, 131.
] Donatists, who writ clamours and argued most of any against perseution the
power of the civil Magistrate, the laws and punishments enacted and but
moderately executed against them, for their Heresy and dangerous Schism: who
yet, as S. Augustine proves at large, were the bloodiest and most outrageous
persecutors of all others, where they had any power; making use of the Apostate
Emperors Jalians Edicts against the Orthodox Christians, to dispossess them
of their Churches, estates, lives: their Circumcellioes first with clubs, and
after that with swords, murdering and spoiling many in all places in a m^st
tumultuous manner, so as the Emperors were enforced to suppress them by force
of arms, and execute some of them to terrify the rest. Witness the bloody
Fox Acts and M^^uments. ^ Chytraeus Chro (...) l 12 (...), p. 46, ^153
Papists proceedings against our Martyrs, who yet cry out of persecution
against us, for executing some of their seditious traiterous Priests and
Jesuits: and the * Anabaptists unparalleld tyranical seditious, bloody
proceedings in Germany, at Munster and elsewhere: with some Anabaptistical
Sectaries cariages of late in England toward their Ministers, Neighbors: and
some of their fellow soldiers, who would have none dissenting from them in
opinion, or party, either in our Parliament, Army, or in any place of public
profit, or trust, were it in their power; and admitting none to preach or
communicate in their separate Congregrations, though never so pious, who will
not conform exactly to all their fancies; as their daily practices their
manifold late libellous seditious printed Pamphlets, and Mr. Edwards his
Gangraena^s at large discover: Let them therefore give over, and abandon the
sin of persecution themselves, and cast this beam out of their own eyes,
Churches, before they find fault with that seeming mo^e of Persecution which
they so much exclaim against in then Presbyterian Brethrens eyes.

Finally, I have [ (...).
] premised this at first, That both Ministers and Magistrates, are to use all
possible s^eet, mild^, and gentle means, to reclaim, reform Idolaters,
Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers, Schismatics, before they proceed to
corporal or capital punishments: and when they are necessitated to punish any
such by reason of their own wilful obstinacy, for the ^ndication of Gods
glory, the preservation of the truth, and purity of Religion, the maintenance
of the Churches, Kingdoms public peace, the prevention or diversion of Gods
judgments, and keeping the souls of their people from infection and
destruction: they ought to do it, not out of any uncharitable, malicious, or
revengefull spirit, or in an insulting, taunting, angry manner; but with a
melting, bleeding, tender, compassionate spirit, lamenting their obstinacy;
yea, with a desire by the punishments inflicted to reform and save their
souls, and interrupt their future progress in these sinful courses: in such
a manner ^am. 3. 33. Hos. 11. 8, 9. c. 6. 4. Ier 31. 18, 19, 20.
as God himself corrects his dearest Saints, or a father his only best-beloved
son, when they offend: or as a [ See Gratian cause. 23. qu. 4.
] Surgeon lanceth his patient, or cauterizeth his ulcers out of mere love
and tenderness, to preserve the parties life when there is no other means of
cure. To punish Heretics, Schismatics, Idolaters, False-teachers, Apostates,
Blasphemers, with such affections, by inflicting such corporal or capital
penalties as their respective crimes deserve, when no means else will work upon
them, is so far from demeriting the odious name of Persecution, that it
deserves the very title of merciful, compassionate, necessary piety and
justice, commended by the very Heathen Poet in this Distick, as the resolution
and vote of Jupiter himself.

[ Ovid. Metamorph. l. 1.
] Cuncta prius tentanda, sed imm^dicabile vulnus*
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.
For the Presbyterians part, I may truly say unto our present seduced Heretics
and Blasphemers in their names [ The defense of the Ap^^ part 1. c. 22. Divis
1. p. 530, 531, 532.
] as Bish. Jewel did to Harding and the Papists. As for us, we run not for
succor to the fire, as these men's guise is, but we run to the Scripture;
neither do we reason with the sword, but with the Word of God. We were never
yet guilty of one drop of your blood: We seek no aid of fire or sword: We will
rather say with S. Hierome, [ Hieron. in Esaias l. 5. c 14.
] Vtinam filios Haereticorum and omnium, qui decepti sunt, interfi^iamus
sagittis spiritualibus, id est, testimoniis Scripturarum: Would God we may
rather kill the children of Heretics, and all them that are deceived with
spiritual arrows, that is to say, with the testimonies of the Scriptures. And
with S. Augustine, [ Confess. l 12 c. 14.
] O si occidas eos de gladio bis acuto, ^ non sunt hosts tui; sic enim amo eos
occidi sibi, ut vivant tibi. Would God thou would kill them O Lord, with the
two edged sword, (that is, with thy holy Word) that they may no longer be thy
enemies: For so I wish them to be ^illed unto themselves, that they may live
unto thee. And again, Vindicet nos Deus de vobis, ut ipsum errorem vestrum, in
vobis occidat, and nobiscum de veritate gaudeatis. God so revenge our cause
against you, that he may kill the errors in you, that you may rejoice together
with us of the truth. This, this is the REVENGE that we seek upon you, as this
day it may appeaer, if you will be tractable; and yet we say again with the
same Jewel of our Church, The defense of the (...) part 3. c. ^. Div^^ 3. p.
387.
We know well enough, that the same Word which was opened by Christ, and spread
abroad by the Apostles, is sufficient both for our salvation, and also ^o
uphold and maintain all truth, and to confound all manner of Heresy. By that
Word only do we condemn all sorts of the old Heretics, whom these men say we
have called out of Hell again. As for the Arians, the Eutycheans, the
Marcionites, the Ebeonites, the Valentinians, the Carpocratians, the Tatians,
the Novatians, and shortly all them that have a wicked opinion, either of God
the Father, or of Christ, or of the Holy Ghost, or of any other point of
Christian Religion, for so much as they be confuted by the Gospel of Christ,
we plainly pronounce them for detestable and damned persons, and defy them
even unto the Devil. Neither do we leave them so, but we also SEVERELY and
STRICTLY HOLD THEM IN BY LAVVFVL AND POLITIC PVNISHMENTS, if they fortune to
break out any where, and between themselves.

I shall close up all with the words of [ On Rev. 2. v.
] famous and religious M. Perkins, a man formerly highly honored by all our
dissenting brethren, who borrowed most of their true, but none of their
New-light from his industrious Works. Every man is not left to his own
conscience, to teach and hold what Doctrine he will; But ALL SVCH MEN OR WOMEN
as teach erroneous doctrine, are to be restrained by the Governors of the
Church. It is a grievous fault in any Church, not to restrain the Authors and
Paintainers of Sects, and false Doctrines, and of opinions which stand not with
the truth of Gods Word. And on the contrary, I's a virtue and good gift in any
Church when they restrain the authors and favorers of Sects and
Falsedoctrines. And in this regard our Church is to be commended and approved,
and the Commonwealth likewise, for making laws to restrain both Popish
Recusants and some Protostants, who depart from this our Church, as being no
Church of God, but a member of Antichrist and of Babylon.

I hope his Resolution, seconded with the conclusion of Causa 23. qu. 4
Gratian (which he proves by many sentences of Fathers, Vindicta (haereticis
and schismaticis) est inferenda, non amore ipsius vindictae; sed zelo
justitiae, non ut odium exerceatur, sed ut pravitas corrigatur. with the
precedent Treatise, justifying the lawfulness hereof in point of conscience,
will excite all godly Christians (according to their duty and solemn
Covenant,) to put it into due and speedy execution in point of practice, for
the suppression of al present, prevention of all future Heresies, Errors,
Schisms, Blasphemies, whose licentiousness and impunity may justly expose us
to more grievous public judgments of all sorts, then any we have hitherto
suffered from the avenging hand of our provoked God.

Augustine Epist. 167. Quidigitur hic faciat Ecclesiae medicina salutem omnium
materna charitate conquirens, tanquam inter Phreneticos and Lethargicos
aestuans? Nunquid contemnere, nunquid desistere vel debel, vel potest?
Vtrinsque sit, necesse est molesta, quia neu^r^s est inimica. Nam and
Phrenetici nolunt ligari, and Lethargici nolunt excitari: sed perseverat
diligentia charitatis, Phreneticum castigare, Lethargicum stimulare ambos
amare. Ambo offenduntur, sed ambo diliguntur; ambo molestati, quamdiu aegri
sunt, indignantur, sed ambo sanati gratulantur.
FINIS.
Errata.
Gentle Reader I shall entreat thee to pardon and correct these Errors of the
Printers.

Page 2. 14. l. read, thought, p. 15. l. 27. ^. concitare, p. 25. l. 1. r. he
commands, p. 32. l. 3. Rom, r. Reu, p. 65. l. 9. Towns. r. Turns, p. 70. l.
28. A. contemtuous, p. 72. l. 15. Curiae, p. 79. l. 2. a^gue, p. 81. l. 28.
but, p. 84. l. 18. me, r. we, p. 87. l. 18. dele, in, p. 106. l. 21.
exorbitant, p. 124 l. 15. times, p. 125. l. 33. viuendi, p. 126. l. 26.
abjecerit, l. 42. Dominus, p. 127. l. 18 propter, l. 19. caelorum, p. l. 27.
ca. lumniosi, l. 35. dilectione, p. 128 l. 7. humano p. 129. l. 19.
affligendum, l. 25. privatae, l. 26, que inerant ablatis, ipsi etiam laniati,
l. 37. aut. p. 130 l. 11. nocturnis, l. 21. dele, l. 24. vehemenenter, p. 132.
l. 34. eum r, enim, p. 133. l. 37. Melhusum, p 135. l. 42. intimating, p. 136.
l. 12. Amphilochius. p. 143. l. 12. Gretseri. p. 146. 26. porpetratis, p. 147.
l, 21. sapientum, l. 24. reddamur, p. 150. l. 16. Cum. p. 89. l. 45. dele. Lu.
1. p. 97. l. 21. Ergo, p. 205. l. 6. Magistrates, p. 106. l. 36. sensible, p.
157, l. 15. groves p. 159. l. 1 for.

In the Margin, p. 61. b. 49. r. Patavinus. p. 110. l. 9. Antoninus. p. 112. l.
2. Mr. p. 115. l. 5 Haereses. l. 10. Beauxamis. p. 136. l. 24. CT esiphontem.
P. 152. l. 12. dele. the: p. 138. l. 42. Surius: l. 14. Annot. p. 86. l. 19.
Lit, p. 109. l. 1. Scorpiacum, p. 110 l. 2. transiret, p. 153. l. 10. brugius.


