A DEFENSE OF THE ANSWER TO A PAPER ENTITLED The Case of the Dissenting
Protestants of Ireland, in Reference to a Bill of Indulgence, from the
Exceptions lately made against it.
THE Vindicator of the Case of the Dissenting Protestants of Ireland having in
the beginning of his Reply to my Answer expressed his Resentments at my saying,
That he had weakly Argued for the granting their Desires; I shall, to abate if
possible the sourness; tho not to gratify the vanity of his Temper, now
declare, That the weakness of the Arguments he produced is not wholly to be
ascribed to the meaness of his Abilities, but chiefly to the badness of the
Cause he had undertaken to defend.

And tho he has showed great dexterity in perverting, and little sincerity in
representing the sense of my Answer, yet I shall not be influenced by so
disingenuous an Example, but whatever is material in his Replies (tho there be
very little that is really so) I shall set in its proper light, and give it a
due consideration: and should never have blamed him for what he charges me
withal, viz. For not showing him the civility of using his own words (tho I
was generally careful to oblige him even in that) if he had not done me the
injustice of wresting my Expressions to such a meaning as they are not fairly
capable of, which he has manifestly done in most passages of his pretended
Vindication.

And the first remarkable instance of it, is in the phrase of General
Indulgence, which (as is apparent by the beginning and end of the Paragraph
where it is first used) does plainly signify no more than a Legal Toleration of
Dissenting Protestants, tho he wrests it to import a comprehension of all sorts
of Religions.

I perceive that the Vindicator lays it down as a Rule, that those are of the
same Religion with the Established Church who subscribe the Doctrinal Articles
of it, and that there are three Sects only, viz. Presbyterians, Independents,
and Anabaptists, for whom he desires an Indulgence, which he tells us can
multiply no other Sects than these.

Now to this I Answer, First, That the Rule he lays down is not in strictness,
and propriety of speaking to be allowed as true; for sure he cannot be ignorant
that there are three grand parts of Religion, namely, Doctrine, Worship, and
Government; and that an Agreement in every one of these is necessary to make
the several Societies of Men appear to be of the same Religion. And truly in
order to the preservation of that Christian Peace and Unity, which are so
strictly required by our Savior, and his Apostles, it is highly necessary that
we should not only be joined in the profession of the same Principles of
Religion, but also in the participation of the same Ordinances, and in
conformity to the same Discipline. For it is observable that an Agreement in the
same Doctrine among those that differ in other Religious matters is generally
known, only to the Learned of each Dissenting Party; but the holding of
distinct Communions, and the differences in Ecclesiastical Government are
plainly perceived by the most vulgar Capacities, and do more effectually tend
to the alienating of our Affections from one another than our consent in
Religious Articles only, to the establishment of public Peace, and the
promoting of Christian Charity amongst us.

But secondly, Tho the Presbyterians and Independants profess their wilingness
to Subscribe all the Doctrinal Articles of our Church, the Anabaptists (whom
the Vindicator would have comprehended in the Indulgence) do not even in
Doctrine, as he acknowledges, agree wholly with us. Now if their differing from
us in one single Article of Faith can in the Vindicators judgment neither
incapacitate them for public favor, nor Justify us in esteeming 'em of a
distinct Religion from the Established Church; many other Divisions of
pretended Protestants may arise and lay claim to the same legal Toleration from
Authority, and the same charitable opinions of 'em from the Conformists, on
account of their refusing to Subscribe no other Doctrinal Articles of our
Church but one: and by this means it may possibly happen, that all our
Doctrinal Articles may, one by one, be denied by the different Sects of
Dissenters: and yet according to the Vindicator, we must be so far from judging
'em unqualified for public Indulgence; that they will appear to be of the same
Religion with the Established Church.

Thirdly, He tells us, That the Bill he pleaded for can multiply no other Sects
than those he mentions; Now this methinks has little show of reason to
recommend it; for may not the Indulgence he desires occasion the Rise and
Increase of many others that he never pleaded for, nor ever thought of? Are we
not sufficiently assured by the experience of all ages; that a free Toleration
of some few Sects has been productive of a strange medly of different
Religions? as in Holland it was particularly remarkable in the Sect of the
Anabaptists; which in a few Years time was observed to spawn so numerous a
brood, that by their Divisions, and Subdivisions from one another, they
increast to near Fifty Sects of different Principles, and distinct Communions;
and yet all of them agreed in the common name of Anabaptists. Is there not
therefore great reason that all Persons in Authority, who are answerable to God
for all the People committed to their Charge, should deny an unlimited and
irrestrictive Indulgence to Presbyterians, Independants, and Anibaptists, lest
the general and legal Allowance that is granted them may be productive of a
multiplicity of new Sects; which, tho much different from each of those, may
desire to be called by their Names to take away their Reproach, and by
shrowding themselves under their cover may plead a Title to, and enjoy the
benefit of the public Toleration.

Yet notwithstanding all that I had said in my former Answer, the Vindicator
seems either unable, or unwilling, to apprehend the mischievous consequences of
this Legal Indulgence; and propounds several Questions very little to the
purpose; as whether the Popish Interest will be ever the stronger, because
there are more Protestants to oppose it? And because their mutual forbearance,
as to their lesser differences, will more unite their endeavors against the
Common Enemy? To which I answer, First, That tho the Popish Interest would
sensibly be weakened by the Increase of Protestants of the same Communion, yet
it will be considerably strengthened by the multiplicity of Sects, which these
Legal Indulgences have perpetually promoted. Secondly, we have no reason to
expect that a Toleration here will have a happier Influence now than it has
formerly had in a Neighboring Kingdom; where it has been observed, that the
Dissenters on the Granting of these Indulgences did not grow more peaceable and
modest, but far more Insolent and Tumultuous than they were before.

But because the Vindicator says, he would gladly know from me wherein a
Toleration to Dissenting Protestants will advance the Popish Interest here; I
shall endeavor to give him full and ample Satisfaction in this matter, and in
Order thereunto, I shall desire him seriously to consider: First, whether there
be not violent presumptions that a Public and Legal Indulgence to Protestants
does highly advance the Popish Interest, since all Romish Emissaries, who must
be allowed to know their own Interest best, and to be very wise in their
Generation, do so eagerly desire and so industriously promote Tolerations, tho
limited to Protestant Dissenters: and when all other measures sailed have
readily expended considerable sums of Money for the purchase of them; and it is
generally known that the Declaration of Indulgence in the Year 1671/2 was of
the Papists procuring.

Secondly, When the free exercise of Religion, according to the different modes
of Divine Worship among pretended Protestants, has either been Legally
Indulged, or Generally Tolerated among us, it has still been observed that
Popish Emissaries have been then more numerous, their application much greater,
and their Harvest of Proselytes experimentally sound to be more plenteous, than
at any other Conjuncture of Public Affairs. And to this purpose there is a
very remarkable Letter of Bishop Bramhal's who was then in France, to Primate
Usher, in the Year 1654. wherein he gives an account, that then, which was a
time of uncontrollable Liberty to most of the different sorts of the pretended
P^^testants among us. there was a great multitude of the Popish Clergy in the
place he lived in, who were taught several manual Trades, and were then ready
to be sent into England, to foment the Divisions there, by setting up as
spiritually gifted Mechanics, and by maintaining the cause of Presbytery,
Anabaptism, and Independancy, etc, according to the various tendencies of their
natural parts, and the signal proofs they gave to their Superiors of their
different abilities in Canting and Arguing for the several Sects, and Opinions,
they were obliged to maintain. By all which the Vindicator may understand if he
please, at how considerable a rate the Papists value, and what great advantages
they make, of all public Indulgences to Protestant Dissenters; which have
proved very fatally Instrumental to the promoting of what they commonly term
the Catholic cause.

Thirdly, among the several fallacious Arguments that Popish Emissaries make
use of, to beguile unstable Souls, there is none so generally plausible, and so
unhappily successful, as the seeming Unity of the Members of the Church of
Rome, and the open and scandalous Divisions among those of the Reformed
Religion: And as all Public Indulgences to Dissenting Protestants do evidently
Countenance, so they have always very sensibly Inhanc'd these Religious
Differences amongst us; and thereby have given great advantages to the Common
Enemy of Increasing the number of spiritual Deserters from us. And accordingly
when the like Indulgence was pleaded for, in King Charles II's time, Mr. Baxter
writ his Defense of the Cure of Divisions, in the Preface of which he has these
Remarkable words viz. Our Divisions gratify the Papists and greatly hazard the
Protestant Religion, and that more than most of you, (speaking to the
separating People,) seem to believe or regard. (Among the chief of which non
believers, and non regarders, the Vindicator may deservedly be reckoned.) And
again he says, Popery will grow out of our Divisions, for by the Odium and
scorn of our disagreements, inconsistency, and multiplied Sects, they will
persuade People that we must come for unity to them: or else run mad, and
crumble into Dust, and individuals. -- Thousands have been drawn to Popery, or
confirmed in it by this Argument already, and I am persuaded that all the
Arguments else in Bellarmine, and all other Books that ever were Written, have
not done so much to make Papists in England, as the multitude of Sects among
our selves, yea some professors of Religious strictness, etc. have turned
Papists; when they had run from Sect, to Sect, and had found no consistency in
any.

Fourthly, these Public Indulgences have not only fatally conduced to the
perverting a considerable number of Protestants, but also have effectually
hindered the Conversion of many Papists: who, tho they were sensible of several
gross Errors in the Principles, and ungodly Practices in the Worship enjoined
'em by the Church of Rome; yet were so highly Scandalized by the multitude of
Divisions among us; that they chose rather to continue in a House, that seemed
to be at unity in it self; (tho the Superstructure were ruinous, and its
Foundation on the Sand,) than to remove unto a fairer Building, which, (tho its
Materials seemed to them to be of a stronger consistence, and its Foundation on
a firmer Bottom,) yet could not in their Opinon continue long, where they
observed many Intestine Divisions unfortunately raised, and industriously
propagated among the several Members of the Family.

Fifthly, That the Granting Liberty of Conscience will considerably advance the
Popish Interest may be further evidenced; if we consider the different State of
Denmark, and Sweden, from that of the United Provinces, in reference to the
number of Papists in those Countries. For as the strictness of their Laws,
against those that differ from their Established Churches, has been remarkably
effectual to the Rooting out of Popery from amongst 'em; so the free and
unlimitted Toleration that is granted in Holland, to Men of all Sorts and
Persuasions in Religion, has been highly Instrumental to the multiplying of
Papists there. Neither will the Restriction of the Indulgence pleaded for in
this Kingdom, for the three Sorts mentioned by the Vindicator, namely,
Presbyterians, Independants, and Anabaptists, prevent the Advancement of the
Popish Interest here; since the various and cunning ways, that Priests and
Jusuites have of creeping in among us, under several Shapes and Disguises, are
sufficiently known: And I have showed the time when a vast Colony of 'em was
sent into England, professing, and maintaining, the Opinions of those very
Sects, for which the Vindicator so eagerly desires a Bill of Indulgence.

Neither, sixthly, Does his Argument for this Indulgence, drawn from the
widening of the Basis (as he has often told us) of the Protestant Interest,
seem of any force or consideration at all; for tho it may appear to widen, yet
it will undoubtedly weaken the Foundation of the Protestant Security in this
Kingdom; because each Tolerated Party (as experience has sufficiently taught
us) will rather industriously promote their own distinct Interests, than
unanimously oppose the common Enemy, as was lately evident in Huson and his
Followers; who in the times of the greatest Danger, most scandalously separated
themselves from the main Body of the Protestants in the North of Ireland: and
publicly owned their Acting on a different Bottom from them; and the Intestine
Animosities of those seeming Friends, would (if an extraordinary Providence had
not Intervend) have been of a more mischievous consequence, to the Designs of
our Brethren, than the open Hostilities of our professed Enemies; And the
Divisions which those few pretended Protestans, endeavored to foment, were
really more formidable, and might have been more fatal, to our common Interest
and Security, than the united force and power of a numerous Popish Army. For
it is not our agreement in one common Name, and in the public profession of the
Protestant Religion, but our Union in the same Christian Faith, our Communion
with one another in the same Holy Ordinances of Divine Worship, and a quiet
Submission, and Obedience, to the same Ecclesiastical Government; These I say
are the only sure Bands of the Protestant Safety against the common Enemy. And
it is observable in the Gospel, that as it was not the wideness, but strength of
the Basis that preserved the wise Man's House unmovable against the most violent
assaults of Wind and Floods, so 'twas not the narrowness of the Foundation, but
the looseness of the Sand on which the other House was built that made it
obnoxious to the prevailing force of the Water, and the Violence of the
Tempest: And therefore we may undoubtedly conclude that it is not the large
compass of the same Religious Profession, but a close Union in the same Holy
Doctrine, a Hearty Communion in the same Divine Worship, and an humble
submission to the same Ecclesiastical Discipline that will secure the
Protestant Interest against all Opposers.

But because all that I have said in this matter, may perhaps appear of little
or no weight with the Vindicator, I shall confirm the truth of what I have
said, by an Authority, which I presume he will not have the confidence to
oppose: For as he recommends the Case of the Dissenters to a Protestant
Parliament, so I shall give him the judgment of a Protestant Parliament
concerning these Indulgences, for which he pleads, in the very words of the
Address (of the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament) to King Charles the
Second, on the Twenty Fifth of February 1662, viz. We have considered the
nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference to those Consequences, which
must necessarily attend it. It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the
whole Government of the Church precarious; and the Censures of it of no moment,
or consideration at all -- It will be a cause of increasing Sects, and
Sectaries; whose numbers will weaken the true Protestant Profession so far,
that it will at least be difficult for it to defend it self against them: And
which is yet further considerable; those numbers, which by being troublesome to
the Government, find they can arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their Numbers
increase, be yet more troublesome; that at length they may arrive to a General
Toleration; and in time some prevalent Sect, will at last contend for an
Establishment, which for ought can be foreseen, may end in Popery.

But Seaventhly, As an Argument that may appear to the Vindicator, and those of
his Persuasion, the most forcible of all, to prove the great Mischief of
Toleration, I shall give them the united Votes of a very considerable Number of
Dissenting Ministers, Assembled on purpose to declare their Judgments
concerning these Legal Indulgences, which we have in these following Words: A
Toleration would be putting a Sword into a mad Man's hand; a Cup of Poison into
the hand of a Child; a letting loose of mad Men with Firebrands in their hands;
an appointing a City of Refuge in Men's Consciences for the Devil to fly to; a
laying a stumbling Block before the Blind; a proclaiming Liberty to the Wolves
to come into Christ's Fold, to prey upon its Lambs, a Toleration of Soul
Murder, (the greatest Murder of all others) and for the establishing whereof,
damned Souls in Hell would accurse Men on Earth. Neither would it be to provide
for Tender Consciences, but to take away all Conscience: If Evil be suffered,
it will not suffer Good; if Error be not forcibly kept under, it will be
superior, which we here the rather speak of to undeceive those Weak Ones, who
under the specious pretext of Liberty of Conscience (being indeed Liberty of
Error, Scandal, Schism, Heresy, Dishonouring God, Opposing the Truth, Hindering
Reformation, and Seducing others) are charmed by Satan into a better liking of
an unconscientious Toleration. -- We are struck with Horror, and Astonishment,
at the endeavors of many; for it looks as if Men could not sin fast enough,
unless they were bidden; as if God were not already enough dishonored, except
the Throne of Iniquity were set up, framing Mischief by a Law. Harmonius
Consent of Lancashire Ministers with those of London, printed 1648.

I should be voluminous if I recited all the severe Reflections that are passed
and published by great multitudes of Dissenters on the Granting of Tolerations,
even to those that are Protestants; I shall therefore mention but a few: Thus,

In Edward's full Answer, p. 247. it is said, That a Toleration of one or more
different ways of Churches, and Church Government, from the Church and Church
Government Established, will be to this Kingdom very mischievous, pernicious,
and destructive.

And it is said, (Nepthaly's Engagement to Duties) We do again Renew our solemn
League and Covenant, wherein the securing, and preserving, the Purity of
Religion against all Error, Heresy, and Shism; and namely Independency,
Anabaptism, etc. and the Carrying on the Work of Uniformity shall be Studi'd,
and Endeavored, by us, before all wordly Interest.

In Prin's full Answer to Jo. Goodwin, p. 13. We are told, If the Parliament,
and Synod, shall by public consent Establish a Presbyterial Church Government,
Independents, and all others are bound in Conscience to submit unto it, under
the pain of Obstinacy, singularity, etc. In case they cannot really, by direct
Texts and Precepts, prove it diametrically contrary to the Scripture.

And in Adam Stewart Dubly 1644. part 2. p. 162. We have these words, That
Courtesy, viz. Toleration, which no Man can obtain of the Independents, where
they have Authority, viz. in New England; That Courtesy, should they not be
suitors for here in Old-England.

I shall add no more Concerning this Matter, but shall make this true and
obvious Remark, viz. that the Fortune (if I may so speak) of Toleration is
always in extremes, either very good, or very bad, and is at several Turns both
highly Applauded, and violently Decry'd by the whole body of Dissenting
Protestants; For they esteem it the most unreasonable thing to be denied, when
they are in a depressed Condition; and the most mischievous to be Granted when
they are in Power.

Yet notwithstanding the inconveniences I intimated in my first Answer of
Granting Indulgences, the Vindicator suggests it to be so groundless an
Imagination to suppose that a Toleration to Dissenting Protestants would make
many of 'em turn Papists, that he Questions whether I could produce one
Instance of any Protestant Dissenter, even in the late Reign, turning Papist.

To which I Answer, That I could give several Instances of this kind, tho I
shall not mention any, but hope the Non-Conformists will do us the justice, to
acknowledge that the great reason why no more of theirs, and of our Communion
were perverted, is, under God, to be ascribed to the happy influence of the
many excellent Discourses Writ against the Papists, by the Episcopal Glergy in
the late Times: For it is particularly observable, that amongst the vast number
of those admirable Tracts, only two were Written by Dissenters, one of which
was by Mr. H. Care, and it is not certainly known what Communion he was of. But
this is certain, that what ever censures might have been passed heretofore on
the Dissenting Clergy, for being Trumpeters in State Tumults, and Seditions;
they too nearly resembl'd such kind of Persons in the Religious War of
Disputes, between Protestants and Papists, in the late Reign: For tho they made
the greatest noise, yet they did the least Service; tho they founded to Battle,
yet they were very little engaged in the Action: And unless the Walls of Rome,
like those of Jericho, fall by the noise of the Trumpet, and not by the Force
of the Assault, they will have no Considerable share in the Honor of the
Conquest; but if the most effectual way of Apprehending or Rooting out the
Popish Robbers of our Churches be merely by raising the Hue and Cry, and not by
a hot and close Pursuit; I look upon our Dissenting Brethren as having the best
Weapons for this part of spiritual Warfare: And since the Writings of the
Conforming Clergy have been of late so eminently serviceable in preserving the
main Body of the Protestants in these Kingdoms, from lapsing into Popery; the
Vindicator had no occasion to upbraid us with our unsuccessfulness in drawing
over Dissenters to our Communion: for tho our endeavors in this Pious and
Charitable undertaking, are not so uneffectual as he suggests, yet the reason
why no greater Number of Nonconformists have of late been Reconciled to the
Established Church, is mainly to be ascribed to the unwearied Labors of the
Dissenting Preachers, in raising unreasonable prejudices, and in fixing an
Invincible Aversion in their Hearers to our Ecclesiastical Discipline and
Constitutions: For tho they pretend to be the Greatest promoters of
Edification, yet it is undoubtedly true, that they have made it no small part of
their business to Widen those Breaches in Gods Church, which they should
zealously have endeavored to Close.

But tho the Nonconforming Preachers have been the chief, yet not the only
Fomenters of the Divisions among the Protestants in these Nations, which are
indeed in a great measure imputable to the prodigious Licentiousness, and the
uneven Management of Affairs in a late Reign: The Dissenters having perhaps
just Occasion, at some times, to despise the Government for its too easy
Condescentions; and at other times to abhor its Rigor in too severe an
Execution of the Laws against 'em: Whereas the Civil Magistrates Behavior to
his People, should resemble that of discreetly tender Parents to their
Children; not indulging their Follies by an imprudent Fondness, nor punishing
their Faults by too harsh a Correction, but by constantly keeping a strict hand
over 'em, which will prove the most effectual means of preventing, or
restraining their Exorbitancies.

And truly the present state in this Kingdom does seem in a more especial
manner to require the watchful Eye of the Government in observing, and a
prudently strict hand in managing, the Public Affairs. For tho the Vindicator
tells us, that this present Toleration can tempt none to leave Scotland, yet
I Am sure it has not hindered many Thousand Families from coming thence, and
settling in this Nation within these Five Years; and it is observable, that the
Dissenting Ministers among 'em, are all zealous for the Covenant, and it is not
to be doubted but that the whole Body of the People (excepting some few
Highlanders) are of the same Persuasion with those Teachers: And all of 'em
being lately come from a Kingdom where Episcopacy is abolished, and Presbytery
established, and having solemnly sworn to exterpate Prelacy; and their Aversion
to our Ecclesiastical Polity being so deeply rooted in their Natures, and their
Obligation to destroy it so strongly enforced upon their Consciences, there is
great reason to fear, that when their Power and Numbers are increased, they
will employ their Utmost Strength, and most Vigorous Endeavors to Overturn
(now their hand is in) this Truly Apostolical Government of the Established
Church: And therefore for the preservation of the public Peace and Safety of
the Nation, it is advisable that we should deal with their Preachers at their
first coming over as it is usually done with those that come from a Country
infested with the Plague: they should all be obliged to perform their
Quarentine, and undergo some Religious Tests, and Probations, before they be
publicly allowed to Preach in their Conventicles.

Neither may the Civil Government of this Nation, be less reasonably alarmed
with it is Danger from the Cameronians, who are lately Landed here, and dwell
among us, and are not so inconsiderable in their Numbers as the Vindicator
re-presents 'em: For he tells us, he could hear of few or none left in this
Kingdom: By which I perceive he is as great a stranger to the State of this
part of Ireland, as he imagins me to be to the Public Affairs of Scotland.

But the next mistake, or rather disingenuity he is guilty of, within a few
lines after is of greater Consequence and more Unpardonable; where he tells us
that the Avou'd designs of extirpating the Protestant Dissenters, were declared
in the many Sanguinary Laws passed against 'em, both in England and Scotland,
and that there were later Ones in Scotland, that made it Capital to be present
at their Meetings.

To which I Answer, That as I never heard of any, so I Am informed by some (that
have reason to know this matter, better than the Vindicator) that there is not
one Sanguinary Law in England against Protestant Dissenters: And touching
Scotland, I do not find that there was any Sanguinary Law enacted against
Protestant Dissenters in that Kingdom, except one, which was August the
Thirteenth 1670. Wherein it is Declared, that whereas Field Conventicles are the
Rendezvous of Rebellion, and tend in a high measure to the Disturbance of the
public Peace; He that shall Preach or Pray, in such Field Meetings, shall be
punished with Death, and Confiscation of Goods, and every person present at
such Field-Conventicles, shall be fined toties quoties, in the double of the
respective Fines appointed for House Conventicles. And that this Act was to
continue in force only for three Years, unless his Majesty think fit it should
continue longer: By which it is observable.

First, That the occasion of making this Act was, because Field-Conventicles
were Rendezvouses of Rebellion.

Secondly, That no Person was to be punished with Death, but he that Preached
or Prayed in those Field-Conventicles. For

Thirdly, All others that were present at those Meetings, had only a double
Fine imposed upon 'em. And

Fourthly, This Act was to continue in force but for three Years, unless the
King (viz. King Charles the Second, who was Remarkable for his Clemency) should
continue it longer.

And now the Reader may take notice, that those many Sanguinary Laws, which the
Vindicator tells us, were in force in England, against Protestant Dissenters,
prove upon Enquiry, to be none at all: That the many Sanguinary Laws in
Scotland, against 'em, are, as far as I can find, reduced to One: That the Law
Declaring it Capital to be present at their Religious Meetings, extended only
to Field Conventicles; and that the avowed Designs of Extirpating Protestant
Dissenters, were not formed against the Hearers, but solely against them that
Preached or Prayed in those Seminaries of Rebellion. So disingenuous is the
Vindicator, in saying that there were many Sanguinary Laws in Scotland, that
made it Capital to be present at the Meetings of Protestant Dissenters,
intimating thereby that every Person who was present at any of their Religious
Meetings, was to be punished with Death.

And how destructive their Principles, as well as their Practices were to the
Established Church and Government, was plainly evidenced by the desperate
obstinacy of these Field Conventicle Rebels, several of whom refused to save
their Lives at so dear a Rate (as they called it) as praying for the King. And
certainly those that refuse to give the Government (under which they Live) all
reasonable assurances of their Fidelity and Obedience, and will not solemnly
Disavow their Turbulent Principles, but still retain their Inveterate
prejudices, and pernicious Disaffection to the Established Church and State,
cannot with any modesty expect to be treated as sincere and hearty Friends; but
as declared and open Enemies to the lasting Peace and Settlement of the Nation.

And tho the Vindicator tells us, That the Conformists, and the Dissenters in
England did now Converse more sociably, and Live more peaceably together, than
when the Protestant Dissenters were in danger of having their Persons
imprisoned, and their Goods distrained and sold: Yet this only manifests the
undisturbed security which the Dissenters there enjoy; but does not prove
either their modest behavior to the Government, or any grateful returns they
have made to the Conformists for the Indulgence that is granted 'em: But on the
contrary, I have been very credibly informed, since my writing the first
Answer, That the Dissenters in England were grown very insolent on the news of
the intended Dissolution of the last Parliament, and that they resolved (if
possible) to necessitate the Government to make some larger Concessions in
behalf of their Ministers.

By this late instance of their restless tempers we may conclude, That they
will (as their Circumstances admit) imitate the Example of their Nonconforming
Fathers in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, of whom the Historian Isaac Waltons Life of
M. Hooker
gives account, That first they began with tender and meek Petitions, proceeded
to Admonitions, then to satirical Remonstrances, and at last, having taken an
estimate of their strength, durst threaten, first the Bishops, and then the
Queen and Parliament.

And now the Vindicator's method leads me to consider the Replies he makes to
my Answers; of the Arguments he produced in his first Paper, for the
reasonableness of granting an Irrestrictive Indulgence to Protestant Dissenters.

To the first of his Arguments, drawn from the early Zeal of the Dissenters in
behalf of this Government I returned Answer, by enumerating several
considerable Marks of Royal Favor, which the Nonconformists in this Kingdom
have for these several years enjoyed as a Reward of their Services. To which he
replies, that it is reasonable that the continuance of the same favor should be
secured to 'em by Law Now to this the Answer is very easy; namely, That a legal
security of the same favor is not denied 'em, if they be pleased to accept of
it, with those Clauses and Restrictions that their equally deserving Brethren
do now enjoy it in England: And if they had as full an assurance of their own
dutiful Obedience to the Government for the future, as they have reason to have
an entire confidence in His Majesty's justice and goodness, they would not only
with gratitude acknowledge the many signal Acts of Royal Bounty, but would also
with a cheerful thankfulness acquiess in their present Indulgence. And whereas
the Vindicator intimates that there are few of the French Protestants, but if
left to their liberty, would choose a Discipline, and Worship more conformable
to their own, than ours.

I Answer, First, That supposing it were true that the French Protestants have
a more forward inclination to the Communion of the Nonconformists, than to that
of the Established Church, it would not in the least abate the force of my
Argument: For the Question between us, is not whether the French Protestants
are more inclined to our way of Religious Worship than to that of the
Dissenters; but whether their generally declaring the Forms of our Communion
lawful, and unanimously joining with us in the same Divine Offices, as they all
did before the late Troubles, do not give them, tho Foreigners, a better Title
to a legal Indulgence than those of our own Country, who scandalously separate
from us; most of whom severely censure our Form of Worship as unlawful, and
many of 'em judge our Church Government to be Antichristian.

Secondly, The best way of passing a right Judgment on the Principles of any
particular Church, is not by taking notice of the inconsiderate Words or
Actions of some of the meaner sort of the Laity, but by observing the solemn
Declarations, and the constant practice of the Learned Clergy of that
Communion. And therefore, that the Reader may the better know what Sentiments
the French Protestant Church entertains of our Liturgy and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, as also what Censures she passes on our Brethrens Separation
from us; I shall deliver the Judgment of some of the most eminent Divines
amongst the French Protestants, out of their own Letters, written professedly
on this Subject about Fifteen Years ago: The first of which shall be that of
Monsieur Le Moyne, Professor of Divinity at Leyden. whose Words, according to
the English Translation are these, viz. From whence does it come that some
Englishmen themselves have so ill an opinion of her (meaning the Church of
England) at present, and divide rashly from her as they do? Is not this to
divide from all the ancient Churches, from all the Churches of the East, from
all the Protestant Churches, which have always had a very great respect for the
Purity of that of England. -- For my part, as much inclined to Toleration as I
am, I cannot for all this persuade my self, that it ought to be allowed to
those that have so little of it for other Men; and who, if they were Masters,
would certainly give but bad Quarter to those that depended upon them. I look
upon these Men as disturbers of the State and Church, and who are doubtlesly
animated by a Spirit of Sedition. Nay, I can scarce believe that they are such
as they say they are; and I should be something afraid that very dangerous
Enemies might be hid under color of these Teachers. Societies composed of such
Persons would be extreme dangerous; and they could not be suffered without
opening the Gate to Disorder, and advancing toward ones own Ruin. There are
some of these that are composed of more reasonable Men, but I could wish they
were reasonable enough not to separate from those, of which the Church of
England is composed. -- For, to speak the truth, I do not see that their
Meetings are of any great use, or that one may be more comforted there, than in
the Episcopal Churches. When I was at London, almost Five Years ago, I went to
several of their private Assemblies, to see what way they took for the
Instruction of the People, and the Preaching of the Word of God; but I profess
I was not at all Edified by it. --

The second Extract I shall produce, is taken out of a Letter of Monsieur De
L'Angle, one of the Protestant Ministers of Charenton near Paris, and is as
follows, viz. That which you tell me of Writings which are at this time
published, to make Men believe that communion with the Church of England is
unlawful, etc. seems to me, a thing so unreasonable in it self, and so very
unreasonable now, that I should scarce believe it, if it were not attested by a
person of your merit, and consideration. -- The way which I used two years ago,
when I was in England, in frequenting your Assemblies, and Preaching too in a
Congregation that is under the Jurisdiction of the Church of England,
sufficiently shows that I am very far from believing that her Communion is
unlawful. And this also proves very evidently, that my Opinion in this matter
is the same that is holden by our Churches; because it is not imaginable that I
would, without any necessity have done a thing which would have drawn the
displeasure of my Brethren upon me, and which at my return would have exposed
my self to be blamed, if not to be censured by them. -- I would to God, that
all the mistaken Christians that are in the World would receive your
Reformation; I would with all my heart spend all the blood I have, to procure
them so great a good. And I am sure with what an exceeding Joy our Churches
would enter into their Communion, if being pure in their opinions for Doctrine,
they differed no more from us than by Surplices, and innocent Ceremonies; and
some diversity of Orders in the Government of the Church. -- It is without
doubt the duty of all the Reformed of your Realm to keep themselves inseparably
United to the Church: And those that do not this, upon pretense that they
should desire more simplicity in their Ceremonies, and less of inequality among
the Ministers, do certainly commit a very great sin. --

The 3d Person whose sense I shall give concerning the separating of the
English Protestants from the Established Church, is that of Monsieur Claude,
Colleague with Monsieur de L'Angle, in the Church of Charenton: in these words
viz. We do not believe that a single Difference of Government or Discipline,
nor even a Difference of Ceremonies, innocent in their own Nature, is a
sufficient occasion to break the sacred Bond of Communion. -- The same reason
which makes them desire the Independency of the Flocks, may be likewise
employed to Establish the Independency of the Persons in every Flock: For a
Flock has no more right to desire to be Independent upon other Flocks, than a
Person might have to desire to be Independent upon other Persons. But this
would be to bring all Discipline to nothing, to throw the Church, as much as in
us lies, into a horrible Confusion, and to expose the Heritage of the Lord to
the Reproach of its Adversaries. But to imagine that we cannot with a good
Conscience be present at Assemblies, but only when we do fully and generally
approve of all things in them, is certainly not to know neither the use of
Charity, nor the Laws of Christian Society. This Principle would overturn all
Churches; for I cannot tell whether there be any, whose Government, Discipline,
outward Form, Usages and Practices be of such perfection, that there is nothing
at all in them to blame; and however it be, as the judgments of Men are very
different, this would be to open the Gate to continual Separations, and to
abolish all Assemblies. It is therefore certain, that Conscience does not
oblige us to withdraw from the Assemblies, but on the contrary, it obliges us
to join with them, when the things that offend us are Tolerable, and do not
hinder the Salutary efficacy of the Word, of the Divine Worship, and of the
Sacraments. It Is the favor of this Charitable patience that justifies our
being present at those things, which we do not perfectly approve. See what St.
Paul says, to the Phillippians, Chap. 3. If in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you Nevertheless, whereto we have
already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing.
This is very far from saying, as soon as ye have the least contrary sentiments;
Separate your selves, Conscience will not allow you to remain together. -- What
deadly effects would not such a Separation produce if it were Established
amongst you? As the dispositions of Men are, one should quickly see to spring
from hence a difference of Interests, of Parties, of Opinions, even in respect
of the civil Society, mutual Hatred, and all the other sad Consciences which a
Division not tempered with Charity, does naturally produce. The Question here
is not about the esse or the been esse, but only about the melius esse that
they dispute with you, and this being so, Justice, Charity, the Love of Peace,
Prudence and Zeal for Religion in General, will never allow that they should
Divide themselves from you. --

To his third Reply, wherein he tells us, That it is fit the Dissenters should
have a fuller security granted 'em than the Papists; because it is reasonable
that some difference should be made between those that deserve well and those
that deserve ill of the Government.

I Answer, That it is unquestionably true, that there ought to be a very
considerable distinction in the treatment of persons in so dfferent, or rather
in so contrary circumstances as those whom the Vindicator mentions; but still
this Rule ought to be understood with this supposition, viz. That the
dispensing of those Favors be in the free choice and election of the
Government; for it is no reflection on the justice or kindness of the Civil
Parent, if by the pressure of some Unfortunate Occurrences he be forced
unavoidably to a Concession of such favorable and advantageous conditions to
an Enemy, which if he was left to the freedom of his own Will, neither his
Fatherly kindness would incline him, nor his Prudence permit him to allow to
some, even of his own Children.

To his fourth Reply, viz. That the Dissenters do not think a general
Declaration of Tenderness a sufficient security from future Persecution.

I Answer, That they have far less reason to be jealous of the kindness of the
Government to 'em, on any State turn, than we have to be apprehensive of the
change of their Behavior on the granting 'em a free and irrespective
Indulgence; and if ever we should follow the Wise Man's Advice in Remembering to
Distrust, it should be when we are treating with persons whom by former
Experience we have found to be Men of uncertain Measures, and unsteady Tempers;
and we know not what Changes some sudden Turns of public Affairs might
possibly make in the Passions and Interests of such Men, and therefore, tho the
Vindicator cannot but apprehend a legal and irrestrictive Liberty more
desirable and satisfying to Dissenters; yet I presume all prudent and unbias'd
persons will agree in judging a limited Indulgence to be both more proper for
the Nonconformists themselves, and far more conducive to the establishment of
the public Peace, and for the security of the Government both of Church and
State: And none ever blamed the quiet Chinese, who having had so frequent, and
so fatal experience of the Incursions of the Tartars, built a Wall on their
Frontiers to defend 'em from the violent encroachments of their envious and
unpeaceable Neighbors.

And now at length the Vindicator being sensible of the insufficiency of his
Replies to my Answer, endeavors to Support the weakness of 'em by having
Recourse to a pretended Memorial of the Affairs of the Church of Scotland since
the Revolution; for being hunted out of his Cover of Arguments, he thinks fit
to take Soil, in matter of Fact, He therefore presents us with a Letter, which
he petends to have received from a Friend, who, as he tells us has good ground
to understand the Affairs of that Kingdom better than the Answerer; but what
advantage soever the writer of that account may possibly have of the Answerer,
in his knowledge of those late remarkable Transactions there, I am fully
persuaded he does not understand them better then the Vindicator, for the style
of the Letter does clearly discover him to be the Author of it and plainly
shows, that it was writ from himself to himself. And besides, the pretended
Narrative of those public Affairs has so many Marks of his peculiar Genious in
setting things in a false Light as are easily distinguishable from those of
other Men.

And first, concerning the particulars of this Letter, I shall observe, that
the general Reflection which he Casts on the whole Body of the Scotch Bishops,
for Expressing their utmost abhorrence of His Majesty's Descent into England,
their Unanimous Deserting the Convention of Scotland, would in all probability,
if it had been true, have occasioned some public and severe Remark to be
passed upon them, and would have been insisted on as the most plausible, if not
the greatest Reason for the Exterpation of Episcopacy: whereas in the Act for
Abolishing Prelacy in that Kingdom, there is not the least censure passed on
any of the Bishops, either on account of any misbecoming Actions of their
Lives, or of any unpeaceable Turbulency of their Principles in Relation to the
Civil Government.

And it cannot but appear very hard, that so many worthy persons should be made
the Instances of so remarkable a severity, for no other reason; but for the
Eminency of their Stations, and the Principles of their Religion.

But Secondly, Because the Vindicator so confidently asserts, That there is not
so much as One single Man of the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland who were in the
possession of the Churches, and public Livings when King James, Abdicated and
Forfeited, who has been since King William's Accession to the Throne thrust out
for any other Crime, than either first, For not Reading the Proclamation
whereby King William and Queen Mary were declared King and Queen; or 2dly. For
their not Praying for their Majesty's; or 3dly. For not Swearing the Oath of
Allegiance and Assurance; or 4thly. For Immoralities as the Church of England
as truly disallows as Presbyterians. I shall produce a remarkable instance to
the Contrary in an Episcopal Clergy man of Scotland who is now in this City;
The Clergy man's Name is Mr. Samuel Mowat, of the Diocese of Glascow, who was in
the possession of his Living of Crawford John, after King William's and Queen
Mary's accession to the Throne, and Read the Proclamation whereby King William
and Queen Mary were declared King and Queen, published by the Council of
Scotland, April 13. 1689. by the appointment of the General Assembly. And
secondly, He publicly Prayed for Their Majesty's. And thirdly, Took the Oath
of Allegiance, and Subscribed the Assurance before the Council in Scotland,
which was all that was required of him by the Council. Neither fourthly, were
there any Immoralities laid to his charge; and moreover declared his
willingness to submit to the Presbyterian Government, according to His
Majesty's Formula: For the truth of all which he appeals to the Books of the
Council and the Books of the Treasury of Scotland where these things are
recorded; yet Notwithstanding all these Quallifications, when the said Mr.
Mowat made his Application to the Presbyteries of Lanerke and Hamilton, in
order to be Restored to his former Living (out of which he had been violently
turned by the Rabble) he was rejected by them, because he would not Renounce
the Episcopal Government, and declare his Unseigned Sorrow for his submitting
to it heretofore. By which we may percieve that what the Vindicator, or his
Friend, has told us concerning the Terms on which the Episcopal Clergy of
Scotland may be continued in their Livings, is far more confidently than truly
asserted.

And Mr. Mowat does further declare, that he was so far from prejudicing the
Presbyterians against him that he protected 'em, and interposed his interest in
King Charles the Second's time to preserve 'em from any severe usage, on
account of their Nonconformity to the then Established Government of the
Church; and yet notwithstanding all the good Offices he had done the
Presbyterians, he, and his Wife, and Four small Children, were violently turned
out of his House, in a very stormy day, and forced to take shelter in a Barn,
but durst not return to his House, or live in his Parish for fear of the
Rabble, but went and lived privately in Dunfreze, where the Rabble took a
Common Prayer Book (which some Episcopal Ministers were privately reading
together) and put it on a Pole and burnt it publicly.

Thirdly, The Vindicators Friend further tells us, That so far are they in
Scotland from exercising Severities against Men for their being Episcopal in
their Judgment, that a great part of the Ministers of that Kingdom, who enjoyed
not only the Protection of the Government, but the free and public exercise of
their Ministry, together with the legally established Maintenance before the
First of September last, were, or professed to be of the Episcopal Persuasion,
and had not all that time so much as taken the Oath of Allegiance to His
Majesty; and yet of these no more is required for their continuance in their
Parishes, than that they take the said Oath of Allegiance and Assurance, and
that they behave themselves worthily in Doctrine, Life, and Conversation, as
appears by the Act of Parliament past the 16th of July 1695.

Now before I return a distinct Answer to these several particulars, I cannot
forbear most seriously to declare my wonder and astonishment at those who
pretending to be more than ordinarily strict and holy Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and the most faithful and obedient Servants of the God of Truth, can
allow themselves the liberty of wilfully misrepresenting the most notorious
Matters of Fact, and the plainest state of Public Affairs, by designedly
casting their sense into such Phrases as may impress on the unwary Readers Mind
such a meaning of 'em as is flatly contrary to the Truth of things, and the
certain knowledge of the Writer. Now that the Vindicator is most scandalously
guilty of this disingenuous way of writing will more fully appear by a distinct
consideration of his Words that I have last recited.

For first, Tho it is very true that a great part of the Episcopal Clergy in
Scotland have enjoyed the free Exercise of their Religion, and have had the
quiet possession of their Parishes ever since the late Revolution; and for
these several Years last past had neither taken the Oath of Allegiance to His
Majesty, nor made any Submission to the Presbyterian Judicatories, yet I may
justly deny any one of these to be true, in the sense that the Vindicator would
impose them on the Reader; for it is evident that these Remarkable Instances of
a seeming Favor, which the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland have for some time
enjoyed, he produces as Arguments of the Moderation of the Presbyterian
Government there; whereas in truth these were nothing else but the effects of
the weakness of that party, for that great part of the Episcopal Clergy in
Scotland, which the Vindicator mentioned, as having so long continued
undisturbed in the exercise of their Religion, and the enjoyment of their
Benefices, are most espetially, if not solely, the Ministers that live on the
North side of the River Tay which is known to be little less than half of that
Kingdom; and where it is very remarkable that there are (as I am very credibly
informed) about Eleven Persons of the Episcopel persuasion for One
Presbyterian, and it must be allowed as a most Notable Proof of the
Vindicator's ingenuous temper in extolling the Lenity of the Presbyterian in
the West, for the granting to those of the Episcopal persuasion in the North a
free exercise of their Religion, which they wanted sufficient power to
suppress; and in permitting the Ministers quietly to enjoy their Benefices,
where they had no Rabble on their side to dispossess 'em; and in not imposing
an humble Submission to the Presbytery on those who were very considerable in
their Number, and universally devoted to the Episcopal Government; by all which
we may perceive, that it was not the special Indulgence of the Presbyterians in
the West, but the formidable force of the Episcopal party in the North that
secured the Ministers there in the undisturbed possession of their Livings, and
exempted them from the grievous Impositions of the Kirk.

But secondly, As every odinary Reader must observe that the Vindicator, or his
Friend, makes mention of an Act of Parliament in Scotland passed the 16th. of
July last, in favor of the Episcopal Clergy of that Kingdom, so every thinking
Reader must conclude, that if there had been any other Acts of Parliament of
the like nature passed since the Revolution, the Vindicator would undoubtedly
have produced 'em, and therefore since he produces but one single public Act
of Grace to those of the Episcopal persuasion in that Kingdom, and that too of
so late a date as July last, it is left to every prudent and impartial Reader to
consider what sort of Usage the Episcopal Ministers have had for these last
Five Years, not only from the unparalled rage of a Barbarous Rabble, but also
from the intemperate zeal of their bitter and bigoted Enemies in Authority.

Nay thirdly, This very Act of Parliament which the Vindicators Friend seems so
much boast to of, and thinks himself so happy in having in his Custody, and
does so much depend on undeniably to demonstrate the Lenity of the Presbyterian
Government in Scotland, has considerable Marks in it of the great hardships the
Episcopal Clergy have been under heretofore, as also plain Evidences of the
Continuance of many Severities against them for the future: For having that Act
of Parliament by me, which he refers to in his Letter, I observe first, That
the Favor granted by it, is only to those Ministers that were at the time of
his Majesty's happy Accesion to the Crown, and have since Continued actual
Ministers in particular Parishes; By which it is evident there is no provision
made for those that were violently dispossessed of their Livings by the Rabble,
tho they should take the Oath of Allegiance, and Subscribe the Assurance, which
I hope the Vindicator himself will acknowledge to be severe; for he having
owned, That the barbarous treatment of the Episcopal Ministers, by the Western
Rabble, was an Illegal violence, which none can excuse. The Argument he makes
of to Justify the Government there, for not employing their authority in
quelling those illegal violences, was, because their Circumstances were such
that they might have hazarded the overturning the whole Revolution, by
immediately resettling 'em in their Parishes; so that according to the
Vindicator himself, as soon as the violent ferment of popular Rage was abated,
and the present new model of the Church established, those Ministers who had
been barbarously abused should have been quietly resetl'd in their Parishes by
the authority of the Government; but they were so far from receiving this
Ordinary Mark of Public Favor, that these were not allowed the Liberty to
perform the Offices of their Function in their Parishes, on the same Conditions
with those of their Episcopal Brethren who had still continued on their Cures.

And Secondly, Those Ministers also are excluded by that Act, who are under any
Sentence of Deposition or Deprivation past against them; (and how many those
are is not easily known) and are now unqualify'd for any Ecclesiastical
Benefices, tho they should apply themselves to the present Church Government
for Admission, and perform all the conditions that are required of others.

Fourthly, That the severities in Scotland, since the Revolution, against the
Episcopal Clergy, have been more than ordinary, may be clearly demonstrated by
an Act of Parliament passed June the 12th. 1693. whereby it is Enacted, That no
Person be Admitted, or Continued to be a Minister, or Preacher, within the
Church of Scotland, unless he own the Presbyterian Government to be the only
Church Government of that Church; that he will submit thereunto, and Concur
therewith, and never endeavor directly or indirectly, the prejudice or
Subversion thereof. Now from hence we may take an Estimate of the truth of what
the Vindicator tells us, viz. That in Scotland, they are far from exercizing
Severities against men for their being Episcopal in their Judgment; for I
presume all rational, and indifferent persons will be fully convinced that the
Episcopal Clergy of Scotland are very far from being favorably treated by this
Act; tho perhaps the Vindicator may be of so rigorous a temper, and of so wild
an opinion, as to believe that no Ministers of the Episcopal persuasion can be
harshly dealt withal, and that the Depriving them of those Benefices which
they were formerly possessed of, and the Declaring them incapable of Enjoying
'em for the future is no hardship, or Severity at all.

Secondly, It Is ordered in this Act, that Uniformity of Worship and
Administration of all public Ordinances within the Church of Scotland should
be observed and Subscribed by all Ministers, and Preachers, not only as it is
at present performed but as it shall hereafter be declared by the authority of
the same. Now if it be deservedly counted unreasonable for the Papists to
oblige the members of their Communion to Implicit Faith, and to believe as the
Church believes, it must also seem very strange, for the Presbytery of Scotland
to Impose an Implicit Obedience on all those that shall be Admitted, or
Continued Ministers or Preachers in their Communion, and to require their
solemn Engagement to Observe that Uniformity of Worship which the Church does
now, or shall hereafter order to be Observed. And methinks this new Mode of
promising, does nearly resemble the old way of sweating to et coetera's.

Upon the humble Representation of these and other Grievances to his Majesty
which the Episcopal Clergy lay under in Scotland, his Majesty was pleased to
write such a Letter in their favor to the Government in that Kingdom, as gave
Rise to the forming of the Bill that passed the 16th of July last, whereby the
Act of July the 12th. 1693, was in part repealed in favor of some persons
only, whose more than ordinary Circumstances gained them an Exemption from the
severity of that Law. Notwithstanding which it is observable they passed a very
severe Act the 5th of July 1695. against the Episcopal Clergy under the name of
Intruders, by whom were Chiefly meant those Episcopal Ministers who being
thrust by the Rabble from their Churches, had repossess'd themselves of them,
when the popular Fury was abated. And by this Act it is Declared first, that
such Intrusion into Parishes without an orderly Call from the Heretors, and
Legal Admission from the Presbytery, was of dangerous consequence, and tending
to perpetuate Schism. Secondly those persons that have thus Intruded are
Declared incapable of any Church or Stipend within the Kingdom for the space of
Seven years. Thirdly, Sheriffs, Stewards, etc. are required to remove all
those that shall hereafter Intrude into Churches. Fourthly, Letters of Horning
and Caption are ordered against 'em to Compel the Intruders upon Ten days
warning to remove from their Churches. And fifthly, they are commanded to cause
those Ministers to cease from exercizing any Ministerial Acts within the said
Parishes into which they shall hereafter Intrude. And sixthly, the Privy
Council are to take effectual Course to hinder those Ministers that are, or
shall be hereafter deposed by Judicatories of the present established Church
from Preaching or Exercizing any Act of their Ministerial Function.

And therefore we may undoubtedly conclude, that the reason of the Vindicator's
not publishing the Act of Parliament of Scotland passed the the 16th of July
last, was not the Inconvenience of delaying his Reply to my Answer (as is
alleged to the Letter) but a just Apprehension of seting Matters in a true
Lighr, and of exposing too plainly his Gross and Wilful Misrepresentations of
the present state of that Kingdom.

Now by all the foregoing Remarks I have made on the Vindicator's Letter, every
intelligent and impartial Reader may easily judge what great reason he had so
Triumphantly to say that in this Resolution, Scotland has set those of the
Established Church a very commendable example of moderation which if they will
once come up to, and equal the Dissenters, will give 'em leave to censure any
thing that may yet seem too hard in their Constitution.

I must indeed acknowledge that we cannot boast of our coming up to and
equalling the example which the present Presbyterian Government in Scotland has
set us; for.

1st. Our Moderation to Dissenters has not expressed it self in the raising of
the Rabble against 'em, much less in returning them public and solemn thanks
for the greatness of their Zeal.

Nor 2dly. has our Church of England Parliament in this Kingdom declared that
the Nonconformist Ministers in exercising any part of their Ministerial
Function have offered a high Contempt of the Law, as tending to perpetuate
Schism and of dangerous Consequence.

Nor 3dly. has their Commendable example influenced us to make an Act of
Parliament in 1695. against Nonconforming Ministers as Intruders (tho they be
really so) into our Parishes.

Nor 4thly. have we forbid any of 'em whom the Calamity of the late times had
driven away; to return and perform any Ministerial Acts in the places where
they formerly held their Conventicles, for want of a Legal Call.

Nor 5thly. have we by any Act of Parliament Authorized and required the Mayor
of Corporations, and Justices of the Peace, as in Scotland they have orderd
their Stuarts, Sheriffs, Bailzyes of Balzuries, etc. to remove all those that
shall hereafter intrude, not recommended the Removal of those that have already
intruded, to the Lords of the Privy Council.

Nor 6thly. Are we come up to, and equaled their Example in Ordaining Letters
of Horning and Caption, Viz. in issuing Writs of Rebellion and Capias's,
against Dissenting Ministers, in order to the Compelling 'em to remove out of
the Parishes, where they Live, and making 'em desist and Cease from exercising
any Ministerial Acts.

These are some of the many Instances of the Moderation of the present Church
Government in Scotland, toward those of the Episcopal persuasion, which I
presume the Vindicator on second thoughts will not be so fond of as to judge 'em
fit Patterns for us to imitate, much less to equal and come up to; but yet it is
highly probable that if such a Revolution of Church Affairs should happen in
this Kingdom, as we have lately seen in Scotland, the Vindicator and his
Adherents would be easily inclined to believe the practice of their
Presbyterian Brethren there a very considerable Example for them to follow
here, and would then be very fully persuaded that the Episcopal Clergy in
exercising the Acts of their Ministerial Function were guilty of dangerous
Schism, and would therefore think themselves indispensibly obliged to take some
effectual course to make 'em desist and cease from exercising any Ministerial
Acts, and would judge it a commendable instance of their Zeal to order Writts of
Rebellion and Capias's to be issued out against all those that should presume
to keep any separate Congregations. And indeed there is little reason to doubt
but that the Dissenters here would, if their Power was as great, and their
Numbers were as considerable as those of their Brethren in Scotland, equal and
come up to the lenity and moderation that is set 'em by the Presbyterian
Government there; not only in removing the Episcopal Clergy from their Parishes
by Letters of Horning and Caption, but also in depriving others of the
Episcopal persuasion of their Civil Offices by the imposition of New Tests: for
not only the Ministers of Parishes, but the Masters of Schools, and the
Professors in the Colleges of Scotland have felt the Rigor of the Presbyterian
Visitations, as is evident by the Inquisition that was lately practiced against
the Professors of the College of Edinburgh in August and September 1690,
according to an Act passed the 4th. of July 1690, by which it is ordered, That
no Minister, or Professor in any College or School, shall be allowed to
continue in the exercise of his Function, but such as do acknowledge and
profess, and shall subscribe the Confession of Faith rattified by this present
Parliament, -- and submitting to the Government of the Church now settled by
Law. --

And it is observable, first, That in the management of this Inquisition, all
the Leidges were warned and summoned to come in, and make what Objections they
could against the Masters.

Secondly, That the Commissioners of the Universities did plainly declare, with
what tenderness and moderation the Professors might expect to be treated by
'em, by their calling all Episcopal Men by the name of Malignants.

Thirdly, It Is observable, That when it was enquired of some of the
Commissioners whether by that part of the Test which requires to submit to
Presbytery were meant only a quiet and peaceable living under that Government,
or if it imported any thing farther: It was answered, that by that clause of
the Test was also meant, That every Master should thereby declare the
Presbyterian Government to be preferrable to any other whotsoever, and the only
Government left by Christ and his Apostles in the Church, and warratned by the
Scripture.

Now by those, without making any more Observations, every rational and
indifferent person may perceive by what spirit the Commissioners were acted,
and what issue the Professors, Dr. Monro and Dr. Strachan might have expected
of their Trial before 'em.

And now, tho I have just occasion to make further Reflections on the unfair
representation that has been made by the Vindicator, or his Friend, of the
state of Scotland since the Revolution, yet I shall rather choose to end the
account I have now given of the Affairs of that Kingdom with a just
commendation of the ingenuous temper of the General Assembly there, declared in
their Act for a solemn National Fast and Humiliation, with the Causes thereof,
at Edinburgh November the 12th. 1690. in which we have these remarkable words,
viz, The the Lord has put a stop to the course of Defection, and of his great
mercy given us some reviving from our Bondage, yet we have sad cause to regrate
and bemoan that few have a due sense of our Mercy, -- few walk as becomes the
Gospel, and imitate our holy Lord in Humility, Meekness, Charity toward Men;
there is even until now a great want of Piety toward God, and Love toward
Men, (viz. as I presume those of the Episcopal persuasion) with a woeful
selfishness, every one seeking their own things, few the things of Christ, or
the public good, or one another welfare. And finally, the most part more
ready to censure the Sins of others, than to repent of their own.

God grant, that as they have been very ingenuous in acknowledging their
grievous Offenses, particularly against their Neighbors, so they may be very
sincere in repenting of 'em.

And now the Vindicator's Method leads me to consider the remaining part of his
Replies to my former Answer. For having given him several Material Reasons why
some Conformists may be unwilling to grant the Dissenters a Legal Toleration,
the Vindicator replies, that there is no such satisfying mark of tenderness to
'em as this Legal security, and that it is hard to forbear some jealousy of
those that will still hold a severe lash in their hand.

To which I answer, that those Gently Penal Laws which he is pleased to term a
severe Lash are not designed as the Instruments of an Unreasonable Correction,
but as the Necessary Means of keeping such Children as are of a Froward and
Ungovernable temper within the Bounds of a due Subjection and therefore it
ought not to be esteemed an Unkind Severity, but a Prudent tenderness in a
Parent to deny 'em such Indulgences, as in all probability will be abused to
the divesting him of his Paternal Authority, and to the encouraging them to a
total withdrawing of their fillial duty and obedience for the future.

The next exception that he makes, is at my mentioning the Misdemeanors of the
Dissenters which I would have in the power of the Government to repress; by
which he seems to suspect (but without any ground) that I meant matters of mere
Nonconformity, but withal tells us, that if I meant any other misdemeanors, a
Legal Indulgence would not disable the Civil Magistrate from repressing them.

The Answer to which is very obvious; that tho a Legal Indulgence would not
wholly disable, yet would in some degree weaken the Hands of the Governor, and
besides, since the main design of all Government is Obedience, and not
Punishment, it becomes the wisdom of every Governor to take such measures as
may rather prevent than repress the Exorbitancies of the Subject.

His Reply to my Answer to his last Argument on the first head, refers to the
late and present circumstances of the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland, and tells
us, that no Protestants are persecuted in that Kingdom, on the account of
Religion, either by the Civil or the Ecclesiastical Government, and doubts not
but that by this time I am satisfied what Reply may be given to the Question I
propounded, viz. Whether there were any Law to Cover the Episcopal Clergy in
Scotland.

Now to this I presume I have given a full Answer in the preceding account of
the Church Affairs in that Kingdom out of several Acts of Parliament that were
passed there since the Revolution: by which the Reader may be inclined to think
that the Vindicator does rather take the liberty of a Traveller come lately
from a far Country, than to act the part of an impartial Relater of affairs
transacted in a neighboring Nation; and surely there is none of so little
Intelligence, or of so great Credulity in this Kingdom but can certainly know
what circumstances the Episcopal Clergy must be in, where the very Order of
Episcopacy it self has been so lately, and so forcibly extirpated.

In reference to the second thing desired by the Dissenters, viz. that there be
no such Clauses to the Bill of Indulgence as may disable 'em from serving the
King and their Country. I observe that this is the very Argument the Papists
made use in the late Reign for taking off the Penal Laws and Test, and the
design of the Dissenters now is the same with that of the Papists then, viz,
not only to capacitate themselves for all Employments of Honor, Trust, and
Profit, but also to exclude all others of a different persuasion for having a
share in any, unless perhaps in mean and unprofitable Offices. We freely
acknowledge that the late services of the Dissenters did deserve public Favor;
and I hope they will not deny but that they have received it in many
considerable instances; and I am glad that the Vindicator assures us, in their
name, that they do not seek any new Privilege, but only are unwilling to have a
new Yoke put upon 'em. I do not know indeed of any design that the Conformists
have, either of depriving the Dissenters of their present Liberties, or of
imposing on 'em a New Yoke; but if they desire an accession of New Favors, I
think we may justly expect a further security of our Legal Establishment, that
the advances of the public Safety may be suitable to the increase of their
Privileges; for it is not reasonable that we should either pull down or weaken
any part of our Church to furnish them with Materials to build or strengthen
theirs.

To what the Vindicator further urges, That if a thousand Men have ten or
twenty thousand Enemies to secure themselves against, it is against their
interest to divide their strength hy disabling three hundred of them from being
employed in any public Post for their common defense. I answer, That if these
thousand Men, as they plausibly agree in one common name, were as heartily
united in their affections, and if the three hundred of the thousand that seem
to be of the same party had as great a kindness to the remaining seven hundred
of their Allies, as they have an aversion to the twenty thousand of their
Enemies, I should then agree that the disabling of the three hundred were not
only an unreasonable weakening of our Confederate Forces, but a shameful
betraying of our Common Cause: But where we have good reason to believe that
the three hundred Men will with all secret Industry endeavor more to promote
the Interests of their own distinct party than to provide for the security of
the main body, if while they desire Arms to assist us in keeping a Conquered
Enemy in a due subjection, there be violent presumptions to persuade us that
they will make use of their power to the subduing of their Friends; in such a
case as this I think they have not so great reason to complain of our
Unkindness to them, or to accuse us of our neglect of the Common Interest, as
we have to suspect their Unfaithfulness to Us, and their preferring their own
separate designs to the public Good.

Now since it cannot be denied that there is a daily accession from a
neighboring Country of great numbers of such as are generally Enemies to the
Episcopal Government, and the public Worship of God establshed in this
Kingdom, We should look upon our selves indispensably obliged to take such
prudent measures as may secure us not only from the open Violence of our
professed Enemies, but also from the possibly ill designs of our seeming
Friends, and should be very cautious of expressing our tenderness to Protestant
Dissenters in such instances as may very probably tend to the disturbance of
the public Peace, and the subversion of the Established Church.

And that this Censure on the Dissenting Protestants of this Kingdom,
especially on those in the North, may appear to be reasonable, and the
Representation I have made of the public mischiefs of an unlimited Indulgence
to 'em may not seem to rely upon the Credit of my Assertion, I shall endeavor
to justify it by matters of Fact since the Revolution, attested by several
considerable persons of known prudence, and integrity in the North; One of whom
gives us this account; That the late Presbyterian Minister of the Parish where
he lives, viz. Litterkenny, did scarcely suffer a Lords day to pass these two
years, but he either expressly declared our Church to be Popish, and
Antichristian, or spoke words purporting as much, either in his Prayers or
Sermons, and that it was his Constant practice to pray for its Destruction, and
upon all occasions both preached and talked against its Government and holy
Offices as Popish, and Superstitious, and that upon the annual return of our
Festivals, he never failed to preach against 'em and forbad his people at their
utmost peril to keep any of 'em, and in particular last Christmas, he told his
hearers, in the Pulpit, that that Festival was kept in honor of the Devil, and
that he was solemnly worshipped on that day. And that for some years past he
commanded the Inhabitants of that Village not so much as to entertain a Servant
in their families who was of our Commumunion tho at the same time he indulged
'em to keep Popish Servants at pleasure. And that there was an Affidavit made
by a young Gentlewoman in that place, who had been Presbyterianly educated, but
out of mere conviction of Conscience came to Church, who deposes, That the
Presbyterian Minister of that Town said to her, that all of our Communion were
certainly damned, and publicly preached against Her, as an eternally damned
Creature, she having renounced her Baptism, and Christianity by going to
Church, and that he came to her Parents and bid 'em turn her out of doors, and
afford her neither meat, drink, nor lodging, and if that did not bring her back
to the Meeting to take her, and hang her up for her Apostasy, or to that
effect, as the original will show.

And I have received from the same worthy Person a further account, viz. That
the same Dissenting Minister puplickly called the Minister of the
forementioned Parish an Usurper, for keeping his Church, and Revenues from
him, who was the true, just, and legal owner of 'em, and all this without the
least provocation or disturbance given to him in the free exercize of his
Ministry in the Meeting house, or where ever else he pleased, save only in the
Parish Church.

And another considerable Person of the North in a late Letter to his Friend in
Dublin has these words, viz. To evidence how far we can depend upon
strengthening our Party against Irish Papists, by raising Dissenters, may appear
by their practice, anno 1690. and 1691.

Mr. Nathaniel Cooper (a Clergyman) was in the Town of Litterkenny by them
pulled out of the Church. They in the same Church hindered Mr. Crawford to
preach. Mr. John Lesly officiating in the Church of Rimoghy, Mr. Liston the
Presbiterian Minister (tho they had a Meeting House near the Church) came with
a Party, forced him to give over, threatened to Kill him, and Mr. Liston went up
and preached. And Mr. Hunter, in the Diocese of Derry had his Gown torn, and
was pulled out of the Pulpit.

But the latest, and most remarkable Instance he gives of the Inveterate Malice
of the Dissenting Ministers to the members of the Established Church, and the
utter Abhorrence they express to our Liturgy and Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
is in a Sermon preached by Mr. William H. near Castle Darg in the Diocese of
Derry, who took for his Text, the Second of Kings, 18. Chap. 4. v. whence he
endeavored to explain what Idolatry was, and how great a sin, and to prove
that Idolatry, and Idolaters were to be destroyed, he affirmed that the Book of
Common prayer Used by the Prelates was altogether Idolatrous, and that
therefore of necessity it should be destroyed; that Kneeling in the Receiving
the Sacrament was damnable, and that the Prelates were gone so far in Idolatry
that he believed they would at last worship the Devil.

I hope the Reader does observe, that tho Mr. H. does not expressly declare that
the Prelates, as well as the Common Payer Book, ought to be destroyed, yet his
Argument does manifestly imply the Necessity of their destruction too.

And from these Instances, we may undoubtedly Conclude, that if the Dissenters
have been guilty of such Intemperate Speeches, and Illegal violences against
those of the Established Religion, when the Liberty they enjoy wholly depends
on the favorable Connivance of the Government; they will be most insufferably
Insolent, and Tumultuous, if by their Importunity, and our Imprudence they
should gain the uncontrollable Liberty of a Legal Irrestrictive Indulgence. So
true was the Representation which the House of Commons in England made to K.
Charles the 2d. above thirty years ago, of the fatal Consequence of granting
Toleration to Dissenting Protestants, viz. That it would be so far from tending
to the peace of the Kingdom, that it was rather likely to occasion great
disturbances, because the variety of professions in Religion does directly
distinguish Men into Parties, and withal gives them opportunity to count their
Numbers, which considering the animosities, which out of a religious pride will
be kept on foot by the several Factions does tend directly and inevitably to
open Disturbance, nor can your Majesty have any Security that the Doctrine or
Worship of the several Factions which are all Governed by a several Rule shall
be consistent with the peace of your Kingdom.

And we cannot reasonably expect, that if Dissenting Protestants should grow
considerable in their Numbers, and power, they would express a more dutiful
regard to the Established Church in this Kingdom, than they have lately done in
a Neighboring Country, and therefore we ought not to entertain so great a
fondness for these professed Protestants us to lay a side all jealous
Apprehensions of Bigoted Covenanters; For a pompous appearance of Zeal against
Popery cannot make sufficient compensation to us for an irreconcilable hatred
of Episcopacy.

That the Number of Papists will in all probability increase by the granting an
irrestrictive Indulgence to Protestant Dissenters, I have I hope, sufficiently
proved in the preceding part of this Discourse, and that the Vindicator may
perceive that his Reply to the Instance I gave of Holland is plainly
insufficient, I shall farther acquaint him that it is so far from being evident
that those who adhere to the Protestant Religion, as there established, are a
large Body, to which those that are excluded from public Service bear no
proportion. That every one who has but a superficial knowledge of that State can
inform him, that none but Calvinists are admitted into any Employments in the
Policy or Justice of that Country, and that the several Sects and Denominations
of Protestants there, are a far larger Body than those of the Established
Church. And it is the observation of Pensioner Fagell, one of the late great
Ministers of that State, That there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any
constituted Body or Assembly whatsoever, in which there are not Laws made for
the safety thereof, and that provide against all attempts whatsoever that
disturb their Peace, and that prescribe the Conditions and Qualities that they
judge necessary for all that shall bear Employments in that Kingdom, State, or
Corporation: And he declares his Judgment, that no Man can pretend that there
is any Injury done him that he is not admitted to Employments when he does not
satisfy the Conditions and Qualities required. --

I have told the Vindicator in my Answer to the Case, that in the North of
Ireland, where there are the greatest numbers of Dissenters, the generality of
the Nobility and Gentry are Conformists; so that if another Rebellion should
break out (which God forbid) there is no danger of what the Vindicator urges,
viz. That any considerable party of Men might be disobliged by having any but
their Landlords, or other Gentlemen of their acquaintance, or of great esteem
and authority in their Country to command 'em; and as those that first shut the
Gates of Derry against the late King's Soldiers, and those that were the
Governors of it in the time of the Siege were Conformists, so I am very
credibly informed that in that prodigiously daring and successful party at
Eniskillin there was not one Commission Officer, not so much as one Ensign,
that was not of the Established Church, and of the private Sentinels there were
Six Conformists to One Dissenter.

To what the Vindicator says, viz. that there is nothing to the purpose in my
Answer to his Third Argument drawn from the Parliament of England, I Answer
that since in the beginning of his Vindication he had expressly declared that he
would present the Reader with the Answerers Reply in his own words; he has here
neither been just to his own Promise, nor answered the Readers most reasonable
expectation of presenting him with the sense of my Answer: However he has well
consulted the Reputation of a weak Argument which he himself acknowledges to be
but a probable one, by not producing the least word of that Answer, which was
so plain a Refutation of it. Yet since he is pleased to say, that if the
Parliament of England had thought the Sacrament Test Needful, they could easily
have added it as they have the Test against Popery mentioned in the same Act.

I answer, that if the Parliament of England had intended to excuse the
Protestant Dissenters in this Kingdom, from a Sacrament Test, as they had
obliged 'em to the Test against Popery, they might as easily have forbid the
former as they have positively enjoined the latter.

And since the Vindicator, in his Reply to my Answer to his fourth Argument,
desires to know what Rights of the Church have been hazarded since this
Revolution, I shall acquaint him (tho I presume he has heard it before) that
the Dissenters in the North did generally refuse to pay the Conforming
Ministers their accustomed Dues till His Majesty did on that occasion put forth
his Royal Proclamation for the payment of 'em.

And whereas the Vindicator speaks of the Government's employing a few
Protestant Dissenters in a few Inferior Offices, I must needs tell him, that
this is a plain mincing of the matter, or rather, (to give it its due
character) a most disingenuous representation of the desires of the Dissenters;
for I would fain know whether they would be satisfied that an Act of Parliament
in their favor should be so worded as to qualify some few Dissenters for an
admission into some few inferior Offices. I am sure a friend of the
Vindicators, namely the Author of their Case, did not represent their desires
in this seemingly modest guise, but their Indulgence desired was without any
restriction of the number of Persons, and without distinction of the quality of
Offices.

Nay supposing the case was really as the Vindicator represents it: We know
that when a great crowd is waiting at a door, tho there be but few of them that
may reasonably expect, or be duly qualified for admittance, yet when the Door
is once opened there is no shutting it till they all rush in.

To invalidate the Replies which he makes to my Answer of his Arguments for the
unfitness of the Sacrament Test, I shall acquaint him now, as I formerly did,
that we do not drive any to the Sacrament: But since the Civil Magistrate is
God's Vicegerent, it is surely not unfit that he should imitate Almighty God
whom he represents, in proposing temporal Advantages as encouragements to the
performance of Religious Actions; and surely to any unprejudiced person it
cannot seem improper that those should be judged best qualified for public
Employments, of the greatest Profit, Trust, and Honor, that give the most
public and signal Evidences of their Piety to God, and of Obedience to the
Civil Magistrate: And notwithstanding the Vindicator's vain boasting of the
super eminent Holiness of the Dissenters, and his uncharitable suggestions of
the general wickedness of Conformists, in saying, that if the Sacrament Test
were intended as an expedient to discriminate the Good from the Bad, it seems
to be hitherto but ill applied. We hope there will be still a sufficient number
of the Members of the Established Church who will be both fitly prepared,
according to the Rubric, for the reception of the Blessed Sacrament, and duly
qualified otherwise for admittance into Civil and Military Offices, so that
there will be no pressing necessity of advancing Dissenters to great
Employments in the State, or considerable Posts in the Army for want of Men of
true unexceptionable Worth and Abilities amongst the Conformists to supply
them. All that I shall further say in this matter, is to tell the Vindicator as
the Apostle did some in his time, viz. That we do not compare our selves with
some that commend themselves, considering that not he that commends himself
is approved, but whom the Lord commends.

What the Vindicator says concerning the Mode of Receiving the Blessed
Sacrament, if it proves anything, it proves too much, for it does not only
infringe the Power of the Church in that particular Instance, but nulls the
Authority of its Laws in all Indifferent Matters, and then not our Liturgy, but
the Dissenters Directory too, must be abolished, and all their determinations
in reference to the several Rites and Ceremonies must be of no effect. The
Vindicator indeed tells us that those different Modes of Worship are called
trivial in respect of their Intrinsic Importance, not in respect of the
Consciences of those that Scruple'em: Now that, says he, may be in it self an
Inconsiderable thing, which yet the Conscience of a wise Man may for fear of
sinning not dare to comply with; but can he be deservedly counted a Wiseman
that wilfully entertains such Scruples in his mind, and suffers himself to be
so far influenced by 'em in his practice, as to incur the certain guilt of
offending God by disobeying the lawful Commands of Authority? To avoid those
groundless fears of falling into sin which his own misguided Fancy has created.
It Is more agreeable to the Character of a truly Wise Man to be Scrupulously
fearful of disobeying, rather than of obeying the Commands of Authority, and
it is far more reasonable that Children should lay aside their Groundless
Scruples of Complying with the Orders of their Parents, than that Parents
should lay aside their most prudent commands out of a too easy compliance with
the Froward Humors of their Children.

To the Vindicators last Argument I answered that many Unforeseen
Inconveniences might happen to the Established Church by the Admittance of the
Dissenters into Civil Offices; and to this he replies that the Clergy have met
with no opposition in asserting the Rights of the Church, the contrary to which
I have already proved. But it is very surprising that the Vindicator should so
peremptorily say, that the Nonconformists have been both before and ever since
the Revolution qualified for Civil Offices when the contrary is so undeniably
evident; for, as before the Revolution they were bard from Employments by the
Oath of Supremacy: So there are several Ecclesiastical Laws still in force, by
which, tho they be not wholly unqualified for an Admittance into Civil Offices,
yet they are perfectly disabled from continuing in 'em: So that their present
quiet enjoyment of Employments is not so much owing to their Legal
Qualifications as to the Kindness and Lenity of the Ecclesiastical Governors.

And now having, as I hope, returned a full Answer to the particulars of the
pretended Vindication of the Case of the dissenting Protestants of Ireland; all
that I shall further add, is to remark, that as the Vindicator has been
manifestly guilty, in many instances of great disingenuity, in misrepresenting
the sense of my Answer, and the truth of matters of Fact, so the grofest, and
the most imprudent of 'em all is in the latter end of his Vindication; for he
having justly repeated my words, viz. That None can foresee the difficulties
the conforming Clergy may contest with in asserting the Rights of the Church,
etc. Within three lines after he very unfairly says, that he agrees with the
Answerer, That no wise Man can foresee ANY Difficulties they are in danger of
meeting with for the future; by which most palpable misrepresentation of my
Words, as he passes a great affront on the Reader, and does a manifest
injustice to the Answerer: So he does most effectually expose to the censure of
all men, the strong, and (as I fear) unalterable biass of his disingenuous
temper: For by this we may plainly perceive, that neither the heinousness of
the crime of misrepresenting an Adversary, nor the certainty of detection can
restrain him from it: But seems to love disingenuity for its own sake, and to
practice it on purpose to keep his hand in, tho he be sure of being discovered
by the most heedless Reader.

And as by this, and many notorious Instances in his other Writings, he has
proved himself a very unfit person to accuse the Considerer of disingenuity: So
in this pretended Vindication he has showed himself no less unduly qualified to
tax the Answerer with irreverence toward the Holy Scriptures: For he has not
only in a very undecent and profane manner ridiculed the first Constitution of
the Apostles against eating Blood; but has been pleased to end his Replies to
my Answer by an irreverent and unjust application of the Words of our Savior
to the present celebrated Parliament of Ireland, in implying that their
granting the Dissenters a Legal Indulgence, with a Sacramental Test, would be
to act like those churlish Parents, that when their Children ask for Bread give
them a Stone, and when they ask for Fish give them a Serpent; as if the free
exercise of their Religion with worldly honor and profit were Bread and Fish,
but that a public freedom of Divine Worship, without Temporal Advantages, were
Stone and Serpent: And that the Parliament in denying the Dissenters an
unlimited Indulgence were churlish Parents.

To the Vindicator's Reflections on the Considerer, drawn from the unfitness of
narrowing the common Protestant Interest, from the sanguinary Laws in Scotland,
from the Dissenters subscribing the Doctrinal Articles of Faith of the
Established Church, and their thinking themselves obliged in Conscience to give
to all their Fellow Protestants the Toleration they now desire, from the
greater inclination of the French Protestants to their Communion then to ours,
from the pretended inexpediencies of the Sacrament Test, and from the pretense
of desiring that only a few Protestant Dissenters should enjoy the effects of
his Majesty's favor: To all these I leave the Reader to determine whither I
have not already given a satisfactory Answer, and all that remains to be
considered in those Reflections is the Doctrine and Practice of some Dissenters
occasionally Communicating with the Established Church. To which I answer.

First, That what the Vindicator says here, concerning the Dissenters in these
Reflections on the Considerer, seems inconsistent with what he says in his
Replies to my Answer; for there he says; that those who really scruple Kneeling
in the Act of Receiving are no way Inferior for Wisdom to those whose judgment
has that latitude that they could receive the Sacrament Kneeling, Sitting, or
Standing: but here he says he takes those Protestants who can Occasionally
communicate both with the Established Church and with the Dissenters, to be the
most judicious.

But 2dly and lastly, Concerning the Doctrine and practice of Occasional
Communion, I shall present the Vindicator with the sense of the Author of a
Book called Vox Clamantis, who was himself a Dissenter, and addresses himself
to his Brethren in these words, viz. There are some things that I will but
lightly touch, tho others of Contrary Sentiment will lay on loads; one is, at
which I am not a little abashed, that tho you according to your declared
Principles and ordinary practice are Nonconformists and Dissenters; yet upon
occasion, and to get into Place, and Office of Honor or Profit, you will, and
can take any manner of Tests that have of late been imposed; also that you can
on such occasions take the Sacrament according to the Form and way of the
Church of England, tho you never did it before, nor perhaps will ever do the
same again, except on the like occasion. -- And tells 'em that they make use of
the same Artifices as the Jesuits do on such cases, -- and that he knows
nothing will more render 'em, in the eyes of all, as Men of flexible and
profligate Consciences -- And speaking of the Reflections which he supposes the
Conformists pass on the Dissenters, for these things he says, that they think
that nothing, tho never so contrary to their Principles, can be devised or made
to keep you out, or to hold you in, but that you will break all Bounds, and
leap over all Hedges. -- And now I do not question but that if the Vindicator
would deal ingenuously, and speak a bold Truth, he would, with the Author of
the forementioned Book, protest that he knows not how to answer this in behalf
of the Dissenters with TRVTH and HONESTY.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 39. read are. p. 7. l. 40. r. two or three. p. 10. l. 13. after
answer; dele; p. 13. l. 18. r. consequences. l 44. r. irrestrictive. p. 14. l.
21. r. Genius. l. 27. r. and their l. 47. r. such immoralities. p. 15. l. 37.
r. their. p. 16. l. 19. r. especially. l. 24. r. Presbyterians. l. 36. r.
ordinary. l, 49. r. to boast. p. 18. l. 13. r. swearing. l. 46. r. easily. l.
47. r. Revolution. l. 49, put, after equal. dele, after Dissenters, p. 20. l.
23. r. warranted. p. 21. l, 8. after subjection put. l. 45. r. use of.


