TEN QUAERES, UPON THE TEN NEW COMMANDMENTS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE
Officers of the Armies December. 22. 1659.
NOW Declaring themselves, The only Supreme Legisers, and Absolute Sovereign
Lords of our Three kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, by what just
Title from God or Man, we yet understand not, unless it be from the 2 Thessalonians.
2, 3, 4.
Man of Sin, opposing and exalting himself above all that is called God and
worshipped, by his own usurped Authority and Ambition.
1 WHether the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, Citizens, Yeomen, and other Freemen
of England, Scotland, and Ireland (the Supreme Authority and Legislators of the
3. Nations by the Army Officers former Votes, Declarations, Agreements of the
People, and the Rumps too) have not better Reason and Authority to Agree and
Vote, That the Government of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions
and Territories thereunto belonging, shall be in the ancient legal, safe,
honorable, known way of a KINGDOM, and MONARCHY, by an hereditary lawful
King, according to the Fundamental Laws, Oaths, Protestation, League, Covenant,
the Parl. and these Officers former numerous Declarations, Remonstrances, and
Proposals, than in the way of an unknown, unborn Utopian Free State and
Commonwealth; the bare Notion whereof without any conception or production,
has involved us in 11. years dangerous Wars, Confusions, Distractions,
Revolutions, without any probability of Ease, Tranquilliey, or Settlement?

2. Whether they might not with as good Authority and Reason have agreed, That
they will not have God himself, and Jesus Christ (who are not excepted, but
included in their Vote,) to exercise a Kingship in th^se Nations; nor any
single Person to exercise the Office of Chief Magistrate over the City of
London, or any other City or Corporation in our 3. Kingdoms: Or the Office of a
General over any of our Armies, or Admiral over any of our Fleets; or of a
Colonel or Captain over any Regiment, Troop, Company, Ship in the Armies, or
Navies of these Nations; or one Speaker to sit in any Parliament, or one
Chairman in any Committee, or one head to exercise any authority over the
natural body of any Officer, Soldier, Man, Woman, Child within their new
Kingless, Headless Free State and Commonwealth; As that they will nst have
Kingship to be exercised in these Nations, nor any single Person (out of which
Fleetwood, Lambert, and all other married, James 1. 8.
double-souled Officers are excepted, being no single persons) to exercise the
office of Chief Magistrate over the same? And whether these Voters have not
lost their heads or brains at least, and passed this Vote out of pure
necessity, because for the present, their Chieftains cannot or da^e not claim a
Kingship, or Monarchieal Protectorship over us, through others oppositions,
though they ambitiously desire it, as well as their deceased ambitious bloody
Tyrant Oliver?

3 Whether they had not with better Justice voted; That there shall be no L.
Fleetwood, L. Lambert, L. Desbrow, L. H^wson, etc. nor any General Council of
Lording lordly Officers of the Armies of England, Scotland and Ireland, nor
Wailingford House, taking upon them a power which no Lords House ever used, to
impose Laws, not only on the Soldiers, but Lords, Commons, and Freemen of our
whole 3. Nations; Than that there be no House of Lords, or Peers? And whether
they may not order the Lords House at Westminster, and all Lords Houses within
our 3. Realms to be demolished, by the letter of this Vote; and deprive the
Lords and Peers of their hereditary Mansion-Houses, Lands, as well as of their
Honors, Peerage, and Session in Parliaments?

4. Whether the General Council of Officers ^^y their former and late
Instruments, Votes, and this their Agreement, whereby they usurp both the
Legislative and Executive Power over our 3. Nations and Parliaments in the
superlative degree, (which no Military Officers or Council under heaven ever
did before them in any age or Nation) have not already contradicted this their
Agreement, That the Legislative and Executive power be distinct, and not in the
same hands? And whether either of these 2 Powers ought to be henceforth
entrusted in their hands?

5. Whether Henry Garnet, Guy Faux, with the rest of the old
Gun-powder-Traytors, who sat in Counsel together how to blow up the King,
Lords, and Parliament in the 3d. year of King James, and all those persons and
every one of them, who since the 1. of October 1659. have acted and executed
any Treason, Murder, Rape, Robbery or Villainy whatsoever for which they deserve
execution at Tiburne; may not with as much Authority, Justice, Law, Equity,
indemnify themselves and all their Confederates both in their Persons and
Estates, for all such things as have bin done by them, or any of them, or by
any acting under them in pursuance of their authority; as the Council of
Officers and their Committee of Safety can indemnifie one another, and those
who have acted under them, for all such things as have been done by them or any
of them, in pursuance of the instructions given them by the Council of
Officers? Whether this be not an open inlet and Eccles. 8. 11. Ps. 55. 19, 20,
21.
encouragement to all Treasons and Villainies whatsoever, for these Officers and
their Instruments to act new Treasons and Violences over and over against the
Parliament, King, Lords, Commons, Kingdom, People, with most daring impudency,
and then to force and procure an Act of total Indemnity and final Oblivion for
them, as to their Persons and Estates, when perpetrated and committed?

6. Whether such Persons as have acted, done or spoken any thing before or
since the first day of October, 1659. for Charles Stuart (their 1 Jac. c. 1. 3
Jac. c. 1. 4. 7 Jac. c. 6.
undoubted lawful King) in pursuance of their Oaths, Vows, Protestation,
League, Covenant, the Laws of God and the Realm, the Declarations, Orders,
Ordinances, Remonstrances of Parliament, and Army Officers themselves whiles in
their right wits; do not better deserve an Act of Indemnity, and perpetual
Oblivion both for Persons and Estates for all and every thing and things,
acted, done, spoken, ordered, or suffered to be acted or done, with respect to
raising of forces, issuing of money, and proceedings of any kind for his
Service; than all and every of the Council of Officers of the Army, their
Committees of Safety, or any other Person or Persons under them, for all and
every thing and things acted, done, spoken, ordered, with respect to raising of
forces, levying or issuing moneys, proceedings in any Courts of Law, or
otherwise, against the Kings, Parliaments, Lords, Commons, or Rumps Authority,
and the known Laws, Liberties of our three Nations? Whether their voting such
an Act of Indemnity and perpetual Oblivion for themselves and their
Confederates alone be not an evident Confession and Proclamation of their own
Guilt and Treachery to all the world; and their excepting of all such who have
acted, done, or spoken any thing for or on the behalf of Charles Stuart, out of
their desired Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, a real Argument and Declaration
of their Mat. 6. 14, 15. c. 18. 23, to 35. c. 7. 12.
innocence, loyalty, and legality of their actions; and the Unsaint-like
malice, part^ality, injustice of these guilty Voters in indempnifying
themselves and all their Adherents only against the highest Treasons and
Rebellions, Crimes that possibly can be perpetrated by men; and yet exposing
all Royallists to the extremity of Justice, (if Delinquents as they doom them)
only for their loyalty to their Liege-Soveraign? Surely -- Dat veniam Corvis,
vexat censura Columbas, was never so really verified by any as these gracious
Army Counselors.

7. Whether their extraordinary zeal and care in providing, That such who
profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though differing from the Doctrine,
Discipline, and (...) publicly held forth, shall not be restrained from, but
shall be equally protected and encouraged in the profession of the Faith and
exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse not that liberty to the civil
injury of others: does not open a wide door to all damnable Heresies,
Blasphemi^^, Sects, Opinions whatsoever, to the ruin of our Churches and
Religion; and give a free toleration, encouragement, and protection to all
Jesuits, Popish Priests, Friars, and Romish Emissaries whatsoever, under the
disguises of other Sects, and separate Congregations, professing Faith in God
by Jesus Christ, into which they creep to introduce the body of Popry and
Jesuitis^^ amongst us, both in Theory and Practice, (as they have done of late
years) in a higher degree than ever? Whether any Doctrine, Worship or
Discipline can be said, to be publicly held forth, when all of all sorts are
thus equally protected and encouraged by their Agreement. How they can in
conscience or Justice in words provide, that this Liberty be not extended to
Popery or Prelacy, when they so freely allow it to all others, though Heretics
or Blasphemers, far worse than bare Papists, or Prelacy? And whether their last
restriction, nor to such, as under the Profession of Christ, hold forth and
practice Licentiousness, extends not principally to themselves, who under the
Profession of Christ, hold forth and practice the greatest Licentiousness, even
to act all kind of Treasons, Rebellions, Violences, Rapines, Murders, Plunders,
Oppressions, Perjuries, Hypochrisies, Atheistical Impieties, Sacrileges,
Treacheries and Villainies, with greater Impudency, Indemnity, and
Incorrigibility (after This Fleetwood confessed at the Guildhall last week.
public and private seeming Humiliations for them) than they were ever yet
acted in the world by men professing Faith in God by Jesus Christ, or the true
reformed Religion?

8. Whether the impoverished, undone people of our three Nations, have not far
juster cause and reason to detain the Arrears of pay pretended to be due to
most of all the rebellious Officers and Forces of this Commonwealth, (as
forfeited by their manifold Treasons, Rebellions, and Mutinies against their
Superiors, and obeying only the wills, lusts, orders of their ambitious,
mutinous chief Commanders, whose devoted Servants they are) than they thus
peremptorily to demand, That the arrears of pay to the Armies and Forces of the
Commonwealth, now due or incurred to them, or any of them (though never so
treacherous, rebellious to their Lords and Masters the Parliament and people,
who must pay them) be with all convenient speed satisfied and paid; before
their repentance, and declared future obedience to the Parliament and people,
whose Servants and Mercinaries they only are and ought to be, in truth?

9. Whether the old secluded Members, Rump, Nobility, Gentry, free people of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any free Parliament elected by them, can
with honor, justice, or the public peace, safety, settlement, after so many
former and late Rebellions, Treacheries, Perjuries, breaches of Protestations,
Covenants, Commissions and Engagements of all sorts, by the Army and their
Officers, condescend to their 9th Law; That the Armies, Forces and Navies of
this Commonwealth, as the same stood upon the 9. of October. last, be continued
and maintained under the same conduct, as the same stood upon the said 9. day
of October, for the security, service, and Peace of this Commonwealth, and not
to be disbanded, nor the condust altered until the cause contended for be
secured (and what that is we know not, unless that the Army-Generals and their
Council of Officers may be our only Kings, Lords, and Parliament Legislators;
call and dissolve Parliaments at their pleasures, vote and unvote what they
will without punishment, and ruin our 3. Nations without opposition) and the
Government of this Commonwealth, as is before proposed, be effectually settled:
Be not a most unjust, unreasonable command, exempting the Army and Officers
from all subordination and obedience to any Parliament, Council, or power of
the Nation whatsoever? An absolute imposing of a perpetual uncontrollable Army,
and Iron Yoke of Bondage upon the 3. Nations and their Parliaments galled
necks, who must only pay and raise moneys for them, and obey their
Prescriptions? And whether the Officers and Conductors of this Army, who have
so frequently disturbed, subverted the Security, Service, Peace and Settlement
of our Nations both heretofore and at present, and been so treacherous,
mutinous, can be continued undisbanded for any other end, but only to act over
their former Tragedies and pranks of Rebellion at their pleasures, and then
force a New Act of Indemnity and Oblivion to expiate them, and make themselves
Monsters of Treachery, and Parliaments the very scorn, shame, dishonor of our
Nation and the world?

10. Whether their 10th. and last Agreement, That we whose names are
subscribed, do hereby promise and engage by the help of God (it had been truer,
by the assistance of the Devil, the Ephesians. 2. 2.
Spirit who rules in the children of disobedience) to stand by and assist each
other in the obtaining of the things before mentioned, Be not a New Treasonable
Engagement against the Laws, Liberties, Freedom, Privileges, Birthrights of
our Nations and Parliaments; in opposition to the Cities and Common-Councils
Declaration, Dec. ^0. well deserving all past arrears, and future pay, without
disbanding? Whether those Officers who have subscribed this Engagement, be
likely to observe it better, than they did their late and former Engagements,
to be true, faithful, and constant to their New Lords and Masters from whom
they received their Commissions? the faith, property of an Army-Officer and
Soldier, being now refined to this Quintessence of Atheism; to be faithless,
treacherous, perfidious to all others, and faithful, loyal unto none, any
longer or further than consists with his own interest and self-designs. Whether
there can be any probable or lively hope of curing the manifold desperate
Wounds, Fractures, Convulsions, Confusions in our expiring Church, State, or of
establishing any lasting Peace, Government, Unity or Tranquillity in our
distracted Nations, without an impartial restitution of all real Members of our
English Parliaments to their ancient indubitable Privileges, to meet, sit, vote
with all freedom and security, without the least forcible suspension or
seclusion? And whether there be any possibility they should thus sit and act,
till the prodigious Parliament-interrupting, secluding, securing-dissolving
General Council of Officers of the Army, be totally dissolved, and the Army in
some good measure purged from all mutinous Innovators, and masked Romish
Emissaries? The Lord give them all grace unfeignedly to lament and repent the
premised Exorbitances, and this their new Agreement, before they go hence and
be seen no more. Amen.

FINIS.

