A Summary Review OF THE Kings and Government OF ENGLAND.

A POLITICAL ESSAY: OR, Summary Review OF THE Kings and Government OF ENGLAND
Since the Norman Conquest.

By W. P(...)y. Esquire.

Principis est Vertus maxima nosse suos.

Martial. All Precepts concerning Kings, are in effect comprehended in these
Remembrances: Remember thou art a Man; Remember thou art God's Vicegerent. The
one bridleth their Power, and the other their Will.

Lord Bacon 's Remains. LONDON: Printed in the Year. School.

TO THE READER.
IT IS said, Action is the Life of a Prince, Speculation of a Scholar: If the
first would give himself to Thinking somewhat more, and the latter to Action,
perhaps it would not be amiss; they would Each of 'em discover some Defects in
themselves, and Both be more Useful to the World. Be it how it will, however, I
present you with my Thoughts, defective enough, as not being much seen in one
or the other; the Fruit of Idleness and turning over a few Books, for want of
better Employment: They are some passing Observations on the Conduct of our
Princes, who have managed the Scepter from the Norman Conquest, and Those that
managed Them. I do not pretend hereby to limit the Descent of our Kings to that
Line: I know the Learned derive their Pedigree from much higher Pretensions,
from I know not whence, even from Adam; and that will scarce satisfy; some will
have them all the immediate Work of God; All Originals. I have not the
Confidence to Dedicate this Issue, but only to a Random Patronage, if any one
shall be so kind to give it a favourahle Reception: Something like that with
the Child left in the Temple-Cloysters, with this Inscription; Pray be
exceeding kind to this Infant, as Related to Both Societies by Father and
Mother's side. Some Authors who can bring in but the Name of a King, must
interest Him in the Title, and think the Work presently due to Majesty, and
presume to Address the Offspring to his Protection: But I do not think the
Pretense of Duty does sufficiently Apologize for the Vanity and Ambition of it:
Besides, that Kings seldom read Books (they see with other Men's Eyes), and
those who did, have not much improved the Talent of Government to their Own or
the Nation's Advantage. I would have Addressed it to a Friend, (if I had any,
as I should my self); yet I know not what Commission I have to venture a
Friend's Reputation in my Bottom: Though after all, I must, in truth, beg leave
to question, Whether there be any such thing as a True Friend, notwithstanding
all the fine Harangues on that Subject: Not that, I hope, I have behaved my
self so indifferently in my Conversation, as undeserving that Character; but I
mean Regular Friendships are founded on adequate Considerations, and are
generally too much upon the Square in mutual Expectation. Alas! I have nothing
to leave a Friend, except it be Eudamidas's Legacy, a Wife and Children; and
could I find a Charixenus or Aretheus, I should very willingly quit the World,
and with greater Satisfaction, than to remain in it, unless it were only at the
Instance of such a Friend, for his Service, and to pay him the Satisfaction of
Gratitude in due Acknowledgments. But this is too extravagant an Expectation;
for Eudamidas had but One Daughter to bequeath between Two Friends, whereas I
have enough to break Friendship it self; enough to set forth a decent Parade of
Intercession for Mercy, if it should be my Misfortune to be convicted of a
Capital Offense. Nevertheless, I have somewhat more particularly designed these
short Reflections for the Entertainment of a particular Acquaintance or two;
and that in a sort of Grateful Return, That as I have the Honor and Advantage
of Improving by their Conversation, so I on my part might endeavor to
contribute somewhat to their easier Information in some things, who have not
Leisure, nor perhaps Inclination, to peruse larger Volumes, or to read over
tedious Histories. It Is for this Reason especially, that I have contracted
these Remarks into as narrow a Room as the Length and Variety of Matter will
possibly bear; and Brevity is the only Commendation I expect; but this, I
think, with some Justness; otherwise I am very little concerned at the Success,
or with what Opinion I shall be received in the World: I pretend but to Sketch,
not to Draw exactly, not to a Finished Piece: Besides, I am sure there is no one
can be more severe upon me, than I am upon my self; and there is scarce any body
sharper-sighted to discover an Imperfection in a Child of my own, than the
Father: And for this I have Authority. What you have, is but the Diversion of a
long Vacation; one Summer's recollected Thoughts, dressed up between a very
ordinary Study and Garden, and without help from Conversation, as not having
Opportunity to spend Time or Money any where abroad. I confess I might have
made a more Elaborate Piece of it; I cannot tell whether the better for that:
But if the Subject of these Considerations seems to require a more serious and
intent Application (as if any does, it is this in my Judgment), I hope it may
put some other Person upon it, of better Qualifications, and of a greater
Genius and Diligence this way. Not but that I my self have Leisure enough, God
knows, and a little too much for a Man in my Circumstances: But I must confess,
for my part, as the World goes, I cannot think it Tanti: For besides that a Man
will hazard the Reputation of his own Understanding, in the Pretenses of
Reforming that of others, it is not in my Inclination to jade a Reader in a
Journey of Paper and Ink, no more than my self: (The Drudgery of the Mind is of
the worst sort), And 'twere well if some other Writers were of this Opinion,
they would save a great deal of Trouble to others at least. If it be Objected,
That I am not particular in my Citations; I confess it; I write an Essay, not a
formal Treatise: But the Passages have been so beaten, and the Authorities so
well known of late Years, that I conceive it is superfluous, and I needed not:
However, I must aver they are Truths, and faithfully delivered, as well as my
Memory will bear; which, I must confess, is treacherous enough: Yet I give you
nothing but what I Am sure I my self have met with and received; and that any
Man but moderately versed in Books, will easily discover and acknowledge: And
in Arguments and Authorities which are not Nice or Critical, it is not of much
Importance, or Material, to be so exact. Others, I suppose, will say, I touch
things slightly. I agree it; I write not to those who are Strangers to Books
and Reading, but to refresh their Memories, who, perhaps, may not have much
better, than my self; and to give Hints to those who are inclined to make
larger Enquiries upon Occasion. It may serve to Admonish, if not to Inform; and
may Divert, if it cannot Edify.

As to what relates to the Justification of this Government, it may be thought
this comes out but poorly at this Time of Day, and is a sort of barbarous
Triumph over the Silenced and Oppressed: But those who know how early I was
engaged in this Revolution another Way (as early almost as any Gentleman on
this Side of the Water), cannot entertain such Thoughts of me: I can only say,
I have not advanced one Expression upon that Consideration; and the Occasion
given me now, was only Reading over some Books which had been on both Sides
Published, but not with Satisfactory Arguments to me, and not in so clear a
Method on the Side of the Revolution, as I wished; and besides, I do not find
that Men are less apt to Talk against the Government now, than they were Seven
or Eight Years ago; and therefore I suppose this Publication may not be
unseasonable, even under so Long and Prosperous a Success of this
Establishment, which can never be made too Secure in the Hearts and Affections
of the People.

Your Humble Servant, W. P.

A Summary Review OF THE KINGS and GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND, etc.
IT IS somewhat wonderful, and I know not by what Fate it comes to pass, That
those Nations which by Nature seem designed to enjoy the most retired Repose
and Tranquillity, as not being by Situation involved in the common Hurly-burly
of the World, should yet notwithstanding deny themselves that Happiness, as it
seems, and run into equal Confusion and Trouble with the large Continents of
Men. Whether it be that we ascribe too much, or too little, to the Powers
above, and assume to our selves too far in the Conduct of Human Affairs: Or
whether, in truth, we are not permitted to establish that settled Peace and
Pleasure here below, which Mortals in their Wisdom would fancy, and pretend to
prescribe to themselves: Be it how it will; Is it not certain, that all States,
Civil and Ecclesiastical too, when they have arrived to the Top of Grandeur, by
a sort of Necessity, as it were, dissolve into Luxury, and by an unaccountable
Weakness and Vanity dwindle into Disreputation, lose their Edge, and are
disarmed, till another Encroachment steps up, and takes the place? Not that all
New Establishments and Reformations have been always for the better; but only
to show, that all sublunary things are subject to change.

However, That Government and some Form of Polity is necessary, cannot be
disputed; though it may, what sort is: But admitting Monarchy to be the best
constitution, and with all the Compliments of Comparison and Advantages that
the Church will have; for that does not pretend that it is the Only Form
approved by God, with exclusion to others; yet we see the best Scheme of this,
whether Absolute, Limited, or Mixed, Hereditary, or Elective, has never yet
been capable to establish and secure it in Peace and Prosperity long; as it
were to intimate, That even the wisest Scheme (if any such be) of Policy, will
have its Defects; and all Foundations of Government are planted in a changeable
Soil, and are transformed even in Notion, either through the Perverseness or
Inconsideration of the Prince or People, or both. Nay, when we have prayed in
Aid of Religion, and taken that into our support, what wretched work has
Religion it self made in States, and unhinged them, as Learning has Religion?
Those very Means that should compose and settle, have subverted, and do still
disorder the World. What Mischiefs have not those two words, Prerogative and
Liberty, introduced both in Law and Gospel Construction? and those two Epithets
of Obedience, Active and Passive, are sacrificed to Forms more than Force; and
have been abused almost as much by Government as Anarchy.

In our best Form of Government (as we call it) when the Constitution comes to
clash, the sole Question is, Which is to be preferred, the Person and Will of a
Prince, or the Law of the Land? Which is most sacred, the Power, or the
Ordonnance? Which is to be obeyed and maintained, the King who invades the Law
and Religion Established, (for it is certain such a Case has happened) or
Religion and Law which established them? Whether Religion, or the Humor of a
King be to be obeyed, even for the sake of Religion?

This, it seems, has been made a Doubt, and has been a Theme more than
sufficiently handled of late Years especially, and managed with Artifice enough
(to say no worse) on both sides. Indeed if we were now under a Theocracy, the
extravagance of the Dispute would be on the other hand; and if God at this day
could be supposed to govern our Governors, as in the Jewish Economy, when
Rulers, Captains, Priests, Judges and Kings, were immediately inspired and led
by the Almighty to keep them from stumbling or swerving, before that Kings were
given for a Curse, and when not made such; Implicit Faith and Obedience must be
then due: But when God himself leaves us to the Rules of Human Laws, as he
plainly intimates, and is confessed by the most Learned Divines who are
impartial, it is otherwise: And I must confess, in my poor Opinion (God forgive
me if I err, and I err in good Company) under the Gospel God seems not so much
concerned in Human Powers (otherwise than Human Laws): And our Savior, in his
Sermon on the Mount, has not one word about Kingdoms, (only of another World).
After which the Texts of the Apostles are not to be taken in a general extended
Sense; for our Savior himself, who is, and must be supposed to comprehend all
necessary Instructions for a Christian, (when he insists on superlative
Directions) would, no doubt, have vouchsafed some Guide in obedience to the
Powers on Earth, if he had not concluded them by the Measures of their
respective Constitutions; and his Expression of rendering unto Caesar the things
that are Cesar's, etc. sufficiently implies the force of that Argument, and the
Exempt reservation of Property, etc. No doubt the meaning of the Apostles has
been strained too far by some Divines; and besides, it infers but little to us,
forasmuch as they do not, nor ever did agree in their Interpretations; 'twill
be to little purpose that the Apostles were inspired, if we are not inspired
also with an adequate degree of Apprehension. But this only by the by: This is
not my Province, and I shall have occasion to resume this Argument hereafter.
All that I shall say at present is, That Arbitrary Power, and Legal Right, are
Contradictions, and cannot consist in Human Understandings. Therefore I shall
make bold to take Power in that sense which may consist with Reason, and
Rejecting the first, tack the word Legal to it, and shall wave or post-pone the
Premises, from the absurdity of the Conclusion. For if it be allowed, or may
be supposed, That a King can with his own breath blow away the Laws of the
State, or at second-hand remove the Landmark; or is to be told by any
Metaphysical Pedant, That no Law can bind him, but what proceeds from his own
Mouth, nor that neither, any longer than he pleases; and by virtue of such a
Traitorous Legerdemain, a Prince is to be distinguished often, and absolved from
a Coronation Oath, and our Allegiance to be transposed or inverted by a
barbarous Contradiction of the Term, into a subsequent Obligation: And the Duty
of Obedience must shift with the Wind (because the Weathercock was placed upon
Churches in pious memory of St. Peter, who besides denying Christ, preached, as
it is said, the Doctrine of Passive Obedience also); I Am sure, if this be true,
morally speaking, 'twill be nonsense, and to no purpose, to pretend to
establish any Laws in Church or State: And our Ancestors had been every jot as
well employed at Push-pin (or with Socrates and his Boys) playing at Cob-Nut,
or riding the Hobbyhorse, with as good a grace, as contending for Magna
Charta: All Government, in short, without the immediate hand of Heaven (which
we are not taught by God, or instructed by the Events of Story, to rely on, or
expect) will at this rate of Argument become utterly impracticable, and must
degenerate into Confusion.

So on the other side, the misapplication of the Constitution of Government may
be almost as fatal as the throwing it off. As for instance, in a Mixed or
Limited Monarchy, where the Ingredient Qualifications are not duly observed,
and fairly maintained; Sometimes these Forms have proved but Snares on the
Subjects Liberties and Properties: Thus it is when one part of the State
encroacheth upon the others; and 'twill be the same thing when they have all
together (or two of them) too close and united a Correspondence and
Intelligence, and the Trinity in Unity, or Vice versa (if I may so speak) are
confounded and consolidated: The one part of the Body represented, may thus as
well be betrayed out of its Rights, as huffed out of them in the other Case.
Wherever a Constitution is not preserved in its primitive force and dignity,
according to the true intent thereof, some part may, and must suffer: A
Legislative Power may be as pernicious as an Executive; for it is far from
impossible, that Injuries may be done under the Color and Mask of Laws. Sir
William Temple quotes Heraclitus for saying, The only skill or knowledge of any
value in the Politics, was the Secret of governing all by all:And he
afterward remarks, That what Prince soever can hit of this Secret, need know
no more for his own Safety and Happiness, or that of the People he governs: For
no State or Government can be much troubled or endangered by any private
Factions, which is grounded upon the general Consent and Satisfaction of the
Subject. Happy Kings, if they would be contented to have kept within the
Confines of such Measures! But this is a Doctrine which will not go down with
Kings: Thus Germany flourished till Charles the Vth's time, who introduced
higher Reasons of State; till the Jesuits taught the way of bringing the
Sovereign Power from the States to the Empire: What has Spain got by the
pretense of an Absolute Power, i. e. Oppression? It lost Portugal, it lost the
Low Countries, etc. And in truth, the Kings of Spain have exerted their Power
so far, till they have lost it all; and by Trick of Favourite-Ministers, and
other Politics interchangeably transacted and shuffled between them and the
French Kings, they are now at last scarce in a Condition, by virtue of such
Arbitrary Extravagancies, to defend themselves. The Princes of Italy, who are
so Absolute, only betray their own Weakness by it. And though France at present
may seem to flourish outwardly, yet who knows not that She groans in her
Bowels? Indeed Sir Robert Cotton is unhappily mistaken in his Conclusion
touching England; That it cannot groan under a Democracy, which it never yet
felt or feared: And the late Times under King Charles the First, seem to be an
Instance to the contrary, and an Exception to that Rule: But then the Reasons
are given by him but just before; viz. That such a Government suiting thus with
Monarchy, must strictly maintain its Form: And I doubt 'twas something like
affecting at Arbitrary Power, exclusive of his Parliament, at least the House
of Commons, which brought that Unfortunate Monarch within the Exception to the
Rule; and the Rule may stand good still. Generally speaking, Trick and Fraud
seldom make a Second Advantage; and Matchiavel, after all his Noise, instances
only in Alexander the Sixth, who (he says) thrived by it; yet mark the End; he
at last was poisoned by a Fraud prepared by his Bastard Borgia for another. The
French have a Saying, L' Address surmonte la Force: But I suppose they are not
so hardened to extend this to all Frauds and Falsifications: There are some
Honest Politics and Stratagems, which a Man of Honor may lawfully use, no
doubt, in War, in Peace, in Treaties: Honest, if only that Custom has given
them a sort of Sanction: Though, by the by, of old these Methods were despised
by the Braver Heroes, even before Christianity; which allows us to be Wise as
Serpents, but Innocent as Doves. But all that I contend for in Modern
Politics, is the Exercise of Justice and Honor, which is, or ought to be the
Peculiar Character of Kings: And that Sincerity is the likeliest Principle to
establish a Nation: And must hold with Padre Paolo, That open Honesty and
Plain-dealing at last will prevail against Trick and Artifice.

All Laws of Power are, or are supposed to be, founded on the Law of God; and
it is said, Righteousness supports Crowns: For God's sake, What is the Moral of
Prerogative? What is the End of this Absolute Power? Whence do Kings derive
this superlative Talent of controuling Mankind? Is it that they have been
styled and courted as Gods, or their Representatives? Alas! we find they
represent Man in Understanding and Failings: It Is not therefore that they are
inspired with any greater Degree of Perfection or Wisdom: No, we find by
Experience they are in this like other Men, subject to the same Passions and
Infirmities: As King James the First said, They differ not in Stuff: Their
Natural Advantages do not afford them such Superiority and Pre-eminence in
Power, with any Justice of Human Reason. This great Deference and Submission
which they claim as due to their Character, must be either, That God once
vouchsafed them his Supernatural Assistance; or, That now Kings are presumed to
have the Assistance of a Better and Wiser Council. If the first, the Signs are
vanished; if the latter, it is confessed due, subject to the Rules and Forms of
the General Law of Nations, and the Municipal Laws of the Land; on supposition
that Kings act and labor by the joint Concurrence of Wise and Legal Councels
for the Public Good of the Commonwealth. Hence it is that they are endowed
with greater Privilege; Hence it is that they are entitled to (what is called)
Prerogative, to pass over the Definitions given by Bracton and Britton, and
Fortescue's foolish Etimology. There must be a Prerogative somewhere in all
Places. There is a Prerogative in Kings by the Law of Nations; and the Use of
it is to show Mercy, to reward Virtue: It Is the Law that punishes, not Kings;
and because there is no written Equity in Criminal or Capital Matters,
therefore the Seat of Mercy is placed by the Fountain of Justice. This is, no
doubt, properly and truly to be God's Vicegerent. Thus with us, Potest Rex ei,
lege sua Dignitatis Spelman Gloss. Praerogativa Regis.
Condonare, si velit, Mortem promeritam: Spoken of Edward the Confessor. Though
there is a sort of Equity by the Letter of our Law in the Case of Manslaughter,
making an allowance for the Passions of Men; and the King's Pardon of Murder
has been questioned; it looks like a Dispensing with the Positive Law of God:
It is certain he cannot change the Punishment. There are several Prerogatives
and Flowers of the Crown, some of Use, some for Ornament, but founded also upon
Reason. The King has all Mines of Gold and Silver, Treasure Trove, Escheats of
all Cities: May take his Creditors into Protection, till he be satisfied with
Preference: May take Body, Lands, and Goods of Debtor, etc. because the King's
Treasure is supposed to be for the public Benefit. May make any Foreign Coin
lawful Money of England by Proclamation; for Exigencies may require it. The
King may dig in the Subjects House (not Mansion House or Barn) for Saltpeter,
being for the Defense of the Nation. Kings only can have Parks and Chaces, and
not Subjects, without his License: So Swans in Royal Rivers, because they are
stately Creatures, and Royal Game, and become the Honor of a King. The King
shall be said to be Founder, though another join in the Foundation, etc.
because it is for his Honor. The King shall have Ward, though the Lands were
held of him by Posteriority, because the King's Title shall be preferred, and
not put in Competition with the Subject. So he shall not be Tenant in common;
i. e. He shall have all, because a Subject ought not to be equal with him in
any thing. There are also several other Franchises which by the Policy of our
Law belong to the Crown: And we say in our Law, That the King's Prerogative is
part of the Law of England, and comprehended within the same. We say also, That
the King has no Prerogative but that which the Law of the Land allows him: And
it is certain he is restrained in several respects by our Law, as in a Politic
Capacity: Letting pass those Distinctions and Cant in Coke's 7th Rep. Calvin's
Case of the King's Prerogative. As he has Advantages, so he has his
Disadvantages also; at least, Kings, or others for them, are apt to call them
so. Thus he cannot by Testament dispose of the Jewels of the Crown; it is doubted
whether he may legally pawn them, though it be said he may give them by his
Letters Patent; it is against the Honor of the Crown: The Law is so jealous of
the King's Honor, that it has preferred it before his Profit. He has no
Prerogative against Magna Charta; cannot take or prejudice the Inheritance of
any: Cannot send any man out of the Realm against his Will, because he has the
Command of the Service of the Subjects only for Defense of the Realm: Cannot lay
any new Impost on Merchandises. Can take none but usual and Ancient Aids and
Taxes. Cannot dispense with Statutes made for Public Good, or against Nusances,
or Mala in se; Can do no Wrong; Cannot alter the Law, Common or Ecclesiastical;
Nor Statute Law, or Custom of the Realm, by Proclamation or otherwise: Nor
create any Offense thereby, which was not an Offense before. Cannot grant a
Corporation any new Jurisdiction to proceed by Civil Law, because it may
deprive Subjects hereby of Privilege of Trial. The King cannot put off the
Offices of Justice of a King; is not supposed to be ill-affected, but deceived,
and imposed upon, and abused: Eadem presumitur men's Regis, quae est juris, etc.

But the late Sticklers for Arbitrary Power have found out a Plea for the
Absoluteness of Kings, which as they think, carries some Face of an Objection
against the fettering their Prerogative: Say they, At this rate a King can
never exert himself as he ought, to do any Glorious Action; or as King James
the IId phras'd it, to Carry the Reputation of a Kingdom high in the World: He
cannot extend his Conquests, etc. No matter whether he can or not: Neither can
he oppress his Subjects: It is sufficient for Kings (especially for a King of
Great Britain) to be on the Defensive by Land, neither do I believe any of our
Kings ever got any thing by extending their Dominions. It Is no Argument to us
in our Situation, if the matter were so: But this Notion is a Mistake: For
never did any King do extraordinary Feats, where he made War, and carried it on
against the Inclinations, or without the Consent of his People: The Fights with
the Dutch at Sea, in the Reign of King Charles the IId, is a sufficient
Instance of this Nature: We fought against the Grain, and without an Enemy, as
Sir William Temple observes. Nor shall we find in History, that any King has
continued his enlarged Bounds, where he carried on Imposts and Taxes by
Violence at Home, to the Impoverishing of his People. Let the End of this
present French King be observed, who seems to stand an Exception at present,
but he stands a very ticklish one. Besides, the true Interest and Advantage of
our Island lies another way: To maintain the Sovereignty of the Seas; to
promote Trade and Traffic, etc. And to this purpose the King has the highest
Prerogative in this Element: He may press Men for this Service, which he cannot
for any Foreign Expedition by Land: He has Customs, Tunnage and Poundage, etc.
Yet not these without Consent in Parliament; and some of our Kings have made
but a scurvy Experiment, in attempting to take them without it. Whence then
does come this Title to Arbitrary Absolute Power? It must be the Child of
Conquest, or some other Paramount Inherent Right. And to this purpose it is
objected, That by our Laws we acknowledge several Rights and Privileges of the
Subject to be Concessions from Kings; and we yield the Lands to be holden
immediately or mediately of the Crown, etc. This is pretended to sound in
Conquest rather than Compact, or to be founded on the Patriarchal Right: And
Sir Robert Filmer especially is pleasant upon Sir Edward Coke for this: He
says, If the first Kings were chosen by the People (as many think they were),
then surely our Forefathers were a very bountiful (if not prodigal) People, to
give all the Lands of the whole Kingdom to their Kings, with liberty to them to
keep what they pleased, and to give the Remainder to their Subjects, clogged
and encumbered with a Condition to defend the Realm: This is but an ill sign of
a Limited Monarchy by Original Constitution or Contract. At this rate a Man who
writes with the Fancy of a Government, may expose any thing, even himself. But
why does this necessarily follow? May not several Privileges and Powers be
lodged in the Crown, for Conformity and Dignity of Government, by Consent? And
so, May not Estates, or the Lands of a Kingdom, be divided by Contract, with
the acknowledgment of the Tenure, and to express the Service? How come Lands to
Escheat to the Crown, (for they are forfeited for Treason) I mean of Cities,
but that there is no Heir? How comes the King to have the Year, Day, and Waste
of Lands, which Escheat to the Lord? By what Law, if not of Contract? To say
they moved from the King, and were Limitations of his Bounty, is as much
supposed on the other hand, and gratis dictum. If he had virtually all Lands,
Why not all Goods, etc. too? No man will say that. If he had, I confess there
would be then no use of Parliaments. But to proceed, the King by his
Prerogative may Call, and Prorogue, and Dissolve Parliaments: By what Law had
he this Prerogative? If not by Law of Compact and Consent, of Necessity to
avoid Confusion; for if he could Command his Subjects Purses, etc. there could
not otherwise be any Original use of them: He might, and would, no doubt, have
called and made use of only a Privy, or Cabinet Council, or Cabal; for after
this way of Inference, no King would certainly have Clogged himself with the
impertinent Formalities of a Parliament; their Predecessors were very Weak, or
Prodigal to Clip their own Wings, and give their Subjects a share in the
Legislative Power: This is but an ill sign of an Original, Absolute, Arbitrary
Power: And 'twas upon this pretense, though those Gentlemen don't care to own
it, That they would have endeavored to Disengage their King from the use of
Parliaments, and would conclude, That the King might choose, whether he would
ever call any or not, at least in this Form. Thus they would beg the Question,
and presume the Consequence on their side; because equally absurd. The King may
Proclaim War, etc. Does it follow therefore that he may make it without other
Heads and Hands? Thus they confound the Executive and Legislative Authority.
They say Scribbling is a sign of a Licentious Age, and some think of a Decaying
State too: Ought not some Creaturs to be Muzled? There were many odd sort of
extravagant Books published on Subjects of this Nature, in the Reign of King
Charles the IId; not without Reason, as we may suppose: But all these violent
pursuits in both Extremes, are suspicious; and where all Parties mean nothing
but the Public Good, there is nothing of this nature worth contending for. And
whoever will reflect on the Circumstances, and Occasions, or Times of such
Publications, and the advancing these high-flown Notions, with a little pains
of Comparison, will easily see through the Mystery of their Policy.

It is very extraordinary, That Subjects make Kings Conquerors in spite of
their Teeths, and against their own Professions and Declarations, on purpose to
make themselves Slaves by their own Consequence; though this really is neither
the true Signification nor Import, as Mr Spelman makes appear in his Glossary;
let them take it in their own sense; but we may assure our selves they did not
intend to inslave themselves. They tell us, That William the Is It was a
Conqueror, and therefore we were all Slaves, etc. (though at other times Force
and Success will make no Right): Yet afterward they also tell us, when we come
to insist on our Rights as Subjects, That Magna Charta was obtained by Force,
etc. What then? So had the Crown been before. (it seems) by them: Either the
People of England had some Legal Rights before the Conquest, or not: If they
had (as is confessed), 'twas time to endeavor the Restoring of them. If
William the Is It were an Intruder, and came in by Force of Arms only, he was but
a Successful Usurper; and the People being under a Force, could not lose their
Rights: If he came in with pretense of Title, Title continued them in their
Rights; and either way was justifiable. I am engaged in this matter before I am
aware, and beyond my first intention, and I shall meet with these Gentlemen
anon. But not to forestal you in the History, I cannot avoid a Hint upon those
times, being upon Magna Charta, and that being by that Act declared to be
Declaratory of the Fundamental Rights and Common Laws of the Realm: To show the
Arts of Debauching Kings, and the end of such Attempts, in one previous
Instance; Hubert de Burgo (as you may see in Sir Edward Coke's Preface to Magna
Charta, etc.) meaning to make his step to Ambition, (which ever Rides without
Reins) persuaded and humoured that King, That he might avoid that Charter of
his Father King John, by Duress, and his own great Charter, and Charta de
Foresta also, for that he was within Age; whereupon the King got one of the
great Charters, and that of the Forest into his Hands, and by his Council
unjustly Cancelled both the said Charters; though this Hubert de Burgo was
Primier Witness of all the Temporal Lords to both the said Charters; whereupon
he became in high Favor with the King, etc. But soon after (for Flattery, and
Flatterers have no sure Foundation) he fell into the King's heavy Indignation;
and after many fearful and miserable Troubles, he was Justly, and according to
Law, Sentenced by his Peers in open Parliament, and as justly Degraded of the
Dignity which he had unjustly obtained, etc.

So that other Notion of Paternal Right is as Extraordinary: This takes a short
way, and makes Mankind Rebels from the Creation, or from the Flood. Who could
have imagined, That this Paternal Dominion from Adam could have been inferred
from that Expression of the Psalmist, The earth has he given to the children
of men? Which Sir Robert Filmer (learnedly) says, Does show that the Title of
Government comes from Fatherhood. Methinks it seems a more plausible and
literal Argument to Exclude Fathers, (or to lay them aside, as they do in some
Countries, at such an Age): Why have not this Party a scruple of Conscience
about all other Variations of Government, even by God himself? At this rate
they ought to procure Masses for the Souls of their Progenitors who lived in
the Heptarchy: It is certain, no body living under any Commonwealth can hope to
be Saved, as remaining in a continued state of Rebellion. Thus they create a
double Obligation on Men, and harrass their very Souls between their Natural
and Political Parents, in virtue of the Fifth Commandment: But as much a
Frenchman as he seems to be, I know not how he will excuse Pharamond for
introducing the Salique Law, nor the Nobless of the Country for encouraging it;
for the Commandment says, Honor thy Mother also. I hope Sir Robert Filmer had
no Gavelkind Land; the Custom of Tanestry and Borough -English, must also be
abominable in his sight; which to other Men seem to be built upon good natural
Principles of Reason. But (seriously) what indifferent Person (if there can be
any such in the World) will, without indignation, digest such sort of Debates?
After the same fashion Sir Robert Filmer gives us farther to understand; He
cannot learn, That either the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, have any proper Original
Word for a Tyrant or Slave; it seems these are of late invention, and taken up
in Disgrace of Monarchical Government. Why not more Charitably, as well as more
truly, from the Experience of the Abuses in the Exercise of such Monarchical,
or Absolute Powers? And he himself had given the reason but just before, viz.
That the Greek and Latin Authors lived in Popular Governments: For which
reason, no doubt, there was no occasion for such Monstrous and Barbarous Terms.
But he could not be in earnest in this Observation; I must appeal from his
Sincerity, to his Judgment. He does well to bar all other Schemes but his own:
He forbids us to rely on Aristotle, the Grand Master of Politics; or the Greek
or Latin Historians, who lived in Popular Times: Though Monsieur Rapin allows
Aristole, etc. to be used in Divinity, and says, St. Thomas, and other Divines,
have used him with good success.

But others, and they Divines and Bishops too, have lately told us, That we are
not to rely on Scripture in such Cases. In what a condition is poor Subject
Man? And what was all this to the purpose? when Scripture it self does not
peremptorily conclude us, but leaves us at large to the Laws and Usages of
Countries, to the Ordinances of Man, as Sir Robert himself confesses, though
with a lamentable strain upon St. Paul and St. Peter. Every one saw what was
aimed at, and offered by way of deduction from those Topics of Doctrinal
Government: But because Sir Robert sends us to France to School to be informed
in our Constitution, and very much affects French Policy (for he wrote in a
time when the French Air was predominant); let us see whether the Kings of
France themselves did always talk in this Language: Whether they have been
continually so uniform in this Fancy of Absolute Power, for the disposing of
themselves, and their Kingdoms: Francis the First (who was Contemporary with
our Henry the Eighth, and as Haughty a Prince, and was attended with the
Flattery of Courtiers too) when he was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Pavia,
afterward for Answer to the Proposals sent him by the Emperor for his Release,
amongst other things, says, That they were not in his power, because they
shocked the Fundamental Laws of France, to which he was subjected, etc. After
he was at liberty, having called an Assembly of the most Notable Persons of the
Three Estates of the Kingdom for their Advice touching the delivery of his
Children and himself, proffering to return to Prison, if they thought fit;
Their Orders all answered separately, That his Person was the Kingdom's, not
his; and as touching the restoring of Burgundy, That it was a Member of the
Crown, whereof he was but Usufructuary; That therefore he could not dispose of
the one or the other. But withal they offered him Two Millions of Gold for the
Ransom of his Children, and assured him, That if it must come to a War, they
would neither spare their Lives nor Fortunes. I Am Mez. Chron. 587.
sorry no Precedent will serve for our Imitation, but only that of the present
French King, and his Ally the Great Turk: In the sense of these Authors, theirs
must be the only Apostolic Orthodox Institution. We are told also, That there
is a Place, where, whenever the King spits, the greatest Ladies of his Court
put out their Hands to receive it: And another Nation, where the most Eminent
Persons about him stoop to take up his Ordure in a Linen Cloth: And other
People, where no Subject speaks to the King, but through a Trunk; and there
are, no doubt, several other such like Fantastic Customs of Submission, and
Idolatrous. Reverence: What then? Every Land is still nevertheless to be guided
by its own Customs and Laws: And I wish some of these Absolute
Arbitrary-Power-Sparks lived in one of the last mentioned Places. In earnest,
Flattery is a most sordid and pernicious Vice, and we were lately very near
drawing down Judgments on our selves for it; and had like to have suffered for
pretending to offer Sacrifices which were never meant. This Stuff of Passive
Submission to Arbitrary Tyrannical Powers, could never be offered to sale in a
true Light: The Doctrine would stink in the Nostrils of a Good King, who had
any thing of Virtue, Piety, or good Nature: A King, who, to use the words of
King James the First, Acknowledges himself ordained for his People, having
received from God a Burden of Government, whereof he must be Accountable; and
a good King thinks his highest Honor to consist in the due Discharge of his
Calling; and employeth all his study and pains to procure; and maintain, by the
making and executing of Good Laws, the Welfare and Peace of his People; and as
the Natural Father and kindly Master thinks his greatest Contentment stands
in their Prosperity, and his greatest Surety in having their Hearts. This, as
to the Political and Moral part of Government. And as to the matter of
Religion: What is it but to inspire a King with Persecution? What must this
come to, when Kings have different Educations, and different Tutors to
catechize them, if the Civil Establishment be not our Standard, and the Law our
Protection in Church as well as State? As to the Case where the King and the
Laws are of the same persuasion, If Recusants and Dissenters are so unfortunate
as to fall under a Prosecution for their particular Opinions, be it at the
peril of the King's Conscience, and those who advise him; but here, and here
only is the true Notion of being Passive; and I must confess I cannot tell how
to help them: Here I think they must suffer, and not resist, but fly to another
City, if they do not like that where the Government legally sits upon their
Skirts. Though I know some don't allow the Legislative Power to intermeddle
with Religion, as having too much a Lay mixture for the Pallet of the Church;
Yet, for my part, I do not see how otherwise we could maintain any
Establishment in it: For though since the Reformation, the King, as Head, has
the Supremacy devolved on him, and it is consented that he may make Canons to
bind the Clergy even without a Convocation; yet as the Church does not allow
him to speak with his own Mouth, or Act with his own Hands in the
Administration of Essentials of Religion, so the State does not in the
Alterations of them: So that he is not Absolute or Independent either in his
Ecclesiastical or Civil Capacity of Policy: And therefore the whole
Constitution, and Three Estates, must necessarily be called in on all Occasions
of Change in Discipline, or Innovation of Rites, as well as in the alteration
and repealing of other Old Laws, or introducing and declaring New ones. This by
way of Parenthesis; But I was speaking of Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarchal
Power, and the Extravagancies he infers from thence, grounded, as he pretends,
from Scripture. Therefore I would only ask him one Question more: Was there no
such proper Word in the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, for Tyrant, or Slave? Pray how
then came the Words and Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience into
the Greek? It must be only taken up of late by some such Authors, in disgrace
of Monarchical Government, according to Law; and to put Obedience, as Legal,
out of countenance; To bring People to submit blindly to Arbitrary Power. There
is the word (...) in Greek, which signifies at least, King or Prince: But is
there any one doubts, that there has been such a thing as a Harsh,
Unreasonable, and Unnatural Father or King? It must follow then, that the
Obedience intended by the Apostles (who wrote in Greek) was only to the Laws,
and the Legal Exercise of them, according to the Usage of their respective
Places, which made them Legal: Or to Kings, as not being a terror to the Good,
but only to the Evil: But it would tire even Patience it self to follow these
sort of Gentlemen in all their Confused By-ways. Therefore to return more
immediately to my Subject, and to my Friend Seigneur de Montaigne, whom I am
not ashamed to own, let the Grave and Wise say what they will; for I must ever
have a greater Respect for an Author who talks judiciously of Trifling Matters
(if they be so), than for One who talks triflingly on Judicious Subjects. He
tells us, These Great and Tedious Debates about the best Form of Society, and
the most Commodious Rules to bind us, are Debates only proper for the Exercise
of our Wits; and all the Descriptions of Policies, feigned by Art, are found to
be ridiculous, and unfit to be put in practice. And in another place, Not
according to Opinion, but in Truth and Reality, The best and most Excellent
Government for every Nation, is that under which it is maintained: This
Montaigne says, who expressed and practiced as great Loyalty as ever any Man of
Sense and Honor did; and I agree with him, That all Reverence and Submission
is due to Kings, except that of the Understanding.This as a Gentleman; and as a
Christian, he farther adds, Christian Religion has all the Marks of utmost
Utility and Justice, but none more manifest than the severe Injunction it lays
indifferently upon all, to yield absolute Obedience to the Civil Magistracy,
and to maintain and defend the Laws: i. e. in English, To submit according to
Law. And all Policy, as well as Religion, enforces Obedience to the
Administrators of Right and Justice: And if it be permitted to argue from
Etymologies (which is surer than from Examples) the Grecians tell us the word
(...) signifies Vbi homines versantur, vel potius a (...) quod sint (...)
certis legibus juncti: And we may assure our selves, That People would not
build Houses, etc. till the Possession and Enjoyment of them was established by
certain Laws. But we shall never have done, never come to any settlement, if
the Forms of Government and Laws are not admitted, but suffered to be disputed
at this time of day. We are therefore to take Laws as we find them, and as they
stand in use and practice by a continued Establishment: It cannot be material
therefore to look back how the Figure of our Legislative Power stood a Thousand
Years ago, or from a much shorter date of Time; How the Form of Writs, issued
to the Commons, was heretofore: (though, no doubt, the best Authority is with
them, and it is confessed they were always a Constituent part of the Legislative
Power); as it is idle and impertinent to say, The Supreme or Legislative Power
must be ever Arbitrary; this is an absurd Affirmation, when all Parties in a
Nation agree by their Representatives to the Enaction of Laws. By the Laws of
God and Man, Our Constitution ought now to rest in Peace in an Inviolable
Establishment: Kings swear, as our Savior preached in the Mount, to the
Multitude: A King's Coronation Oath must be interpreted, ad Captum Populi, and
to ordinary Intendment; That so there may be some certain Rule of Governing,
and true Measures of Obeying, whereby the whole Community may be preserved in
Peace and Order, which is the End of all Government.

We in England seem to value our selves more peculiarly on the Polity of our
Constitution: There has been enough said in praise of our Laws: No doubt they
are very good, if well observed; so good at least, That I never heard that any
King of England ever pretended to except against them, when he was ask't the
Question at his Coronation, Whether he would Observe the Laws? and so Good,
That the Subject (as far as I perceive) desires only the Confirmation and
Continuance of them. And I will be bold to say, for the Honor of the English
Nation and People, (notwithstanding the ill Name some are pleased to give us at
home and abroad at present) That there was never any War in England, from the
Barons War to the late Civil War, (setting aside the Dispute between the H. of
Y. and L.) but what was occasioned and begun on Color of the King's imposing
an Arbitrary Power over the Rights and Privileges of the People, and after
Complaint and Application for Redress of Grievances, and Restitution of their
Rights and Privileges; and all other Nations have done the same where they
could; (I speak of the beginning of Wars, I do not always justify the End of
them); And must aver, That the People of England in general, have,
notwithstanding the Proverb, which is Exotic, been always Goodnatur'd
Subjects: Easy enough to be imposed upon, and cajoled out of their Money, and
their Lives, for the Service of the Crown; And, as I think, so Modest, that
they have never assumed, as Men, to stand in competition with Majesty, nor have
ever pretended to be so much as Kings, till Kings were persuaded to think
themselves more than Men, Hence, as you will perceive, in these short following
Remarks, have (for the most part) sprung those Jealousies which divided King
and People, and disjointed the United Common Interest of Both. Ambitious and
Designing Men have raised Fantoms of Powers and Laws, which had being only in
the Clouds, at least had none amongst us: And Imaginary Constructions have been
put upon those, which were plain and obvious. The Terms of Power and Subjection
have been so artificially debated, and the Laws of God and Nature, the Law of
Reason, and that of Nations, so partially and slily, as well as learnedly
confounded, that the true Idea of our own Government and Law was perplexed and
lost. So that no wonder if Mistaken Principles sometimes misled King and
People, where they might mean well enough both; and at other times either King
or People might have a latitude of construing them perversely, when they did
not so.

Now though it is confessed we cannot arrive at any degree of Perfection in
Government (nor any thing else) here in this troublesome uncertain World; Yet
Experience convinces us, That some Times have been better than others; and
that this Nation has been happier under some Princes than Others, i. e.
happier under those whose Conduct and Government have agreed best with the Laws
and Constitutions. The only Design of these passing-Observations and
Reflections, is to point out the Errors, and set a Mark on the Rocks, that we
may avoid them: To show Kings and People the Principles and Practices by which
they Miscarried or Succeeded, upon Rational Grounds, and Natural Consequences;
so that Measures may be taken which may more probably secure the Peace and
Welfare of this Nation for the future. I go no farther back than the Conquest
or Descent here by King William the First; That being (as I think) enough for
our Instruction; enough to Inform, without confounding our Memories and
Judgments.

WILLIAM I.
NOT to play the Grammarian on Words, nor to repeat Old Stories; though I can
scarce pass by Mr. Spelman's Definition of him; Conquestor dicitur qui Angliam
conquisivit, i. e. acquisivit, purchased, non quod subegit. But to take William
the Conqueror (as they call him) in the usual Acceptance, there can be but
little Observable during the Transactions of his Reign, to ground Remarks of
Civil Policy. As he trimmed between Conquest and Title (by Gift from Ed. the
Confessor, he was also Kin by his Mother's side) so he divided his Government
between Acts of Justice and Wrong; not to mention the old Story of Warren the
Norman, and Sharnborn an Englishman: It is plain the Kentishmen had their Laws
Confirmed to them by Treaty, and were never Conquered. He granted to the City
of London their Charters as they had them in the Time of Saint Edward: It Is
true, he Altered the Laws, and introduced the French Language; but the
Alteration seems to be for the better, and he was generally Just to the Laws
which were made: He altered Pastimes also, and 'twas of course, for Englishmen
are ever fond of New things. The worst thing he did, was Depopulating so many
Towns, and overthrowing so many Churches, for Thirty Miles round, to make a
Chase, or New Forest in Hampshire; and the Execution of severe Laws against
Destroyers of Deer, or Game, by putting out their Eyes, etc. for which, for
ought I know, his Two Sons and Nephew might come to untimely Ends in the same
place. But in the main, he was modest enough for a Prince who came in with his
Sword in his Hand: And at last, after all his Bustle, he was forced, as it
were, to come to a Parley with the English Nobility, and before they laid down
their Arms, this mighty Conqueror engaged for Peace, and after, in the presence
of Archbishop Lanfrank and others, took a Solemn Oath upon the Evangelists, and
all the Relics of the Church of St. Albans, from thenceforth to Observe and
Keep the Good and Ancient Laws of the Realm, which the Noble Kings of England,
his Predecessors, had before Made and Ordained, but especially those of Saint
Edward; which, as is said, were supposed of all others to be the most Equal and
Indifferent for the general Good of the People. If the Churchmen can Forgive
him (for he Repented of it) the taking them down somewhat in their Temporal
Power, and calling in the Jews; they may forget his Ransacking the Monasteries,
if thep please, also, because he spared the Profits of Vacant Abbeys and
Bishoprics. His Life ended in a Circle; and as he pretended to take the Crown
by Gift, so he disposed of it, and left it by Gift also.

WILLIAM II.
DURING this King's Time, the Government and Laws seem to be in a continued
Ferment and State of War. As he was attacked on all Hands, and put to great
Charges, so he spared neither Church nor State for Taxations, but pillaged both
in an unreasonable extravagant manner. It is said he doubted of some Points of
Religion; but one would rather believe he doubted of it all, by his Life, and
Expression to the Jews, and the Management of Churchmen and their Benefices,
and Religious Houses: He Died so suddenly, that he had not time to tell his
Opinion at his Death. If he did not keep his Word so devoutly as he ought; if
he was trifling in things appertaining to Religion, and profanely free with the
Patrimony of the Church, the Historians of that Age have assigned him the
Judgments of God in the End; and I shall leave him to the Pope's Mercy, for
withholding Peter Pence. In this King's Reign we find the first Exercise of a
Prerogative; which seems reasonable and natural enough, in forbidding his
Subjects by Proclamation to go out of the Land without License, if it had been
grounded on a good Design; but being introduced only, first to make his
Subjects uneasy at Home, and after to get Money out of them for a License to go
Abroad; the Occasion disgraceth the Thing, which otherwise had been justifiable
on a true foundation, viz. To require the Service of the Subject at Home; for
the Command of the Aid of the Persons of his People, is as much an inherent
Right in the Crown, as any can be in his own Dominions, though not so to
Command them out of them on his Service Abroad. He also kept his Money from
going to Rome; and, I suppose, we ought not to be Angry with any King for
keeping his Men and his Money at Home.

HENRY I.
THEY who Write this King's Life, do so vary in his Character, that it is
somewhat difficult to Adjust it: But we always ought to speak the best of
Kings, if the matter will any ways bear it. Whether he came to the Crown with a
just Title or not, he came with a just degree of Understanding and Inclinations
to do Justice: He was Born of a King in England, and Queen of Royal English
Blood, as Sir John Hayward says; though I know not how he makes it out well;
and is said therefore to have raised the Depressed English Nation again unto
Honor and Credit, and took off their Badges of Slavery, and seems truly
Endowed with Kingly Principles; though Cambden will have it, That he was Just
even to a Fault; Pray God That were the only Fault of Kings. Whatever has been
said to his Disadvantage, he appears, for the most part, to have Governed by
the Laws of the Land: And as he gave a Measure to others, he himself made the
Laws a Measure of his Prerogative. It will not be worth Enquiry, Whether he
first Instituted a Parliament in the Form it now stands: He raised Money in a
Parliamentary way; we find in his First Parliament at Salisbury, he obtained
Three Shillings upon every Hide of Land, toward the Marriage of his Daughter
with the Emperor, although it is said there, these Aids were due by Common Law
from the King's Tenants by Knight's Service, viz. Aid to Ransom the King's
Person; Aid to make the King's Eldest Son a Knight, and Aid to Marry the King's
Eldest Daughter once. And although this matter was ascertained afterward by
King John's Charter at Running-Mead, yet following Kings have not been so
tender and reserved in this Point. If he may be said to be Cruel to his Brother
Robert, I Am sure he was very Honorable toward Lewis of France, when in
England, whither he came on his own Head, notwithstanding he was Solicited and
Tempted to make him away. As to his Personal Virtues or Vices, they were to
himself: If he failed in the Oeconomicks, he had Troubles in his own House; and
whether his Misfortunes of this kind were occasioned by Judgments, or the
Follies of himself, or Wife, it is certain he had his share of them; but he
took so much care that the Nation knew but very few troubles during his Reign.
And as he obtained a Kingdom by a sort of Artifice, so he used his Prerogative
with Discretion.

STEPHEN.
THIS King's Reign was almost one entire Scene of Military Actions, without any
mixture of Civil Policy; he did not live a Year to Enjoy or Manage Peace after
his Agreement with Henry II. the Son of Maud: And there was never any formal
Meeting of the Body of the Estates in his time: The Expenses of his War were
occasioned by a troubled Title, and he maintained them by Confiscations; and
although he had continued Charges that way, yet he required few or no Tributes
from the People. It Is said he had another way of getting Money, viz, by causing
Men to be Impleaded and Fined for Hunting in his Forests, after he had given
them Liberty to Hunt there. For thus far, at least, the Kings Exercised an
Absolute Prerogative (only) over the Beasts of the Forest: Which is a
Prerogative, I confess, they ought to Enjoy Indisputably.

HENRY II.
THOUGH this King came to the Crown by the most Absolute Title and Clearest
Right, yet in Four and thirty Years time, we do not find that he pretended to
impose upon his People any Arbitrary Power; but by Success and Policy he added
to the Crown of England, Scotland, Ireland, the Isles of Orcades, Britain,
Poytiers, Guyen, and other Provinces of France: And for all this he had only
one Tax of Escuage toward his War with France. His causing the Castles to be
Demolished, was a justifiable piece of Policy, for the reason given, as being
Nurseries of Rebellion. In the beginning of his Reign he refined and reformed
the Laws, and it is said, made them more Tolerable and Profitable to his People
than they were before; and, what is better, Governed himself by them. We do not
find the Punishments of Capital Offenses, or others, were certain, but variable
and distinguished in the same Crime, according to the degrees of Aggravation.
The Church-Chroniclers bestow a Judgment upon him for refusing to take the
Protection of the Distressed Christians in Jerusalem, offered to him by
Heraclius the Patriarch, and assign his Troubles at Home to that Cause; but
they might be mistaken, and he might (as he apprehended) have had greater from
his own Sons, if he had gone Abroad upon that Errand. And if the Church will
forgive him the Story of Thomas Becket, (for he was otherwise very Civil to it)
the State had no reason to complain of him; for he suffered neither his Wars
nor his Pleasures to be Chargeable to the Nation, nor his Concubines to be
Spungers on the People.

RICHARD I.
THERE is but little Observable in the Reign of this King with relation to the
Subject at Home, he being the greater part of it out of the Land. If his
Artifices of Raising Money were not Justifiable, the occasion may at least
Excuse him: He obtained a Subsidy toward his necessary Charges of War; what
was properly called Taxation, was by Parliament, or by the Subjects own
Contribution and Method of Charging themselves with, as the Money raised for
his Ransom. If he may be charged with some slips in Justice, he made it up in
Courtesy (which, by the by, goes a great way with Englishmen, for it is
observed, they may be Led, though they will not well Drive). And upon his return
Home from the Holy Land, we find the first thing he did, was to give his Lords
and People Thanks for their Faithfulness to him in his Absence, and for their
readiness to Supply him for his Ransom.

JOHN.
MOntaigne says in one of his Essays (and he speaks it upon Observation of
History): That Women, Children and Madmen, have had the Fortune to govern Great
Kingdoms equally well with the Wifest Princes: And Thucydides, That the Stupid
more frequently do it, than those of better Understanding. Whether this be an
Argument of a Providential Disposing and Governing of Kingdoms, I leave to
those that are conversant that way. Some Men, perhaps, may be apt to think it
reflects Disgrace on Dignities, if this be true. Some Kings are involved in
such a Cloud of Circumstances of Difficulty and Intrigues, that there is no
looking into them, nor making any Judgment of their Actions. Speed guesses of
King John, That if his Reign had not fallen out in the time of so Turbulent a
Pope, such Ambitious Neighbor Princes, and such Disloyal Subjects; nor his
Story into the Hands of Exasperated Writers, he had appeared a King of as great
Renown as Misfortunes: This is civilly and gently said.

This is certain, This King (as all others, when once they have broke through
their Coronation Oath) presently became, as it were, infatuated and deaf to all
good Counsel, stoop't to every thing that was mean and base; and having once
laid aside his Native Honor, run into all Dishonorable Sordid Actions: The
History represents him pursuing his Profit, and even his Pleasures by all
manner of Injustice: He prosecuted his Brother, Geoffry Archbishop of York, and
took from him all he had, only for doing the Duty of a Wise and Faithful
Councellor. Hence his Lords grew Resty, and refused to follow him into France,
unless he would restore to them their Rights and Liberties which he had
invaded: And when he shuffled with them in the Grant of their Demands, What
Wars, what Miseries did not follow? Wars at Home, Foreiners called in, the
Nation plundered and spoiled, Money procured by Base poor-spirited Tricks: He
on one Side forced to truckle to the Pope, and (as is said) to submit to
somebody worse; his Subjects on the other hand calling in to their Relief (as
they thought) a Foreiner, fetched in Lewis, the Son of Philip the French King;
the People in general not living like Men, nor dying like Christians, nor
having Chrstian Burial; the whole Nation one dismal Scene of Horrid
Misfortunes: Behold the Effect of Violated Faith and Arbitrary Oppression! But
it is no great Credit to Prerogative, That this King, who had no very good
Title, unless it were Election, was the first Vindicator of it, in a violent
manner: And asserted the Right to Absolute Power with the same Justice, as he
did That to the Crown in the time of Arthur his Nephew, who was the Undoubted
Heir. By these means he brought himself and People into Troubles, which never
ended but with his Life.

HENRY III.
HERE we may perceive, as also in another Reign or two hereafter, how the
Irregularities of a Father or Predecessor involve the Son and Successor in a
Remainder of Troubles, and the Nation also in their entailed Misfortunes: For
although those Lords (as Sir Richard Baker tells us) who had been constant to
the Father, notwithstanding his Faults, were also more tender of the Son, who
was Innocent; and so stuck to him, That by the Interest, chiefly of William
Marshal Earl of Pembroke, who married his Aunt, they prevailed so, that Young
Henry was Crowned King, yet he could not come to the Crown upon the square, but
was forced to do Homage to Pope Innocent for his Kingdom of England and Ireland
when he took his Coronation Oath, and to take an Oath to pay the Church of Rome
the Thousand Marks which his Father had granted: And though after his
Coronation most of the Lords maintained him in his Throne, preferring their
Natural Allegiance to Henry, before their Artificial Obligations to Lewis, and
Beat or Compounded the latter out of the Kingdom; yet this King Henry, so soon
as he was got out of Protection, and came to Administer the Government himself,
immediately, in gratitude, Cancels and Annuls the Charters which he had
granted, on pretense (forsooth) of Minority, although he had taken an Oath (as
well as the Legate Guallo, and the Protector) to restore unto the Barons of the
Realm, and other his Subjects, All their Rights and Privileges; for which the
Discord began between the Late King and his People: These Rights and Privileges
were several times enquired into, and ascertained by the Returns of the
Knights, who were charged to examine them; were what were enjoyed in the time
of the Saxon Kings, and especially under Edward the Confessor, and what the
Charters of King John, and his own expressed: For it is ridiculous to imagine,
That William II. Henry I. Stephen, and King John, should pretend to an
Arbitrary Power virtually, who all came in by the Consent, if not Election, of
the People. We may see how a Favorite can Absolve a King in Law and Conscience
too: And what a pretty Creature a King is, when Prerogative and Humor are
Synonimous, and he Acts by Advice of a single Person or Party, counter to that
of his Parliament. Hence, as the Historians say, grew Storms and Tumults; no
quietness to the Subject, or to himself; nothing but Grievances all the long
time of his Reign: He displaceth his English Officers to make room for
Foreiners; and all the Chief Counselors, Bishops, Earls and Barons of the
Kingdom are removed, as distrusted; that is, for giving him Good Counsel; and
only Strangers preferred to their Places, and Honors, and Castles; the King's
House and Treasury committed to their Care and Government.

These Indignities put upon the Lords, put them also upon Confederating, to
reduce the King to the sense of his former Obligations; but to their Petitions
he returns Dilatory and Frivolous Answers; and to requite their Favors, sends
for whole Legions of Poictavins to Enslave the Nation; and, to crown the
matter, marries himself, without Advice, to a Daughter of the Earl of Provence,
by which he brought nothing but Poverty into this Kingdom: Afterward, in the
Long Story of this King, we hear of nothing but Grievance upon Grievance,
Confederacy upon Confederacy, Parliament upon Parliament; and Christmas upon
Christmas, were kept here, now there, in as many Places as he called his
Parliaments; and to as much purpose; Bickerings upon Bickerings, and Battle
upon Battle; till it grew to that height, That the Lords threatened to Expel
him and his New Councels out of the Land, and to create a New King; and the
Bishops threatened him with Excommunication; whilst, through a various Scene of
Confusion and Hurly-Burly, sometimes one Party being too peremptory, sometimes
the other, with an Interchangeable undecent Shuffling on the King's Side, and a
Rude Jealousy on the Lords, and various Turns of Arbitrary Fraud, and Obstinate
Disputes, for above Forty Years, wherein Prerogative and Liberty grew
Extravagant and Mad by turns, till the Nation was brought to the last Gasp; at
length the King in the Fifty second Year of his Reign, in most solemn manner,
confirms the Charters. That Magna Charta, which was granted in the Ninth Year,
and pretended to be avoided by reason of Infancy, and the Statute of
Marlebridge, which he had granted upon his Second Coronation in the Twentieth
Year, Wherein Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, were confirmed, with this
Clause, Quod contravenientes graviter puniantur; Upon which, as is said, Peace
and Tranquillity ensued: And these Charters have never since been Impugn'd or
Questioned, but Confirmed, Established, and commanded to be put in Execution by
Thirty two several Acts of Parliament. And from the Authority whereof, no Man
ought to be permitted to recede even in his Writing, to flatter any King
whatever; and Sir Robert Filmer, Dr. Brady, and Mr. Bohun, etc. perhaps
deserved as severe a Correction as Colonel Sidney, for writing Books and
Papers only, (for I do not think he deserved Hanging) if not greater; for
their's were dispersed by an ill-tim'd-publication, whereas to others lay still
only in his Study. We date our Non Obstantes from this King, which Matthew
Paris calls an Odious and Detestable Clause, and Roger de Thursby with a sigh
said it was a Stream derived from the Sulphurious Fountain of the Clergy.

EDWARD I.
I Know not whether this King may come up to the Character which some of our
Historians give of him in all Respects; yet, without doubt he stands an
Instance and Example of Princely Qualities and Virtues fit to be imitated, and
at least, as he is styled, the Second Ornament of Great Britain: And as a Wise,
Just and Fortunate (because Wise and Just) Prince, who in regard of his Noble
Accomplishments, and Heroical and Generous Mind, deserves to be ranged amongst
the Principal and Best Kings that ever were, as Walsingham, and Cambden, Polyd.
Virgil, and Others relate. Baker divides his Acts into five Parts; 1. His Acts
with his Temporal Lords. 2. His Acts with his Clergy. 3. With Wales. 4. With
Scotland: And lastly, With France. And First, He gave his Lords good
Contentment in the beginning of his Reign, by granting them Easier Laws, and
particularly in the Statute of Westminster, which consists of Fifty one
Chapters, and is well worth perusing. Sir Edward Coke says, This, and all other
Statutes made in the Reign of this King, may be styled by the Name of
Establishments, because they are more Constant, Standing, and Durable Laws,
than have been made ever since; and Sir William Herle, then Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, says, Fuit le plus Sage Roy que Vnques fuit. And though these
Laws were said to be Pour le Commun. profit de seint Eglise and del Realm, yet
he thought it expedient to clip the Wings of his Clergy; observing, as is said,
their Power too predominant; and afterward, by the Statute of Mortmain, kept
them from engrossing Lands, and increasing their Temporal Possessions; and when
his Prelates pressed him to repeal this Statute, he gave them for Answer, That it
was a Statute made by the whole Body of the Realm, and therefore not in his
Power, who was but one Member of that Body; not like some of his Successors,
who have pretended to dispense with all Acts of Parliaments: He united Wales to
the Crown of England, partly by Force, and partly by Policy: As to his War in
Scotland, if it were managed with the same Policy, it had not, nevertheless,
the like success; at least, Scotland was so unfortunate to him, that he died
there: His War with France was but a Trifle, and soon ended in a Truce: His
last Misunderstanding with his Lords was the Effect of Unadvised Obstinacy on
both hands; for he ought not to have insisted on sending, or their going to the
Wars in Gascoin, without his going himself in Person; and they ought not to
have refused going with him in Person, though in or out of France or Scotland;
but yet he made up the Breach by his subsequent Prudence, and soft Demeanor:
The worst Action of his Reign (to me) seems to be Bribing the Pope to absolve
him from the Covenant made with his Subjects concerning their Charters, which
he had confirmed with an Oath; but the other good Laws which he made and
observed, shall (with me) excuse one Act of Frailty or Passion. And if he be
censured for his Taxes, he is, in part, justified by his well bestowing them,
to his own Honor, and Good of his Kingdom.

EDWARD II.
WE are not to expect much good from a King who begins his Reign with the
breach of his Father's Admonitions, and the Obligations he lay under by him in
matters of Duty; Commands which his Father gave him in charge with his last
Words, on pain of a Curse for his Disobedience, as Stow says. And here it may
be observed, how wretched and contemptible a Creature (pardon the Expression)
even a King (as well as another Man) is, when he has once broke loose from the
Principles of Honor and Morality; when the Natural Bonds of Modesty are
unhinged and broken: How he wavers and shuffles, and is driven about by every
Wind, that he cannot be steady to himself, or any one else. When Men have once
forsaken the Path of Virtue, they walk in an endless Maze; they cannot rely on
themselves, and therefore are imposed upon, and misled by every one. For when a
Man cannot justify himself to himself, he can never do it to another; and Kings
generally stand so much upon the Prerogative of being like Gods, that they
scorn to be thought to be in the wrong, like Men.

Here we may see how fatal it is to prefer a private Person, before the Public;
and for a Prince to espouse the Interest of a Favorite, so far as to put him
in competition with all his other Subjects; and to oppose his Welfare to theirs.

The whole Reign of this Poor King is but one Farce of Folly and Misfortune;
contemned by his Subjects, and even by his own Wife, who revenged upon him the
violation of a double Tie of Obedience: This was the immediate, as well as
natural Consequence, of relying upon the Opinion and Advice of single Persons,
contrary to the Counsels, and against the Advice of the Wisdom of the Nation.
After Troubles on the behalf of Gaveston; Troubles in Scotland, with a faint
ill-managed War; Troubles on account of the Spencers; Troubles in his own
Family, (for he was no wiser in his Oeconomicks than his Politics) with his
Wife, etc. he was at last shamefully Deposed, barbarously Used, and villanously
Murdered. A Person in his Natural Capacity certainly to be lamented, as having
some Virtues and Good Qualities: Fit to make an Accomplished Gentleman, though
not a Good King. Kingly Government did not seem to be his Talent, for he lived
as if born for himself, not for others; and there is certainly a difference in
the Quality of governing a Man's self and others, between governing and being
governed. To this purpose I must bring in Montaign, who seems to have a good
Notion of the Thing. Doubtless, says he, it can be no easy Task to Rule others,
when we find it so hard a matter to govern our selves: And as to the Thing
Dominion, which seems so charming, the Frailty of Human Wisdom, and the
Difficulty in Choice of Things that are New, and Doubtful to us, considered,
I Am very much of Opinion, That it is far more pleasant to follow, than to lead;
and that it is a great Settlement and Satisfaction of Mind, to have only one
Path to walk in, and to have none to answer for but a Man's self: For without
doubt (says he) there is a great and painful Duty incumbent upon a Good King:
How much does it import Kings to have a Good Advice of Counsel? For, I doubt we
shall find but few Kings (whether of God Almighty's making, or our own, i. e.
whether by Inheritance (Solus Deus facit haeredes) or Election) of Cyrus's
Qualifications, who says, That no Man is fit to Rule, but he who in his own
Worth is of greater value than all those he is to govern.

EDWARD III.
THE Reign of Edward the Third was more a School of Arms than Civil Polity: For
having in the beginning patched up an Indifferent Peace with Scotland, he is
immediately embroiled in a War with France, with which, and some few Matters in
Scotland, he was engaged all his Lifetime. It is true, in his Parliament at
Westminster, Supply and Grievances were pretty warmly Debated: And he has his
weak Side in the Business of Alice Pierce his Concubine; but I let this pass as
a Failing: (And who is without some?) But when he was at leisure he made Good
Laws, and particularly in the Affair of Purveying: He caused all Pleas to be in
English, that the Subjects might understand the Laws; Ordained Sumptuary Laws,
etc. and in the general was a Great and Good Prince; as Walsingham; Fuerat
nempe Rex iste, inter omnes Reges Orbis and Principes, Gloriosus, Benignus,
Clemens and Magnificus: Belliger fuit insignis and fortunatus, qui de Cunctis
Congressibus and in Terra and Mare semper triumphali gloria Victoriam
Reportavit. I can only attribute this to the Character Stow gives of him, viz.
That he advanced Persons to Dignities for Merit only, and who did excel others
in Innocence of Life.

RICHARD II.
SOME Princes have Erred upon a mistaken Consideration, some through a wilful
and rash Inconsideration; some have taken Measures by Advice of Friends (as
they thought) and have been deceived by Misrepresentations; (these may be
pitied); Others have Miscarried by hearkening only to Minions and Favorites,
are headstrong, and resolvedly deaf and obstinate against Advice: But the
Actions and Conduct of this King are so Unaccountable, that it would puzzle a
Matchiavel to assign him a Character, or to fix him in any Rule or Principle of
Government, Good or Bad. The Rebellion of John, or Wat Tyler, ought not to be
laid at his Door; it is called an Accident, though it had some dismal Effects
in it; but the occasion which appears, was the Abuse of a Collector who
gathered the Poll-Money; yet it may teach Kings, that it is a ticklish and
dangerous Experiment to let out a Revenue or Tax to Farm; so that it may be
scrued up into what may be called in the Country Oppression. This King's first
Misunderstanding, in earnest, or Misdemeanor, if I may so speak, after his
coming to Age, was imposed upon him by way of Surprise, and Artificial
Insinuation of Favorites; it might be the result of a hot Indiscretion, not of
a premeditated Violence or Invasion of Ill-natured Policy: And if the Duke of
Ireland, Michael de la Pool, the Chancellor, or the Archbishop of York, were in
fault on the one side, neither was the Duke of Gloucester, the Bishop of Ely,
etc. to be altogether excused, on the other; and the Parliament imposing on the
King Thirteen Lords to have oversight under the King, as they called it, was an
unsufferable Encroachment on the Spirit of a Young Prince: And he had reason to
have recourse to the Judges for their Opinions and Directions touching what had
passed in that Parliament as to their Participation of the Government with him;
whose Opinion (though they had the misfortune to suffer for it) was not so
Illegal, but Justifiable by the Laws, saving only in Two or Three of the
Questions to which they gave their Answers. But Law is not always measured by
its own Rule, it stands or falls according to the Circumstance of Times: A Man
may at some time sooner and better Steal a Horse (as they say) than look on at
others. This first Affront so put upon the King, gave him a prejudice to
Parliaments ever after, and consequently put him upon indirect Means and
Practices to Debauch the Constitution; and we may be sure Kings will never want
Tools fit for their purpose. Hence were conceived those prejudices also against
the Duke of Gloucester and the other Lords; the King had Reason to be out of
Tuition when he came to be of full Age: It Is true, the Attempting of the Duke
of Glocester's Life in that Treacherous manner, was not to be excused; neither
was his Behavior to be pardoned toward the King; he reproached him too
severely on all Occasions, for though he was the King's Uncle, he was not
always to be his Governor; they were both in Fault, no doubt, and both equally
Unfortunate in their End. 'Twas an unhappy Reign, divided between too haughty
Subjects, and Ill-designing Favorites, too powerful for a Young Inconsiderate
King to Manage with Prudence and equal Power. Whether Chief Justice Tresilian
did according to Law or not, it is certain his Death was not according to Law;
and as the Duke of Gloucester had taken his Life, so his own was soon after
taken away without Trial also, in an Arbitrary manner: And the Earl of Arundel
had the same Measure he meeted to Calvery, one of the Queens Esquires. The
Banishing the Duke of Norfolk, and Hereford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
was rather a fault in the Politics of those times (for it seems it was the
Custom then to Punish the Faults of Great Men only with Banishment, but an
ill-advised Custom,) than want of Consideration in the King. Sir John Bushy,
the Speaker of Parliament, was the most in fault, in attributing Vain, and
almost Blasphemous Titles to the King; Titles fitter (as is observed) for the
Majesty of God; and putting him upon a piece of Omnipotence, in Recalling his
Pardons; which the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, Adjudged in the Affirmative,
That the King might Revoke; but the Lawyers and Judges, having been burnt
before, designed to give Judgment the other way, and had no mind to Determine of
Transactions in Parliament any more, nor of the Kings Prerogative in such
Ticklish Times: Though at the next Parliament at Chester, the Judges were drawn
in to give another Extraordinary Judgment, viz. That when Articles are
propounded by the King to be handled in Parliament, that if other Articles are
handled before those are determined, it is Treason in them that do it. What was
there Extravagant that was not done in this Parliament? He brought it about, as
the History says, That he obtained the whole Power of the Parliament to be
Conferred upon certain few Persons; who proceeded to Conclude upon many things
which concerned generally the things of the whole Parliament, to the great
Prejudice of the State, and dangerous Example in time to come. What could we
expect from a King who was Taught, That the Laws of the Realm were in his Head
and his Breast? By reason of which fantastical Opinion, he Destroyed Noblemen,
and Impoverished the Commons; which was one of the Articles against him; and
which was much such a worthy fancy as Wat Tyler had, who putting his Hand to
his Lips, said, Before Four Days come to an End, all the Laws of England should
proceed from his Mouth. But I am weary of the Medley of this King's Story: In
short, if we survey him in his Taxations, in his Laws and Ordinances after all,
and in the Station of a Christian, and Man, as well as King; we shall, with a
little Charity, or good Nature, conclude him Blameable rather by Accident than
natural Temper: And as to his Conditions, That they were more the Fault of his
Education than Inclination; and at the bottom, those Failings that were in him,
retained the tincture of the light Inconstancy of his Mother. He is another
unfortunate Instance of the Instability and Misery of a King when he leaves the
Track of Law and Justice, for the Ways of Humor and Passion. Sir Robert Cotton
Observes, That Bushy's Contrivance of Compounding with Delinquents, wrought
such Distaste in the Affections of the People, that it grew the Death of the
One, and Deposition of the Other.

HENRY IV.
IN the next Six Reigns, during the Divisions of the Houses of York and
Lancaster, the Kingdom was scarce ever cool enough for Observations of Civil
Polity and Administration. The Thirteen Years of this King were divided between
Conspiracies and Wars. And as he came to the Crown without a Title, with
respect to Richard II. or the Earl of Marsh, who had the Undoubted Right, as
being of the Eldest House; without any Title, unless what he had from the
People, (or, as Stow says, was Ordained King more by Force than lawful
Succession, or Election), so he held it in continued Trouble and Confusion,
saving only the last Year: And it is said, he was well pleased that there were
always Troubles that there might be no Calm or Interval for Reflection. He was
so jealous of his Crown, that in his Sickness he would have it laid by him upon
his Bolster, for fear some body should Dispossess him of it, as he had Richard
the IId; and his Son as readily took it up, for fear of some other
Interposition. Though he had not leisure for Politics, yet he made a very
useful Observation, fit to be thought on by Kings, viz. That of Englishmen, so
long as they have Wealth, so long shall thou have Obeisance; but when they are
Poor, they are always ready to make Insurrection at every motion. Here we have
also a great Example of a King's Son submitting to the Laws, and of a King
protecting and countenancing a Judge in a due Execution of them; and also of a
Judge with a steady Gravity and Resolution putting the Ancient Laws of the Realm
in Execution, without Favor or Partiality.

HENRY V.
THE Reign of this King was wholly taken up with the Wars in France; and here
may be seen what an English Prince can do, when he himself is Brave and
Generous, and stands well in the Opinion of his Subjects; they paid him Homage
before he was Crowned, and voluntarily granted him a Subsidy without asking;
and he, on the other hand, asked but few: By which it appears (as Sir Richard
Baker observes) what great matters a moderate Prince may do, and yet not grieve
his Subjects with Taxations. Under this King, who was of English true Honor,
the Honor of the Nation was at the highest Character; for in a Council holden
at Constance, it was Decreed, That England should have the Title of the English
Nation, and should be accounted one of the Five Principal Nations in Rank
before Spain; which often before had been moved, but never till then Granted.

HENRY VI.
I Know not what to say to the Reign of this unfortunate King, only that it is
an instance of the Impertinence of Fortune, and of the Unsteadiness of Human
Affairs; although Philip de Comines says, he was a very Silly Man, and almost
an Innocent; yet this silly Innocence seems to be what we call Simplicity in
the modest acceptance of the word, and the Effect rather of Choice, or
Observation, than Defect. It Is true he had a sort of Passive Understanding; but
he had Judgment enough to distinguish Good and Bad, between Virtue and Vice,
Success and Misfortune; to resent these as a Man, but overlook them as a
Christian, and what Sir Francis Bacon reports of him upon the account of his
being to be Canonized, (That the Pope, who was jealous of his Honor and of the
Dignity of the Sea of Rome, knowing that Henry the VIth was reputed in the
World abroad but for a Simple Man, was afraid it would but diminish the
Estimation of that kind of Honor, if there were not a distance kept between
Innocents and Saints,) seems to be brought in rather for the sake of the Jingle
or Jest, than Truth. His greatest symptom of Weakness was suffering a Wife to
be imposed upon him, and then being ever after imposed upon by that Wife; but I
doubt this may have been the condition of some Wise Men; and the Earl of
Suffolk played the fool in the Match, not the King, any otherwise than by taking
the Advice of a single Person, without, and contrary to the Counsel of his
Other Peers, etc. And what have Wiser Kings done, beset with a Favorite or a
Wife? Whereas he had both; which shows, that it is not so much a King's personal
and private Wisdom, as That of the General Council of a Nation, is to be relied
on. The Ill-advised Tragedy of the Duke of Gloucester made Room and opened way
for That of the King's, by letting in the Duke of York's pretensions to the
Crown, and soon ended in the Death of the Duke of Suffolk himself. So unsafe is
it for any Favorite, how Great soever, to presume on his Own strength against
the Interest and Policy of the Commonwealth. The Other Affairs of this Reign
seem transacted upon a stage of Fortune or Fate, rather than Prudence or
Policy, trod between a Headstrong People, Ambitious Nobles, and a Queen too apt
to Rule, and a King too easy and apt to Suffer. If we may learn any thing from
this Reign, it is only this, That Virtue and Goodness, without Policy and
Justice, nor Policy without Virtue and Resolution, can Establish a Throne: But
after all, Fate it self seems to weigh down the Scale; his Father's Prophecy
(is said) was not to be avoided, which I leave in the Words of Howard's
Defensative against the Poison of supposed Prophesies, viz. What Prophet could
have picked out of Mars and Saturn the manifold Mishaps which befell the Prince
of Blessed Memory, King Henry the VIth; sometimes Sleeping in a Port of Honor,
sometimes Floating in the Surges of Mishap; sometimes Possessing Foreign
Crowns, sometimes Spoiled and Deprived of his Own; sometimes a Prince,
sometimes a Prisoner; sometimes in plight to give Succor to the Miserable,
sometimes a Fugitive amongst the Desperate. Habington in his History of Edward
the IVth says, That this poor King in so many Turns and Vicissitudes, never met
with one fully to his Advantage. And Cambden says, He was Four times taken
Prisoner; and in the End Despoiled both of his Kingdom and Life.

EDWARD IV.
THE first Twelve Years of this King's Reign (if I may so call it, who came to
the Kingdom (as Biondi says) not by Power or Justice, but by the People's
Inclination) were passed in a ferment of Blood, and the better part of his Two
and twenty (if I may so say) were taken up in Wars and Executions; not so much
occasioned by Henry the VIth as by the Earl of Warwick; so dangerous a thing it
is to put an Affront upon a powerful Subject: But especially King Edward showed
a very weak part in this Management, who came to the Crown chiefly by the Earl
of Warwick's Interest, and with a confessed Election of his People, when he had
Married a Subject of no great Parentage or Interest, to disoblige such a
Subject, Dishonourably, who had so great a Stroke and made such a Figure in the
Nation. But all Rules of Policy, they say, must submit to Love; therefore to
pass that Oversight, for which there is an Excuse made: Certainly the
Confidence and Trust afterward by him reposed in the Duke of Gloucester, was a
manifest Infatuation, not to be supported with any pretense of common
Consideration, or color of Reason. And though Philip de Comines says he was
the Goodliest Personage, yet I doubt he was not the Wisest, and he might well
affirm that his Master Lewis of France exceeded Edward the IVth in Sense and
Wisdom. How idle and vicious was his Consideration upon that imagined Prophecy,
That G. should Disposse is his Children of the Crown; to suffer it to influence
him so far, as to consent to the Murder (as it is said) of G. Duke of Clarence,
on supposition (foreign enough) that That G. was intended him; whereas it fell
out to be Gloucester; to whose Tyranny he left them by this Foolish and Ungodly
Fancy, and such a profane extravagant Application of Sorceries; to which, in
truth, that Age was every where too much addicted. And 'twas not his jealous
practices with the Duke of Britaign, against Henry Earl of Richmond, could
secure the Crown to his Children, when he overlooked the more immediate Danger.

EDWARD V.
ONE would have thought Edward IV. might have, without Sorcery or Prophecy,
foreseen what would become of the committing the Care of Edward the Vth to his
Brother the Duke of Gloucester, who had before Killed Henry the VIth with his
own Hand, in all probability without Commandment or Knowledge of his Brother
and his Son, in his own presence; and was suspected also to have a hand in the
Death of his other Brother the Duke of Clarence; besides the symptom of an
ill-contrived Soul and Body: Without taking notice of all the villainous popular
Harangues, Insinuations and Artifices used by the Duke of Gloucester, to get the
King's Person into his Power, out of the Hands of the Queen and her Friends. In
short, this poor Prince was an Unhappy instance of a misplaced Guardianship,
and an Unnatural Uncle's Care. A Youth, made a Jest of Sovereignty for Ten
Weeks, and Sacrificed to Ambition at Eleven Years of Age; and an instance of
the fatal Credulity of a Woman, too apt to be deceived as well as to deceive:
He and his poor Brother were Murdered in the Tower, Betrayed by an Uncle, and
too easily delivered up by a Mother. A Reign, a fit Subject only for Poetry.

'Twin-Brethren by their Death, What had they done? Aleyn Hist. of Hen. VII.

Oh Richard sees a Fault that they were in!
It is not Actual, but a Mortal One,
They Princes were, 'twas their Original Sin.
Why should so sweet a Pair of Princes lack
Their Innocents Day in the English Almanac?
RICHARD III.
THIS -- was so great a Monster in all Respects, that he ought not (for the
Honor of England) to have place amongst the Catalogue of Kings. There ought to
be nothing Recorded of him, but only this, That he died in the Field with his
Sword in his Hand. It Is said, he made Good Laws; but I know of none
Extraordinary, but only One, which is rather a Popular Declaration of what was
so before; and that was, That the Subjects of this Realm shall not be charged
by any Benevolence, or such like Charge, but it shall be damned and annulled
for ever. Let his Laws be transferred to another Reign; let us not acknowledge
Mercy from the Hands of Blood. Sir Francis Bacon says, That his Good Laws were
but the Brocage of an Usurper, thereby to win the hearts of the People, as
being Conscious to himself, that the true Obligations of Sovereignty in him
failed: And if he had lived, no doubt, would have proved such a One as King
James the First describes a Tyrant to be.

HENRY VII.
IT behoved Henry the Seventh, having in himself but a slim sort of distant
Title, to support himself by Policy: And here will appear what Single Prudence
can do: This maintained his Crown, whilst he trimmed between Conquest, Military
Election, Parliamentary, Birth, Donation, and Marriage: Though he did not care
to be beholding to the Last, and to take a precarious Right from a Wife. Sir
Walter Rawleigh says, He was a Politic Prince, who by the Engine of his Wisdom
beat down and overturned as many Strong Oppositions both before and after he
wore the Crown, as ever King of Enggland did. And Cambden, Through whose Care,
Vigilance, and Policy, and Forecasting Wisdom for times to come, the State and
Commonwealth of England has to this day stood Established and Invincible;
Henricus noster Septimus cum omnes Regni recte Administrandi Arts calleret,
sic his Ornamentis Instructus venit ut cum Pacem Exulantem, Exul, exterremque
Extorris concomitatus esset, reducem quoque, Redux aportaret. Win. Com. de
rebus Brit.

But, perhaps, the Tyranny of his Predecessor might make his first Steps more
easy: However, I take Henry the Seventh's Masterpiece of Wisdom to be, That he
used That of other Men's also: He called his Parliament, and consulted with it
upon all Occasions, especially when he had any Provocations to War from France
or Scotland: Not insisting on, but ever waving that impertinent piece of
Prerogative, of Declaring War upon a King's own Head: This Method opened his
Subjects Purses; This procured even a Benevolence as odious as it had been
heretofore, and Great Sums of Money were soon collected by it: The Commotions
which happened in the North and West upon gathering the Subsidies, were but
slight Exceptions, taken on the Occasion of the Extravagancies and Passions of
particular Persons: And the Business of Lambert Simnell, and the greater
Attempt of Perkin, Warbeck, were but the Effect of a Woman's Malice, and
promoted by the Duchess of Burgundy, who was an Avowed Enemy to the House of
Lancaster. Sir Francis Bacon tells us, His Time did excel for Good Commonwealth
Laws; so that he may be justly celebrated for the Best Lawgiver to this
Nation, after King Edward the First. For his Laws, whosoever marks them well, are
deep, and not Vulgar; not made upon the Spur of a particular Occasion for the
present, but out of providence for the future, to make the State of his People
still more and more happy, after the manner of the Legislators in Ancient and
Heroical Times. I suppose he means the State-Laws against Retainers and Riots;
these seem more properly to be made on his own Account, and that no Person
assisting a King de Facto should be attainted therefore by course of Law, or
Act of Parliament; and that if any such Act should be made, it should be void,
which seems also calculated for a particular purpose (though it has since made
so much noise in the World) [as the Act to take away the Writ De Haeretico
Comburendo, was in King Charles the Second's Time.] And this de Facto Act seems
to have no foundation at that time, unless it were for fear of the Earl of
Warwick, who was the last Heir-Male of the Plantagenets; for the King and
People most certainly knew, that Richard, the Younger Brother of Edward the
Fifth, was Dead, and Safe, whom Perkin pretended to represent: And methinks,
after all, this Act seems to have but a Weak and Dishonourabble Foundation, and
leaves an ill Savor, and will cast a Reflection some-where: For Fears and
Jealousies put Men and Kings too often upon poor spirited Actions. But letting
this pass; Another touch of his over-Wisdom, viz. his Disposition to squeeze
Money out of his Subjects Purses by Forfeitures on Penal Laws, was an Excess of
Policy scarce to be excused; and, as is said, without all doubt proved the Blot
of his Time; and as Sir Robert Cotton observes, There is no string will sooner
jarr in the Commonwealth than this, if it be generally touched. This was that
which passed for the Disgrace of his Reign, though what may pass under the Name
of Severe Justice: And though he escaped the Violent Consequences of it
himself, yet the fatal Return overtook Empson and Dudley in the beginning of
the next Reign, who were both executed for Treason, for extending this Summum
Jus to Violence and Injury, and turning Law and Justice into Rapin; (Though it
will puzzle a Lawer to determine what Species of Treason this is, unless it be
against the Laws, by traitorously betraying the Trust reposed in them). But no
Government, King, or Person, is without some Failing, and Wisdom it self may be
overacted.

HENRY VIII.
I Am not to determine how it came about, yet it may be observable, That though
this King came to the Crown by an Undoubted Right of Succession, as Heir of the
House of Lancaster by his Father, and of the House of York by his Mother; yet
upon his Coronation the People were asked, Whether they would receive him for
their King? But I know this will be thought a trivial Matter of Form, not worth
taking notice of. It is said his first Years were a Reign by Book, having come
from the Instruction and Contemplation of Good, to Action; his Notions stuck by
him some Years: And not to pretend to single Sufficience at those Years, at
least, That he might know how to perform his Coronation Oath, he chose a Wise
Council to direct him in the Observation of the Laws; and as they generally do
in all New Reigns, He redressed the Grievances of the former, by making
Examples of the Oppressors in the last. He did not enter into the War with
France upon his own Head, neither upon the Advice of his Privy Council; but had
it debated in Parliament, where it was resolved, That Himself with a Royal Army
should invade France; and then for that purpose an Extraordinary Subsidy was
willingly granted toward the Charges thereof: These were the beginnings of his
Reign; and he might have finished it with the same Honor and Wisdom, if
Woolsey had not piously told him, He might lay aside the use of his
Understanding, and his own Consideration (no doubt to rely on his): That he
should not need to trouble himself with frequenting the Council Table, but
might take his Pleasure, etc. (Admirable Council for a Priest)! And he himself
would give him Information, etc. Thus he engrossed the King, disobliged the
King's Friends, caused the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of Winchester,
Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, to withdraw from Court, and Topp'd his
Prerogative upon the King's, and led him away by the Misdirections of his own
False Oracle; persuades and puts the King upon Lending the Emperor Money, who
was poor and Insolvent; because, forsooth, the French King had withheld the
Revenue of the Bishop of Tourney, that is, his Own. After he had tired the
People with his Civil Justice before, he sets up for an Arbitrary Spiritual
Power in himself: Obtains an Office from the Pope to dispense with Offenses
against Spiritual Laws, and erects a Trade for Sin, to make Virtue and Religion
Venial, and betrays the King into the Restoring or Surrendering Tourney, for
great Gifts, and greater Promises, after that he found it did not turn to
Account, and he could make nothing of it by way of Yearly Income: And thus
dishonored the King and Nation, and like a very Godly Prelate, dissolved the
King and Court into all sort of Luxury, and the Priesthood it self into
Licentiousness and Disorder: And so far the Artificial Malice and Villainy of
this Saucy and Bloody Butcher's Son went, who had neither Honor or Religion,
That he persuaded the King to sacrifice his Nobility to him, and the Duke of
Buckingham must be made an Example and Martyr to his Revenge, for only pouring
a little Water into his Shoes, when he had the Impudence to dip his Hands in
the Basin, whilst the Duke held it to the King to wash. He alone could create
Misunderstandings between the King, Lords and Commons, by virtue of his Lies
and Misrepresentations of Matters from one to the other, although he had been
caught in them more than once: He dissolved Convocations, by virtue of his
Power Legantine, which were convok'd by the Archbishop; and calls Him and all
the Clergy to another Place, according to his own Imperious Fancy; diverts the
Laws of the Land, and seeks to raise Money by Commission, which the People
opposed, and the King was afterward forced to Disclaim: On the other hand
abuses the King's Grace, and takes it upon himself; alters the State of the
King's House, Retrenches the Allowance of his Servants; and in short, arrogates
the Power over Servants, and Master also, and assumes the Power and Honor of
the King, and Styles and Directs Ego and Rex meus in his Writings and Letters
to Rome, and Foreign Parts: This could an humble Successor of the Apostles do?
And by the bye, It may be worth observing, how far Pride can inspire these
Prelatical Sparks with Presumption, who pretend to be but the Representatives
of the Apostles, to exalt themselves above, and Lord it over Kings, whom yet
they themselves acknowledge to represent God: I regard not their Distinctions,
neither before nor since their Compliment of the Supremacy, which they would
resume if they could, without a Pope. But it happened the Cardinal carried on
the Scene and State of Pageantry too far, even to his own Ruin; and the King's
Eyes were opened at length, after that the Cardinal had cut him out a way for
the Ruin, or Reformation rather of the Church, as well as himself; and by his
Exorbitant Behavior had opened the Door to the Parliament to Redress the
Grievances, and provide for a Remedy against them, by restraining and wholesome
Laws. I am the more particular upon this Prelate, because he was the Hinge upon
which every thing turned; and would set a Mark upon him for Kings to know whom
to avoid, and for what Reasons: And would upon all Occasions also remind them
how wretched and inconsiderable a Creature a King is, when he abdicates his own
Reason, to submit it to another's; and waves the Public, for any private
Whispers of Admonition.

I desire to be excused from meddling with the long Story of the King's Quarrel
with the Pope, and the Occasion; and shall pass over the Alterations in
Religion in this King's time; or what was more considerable, the Change and
Dissolution of Religious Houses: I have nothing to do with his Shifting and
Dissolving of Wives neither: There are particular Histories of the Reformation
enough, and fresh in every one's Memory; having had an occasion, not long since,
to review them, and consider them afresh. There are Plays and Novels also of
the other to gratify the Female Politicians; who, whether they ought to be
severe upon him, or not, I know not, and leave to them to determine: This is
besides my Design, as being out of all Ordinary Rules of Civil Policy:
Therefore waving all Enquiry into the Reasons or Provocations of one or
the other, though I know some are assigned and remarked to his Disadvantage,
others to his Advantage; I shall dismiss my self with this general Remark upon
the Qualities of a Man, or King; That when Either have once broke through the
first Obligations of Justice or Virtue, he makes but little difficulty in the
proceeding upon Attempts of the same Nature: Though after all, to speak
impartially, and without Reflection, I am not satisfied, but the first Occasion
of Divorce, and Reformation too, was in its self justifiable, though the
Circumstances inducing it, are suspected; and it was concluded a Reason sought,
not offered. But certainly Sir Walter Raleigh's Character of him is not to be
justified, who says, That if all the Pictures and Paterns of a Merciless Prince
were lost in the World, they might all again be painted to the life out of the
Story of this King: And that of Sir Robert Naunton is as ill-natured; viz.
Having a Design to marry within the Degrees Unlawful, he set his Learned Men at
work to prove it lawful; and after a while, being cloyed, and desiring Change,
set them again on work to prove it unlawful; He never spared Man in his Anger,
or Woman in his Lust: This is Satyrically said, but not truly; For he had no
mind to marry at first where he did, but did it in Obedience to his Father's
Will, and against the Grain with himself: And he lived with this first Wife
Twenty Years, and never took notice of the Unlawfulness of that Marriage, till
it was objected against him again, and the President of Paris started and moved
it on the Proposal of Marriage between the Lady Mary (his Daughter by
Katherine) and the Duke of Orleance, the second Son to the French King: And as
to the Cruelty toward Men, the Death of the Lord Cromwell, and that of the
Duke of Norfolk's Son, Henry Earl of Surry, sound most of Severity; yet as to
the first, he had raised him from a Smith's Son, he was Cardinal Woolsey's
Pupil, and trod in his Steps: He was Attainted by Parliament, and the Record
says, for Crimes of Heresy and Treason, perhaps the Advice of the Match with
the Lady Ann of Cleve; but I think it does not argue Cruelty in the King
neither toward him or her: He dismissed her with a gentle Farewell after her
Marriage was declared Unlawful by the Convocation, and adjudged so in
Parliament; and she lived sixteen Years after, and died in the Fourth Year of
Queen Mary: As to the other, It is plain it was not to gratify his Personal
Cruelty: For being no Lord of Parliament, he was Arraigned at Guildhall before
a Special Commission, and found guilty by a Jury; the Charge of bearing Arms
which belonged to the King and Prince, may seem somewhat slight, yet it is
always dangerous to play with Edged Tools, and the Ragion di stato may in part
excuse it. In the main he appears a King of a great deal of Honor, not without
a Good-natured Generosity: He was careful also to maintain the Civil
Constitution, and devout to the Privileges of Parliament: He carried it fair
with his Subjects in the general, and was never Ill-natured or Froward (as far
as I can perceive) without some Color of Justice. I know not whether I can
justify him in his Politics so well, in his contradicting by the Will, the
Disposition of the Crown, and its Succession, which he had before Established
in Parliament; especially to bring in Queen Mary, after his Subjects had sworn
to the Parliamentary Succession of his Daughter Elizabeth: Besides, That this
was subsequently by Implication, to affirm the Legitimacy of his Marriage with
Katharine of Spain, which was with so much Solemnity labored, and declared
Unlawful: All that can be said, is, That he might, in respect to the Mother, be
unwilling to suffer the Daughter to be Bastardised: And we always ought to
construe the Actions of Princes in mitiori sensu, and to take them by the best
part of the Handle in History: To speak well of them, if we can any ways
justify it; and to be silent in Doubtful Characters, if we cannot Commend.

EDWARD VI.
I Am at a loss in speaking to the Short Reign of Edward the Sixth: He seems
born and designed for the Advancement of Ecclesiastical and Civil Polity, and
to be snatched away to the Disappointment of Human Expectations; to intimate,
That there is no Establishment of Happiness to be relied on here below.
However, that Government which might have come to something in himself, was
Unfortunate in the Administration of the Council which his Father with so much
Care had assigned him, and impertinently enough shuffled between the Aspiring
Conduct of the Great Men, and the Foolish Ambition of Pretending Women: These
interrupted the Wisdom of Councels (though the Protector did his part well
enough at first, till he came to pull down a Church, and two Bishops Houses in
the Strand, to make him a Mansion House, etc.) For after the Disturbances of
the Nation on the Account of Religion, and the Enclosures at Home, and with
relation to the French and Scots Abroad, had been managed with Prudence and
Honor, and the Kingdom began to appear with a Face of Peace and Satisfaction:
How vain are Mortal Considerations! Behold the whole Economy is on a sudden
Discomposed, and the Frame of Government Subverted: And a Frivolous Pretense of
Place between two Women Unhinges the Constitution, and first exposes, and then
destroys and ruins the Husbands, by virtue of the False Designs of a Third
Person behind the Curtain, who grafted Villainy artificially upon their Follies,
and at last, as was suspected, brought in the King himself, whose Death also is
laid at the same Door. What the Sense of our Neighbors was concerning it, you
may read in Mezeray: France and England held pretty good Correspondence, when
Death cut the Thread of Young King Edward's Days; It was believed to proceed
from a slow Poison, and John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, was suspected
guilty of the Crime, he having suggested to him to Institute Jane of Suffolk
for Heiress to the Crown: However it were, it proved a Fatal Policy to the poor
Lady Jane and himself too. I confess, I cannot see why Edward the Sixth might
not make bold with Mary, as well as his Father had done before him, and dispose
of the Crown by Will, as he did; especially for the Propagating and
Establishing the Infant Reformation, if that Age had been serious, and well
agreed in the Business of Religion: For we shall find, I doubt, in History
(notwithstanding all Observation to the contrary), That if Religion be not
supported by State-props, it will not stand long; and that That which has only
for its Ingredients Mercy and Honor, will be in short time overrun, and go to
the Walls, whilst the Religion of Violence and Blood will propagate it self by
Inquisitions, and the Artifices of its own pretended Zeal. And that,
notwithstanding all Innocent Precautions, it is too true, That a Prince of
Matchiavell's Composition, will at present, and for once, prevail over one of a
Sincere Virtue, and open Honor: This, I say, upon the appearing Reason of the
thing, That our Nation in particular may not be imposed upon over and over
again with the same Appearances, and only that we should stand upon our Guard
against all Popish Representations, how innocently soever colored; and against
all Foreign Overtures, how well soever baited.

Queen MARY.
ONE would have thought, that the Reign of this Queen might have satisfied a
Nation (of any Capacity of Thinking) in the Professions of a Papist, and what
weight the Promises of the Church of Rome to Heretics ought to have with
Protestants.The Principles and Practices of Papists were well enough known,
even in those times, in our Neighboring Country of France under Henry the IId,
by the Execution of so great a Number of Protestants, who were Burned in the
Greve, the common Place of Execution; but the manner of it was not Common: They
were Haled up by a Pully and Iron Chain, then suffered to fall down in the
midst of a great Fire; which was repeated several times: And it is said, the
King himself would needs feed his own Eyes with this Tragical and Melancholy
Spectacle, and that the Horrible and Mournful Shreiks of one of those poor
Wretches left so lively an Impression in his Imagination, that all his Life
long he had from time to time a very frightful and terrible Remembrance of
those dreadful Groans: However it were, it is certain that the Smell of those
Carcasses then Roasted, got into the Brains of a great many People; who on the
one hand beholding the (false) Constancy, as Mezeray calls it, and on the other
hand the scandalous dissolute Living, named this Justice (as he terms it) a
Persecution, and their Punishment a Martyrdom.This is the tender Account given
of it by a Popish Historian. And he says, Faggots were then lighted every where
against the Protestants. Queen Mary made her passage to the Throne through her
Promises to the Norfolk and Suffolk Gentlemen, that she would make no
Alterations in Religion; but before she was warm in it, she showed how she
dissembled her false Favors, and removed the Protestant Bishops, and sent
Cranmer the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Latimer, and others, to the Tower,
and passed Judgment on them to Dye: All this before her Coronation. And as
Mezeray tells us, When she was once Absolute Mistress, she Cemented the Throne
with the Blood of the Lady Jane, her Husband, her Father, and almost all her
Kindred, and after that she spilt much more to Restore the Catholic Religion;
which brought the State into such Convulsions as had like to have proved
Mortal, and all for the Advantage of a short Duration. Thus Mezeray still, a
French and Popish Writer. And, in truth, the Lady Elizabeth escaped very
narrowly; for Gardener, that special Bishop of Winchester, had procured her to
be sent to Prison, and had framed a Warrant under certain Counselors Hands to
put her to Death; but that Mr. Bridges, Lieutenant of the Tower, pitying her
Case, went to the Queen to know her Pleasure, who utterly denied that she knew
any thing of it, or was then ashamed, at least, to Own it; by which means her
Life was preserved. This Good-natured Merciful Bishop, and Popish Priest, was
not contented to Lop off Boughs and Branches, as he phras'd it at the
Council Board, but was for plucking up the Reformation by the Root, meaning
Queen Elizabeth; and to do the Spaniards Justice, it is said they interceded for
her; perhaps it was only in Policy, that their Master might have Two Strings to
his Bow, as it appeared by the sequel; for he Courted Queen Elizabeth after the
Death of Queen Mary. 'Twas evident farther, how Queen Mary intended to keep her
Word as to Religion, by her Match with Spain: No doubt she had a mind to put it
out of her Power, and cast the Odium of Persecution off from her self. But we
ought not to Reflect on her for Marrying one of her own Religion; since our
Protestant Kings on this side the Reformation have had a good knack ever since
of providing for the Security of the Protestant Religion by Popish Matches; for
though King James the First did not actually Wed (he did not dare to have
attempted it in Scotland) a Papist, yet he was more to blame in advising and
pursuing One so hotly for his Son, than his Son who finished a Popish Match at
last: This by the bye. The Rebellion of Wyat was an ill timed Attempt begun too
early (as another late One since); but had he let it alone a little longer,
till Queen Mary showed her self more fully in her proper Colors; when the
Pope's Primacy came to be proposed and labored to be Restored, and Cardinal
Pool came over, it might have had another Effect, and proved a generous Effort
for the Rescuing the Infant Reformation from the Jaws of Popish Tyranny: For
the Pope had just Taught the People the way of being Absolved from their
Allegiance; and they might infer if he could do it, or it were to be done for
the sake of Religion, That they might Absolve themselves from their Allegiance
for the good of Religion also. But when once a first Undertaking miscarries,
through an ill-timed and rash Precipitation, a Second seldom or never comes to
Maturity in the same Shape and Nature. Her Five Years Reign passed in a Hurry
of Religion, Love, Persecution, Marriage, etc. with some Lunatic Intervals of
Mercy. It is said her Reign was polluted with Blood of Martyrs, Unfortunate by
frequent Insurrections, and Inglorious by the Loss of Callis. It is said also,
she was a Lady of Good Nature and Merciful Disposition in her self; What then
can we expect from the Reign of any Popish Prince, where the Barbarous Zeal,
and Unhuman Authority of that Church, can so far Impose upon, and Overruled
even a Merciful Prince, that Dr Heylin calls here is the greatest Persecution
since Dioclesian's time, and which raged most terribly. It Is truly and
absolutely impossible for any thing of Honor, Virtue, or Good Nature, to have
any place in a Sovereign under such a Sovereignty.

Queen ELIZABETH.
IN the Reign of Queen Elizabeth we may observe the difference in a method of
Protestant and Popish Reformation, or Alteration of Religion: The Popish under
Queen Mary was begun and carried on by Imprisonments, Fire and Blood: The
Protestants by this Queen, with a true Christian Temper, by a gentle Remove,
without any Blood, without Imprisoning any Person, and without inflicting
almost any Suffering or Penalty, till the Seditious Practices of the Popish
Party had provoked the Arm of Justice; till the Pope had given away her Kingdom
of Ireland as a Heretic; and Parsons and Campian, Two of his Emissaries, had
Deposed her at Home in their Doctrines. And after all, Campian, Sherwin, and
Briant, did not suffer as Popish Priests, but were Prosecuted on the 25th of
Edward the IIId for Plotting Destruction of the Queen, and Ruin of the Kingdom;
for Adhering to the Pope, the Queen's Enemy, and coming into England to Raise
Forces against the State. And 'twas only for these Exorbitances of the Papists
that new and strict Laws were Enacted against them in the following
Parliaments, in the 23d 27, 29, 35th Years of her Reign: Before that, there was
only the Penalty of Twelvepence a Sunday for Absence from Church; and some
other necessary provisions concerning the Supremacy, Administration of the
Sacrament, and Form of Common Prayer; which also were very tenderly put in
Execution, and for above Twenty Years no Body suffered Death for Religion; nor
till long after the Pope and King of Spain had conspired her Ruin, and Gregory
the XIIIth held secret Consultations to Invade at once both England and
Ireland, and longer after that Bloody Massacre of Paris; which was a design to
Cut off the Protestants, as it was Termed, or at least to give them a deep
Wound; and the terrible Slaughters of Protestants through all the Cities of
France, and the War afterward declared against the Protestants in the time of
Charles the IXth; not to reflect on the Chambres Ardentes before against
Protestants in Henry the IId's time; and after the Attempt which the Duke of
Alva, on the behalf of the Queen of Scots, and the just suspicious she might
entertain on her account, who was then accounted the great Patroness and only
hopes of the Papists, and all the other Stratagems and visible Designs of that
Party. And the second Execution of any Person was in her Twenty fifth Year, and
upon a just necessity of Self-preservation, upon the rash and extravagant
Proceedings of Somervill and Others. Besides, when the Queen was informed even
of these Severities (as they are called), tender ones in comparison; she grew
offended with the Commissioners for Popish Causes, Reproved them for their
Severity (although they declared and protested, they Questioned no Man for his
Religion, but only for dangerous Attempts against her Majesty and the State);
and the Queen forbad them afterward to use Tortures, as she did the Judges
other Punishments: And not long after that, when Seventy Priests were taken,
and some of them Condemned, and the rest in danger of the Law, she only shipped
them away out of England. A Merciful piece of Justice! So Merciful she was,
that it gave her Enemies such Encouragement, as her Life was never safe; (as
may appear by the Case of Dr Parry); till there was a necessity for an
Association to provide for the Queen's safety, which was first Voluntary by a
Number of her Subjects, the Earl of Leicester being foremost, thence after of
all Ranks and Conditions bound mutually thereunto to each other by their Oaths
and Subscriptions, to Prosecute all those to the very Death, that should
Attempt any thing against the Queen, which the Year following was in a
Parliamentary manner Enacted into a formal Law. Notwithstanding which, another
dangerous Conspiracy of one Savage, set on foot by Babington and Others to take
away her Life, as being Excommunicated, was discovered, and about Fourteen were
justly Executed for Treason. Upon which last Treason hung the Fate of the Queen
of Scots; the Justice whereof has been so much Controverted and Debated: Rules
of Policy and Self-preservation must cashier all Principles of good Nature or
Honor: Yet, however, Execution was not done upon her, till the French
Ambassador and others, were again discovered to take off the Queen by way of
prevention. And the Circumstances (suggested to the Queen at least) of the
Spanish Navy being come to Milford Haven, the Scots into England, and that the
Duke of Guise was Landed at Sussex, etc. may extenuate, if not excuse, the
Severity of her Execution, with any but Papists; and the manner of doing it at
last, shows it was Extorted from her upon inevitable Considerations, and
Symptoms of a relucting necessity. Her often Countermanding it, demonstrates it
was not an Act of her Inclination; and at last, perhaps, (as far as it appears)
it was obtained of her by Surprise, and without her Authorizing Hand to the
finishing Stroke. If there were any thing in it of Barbarity, 'twas the denying
her a Catholic Priest or Confessor, and the Manner of her Execution: Which yet
is no more than Papists deny Protestants on all occasions; and I know not why
we should not vouch the dying Honor of our Religion, as they do of theirs. But
enough has been said of this Tragedy on all Hands; only it may be fit to
Remark, That even the French Historians give a more favorable Account of it
than our own, and particularly Mezeray is softer in his Expressions than Baker:
The first says, The Indiscretion of her Friends was no less the Cause of her
Misfortune, than the Wickedness of her Enemies; as the First sought with
violent passion after some plausible pretense to Ruin her, the Other furnished
them with diverse, by contriving every Hour some odd Design, and even
Conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth; so that they made her Perish by their
overmuch Care and Endeavors to Save her. The Later gives a slim, trimming
Account, which was worse. Although it is true, the taking off the Queen of Scots
did not break the Neck of the Popish Designs (for who can restrain the Malice
of Jesuits? for Men must have some ingredient of Modesty to be convinced and
silenced, and kept within the bounds of natural Virtue) yet it stopped their
Hands for some time. And when afterward they began again upon the Example and
Encouragement of the Holy League in France (of which the Duke of Guise was
Head, and in virtue of which they had taken off their own King, Henry the IIId,
by the Hands of James Clement a Monk, though Guise himself was first
Assassinated); and they had taken new heart upon the King of Spain's Founding a
Seminary of English at Validolid; and new Plots were contrived against the
Queen: It put them somewhat out of the way, and they were at a loss where to
find a Successor to the Crown for their purpose, when Lopez and Patrick Cullen,
etc. were to have Killed the Queen: And they were forced to hunt after
far-fetched Titles in the Infanta of Spain, and farther, for the Earl of Essex
at Home (the Son of the Queen of Scots being a Protestant); and even at last
they made but little of it: The Queen remained in Peace and Safety, and their
Pretender Essex, was himself Executed for Treason. The Affairs of the Church
were so prudently managed in her time with relation to Puritans as well as
Papists, that she left it in a Condition to stand upon its own Legs, and
maintain it self without Danger from Opposition; had it been preserved with the
same continuance of Zeal and unshaken Fidelity by her Successors. As to her
Civil Administration, the Heathen and Mahumetans, the Persians and Idolaters,
the Ethiopians and Muscovites, name her with Reverence. And Bossac in one of
his Letters to Cecil says, He that Excommunicated her, spoke of her with
Honor.

She chose her self a Wise Council, and showed her own Wisdom in being Advised
by them. She had a hard Game to play with Philip of Spain, as well as her own
Popish Subjects; yet she managed both softly and by degrees, and at last by
Parliament fixed and secured the general Alteration in Religion, which she
could never have done by her self. First Fruits and Tenths were Restored to the
Crown, and the Supremacy Confirmed to the Queen. She avoided Matrimony, whether
upon any Consideration besides Prudence, I shall not enquire; by doing so, she
preserved her self Head of the Church and State, and Mistress of her self as
well as her Subjects; and Obliged and Silenced the Parliament by soft Answers
of denial, when they Remonstrated to her for that purpose, and put an
unanswerable Compliment upon them, by telling them, She had placed her
Affections upon her People in General. But in matters of Religion she was no
Courtier; after she had once declared her self a Protestant (though some
pretend she Dissembled in her Sister's Days) she did not look back toward the
Pope, did not shuffle in her Religion, but refused all Communication with him,
and also generously declined all the Overtures of Advantage made by Pius the
IVth. She equally despised his Threats and Temptations: Afterward she readily
and sincerely Assisted the Distressed Protestants, her Neighbors, on all
Occasions. She provided every thing for the Strength and Honor of the English
Nation, and saw it maintained in its True Glory both at Home and Abroad: Would
not be wheadled, nor huff'd to betray it, but carried its Reputation farther
Abroad than any of her Predecessors had, or Successors hitherto have done. She
showed it the way to overcome even the Invincible Armada of Spain, which the
Spaniards with all their Force and Fraud had provided to Invade us, and basely
to Attack us by Surprise, when they were at the same time in a (Treacherous)
Treaty of a Peace: And all this she did without oppressing her Subjects, well
knowing (as she her self declared, when she remitted a Fourth Subsidy) that the
Money was as sure in her Subjects Coffers as her Own. It Is said of her, Never
Prince ruled with more Justice, and with her Justice mingled more of Mercy: She
was termed St. Elizabeth by some at Venice, for her Merciful returning home
certain Italians which were taken Prisoners in the Invasion of 1588. And it is
said, some told the Lord Carleton, being then Ambassador, That though they were
Papists, yet they would never pray to any other Saint; a Compliment at that
distance may be laid hold of at home, for an acknowledgment of a just
Character. But her Truest Character we may take from her own Behavior, and
from her own Mouth, because it seems to have nothing of Vanity in it: In her
Speech to her last Parliament, 1601. she thus expresses her self. To be a
King, and to wear a Crown, is a thing more Glorious to them that see it, than
it is Pleasant to them who bear it: Though you may have had, and may have many
Mightier and Wiser Princes sitting in this Seat, yet you never had, nor shall
have, Any that will love you better. Du Serres says of the Reign of Henry the
Fourth of France, her Contemporary: It is a Sign of a Happy Reign, when the
Subject rejoices to see their Prince: It Is probable he might mean it as well
of Queen Elizabeth; Or we may apply it for him, as it was verified of her: For
it was observed in her short Progresses, that People of all sorts would flock
to see her? And not only that, (for I have known other Kings attended through
Curiosity) but also what hearty Acclamations did they utter? As God save Queen
Elizabeth, etc. and she would Reply, God bless you, my People all. Few Princes
miscarry who have the Affections of the better part of their People: 'Twas for
this Reason, I suppose, that the Mother of the Duke of Guise, her professed
Enemy, said, Elizabeth of England was the most Glorious and Happy Woman that
ever swayed Scepter: And Henry the Fourth of France, in a Letter to Monsieur de
Rosny, commends her with an implicit sort of Emulation. She had such a
Character even with the Turks for Morality, and Natural Honor, That at her
Instance he countenanced the English Trading there, and thence came, as is
said, our Turkey Company, and every one knows the Benefit of it to England. Also
the Duke of Russia, for her sake, as is said, (who yet is so jealous of
Strangers) gave Civil Reception to the English. In short, That Kingdom which
she found in Troubles, and unsettled, she left Established in True Religion,
Peace and Plenty at Home, and Reputation Abroad.

JAMES I.
I Dare not Encounter this King so rudely as some have done ('it is said upon
good Experience): Nor would I be thought to offer Undecent Reflections at a
King, who came Ushered into our Throne with such a Reputation for Wisdom of his
own, and such Advantages of a Council, left him famed for it. Yet in my own
Opinion, and poor Observation, I cannot for my Soul pay that mighty Veneration
to his Character and Memory which the World would seem to demand. He seems to
me to have stumbled at the Threshold in our Kingdom, and to have done a thing
not very Honorable or Prudent. Who, after he had so poorly quitted the
Resentments of his Mother's Death before, by a sort of Reflex Malice; yet in
pious Memory of her Sufferings, and to revive the Reasons of them here, and as
it were, to Countenance and Abet the Norfolk Family upon the same Foundations,
forthwith calls the Lord Thomas and Henry Howard, two Papists, to the Council,
thereby intimating, as it were, hopes to the Papists, etc. which they were apt
enough, no doubt, to conceive. Nor will his Pretended Apprehension of the
Pope's Briefs to the Catholics, excuse him: Tho Sir Richard Baker, (who was
bribed by a Knighthood at his first coming over) represents him in the front,
to have done it only upon Prudential Motives; that is, Fear: Thus he at first
dash disobliged all Parties. And who knows, but this first Cast of Favor to
them, and to the Earl of Southampton, (whose Father, it is true, was a great
Friend to Mary Queen of Scots, but a greater to Popery); and his partial,
awkward Behavior toward other Gentlemen, might be the Foundation of that
complicated Treason by the Lord Cobham, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and others,
Protestants and Papists, amongst whom were two Priests, and for which there was
no other apparent Occasion, only that he provoked all Parties, whilst he sought
to win One, by Fawning; to show something like good Inclinations to the Sea of
Rome, as the Pope expected, though they well knew, he did not mean that
neither; whilst he received others coldly, for Reasons neither he nor they
knew: So that they agreed, only in this, to lay him aside, who, as they
concluded by his Behavior, would answer the Expectations of neither. There was
no necessity of adding Papists as Spies upon his Councels; he might in prudence
been contented to have taken it at present, as left him, with the Addition only
of his Scotchmen to the Number: And it is plain it gave no satisfaction to the
Papists by the Powder Plot which followed: His Next Step of Unaccountable
Wisdom was dissolving the Parliament, for Reasons known to no body besides
himself; it is said, because they did not comply with his Designs; but what
those Designs were, do not appear Above-board. The Third Action of Moment, out
of common Forms, was the sacrificing Sir Walter Rawleigh to the Importunities
of Gondomar (for neither his Justice nor Mercy was to be relied on); that is,
giving up the Interest of England to the Spanish Satisfaction. And his Conduct,
with relation to Spain, is admirable throughout.

Queen Elizabeth had pretty well humbled that Potent Monarch; and, as Sir
Robert Cotton observes, forced him in his after-Reign (that is, after his
Unsuccessful Tricks with her) to that Extremity, that he was driven to break
all Faith with those Princes that trusted him, and paid for One Year's Interest
above Twenty five thousand Millions of Crowns: Hear Sir Robert Cotton, who
speaks to the Person of King James, and therefore we may assure our selves
modestly and gently: So low and desperate in Fortunes your Highness found him,
when you took this Crown; Thus from the abundant Goodness of your Peaceable
Nature (this is the way of Banter, if Kings would see it) you were pleased to
begin your Happy Reign with General Quiet, and with Spain first, which should
have wrought in Noble Natures a more Grateful Recompense than after followed:
For long it was not before Tyrone was hearten'd to Rebel against your Highness;
and flying, had a Pension at Rome paid him from the Spanish Agent: His Son
Odonel Tyrconnel, and others, your Chiefest Rebels, retained ever since in
Grace and Pay with the Arch-Duchess, at Spain's Devotion. So soon as your
Eldest Son of holy Memory, now with God, was fit for Marriage, they began these
Old Designs, by which before they had thriven so well, etc. Thus Sir R. C. in
that Style.

And thus they led him on their Dance, whilst he Deserted (or, what was worse,
so meanly Vindicated) the Interest of his Son-in-Law the Prince Palatine: He
must take his Measures from Gondomar; and instead of assisting him with a
Powerful Army, he is treating with this Spanish Agent, and must take his
Advice, and Matters are to be made up with him, by a Match for his Son the
Prince of Wales, with the Infanta of Spain; and then suffers himself to be
imposed upon by Idle Representations, which this Ambassador carried on only in
Disguise to serve his Master's Ends; whilst in the mean time the Poor Palatine
is swallowed up by a Confederacy between the Emperor and King of Spain, and all
this without calling a Parliament; that being, forsooth, an Affront to his
Wisdom; then sends his Son to Spain, when he was told by Sir John Digby, etc.
(who advised him not to suffer his Resolutions to be interrupted by that
Overture) of the False Appearances and Insincerities of the Spaniards, which
the Letters from the King of Spain to Olivares, and his Answer, would have
convinced any one of, besides himself; and after that, his making so many and
ample Concessions in favor of Popery during the Treaty. And in truth, Treating
of any Popish Match, are no great Arguments of Wisdom, Fatherly Care, or indeed
of Religion: The English Navy must be neglected, on pretense intimated by
Gondomar, that the furnishing of it would breed suspicion in the King his
Master; and the Cautionary Towns must be rendered up, being the Keys of the
Low Countries, to oblige his Friend Gondomar too: His People of England must be
Checked, Disgraced, and Silenced, for opposing this Popish Match, with their
Speeches, Counsels, Wishes, and even Prayers; ('it is said Gondomar could
Dissolve Parliaments also.) The Protestant Interest on his Son's Account in
Bohemia slighted; though Archbishop Abbot represented the Circumstances and
Call of Religion to Engage him, besides Honor: Though his Ambassador
Cottington informed how Matters went, and though every body, besides himself,
saw through the Designs of Spain, as well in the Complimenting him in the Match
as Mediatorship, to keep him Neuter, and hold him in Suspense: And though he
himself saw it turn to a War of Religion, and would be the Overthrow of the
Protestants or Evangelicks; and though the Emperor had proscribed the Prince
Palatine; yet King James's Eyes would not be opened, nor would be persuaded to
take the Alarm. These are no great Master-strokes of Policy, no more than of
Conscience or Honor: And to War at last, when all was lost against his own
avowed Principles, was an Incomprehensible Mystery of Judgment and Wisdom.
Besides these, of which he discharged himself thus learnedly, there was no
Matter of Moment did or could Occur during his Reign, to exercise any
Extraordinary Talent. As for the Governing his People, it is plain he had
King-Craft, as his Friend Sir Richard Baker calls it, as is pretty Evident by
his Parliamentary Speeches, and his Ways of getting Money. He could also
Dissemble, and sometimes Huff, but 'twas only his own Subjects, and that with
no good Grace neither.

He had Priestcraft too, as Heylin observes, who tells us, 'Twas his usual
Practice in the whole Course of his Government, to Balance one extreme by the
other, Countenancing the Papists against the Puritans, and the Puritans
sometimes against the Papists. Thus he was Devout for the Church of England at
Home, and for Popery Abroad; making Canons for their Conformity here, and
submitting our Orders to Truckle to the Popish Match, against all the
Remonstrances of Parliament, Church, and People: What could he expect from this
Popish Match, from any Popish Match, but the Consequences all the World
expected? That it would let in Popery once more into Hopes of Success, at least
to gain Breath by a suspension of the Laws against them: What could be expected
but that this must create Jealousies and Misunderstandings between him and his
Subjects? And 'twas not sending a Synod of Divines to Dort, or having a
Convocation at Home (of which Dr. Overal, his Dean of Paul's, has given a
special Account for the Edification of his Successor the present Dean) could
likely settle the Affairs of the Church in Europe, when he at the same time was
giving the Pope a Lifting-hand, and raised his drooping Head here so early
after the Reformation; and when at the same time the Protestants in Germany,
France, and the Low Countries, were groaning under a Persecution. Which made Du
Plessis complain, Que Sa Majesty D'Angleterre trop arreste a quelques petits,
dissensions enter les Siens, n'evoit pas assez de soin de la guerison de plus
profondes plays qui sont en l'Eglise; and which made the House of Commons
Petition and Remonstrate in the Force of Fourteen Reasons, and Ten Remedies, in
the XIXth Year of his Reign; which had only this Effect, to make him fly to his
old Refuge of Prerogative with a Huff: And that the Marriage of his Children,
Peace and War, etc. were Matters of State and Government above their
Considerations: And Speeching it backwards and forwards (which he took great
Delight in) till his Son-in-Law was despoiled of his Ancient Patrimony, which
he at last ingenuously confessed was through his Default. Here Is the Effect of
Prerogative! These Proceedings, I suppose, put Sir Robert Cotton upon Enquiry
what the Kings of England had done in the like Cases: And after great pains in
the search of Records, he informs us, That the Kings of this Nation, ever since
the Conquest, so soon as they were cool enough for Councels, have usually
consulted with their Peers in the great Council, and Commons in Parliament, of
Marriage, Peace, and War. He might have said before the Conquest also; for
Harold, who had promised William Duke of Normandy, to take one of his Daughters
to Wife, Answers, That he should be very injurious to his own Nobility, if he
should without their Consent and Advice take a Stranger to Wife. If we look
into our Neighbor Kingdoms, Mezeray will tell us, That the French, during the
two first Races, and part of the third, had a Right to intermeddle and control
the Marriages of their Kings; and neither could the King make War without the
Lords In earnest, I know not whether Kings in Reason ought to be permitted to
Converse with Ambassadors on the other side of Forms, upon their own Heads
without a Quorum of their Councils: For Nations generally send the sharpest Men
on such Errands, and sometimes Kings are not a Match in Politics for them, as
it plainly appeared by this Story this King was not for Gondomar, who outwitted
him, who pretended to be the wisest. But King James came over to us, Tinctured
with his Scotch Notions of Monarchical and Sovereign Absolute Power, without
vouchsafing ever after to consider the English Constitution; and he lets us see
what Opinion he had of Parliaments in his (...), wherein he Advises his Son to
hold no Parliaments but for Necessity of new Laws, which would be but seldom:
Not, it seems, for the State, Matters of War, Marriage, etc. No, not for raising
Money neither, so long as he could get it by Privy-Seals and Benevolences.
Besides, after all, he did not come hither without some Prejudices to the
English People, though he had none to the Crown of England. Thus there may seem
to be some inconveniences in a Learned Crowned Head: This King thought himself
too Wise, and too Knowing; He was above Advice or Instruction, because, as he
thought, he was capable of giving it: He was too wise in himself to be taught
by others, and yet not wise enough always to follow those Rules of Wisdom which
he had given; As is evident by the Observation of his Theory and Practice; and
by his inconsistent Directions to his Sons, Henry and Charles. He was a little
too much addicted to the Pedantry of a Scholar, and affected with Polemical
Controversies in Words, which he dreaded in Action: Was more for determining
Quarrels by the Pen, than the Sword: And perhaps might have made a better
Bishop than a King; a better Father of a Family, than Country; as being better
seen in the Oeconomicks, than Political Government of a Nation.

CHARLES I.
MOntaign, (whom I confess I delight to bring in as often as I can, though I
know the Philosophers are angry with him, for I do not pretend to be a better
Politician, or any thing else than he was; The Grave have Gravity in them, but
I know not what besides,) says, That about a Month since, he read over two
Scotch Authors, of which he who stands for the People, makes Kings to be in a
worse condition than a Carter; and he who writes for Monarchy places him some
Degrees above God Almighty in Power and Sovereignty: I Am sorry there is no
Medium; and I know no Necessity for Either. Who those two Scotch Authors were,
every one knows: King James complained of one of them, and advanced the other, as
it always happens to them who stretch for Kings. Such have been the Notions of
Government in both Extremes, and both were unhappily experimented in this
Reign. This King, flushed I doubt with such Authors as the last, and perhaps
withal observing what was done in France under Lewis the XIth, who boasted that
he had mis le Royaum horse du Page, as he calls it; and who, as Mezeray
observes, had even Government without Council, and most commonly without
Justice and Reason: Who thought it the finest Policy to go out of that great
and beaten Road of his Predecessors, to change every thing, were it from better
to worse, that he might be feared: His Judgment which was very clear, but too
subtle and refined (as was that of King James) was the greatest Enemy to his
own and his Kingdom's quiet, having, as it seems, taken pleasure in putting
things into disorder, and throwing the most Obedient into Rebellion: Who rather
loved to follow the bent of his own irregular fancies, than the wise Laws of
the Land; and made his Grandeur consist in the Oppression of his People, etc.
And also in the Reign of Henry the IVth, who gave the last stroke to
Parliamentary Formalities, and Huff'd the People into a new Law, that from
thenceforth the King's Edicts should be ratified on sight, without those formal
triflings of Dispute, by Virtue of Living and Ruling always with his Sword in
his Hand, might conceive some such great Hopes. These Reflections might perhaps
inspire King Charles with the French Air of Grandeur; but a People is
sometimes quick-sighted too: And hence on a sudden grew an impertinent (as it
then seemed) Jealousy between King and People: One pretending to too much after
one Author, and the other yielding too little by the other: Whilst the former
might be Nibbling at Arbitrary Power in an Extended Prerogative, and the latter
enlarging their Liberties somewhat beyond a modest Bound; and there were
Courtiers in those Days also, such as Philip de Comines observed, in Court
Language to Complement a King, called it Rebellion to mention a Parliament; and
Lewis also was a superstitious Friend to the Church, whilst he was assaulting
and oppressed the State. In these and such like Circumstances of Notional
Government, in such State of picqueering Misunderstanding, King James left his
Crown to King Charles, and in a War for Recovery of the Palatinate without any
Money, and in a fair way of Quarrel at Home, as well as Abroad. Besides, the
People had it in their Memories and Consideration, his Complaisant Behavior in
Spain, his Letter to, and Tampering with the Pope in Order to that Match, which
raised new Jealousies on Account of Religion; and his Completing himself the
Match with France with as Frank Articles for Popery, as had before been offered
to Spain in Conjunction with his Father, confirmed them in them.

These Reasons and Considerations took possession justly enough in the Minds of
Men, which made them ever after stand upon their guard: And setting aside all
those Scurrilous Authors on the One hand, who have pretended to give us a
Narrative of his Actions; and also those Fulsome Ones, on the Other; all those
who would Depress or Advance his Character with Art; certainly a great many
Actions of his Administration are not to be justified in a Court of Honor or
Wisdom: Such as Dissolving the First Parliament merely in Complaisance to the
Duke of Buckingham: A King must necessarily Disoblige and Affront the
Community, when he Espouseth the Interest of a Single Person against the
Public; and it shows a Weakness to put one Man (no better than the rest) in
the Scales in competition with Mankind, as it were: But especially a King ought
to be sure the Subject Matter of such Protection and Preference is good and
justifiable, otherwise he commits a double Error. It will be thought
Ill-natured to Argue against Favorites; but I must Argue against the Argument
for them: It is a very odd Inference, That because our Savior had his
Favourite-Disciple, therefore Kings must have their Favorites: I suppose No
body will pretend there is any parity of Reason.

To return therefore to the Duke of Buckingham, who, without Dispute, had
betrayed the Vantguard, etc. to the French, after the King and he knew both
that they were to be employed against the Rochellers; this was in it self a
great Abuse to the Honor of the English Nation, and a manifest Injustice and
Injury to the Protestant Religion. And 'twas from this King's Reign that the
French began to Date their Strength at Sea. This only Action bred such ill
Blood, and created so great a Misunderstanding at first between the King and
his Subjects, as stuck to the Duke of Buckingham till his Death, whom Felton
killed; and, I doubt, till the King's too.

His next Proceeding was Extraordinary, when he had thus Dissolved the First
Parliament: To Levy Money by Privy Seals, which had so ill a savor in his
Father's Time, and then to call a Parliament presently on the neck of that
Miscarriage, and to side with the D. of B. against the E. of B. and the denying
the latter his Writ to Parliament; this looked inconsiderate, and a little mean;
and the interposing so much on behalf of the former, even with passion as well
as partiality, had but an ill grace. I pass by the Business of the Earl of
Arundel, which also could not but breed ill Blood in the House of Peers. By the
King's Obstinacy in these Affairs (though I do not pretend to justify the House
of Commons in theirs), instead of preserving one Friend, in the mean time he
sacrifices all the rest to his Humor: For the King of Denmark, who (at his
Instance chiefly) had taken up Arms in his Quarrel, was beaten, and reduced to
great Distress, for want of Succors from England, which the King had thus
disabled himself to supply according to his Promise. That Necessity put him
again upon Indirect Courses for Raising of Money by Commissions of Loan, and
seizing all Duties of Customs, Privy-Seals, Benevolences, etc. as if he would
show he designed, if he had prevailed, to live on himself without a Parliament.
But the Imprisoning the Gentlemen for refusing the Loan, and the Suspending and
Disgracing Archbishop Abbot for refusing to License Sibthorp's Book, were
Strains of Arbitrary Power, which exposed Religion as well as Law into a Jest;
and seem to profane the Sacred Title of a King, as well as that of an
Archbishop; as appears especially in that Archbishop's Narrative and Dialogue,
with the Passages therein expressed, if it be true, which exposes that whole
Transaction as a plain Rhodomontade and Defiance to all Rules of Justice and
Reason. I will take notice only of the Observation of the Archbishop upon the
Fourth Objection to Sibthorp's Sermon, by which you may guess at the rest: To
the Fourth; Let the Largeness of those words be well considered, says the
Archbishop; yea all Antiquity to be absolutely for Absolute Obedience to
Princes in all Civil or Temporal things, for such Cases as Naboth's Vineyard
may fall within this; and if I had allowed this for Doctrine, I had been justly
beaten with my own Rod: If the King the next day had commanded me to send him
all the Money and Goods I had, I must, by my own Rule, have obeyed him: And if
he had commanded the like to all the Clergy of England, by Sibthorp's
Proposition, and the Archbishop of Canterbury's allowing of the same, they must
have sent in all, and left their Wives and Children in a Miserable Case; yea
the Words extend so far, and are so absolutely delivered, that by this
Divinity, If the King should send to the City of London, and the Inhabitants
thereof, commanding them to give unto him all the Wealth they have, they were
bound to do it: There is a Meum and Tuum in Christian Commonwealths; and
according to Laws and Customs Princes may dispose of it. That Saying being
true, Ad Reges Potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas. This was the
Sense of the Archbishop on this Matter; and yet the King espoused the Fancies
of a Sibthorp against him, who was not so much as a Batchellour of Arts, only
for the merit of his Flattering Divinity: And in truth the whole Proceeding is
apt to turn one's Stomach; besides, that the King in Exposing the Dignity of a
Person of such a Figure in the Church, did also make bold with his own
Character at second hand, who stood but one Remove Higher. And what was it but
to intimate to the Lay-Gentlemen, that neither of them were so sacred or
inviolable as was pretended: And, by the by, it is not safe to make too Light of
a Spiritual Person, they cannot be held too sacred on this side of
Infallibility: But how like a Prophet did the Archbishop talk? How did he
Reason like a Statesman concerning the King and Duke of Buckingham? How did the
Event but too well justify the Predictions? What could the King expect from his
Next Parliament, which he was in a manner forced to Call, after the
Imprisonment of so many Gentlemen, and the Poor-spirited Way of Releasing them,
which looked almost as bad as the Imprisoning them? What could he say after that
Unfortunate Action in the Isle of Rhee? 'Twould make one sick to reflect on Sir
Robert Cotton's Speech and Advice, in comparison with the Giddy Peevish
Measures taken at Court. What Event that Parliament was like to have, may be
seen, together with the Talent of these two Kings, the Father and Son's
King-Craft, in the Jesuits Letter, in the Speeches within Doors and without,
and in the Petitions, Debates and Remonstrances, after that the King had
brought himself and his Honor in Jealousy with the People, and the People
understood the Circumstances of his Administration, and Pressures of his
Affairs. But to show there were some Dispositions to Agreement, the King's
granting the Petition of Right had almost reconciled and softened all these
Discontents and Misunderstandings; till the Old Bone was thrown in again, and
the Business, that unhappy Business of the Duke of Buckingham, resumed, which
caused Ill-natured Reflections, and in which, perhaps, all Parties were too
stiff: Hence the Old Game was played over again. This set up the Dispute of
Tunnage and Poundage; this Prorogued the Parliament, and after many Exorbitant
Bickerings about Religion, and Levying this Duty, or Branch of the Revenue, the
Blood was put into such a ferment, that although the Duke of Buckingham was
gone, the Parliament was dissolved in a heat. It is pretty hard to find an
Impartial Comment on the Transactions of these Times: By what appears, no doubt
some Members of the House of Commons had behaved themselves insolently enough;
but to do Justice on the other hand, there was some provocation on the King's
Part, not only before, but after the Death of the Duke of Buckingham. The
preferring Montague to a Bishopric for his Appello Caesarem, and Manwaring to
another Good Benefice, with a Dispensation, in contradiction to the Parliament,
who had Censured and perpetually disabled him for the future to Ecclesiastical
Preferment in the Church of England; and taking Laud into so peculiar favor,
as in pious Memory of the Duke of Buckingham (for otherwise he had been
obnoxious to Censure justly); and making Weston Treasurer, who died a Papist;
and Windebank afterward Secretary of State: Besides these Odd Promotions, the
Malicious and hard Prosecution of the Merchants, even to Ruin, for not paying
the Customs; and the little Overtures which were discovered for breaking
Parliaments for the future, and to set up Something in Imitation of the
Assembly des Notables, (for he always collogued with the Lords) to introduce
what should be very like Arbitrary Power; These were all things of ill
digestion, and did not look like Touches of a Complexion with a Limited
Monarchy. I take no notice of the Affairs in Scotland, nor of some Intervening
Transactions at Home, which are Mysterious, and proved Unfortunate, though they
might bear a candid Construction with some. The Business of Ship Money was the
Invention of his Attorney General Noy; and the Project was backed with the
Opinion of all the Judges obiter, and confirmed by the Judgment of Ten of them
on mature Deliberation: But how unhappily soever that Affair was resented, and
succeeded at last, this at least must be said in vindication of the King, That
he did apply the Money to the true Use; did equip a Gallant Fleet with it,
whereupon our Trade was not only made secure by scowring the Seas of Pirates,
but in asserting the Honor of the English Nation; saved Flanders from being
swallowed up between the French and Dutch; rescued the Fishery from the
Incroachment of the latter by seizing or dispersing their Busses, which were
fishing on our Coasts, and made them petition humbly, for what they before by
force of Grotius, and by force of Arms, arrogantly asserted, and claimed as a
Right; and thus maintained the Dominion of the Seas, and advanced the
Reputation of the Kingdom Abroad.

But we will now come again to the Church, which first and last disordered the
Scene of Affairs in the State: Here we see the Misfortune of a Popish Match,
which renders all Things and Persons suspected, and gives a latitude for
Enemies to work by Mines, who could not have hurt Us by Batteries. This makes
an Archbishop, who was guilty only of Pride and Rashness, suspected for Popery
also: Whilst Cardinal Richlieu behind the Curtain, and Nuntio's, Priests and
Jesuits in Masquerade, blow up the Coals, till they had kindled the Nation into
a War; and not only that, but their Priests personally engage in it, for fear
it should not effectually be carried on, unless they were in it on both Sides.
That these things are true, is past all doubt; and as to the last, it appears
by Mentet Hist. de Troubles de Grand Britain, who must be admitted to be a
Faithful Author on this Account.

And here we are launched into a troubled Sea; here I desire to draw the
Curtain; for all the rest of this Unfortunate King's Life is too Troubled and
Stormy for Calm Remarks of Policy. His Consideration came too late, I believe,
even from the first want of it; the first foundations of Jealousy were so
strong, that all the other subsequent Debates could signify nothing toward
Satisfaction; all the consequential Meetings and Parliaments, were Tumults
rather than Counsels, after the Scotch Air of Sedition blew this way; the first
false Measures are seldom or never to be retrieved. All this King's subsequent
Actions could never absolutely undeceive his People; they must still believe
him Popishly affected, though they were almost convinced he was not a Papist.
It Is impossible to dispossess an enraged Multitude, and difficult to satisfy
generous Minds under prepossessions and prejudices of Opinion. The Wounds were
too deep for a gentle Cure. I presume not to Arraign or Justify his Conduct: He
seems to have been a better Man than King; and a better Churchman than he was
believed to be: It Is evident, beyond possibility of doubt, that he was charged
falsely with being a Papist. But when a Man has brought himself to the
circumstances of Trimming between two Extremes, he is in danger of being
Crushed by Both. And that had been King James's Fate, no doubt, had he been
linked to a Papist as well as his Son; whereas had King Charles Married one of
the same Persuasion, neither his own Trimming, nor his Father's would have hurt
him; but having Married a Papist, his Father's Insincerity and Priestcraft
Ruined the Son, without descending upon him. For Popish Priests, so long as we
Harbor them, will sting one way or other. Henry the IIId and IVth of France,
fell by the Hands of a couple of Priests, upon another sort of suspicion; but
Ours at second hand from Priests, who were not contented only to Kill him,
unless they Destroyed the Constitution also. Hard Circumstances of this poor
King! to be pursued by the Fanatic Party as giving too great Countenance to
Papists, and by the Papists for not giving them enough, and not coming up to
answer their Expectations. This I take to be the Case, and this the true
Consequence of the Popish Match; and Popery was at the bottom: For though it be
said the Puritans had a Design to throw him out of the Saddle, right or wrong,
and that nothing of Concessions should ever satisfy them; (and this, perhaps,
may be true of some very sower Zealots, and extravagant Pretenders); yet it is
improbable, and what they could never have hoped for; and the greater part of
the Presbyterians were drawn in by Surprise, who did not foresee the end, and
withdrew afterward, when, it is true, 'twas too late. But after all, the design
was carried on in other Nations besides our own, and by other Councels beyond
ours: And Popish Priests had not only their Heads but Hands also in the
Business, not only in Peace but War likewise; as you may read in Mentet, who
would not lie in that Affair; it is a pretty scarce Book, and therefore I will
give you his Words; he says, speaking of the Battle of Edgehill, Ce que
surprit le plus tout le Monde ce fut qu' on trouua quelques Prestres parmi les
Morts du Cost des Estates: Car Encore que Dans leurs Manifestes ils
appellassent l' Armee du Roy l' Armee des Papists pour le render Odieux au
Peuple, ils avoient neamoins deux Compagnies de Wallons and d'autres
Catholics dans leur Armee, Outre qu' ils avoient rien oublie pour tascher d'
engager en leur Party le Chevalier Arthur Aston, Colonel Catholic de grand
Reputation. And he says before, That the King published an Edict at Stonely
(before that) wherein he tells them, He did not mean that any Papist should come
to serve in his Army, that he might not give Discontent or Jealousy to his
Protestant Subjects; but then 'twas too late for such like Overtures of Honor
or Professions of Sincerity. But to go on with Mentet; Il est vray que le Roy
avoit aussi sou ert dans son Armee quelques Officiers Catholics, Homes de
grand suffisance and les bien intentionees pour le bien de l' Estat, ainsi les
appella't 'il, dans la declaration qu' il' fit publier apres le Battle, a quoy
les Estates n' oublierent pas de repondre par autant des Contredits. Il
temoigne qu' encore que les Estates eussent sans Comparison plus grand Nombre
des Catholics, que luy dans leur Armee, and qu' ils eussent tasche, par
toutes sorts de moyens de gaigner tous ceux du Royaume leur ayant fait
promettre sous main que moyennant qu' ils voulussent prendre party avec eux.
On abrogeroit toutes les Ordinances faites a leur prejudice: Il ne pouvoit
toute fois se resoudre d'appeller les Catholics a son secours n'y de revoquer
son Edit por le quel il leur avoit fait des defenses de s'y presenter: Il
asseure de plus tous les bons sujets que bien qu' il eust regard aux persons
des Catholics qui l'avoient secouru dans sa Necessite and qu' il eust bonne
Memoire de leur Services, il ne feroit pourtant jamais rien en faveur de leur
Religion, etc. All this came too late for our purpose; yet if this, and his
Manifesto at the beginning of the English and Scotch Presbytery; if his Letters
to the Queen taken at Naseby, wherein he protests to differ in nothing from her
but Religion; if his other Conferences with the Marquess of Worcester, etc. and
his (...), and his Dying Speech will not satisfy Men, that he was no Papist;
they seem to be as Cruel to his Memory as they were to his Person: Though after
all, his Articles of Marriage were too Frank for a Church-of-England-Man, who
was not in Love at the same time: And the Spanish Match, if either, might
probably, have had somewhat a better Success, for this Reason only, That the
King of Spain was going down the wind, whereas the French King was advancing;
and I must repeat it, the Observation of what his Brother of France, Lewis the
XIIIth, was doing but just on the other side of the Water, increased our
Jealousies on this, and gave an incurable Wound to the King's Reputation. This
made the People, with some color of Reason, by way of prevention, endeavor to
wrest the Sword out of the King's Hands, and attempt to get the Militia into
their own; upon this pretense the Parliament were forward to put a false
Construction upon his Raising of Forces, and turned it to a Levying of War on
the People, in order (as they called it) to subvert the Laws, and introduce an
Arbitrary Tyrannical Government; whereas we have the King's Word for it, That
he took up Arms only to Defend the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; and in his
Dying-Speech he tells the World, He did never intend to incroach upon the
Privileges of the People, and that he desired their Liberty and Freedom as much
as any body whatsoever; and that he died a Martyr of the People, meaning, I
suppose, for them. And after all, these Proceedings are so unaccountable, that
they cannot be reconciled to any Rules of Political Observation; there seems to
be somewhat of Fate in them, which will not be confined to our little narrow
ways of Reasoning, nor to the more enlarged deep Politics of Statesmen. The
Event exceeded the Scheme laid by Richlieu, and the Expectations of his
Successor Mazarine; who at first, being surpised, did prosecute the King's
Death with some Resentment, though after (like a true Politician) he kept
Correspondence with Cromwell. It seems their design was only to Embroil
England, whilst France carried on its Designs elsewhere; not to Establish any
settled Power, not a Commonwealth certainly: Their Business was but to Embarass
our Councels, that they might be at liberty to followitheirs without
Interruption. Not to Establish any Religion, not even Popery; for even Religion
was not their Business, if it could have procured Peace and Prosperity to the
Kingdom: But only to Counterpoise the two Extremes of Popery and Fanaticism
(after the manner of King James) for a while, and to set the Fanatics
themselves by the Ears at last. Thus their Correspondents, their Agents, and
their Money, was employed on all Hands to confound us in England, as well as
the Jesuits had done all Europe by their Intriegues before, and we must fatally
run into their Noose.

But there yet farther seems to be some extraordinary Hand in the Turn of these
Affairs, above the Common Councels or Actions of Man, though not to be adjusted
to Human Measures of Comprehension. Who knows what to say to the Prophecy of
Nostredamus, (setting aside the Scotch Predictions, and those nearer home) viz.
The Senate of London shall put their King to Death? It Is so very peculiar,
though Printed almost an Hundred Years before, that it must intimate something,
and even this or nothing. This, and those which Mezeray reports to have
preceded the Death of Henry the IVth of France, particularly that Ticket which
a Priest found upon an Altar at Montargis, giving notice that the King would be
Assassinated; his Horoscopes which determined the Year of his Life, and even
the Queen's own Dream that the King was Stabbing with a Knife, (to pass by all
others relating to this and other Occasions) must import this at least, to use
Mezeray's own Words (who, I believe, was no more Superstitious this way than my
self) That there is a Sovereign Power which Disposes of Futurity, since it so
certainly Knows and Foretells it. But this Subject is not my Part. Nevertheless,
in truth, there appears to have been some extraordinary Conjunctions of the
Planets, or something more Extraordinary which gave that extravagant Turn to
Powers here below, not only in Europe, but other remote parts of the World, and
put sublunary Motions in such a Ferment about these Times, as was evident in
the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Spain, Germany, France,
Portugal, and Naples, and the Hurly-burlies and Revolutions there, and in
several other Parts; but also between the Tartars and Chinese, and in the
Empire of the Great Mogul, between Cha-gehan and his Four Sons, especially
Aureng-zeb; the Story whereof is Famous, and you may Read it at large in
Tavernier: Which Aureng-zeb Sir William Temple calls a Fanatic, and compares
to Cromwell; as if all such strains of Empire were Enthusiastical, like that of
the Great Turk. But to return to take my leave of King Charles; Morally
speaking, I think the Queen was the Chief Occasion of all those Misfortunes
which attended Him and the Nation, for there is no reason the Welfare of a
Kingdom should hang at a King's Codpiece. The King's Marrying a Papist gave the
suspicion of Popery, and the suspicion brought in Popery in Earnest.

CHARLES II.
AS to the first Twelve Years of the Nominal Reign of this King, 'twas such a
Farce of Policy and Government, that it Libels the Chronicle; and I believe he
had been sooner in his Throne, if he had never made a Step to help himself, by
the Disturbance of those who usurped his Place. I wish for his Honor in the
beginning, he had not intermedled with the Action of Montross during the Treaty
with the Scots; it reflected some Aspersion upon his Sincerity, and he only
sacrificed one Friend's Life, and the Reputation of others, and thereby
prejudiced his own Interest for the present. But I know that Business has also
another Face, and therefore I pass by that, and some other Occurrences, to
proceed to his own Administration after he was Crowned in England: Which I
shall touch but very slightly neither, as slightly as he did the Interests of
the Nation; the History of these Times being fresh in every one's Memory, I am
very much at a loss (considering the different Opinions of him, and his
Inconsistency with himself) with what Character to introduce this King to his
Government. If he was a Protestant when he came over to Us, as all his fine
Declarations, etc. import, surely the Devil owed Us a shame (pardon the
Expression) that we should blunder on a Popish Match again at first dash: Here
was a loose given to the Papist and Fanatic to play their Old Game over again,
and he put himself under a necessity of Suspicion with his People once more:
For let a Prince make what Gracious Speeches he pleases, his Actions will be
always more significant, and speak plainer than his Declarations: Hence this
Dilemma became entailed; either he does answer the Expectations of the Papists
or not: If he does, and gives them any Assurances, etc. his own People are upon
his Skirts: If not, then he is attacked by the Indefatigable Plots and Attempts
of the Jesuits, and that Party.

In the mean time, in what a blessed Condition of Settlement is a Nation? It
can never be at quiet. I shall not pretend to dive into the Mysteries of one
Plot or the other, let them stand on their own Bottom in the validity of the
Records. No doubt there always has been a Popish Plot of one sort or other
(more or less, as our Kings have given them a helping hand) ever since the
Reformation; and, I believe, ever will be, so long at least as our Kings manage
Affairs as they did for the Four last Reigns: And for ought I know too there
may have been a Fanatic Plot ever since Calvin's, time, and will continue as
long as Kingly Government and Church-Hierarchy are in fashion. Neither shall I
trouble my self to enquire which Plot was the Agressor, which Plaintiff, which
Defendant; which the Original, and which the Counter-plot: But between them
both, this King had reduced himself to a pretty Condition of Trouble, if any
thing could be so to him, by his Trimming, (a Quality which was scouted in the
Subject): For in the Popish Plot he was to be taken off, for not being a
Papist, or at least for not coming up to their Expectations of him; and by the
Fanatic Plot he was to be Blunderbuss'd and destroyed for being a Papist, and
favoring their Designs too much: But to determine the precedence of these
Plots: I think the Popish Plot first appeared upon the Stage against him, and
it is thought; attended him at his Exit, though he died of their own
Persuasion: I mean the Popish was the first Plot of Quality; for I take no
notice of such little Things, as the Extravagant Matter of Venner, or that in
the North, which was but a Fag-end of that in Ireland, and scarce then settled;
nor of any thing of that nature which happened before the Year 1670. I do not
find any Plot of Consequence till after the Acts of Parliament against
Dissenters; not taking notice of the Act of Uniformity; or that against
Quakers; but not till after that against Dissenting Preachers in Corporations,
that against Conventicles, which came after the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, and, as far as I can see, without any great provocation; which
Acts, as they themselves speak, were grounded chiefly on Surmise and Suspicion.
Thus was he fain to shuffle on, sometimes in the form of Persecution against
Dissenters, sometimes in that of Toleration and Indulgence to them and their
Tender Consciences; so that Religion grew a mere State-Weather Cock, as
Circumstances happened, and turned as Court Cabals moved, now one way, now
another. Whereas, if he had come over a True Church-of-England Man, as he
pretended to profess himself; he might have reduced the Church easily enough to
some degree of Uniformity, and modeled the Civil Government, and
Ecclesiastical State, to a good Temper, having the Military Power in his own
hands by the Militia Acts. But I suppose that was not his Business. And he
discovered the same Unsteadiness in Civil Matters; shifting Ministers and
Officers, Proroguing and Dissolving Parliaments without apparent Reasons; and,
it is said, for very bad Ones sometimes, and at very Evil Instances also. 'Twas
the same thing in Military Affairs; Raising Armies to take the Air, and then
Disbanding them abruptly; sometimes with the French against the Dutch, and then
with the Dutch against the French; so Unconstant and Variable in his Councels
and Himself: In truth he did not love to be tied to any thing, not even to a
Mistress; and as very fond as he pretended to be of Parliaments once, he found
Expedients, if they did not present themselves, to shake hands with them (after
that long one that he was almost married to) very lightly shook them off as
Uneasy Monitors; and, I believe, would have liked a Triennial Wife much better
than a Triennial Parliament: And it is almost pity, that his first Choice was
made by him (or rather for him) that he had not had an Opportunity of Wedding
once more, to have tried if he or they could have made a more improper Choice.
In short, his Court and his Camp were a Jest, I had almost said his Church too;
So far on Civil Supposition that he was a Protestant: But Sir William Temple,
in his Memoires, scurvily intimates, That he was a Papist, and had a Design of
setting up the same Religion and Government here, as that in France; and that
he had his Pentionary Ministers and Cabals for that purpose, etc. I Am sorry if
this was the only thing he was serious in! If this be true, he failed in his
Designs, and showed himself no more a good Politician, than a good King: For
whereas (as it is said) he might have given Laws to his Neighbors, by a
well-grounded Peace or War; he was imposed upon to take them from them; and was
nothing at Home, as Gourvile, (who is said to be the soundest French-Head)
observed, reflecting on him; Qu'un Roy d' Angleterre qui veut estre l' homme de
son peuple, est le plus Grand Roy du Monde; mais s'il veut estre quelque chose
d'advantage, par Dieu, il n'est plus rien. 'Twas boldly expostulated by Sir
William Temple, and well answered by the King; Et je veux estre l'Homme de mon
peuple, if he could have held to it, as well as said it: But there was
something else behind, or within the Curtain: However this Matter was, it
seems, the King had managed his Affairs so, that he had no more Reputation for
his Sincerity Abroad, than he had at Home: The States of Holland, and the
Prince of Orange himself, had his Ministers and him in suspicion, and his own
Faction or Cabal divided against him, as knowing he was not to be depended
upon; and the Parliament it self also had him in Jealousy: What a Figure is
such a King like to make, when he and his Parliament encounter one another with
Contradiction and Tricks! And when his taking Liberty of Conscience gave more
Offense, than his giving of it! He was, besides, thought somewhat too much
addicted to Pleasures, to apply himself to any thing serious: Not that, I
think, those Reliefs are to be disallowed: No man would be a King, if he were
not to be allowed to soften his Cares with Diversions, and to sweeten them with
Advantages of Delights; but he ought not, certainly, to suffer them to
interfere with the Public Consultations, and Clash with the Considerations of
the Welfare of his People: And this is said to be his fault. He was so much
given up to Softness, that he abhorred Application and Business; but, perhaps,
he had other Reasons, besides, against too much Intenseness of Thought and
Reflection: He might have the Success of the English Interest, as then
Constituted, no more in his Wishes, than his Thoughts; Sir William Temple has
an Unhappy Observation this way, which I doubt applied it self; viz. I have
observed from all that I have seen, or heard, or read in Story, That nothing is
so fallacious, as to Reason upon the Councels or Conduct of Princes or States,
from what one conceives to be the true Interest of their Countries; for there
is in all Places an Interest of those that Govern, and Another of those that
are Governed: (Hard Saying!) And therefore I could never find a better way of
judging the Resolutions of a State, than by the Personal Temper, Understanding,
or Passions, or Humors of the Princes, or Chief Ministers that were for that
time at the head of Affairs. It Is true, he gives the King a very handsome
Character afterward; but it is such a one, that seems to be restrained to his
Private and Natural, not his Public or Politic Capacity; as if a very fine
Gentleman were spoiled, to make a very Indifferent King: And certainly he had
more Virtues one way than the other. I do not think he was Covetous; but I cannot
commend his Liberality, in being Generous at the Expense of others, and free of
his Subjects Purses: Thus he had rather be at the charges of a Pentionary
Parliament, than at the pains of treating Fairly and Above-board. I shall not
engage with the Secrets of this Court, they are too much a Mystery for me to
dive into: Only I shall infer this Political Observation, That the Affairs of
this Nation have never gone well, when the Councels of Parliament have been
very much an Intrigue: They ought to be no more reserved, than too much
exposed: But there is One thing the People always will expect to be made privy
to, that is, the Application of Money given; for if it come from them, they
will always, and with Reason, know the Occasion; and will not endure to see it
misapplied: Especially as the Circumstances of the Revenue then stood, his
Income was certainly known, though I do not think the state of it was altered
for the better in all Respects: The King had lost some Privileges in parting
with those Commanding-Tenures; and though his Revenues might be thought
ascertained, yet if it were not precarious, 'twas somewhat odious, and to be
improved by the Debaucheries and Vices of his People. Hence; and by the Example
of the Court, the Nation began to be Lewd, Headstrong and Dissolute: Laws of
Temperance, Frugality, and Good Manners, were let loose, and the Execution of
them became in a little time a Jest in the Country, as Politics and Morality
were at London and Whitehall. A new Scheme of Government was to be contrived,
and new Methods of Administration, and new Measures of Loyalty set up: A Man
was not to Consider or Reflect, on pain of being accounted a Whigg or Trimmer;
Names of Distinction of the two Extremes. Tory and Whigg were maliciously
contrived by way of Reproach; and what was worse, that he might be sure to go
with the Court-Tide and Stream, the Moderate Character was exposed as the worst
of all: We were not by any means to reason on Government, but 'twas required
that we should wink, or be blind, and implicitly submit our Understandings to
Patriarchal and Arbitrary Doctrines and Examples, to prepare Us for what was to
follow. Such were our Kings, such our Ministers, and such were the People to
be. But all these Kings of the Scotch Line seem to have differed in their Ideas
and Methods of Government. King James the First Philosophised upon it; Charles
the First Reasoned on it (with too much Opiniatretie), and King Charles the
Second Banter'd it; and I Am sure King James the Second did not Moralize upon it.

JAMES II.
IF what Sir William Temple says of King Charles the IId be true, and he gives
good Authority for it, viz. That the Prince of Orange upon Discourse, etc. said
to him; That the King (Charles IId) was (as he had reason to be confident) in
his Heart a Roman Catholic, though he durst not profess it; It will go a great
way toward the justification of those Gentlemen, and their Conduct in the
Oxford Parliament, etc. in relation to the past King, and much more the
Behavior of the Nation toward King James, of whom there was no doubt of being
one, and who dared own it at last, though he very meanly prosecuted One upon a
Scandalum Magnatum for having said so once: For no doubt they both came over as
much Papists as they ever were; and if the first dyed such, I cannot but believe
he had lived one for Thirty Years at least; and they will both stand in need of
a very great Dispensation somewhere else, for their Hypocrisy so many Years. If
King Charles believed nothing of the Popish Plot (as is said) I know not
whether it will diminish the Credit of it: But it is certain his Successor King
James abundantly confirmed its Credibility, even so much as to give a
Reputation to the intended Bill of Exclusion; though the Loyalty of the People
then ran so high, that they were not willing to part with him without
Experience; nor then neither, it seems, by some; vainly imagining, that the
Honor of a Popish King could supersede, and take place of his Religion. The
Books and Pamphlets of that Season, have sufficiently exposed or demonstrated
the Character of this King, and the Principles of that Religion. And 'twas as
Evident to any body that would see what he had been doing in his Brother's
Reign, as what he did in his own. Whether we conclude his Practice from his
Principles, or his Principles from his Practice, there is enough to convince for
the past, and to caution for the time to come. If Declarations repeated with so
much Solemnity, and broke through with so much Ease, and a Coronation Oath
Discharged and Violated so plainly though with an impertinent Distinction of
the Judges to keep up a feeble Countenance of Law: For what will not Judges in
Commission during pleasure say or do? For our Judges are not Sworn as those
Judges, whom the Kings of Egypt made solemnly to take an Oath that they would
not do any thing contrary to their Conscience, (though commanded to it by
themselves.) If the Business of the Irish at Portsmouth: If the sending the
Lord Castlemain to Rome, and receiving a Nuntio here, which was never suffered
in a Protestant Country, nor at Treaties where Protestant Ministers have been:
If the Letters from Liege to the Jesuits at Friburg: If sending the Lord
Preston to France; which sufficiently implies a French League, to mention no
other Evidence of it; nor the Story of sending out the Fleet Half-Mann'd: If
these or any of these did not unvail the Designs of that King, we shall ever be
in the Dark, and nothing on this side of Dragooning could have opened their
Eyes; they must also be persuaded, That the Pope, King Lewis, and King James
were all well-wishers to the Protestant Religion, and to the Heretic
Prosperity of England, as by Law Established. That inviduous little Management
of Magdalen-College Affair, with Huffing a parcel of poor naked Fellows of a
College, for not swallowing Perjury, without a Dispensation, shows his good
Nature, equally with his Policy, and sets forth in Epitome his Devout
Observation of an Allowance to Church-of-England Consciences. The prosecuting
the Bishops so Barbarously: First, One for refusing to do what was not in his
power, by Law, and then the rest for humbly begging to be allowed to have
Souls: The turning all the Nobility and Gentry out of all Commissions, Offices,
and Places, for pretending to Honor, and refusing to concur in Dissolving the
Reformation, was a Master-stroke, that we might be subdued and overrun with
Jesuits Councels, and Irish Courage and Conduct. Some of his Friends are so
Hardy to fancy and pretend to say, He could not have introduced Popery, if he
had endeavored it; they should have put in Arbitrary Power too: For what
cannot a King do, over a passive People, Disarmed in Power, and Defective in
Notion and Thought? Cependant les Anglois se doivent souvenir le Massacre
D'Ireland, etc. says a late French Author; but I forbear to give you any
Account from the French Refugees. It Is true, he could not subdue our
Understandings, but he might exercise a fatal Tyranny over our Wills: Besides,
King James never tried fair means, which would have went a great way; he went
the false way to work upon Englishmen: I doubt we are not so much
Temptation-proof: And it might, for ought I know, have been a dangerous
Experiment, to have trusted the Church with it self so long in an Enemy's
Quarter. We see King James has lived a great many Years, enough to have gone a
great way with us, with the Assistance of French and Irish, and such Subjects
as were inclinable to be of the King's Religion at Home; and he must have gone
as far as he could: No doubt the Nation had been as easily supplied as
Magdalen-College. But it happened very luckily for England, that King James
discovered his Temper of Spirit a little too soon. We all knew of what force
Edicts-had been in Hungary and France, the Copies whereof our Kings had been so
apt to follow; and what the Duke of Savoy had been doing in the Valleys of
Piedmont; but we would not believe King James was Cruel, was a Persecutor,
scarce that he was a Papist, because he had the Art to Conceal and Disguise
himself a little, before it was in his power to use the Rod. But presently
Father Petre showed that he would do as much in England, as la Chaise had done
in France; and the first was observed to be the hottest of the two: And not to
aggravate or mince Matters; They must all have done what lay in their power, in
Obedience to what their Councils Decree toward the Extirpation of Heretics.
But God be thanked King James did not show himself that Prince of Resolution;
at least he failed them in one Character, as they would have had him deceived
us by another. He was pleased for some Considerations (whether of Fear or
Guilt) to leave us abruptly, and we have taken that Advantage of parting with
him fairly: And I wish him all the Happiness that is consistent with the
Welfare of England. Only let us as Englishmen remember, That we now have an Act
of Parliament of our side, which Asserts the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, and has Established the Settlement of the Crown; and which
incapacitates any Papist, or Person Marrying a Papist, from having and enjoying
it; which Act is only Defective in this, That it is not Ordered to be Read in
the Churches twice at least every Year, and upon Penalty of Deprivation. If
such a Law had been made in Edward the VIth's Time, it might have saved some
Blood and Trouble since the Reformation.

WILLIAM III.
THE Lord Chancellor Notttingham in the Case of the Duke of Norfolk and Charles
Howard Esquire, etc. has, in my Mind, a notable Expression, viz. Pray let us
so Resolve Cases here, that they may stand with the Reason of Mankind when they
are Debated abroad. Shall that be Reason here, that is not Reason in any part
of the World besides? In truth, we are apt to be peculiarly Artificial in our
Thoughts and way of Argument, and our Reasonings are too Municipal. Thus every
little Pedant can Settle and Establish the Affairs of Religion and Government,
and can Resolve all the great Mysteries of Church and State (as he thinks) in
his narrow Study. But if a Man looks Abroad, and takes a general survey of the
World, and reflects upon the Universal Notions and Customs of Mankind, his Soul
will become more enlarged, and will not determine so Magisterially upon the
Principles of any particular Sect or Society.

The Case of King WILLIAM in it self, is, perhaps, the most Glorious and
Generous Cause that has appeared upon the Stage of Human Actions; yet has
been sullied by dire Representations, by poor-spirited and precarious
Arguments, which have been brought in for its support. His Title to the Crown
of Great Britain stands Firm, and is justifiable upon Natural and Sound
foundations of Reason, without Props: But has been so oddly maintained by the
manner of its Defense, that it has been the Justification only that has
Disgraced the Revolution: Doctrina facit Difficultatem. We have been running
out of the way to fetch in Aids from Art and Learning, whilst Nature presents
us with obvious and undefiled Principles of Reason. Thus the King's Accession
to the Throne has been introduced by shuffling between Providential
Settlement, Conquest, Desertion, Abdication, and topping Protections of Power;
whilst Men of Honor, and People of Honest Plain Understandings, stand Amazed,
instead of being Convinced; and hang back when Allegiance comes to be
explained, and a Recognition demanded; an Association proposed, frights us as a
thing strange and impious; which shows our Allegiance was not rightly founded,
but looks like a thing of Fancy, built upon a forced and fictitious bottom. All
these ungrateful Terms have been ingeniously exposed by Mr Johnson, except only
Abdication; which, with submission, is also too Artificial; a Word not to be
found in the Alphabet of Spelman; a Civil Law Term (used almost in Fifty
several Senses) and therefore an uncouth Expression of the Common Laws of this
Realm to speak in: The Word Forfaulture seems to have a plainer Signification
to our common Understanding: This, as Forisfacere, Forisfactum, Forisfactura;
and Forfacere, Forfactum, Forfactura, etc. we find in Spelman, and it
signifies, Rem suam ex delicto amittere, and sibi quasi extraneum facere, Rem
culpa abdicere, alterique, Puta Regi, Magistratui, Domino abjudicare:
Forisfacere pro Delinquere, peccare, transgredi, Injuriam infer: LL. Edw.
Confess. cap. 32. ut Codex noster MS. legit, Aliqui stulti and improbi gratis
and nimis consuete erga vicinos suos foris facebant. This agrees with the Sense
of King James the Is It his Speech to his Parliament, viz. A settled King is
bound to observe the Paction made to his People by his Laws, in framing his
Government agreeable thereunto: And a King Governing in a settled Kingdom,
leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off
Governing according to the Laws. In which Case the King's Conscience may speak
to him (as the Poor Widow said to Philip of Macedon,) Either Govern according
to your Law, aut ne sis Rex: And if a Subject's Conscience may not speak the
same thing, King James's Words signify nothing. The other Words carry an Odious
or suspected Construction in them; the First (in the Convocationstyle) implies
Guilt, and at best creates but a Transylvanian Allegiance; the Second is a
Jest, and false in Fact, besides it is what the King himself disowns; the Third
is an idle Sham, as stated; and the Fourth is also a little strained, as I
concieve; and we might, for ought I see, as well have called it a Cession,
especially if King James was a Spiritual Person of the Society of Jesuits, as
has been said. But what need we any Term of Art? Let the matter express it
self by Periphrasis in its own genuine Phrase. It is fairly stated in the
Prince's Declaration: And our Case is no more nor less than this; A King,
contrary to his Coronation Oath, dispenses with, and breaks through all the
Established Laws of the Land, Invades and Subverts the Rights, Liberties, and
Properties of the People, which he Swore to maintain inviolably; and Dissolves
the Constitution of Church and State in an Arbitrary Tyrannical manner; the
People therefore in Defense of their Laws, Rights, and Religion, and the
necessary Preservation of them, Oppose the violent proceedings of such a Prince
(I put the Case at the worst) and also apply themselves to a Neighboring
Prince, (who has an Expectation of a Right to the Crown), and pray in Aid of
him to assist them in the Maintaining and Defending their Legal Rights,
together with his own Title to the Succession; who, in his own Words, makes
Preparation to Assist the People against the Subverters of their Religion and
Laws, and also Invites and Requires all Persons whatsoever, All the Peers of
the Realm, Spiritual and Temporal, and all Gentlemen, Citizens, and other
Commons of all Ranks, to come and assist him in order to the Execution of this
Design, against all such as shall endeavor to Oppose them, to prevent all
those Miseries which must needs fall upon the Nations being kept under
Arbitrary Government and Slavery; and that all the Violences and Disorders
which have overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government, may be
fully Redressed in a Free and Legal Parliament, to secure the Nation from
relapsing into the Miseries of Arbitrary Government any more. Upon which
appearance of mutual Defense for Self-preservation, the Conscious King Retires,
first leaves his Army, (which no Man I will be bold to say would do without
Guilt or Cowardice, and I Am sure a Prince that had been Brave, or acted upon
Principles of Honor, would have Fought it out with but Ten Regiments, or with
One at his Heels, which was Richard the IIId's Case in the first sense, though
not in the later) and after leaves the Realm, for Reasons best known to himself
(whether Frighted, or not, is not material) upon which, the Prince, together
with his Consort, the next Heir (Indisputable) to the Crown, in a full and due
Representation of the whole Community and Body of the Kingdom, is and are
Declared and Appointed King and Queen.

Now let us see what we have done upon the whole matter, to deserve that harsh
Language of the Convocation-Book, produced by Dr Sherlock; Whether we have done
more, or so much as all other Nations have done in a Case any thing like Ours?
Whether we have done more than becomes Good Christians, or Men of Honor? And
what it is that stands in our way to hinder or bar such an Attempt and Action?

First, Setting aside at present those Texts of St. Paul and St. Peter, which
are the only discouraging Impediments, and which have been sufficiently, as I
think, answered and avoided by several Pens: Upon the Law of Nature, no Man, I
believe, can pretend to say, here is any Natural Injustice, or Moral Injury
done; Certainly Nature and Reason prompt us to Defend Injuries, and to Repel
Force; Nature will preserve it self in its Being. No Man will say a King of
England has power of Life and Death over his Subjects (We say he has no
Power, other than by the Law of the Land); the Moral, as well as Legal
Consequence must be, That we may Defend our Lives against all Assaults; it is
the same of Liberty and Property; for there is a Meum and Tuum in all Christian
Commonwealths, as Archbishop Abbot said before, subject only to the Laws of the
Place; therefore I cannot defend my self or House against the King Armed with
Legal Power, as upon a Cap. Vtlagatum, or upon a Duty due to him, etc. but I
may, where I am out of the compass of a Legal Prosecution. If the consequence
of Self-defence and Preservation be denied, it is vain trifling to talk of Laws,
and to value our selves upon Living in a Country where the Measures of Right
are ascertained, and the Limits of Government and Subjection; the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, and the Bow String, will be the same, if Laws are only a
simple Direction for Information, and not an Obligation. We must owe our Lives,
etc. at this rate, to Fortune, not to Justice: But since the Restoration, it is
said we are under another Tie not to take up Arms, by the Extravagant
Compliment to King Charles the IId, and the Declaration pursuant to that Act.
Be it so; though all Laws made in Extraordinary Heats are not a regular
Obligation; but let them take that State-Artificial Obligation into the
Bargain; the King Swears too, and this was not designed to let loose the King's
Hands, and tie the Subjects; for all Obligations, whether Natural or
Artificial, are Reciprocal and Mutual, and always so taken and understood in
common Intendment. There can be no other Notion of Justice, Natural, Moral, or
Political; and whatever Preference and Advantage is allowed to One above the
Other, it is an Authority upon Supposition of Care, Protection, and for Order,
and centers in the Good of the Community. And, I think, the Lacedaemonians had a
Law to Punish Parents who did not their Duty toward their Children. Let us
therefore take in the highest Instance of Obedience and Duty from Children to
Parents: No Man, I suppose, will pretend now, that a Father may Castrate, Sell,
or Kill a Child; the Inference must be, That in any Case of such open Violence,
a Son may Resist a Father, in his own necessary Defense and Self-preservation
(without offering Reproach, Injury, or Vindictive Force): So in the Case of
Lunacy in a Parent, or any fatal Extravagance, no doubt a Son may lay Hands on
a Father by way of Restraint, and must take a continued Commanding Care over
him, in case of Relapse, etc. This is agreed on all hands to be the severest
Tie of Obedience; and therefore Kings are endeavored to be brought within the
Fifth Commandment to make our Chains the faster; not in the mean time
considering that they make them looser, by putting an inconsistent double Duty
upon us. Thus we are told Religion stands positively in our way, and fetters us
with an Absolute Obedience to Kings without Reserve, etc. It seems hard that
Religion should weaken our Arm in Defense of it self, and force our Obedience
and Submission to Laws and Absolute Power in the same breath: For where there
is Absolute Power, there is no Law; and where there are Laws, there is no
Absolute Power. But Scripture is to be our Guide; I agree it: But what
Authority shall I rely on? Where shall I apply my self for an Interpreter? It Is
manifest our own Church cannot settle me, that is divided against it self. Some
bring Instances from the Old Testament; Others tell us, That is nothing to the
purpose, those Kings being by God's Designation, etc. Some tell us, these Texts
of St. Peter and St. Paul oblige us to Passive Obedience on peril of Damnation:
And Others as boldly and magisterially inform us, That the New Testament gives
no Rules for Submission to Forms of Government, but only Rules of Justice,
Order, and Peace; That those Texts are nothing to Our purpose; for the Apostles
spoke to those under Heathen Emperors, where Paganism was Established by a Law;
and that those Texts are to be only Expounded against the Jews, who still
believed themselves under the Divine Authority, and thought they could not
become the Subjects of any other Power. As to the Scripture-Examples, we are
Taught by a very great Divine and Bishop, not to rely on them; and he says,
Those who place the Obligatory Nature of these Examples from Scripture, must
either produce the Moral Nature of those Examples, or else a Rule binding us to
follow those Examples, especially when these Examples are brought to found a
New positive Law Obliging all Christians. Some say in general, the Bible is a
Miscellaneous Book, where Dishonest and Time-serving Men may ever, in their
loose way, find a Text for their purpose. Sir Robert Filmer upon the Dispute of
the Form of Powers (for these Texts are sometimes applied to the Form, and
sometimes to the Quality of Power) takes Power only in the Singular Number;
Powers in the Plural is a damnable Sin; and he will have all Governments but
the Patriarchal, to be Illegal and Abominable; but this is so Extravagant,
that, I think, none of our Divines pretend to justify him in it; and therefore
Others, on the contrary, are of Opinion, That Submit to all Powers, infers,
That all Forms of Government are admitted to be good, and do not allow that
Power in the Singular is to be taken restrictive, and so there is no Authority,
if not of God, and the Authorities which are (of God's Institution) are ordered
under God. Sir Robert Filmer, Dr Hicks, etc. will have the Legislative Power to
be in the King alone. And the First says, all Legislative Powers are Arbitrary;
But where is the necessity for that? And Dr Hicks says also, Only the Laws of
Men are God's Ordinances: St. Paul, speaking of Authority in general, says,
Ordinance of God. St. Peter, of the particular Persons administering Authority,
calls it, the Ordinance of Man; Sir Robert Filmer upon that, Render unto Caesar,
the things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are God's, divides all
between God and the King, and leaves nothing to the poor Subject; which does
not very well consist with our Savior's Advice to him, whom he bid Sell All
that he had, and give to the poor, which grieved the Young Man, for he had
Great possessions. It seems by this our Savior implies the Subject had
Property, otherwise he could not have Sold it. Thus they make their own Idol.

We see then by the better Opinions of Divines and Learned Men, all Forms of
Power are Authentic, with respect to the Laws and Constitutions of Places; and
submit to all Powers, imports only Obedience according to Law, the Ordinance of
Man; To render unto Caesar, etc. implies certainly that something was left in
him who rendered: It is not said, Give all to Caesar. So no Man will controvert
the submitting to every ordinance, with the Context; for Rulers are a Terror to
the Evil, and not to the Good. There never was any King in Israel, but had some
Engagement and Tie upon him, Formally with God, or by Covenant with Man: To
keep the Laws, to judge righteously, to seek the Good of the People, etc.
Besides, the Case of the Apostles is wonderfully different in all respects: As
to Property, etc. the Government of the Roman Emperors was Absolute (taking it
at worst) and therefore Christians, who had no Law on their side, could not
resist: (This is said by some, though our Savior does not seem to mean it so);
whereas Ours under our Kings is limited and mixed; therefore not the same
foundation to apply the Injunctions of Nonresistance from the Apostles. As to
Religion, the Apostles came counter to all Laws, and therefore were to submit
to them: Not to raise Rebellion on account of a new Religion, which had no
foundation in any Law: And the proper Talent and Business of the Apostles was
suffering for the sake of the Gospel; therefore impertinent as well as profane
and wicked for them, to think of resisting any Powers. What is this to the
maintaining a Religion established by a Law? But this Construction imposed upon
Us toward Passive Obedience, is a Conceit against the Opinion of most Learned
Men, and also contrary to the Common Practice of the Christian World. Grotius,
Seldom, etc. understand submission to every ordinance, to be to the Government,
and the Laws thereof: And so in common construction and intendment, those Texts
may be taken a Direction from the Apostles to their Missionaries and
Correspondents, who were to travel through variety of Governments to pay all
Duties and Civil Respects to Kings and Magistrates, and may be satisfied with
that particular application of Obedience: They were enjoined not to enquire
into the Fundamental Rights of Power, but to take them as they found them,
being only Powers of this World, with proper Laws for keeping Mankind in Peace
and Order in general, according to the Respective Customs and Constitutions. I
believe besides, the Gospel is an Universal Instruction for Obedience to the
Laws, on the severest punishment of disobedience to them: 'Twas intended to
make them good Subjects, but not Slaves. It Is too much to be Passive and
Martyrs by whole Nations, with the Laws and Religion bleeding by our Sides.
Let Us look into the Customs and Usages of other Ages and Places, and enquire
into, and examine the Principles and Opinions of Learned Divines on the
Occasions of Power, and the Exercise or Abuse of it. If a man should consult
the Histories of the first Kings of France and Spain, both before and since
those Nations received the Light of the Gospel, and the hudled abrupt
Succession, besides the very odd Partnerships in Kingdoms; he will find matter
but of small Veneration for Titles to Crowns of Old Times, whatever he may
fancy is due to the Present Establishments: And I doubt we should discover but
a faint blind Track of Active Providence in the transferring Kingdoms (as it is
called) but only rather the Effects of a Ludicrous Fortune. Suppose we should
be free, and tell the World we have Elected, Made, or Appointed (call it what
you will) King William King of Great Britain, instead of King James (without
the formality of Deposing, or taking off his Crown or Head, to make a Vacancy,
or without the Ens Rationis of a Vacancy); it would be no more than what may be
justified by Precedents of no Bad Times in other Countries, and our Own too. In
France, the Instance of Childerick degraded, and Aegidius or Gillon, Master of
the Roman Militia (who was a Stranger, but in Reputation for Probity and
Wisdom) Elected in his stead. It is said, the French, according to their
Ancient Rights, conferred upon Pepin (after Thierry was stripped of his
Royalty) the Sovereignty of Austrasia: And afterward Pepin his Grandson (Son
of Charles Martel, and Father of Charlemain) by a Parliament assembled was
appointed King, although there was One of the Marovignian Race remaining, but
Young, Stupid, and Witless: And for the Honor of the Church, Pope Zachary
confirmed him: Upon which, in another Parliament at Roymes, they degraded
Childerick, and Elected Pepin: And the Archbishop of Mentz, Boniface, declared
to them the Validity of the Pope's Answer. And after, at the Assembly at
Carbonnat, the Austrasian Lords and Estates acknowledged Charlemain their King.
They might do, says the History, this, and if he had not had That Right, he had
been an Usurper, for the Children of Charlemain were living: Hugh Capet's best,
if not only Title, was Election: For Charles Duke of Lorrain was of the
Carolovinian Race, and Heir, but, as is said, of little merit.

In Spain the Visigoths (about 1200 years since) made and unmade their Kings as
they pleased. I suppose 'twill not be said They were the worse Christians for
being nearer the time of our Savior and his Apostles.

So it was in Denmark too, till they lately changed from Elective to
Hereditary, from a Limited to an Absolute Government; and so, for ought we
know, it may again, when that Arbitrary Power has had its full swing.

To look back here at home; formerly it was so. And I know not why we may not
be permitted to go upwards as far as we please, since those on the other side
think fit to go backward to Henry the Third for the beginning, as they say, of
our Constitution. Egbert the First, sole Saxon King, upon the Report of the
Death of Britric, with great speed returned out of France, where, during the
time of his abode, he had served with good Commendation in the Wars under
Charles the Great; by means whereof, his Reputation increasing amongst his own
Countrymen, he was thought worthy of the Government before he obtained it: And
Ethelwolf a Monk, a Deacon, and a Bishop, yet Elected King, because they could
not find a fitter Person for the Crown. Edwin by his Miscarriage turned his
Subjects Hearts, and the Mercians and Northumbrians revolted, and swore Fealty
to his Younger Brother Edgar. The Danish Kings were approved by the Lords
during their short time of Reign here: Edward the Confessor by general Consent
was admitted King: Harold chose himself, and ravished a Crown, and he fared
accordingly for his Intrusion without the Consent of the People. All that is
intended by this short Account, is, only to show, That Succession was not
always esteemed so Sacred; and that Non-Resistance has not been so stanch'd a
Doctrine always, as some now would pretend.

To come nearer to our present Case, Let Us see the Opinion of Councels and
Divines, and perhaps we shall not need to be much out of Countenance for
assisting the Prince of Orange in the Vindication of our Civil Rights and
Religion, and I believe the Church of England will stand by Us: And Divines of
great Reputation gave their Judgment for Subjects defending themselves against
their Princes in Cases not near so strong as Ours.

Queen Elizabeth gave Countenance and Aid to the Revolt of the Low Countries,
or Rebellion, as it is called, against the King of Spain; and did it by Advice
of Learned and Religious Divines, as Dr. Bancroft, etc. And 'twas for the sake
of Religion: Queen Elizabeth also assisted the Protestants in Scotland against
the French Faction: Cambden says, she had a Consultation about that Matter; and
although it was urged, That it was of Ill Example to patronise another Prince's
Subjects in Commotion; yet it seemed to be an Impious thing to be wanting to
them of the same Religion.

Bishop Bilson justifies the Defense which the French and Dutch made, on
supposition that it was for the Maintenance of the Laws.

If we look into the Affair of the King of Bohemia, or Prince Palatine, we find
(tho King James was backward, i. e. fearful, and had not Courage when the War
broke out in Germany) the Sense of the Archbishop, in his Letter to Sir Robert
Naunton, Secretary of State, when he advised the King to send Aid against the
Emperor's Attempts of introducing Popery and Arbitrary Power; he encourages the
Prince Palatine as King of Bohemia by Election, in the matter for propagation
of the Gospel, and to protect the Oppressed, and declares for his own part, He
did not dare but give Advice to follow where God leads; apprehending the Work
of God in This, and That of Hungary; and that he was satisfied in Conscience
that the Bohemians had a Just Cause, etc.

King Charles the First, who appeared to be of as Scrupulous a Judgment in the
Point as any, By the Advice of Archbishop Laud, not only assisted the King of
Denmark (who assisted others) against the House of Austria, to keep the King of
Spain from overrunning the Western part of Christendom, and sent Forces and
Supplies for the Cause of Religion; as his Reasons are emphatically expressed
in the Declaration: But also some time after published a Declaration of War
against France, chiefly on Account of that King's Protestant Subjects, for
Violation of Edicts, and Breach of Articles and Contracts with them. Whereas
Contracts and Articles at other times with Us have, by some, been pronounced
Profane Absurdities, etc.

The Revolt of Catalonia has had its due Representation here as well as
elsewhere: The only Reason for their taking up Arms, was, in plain Terms, to
rid themselves of their Oppressors, which the Nobility said was their Duty; and
to preserve their Ancient Form of Government from the Encroachments of the King
of Spain, who Oppressed Rich and Poor by Arbitrary Taxations; Religion was no
Ingredient in their Rebellion: Their Acclamations were, Long live the new King
D'Juan de Braganza, and let them dye that govern ill. His Accession to the
Crown of Portugal was Congratulated and Countenanced by all the Kingdoms and
States in Europe upon the Return of his Manifesto's; (only the Emperor, whose
Interest it was, condemned it) the Pope himself did not Resent it. And they
congratulated him upon the Merits, as well as Success of the Attempt.

Where then is this Ambitious Prince? Where is that Wicked and Ungodly People,
as they call Us? We have done no more than what has been done upon a Godly
Consideration in like Cases; nay not so much, and our Case goes farther; for
these had only Edicts and Acts of Grace to maintain; We defend our Religion
Established by the Laws of the Land.

This Family of the Nassaus have the hardest Measure under the Sun; To be
styled Daring and Ambitious Spirits, and to have Damnation thus Entailed upon
them, only for undertaking the Cause of the Oppressed, and Rescuing Abused
Innocence from the Tyranny of Arbitrary and Barbarous Power.

Why then are the Gentlemen of the Church of England so resty upon this
Revolution? There is scarce any Reason to be imagined, unless it be for those
which they bring themselves; such as the Convocation-Settlement, Conquest, etc.
If we should enquire into their Opinions, and variety of Principles, I doubt we
shall find them so Un-uniform, that we shall never ground any fixed Authority
upon them in this Point, or any other. Tho it seems but an Ungrateful Task to
expose their Contradictions and Contrarieties in all Ages: But if they have
differed amongst themselves in their Doctrines and Notions of Obedience, or
Resistance, and the Settlement of Crowns, I hope they will give Us leave in
Equal Authorities to choose which we will follow: In truth, he who will be at
the pains to examine their Writings, i. e. their General Councels themselves,
even from the first Four, to the Last, I Am sorry to say it, will, I believe,
find but a Sandy Foundation to fix his Conscience or Judgment in Articles of
Faith. What have they been doing with the Trinity of late? What have they not
been doing to get the Government into the Church-Conusance by way of Success
and Providence? Tho I would have this Government settled to satisfy and please
every one in their own way, if it were possible, for Men have different Ideas
of things: Yet I Am unwilling the Government should be tricked and imposed
upon: And that Men should advance their own Stations and Interest, by
publishing and mis-applying Notions which expose the Church and King both: I
must confess, I think Dr. S -- Reasons for the Government have been the
greatest against it with all Men of Reason and Honor, and have hindered many
from coming into it. What stuff have we produced in a Convocation-Book! the
greatest Affront to a King and People that was ever offered with a salvo to the
Church. It is said, Providence may actually, and God will, when he sees fit,
and can serve the Ends of his Providence, set up Kings without any Regard to
Legal Right, or Human Laws; and when they are thus set up, they are invested
with God's Authority, which must be obeyed, and this supersedes all Legal
Disputes of Right, and our old Oaths and our old Allegiance are at an end: For
when God transfers Kingdoms, and has set over Us a New King (and settled him)
and requires our Obedience to a New King, he necessarily transfers our
Allegiance, etc. And the Authority unjustly gotten and wrested from the True
and Lawful Possessor, being always God's Authority, and therefore receiving no
Impeachment from the Wickedness of those that have it, is ever, when any
Alterations are truly settled, to be obeyed: Why all this, (tho as with a
supposing) to Us? It seems by this, That the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation
have been bantering God Almighty with Prayers and Praises all this while,
whereas both Prince and People, and All of Us, should have been humbling our
selves in Sackcloth and Ashes, and doing Penance for our Rebellion and
Wickedness. I shall not trouble a Serious Thought about this Convocation-Book,
or the Occasion of it; enough has been said about that and the Doctor already.
King James I. in his Letter to Dr. Abbot, shows his Resentment of the
Proceedings of that Convocation. Only I will produce another Convocation, to
show how the former has settled the Government: The first was in the time of
James the First, the other in James the Second. Now you shall see the Judgment
of the Famous University of Oxon: They in their Convocation reflecting (as they
tell Us) upon certain Pernicious Books, and Damnable Doctrines, (viz amongst
others, Proposition 10. That Possession and Strength give a Right to
Government; and Success in a Cause or Enterprise proclaims it to be Lawful and
Just; (Nota) To pursue it, Is to comply with the Will of God, because it is to
follow the Conduct of his Providence: Hobbes, Owen, Baxter, Jenkins, etc. And
Proposition 15. If a People, who by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign,
shall sinfully Dispossess him, and, contrary to their Covenant, choose and
covenant with another, they may be obliged by their Latter Covenant,
notwithstanding their Former; Baxter, H. C. etc.) by their Judgment and Decree,
Ann. 1683. pronounced these, amongst many other such like Propositions,
Heretical; and Decreed, Judged, and Declared them to be False, Seditious, and
Impious, Blasphemous and Infamous to Christian Religion, and destructive of all
Government in Church and State: What a Blessed Establishment is here! What an
Honorable Title has the King! in what a Condition is the Subject! Thus we see
how unsafe it is to imply or suppose a Providential Usurper, or King de facto,
which is all one; and then to secure him by Arguments out of the Clouds. So
it is of a Forcible Usurper, or King de facto, the other way, to Establish him
with a Providential Success, as Conqueror, without Right: As if we come to
measure the Mysteries of Providence by our narrow Comprehensions and Rules, and
tack it to every Success, we shall make a very odd Business of it, and put
Providence upon very Irreverent Offices. We know how That, and Scripture has
been interpreted upon other Occasions: In less than half a Century, upon a
Certain Revolution, One Side said, God showed his Indignation in Thunder and
Lightning: The Other, That he Congraturated the Success with his Guns and
Fireworks from above. Plato in his time said, Lawyers and Physicians were the
Pest of a Country: Would he not have added, Divines also; had he lived in some
other Ages?

When these Gentlemen were upon their Providential Disposal and Settlement of
Kingdoms, They might as justly have brought some Instances from Scripture,
which would have been for the Honor of the Revolution. Where God vouchsafed
his Assistance to a good Cause for a Blessing to a People (as well as always
for a Curse to a Bad and Sinful Nation) Instances which comply and would have
stood with the Ordinary Rules of Morality and Human Justice. As the Case of
Solomon and his Son, between Hezekiah and Josiah, and the succeeding Tyrants,
and Wicked Princes. Also in the Case of Rehoboam, where God seems to give a
Countenance to the Revolt of the Ten Tribes, and assist against his Tyranny and
Oppression; for God says, 'twas his doing there also. David seems to agree with
this: He sufficiently differences his Expressions, according to the Characters
of Princes and Rulers, as good or bad: He tells us the Fate of wicked ones, not
by executing upon them God's immediate personal Judgments, or by the visible
Hand of Providence; but by Human Mediums of interposing Power to restrain them,
etc. by the Favor of God's Assistance in an Ordinary Course of Providential
Justice: The Prophets did not preach Passive Obedience to the Idolatrous Kings
of Israel and Judah, but inveighed against them. Did not David and his
Adherents resist Saul, though he spared his Person: (I do not pretend to plead
for a Vindictive Account against the Person of Kings) And the Story of Manasses
methinks seems something toward ours: He Set up, Repaired, Adorned, and
Furnished the Altars, Temples, and High Places in which the Devil was by the
Heathen Worshipped, forgetting the Piety of his Father, and most abominably
burnt his Sons for a Sacrifice to the Devil, Moloch, and shed so much innocent
Blood, that it is said, Jerusalem was replenished therewith. And when after all,
he was reprehended by the Reverend Prophet Esai, he caused him to be Sawed
asunder with a Wooden Saw. Therefore for his Sins, the Lord brought upon him
the Captains of the Host of the Kings of Ashur, who took Manasses, and put him
in Fetters, and bound him in Chains, and carried him to Babel, where, after he
had lain Twenty Years as a Captive, despoiled of all Honor and Hopes of doing
Mischief, God inspired him with Repentance, and afterward moved the Assyrians
Heart to deliver him; after which he forgot his Impieties and Villainies,
detested his Idolatry, cast down the Idols of his own Erection, repaired
Jerusalem, and at last Dyed in a Religious Peace. But it is not my Province to
apply Scripture, only to my self: And I know not what Commission They have so
familiarly to determine the Councils of the Almighty. It Is true, as St.
Augustine says, Nothing is sensibly and visibly done in the World, which comes
not from the Interior and Invisible Cabinet of God, whether it be commanded or
permitted; though some will not allow a permissive Providence, yet the Psalmist
says, Oh God! How profound are thy thoughts! and how unsearchable to the
ignorant and foolish? Yet Man must be presently making Inferences. Providence
is said to take care of the most minute Creatures, as well as the greatest. And
these great Texts and Stories of Prerogative and Supremacy, with Complement to
each other, are only taken notice of; whilst Others as positive lie dormant;
as, Resist not evil; Turn the other Cheek; and about giving the Cloak also. These
might do mischief, and the Wicked of the World might take Advantage by
returning them upon the Exhorters. The Practice of the World runs otherwise,
and the Prospect is too Melancholy, where there is no Sunshine in the Landscape.

If then neither the Historical part of the Old Testament, nor the Doctrinal
parts of the New, nor the certain Authority of Councils or Convocations, nor
the Extrajudicial Opinions of Divines, do unanimously evince our Duty of blind
Obedience, or Non-resistance, under a total subversion of a Constitution in
Church and State, and the Practice of the Christian World, in all places is
counter to it; Why are these Gentlemen so severe upon us, and so resty
themselves? Lay the Scene in Holland, Germany, France, (where a Holy League is
no News) or Portugal, etc. Resistance is an Orthodox Doctrine; but put the Case
at Home, it must be Heretical, and no less than Damnation. Why must Englishmen
be the only Cullyes of Europe, and have their hands ti'd? Although the Church
of England does not pretend to follow the Doctrines of the Church of Rome; yet
I verily believe they never thought to betray their own Church to that, by
setting up a contrary Doctrine. Suarez de Legibus acquaints us with the Popish
Doctrine, expressly in this Case, viz. That Heathen Kings cannot be deprived of
their power by War, unless they abuse it, to the Injury of Christian Religion,
or the Destruction of the Faithful that are under them, as is the constant
Opinion of Divines, meaning of the Church of Rome. And again, If Infidels have
the Faithful for their Subjects, and would turn them from the Faith or
Obedience of the Church, then the Church has just cause of War against them:
But for Heretic Princes, he says, the Church has Direct power over them, and
may deprive them in punishment of their Infidelity or Heresy. This we saw
verified in Queen Elizabeth, and she by Advice of her Divines, in preservation
of Church turned the Tables upon them. I do not believe any of our Divines are
so passive, to betray their Church, and yield to the Pope, or any one
commissioned by him, their Dignities and Revenues, though they Deliver over the
Nobility and Gentry to Damnation, for preserving them in possession of them. I
mean they who have taken the Oaths to the Government, as a King de facto, for I
believe the Others who are not come in, are more charitable; for I confess I
have an Honorable pity for them, and value them never the less for sticking to
something, though they are unfortunate, and differ from me in Judgment. But
besides the Business of Religion, the Papists ought not to be angry with us,
for Deposing or Removing a King; they are uneasy as soon as others, and do not
take the Passive Doctrine to be any Restraint upon them, even in the ill
Administration of a Popish King; Witness that Story of the King of Spain in
Portugal, and the Advance of the Duke of Braganza. And here at home to look
back and instance only in Edward the IId, who, as the History says, being
governed by Gaveston and the Spencers, murdered his Uncle Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, and numbers of Great men, The People, the Popish People, rose
against him, Imprisoned him, and a full Repesentative of the Nation, in a
solemn manner renounced their Allegiance to him; but told him withal, they
would suffer his Son Edward to succeed, which was a favor, it seems, in those
Times. Therefore, I think, the Papists, whether they consider their Doctrine or
their Practice, cannot hit us in the Teeth justly: Their only Grievance is, That
the Person is mistaken, and does not prove for their turn. And I do not doubt,
notwithstanding Dr. Sherlock's Settlement, they would endeavor to remove King
William, for King James, or any other Popish King again: And I cannot blame them
for it, for it is their Principle; but as Gentlemen they ought to give us leave
to enjoy our fancy too. And so to look into our own Churchmen, who would seem
to mince the matter, either in their Principles or Practice; They tell us a
Story of Licinius and Constantine; and endeavor to parallel the first with
King James IId, and justify the latter for making War upon him, by whom they
intimate King William; but they manage it so scurvily, on and off, that one
knows not where to have them; they would, and they would not, as if they were
ashamed of their Passive Doctrine, and yet ashamed to quit it. The Bishop of A.
allows a Foreign Prince to make War upon Another, who prosecutes his Subjects
for Religion, if the Religion be his that makes War, for that reason; and what
is this more than has been said before? But Puffendorf speaks boldly, and
allows also Subjects to use an Absolute Prince as an Enemy, if he discovers an
Hostile Mind toward them. We keep a Clutter withour filial Obedience to the
Patriarchal Power, etc. But Puffendorf grounds even the Paternal Power over
Children upon their presumed Consent, and says, it is admitted, Sons may, when
they come of Age; choose whether they will be under their Father's Government,
or not. And here (by way of Parenthesis,) a Man might raise an unlucky Dispute;
Whether there be any Government Legal and Rightful, but what is only obtained
by Consent? For if this be true, it will go a great way in the Argument, even
of their Patriarchal Power, which for this reason cannot be Absolute, and no
Other way can give any Right at all; for Conquest is but an overgrown Trespass
upon the Possession and Right of another: And if there be no Government, but by
Consent of the Governed, whether the People's Consent will carry a Government
farther without a subsequent and continued Approbation? And the Consequence of
that, when we Swear Allegiance to a King, be not that it is to be understood no
farther than he governs by Law; and that our Allegiance is due to Law, not to
the person of a King? Whether these Considerations may not be offered with as
good a Color, as some others have been? Whether Kings do not mean this, when
the consent of the People is asked? Or whether they mean nothing? Whether it is
not understood by the consent, etc.? We might also enquire, how our Gentlemen
came to be wiser and more scrupulous in their Allegiance than their
Forefathers? And what Titles William the IId, Henry Is It, K. John, K. Stephen,
Henry IVth, Vth, VIth, and VIIth had, if not by Consent? We might farther ask
them, If this Patriarchal, Despotick, Absolute Power be the Right of Kings, and
Non-Resistance is not Lawful upon any occasion whatsoever, Why they are not
Unanimous in their Doctrine? And what Laymen are to do when there is a Schism
in the Church? But these may be thought invidious Queries?

But what if these Passive-Gentlemen are not consistent with themselves? It Is
plain, our Divines here were not so stiff to the first Motions of the Prince's
Attempts for our Rescue. He himself tells us, that Several of the Lords
Spiritual as as Temporal were in the Inviting of him over; and the Dissenting
Archbishop, who thought fit to draw back afterward, was pleased to Countenance
his coming to London, and to assist with his Counsels. He was willing to be in
the Sanhedrim upon the Vacancy; which by his favor was as far from being
Passive, as Harnessing and Equipping, etc. and several Noblemen with their
Chaplains at their Elbows agreed upon the first Overtures against King James,
who only differed after in the Form of Administration, and supplying the Power.
There were those who would have been contented and satisfied with a Regency,
which by the by was as much against the late Notions of Loyalty; and 'twas once
taught, that it was as Damnable to put any Restraint upon a King, or Fetter his
Prerogative, or to limit the Measures of our Obedience, as to cancel and throw
them off.

If then there be no steady Obstruction in our way, no Irrefragable Arguments,
but what are Overturned or Embarrass'd; Why may we not throw off the Mask, and
declare our selves frankly and sincerely? And talk as becomes Gentlemen or
Freeborn Creatures, of Reason, and tell the World, That King James was no
longer fit to be entrusted with the Government; That he could give no Adequate
Security for his Administration: That it was no more in his Power, than his
Will, to Rule according to Law: That it could not be therefore safe to Re-admit
him on any Terms, because he would not be restrained by any Qualifications. In
short, That King Jamess Character and Administration are inconsistent and
incompatible with the Laws of this Realm; and that therefore it was necessary,
absolutely necessary, That the Government should be supplied, and some Other
Person admitted and placed in the Throne, from, and by whom might be assured he
would Observe and Maintain the Constitution in Church and State: And that for
these Reasons, we have admitted King William to the Crown, allowed him to take
the Government as King of England, and consented to transfer our Allegiance to
him; and have Recognized, Acknowledged, and Declared His Majesty, (he having
accepted the Crown and Royal Dignity) To be of Right, and by the Laws of this
Realm, our Sovereign Lord and King, of England, France, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, etc.

If our Principles are just, the Consequence must be so too. If the Premises be
true, the Conclusion is warrantable. Montaign says, Authority is not given in
favor of the Magistrate, but of the People: And it is the general Opinion, That
Government was made for them, whether originally it were made by them, or not.
All the respective Schemes of it are contrived to provide for the Welfare of
the Community; and the Laws and Constitutions of Power are the Measures of
Submission to it. Thus the Notions of Providence and Human Right may be
understood, and consist in Human Understanding. Kings and Subjects may know
their Duties; Kings may preserve their Rights so long as they continue to be
(Rational) Men; and Man may preserve his Native Honor in the Character of his
first Creation, as he was made after God's Image also.

Thus I hope this Present King may at last rest in Peace, being settled by such
a Recognition, and guarded by an Association in Parliament. Though it is hard to
imagine how the Voluntary one came to be boggled at, after such a Declared
Right in Parliament before, and Oaths of Allegiance taken to it.

And long may He live to Assert the Rights of the People; To administer
Justice, and to retrieve the Honor of Great Britain, by vindicating it from
the Encroachments suffered (not to say consented to) in the late Reigns.

FINIS.
CORRIGENDA.
PAge 3. Line 16. read we are. p. 6. l. 2. r. off. p. 8. l. penult. for
affecting, r. offering at. p. 18. l. 17. r. Sir Henry Spelman. p. 22. l. 8. r.
Aristotle. p. 31. l. 15. r. Government. p. 35. l. 4. r. they. p. 116. l. 8. r.
to make War. p. 118. l. 5. r. n' avoit. p. 123. l. 6. r. ever governed. p. 137.
l. penult. r. souffert. p. 152. l. 27. r. Revenue. p. 153. l. 29. r.
Opiniatrete. p. 160. l. 5. r. Noble. id. l. 24. r. and he. p. 161. l. 5. r.
dimm. p. 180. l. 28. for i, e, r, and even.


