THE Vocal and Instrumental MUSIC OF THE PROPHETESS, OR THE HISTORY OF
DIOCLESIAN.

COMPOSED By Henry Purcell, Organist of Their MAJESTY'S Chapel, and of St.
Peter's Westminster.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for the Author, and are to be Sold by John
Carr, at his Shop at the Middle Temple Gate near Temple-Barr. MDCXCI.

To His GRACE CHARLES Duke of Somerset, Earl of HARTFORD, Viscount Beauchamp of
HATCH, Baron Seymour of TROWBRIDGE, Chancellor of the University of CAMBRIDGE,
Lord High Steward of CHICHESTER, And Knight of the most Noble Order of the
GARTER.
YOUR Grace has been pleased so particularly to favor the Composition of the
Music in Dioclesian, that from thence I have been encouraged to this
presumption of Dedicating not only It, but also the unworthy Author of it to
Your Protection. All Arts and Sciences have received their first encouragement
from Great Persons, and owe their Propagation and Success to Their esteem: like
some sort of Fruit Trees, which being of a tender Constitution, and delicate in
their Nature, require the shadow of the Cedar to shield their Infancy from
Blites and Storms.

Music and Poetry have ever been acknowledged Sisters, which walking hand in
hand, support each other; As Poetry is the harmony of Words, so Music is that
of Notes: and as Poetry is a Rise above Prose and Oratory, so is Music the
exaltation of Poetry. Both of them may excel apart, but sure they are most
excellent when they are joined, because nothing is then wanting to either of
their Perfections: for thus they appear like Wit and Beauty in the same Person.
Poetry and Painting have arrived to their perfection in our own Country: Music
is yet but in its Nonage, a forward Child, which gives hope of what it may be
hereafter in England, when the Masters of it shall find more Encouragement.
It Is now learning Italian, which is its best Master, and studying a little of
the French Air, to give it somewhat more of Gayety and Fashion. Thus being
farther from the Sun, we are of later Growth than our Neighbor Countries, and
must be content to shake off our Barbarity by degrees. The present Age seems
already disposed to be refined, and to distinguish betwixt wild Fancy, and a
just, numerous Composition. So far the Genius of Your Grace has already
prevailed on Us: Many of the Nobility and Gentry have followed Your Illustrious
Example in the Patronage of Music. Nay even our Poets begin to grow ashamed of
their harsh and broken Numbers, and promise to file our uncouth Language into
smoother Words.

Once more, therefore, I presume to offer My Self and this Composition with all
humility to Your Grace's Protection, at least till I can redeem so mean a
Present by One which may better deserve Your Acceptance. Be pleased to pardon
my Ambition, which had no other means to obtain the Honor of being made known
to You, but only this. The Town, which has been so indulgent to my first
Endeavors in this kind, has encouraged me to proceed in the same Attempt; and
Your Favor to this Trifle will be a good Omen not only to the Success of the
Next, but also to all the future Performances of

Your Grace's most Obedient and most Obliged Servant, HENRY PURCELL

First Music.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Second Music.
^1 Trumpet.

^2 Trumpet.

^1 Hautboy.

^2 Hautboy.

^Tener Hautboy.

^1 Violin.

^2 Violin.

^Tener Violin.

^Bassoon.

^Base Violin.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Slow.

^

^

^Slow.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

The First Song in the Second Act, just after Diocles has killed Aper.
^

^Prelude.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Play soft.

^Play soft.

^Play soft.

^

^Gr -- eat -- Di -- o -- cles, -- great -- Di -- o -- cles, the -- Boar has --

^

^

^

^Kill'd which did in -- fest -- the -- Land; What heart is not with Rap --
ture -- filled? --

^

^

^

^

^Who can his -- joys -- command? down, -- down, -- down, down, the bloody --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Vil -- lain -- falls, down, -- down, down, down the bloody -- Vil -- lain
falls. -- Hated, Con -- temn'd

^

^

^

^

^ of -- all, -- and now -- now -- the Emp'ror's -- Spi -- rit Calls -- for
rites -- of --

^

^

^

^Chorus. (Faster time.)

^Chorus. (Faster time.)

^Chorus. (Faster time.)

^Chorus.

^Sing Io's Sing Io's Chorus.

^Sing Io's Sing Io's Chorus.

^Sing Io's Sing Io's Praise the Chorus.

^Funerall Sing Io's Sing Io's Praise the Chorus. (Faster time.)

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Praise the Thun -- d'ring Jove, --

^Praise the Thun -- d'ring Jove, Praise -- the Thun --

^Thun -- d'ring Jove, -- Praise the Thun -- d'ring Jove, --

^Thun -- d'ring -- Jove, -- Praise the Thun --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^praise the Thun -- dring Jove

^dring Jove, praise the Thun -- dring Jove,

^praise the Thundering, Thundering Jove, the Thundering Jove,

^ -- dring, Thundering Jove,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ Pallas and Venus share since the all charming Queen of Love in -- spires the
God of

^ Pallas and Venus share since the all charming Queen of Love in -- spires the
God of

^ Pallas and Venus share since the all charming Queen of Love in -- spires the
God of

^ Pallas and Venus share since the all charming Queen of Love in -- spires the
God of

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^War, since the all-charming Queen of Love in -- spires

^War, since the all-charming Queen of Love in -- spires

^War, since the all-charming Queen of Love in -- spires

^War, since the all-charming Queen of Love inspires

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ the God of War.

^ the God of War.

^ the God of War.

^ the God of War.

^

^

^

^

^

^Slow.

^For 2 Flutes.

^Vers. Charon the peace -- full Shade -- in -- vites, --

^

^

^

^ Charon the peace -- full Shade, the peace -- full -- Shade -- in -- vites,
he --

^

^

^

^hastes -- to waft him -- over, he -- hastes -- to waft him over, --

^

^

^

^give him all, give him all, -- all -- all necessary Rites; give him all, give
him all ne -- ces -- sa -- ry --

^

^

^

^Rites; -- to -- land -- him on the -- shore. --

^

^Sound, sound all -- your In -- struments of -- War, -- Fifes, Trum -- pets

^

^(Symphony for Trumpets and Violins.) -- Tim -- brells -- play --

^

^1 Trumpet.

^2 Trumpet.

^1 Violin.

^2 Violin.

^Very slow.

^

^quick.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure share, And Bless this -- happy, --
happy, -- happy --

^Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure share, And Bless this -- happy, --
happy, -- happy --

^

^day; Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure -- share, And Bless this --
happy, -- happy, -- happy --

^day; Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure -- share, And Bless this --
happy, -- happy, -- happy --

^

^day; -- this -- happy, -- happy, -- happy -- day; -- this -- happy, -- happy,
--

^day; this happy, -- happy, -- happy, -- happy -- day; this -- happy, --
happy, -- happy, --

^

^happy, -- happy -- day. --

^happy, -- happy -- day. --

^

Cho. for Voices only.

^Cho. Sound all -- your In -- struments. Sound all -- your In -- struments.

^Cho. Sound all -- your In -- struments.

^Sound all -- your In -- struments.

^

Flourish with all the Instruments in C faut Key.

^Cho. Violins and Hautboys.

^

^

^Cho. Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure -- share, And Bless this --
happy, -- happy, -- happy --

^Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure -- share, And Bless this -- happy, --
happy, -- happy --

^Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure -- share, And Bless this -- happy, --
happy, -- happy --

^Cho. Let -- all Man -- kind the -- Pleasure -- share, And Bless this --
happy, -- happy, -- happy --

^

Soft. 2 Trumpets. Soft.

^Soft. Loud.

^Soft. Loud.

^Soft. Loud.

^

^day; -- Let all Man -- kind the

^day; -- Let all Man -- kind the

^day; -- Let all Man -- kind the

^day; -- Let all Man -- kind the

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Pleasure Pleasure -- share, -- and Bless this hap -- py, hap -- py day; --

^Pleasure share, and Bless this hap -- py, -- happy -- day; -- and -- Bless
this happy, this --

^Pleasure share, and Bless this -- happy, -- happy -- day; -- and -- Bless
this -- happy, --

^Pleasure share, -- and -- Bless this hap -- py, -- hap -- py -- day; --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ -- this -- happy, -- happy, -- happy -- day; -- And -- Bless this --

^happy, -- happy, -- happy, -- happy -- day; this -- happy, -- happy, -- happy
-- day; --

^happy, -- happy, -- happy, -- happy -- day; this -- happy, -- happy, -- happy
-- day; --

^ -- this -- happy, -- hap -- py -- day; -- this -- happy, --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^happy, -- happy -- day; -- this -- happy, -- hap -- py, -- hap -- py -- day.

^And -- Bless this happy, this happy, -- happy, -- hap -- py, -- hap -- py --
day.

^And Bless this -- happy, -- happy, -- happy, -- hap -- py -- hap -- py -- day.

^happy, -- happy -- day; -- this -- hap -- py, -- hap -- py -- day.

^

^

^

The second Song, in the same Act.
^Prelude for Hautboys.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Let the Soldi -- ers re -- joyce,

^

^ with a Gene -- rall Voice, and the Se -- nate new ho -- nours de -- cree 'em;

^

^

^Who at his Armies Head, struck the Fell Mon -- ster Dead: and so bold -- ly,
so bold -- ly,

^

^Chorus. and brave -- ly did free 'em.

^Chorus.

^Violins and Hautboys.

^

^

^Re -- joyce -- with a Ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice, re -- joyce --

^Re -- joyce -- with a Ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice, re -- joyce --

^Re -- joyce -- re -- joyce -- re -- joyce re -- joyce re -- joyce -- re --

^

^

^

^

^

^ -- with -- a -- ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice -- re -- joyce --

^ -- with -- a -- ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice -- re -- joyce --

^ -- joyce -- with -- a -- ge -- ne -- rall Voice re -- joyce -- re --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ -- with a -- ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice, -- re -- joyce --

^ -- with a -- ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice, -- re -- joyce --

^ -- joyce -- re -- joyce with a -- ge -- ne -- rall -- Voice, -- re -- joyce
--

^

^

^

^

^

^

^soft

^soft

^soft

^soft -- with a ge -- ne -- ral Voice, with a ge -- ne -- ral Voice,

^soft re -- joyce -- with a general voice, with a general voice.

^soft -- with a ge -- neral Voice, with a ge -- ne -- ral Voice,

^soft Retornella.

^

^First Trumpet.

^Second Trumpet.

^First Hautboy.

^Second Hautboy.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^To Mars let 'em raise, and their Em -- pe -- rors -- praise, a Tro -- phy, a
Tro -- phy of the

^To Mars let 'em raise, and their Em -- perors praise, a Tro -- phy, a Tro --
phy of the

^To Mars let 'em raise, and their Em -- pe -- rors praise, a Tro -- phy of the

^

^Ar -- mies own making, To Max -- i -- mian too, some Ho -- nours are due, who

^Armies own making, To Max -- i -- mian too, some Ho -- nours are due, who

^Armies own making, To Max -- i -- mian too, some Honors are due, who

^First

^Second Chorus again with the Retor following. joined in the brave, in the
brave under -- taking.

^Chorus again with the Retor following. joined in the brave, in the brave un
-- der -- taking.

^Chorus again with the Retor following. joined in the brave, in the brave un
-- der -- taking.

^Chorus again with the Retor following.

^

^Symphony for Flutes.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^since the toils and the ha -- zards of War,s at an end.

^

^

^

^

^

^the pleasures of Love -- should succeed 'em the fair should pre -- sent what
the Se -- na -- tors

^

^

^

^send and complete what they have de -- creed 'em, and complete, complete what
-- they have de -- creed 'em.

^

^

^

^with Dances and Songs, with Tam -- bours and Flutes, let the Maids show their

^

^

^

^Joy -- as they

^

^

^

^meet 'em, with

^

^

^

^Dances and Songs, with Tam -- bours and Flutes, let the Maids show their Joy
--

^

^

^

^ -- as they meet 'em,

^

^

^

^with Cimbals and Harp, with Viols and Lutes let the Husband and true Lo --
verse greet 'em, let the

^

^

^

^Husbands and true Lo -- verse greet him, with Cimbals and Harps, with Vi --
als and

^

^

^

^Lutes, let the Husbands, let the Husbands, and true Lovers greet 'em, with

^

^

^

^Sym -- balls and Harps, with Vi -- ols and Lutes, let the Husbands and

^

^

^

^true Lo -- verse greet 'em, let the Hus -- bands and true Lo -- verse greet 'em,

^

^

^

^with Cymballs and Harps, with Viols and Lutes, let the

^

^

^

^Hus -- band, let the Hus -- band, and true Lov -- ers greet them.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Let the Priests with pro --

^Let the Priests with processions, the Hero at --

^Let the Priests with processions, the He -- to at -- tend, the

^Let the Priests with processions, the He -- to attend, -- the

^

^

^

^

^

^cessions, the Hero, the He -- to at -- tend, Let the Priests with
processions, the

^ -- Let the Priests with pro -- cessions, the He -- to at -- tend,

^Hero at -- tend, Let the Priests with processions, the Hero at -- tend,

^He -- to, the He -- to at -- tend, Let the Priests with pro -- cessions, the
Hero at --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^He -- to attend, and Statues erect to his glo -- ry.

^Statues erect, and Statues e -- rect to his glory. Let the smoke from the

^ -- tend, and Statues e -- rect to his glory.

^tend, and Statues e -- rect to his glory.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Let the smoke from the Altars to

^Altars to Heaven as -- cend, Let the smoke to

^Let the smoke from the Altars to Heaven as -- cend, to Heaven as -- cend, to

^Let the smoke from the Altars to Heaven as -- cend to

^

^

^

^

^

^Chorus. All the Violins and Hautboys.

^All the Instruments.

^All the Tenors.

^Chorus. Heaven as -- cend. All sing, all sing great,

^Chorus. Heaven as -- cend. All sing, all sing great,

^Chorus. Heaven as -- cend. All sing, all sing great,

^Chorus. Heaven as -- cend. All sing, all sing great,

^Chorus.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^great Di -- o -- cles story, All sing, all sing great, great

^great Di -- o -- cles story, All sing, all sing great, great

^great Di -- o -- cles story, All sing, all sing great, great

^great Di -- o -- cles story, All sing, all sing great, great

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ Di -- o -- cles story, all sing great, great Di -- o -- cles story.

^ Di -- o -- cles story, all sing great, great Di -- o -- cles story.

^ Di -- o -- cles sto -- ry all sing great, great Di -- o -- cles sto -- ry.

^ Di -- o -- cles- story, all sing great, great Di -- o -- cles story.

(Soft Music that is played just before the Dance of Furies.)
^

^

^

^

^

^Dance.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Second Actt Tune.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Two in one upon a Ground. Chaconne for Flutes, in the Third Act.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

The Chair Dance.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

(Prelude for Hautboys.)
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Song.

^What shall I do, to show how much I Love her, How many Millions of

^

^

^sighs can suf -- fize; That which wins others hearts, ne -- ver can move her,

^

^Those common me -- thods of Love she will des -- pise. I will Love more than Man

^

^er'e Loved be -- fore me: Gaze on her all the day, and melt all the

^

^Night. Till for her own sake, at last she will Im -- plore me; to Love her

^

^Prelude again less, to pre -- serve our de -- light.

^and so go on.

II.
Since gods themselves, could not ever be Loving,
Men must have breathing Recruits for new Joys;
I wish my Love could be ever Improving,
The eager Love, more than sorrow destroys.
In fair Aurelia's Arms, leave me expiring,
To be Imbalm'd by the sweets of her breath;
To the last moment I Will, still be desiring;
Never had Hero so glorious a Death.
Third Act Tune.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Soft Music before the Dance in the Fourth Act. Butterfly Dance.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Tune for Trumpets.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Vers Trumpet.

^Sound -- Fame thy Brazen Trumpet, Sound

^

^

^Sound -- Sound -- Sound --

^

^

^ -- thy Brazen Trum -- pet Sound

^

^

^stand, stand in the Cen -- tree, stand in the center of the u -- ni -- verse,

^

^

^ and call, and call --

^

^

^the listening World a round,

^

^

^while we in joy -- full Notes re -- hearse

^

^

^ in Artful Numbers, in Artful Numbers and

^

^

^well cho -- sen Verse Great Di -- o -- cle -- sian's

^

^

^Great -- Di -- o -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry,

^

^

^

^

^Great Di -- o -- clesian's

^

^

^Great -- Di -- o -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry,

^

^

^Great -- Di -- o -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry,

^

^

^

^Cho.

^

^

^

^Let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse Great, Great Di -- o -- clesians Glo
-- ry,

^Let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse Great, Great Di -- o -- clesians Glo
-- ry,

^Let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse Great, Great Di -- o -- clesians
Glory,

^Let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse Great, Great Di -- o -- clesians
Glory,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse,

^let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse,

^let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse,

^let all re -- hearse in lof -- ty Verse,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Great, Great Dio -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry.

^Great, Great Dio -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry.

^Great, Great Di -- o -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry.

^Great, Great Dio -- cle -- sian's Glo -- ry.

^

^

^

^

^First Trumpet.

^Second Trumpet.

^

^

^

^sound his re -- nown, sound his re -- nown,

^sound his re -- nown, sound his re -- nown,

^sound his re -- nown, sound his re -- nown,

^sound his re -- nown, sownd his re -- nown,

^

^

^(Soft.)

^

^

^

^

^sound his re -- nown,

^sound his re -- nown,

^sound, sound his re -- nown,

^sound, sound his re -- nown,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^sound his re -- nown, ad -- vance,

^sound his re -- nown, ad -- vance his

^sound his re -- nown, ad -- vance his Crown:

^sound his re -- nown, ad -- vance his Crown: sound, sound his re -- nown,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ad -- vance his Crown: sound his re -- nown, ad --

^Crown, ad -- vance his Crown: sound his re -- nown, ad --

^ ad -- -- vance his Crown: sound his re -- nown,

^ad -- -- vance his Crown: sound his re -- nown,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ -- vance -- his Crown, ad -- vance his

^ -- vance his Crown, advance his Crown, ad -- vance his

^ad -- vance his Crown, ad -- vance his

^ad -- vance his

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Crown, a -- bove all Monarchs, that ever blessed the Earth: a -- bove all

^Crown, a -- bove all Monarchs, that e're blessed the Earth: a -- bove all

^Crown, a -- bove all Monarchs, that e're blessed the Earth: a -- bove all

^Crown, a -- bove all Monarchs, that e're blessed the Earth: a -- bove all

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Monarchs that e're blessed the Earth. O! O! sacred Fame, O! sacred

^Monarchs that e're blessed the Earth. O! O! sacred Fame, O! sacred

^Monarchs that e're blessed the Earth. O! O! sacred Fame, O! sacred

^Monarchs that e're blessed the Earth. O! O! sacred Fame, O! sacred

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Fame, embalm his name with Honor here, and glo -- ry af -- ter Death.

^Fame, embalm his name with Honor here, and glo -- ry af -- ter Death.

^Fame, embalm his name with Honor here, and glo -- ry af -- ter Death.

^Fame, embalm his name with Honor here, and glo -- ry af -- ter Death.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^All sing his story, all sing his sto -- ry:

^All sing his story, all sing his sto -- ry:

^All sing his story, all sing his sto -- ry:

^All sing his story, all sing his sto -- ry:

^

^

^

^(Soft.)

^(Soft.)

^

^

^

^All sing his sto -- ry,

^All sing his sto -- ry,

^All sing his story, Raise,

^All sing his story, Raise,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Raise, raise -- his Glory; raise,

^Raise, raise -- his Glo -- ry

^raise -- his Glory raise, raise --

^raise -- his Glory, all, all sing his sto -- ry; raise, raise --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^raise his Glo -- ry; all sing his sto -- ry, raise, raise --

^raise his Glo -- ry; all sing his sto -- ry, raise, --

^ -- his Glo -- ry; all sing his sto -- ry, raise,

^ -- his Glo -- ry; all sing his sto -- ry,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ -- his Glo -- ry; Raise, raise his Glory, a bove all

^raise his Glo -- ry; raise, raise his Glory, a bove all

^raise his Glory; raise, raise -- his Glory a bove all

^Raise, raise -- his Glory; a bove all

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Monarchs, that ever blessed the Earth; a -- bove all Monarchs, that ever blessed
the Earth.

^Monarchs, that e're blessed the Earth; a -- bove all Monarchs, that e're blessed
the Earth.

^Monarchs, that e're blessed the Earth; a -- bove all Monarchs, that e're blessed
the Earth.

^Monarchs, that e're blessed the Earth; a -- bove all Monarchs, that e're blessed
the Earth.

^

^

^

Fourth Act Tune.
^

^Two Trumpets.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Country Dance, in the Fifth Act.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Masque in the same Act.
^Prelude for Violins only.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^(Soft.) (Chorus.)

^

^Vers. (Chorus) Enter Cupid, and Sings. (Chorus)

^Vers. Call the Nymphs, and the Fawns, from the Woods; the Nymphs, and the
Fawns, from the

^the Nymphs, and the Fawns, from the

^(Chorus.) the Nymphs, and the Fawns, from the

^the Nymphs, and the Fawns, from the

^

^

^

^

^

^Vers. (Chorus.)

^

^Vers. (Chorus)

^Vers. (Chorus.)

^VVoods. Call the Naids, and Gods of the Floods; the Naids, and

^VVoods. The Naids, and

^Woods. The Naids, and

^Woods. The Naids, and

^

^

^

^

^Vers. (Chorus.) Verse.

^

^Vers. (Chorus.) Verse.

^Vers. (Chorus.) Verse.

^Gods of the Floods. Call Flora; and Co -- mus; Flora, and Comus. Si --

^Gods of the Floods. Flora, and Comus.

^Gods of the Floods. Flora, and Comus.

^Gods of the Floods. Flora, and Comus.

^

^

^

^

^(Chorus.) Verse.

^

^(Chorus.) Verse.

^(Chorus.) Verse.

^ -- lenus, and Momus; Si -- lenus, and Momus. Call Bachus and his Merry merry
merry

^ Si -- lenus, and Momus.

^ Si -- lenus, and Momus

^ Si -- lenus, and Momus.

^

^

^

^

^(Chorus.)

^

^(Chorus.)

^(Chorus)

^merry, merry Fellows. Bacchus, and his merry merry, merry merry, merry

^ Bacchus, and his merry merry, merry merry, mer -- ry

^ Bacchus, and his merry merry, merry merry, mer -- ry

^ Bacchus, and his merry merry, merry merry, mer -- ry

^

^

^

^

^Vers. (Chorus.)

^

^Vers. (Chorus.)

^Vers. (Chorus.)

^fellows. Sil -- vanus, and Ce -- res, and Tellus, Sil -- vanus, and Cerus, and

^fellows. Sil -- vanus, and Ce -- res, and

^fellows. Sil -- vanus, and Ce -- res, and

^fellows. Sil -- vanus, and Ce -- res, and

^

^

^

^

^Vers.

^

^Vers.

^Vers.

^ Tellus. all leave for a while their a -- bodes, all leave for a

^ Tellus.

^ Tellus.

^ Tellus.

^

^

^

^

^(Chorus.)

^

^(Chorus.)

^(Chorus.)

^while their a -- bodes, all leave for a -- while their a -- bodes.

^all leave for a -- while their a -- bodes.

^all leave for a -- while their a -- bodes.

^all leave for a -- while their a -- bodes.

^

^Let the Graces, and Pleasures re -- pair, with the

^

^youthfull, the gay, the witty, and Fair. Let the Graces, and Pleasues re --
pair,

^ with the youthful, the Gay, the Wit -- ty, and Fair. May all harmless de --
lights,

^

^ Happy days and kind Nights, for ever attend this blessed Pair. May all

^

^harmless delights, Happy days and kind Nights, for ever attend this blessed
Pair. May all

^

^harmless delights Happy days and kind Nights for ever attend this blessed Pair.

^

^Come, come away, Come, come away, no de -- lay,

^Come, come away, Come, come a -- way,

^

^ no de -- lay, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no de -- lay,

^ no de -- lay, no de -- lay, no, no, no, no, no de -- lay, no, no, no, de --
lay,

^

^ come away, come away come, come a -- way, come, come a -- way.

^ come away come a -- way, come, come a -- way, come, come a -- way.

^

^All know it is his will, it is his will, then all, then all, show their

^All know it is his will, it is his will, then all then all,

^

^Skill; then all, then all, -- show their Skill.

^shew their Skill; then all, -- show their Skill. To grace

^

^To gracs loves Tri -- umph -- ing day, to

^Loves Tri -- umph -- ing day, to grace Loves Tri -- -- umph -- ing

^

^grace Loves Tri -- umph -- ing day.

^ day.

^

Prelude for Violins, and Hautboyes.
^Both. Haut.

^Haut.

^

^

^Violin.

^Violin.

^

^

^Haut. Violin. Haut.

^Haut. Violin. Haut.

^

^

^Violin. Haut. Violin.

^Violin. Haut. Violin.

^

^

^Haut. Both.

^Haut. Both.

^

^

^Chorus.

^Chorus.

^Chorus.

^Chorus.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Cho. Be -- hold O mighty'st, O mighty'st of Gods, be -- hold, be -- hold, at

^Be -- hold, be -- hold O mighty'st, O mighty'st, of Gods, be -- -- hold,

^Be -- hold O mighty'st, O mighty'st, of Gods, be -- hold, be -- -- hold,

^Be -- hold, be -- hold, O mighty'st O mighty'st, of

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^thy com -- mand, at thy com -- mand we come!

^ at thy com -- mand, we come!

^ Be -- hold at thy com -- mand, we come!

^Gods, be -- hold at thy com -- mand, we come!

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^The gay, the sad, the Grave, the Glad, the

^The gay, the sad, the Grave, the Glad, the

^The gay, the sad, the Grave, the Glad, the

^The gay, the sad, the Grave, the Glad, the

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^youth -- full and the Old; All

^youthfull and the Old; All

^youth -- full and the Old; All

^youthfull and the Old; All

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^meet, all meet, all meet as at the day of Doom.

^meet, all meet, all meet as at the day of Doom.

^meet, all meet, all meet as at the day of Doom.

^meet, all meet, all meet as at the day of Doom.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Be -- hold, O mighty'st, O

^Be -- hold,

^Be -- hold, O mighty'st, O

^Be -- hold, Be -- hold,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^mighty'st of Gods, be -- hold, be -- hold at thy com -- mand, be -- hold at

^O mighty'st, O mighty'st of Gods be -- hold, be -- hold at

^mighty'st of Gods, be -- hold, be -- hold at thy com -- mand, at

^O mighty'st, O mighty'st of Gods be -- hold, be -- hold at

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^thy com -- mand we Come.

^thy com -- mand we Come.

^thy com -- mand we Come.

^thy com -- mand we Come.

^

^

^

^

^

^Paspe.

^(Trumpet.)

^(Trumpet.)

^(Violin)

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Oh the sweet de -- lights of Love, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh the sweet de -- --
lights

^Oh the sweet de -- lights of Love, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh the sweet de -- --
lights

^

^ of Love, who who would live, who, who would live and not enjoy -- them?

^ of Love, who would live, who who would live, would live and not enjoy them?

^

^I'de re -- fuse the Throne of Jove, should power -- or ma -- jesty, should

^I'de re -- fuse the Throne of Jove, should power --

^

^ First strain again. power -- or ma -- jes -- ty de -- stroy them.

^ First strain again. -- or ma -- jes -- ty de -- stroy-e'm.

^ First strain again.

^Give me, give me, give me doubts, or give me, give me fears, give me, give
me, give me jealou -- sies

^Give me, give me, give me doubts, or give me, give me fears, give me, give
me, give me jealou -- sies

^

^ and Cares: But let Love, let Love remove them, but let Love re -- -- move

^ and Cares: But let Love, but let Love -- re -- -- move

^

^ End with the First strain. them, I approve them, I ap -- prove them, I approve
them.

^ End with the First strain. them, I ap -- prove them, I ap -- prove them, I --
approve them.

^ End with the First strain.

^Let Monarchs fight for power and Fame, with noise and Arms

^

^mankind a -- larm, Let daily fears their qui -- et fright and cares dis -- --
turb

^

^ their rest by Night; Let Monarchs fight for power and

^

^Fame, with noise and Arms Man -- kind a -- larm, greatness shall never

^

^my soul In -- thrall, give me con -- tent and I have all, greatness shall

^

^ne'er my soul In -- thrall, give me con -- tent and I have all.

^(Chorus.)

^

^(Chorus)

^(Chorus.)

^Here mighty Love to the I call, Give me As -- tree -- a

^Here mighty Love to the I call, Give me As -- tree -- a (Chorus.)

^Here mighty Love to the I call, Give me As -- tree -- a

^Here mighty Love to the I call, Give me As -- tree -- a

^

^

^

^

^and I have all; That soft that sweet that Charming Fair,

^and I have all; That soft that sweet that Charming Fair,

^and I have all; That soft that sweet that Charming Fair,

^and I have all; That soft that sweet that Charming Fair,

^

^

^

^

^

^First strain again.

^First strain again.

^First strain again.

^First strain again. Fate cannot hurt whilst I have her. Shes wealth and

^First strain again. Fate cannot hurt whilst I have her. Shes wealth and

^First strain again. Fate cannot hurt whilst I have her. Shes wealth and

^First strain again. Fate canont hurt whilst I have her. Shes wealth and

^First strain again.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^power, and on -- ly, she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me: she is wealth
and

^power, and on -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me: she is wealth
and

^power, and on -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me: she is wealth
and

^power, and on -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me: she is wealth
and

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^power, and on -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me.

^power, and no -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me.

^power, and on -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me.

^power, and on -- ly she, As -- tree -- a's all the world to me.

^

^Prelude for Hautboyes.

^

^

Enter two Bacchanalls and Sing.

^Make room, make room, make

^Make

^

^room, make room, make room, make room, make room, make room,

^room, make room, make room, make room, make room, make room for the

^

^for the great God, the great God of Wine: the

^great God, the great God, the great God of Wine:

^

^ Bacchanalls come with Liquar divine, with Liquar divine, make room, make
room, make

^the Bacchanalls come with Liquar divine: make room, make

^

^room, make room, make room for the great God, the great --

^room, make room, make room for the great Gad, the great God, the great --

^

^ -- God of Wine. RETOR.

^ -- God of Wine.

^

^ (Play soft.)

^ Bacchus.

^I'm Here, I Am Here, I Am Here with my jol -- ly, jol -- ly

^

^

^

^

^Jol -- ly Crew come near, come, come

^

^we'll re -- joyce,

^we'll re -- joyce, re -- joyce,

^near, come near, come, come near, come near, come, come near we will re --
joyce, re -- joyce, re -- joyce,

^

^ re -- joyce, re -- joyce, we'll re -- joyce, re -- joyce, we'll re -- joyce,
we'll re -- joyce --

^ re -- joyce as well as you, we'll re -- joyce, we'll re -- joyce --

^rejoyce as well as you; we'll re -- joyce, re -- joyce, re -- joyce --

^

^

^

^as well as you.

^ -- as well as you.

^as well as you. Give to ev' -- ry one his

^

^then all together clash, clash, clash, then all to -- gether

^then all together, clash, clash, clash, then all together,

^glass, give, give to every one his glass, then all together clash; clash,
clash, then all together

^

^

^

^clash, clash, clash, clash, clash, then all-to -- gether clash, clash, clash,
then all to -- gether

^clash, clash, clash, clash, clash, then all-to -- gether clash, clash, clash,
then all to -- gether

^clash, clash, clash, clash, clash, then all to -- gether clash, clash, clash,
then all together

^

^

^

^clash, clash, clash, drink, drink, drink,

^clash, clash, clash, drink, drink, drink, drink and despise the

^clash, clash, clash, drink, drink, drink,

^

^

^

^

^

^Drink and de -- spise the Po -- li -- tick Ass, drink, drink, drink, drink
drink and de -- spise the

^Po -- li -- tick Ass, drink, drink, drink, drink, drink and de -- spise the
Po -- li -- tick Ass, drink

^drink and despise the Po -- li -- tick Ass, drink, drink, drink, drink

^

^

^

^Po -- litick Ass, drink, drink, drink, drink and de -- spise, drink, drink
and de -- spise the Po -- li -- tick

^drink, drink, drink, drink and de -- spise the Po -- li -- tick Ass, de --
spise the Po -- li -- tick

^drink and de -- spise the po -- li -- tick Ass, drink, drink and de -- spise,
de -- spise the po -- li -- tick

^

^Cho.

^Cho.

^Cho.

^The migh -- ty,

^Ass. The mighty, mighty,

^Ass. The migh -- ty, mighty

^Ass. The migh -- ty, mighty

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^mighty, mighty Jove who rules a -- bove never troubled, never troubled his Head
with much

^mighty, mighty Jove, who rules a -- bove never troubled, never troubled his
Head with much

^ Jove, the mighty Jove who rules a -- bove, never troubled, never troubled his
Head with much

^ Jove -- who rules a -- bove never troubled, never troubled his Head with much

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^think -- ing, he took off his Glass, he took off his Glass, was kind, kind

^thinking, he took off his Glass, he took off his Glass, was kind to his Lass,
was kind, kind,

^think -- ing, he took off his Glass, he took off his Glass, was kind, was
kind to his Lass, was

^think -- ing, he took off his Glass, he took off his Glass, was kind, was

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^kind to his Lass -- and gained Heaven by Love, -- and gained Heaven, gained
Heaven by Love and good Drinking.

^kind to his Lass, and gained Heaven, gained Heaven by Love, and gained Heaven
-- by Love and good Drinking.

^kind to his Lass and gained Heaven, gained Heaven by Love, and gained Heaven,
gained Heaven by Love, by Love and good Drinking.

^kind to his Lass -- and gained Heaven by Love, -- and gained Heaven, gained
Heaven by Love and good Drinking.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Still I Am wishing, still -- de -- sir -- ing, still she is gi -- ving,

^

^I -- re -- quir -- ing: Yet each gift I think too small,

^

^still -- the more -- I am -- pre -- sent -- ed, still the less I

^

^am con -- tent -- ed; though she vows she has given me all

^

^RETOR.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

II
Can Drusilla give no more?
Has she lavished all her store?
Must my hopes to nothing fall?
O you know not half your treasure;
Give me more, give over measure,
Yet you can never, never give me all.
Canaries.
^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^A Dialogue. Tell me why, tell me why my Charm -- ing fair,

^

^Tell me why, tell me why you thus -- de -- ny me; Can dis -- pair,

^

^can dis -- pair, or these sighs and looks of care make Co -- rin -- na e --
ver

^

^fly -- me, e -- ver fly me? Tell me why, tell me

^

^why, my Charm -- ing fair, tell me why you thus de -- ny me.

^

^O Mir -- ti -- lo you are -- a -- bove me, I re -- spect but

^

^dare not Love ye. She who hears, in -- clines to sin, who

^

^par -- lies, half gives up the Town, and ra -- ve -- nous Love soon

^

^en -- ters in, when once the out work's bea -- ten down:

^

^Then my sighs and tears will not move ye, no, no, no, no,

^

^no, Mir -- ti -- lo, you are a -- bove me; I res -- pect, but

^

^dare not Love ye: no, no, no, no, no, Mir -- ti -- lo,

^

^you'r a -- bove me; I re -- spect, but dear not Love ye:

^(Soft.)

^I re -- spect, but dare not Love ye. Could this love -- ly

^

^charming Maid think Mir -- ti -- lo would de -- ceive her? could Co -- rin --
na

^

^ be a -- fraid, she by him should be be -- tray'd?

^

^No, no, no, no, too well, too well I Love her, there -- fore can -- not

^

^be above her. O, O, O, O, Let Love with Love be paid.

^

^my Heart, my Life, my Heart, my Life, my all I give her: Let me

^

^now, now, now, Let me now, now, now, Ah! now, now, now re -- ceive her. Oh!
how

^

^glad -- ly we be -- leive, when the Heart is too too willing.

^

^Can that look, that face de -- ceive? can he take de -- light in

^

^Killing? Ah! I dye, Ah! I dye, I dye if you de -- ceive

^

^ me. Yet I will, I will, yet I will, I will be -- leive ye. Ah! I

^

^die, Ah! I die, if you de -- ceive me! Yet I will, I

^

^will, Yet, yet I will, I will, Yet, yet I will, I will be -- leive ye.

^

^Cho. Oh! how glad -- ly we be -- leive, when the Heart is too too

^Cho. Oh! how glad -- ly we be -- leive, when the Heart is too too

^

^willing: Can that Look, that Face de -- ceive? Can he take de -- light

^willing Can that Look, that Face de -- ceive? Can he take de -- light

^

^

^

^ in kill -- ling? Ah! I dye, Ah! I dye, I

^ in kill -- ling? Ah! I dye, Ah! I

^

^dye if you de -- ceive me! Yet I will, I will, yet I will, I will be -- --
leive ye:

^dye if you de -- ceive me! Yet I will, I will, I will be -- -- leive

^

^ Ah! I dye, Ah! I dye, if you de -- -- ceive

^ ye: Ah! I dye, I dye if you de -- -- ceive

^

^ me! Yet I will, I will, Yet, yet I will, I will, Yet, yet I will,

^ me! Yet I will, I will, Yet, yet I will, I will, yet I will,

^

^I will be -- leive ye. Dance.

^I will be -- leive ye.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^All our Days and our Nights, shall be spent in de -- lights, it is a tribute,
a

^

^tribute that is due to the Young; Let the ug -- ly and old, the

^

^sick -- ly and cold, think the pleasures, the pleasures of Love last too

^

^long: Let the ug -- ly and old, the sick -- ly and cold, think the

^

^pleasures, the pleasures of Love last too long. Be --

^

^

^

^Cho.

^

^Cho.

^Cho. be gone, be gone, be gone im -- -- por -- tu -- nate

^be gone, be gone, be gone im -- por -- tu -- nate reason, be --

^Cho. gone, be gone, be gone im -- por -- tu -- nate reason, be gone, be gone,
be gone,

^be

^Cho.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ reason, be gone; be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone,

^gone; be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone, be --

^be gone, be gone, be gone im -- por -- tu -- nate rea -- son,

^ -- gone, be gone, be gone im -- por -- tu -- nate rea -- son, be gone, be
gone, be --

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ -- be gone, be gone, be gone, be gone im -- por -- tu -- nate rea -- son,
wisdom and

^ -- gone im -- por -- tu -- nate rea -- son, im -- por -- tunate reason,

^be gone, be -- gone im -- por -- tu -- nate rea -- son,

^ -- gone, be gone, be gone, be gone im -- por -- tu -- nate rea -- son,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^councel is now out of sea -- son; now, now, now, now,

^wisdom and council is now out of sea -- son; now, now, now,

^wisdom and council is now out of sea -- son, is

^wisdom and council is now out, is

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^now out of sea -- son; wisdom and council is now out of season, now

^now out, wisdom and council is now out, is now out of season; now,

^now out of sea -- son, now, now, now out of sea -- son;

^now out of sea -- son; now, now, now out, wisdom and

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^now, now, now, now out of sea -- son.

^now, now, now, now out of sea -- son.

^wisdom and council is now out, is now out of sea -- son.

^councel is now out of sea -- son, is now out of sea -- son.

^

^Dance.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Tryumph Vic -- to -- rious

^

^Tryumph Vic -- to -- rious Love,

^Tryumph Vic -- to -- rious Love,

^Love, Tri -- umph

^

^Tri -- umph over the U -- niverse;

^Tri -- umph over the U -- niverse;

^ over the U -- niverse; the

^

^the great -- est He -- ro's bow to thee, all, all, all na -- ture

^the great -- est He -- ro's bow to thee, all, all, all na -- ture

^great -- est He -- ro's great -- est Hero's bow to thee, all, all, all na --
ture

^

^owns thy De -- i -- ty: all na -- ture owns -- thy De -- i -- ty. Tri --

^owns thy De -- i -- ty; all nature owns thy De -- i -- ty. Tri -- -- umph

^owns thy De -- i -- ty: all nature owns thy De -- i -- ty. Tri -- -- umph

^ --

^ Vic -- torious Love, Triumph, triumph, Triumph over the U -- ni -- -- verse.

^ Vic -- torious Love, Triumph, triumph, Triumph over the U -- ni -- -- verse.

^ -- umph, triumph, Triumph over the U -- ni -- -- verse.

^

^

^

^

^

^1 Trumpet.

^2 Trumpet.

^1 Hautboy.

^2 Hautboy.

^Tenor Hautboy.

^1 Violin.

^2 Violin.

^Tenor Violin.

^ -- verse.

^ -- verse.

^ -- verse.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Triumph Vic -- to -- rious

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^triumph Vic -- to -- -- rious

^triumpht Vic -- to -- -- rious

^ Love,

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ love, triumph, triumph, trriumph, ore the U -- ni -- verse.

^ love, triumph, triumph, triumph over the U -- ni -- verse.

^triumph, triumph, triumph over the U -- ni -- verse.

^

^Thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty Jove; have tamed all-

^Thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty Jove; have tamed, have

^thou have tamed, have

^

^migh -- ty Jove: thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty

^tam'd all-migh -- ty Jove: thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty

^tam'd all-migh -- ty Jove.

^

^ Jove thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty Jove.

^ Jove; thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty Jove.

^thou have tamed, have tamed all-migh -- ty Jove.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^1 Trumpet.

^2 Trumpet.

^1 Hautboy.

^2 Hautboy.

^Tenor Hautboy.

^1 Violin.

^2 Violin.

^Tenor Violin.

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Tryumph Vic -- to -- -- rious

^Tryumph Vic -- to -- -- rious

^Tryumph Vic -- to -- -- rious

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^ Love, Vic -- to -- -- rious

^ Love, Vic -- to -- -- rious

^ Love, Vic -- to --

^

^1 Trumpet.

^2 Trumpet.

^1 Hautboy.

^2 Hautboy.

^

^

^

^

^ Love.

^ Love.

^ -- Love, Vic -- to -- rious Love.

^

^Cho.

^

^Cho.

^

^Cho. 1 Violin.

^2 Violin.

^Cho. Tenor Violin, and Tenor Haut.

^Cho. Then all, all re -- hearse in lof -- ty

^Cho. Then all, all re -- hearse in lof -- ty

^Then all, all re -- hearse in lof -- ty

^Cho. Then all, all re -- hearse in lof -- ty

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Verse, the glo -- ry of al-migh -- ty Love; from Pole, to Pole, his

^Verse, the glo -- ry of al-migh -- ty Love; from Pole, to Pole, his

^Verse, the glo -- ry of al-migh -- ty Love; from Pole, to Pole, his

^Verse, the glo -- ry of al-migh -- ty Love; from Pole, to Pole, his

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Fame resound; sing it, sing it, the U -- niverse a -- round; From Pole, to
pole, his

^Fame resound; sing it, sing it, the U -- niverse a -- round: From Pole, to
Pole, his

^Fame resound; sing it, sing it, the U -- niverse a -- round: From Pole, to
Pole, his

^Fame resound; sing it, sing it, the U -- niverse a -- round: From Pole, to
Pole, his

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^

^Fame re -- sound; sing it, sing it, the U -- ni -- verse a -- round.

^Fame re -- sound; sing it, sing it, the U -- ni -- verse a -- round.

^Fame re -- sound; sing it, sing it, the U -- ni -- verse a -- round.

^Fame re -- sound; sing it, sing it, the U -- ni -- verse a -- round.

^

FINIS.
Advertisement.
IN order to the speedier Publication of this Book, I employed two several
Printers; but One of them falling into some trouble, and the Volume swelling to
a Bulk beyond my expectation, have been the Occasions of this Delay.

It has been objected that some of the Songs are already common; but I presume
that the Subscribers, upon perusal of the Work, will easily be convinced that
they are not the Essential Parts of it.

I have, according to my Promise in the Proposals, been very careful in the
Examination of every Sheet, and hope the Whole will appear as Correct as any
yet Extant.

My desire to make it as cheap as possibly I could to the Subscribers,
prevailed with me so far above the consideration of my own Interest, that I
find, too late, the Subscription-money will scarcely amount to the Expense of
completing this Edition.

MUSIC Books sold by John Carr at the Middle-Temple-Gate.
THE Musical Entertainment, performed at a Musical Feast on St. Cecilia's Day,
Nov. 22. 1683. The Words made by Mr. Christopher Fishburn, and set to Music,
in two, three, four, and six Parts, by Mr. Henry Purcell, Composer in Ordinary
to His Sacred Majesty, and One of the Organists of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal.

The Second Book of Musical Entertainment, performed at a Musical Feast on St.
Cecilia's Day, Nov. 22. 1684. The Words made by the late ingenious Mr. John
Oldham, Author of the Satyr on the Jesuits, and other excellent Poems; and set
to Music, in two, three, four, and five Parts, by Dr. John Blow, Master of the
Children, and One of the Organists of His Majesty's Chappel-Royal.

An Essay to the Advancement of Music, by T. Salmon, Price 2 s.

The Vocal and Instrumental Music in Psyche, with the Instrumental Music in
the Tempest, Price 2 s.

Melothesia, or, Rules for Playing a continual Bass on the Harpsichord, Price 3
s.

Trepla Concordia, or, New Airs for three Parts for Treble and Bass-Viols.

Easy Lessons on the Gittarr for Young Practitioners, Single, and some of two
Parts, by Seignior Francisco.

Vinculum Societatis, or, The Tie of Good-Company, being a Collection of New
Songs.

Vinculum Societatis, the Second Book.

The Delightful Companion, or, Choice Airs for the Recorder.

Also all Sorts of Musical Instruments and Strings.


