Mr. PVLLEYN's SERMON Preached before the Gentlemen Educated at St. Paul's
SCHOOL, AT St. PAUL's Church, Jan. 25. School/9.

A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting OF THE Gentlemen Educated at St.
Paul's School, AT St. PAUL's Church, January 25. School/9.

Published at the Request of the Stewards.

By JOHN PULLEYN, A. M. And Prebendary of St. PAUL'S.

London, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1699.

TO THE Worthy Gentlemen THE STEWARDS OF St. Paul 's School Feast: Robert
Foul, Gent. John Killingworth, Esquire George Smith, Gent. Samuel Lloyd, Gent.
John Baggs, Esquire William Bonner, Gent.

GENTLEMEN,
THOUGH this Sermon was preached at your earnest Request, yet I could have wished
you would have excused me from the Publication of it. But since you would not
be denied, I should be very well pleased if you share not in the Faults and
Imperfections of this Discourse, which you have now made your own, by espousing
the Subject, and obliging the Preacher to the Printing of it. I have only this
to say for my self, that your Genorous inclinations to do Good, and your
present Resolutions to encourage all the Worthy Gentlemen, who were educated at
St. PAUL's School, to lay a new Foundation of Charity for that Place, led me to
the Subject of this ensuing Discourse. And I hope this will be one Consequent
of it, that this beginning of your Charity will annually be emproved by all
those who bear any Relation or Love to the Place of their Education. And I do
not question, but succeeding Years may raise a noble Superstructure of Charity
from this Groundwork you have so happily laid, for the Honor of our School,
and for the Encouragement of all Arts and Learning.

May all your excellent Designs prosper, your Christian Charity in General
flourish, may you bring Honor to our Established Church and Kingdom, whereof
you are Worthy Members, and may you never want a Blessing and Success in all
your particular Stations and Empolyments; which is the hearty Wish of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Sincere and Humble Servant, John Pulleyn.

ACTS XX. ver. 35. latter part. -- It is more blessed to Give than to Receive.
JOY and Pleasure being the Bright side of human Life, it never touches the
Heart and the Affections with a greater satisfaction, than when it arises from
the Consideration of those many Blessings and Advantages, which result from
Societies and Combinations of Men: And therefore it is not only a delightful
Prospect to me, but, I presume likewise, to every one here present, to behold
the Luster of this Solemn Day; the Design of which is so excellent and
commendable, and all the Circumstances of it so harmonious and beautiful. What
can be more grateful and ravishing, than to see the Children of one fruitful
School, the Offspring of a Pious, Learned, and Religious Founder, to see them
so well united to pay their sincere Gratitude and Honor to the Place of their
Education in the face of the World? And especially to see them begin this their
Gratitude with a dutiful acknowledgment to the great God of Heaven and Earth,
in whom all that is now expected and desired of us This Day ought to terminate?
I was glad (said the Royal Prophet) when Psa. 122. 1.
they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord; glad to see, that
thither the Tribes go up to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord.

And now (Worthy School-Fellows, by whatever Titles you may be dignified above,
or distinguished from one another) since you have met together on this Day,
(and in this most Holy Place) which the Church has set apart to commemorate
the great Apostle St. Paul, to render Thanks for that Blessing of our Education
in that School, which so worthily bears that Name, and which ought likewise
ever to put us in mind of those Benefits and Advantages we have received from
thence, I hope this Religious beginning of our appearance this Day, will give a
happy and a successful Influence upon the following part of your Solemnity,
especially seeing you are resolved to retrieve in some measure the primitive
Feast of Charity, which is in truth the chief and most laudable Design of these
and other the like Anniversary Meetings. A Design so noble and generous in it
self, so beneficial to others, so becoming Men, and so truly Christian, that as
it formerly obtained amongst us, and met with good Encouragement, so I hope
upon the revival of this Feast, it will now be carried on, and cherished and
supported both by the Approbation and Contributions of all pious and
well-meaning Persons.

And therefore in regard all the Benefits and Advantages of a Free and an
Ingenuous Education, was the last Year excellently and fully in this Place, and
upon the same Occasion, declared unto you, I shall wave that Argument of
Discourse, and at present only entertain you with what is as suitable and
proper to all the Purposes of our present Meeting, as will appear from the
Consideration of these Words of our blessed Savior, here cited by St. Paul, --
It is more blessed to give, than to receive.

These Words of the Holy Jesus are not recorded by any of the Evangelists; the
Gospel of St. John, and probably that of St. Mark, being not written when St.
Paul cited them. He must therefore either receive them as an Oral Tradition
from the Apostles, or some first-hand Witnesses, or else from him, who gave him
the first Instruction of his Office, and communicated the Gospel to him; which
he declared, he did not receive it from Men, but was taught it by the Gal. 1.
12.
Revelation of Jesus Christ. But notwithstanding the first conveyers of this
remarkable Sentence are uncertain, yet the Author of them is unquestionable;
the Apostle plainly affirming that they were spoken by our blessed Savior: --
Remember the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed, etc.

Which Words are to be expounded according to the measure and limitation of
other Proverbial Sentences in Scripture, not as if they would hold in that full
latitude, which Grammar and the sound of Words will allow. The Meaning only is,
that the Nature of Things is usually such, that generally speaking, It is more
blessed to give than to receive; Generally speaking, I say, upon a due balance
of Circumstances, and a supposal of right Qualifications. For otherwise, if He
that dispenses his Charity, does it out of a Principle of Interest or
Vainglory, to gain a Reputation, or strengthen a Faction; If he do it to
encroach upon the just Liberties of the Person obliged, to upbraid him with his
Necessities, to betray him into sinful Compliances, and to make him absolutely
obnoxious to his Humor and Inclination, (a grateful Acknowledger and
benevolent Receiver is much to be preferred before such a Donor as this) such
scandalous Reserves as these, are enough to take off the Value, and null the
Obligation of the largest proportion of Alms and Liberality. If a Man should
give away a Kingdom upon such narrow and vicious Considerations, none were
obliged to thank him for it: Because his Good Will did not accompany his Gift:
because he did not design his Neighbors Benefit, but his own: His only Motive
was Vanity, Self-design, or Ill Nature. So that what he parts withal, is
properly but Merchandise and Strategem; and consequently though he gives all his
Goods to the Poor, in the account of God and Reason, he is nothing; he will
never be the better for it, though others may. But then if we consider the
General Event of Things, if we suppose the Giver and the Receiver (purely
considered as such) to be free both from ill Principles and Moral
Indispositions, we shall find the advantage on the Givers side: which will
appear, if we consider the Meaning of the Text more distinctly. -- It is more
blessed, etc.

Which Words may import these two Things, viz.

I. That the Condition of the Giver is more desirable than that of the
Receiver, because it is more satisfactory and secure, and so argues greater
Perfection.

II. That Giving is more commendable than Receiving, because generally
speaking, it is a clearer evidence of a noble and virtuous disposition of Mind.

1. I say the Condition of the Giver is more desirable than that of the
Receiver, because it includes greater Perfection; and that

First, As it is a sign of Sufficiency and Power.

Men generally understand, that the Law of Self-preservation, allows them to
furnish themselves with something more, than the bare Necessities of Life,
before they are obliged to assist their Neighbors; that though they be bound to
love others as well as themselves, yet not better: Nay they think, that if
their Abilities are not large enough to divide between their Neighbors
Necessities and their own, in most Cases they may lawfully prefer themselves:
And without question, if Men stated the Case fairly, and account nothing
Necessary, but what is really so, they might be allowed to practice by this
Opinion. Now, according to this general Apprehension, He that gives to another,
seems to be well provided for himself; he is supposed able to defray the
necessary Charge of Life, and answer the just Importunities of Nature; and not
only so, but to have a redundancy and superfluity of Power to bestow, where he
judges convenient. He that Gives not only looks like a Full Being, whose
Abilities are not wholly exhausted upon it self, but like a swelling River,
which after it has filled the Channel of its own desires, overflows its Banks
to relieve the barrenness of the neighboring Ground. Whereas Receiving implies
Want and Weakness, empty Spaces, and unsatisfied Desires, which a Man cannot
furnish and content himself with, but must depend upon the arbitrary assistance
of others. The Giver resembles a Fruitful Country, which has all the
conveniences of Life within it self, and subsists upon the Product of its own
Growth: whereas he that Receives, must undergo the labor and hazard of a long
Voyage, and the uneasiness of a Foreign Commerce and Conversation.

Besides, Giving includes Choice; for what a Man parts with to another, he has
freedom to retain himself, and consequenly he has the power to assign the
proportion of his own Liberalities, and may reserve as much as he pleases for
his own occasions. And if he takes his Measures too narrow, he is accountable
to none but God Almighty. But the Receiver is not to be his own Carver; he can
neither warrant the Certainty, or the Proportion of a Supply, but must depend
in the Circumstances of his support upon the kindness of his Neighbor. We see
therefore that Power and an approach to Self-sufficiency is a very desirable
Companion to any Being. Power is the greatest active Attribute of God Almighty,
and which provides satisfaction for the rest of his Glorious Perfections. This
is that which makes him the Terror of the Wicked, and the assured Hope and
Refuge of the Righteous. It is his Almighty Arm which brings his just Decrees
into effect, and makes all his Councels stand. By this he is prepared to govern
and judge the World in Righteousness; to repay Vengeance to his Adversaries,
and to save those to the uttermost that come to him. Whereas Wisdom and
Goodness, unassisted by Power, are but vain Speculations and insignificant
Wishes. What does a Fine and Judicious Contrivance signify, if we are not able
to bring it about? What are we the better for foreseeing an Evil, if we cannot
prevent it? To see Reason lie fettered in Impotency, and miscarrying in all its
worthy Designs; to reflect, that Foresight and Consideration, and Thought
cannot divert those Misfortunes it so clearly discovers, must needs be very
afflicting to any rational Being, and turn its Perfection into Misery. So
Goodness, when not seconded by Ability, does but make the Owner uneasy,
because he sees it impossible for him to effect that which he has so great a
mind to. To have strong Affections and Compassions for another, without being
able to give them those Advantages we judge proper for them, or to deliver them
from those Pressures, which we imagine they lie under, does but make a Man
unhappy in his good Nature, and to languish away his generous Being in kind
Wishes, and in ineffectual Desires.

From all which it follows, that in regard the Giver is supposed to have odds
of Power in his hands, upon this account his Condition is more desirable than
that of the Receiver.

2. The Condition of the Giver is more desirable, because the just Liberty and
ingenuous Temper of the Mind is best secured in such Circumstances.

I consess that Rational Beings, much more Christians, ought to be so immovably
Great, as not to be swayed by the Accidents of Life; so humble and resigned to
Providence, as not to raise or sink their Spirits, according to the various
successes of Things below. Yet not withstanding this, we may observe, that this
World has an unhappy Command over the greatest part of Mankind, Men's Minds
usually resembling the Nature and Complexion of their outward Affairs. When Men
believe their Circumstances are well supported, this is apt to inspire them
with generous Thoughts, and raises them to a certain Grandeur of Spirit. It
gives them a considing Air, and a well-assured Deportment; and if they have
but discretion to keep themselves from running into the Extremes of Pride and
Insolence, their Actions are remarkably graceful, by having a noble mixture of
Freedom, and unconcernedness in them. Those who think their Accommodations not
much short of their Desires, and have a competent assurance of continuance in
it, are usually free in their Sentiments and steady in their Resolutions. They
need not be governed by a foreign Fancy and Direction. And therefore when they
are so happy, as to be under the conduct of good Principles, they are in a fair
way to keep them: Whereas on the contrary, an Indigent Condition sinks the Mind
below its native dignity, and makes it anxious ad diffident of it self. It
produces servile Thoughts, ignoble Councels, and unsteady Resolutions. They are
not always allowed to speak and act according to the Dictates of their own
Reason, but have their Humor and Practice prescribed by others. For being
unable to support themselves, and sometimes the favor of those, who are able
to assist, is not to be gained without submitting to unwarrantable Complyances;
They must, if they will succeed, dissemble and flatter, and take no notice of
the Imperfections, applaud sometime, and imitate the Vices of their
Benefactors, otherwise there is no countenance to be expected from them. In
short, they must be sometimes contented to be slaves to the Pride and Folly of
others, and to run through all the dishonorable ways of Scandal and Meanness.

Not but there has been many Persons of brave and excellent Spirits, whose
Integrity is as remarkable as their Poverty; who have bore up against the most
disadvantageous Circumstances, and scorned to be overawed into base and sinful
Obsequiousness: who would not prostitute their Consciences, and live upon the
Spoils of their Honesty. And as a Necessitous Condition does not force any to
transgress their Duty to God, so neither does it excuse them, when they do: As
it was their Choice, so it will be their Destruction, if they continue in it.
However, thus much we may conclude, that Indigence and Poverty is more likely
to produce abjectness of Mind, and is a greater temptation to sinful
Compliance; and consequently the Condition of the Receiver, is not so secure
and desirable as that of the Giver.

3. The Condition of the Giver implies an honorable Trust committed to him by
God Almighty.

God, who is the supreme Proprietor, has permitted an unequal distribution of
the Good Things of this Life, both for the better security of Government, and
likewise to prove the Resignation of the Poor, and the Justice and Humanity of
the Wealthy. Now those who have the greater share of the division fallen to
them, have the honor to be God's Stewards and Almoners to dispense the
blessings of his Providence to the Needy, and, as it were, in a literal sense,
to give his Household their meat in due season. The Poor are, as it were, Minors
all their Lifetime; they do not come to their Estate till the other World; and
God therefore has assigned the Rich for their Guardians, who are to supply
their Necessities, and protect them from Injury and Oppression. An honorable
Employment this is, by which the comfortable subsistence of our poor Brethren
is entrusted with us, and their Lives are in a manner committed to us. It looks
like a Testimonial of our Worth from God Almighty, as if he had owned our
Sufficiency for the discharge of this Office, and did not suspect our Integrity
in the management of it. We should remember therefore, as the Trust is
honorable and weighty, we are bound to perform it with a proportionable Care
and Fidelity; and that St. Paul has told us, that it is required in a Steward
to be faithful. We should consider, that God never gives any Person any full
and unconditional propriety in his Estate, but always reserves a Rentcharge
out of it for the Use of the Poor, only the Sum is left to the discretion of
the Owner; which, as it ought to be fairly and liberally stated, so we should
take care to pay it where it was due: neither throwing away our Lord's Money
for the support of Sloth and Lewdness, nor over-looking any deserving Object.
For as we ought not to be careless, so neither should we be too scrupulous. For
those who will not afford their Charity without a demonstration of real and
compassionable Want, seem to love their Money much better than their Neighbor;
and give a shrewd suspicion that they are willing to find a colorable Evasion
to lay aside their Trust, though their indigent Brother suffers never so much by
it. But when (where we see apparent signs of Necessity lie before us) we have
been as cautious, as the Circumstances of the Occasion will permit, we should
content our selves with a fair probability, and not stand upon a nice and
curious enquiry into the Desert of the Person. To this, both Duty to God, and
good Nature to Man inclines us, considering that we cannot lose by such a
Mistake. For if the Person happens to be Unworthy, he does not cheat us, but
himself. If we are but prudentially careful, our Charity which was done out of
Principles of obedience to God and compassion to our Neighbor, will never fare
the worse for the wickedness and hypocrisy of the Receiver.

2. Another Meaning of the Words of the Text, and which we have reason to
believe our blessed Savior chiefly intends, is, that Giving is more
commendable than Receiving, because generally speaking, it is a clearer
evidence of a Noble and Virtuous disposition of Mind: And that on these four
Accounts.

1. Because it is a greater sign of Goodness. I know it may be objected, that
the Receiver may plead a Title to this Quality, as well as the other. For it is
a fault not to receive, as well as not to give. To refuse an Obligation (except
where we have reason to suspect that the Design and the Event may be ill, that
it comes from a bad Intention, and brings ill Consequences along with it) is a
sign of a haughty and unsociable Temper. To reject the Gift, either supposes it
unsuitable to our Condition, or unsafe to accept, and consequently reproaches
him that offers it with indiscretion or insincerity. By refusing his Kindness,
we undervalue his Person and renounce his Friendship, plainly declaring, that
we are not willing to enter into an amicable correspondence and familiarity
with him. It is an argument of Pride, of a shy and unconversable
Suspitiousness: and therefore by the Rule of Contraries, to be willing to
receive, seems to argue an humble and humane disposition of Mind, that has
worthy and charitable Thoughts of Man, that thinks no Evil, but is ready upon
all occasions to enter into a strict union and intercourse with others.

But here we must consider that this Objection is not valid, but where the
Condition of the Receiver is well supported; where he is able to provide for
himself without the Benevolence of others. For if his Circumstances are
indigent, though his Temper be very humane, though his Inclination may be (and
often is) very friendly and generous, yet the disadvantage of his Condition
hinders these commendable Qualities from showing of themselves. His Necessity
is judged sufficient to make him willing to come under an Obligation without
the conjunction of any other more creditable Motives; which makes his Receiving
look like a much greater argument of kindness to himself than others. But to
give when there are no apparent marks of an ill Intention, is a fair indication
of a rich and of a benevolent disposition. It is a generous exercise of Power.
It shows that we wish Mankind happy, by our endeavoring to make them so. What
can be a more convincing Proof of the tender and compassionate sense we have of
the Wants and Afflictions of others, than to be willing to part with some
Conveniences of our own to receive them.

2. Giving is a better evidence of a virtuous disposition of Mind, because it
is a sign of a greater disengagement from the World. Receiving may consist well
enough with covetous Desires, with a narrow and anxious Mind, with a distrust
of Providence, and an over-valuing Opinion of the Things of this Life. He that
receives, I say, may have all these ignoble Qualities. I do not mean that he
has them, but that there is nothing to the contrary implied in the Act of
Receiving: But now on the other side, to part with our Wealth freely toward
the promoting of worthy and charitable Designs, is a good argument of a great
and a religious Mind, that has honorable thoughts of Providence, and relies
upon it, and is secure and unconcerned about the Events of this Life; such a
Person seems to understand the true Use of this World, and to have no more than
a just value for it. He will not be governed and enslaved by his Fortune, but
is resolved to make use of it for those Purposes God gave it him, and rather
chooses to live Charitably than die Rich. He that forgets not to do good and to
communicate, gives us good assurance, that his Conversation is in Heaven; that
he has made a higher choice, and is in persuit of nobler Objects, than are to
be met with here. For if he aimed at nothing but this World, we have reason to
believe he would never so freely part with it. But when the Abilities of the
Giver are small, when he has nothing but his Labor and Industry to depend
upon for the future; when as St. Paul testifies of the Macedonians, Men are
willing to give not only according 2 Cor. 8. 3.
to, but beyond their Power, and like the Widow in the Gospel, casts, as it
were, their whole Living into the Poors Treasury; This is an undeniable
evidence both of the generousness and devotion of their Spirits, that they have
worthy apprehensions of God, and are benevolently inclined toward their
Neighbors.

3. Supposing the Giver and the Receiver both rightly disposed, yet the due
Qualifications of the first will contribute more to the happiness of the other
World, than those of the latter: i. e. Charity will promote our future
Happiness more than bare Gratitude.

Our blessed Savior, where he tells us that Mat. 25.
those of his right hand shall be called to inherit the Kingdom prepared for
them, gives us the reason of this Invitation, viz. That because they had been
Charitable and Beneficent, fed the Hungry, clothed the Naked, and administered
comfort and relief to those who were in Distress. He does not say, you have
been grateful toward your Benefactors, remembered their good Deeds, and prayed
for them, therefore come into the Kingdom prepared for you. Though these are
undoubtedly Virtues, yet the rewarding Sentence is not founded upon these:
Neither shall we wonder to find Charity preferred before Gratitude, if we
consider, that according to the general Temper of Mankind, the exercise of it,
has more of difficulty in it, and the Effects of it are more beneficial. A Man
may be grateful without being at the expense of any thing, but a little Pride.
He loses nothing but a stubborn Humor, which is usually so far mortified by
strait Circumstances, that People can part with it, without much trouble. The
acknowledging of a Kindness is so far from diminishing any Man's Fortune, that
it rather gives him a prospect of increasing it. But he that gives in any
considerable measure parts with a real Advantage, and is at present at least so
much the Poorer by it. Now in regard the good Things of this Life are in our
actual possession, and likewise agreeable to our inclination, Men find some
difficulty to part with them, unless they have a strong sense of Duty upon
them, and their hearts are enlarged by Religious Considerations.

Besides, to be Charitable, is much more necessary to the support of Mankind,
than to be Grateful. For Gratitude is usually due to the wealthy and powerful,
who are able to provide for themselves, though their Favors should happen to be
unacknowledged: but Charity respects the poor and needy, who absolutely depend
upon its assistance. Ingratitude often only disappoints and disquiets, but
Uncharitableness brings real Mischiefs along with it. A man looses nothing but
his Expectation by the one, but his Life may be in danger by the other.

Lastly, Gratitude seems to be commanded upon the accounts of Charity, and
therefore must be inferior to it. To be Grateful is a Virtue, chiefly because
such a disposition encourages those, who have power, to assist their
Neighbors. For Men are not generally arrived to such a disinterested pitch of
Virtue, as to give purely out of Principles of Humanity: Nay, though they believe
they shall be mightily rewarded for what they do, yet they are not willing to
stay for the whole return of their Charity till the other World. If they have
not some present payment in Respect and Acknowledgment, they are apt to be
discouraged, and grow weary of well-doing. But a just Sense of their Favors
supports their charitable Disposition, and invites it to proceed. A grateful
return, convinces them, that they were not mistaken in their Object, and
consequently confirms them in the Discretion of their choice, and is moreover
an acknowledgement of their Goodness and Power. Now such Apprehensions as these
Men are willing others should have of them. Since therefore Gratitude is
chiefly enjoined to promote Charity, it must be owned to be of an inferior
Order, and consequently, as the Virtue of the Giver has a fairer Trial than
that of the Receiver, so likewise it is of a higher Order.

4. Another Reason, Why it is more blessed, etc. is, because there is more
pleasure in it, and that upon Three Accounts.

1. Because it makes us instrumental in promoting the Good of others. The
Charitable Person (where his Fortune bears any tolerable proportion with the
largeness of his Mind) is the great and universal Remedy against the Calamities
and Misfortunes of Life. He is as it were, a Father to the Fatherless, Eyes to
the Blind, and Feet to the Lame. He is Liberty to the Captive, and if not
Health, yet Ease and Refreshment to the Sick: Now to be able in some measure to
remove Want and Pain, and Diseases out of the World, to make the minds of the
Needy more cheerful, and their Bodies more acceptable and serviceable to them;
to do this, I say, must be no ordinary satisfaction to a well-disposed Mind.
What a strange alteration do we see in a poor man, when he receives a liberal
Alms at the hand, or a Refreshment at the Table of another? All Sense of his
former Wants seem to be forgotten, and his Soul, his Looks, and Motion, seem to
be animated with Joy, and have the very mien and image of Contentment in them.
He seems to be made over again, and to have fresh Ingredients of Happiness
thrown into his Composition. It Is not unusual to see such a Person more
transported with the receiving a few pence, than another is with the news of an
Estate. And must it not be very entertaining, to abate, if not to extinguish
the Misery of one of our own Nature, and to communicate Pleasure at so cheap a
rate? One would think, a Man could not lay out his Money so much to his
satisfaction any other way. It must needs be a mighty Pleasure to a good Man to
be in a Capacity of making others happy. For by this he has an opportunity of
gratifying his generous inclinations, and of effecting that which he so much
desires. By putting others into a good condition he secures and improves his
own. For by making easy and lessening the Inconveniences of Mankind, he so far
prevents the interruption of his own Happiness, which would otherwise arise
from Pity and Compassion. The kind affection he has for his Neighbor, makes
him rejoice with them that rejoice, and counts another happiness his own. To
do Good is very delightful, because by this we are assured, that our Mind is
benign and humane, that it is in its right constitution; that Covetousness,
Malice, and Envy, do not bear rule within us, but that we are free from the
shame and disturbance of such unasie and scandalous Passions. By this we are
conscious that we are of the same temper with God himself; which as it is the
greatest honor we are capable of, so if we are like him, we are sure we must
be acceptable to him, and that he will publicly own his approbation of us
afterward to our unspeakable reward.

To which we may add, that the Matter of a Benefaction often continues but a
little while. An Alms may be soon spent and gone, and the Receiver in distress
for want of another; but the advantage of him that gave it is not of so frail
and short-lived a nature. The pleasure of a Charitable action keeps us company
all along in this World, and in the next too. It is turned as it were into the
substance of the Soul, and is as immortal as the Will from whence it came. It
has a happy influence upon all sorts of Accidents and Conditions. It doubles
our Prosperity, and supports our Adversity; it makes us enjoy our Life, and be
less surprised at the approaches of Death. Indeed the Pleasure with which the
Charitable Man is entertained with here, and the Rewards which are promised to
him afterward, is so great, that we perfectly misunderstand and miscall things.
For properly speaking, the Receivers are the Benefactors. The greatest
Obligation comes from the Needy, because they are the occasion of a far greater
advantage to their Neighbor, than what they receive from him; so that when the
Gain is computed on both sides, the Receiver looks most like the Charitable
Person. From whence it will follow, that the Poor ought rather to be courted
and importuned, than denied, and we should be more forward to offer them our
assistance than they are to ask it.

To this it may be replied, that these Advantages do not come from the
Receiver, nor depend upon him; tho, if he is a good Man, his Prayers are no
mean Requital. The great advantages of Charity proceed chiefly from God's
goodness, who is pleased to entail so great a reward upon it; and partly from
the generous Mind of the Giver, who delights in doing good, and in assisting of
others: and therefore next to God, he is the Author of his own Pleasure, which
does not depend upon the Will, or Qualifications of him he relieves, but
springs from that noble disposition of his own Mind. However the Objection has
truth enough in it to excite us to Charity, and to make us cherish the Poor for
our own sake, as well as theirs, who, as the Apostle speaks, are the happy
occasions of making many rich.

2. There is more pleasure in Giving, etc. because from hence, we have the
satisfaction to believe that others have worthy apprehensions of us.

As Men generally think well of themselves, so they are desirous others should
do so too. For besides the advantages they may expect from such a sense of the
concurring judgment of their Neighbors; it confirms them in the good Opinion
they have of themselves, which is by no means unacceptable to them. Reputation
is a thing so much coveted, that Men are willing to expose themselves to the
greatest hazards to purchase it: Nay so fantastically fond are some Persons of
the acknowledgment of their good qualities, that they are willing to have a
stock of Fame going after they are dead: never considering that it signifies
nothing, though the whole World rings in a Man's applause, if in the mean time he
hears and knows nothing of it. But notwithstanding our affecting good Opinion
of others is not unlawful, when it is void of Pride, Ambition and Vanity; when
it is only desired to encourage us in Virtue, and to give us the fairer
opportunities of doing good to our Neighbor.

Now by Receiving a Man cannot so certainly collect, that he stands in the good
opinion of others. For Men are often so censorious, as to conclude, that his
Necessity was occasioned by his Neglect, or Immorality; and that it was not his
Merit, but his Want, which moved the religious compassion of the Giver to
assist him. But he that is liberal and charitable in any Remarkable Degree,
has usually a better construction put upon his Actions. The Envious are almost
afraid to detract from his Merits, and he may fairly presume, that he is
approved by the Generality, and entertain himself with the satisfaction of it.

3. Another advantage of Giving is this, that it will enlarge the Generality of
our Minds, and make us more disposed to prosecute the Good of others.

The exercise of this Virtue will not only, like other habits, grow easy by
Custom, but readily disengage us from narrow and tenacious Principles. And
there is a particular reason, why we should improve under the practice of it.
For it is natural for Men to love those they have obliged. They look upon such
Persons as Creatures of their own making; and therefore they love to pursue and
second one Kindness with another. Should they cease to oblige, this would (they
know) reflect upon the Discretion of their first choice. They might fear, that
what they have bestowed already would be in a great measure lost, and that
others would suspect, that the largeness of their Mind began to decay, and to
contract it self into its own private Interest. Love is observed to descend
more vigorously from the Parent to the Child, than to move the other way. The
reason is probably, because they look upon them as being derived from
themselves, and grow up into strength and maturity under their care and
protection: which makes them cherish and rejoice in the Effects of their own
Power, and Kindness, and imagine themselves to flourish in their Offspring. Now
the Receiver, if he is not of a very happy and Christian Temper, if the
Obligation was not conferred upon him with frankness and affability, he will
not find himself in any vigorous disposition toward Gratitude. For there is
nothing* more certain, than that the acknowledgment of Men's inability and
dependence, which results from the Relation of a Benefactor, make some Persons
abate in their affections toward him. But the obliging Person has a delightful
sense and prospect of his Condition. He views himself under the notion of Power
and Goodness; which is a strong Motive to invite his Charity and Beneficence,
because he finds himself magnified by it, and the farther advances he makes in
the exercise of this Virtue, the more he raises the Elevation of his Being.

Thus, I hope, I have, in some measure, made good the Truth of these excellent
Words of our Savior, -- It is more blessed to give than to receive.

I shall briefly infer something from the Text, and so conclude.

1. Since it is more happy to Give than to Receive, I think we ought carefully
to avoid all vanity and superfluousness in the managery of our Fortunes, that
so we may be the better able to contribute more liberally to those that want.
Indeed were there no such thing as Want and Necessity in the World, was every
one competently furnished with the Conveniences of Life, Men might then have
been permitted a freer, and a more indulgent use of their Wealth* Then,
provided that they had not fallen into any vicious Excesses, they might have
been allowed to entertain their Appetites at a more expensive rate, and to have
pleased their little Fancies with the glitterings of State and Magnisicence.
For though a strong propensity to the pleasures of Sense, and an affected
ostentation of Riches would be an argument of a weak and an obnoxious Mind, yet
others would not have been the worse for such an Extravagance. But now since we
have the Poor always with us, since there are so many in indigent and
unsupported Circumstances, if we prefer the vanity and effeminacy of an
unaccountable Desire, before the Necessities of our Brethren, we are both
Unjust and Inhuman. For what can be more unaccountable, than to throw away the
surplusage of our Fortune upon empty and insignificant Shows, when there are so
many Misfortunes and Miseries of Mankind, which might have been in a great
measure removed and alleviated by us. And as there is nothing more unreasonable
and unrighteous to spend the Patrimony of the Poor upon Luxury and Pride; so it
likewise deprives us of the great Pleasure, which is consequent to a Charitable
disposition. Such a Person cannot conclude that he has the Favor and Esteem
either of God or Man: the belief of which is one of the greatest supports and
entertainments to a rational Mind. On the contrary, if he has but sense and
impartiality enough to examine his own Actions and Temper, when he sees how
selfish and narrow-spirited he is, how void of the proper Tenderness and
Generosity of his kind, in this Case, if he have any apprehension of Good and
Evil left him, he cannot choose, but be a very unagreeable Spectacle to
himself, and condemn himself in those Things which he allows.

2. Those which are Receivers ought not to murmur against the Providence of
God, and be discontented with their Condition. That the Givers Circumstances
are more desirable, must be granted for the forementioned Reasons. But to draw
the Balance somewhat toward an evenness, we may add, that as the Receiver's
Condition is not so liable to some Vices, as the other is, so neither has he
so large an Account to give up afterward. For as our blessed Savior tells us,
that to whom much is given, much will be required, so he whose Trust is small,
will have the less proportion of Stock and Improvement to be answerable for.
Besides, by his Acknowledgment and good Wishes, and Prayers, he has a fair
opportunity of discharging the Debt, and returning the Obligation upon the most
Considerable Benefactor. As for Dependence, which all Mankind have a natural
aversion to, is rather out of a Spirit of native Greatness than Pride: I say,
this unacceptable attendance of a Low Condition, is not so peculiar to it, as
to be the Poor-man's Fate alone. This is an Inconvenience that pursues the
Indigent and defenseless State of humane Nature in general: there being no rank
nor degrees of Men, raised to that height of Self-sufficiency, but are in some
measure sensible of the weight and uneasiness of it.

As long as Men carry these frail Bodies about them; they must lie at the mercy
of a foreign Assistance, and be subject sometimes to the Insolence and
Ill Nature of an uncompassionate and haughty Disposition. But when we have
nothing but a poor Spirit to take care of, which is able to maintain it self
upon the strength of its own Being, it is impregnable against all Assault: And
when this Mortal shall have put on Immortality, and shall be no longer liable
to Want, or exposed to Injury, then all the Causes of Dependence will vanish
and fall off, and Men in the most comprehensive sense, will be translated into
the most glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. For notwithstanding the Saints
will have different degrees of Glory, proportionable to the great Works of
Piety and Goodness they have done here, yet this Distinction will not subject
those of the Lowest Order, to any dependence upon a Superior Quality. For the
Apostle St. Paul tells us then, that all Rule and Authority shall 1 Cor. 15.
be put down, and God shall be all in all. Which noble State of Freedom must,
without all question, much endear the Society of that Place, and consequently
augment the happiness of those, who have the honor to make a part of it.

3. And Lastly, Since the Case stands thus with us, I shall in a very few words
more, exhort every one here present to this Duty of Charity: I mean, more
particularly, those of us, who have enjoyed the advantages of a Liberal
Education at St. Paul's School. And if ever I could hope to prevail and
persuade in this Matter, I should certainly expect no little Success in such an
Assembly as this, which consists of Persons well Taught and Bred, whose Natures
have been refined and polished, and whose Minds have been improved and
cultivated, new molded and fashioned by the Care and Skill of those Excellent
Persons, to whose Charge we were committed.

The several Meetings and Solemn Feasts, which the Jews (who were a Particular
Society and Body of Men distinct from the rest of the World) held unto the
Lord, were appointed and instituted by God himself; such were the Passover,
the Feast of Harvest, and Ingathering: And there was very great care taken in
the strict Observation of them, that none were then to appear Empty before the
Lord. And though this Festival Assembly, this Anniversary Feast which we hold now
unto the Lord, has not the same Divine Authority to warrant its Institution,
yet I am sure it has the same pious and laudable Ends accompanying it. For we
are here met in this Sacred Place to offer up our Praises and Thanksgivings for
all those excellent Advantages, which we by his goodness have obtained from a
Free and an Ingenuous Education at our School. To praise him with our Mouths,
whose Lips he has opened with the Key of Knowledge, to rejoice before him,
that our Lot fell to us in so good a Ground. That he vouchsafed to plant us by
the Water-Springs, by the Rivulets of Knowledge, that we might bring forth the
several Fruits of our proper Callings in our due time and season. Neither in
this our Meeting must we appear before the Lord Empty; seeing that our Charity
and our Piety ought to go hand in hand, and kiss each other.

Let us then show our Tenderness of Thought and Affection to the Place, where
we received our Institution, and had our younger Years seasoned with Honest and
Religious Principles, and laid a solid Foundation for our after-life to live
upon. Let this Love be expressed by a liberal Contribution to it; I mean, for
the Educating of good Men's poor Children, in useful Literature and Knowledge:
This being one of the most beneficial Acts of Charity we owe to it: To take a
Youth, that is poor and destitute of all advantages of Education, and to bring
him up in the knowledge and fear of God, and to put him into a way, wherein by
his future diligence and industry he may arrive to an honest Livelihood in this
World.

Let us deposite this Tribute of our Affection for this Use, and what you leave
with the Worthy Stewards of the Eeast this Day, be an Earnest-peny of your
Generous Inclinations in doing something further, as God shall bless you, for
the advantage of our School in succeeding Years to come. Resolve to do this
before you go hence, before the Lord your God, from the Ground of your Heart,
and make him some cheerful and suitable acknowledgment of his distinguishing
Providence toward you and yours. So shall the rest of your Substance be
blessed and increased, the Honor of our School promoted and advanced, so as
that Generations to come will rise up at the mentioning of your Names, and call
you Blessed.

In a word. Great will your Reward be that you will have in the Lord, since you
are assured from the sacred Writ, that God is not unrighteous to forget your
Work and Labor of Love, which you have herein shown toward his Name, in that
you have Ministered unto them, and yet resolve to Minister.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion, from this time forth, and
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

