A SERMON PREACHED In CHRIST-CHURCH BEFORE His Excellency the Lord Deputy And
the Parliament, On the Fifth day of November, 1695.

BEING The Anniversary Thanksgiving For the Happy Deliverance of K. James 1st,
and the Three Estates of the Realm of England from the most Traiterous Intended
Massacre by Gunpowder:

And also for the happy Arrival of his Present Majesty K. WILLIAM on that Day,
for the deliverance of our Church and Nation.

By TOBIAS, Lord Bishop of Dromore.

DUBLIN, Printed for William Norman in Dames-street, 1695.

Thursday the 7th of November, 1695 By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled.
ORDERED
On motion, that the Earl of Inchiquin, and the Lord Viscount Blessinton to
give the Thanks of this House to the Lord Bishop of Dromore for his Sermon
Preached before this House at Christ Chuch on Tuesday last, being the
Anniversary of the Fifth of November; and desire his Lordship would please to
cause his Sermon to be Printed.

Gerard Bor. Cler. Parliamentor.

A SERMON PREACHED In Christ-Church, etc.
Psalm 118. Verse 24. This is the day which the Lord has made, we will
rejoice, and be glad in it.
IT IS a question propounded by the wise Son of Sirach, in the 33 d Chap. of
Ecclesiasticus, at the 7th verse, Why does one day excel another, when as the
light of every day in the year is of the Sun? and he wisely resolves it in
these following words, by the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, and
he altered seasons, and feasts: some of them has he made high days, and some of
them has he made ordinary days: some of them has he blessed, and exalted; and
some of them has he sanctified, and set near himself.

For as all the works of God are full of wonder, and every one of 'em deserves
to be awfully regarded, and religiously admired: so there are some of 'em of a
more eminent and exalted nature, and of a more rare and unusual occurrence; and
these remarkable works being placed by God himself in a higher, and more
elevated station than ordinary, may therefore justly challenge from us men a
more solemn honor, and a more frequent commemoration of them.

And as the extraordinary manifestation of God's presence to Moses in the Bush,
did make the place whereon he stood to be holy ground: so the extraordinary
marks of God's grace and favor to the Prophet David at some particular times
and seasons, did make those days whereon these mighty works were wrought to be
deservedly esteemed, and devoutly observed as holy days: and 'twas some signal
demonstration of God's almighty power and goodness in the miraculous
preservation of David's Person and Kingdom, and the utter destruction of his
inveterate Enemies, that moved him so carefully to remind his people of this
remarkable deliverance, and so earnestly to exhort 'em to a public and solemn
Thanksgiving for so great a mercy, as is evident by the words of my Text; This
is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice, and be glad in it.

There are two things in the Text that plainly offer themselves to our
consideration; First, that there was some particular day which was made
remarkable by God's extraordinary Providence, in delivering King David and his
people from some imminent danger. Secondly, that as a token of their
thankfulness for so signal a mercy, they were resolved to solemnize that
remarkable day as a day of public and religious joy.

In reference to the first of these, I shall insist on these following
Propositions;

First, that as God's mercy is over all his works: so his providence does more
especially concern it self in the preservation of States and Kingdoms.

Secondly, that Almighty God does more remarkably employ his power and goodness
in the protection of religious States and Kingdoms professing his holy and
eternal Truth.

Thirdly, that there are some particular events that plainly discover the
special hand of God in the management of 'em.

Fourthly, that it is the indispensible duty of the people of God both
carefully to remark, and religiously to celebrate the miraculous dispensations
of Divine Providence in the preservation of his Church. And

Fifthly, that the gracious deliverance that God was pleased to vouchsafe these
Nations, as on this day, has very illustrious marks of an extraordinary
Providence impressed upon it.

First, I say, as God's Mercy is over all his works; so his Providence does
more especially concern it self in the preservation of States and Kingdoms.

Among the innumerable benefits that the planting of the Christian Religion has
obliged the world withal* the clear discovery of an universal Providence, more
especially expressed in the guidance and management of human affairs, may
reasonably be accounted a very considerable and extraordinary blessing: for by
the promulgation of the Gospel we are all infallibly assured, that God's
Providence is extended not only to things that are most distant* and concealed
from human view; but also to the most minute, and seemingly contemptible
objects, and occurrences. Thus our Savior speaks to his Disciples, Are not two
sparrows sold for a farthing? yet not one of them does fall to the ground
without your Father: and again, he tells his disciples in the following words,
that the very hairs of their heads were all numbered: So that as nothing is so
little as to escape God's Knowledge, so nothing is so despicable as to be
disdained by his Providence: For whatsoever he was pleased to Create by his
power, will certainly be taken care of by his goodness, Yet since there are
different degrees of excellency in the Creatures, we may reasonably conclude,
that according to the various measures of their respective perfections, the
power and mercy of Almighty God will be more or less concerned in their
protection and defense. Now, since man is the glory of the visible World, and
all things we here behold are particularly designed for his benefit, and
accommodation, we may assure our selves, that we are the principal objects of
God's watchful eye, and that his care in the preservation of our persons, and
the promoting of our welfare will express it self in a more illustrous manner
than in consulting the safety, and advantage of our fellow creatures here
below. And since the public interest of States and Kingdoms is of a far
greater, and momentous a concern than that of private persons, it has been
generally observed in all preceding ages from the foundation of the World, that
Divine Providence has been often very eminently visible in preventing the
dissolution of States, and Empires: and accordingly we read in the Prophet
Daniel, in the 10th Chapter of his Prophecy, that God has been pleased to
appoint particular Tuteler Angels over several Countries to manage public
affairs, and to promote the common good of their respective charges by
invisible ways and methods inconceivable by humane understanding: For in the
13th verse of that 10th Chapter, the Angel that converst with Daniel tells him
that the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood him one and twenty days. And
the meaning of that Title of the Prince of Persia in that Text is generally
thought to be the Guardian Angel of that Country, who, it seems, very
diligently solicited the concerns of the Persian Empire in the Court of Heaven.

Secondly, That Almighty God does more remarkably employ his power and goodness
in the protection of Religious States, and Kingdoms, professing his holy and
eternal truth, is evident by that very tenth Chapter of the forementioned
Prophecy: for as that Tutalar Angel of the Jewish Church did acquaint Daniel
that the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia had opposed him: So he assures him,
that Michael, one of the chief Princes, came to help him. By which is meant
that the Persian Angel did so vigourously prosecute the public interest and
advantage of that Kingdom, that, were it not for the more prevalent
intercession of Michael the Archangel, the zealous endeavors of this inferior
heavenly Guardian of the Jewish Nation would in all probability, have been
unsuccesful. From all which we may observe, that besides the general Providence
of Almighty God over all the World, he has delegated the more especial care and
protection of Kingdoms to Angelical Governors; and that he does commit the
defense, and preservation of his Church in a most especial manner to those of
the highest order of beatified Spirits: for Michael, one of the chief Princes
of the heavenly Host is said, in the last verse of that tenth Chapter, to be
Prince of the Jewish Nation, that is, their chiefest Tutelar Angel and
Guardian, by which we may clearly understand with what honor God is pleased to
dignify, and with what security he immures the persons of his own Church and
people against the secret conspiracies, and the forcible assaults of their
inveterate Enemies.

And that we may the more fully be assured that there is no reason to fear the
dark designs, and malicious contrivances of our most subtle and potent
adversaries, God himself is declared by the Prophet David in 84th Psalm, at the
11th verse, to be a Sun and a Shield: a Sun to discover dark plots of our
implacable foes, and a Shield to defend us from their open violence: and since
hell it self, as Job says, is naked before God, and destruction has no
covering, we may certainly conclude that all those treasonable conspiracies
which have their rise and original from hell, and are designed for the
destruction of God's people, tho they be never so cunningly contrived, or never
so secretly carried on, will (as we have reason to hope) be detected, and
defeated by his infinitely wise and overruling providence. For we are told by
St. Paul, that the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of
God is stronger than men: that is, the least degree, if I may so speak, of
Divine Power can baffle the utmost strength of the greatest Princes: and the
least measure of divine wisdom can infatuate the best laid designs of the most
subtle Politicians.

Thirdly, I say that there are some particular dispensations that plainly
discover the special hand of God in the management of 'em. For tho the works of
divine providence be commonly cloudy and dark, yet there are some particular
events that have the signatures of God's Power, Wisdom and Goodness so plainly
stamped upon 'em, and are of such peculiar frame and make, that all men that
seriously consider 'em shall say, This has God done, for they shall perceive
that it is his Work.

And in reference to these unusual occurrences, there are several Phrases in
the holy Scriptures which are very observable, and particularly import the
variety of God's methods in these extraordinary dispensations of his
providence. Thus God's arm is sometimes expressed in holy Scipture, to be made
bare, and to be lifted up, in the achievement of some prodigious Works. An
example of the first of these we have in the 52 d Chapter of the Prophecy of
Isaih, at the 10th verse: Where the Prophet, reminding the Church of the great
miracles which the Lord had wrought for her safety and advantage, says That the
Lord has had made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the Nations: that is, as
a Soldier in the heat of battle will disengage his hands from whatever may
hinder, him in the use of his Sword, and if he find his Gantlet heavy, and
cumbersom to him, will quit it to enjoy the natural strength, and freedom of
his arm, So when God sees his Church and People in imminent danger of
perishing, if they be left to the natural efficacy of visible causes, He is
frequently pleased in such an extraordinary exigence openly to appear in their
behalf, and laying aside some weak and feeble instrument, wherein his hand did
invisibly engage it self in their defense, he makes bare his Arm in the Eyes of
all the Nations, He delivers them from the prevailing Force of their Enemies by
some miraculous instances of this infinite power, and love.

Secondly, Another Phrase made use of in holy Scripture to express the special
Providence of Almighty God in some particular emergencies, is, the raising and
lifting up of his Arm. Thus in the 26 Chapter of the Prophecy of Isaiah, at the
11 Verse, the Prophet Addresses himself to God in these words; Lord when thy
Hand is lifted up they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed for
their envy at the People. Now by his Hand being lifted up we must not
understand Gods acting purely by his own Omnipotence, without the concurrence
of any visible assistant; but only that he raises, and exalts causes to so
great a degree of power, as to enable 'em to perform such actions as are vastly
beyond the small proportion of their Natural strength.

In this sense we must understand the Israelites Conquests of the Land of
Canaan: for God himself does frequently tell 'em, that the Nations whose Land
they should possess, were stronger, and mightier than they; and yet he Commands
'em not to be dismayed, because the Lord himself should go before 'em, and
should destroy their Enemies with a great destruction until they were Consumed.
By all which promises the Children of Israel did not apprehend, that God would
put them into the quiet Possession of the Land of Canaan without a necessity of
their own Fighting; but that he would bless their Arms with wonderful success,
and would enable 'em to the gaining of those Victories which they never would
have got, but by the assistance of his Almighty Power.

But Fourthly, It is the indispensible Duty of the People of God, both
carefully to Remark, and Religiously to celebrate the Miraculous dispensations
of Divine Providence in the preservation of his Church. Among the several notes
of distinction betwixt rational Creatures, and brute Beasts, this is reckoned
as one of the most considerable, that whereas brute Beasts do only Stare at
some unusual objects, and are startled at some sudden and surprising accidents;
God has been pleased to endue Mankind with the power of Reasoning, so that they
do not barely perceive the things that are Represented to 'em by their senses,
but also can narrowly prey, and strictly search into the Reasons of their
productions, and I may justly say, there is as great a distinction between the
natural Man, and the spiritually minded Christian, in reference to some signal
events in humane Life, and remarkable instances of Divine Providence.

For the most earless and inconsiderate Sinner cannot but be amazed at some
sudden and unexpected changes in a Kingdom, and may take such notice of 'em, as
to make 'em the subject of his Discourse, and the entertainment of his idle
hours; but if he goes no further than a slight and superficial consideration of
'em; if he does not strictly enquire, and diligently search into the secret
springs of these extraordinary motions, he not only frustrates the good and
wise designs of Divine providence in those wonderful Revolutions, but does also
affront his own rational Faculties: he debates the Dignity of his Nature, and
sinks himself into the low and ignoble rank of the Beasts that perish. Whereas
on the contrary, the Faithful Servants of Almighty God, do not only plainl,
perceive, and carefully Remark, but do also Religiously admire, highly extol,
and humbly adore his infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness in these surprising
and miraculous Events.

A Remarkable instance of both these different Tempers we have Recorded in the
92 Psalm, where the Prophet having declared at the 4* Verse, that the Lord had
made him glad through his work, and that he would Triumph in the works of his
Hand, and in an extacy broke out, at the 5 Verse in these words, O Lord how
great are thy Works? Thy thoughts are very deep, he assures us in the next
Verse, that a brutish Man knows not, neither does a fool understand this. And
elsewhere the Psalmist gives it as the Character of wicked Men, that they
regard not in their minds the Works of God! nor the operation of his Hands, tho
they be never so Signal in their own Nature, and never so rare, and unusual in
their Event; and of this sort was that wonderful Deliverance which we solemnly
Commemorate on this Day, which brings me to the,

Fifth Particular, That the Gracious Deliverance that God was pleased to
Vouchsafe these Nations as on this Day has very illustrious Marks of an
extraordinary Providence impressed on it.

Of these I might mention many, but I shall insist only on Two: the First of
which is the critical timing and seasonableness of this Gracious Deliverance,
which was wrought for us in the Gate of Death, and the very minute almost of
our designed Destruction. And indeed it is the usual method of Divine Providence
entirely to Baffle the designs of the Wicked, when they are in the height of
all their hopes and suddenly to throw 'em down from the top and pinnacle of
their Towering expectations.

God might very easily; if he pleased, defeat the bloody purposes of ungodly
Men in the First conception of 'em in their minds, and stifle 'em in the First
instant of their motions; but he looks upon it as more agreeable to the
Excellent designs of his infinite Wisdom, and Goodness; and to the
manifestation of his Almighty Power, to permit their Fancies to be impregnated
with the Vain hope of a happy success in their ungodly project: (...) suddenly,
and surprizingly makes the issue of their wicked Hearts abortive, and when the
Children of iniquity are just come to the Birth, he does not permit 'em to have
strength to bring forth, and grants his People a wonderful Deliverance (...)
are (...) falling down the Precipice of utter Ruin and Destruction.

Thus in the Passage of the Israelites over the River Jordan, we read that as
soon as the Priests that bare the Ark were come to Jordan, and their Feet were
dipped in the brim of the Water, and they might according to the measure of
Humane reason have expected at the next step, to be Swallowed up in the deep,
the Text says, that the Waters failed and were cut off, and that River which
just before had overflowed his Banks, did then forsake his Channel; and the
People passed over on dry Ground. We see in this Instance that the time which
God Appointed for the Passage of his People over Jordan was at that time of the
Year when his Flood was at the height; and we also see that the Waters were
not cut off till the Feet of the Priests were wet in the brim of the River; and
then, and not tell then it was that the Text tells us that the Waters which
came down from above, stood and rose up upon a heap. And the Priests that bare
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of
Jordan, as we may read in the third Chapter of Joshua at the two last Verses.

And of the like nature was the Deliverance wrought for us as on this Day: for
while our Enemies had made the Cellers under the Parliament House a Tophet,
according to the Description of it in the thirteenth Chapter of Isaiah at the
last Verse; Though it was prepared for the King, and the three Estates of the
Realm; though the Pile thereof was Fire and much Wood, yet the latter part of the
Character of Tophet was wanting; for the breath of the Lord was so far unlike a
stream of Brimstone to enkindle it, that like a stream of many Waters it
prevented the breaking out of the unconquerable Flame.

In the 18th Chapter of the Wisdom of Solomon, we have a most Excellent Idea
given us of Gods surprising Vengeance on the Enemies of his Church in the
sudden and unexpected destruction of the first born among the Egyptians in
these most remarkable Words, While all things were in quiet silence, and that
night was in the midst of her swift course, thine Almighty Word lept down from
Heaven out of thy Royal Throne, as a fierce Man of War into the midst of a Land
of Destruction, and brought thy unfeigned Commandment as a sharp sword, and
standing up, filled all things with Death, and touched the Heaven, but it stood
upon the Earth. These words may with a little alteration very clearly describe
to us the surprising Wonders of this days Deliverance, for while the
mischievous, and fatal Plots of our Enemies were in quiet silence, and in full
security of Success; and while their mighty Works of hellish Darkness were not
only in the midst of their swift Course, but just brought to the point of
Execution, then it was that Gods Almighty Word leapt down from Heaven, out of
his Royal Throne, to save his People, as he did formerly to destroy his
Enemies, and brought Gods express Command as a sharp Word, to cut off the
implacable Foes of the public Peace, and the Protestant Religion: It touched
the Heaven, and stood upon the Earth, it had its Commission from above, very
clearly to discover, and effectually to prevent that unparalled Massacre here
below, which was just ready to be executed upon us; so that, we were as
Firebrands snatched out of that vast and universal Burning, designed upon the
whole Nation, in the very critical moment of extreme Danger.

The second Mark and Character of Gods special Providence, is the great
Benefit, and advantage of some particular events, for the defense of Truth, the
support of Religion, and increase of Pienty. God who delivered his People out
of Egypt, would not destroy 'em in the Wilderness; much less in the Land of
Canaan, into which he had miraculously brought them; and since the same God had
delivered us from more than Egyptian Darkness, under the Blindness and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome; and from more then Egyptian Servitude,
under the cruel Tyranny of the Court of Rome; and had also brought us into
Canaan into a Land slowing with Milk and Honey, where we have been plentifully
fed with the Milk of Gods word, and had tosted of the Heavenly gift, the Honey
of celestial Ordinances; we had no reason but to rest assured of his ever
watchful Care and Providence over us in our preservation.

And as God was pleased as on this Day plainly to discover the works of
Darkness, and miraculously to prevent the Execution of 'em; and has
successfully completed a Deliverance for his People no less signal and
illustrious than the former: the First Plot indeed was designed to blow up the
Parliament House and the three Estates of the Realm, but this late design was
formed against, and if it had taken Effect, would have entirely destroyed the
very Constitution of Parliaments, and have rooted up the very Original
Foundations of our Government.

The first Conspiracy as Conscious of its own Guilt did hide its face in the
darkness of the night, in the recesses of Vaults and the privacy of secret
Consults, but in this late Conspiracy Popish Villainy appeared in open View, our
destruction was not privately designed, nor carefully concealed from our
knowledge, but openly avowed, publicly managed, and Triumphantly boasted of.

Our Land brought forth not only Frogs, but venomous Toads even in our Kings
chambers, and which is worst of all, this grievous plague of Egypt was thought
by some the greatest blessing of the Land of Canaan, and it was Gods Infinite
Mercy to us that our Rivers were not turned into Blood, which his present
Majesty's timely landing, as on this day, did very happily prevent: and as on
this memorable day God had formerly preserved us from utter ruin and
destruction designed us by the whole Power and Force of Rome, so having
employed his present Majesty in the late mighty work of our deliverance, He was
resolved to give him a remarkable omen of his future good success by Landing
him in England as on this day. For then it was that Superstition and Idolatry
appeared with open Face, and were violently bearing down all before 'em; then
it was that the Egyptian darkness of Popery was overspreading these three
Nations, and more then Egyptian slavery was very closely attending it. Then it
was that our Rights both Civil and Ecclesiastical were invaded, and whoever
would not Worship the Images that were then set up, was in great danger of
being Punished as the three Children were, whom we read of in the Prophet
Daniel, for the Fire which was of old prepared for Heretics and had been for
so many Ages kept alive, and was but lately extinguished by Abolishing the Writ
de Haeretico Comburendo, was enkindling again, but now the Embers are so
effectually quenched by a sudden and wonderful Rain from Heaven, that there is
no fear of a Future revival of the Flame.

We read in the 18th Chap. of the first Book of the Kings, that when the People
of Israel were mightily distressed by the extremity of Famine, Elijah went up
to the top of Carmel, and cast himself down upon the Earth, and Commanded his
Servant to look toward the Sea seven times, and it is said, that at the seventh
time he saw a cloud rise out of the Sea like a Man's hand* which afterward
overspread the whole Firmament, and became the speedy and effectual means of
restoring their former plenty and prosperity; and truly the circumstances of
our late Affairs, both in Church and State, had much the same dismal prospect
with that of the Children of Israel in the time of Famine; for when several
years we had Groaned under the grievous burden of Arbitrary power, when we had
many times cast our selves down upon the Earth at the Footstool of the Throne
of Grace, when we had often humbly Prostrated our Souls and Bodies before God,
and had looked often toward the Sea for our Relief then it was that we at last
perceived a Cloud arising out of the Sea, and increasing daily, till in a
little time, it overspread the Firmament, and then God was pleased to send a
Gracious Rain upon his Inheritance, and to refresh it when it was weary.

And one signal instance of Gods avenging Hand, on the implacable Enemies of
the Protestant Religion, was the impressing on their guilty Minds, such
timorous Misgivings, and foreboding apprehensions of the approaching Period of
their Power and Greatness, as made their hearts faint, and their hands Weak and
Trembling; so that, the joints of their Loins were loosed, and their knees
smote one against a another, and what we read in the fourteenth Chapter of the
first Book of Samuel, concerning the Miraculous Success of Jonathan and his
Armor Bearer, was almost fulfilled in our Days* for there was a trembling in
the Host of the Enemies of Gods Church, the Garrison and the Spoylers they also
trembled; so that, it was a very great Trembling, and behold the Multitude
melted away.

And now, since so Gracious a Deliverance has been wrought for us, since in the
wonderful Year of 88, we saw a truly invincible Armada making toward our
Coasts, and since that auspicious Wind which happily brought our most Gracious
Deliverer to our Lands has effectually freed 'em of those swarms of Foreign
Locusts with which our Canaan like Egypt has been lately so miserably infested,
and has thrown 'em into the Sea; since our Judges are Restored as at the first,
and our Counselors as at the beginning, and we are all compas'd about with the
Blessings of Peace and good Government; What now Remains, but that our Return
of Thankfulness to Almighty God, be in some Regard suitable to the greatness of
his Mercies, and as our Deliverance has been as Signal and Remarkable as that
of King David's and his People, so our Gratitude to our Gracious and Almighty
Preserver, should be as Public and Solemn, as Hearty and Affectionate as
theirs; which brings me to the second particular in my Text. Viz. that King
David and his People were resolved to solemnize the remarkable day of their
Deliverance as a Day of Public and Religious joy, which is included in these
Words, we will rejoice and be glad in it, but having spent so much time in
discoursing on the first Head; I shall only mention some few duties which these
words import, and leave the enlargement on 'em to your own meditation; and the

First one of those duties which the latter part of my Text implys, and which
this days solemnity obliges us to perform, is a public and religious
thankfulness to Almighty God for so general and so miraculous a preservation;
for it is very evident, that Rome intended, as on this day, to treat the Church
of England united in one body in Parliament, as Caligula designed to treat Rome
her self; If it had but one neck, to cut it off at a stroke, to destroy it at
once with a mighty destruction. For all the Representatives of the Realm, as
the Office of the day expresses, were by Popish Treachery appointed as sheep to
the slaughter, in a most barbarous and savage manner, beyond the example of
former ages.

But God has been graciously pleased both by his wisdom to detect, and by his
power to blast this inhuman Conspiracy; and therefore we are all indispensibly
obliged to take care, that the religious expressions of our gratitude for so
great a Blessing, may on the wings of Praise and Thanksgiving ascend to Heaven,
from whence this wonderful deliverance came. And

Secondly, our public Thankfulness for so signal a Mercy, should express it
self in eminent acts of Charity to the Poor: for as the miraculous preservation
of us, as on this day, from this inhuman Plot of our Popish Enemies, does
highly resemble the wonderful deliverance of the Jews from the merciless
designs of Haman; so we ought to imitate the remarkable Example of their
Benevolence on the Feast of Purim, in the generous distribution of our Alms to
our indigent Brethren; as we find it recorded at the first Institution of that
Feast, in the 9th Chapter of Esther, at the 22 d verse: where it is said, that
the days wherein the Jews rested from their Enemies, and the month which was
turned unto them from mourning to joy, they should make days of Feasting, and
Joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.

But lastly, our miraculous deliverance, as on this day, should work in us all
a hearty repentance for our past offenses, and a thorough reformation of our
lives for the time to come; and as we express our public sense of this mighty
Blessing by our public Offices of religious Praise, and as by our Charity we
declare our gratitude to Almighty God, by making our poor distressed Brethren
here below partakers of our Joy, so by a true and sincere contrition, we should
extend our Joy to the triumphant Saints above, and cause joy in the presence of
the Angels of God over so many penitent Sinners. And this excellent duty of a
general Repentance on so extraordinary an occasion, I shall reinforce upon you
in the words of Samuel to the people of Israel, in the 12th Chap. of the first
Book of Samuel, at the 24th verse; Fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with
all your heart; for consider how great things he has done for you; and then we
may with a rational confidence of future safety, commit our selves, and all our
private and public affairs, our Persons, and our Relatives, our Religion and
Liberties, to the care and protection of Divine Providence, being fully
assured, that God's infinite Goodness will prevent the Malice, his Wisdom will
infatuate the Councels, and his Almightiness will quell the Power of our most
formidable Enemies* for Omnipotence is able to support us, and Infinite Mercy
will never be unwilling to help us, and Omniscience can never be Forgetful of
us, and it is impossible for Truth it self to disappoint us.

And now, since God has delivered us from so great a Death, and does deliver,
in him we'll hope that he will yet deliver us; and that he will complete his
wonderful mercy to us, by the speedy conversion of the Corrigible, and the
utter confusion of our implacable Enemies: Which God of his Infinite Mercy
grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

