THE SECOND PART OF A BRIEF REGISTER AND SURVEY Of the several Kinds and Forms
of Parliamentary Writs.

COMPRISING The several Varieties and Forms of Writs for electing Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses for Parliaments and Great Councils, issued to Sheriffs
of Counties only, with the antientest Returns of these Writs by Sheriffs yet
extant on Record (from 49 H. 3. til 22 E. 4.) amongst the Records in the Tower:
intermixed with other rare Writs, pertinent to this subject; and some Writs of
Prorogation and Re-sommons, with special useful Annotations and Observations
on them, after most of these Writs recitals, for the Readers information.

Wherein the Original of the Commons House, and elections of Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Barons of Ports to sit in Parliament, is infallibly evidenced to
be no antienter than 40 H. 3. the Presidents and Objections to the contrary,
answered: The Original of ancient Boroughs, and how many they were under King
Edward the 1. 2, 3. discovered: The power of the Kings of England, in creating
new Boroughs by Charters or Writs, augmenting, diminishing the number of
Knights, Burgesses, Members of the Commons House, and altering the Forms of
Writs of Summons, without a Parliament; The inability of the Commons House to
eject, or censure any one of their Members, much less the major part (as now)
without the King or House of Lords concurrence and Judicature, and the
inconsistency of force and armed Gards with Parliaments freedom, are fully
evidenced. Some gross mistakes touching Parliament Writs and Members refuted,
with many other Rarities concerning Parliaments.

By William Prynne Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolns-Inne.

Jer. 6 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the
old paths, where is the good way? and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your Sou's: but they said, We will not walk therein. LONDON, Printed by T.
Child and L. Parry, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain. 1660.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
LEt it seem neither strange, nor injurious, nor unreasonable or unseasonable
to thee, that I now publis^ only one single Section and Fragment of the severa^
Forms of Writs for electing Members of the Commons House in Parliament, without
the remaining Sections I at first intended to accompany it, to make it
complete; when as a very small Fragment of the old Commons House, not the full
Tenth part of it, (after their own double forcible dissipation by the Army,)
ha^ by their own special command forcibly excluded all t^ old secluded Members,
(being above 200.) by arm^ Gards, not only out of the House but Lobby too,
D^cemb. 27. and voted them quite out of the House t^ 5th. of January 1659.
without the least accusation (...) hearing, behind their backs, though ready to
justif^ themselves face to face against all Objections, contrary (...) all Laws
of Deu^r. 17. 2, to 14. John 7. 51. Acts 23. 30, 35. c. 24. 8, etc. c. 25. 16,
17, 18. Magna Charta c. 35.
God, Nations, and the Land; whi^ judge and disfranchise no man how criminal or
v^ soever, before he be heard, and have his Accusers fa^ to face, and have
license to answer for himself concerning the crimes laid against him. It seemi^
Acts 25. 27.
unreasonable (even in the judgments of mere Pagan^ to imprison or condemn any
person, and not with to signify the crimes laid against him. The only gro^ of
this their Unparliamentary brutish Vote with any crime, cause, or particular
Members names expr^sed in it, is our See the Epistle to my Speech, Dec. 4. 1648.
voting the Kings Concessions up^ the Propositions, to be a Ground for the
House proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of t^ Kingdom, according to
our Trusts, Judgments, C^ sciences, after 3. days and one nights debate
without (...) viding the House, when there were above 300. Members present: for
which Vote alone December. 5. (as it now appears) they then gave secret Orders to
the Army Osficers to secure 45. and seclude above 200. more Members Dec. 6 and
7. 1648. and since that to re-s^clude them, May 7 and 9. and December. 27, 1659.
placing tr^ble Gards at the door, January 5. when they passed their vote to
discharge, and disable them from sitting, to keep them out if they then
attempted to enter. Had this bin only a sin of Ignorance, or private Injury, we
should with patience and Christian charity, have pretermitted and remitted it
with our Saviors prayer, Father forgive them for they c Luke 23, 24.
know not what they do: but being a wilsull malicious, unatural crime against
not only their Fellow Members, contrary to all rules of Justice, Nature, and
the Gospel it self, resolving, That there should be no Schism in the d 1 Cor.
12, 25, 26.
Body (of the House or Parliament, no more than in the natural Body) but that
the Members should have the same care one of another, and whether one Member
suffer, all the Members suffer with it; but also the highest injury and affront
to all those Counties, Cities and Boroughs they represent, and a new kind of
Gupowder-Treason, to blow up all English Parliaments foundations, Rights,
Privileges, Members, and the fundamental Government, Laws, and Liberties of the
people in succeeding generations, if connived at, and not f^lly vi^dicated;
being 6. several times, or more, impenitently perpetrated by them, the last
after their own late double dissipations by divine retaliation, which they so
highly resented as Treasonable and Flagition in Cromwell and Lambert, seconded
with an old and new Engagement and Oath of Abjuration, which some of them have
already taken, and intend to obtrude upon the Consciences of our 3. Nations, to
send them down quick into Hell, if taken, or ruin them in their Liberties and
Properties if denied, I cannot but look upon it as a kind of sin against the
Holy Ghost (which I fear some of these desperadoes have wellnigh arived unto)
Mat. r^. 31, 32.
which shall never be forgiven to men, neither in this world, nor in that which
is to come. The rather because they arrogate to themselves, the Name, Power and
Judicature of THE PARLIAMENT, no less than 5. times in this short Nonsense
Vote; when as they are not the Tithe of a Commons House, and no Parliament at
all, without the King, and House of Lords, and have not the least legal
Jurisdiction to seclude or vote out any one Member, without the Kings or Lords
concurence; whom they have engaged against, abjured, secluded against the very
Act by which they pretend to sit: who were a Parliament always without a
Commons house til 49H. 3. without whom they can now Enact, Vote, Order nothing,
that is valid, or Obligatory to the secluded Members or people; as this and the
former part of my Register, and Plea for the Lords, will inform those
Ignoramusses in Parliamentary proceedings who think they may act, enact, and
vote what they please, against all rules of Justice, the Laws of God and the
Land) and our whole Nation, the reason and end of its present publication. If
they or any others, shall receive any New-light, from these new unknow
Antiquities, to reduce the over-swelling House of Commons, within its ancient
bounds of loyalty and sobriety, for the peace, and settlement of our 3.
Kingdoms, reduced to the brink of utter ruin, by their dangerous (...)
Innovations, and Usurpations over their Fellow Members, ^cers and Kings; and
restore our Parliaments to their ancient Constitution, Rights, Privileges,
without any injurious Encroachments upon the Peoples Liberties, or one House
upon the other, I shall (...) God for it, and by his assistance, proceed to
publish the remaining Sections, for the benifit of Posterity. In the mean time,
I hope this Fragment will demerit thy thanks too, and thy servent Prayers for
thy friend,

The unfeined, unmercinary Servant of his Native Country, in his generation
William Prynn.
Lincolns-Inne Jan. 7. 1659.
THE SECOND PART OF A Brief Register, Calendar, and Survey of the several
Kinds, Forms of PARLIAMENTARY WRITS.
HAving already presented the world with the First Part of my Brief Register,
Calendar and Survey of the several kinds, forms of Parliamentary Writs, in 3.
distinct Sections, with Special and General Choice useful Annotations on, and
Observations from them, relating principally to the Members and Assistants of
the LORDS HOUSE; I shall now proceed in this Second Part (by Gods assistance)
to communicate to this present age and Posterity in several Sections, the
manifold varieties, forms of Writs issued to Sheriffs of Shires, and particular
Corporations made Counties within themselves, Wardens of the Cinqueports,
Mayors of Towns, Buroughs, and Officers of the Ports, for electing Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, Barons of the Ports, and other Members, to serve in our
Great Councils, Parliaments, or attend upon, or appear before them as
Assistants, or otherwise upon Extraordinary Occasions; with the different
Forms of Writs for Proroguing, Adjourning, Superseding Parliaments, or Councils
after the first Writs of Summons, issued to Spiritual and Temporal Lords of all
ranks, the Kings Counsil, Sheriffs, and other Officers: with extraordinary
Writs directed to the King, Nobles, Officers, and others of Scotland; and to
some Lords, Officers, and others in Ireland; as likewise to Merchants, Masters,
Owners of Ships, and other private persons, to appear at or before the
Parliament, or Kings Counsil in England, upon urgent occasions, relating to the
respective Lands, affairs, defenses of Scotland, or Ireland, or to the Guarding
of the Seas, Merchandise, trade, and the like, with sundry kinds of Writs,
issued to the Archbishops, Bishops, Convocations, Clergy of England; besides
other rare Writs relating to our Parliamentarie affairs and proceedings; not
hitherto published or insisted on by any Writers of our Parliaments, though
most worthy the knowledge of all Noblemen, Statesmen, Parliament Men,
Lawyers, Gentlemen of quality, Antiquaries, Historians, hitherto (for the most
part) totally unacquainted with them, or the majoritie of them, almost quite
buried in the grave of oblivion, many of our Records being now overspread with
dust, cobwebs, and eaten up with rust, cankers, moths, worms, in their
overmuch neglected Cells, for want of industry, care in those who should
preserve, and reduce them into better order, for the public benefit of the
present and succeeding ages; A Work fit to be speedily executed, promoted, and
no longer deferred by those whom it most concerns, and by persons in highest
Authority as worthy their superintendent eye and countenance, being the
richest Treasures of the whole English Nation.

SECTION IV.
Of the several varieties, forms of Writs, for electing Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses for Parliaments and great Councils, issued to the Sheriffs of
Counties, intermixed with some of their ancientest Retorns by Sheriffs; and
some writs of Prorogation and Resummons; with special useful Annotations on,
and Observations from them, after most of these Writs recitals.

When and in what Kings Reign, Writs for electing Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses to serve in our great Councils and Parliaments were first issued, and
they upon the peoples free choice admitted into them as Members, is a great yet
undecided Countroversie amongst Antiquaries, and Writers of our English
Parliaments. Mr. William Lambard his Archaion. p. 242. to 273. Mr. Nathaniel
Bacon.
Some conceit, that there were Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Commons in the
Reigns of our Saxon Kings, before the Conquest, summoned as Members to their
grand Councils, and included together with the Nobles, under the name of
Sapientes, and the like; for proof whereof they much insist upon the pretended
ancient Treatise, styled, Modus tenendi Parliamentum, which in truth is but a
late absurd Imposture, though cried up by 4 Inst. p. 12. 349. 1 Instit. p. 110.
2 Inst. p. 7, 8.
Sir Edw. Cook (who over doted on it) for a most ancient Record, beyond Page
18, 19, 20, 40, 85, 87.
all exceptions, relying upon it as an undoubted Oracle. Others refer their
original to the Parliamentarie Council held at Salisbury, in the sixteenth year
of King Henry the 1. to which opinion Polydor Virgil, Holingshed, Speed, in
their Histories, Anno 1216. Justice Dodderidg, Mr. Cambden, Mr. Agar, and
Joseph Holland, in their Treatises of the (c) Antiquity of the Parliaments of
England. The Prerogative of the Parliament of England. p. 2, 3.
Sir Walter Raleigh, The Freeholders Grand Inquest. p. 12, 13.
and others incline, as most probable; Which I have at large refuted in My Plea
for the Lords, p. 165. to 183. by unanswerable evidences. Sir Posthuma, p. 346,
347, 348.
Rob: Cotton, and Titles of Honor, p. 712. 713, 717.
Mr. Seldom, two of our learnedest most judicious Antiquaries, do rather
incline, that the writs for electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, began but
about the later end of King Henry the 3. and that the first Writ of this kind
now extant, is that in Cl. 49 H. 3. before which time, I conceive, it can
hardly be made good by History or Records, that any Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses or Commons elected by the people, or others, were called to our Great
Councils or Parliaments, as Members of them. That which induces me to adhere
to this opinion, are not only the Histories and Records I have Plea for the
Lords, p. 30, to 35. 57, to 128, 203, to 262. The Supplement to it, p. 401. to
417. And Epistle before the 1. Part of The Register, etc.
elsewhere cited during the reigns of King Henry the 1. King Stephen, Henry the
2. Richard 1. King John, and Henry the 3. of all the Parliamentarie Councils
held under them before this year; which make no mention of any such Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, or Commons summoned to, or present in them, as Members;
but only of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Nobles, and Great
men of the Realm; but these memorable Writs entered in the Clause Roll of 48 H.
3. which assure us, that there was a Parliamentarie Council summoned and held
this year, by the King, his Prelates, Lords, Nobles, and Barons, and a Tenth
granted him by the Prelates and Lords, ordained how to be levied and expended
for the common benefit of the Realm and Church of England, by their unanimous
Counsil and advice; without the least mention at all of any Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses or Commons called to, or acting in it in any kind.

Claus. 48 H. 3. m. 5. dorso. Rex Johanni de Balliolo salutem. Cum jam sedata
turbatione nuper habita in Regno nostro, Pax inter Nos et Barons nostros,
divina cooperante gratia ordinata sit ac firmata; Et quaedam ardua negocia Nos
et Regnum nostrum tangentia Vobiscum communicanda habeamus, quae sine
praesentia vestra and aliorum Fidelium nostrorum nequeunt expediri, Vobis de
Consilio Baronum nostrorum mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini
firmiter injungentes, quatinus statim visis literis istis omnibus aliis
praetermissis sitis ad Nos London, sine armis, cum summa festinatione veniatis,
super praemissis consilium vestrum impensuri. Et hoc sicut nos honorem nostrum,
necnon et tranquilitatem Regni nostri diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. T. Rege
apud Sanctum Paulum London 4. die Junii.

Eodem modo mandatum est Rogero de Clifford, Rogero de Leyburn, Hamoni
Lestraung, Roberto de Nevill, Ade de Gesmuch.

These parties were See Mat. Paris, p. 961. and the Catalogue of Barons in the
London Edition of him, 1640. after the Table.
all Lords and Barons of the Realm (not Commoners) and summoned by particular
Writs by name, not elected by the people; and the Aliorum fidelium nostrorum,
were the rest of the Prelates, Barons and Nobles, as these ensuing Writs
resolve us.

Claus. 48 H. 3. m. 3. dorso. Rex M. Episcopo Norwicen. salutem. Cum per
Praelatos et Magnates Regni nostri provisum sit, et unanimiter conceslum, quod
Decimae proventuum omnium beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum in regno nostro
conferantur, ad communem utilitatem ejusdem Regni et Ecclesiae Anglicanae, et
quod hujusmodi Decimae per locorum Episcopos leventur, et ad Nos mittantur.
Vobis mandamus, quod hujusmodi Decimas, quas juxta provisionem praedictam in
vestra Dioc. de beneficiis Ecclesiasticis levari fecistis ad Nos sine dilatione
mittatis, convertendas in communem utilitatem Regni nostri et Ecclesiae
praedictae. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Scitote, quod nisi hoc ad mandatum
nostrum facere volueritis, De Consilio Magnatum qui sunt de Consilio nostro
mandamus Vic. nostro Norff: and Suff: ad dictam Decimam, ob defectum vestri,
quod vellemus levari, et ad Nos mitti fac. indilate. T. Rege apud Cantuar.
primo die Septembr.

Rex Vic. Norff. and Suff. salutem. Cum per Pr^latos et Magnates regni no^ri
Provisum sit, et unanimiter Concessunr, quod Decimae proventuum, etc. (as in
the former W^it) and ad Nos mittantur; Et jam mandaverimus M. Norwich Episcopo,
quod hujusmodi Decimas, quas juxta provisionem praedictam de beneficiis
Ecclesiasticis in Dioc. sua levari fecit, et ad Nos sine dilatione mittat,
convertend^s in commun^m ^tilitatem regni nostri, et Ecclesiae praedictae, et
hoc nullatenus omittat. Nos indempnita^i Ecclesiasticae libertatis quatinus
fieri poterit providere volentes, tibi De Consilio Magnatum qui sunt de
Consilio nostro praecipimus injungentes, quod in propria persona tua accedas ad
praedictu^ Episcopum, et ipsum ex part nostra diligenter moneas et inducas, ut
negotium istud juxta mandatum nostrum expleat cum effectu. Et si ipse propter
hujusmodi monitionem hoc facere neglexerit, tu ex tun^ per negligentiam ipsius
praedictam Decimam de hujusmodi benesiciis Ecclesiasticis levari, et ad Nos
mitti fac. indilate. T. ut supra.

Rex C. Ebor. Archiepiscopo Angliae Primati salutem. Cum Nos, una cum Regni
nostri Pra latis et Proceribus Cl. 48 H. 3. d. 3.
super alienigenarum Inimicorum nostrorum adventu nuper praemuniti, de Consilio
eorundem Prelatorum et Procerum provida deliberatirne duxerimus sta^uendum, ut
ab hujus defensionis auxilio nullus excusatur sexus aut ordo, nullius personae
laboribus, nullis rerum parcatur impendiis; illa tamen devotio debita quam ad
sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam gerimus nos induxit, ut virorum Ecclesiasticorum
in hac part subsidium de Pr^latorum ordinaretur assen^u; qui ut suae et
Clericorum suorum tranquilitati pros^cerent et bellorum clades personaliter
evitaren^. Decimam omnium Ecclesiasticorum proventuum in ^uis Diocaesibus non
solum nobis, set ad utilitatem rei publicae Regni et Ecclesiae Anglicanae
Concesserunt. Quia vero non tantum Ecclesiasticis Ecclesiae Eborum.
Suffraganeis et eorum Clericis, sed et ipsi Ebor. Ecclesiae vestrae ejusque
Cl^ricis et toti Clero regni nostri prospicietur in hac part. Vobis mandamus
firmiter injungendo, quod Decimam omnium Ecclesiasticorum proventuum in Dioc.
Ebor. existentium, nullo ab hac praestatione exempto, per vos vel ministros
vestros citra festum Sancti Michaelis levari, et ad Nos micti facias. In hoc
enim non modicum, Ecclesiasticae libertati deferimus, quod non per Ballivos
nostros in tam ardua necessitate, set per vestros Ecclesiasticos hujusmodi
subsidia ad opus reipublicae Regni et Ecclesiae Anglicanae co^ligi demandemus
Et sciatis, quod nisi hoc mandatum nostrum cum summa celeritate fueritis
executi, quantumcunque libertates Ecclesiae tueri totis viribus nostris
intendimus, omittere non possumus nec debemus, quin pro securitate regni nostri
ejusque defensione et communi utilitate, dictam Decimam per Ballivos nostros
levari faciamus. T. Rege apud Cantuar. 3. die Septembris.

Claus. 48 H. 3. d. 2.
Rex Vic. Linc. salutem. Quia Magister Ordinis de Sempl^gham satisfecit Nobis
de SUBSIDIO nobis praestando ad defensione^ Regni nostri contra hostiu^
adventum alienigenaru^ in regnu^ praedictu^. Tibi praecipimus quod
districtionem quam fac. in terris et tenementis ipsius Magistri in balliva tua
occasion praedicta penitus relaxes, donec ali id inde tibi praeceperimus. T.
Rege apud Cantuar. 28 die Octobr.

Had the Commons, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses been present in, or parties
to the Ayds, or Ordinances, mentiond in these writs of 48 H. 3. it is very
probable w^ should have found some footste ^s or hints of it in them; but their
silence herin, and frequent mention only of the Prelates, Lords and Barons,
concludes, they were not summoned to this Parliamentary Council.

If any Object, That the Knights and others who held of the King by Knight
service, were summoned to appear Objection.
with their horses, (...) and service in the Kings presence at Oxford, as well
as the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots Priors, Farls and Barons, and that to
assist him in his present necessity as well with their COUNSEL as ARMS:
Therefore it is probable they were summoned to this Parliamentarie Council, as
well as the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, as these Writs import.

Claus 48. H. 3. M. 6. Dorso. Rex Reginaldo silio Petri. Vic. Suthampt.
salutem. Cum nuper propter salvationem Regni nostri, ac etiam propter guerram
in eodem Regno jam subortum, summoneri fecissemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons, Milites and alios qui servicium Nobis
debent, ut essent ad Nos apud Oxon ad mediam Quadriges. prox. praeteritam, cum
equis and armis, and toto servicio suo Nobis debito, in hujusmodi necessitatis
articulo Consilium and auxilium essicax super praemissis impensuri: ac quidam
ex eis servicium suum Nobis debitum ad mandatum nostrum facere noluerint;
propter quod De Baronum consilio and Magnatum Nobiscum existentium provisum
est, quod Baroniae, terrae and tenementa eorum qui de Nobis tenent in capite,
and qui Nobis serviciu^ suum Nobis debitum juxta mandatum nostrum facere
noluerunt, capiantur in manum nostram, donec tam de dicto servicio quam de
hujusmodi Transgressione nobis satisfecerint. Vobis mandamus sirmiter
injungentes, quod Baronias Ven. Patris S Winton Episcopi, and Abbatis de
Abindon, qui servicium suum Nobis debitum ad mandatum nostrum facere noluerunt,
capias in manum nostram; and catalla sua cum bonis and catallis in ipsis
inventis, sine distractione seu dilapidatione aliqua inde facienda salvo
custodiri facias; Ita quod de bonis and catallis ipsis, vel ^e precio eorundem,
and de exitibus Baroniarum praedictarum Nobis sufficienter respondeas donec
aliud inde praeceperimus. T. Rege, apud Oxon. 3 die Aprilis.

Eodem modo mandatum est Ade de Grennuill, Vic. Norht. quod capiat in manum Rs.
Baronias Episcopi Elien and Abbatis de Ramisey.

Eodem modo mand. est. Vic. Notingh. and Derb. quod capiat in manum Rs.
Baronias Archepiscop. Ebor. and Episcopi Linc.

Which Writs were accordingly executed by some of these Sheriffs, even beyond
the Kings instructions, as is evident by this Writ to the Sheriff of Yorkshire,
upon the Archbishop of Yorks complaint.

Cl. 48. H. 3. m. 6. dorso, Rex Roberto de Nevil, Vic. Ebor. salutem, Cum
Baronias quorundum Praelatorum regni nostri nuper ceperimus in manum nostram eo
quod servicia sua nobis debita, nobis minime fecerunt ad mandatum nostrum; ac
vobis mandaverimus, quod Baroniam Ven. Patris G. Ebor. Archiepiscopi caperetis
in manum nostram, pro eo quod servicium suum Nobis tempore competenti non
exhibuit, and quod eam salvo, and absque destructione aliqua bonorum ejusdem
Baroniae custodiri faceretis; vos, ut accepimus, bonorum illorum dissipationem
non modicam fieri permittitis ad gravissimum dampnum Archiepiscopi sic
praedicti, super quo, nec immerito, movemur. Verum quia demandam nostram
servicii dicti Archiepiscopi jam in suspenso posuimus ad tempus, vobis
mandamus, quatenus Baroniam suam cum omnibus inde perceptis a tempore captionis
ejusdem in manum nostram sine dilatione restituatis eidem. Quia etiam datum est
Nobis intelligi, quod Milites and servientes Archiepiscopi praedicti versus Nos
nuper venientes cum equis and armativis ad faciend. Nobis servicium praedictum
per viam arestavistis, and quosdam ex eis adhuc in carcere detenetis, and a
quibusdam eorum graves redemptiones cepistis, quod grave gerimus and
indignemus; Vobis firmiter injungimus, quatinus dictos incarceratos sine mora
deliberetis, and tam eis quam aliis, a quibus redemptiones cepistis, omnia per
vos aut vestros sibi ablata plenarie restitui faciatis. Ne super hoc oporteat
Nos gravius sollicitari propter quod ad vos graviter capere debeamus. T. Rege
apud Sutton 26 die Maii.

I answer, 1. That these were Writs of Summons not to a Parliament, but Camp,
cum equis and armis, etc. Answ.
as the Writs recite. 2. That the Counsil mentioned in it was only Military,
not Parliamentary, as the aid and assistance with Horses, Arms, and military
services, coupled with it, resolve; and the recital in the Writs, ac etiam
propter guerram in eodem regno jam subortam, etc. 3. It is most apparent, by
the ensuing Clause: Propter quod de Baronum consilio and Magnatum Nobiscum
existentium provisum est, etc. that the Baronies of these Bishops and others,
who refused to do their services should be seized into the Kings hands: That
the Barons and great men only who were then present with the King at Oxford;
did counsel and advise him, as Members of his Military, and Parliamentary
Council, notthe Knights and others of inferior condition, holding of him by
Knight service, who then assisted him only with their Horses, Arms, and
military services 4. These Knights and others then summoned to Oxford, were no
Knights, Citizens or Burgesses elected by the People and Kings Writs to serve
in any Parliament then held at Oxford; but only such who held Lands of the
King by Knight service, which they were then summoned actually to perform, as
his Tenants, for his defense in the Wars against foreign and domestic Enemies;
as the Writs resolve. 5. The Writs of Summons to the Parliamentary Council held
this year, mentioned in the forecited Writs, were different in form, date, The
one 3. Aprilis, the other 4. Iunii, and 1 September. following after the Wars
ended and Army dissolved, which preceeded this Parliament.
time, place, from the objected Writs; and in the manner of appearing: The one
summoning them to appear at Oxford, cum equis and armis, etc. the other to
appear at London sine armis, consilium vestrum impensuri, etc. Therefore there
being no mention of any Knights and others of inferior condition summoned
together with the Barons and Nobles to appear at London in the Parliamentary
Council there held, as there is in the other Writs of Summons to the Kings Camp
and Army. It is a most clear convincing argument, that in 48 H. 3. there were
no Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses summoned to the Parliament, but only the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords and Barons.

Now because I meet with some other memorable Writs, which may seem in some
men's judgment to prove that there were Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Commons
summoned to Parliaments or Councils before 49 H. 3. I shall present you with
them in order, with my Answers to and Observations on them.

The first and ancientest of them is this notable Writ of Proclamation, much
insisted on, and imperfectly cited by Mr. William Lambard, (an eminent
Antiquarie of Lincolns Inn) in his Archaion. p. 261, 262, 263. which I have
faithfully transcribed out of the Patent Roll it self. Pat. 6 Johan. Rs. m. 2.
dorso, as a raritie not formerly printed.

Rex, etc. Vic. Roteland, etc. Scias, quod provisum est * Pat. 6. Johan. Regis
m 2. dorso.
Communi assensu Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum. Baronum, and omnium
fidelium nostrorum Angliae, quod novem Milites per totam Angliam invenient
decimum Militem been paratum equis and armis, ad defensionem Regni nostri; and
quod illi novem Milites inveniant decimo Militi qualibet die ij. Sol: ad
liberationem suam Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod sicut teipsum and omnia tua
diligis, provideas, quod december Milites de Balliva tua sint apud London a die
Pasche in tres septimanas, been parati equis and armis, cum liberationibus
suis, sicut praedictum est, parati ire in servicium nostrum quo praeceperimus,
and existere in servicio nostro ad defensionem Regni nostri quantum opus
suerit. Provisum est etiam, quod si Alienigenae in terram nostram venerint,
omnes unanimiter eis occurrant cum fortia and armis sine aliqua occasion and
dilatione, audit is rumoribus de eorum adventu. Et si quis Miles, vel serviens,
vel alius terram tenens Convictus.
conventus suerit, qui se inde retraxerit, dummodo tanta non fuerit gravatus
infirmitate quod illuc venire non possit, Ipse and haeredes sui imperpetuum
exheredantur, dabuntur, and feodum suum remanebit Domino fundi, Feodi.
ad faciend. inde voluntatem suam; ita quod exhaeredatus vel haeredes sui
nunquam inde aliquam habeant recuperationem. Si quis vero, Milites servientes
vel alii qui terram non habent, inventi fuerint qui se similiter retraxerint,
ipsi and haeredes sui Serbi fient imperpetuum, reddendo singulis annis iiij. d.
de capitibus suis; nec pro paupertate omittant ad praedictum negotium venire,
cum illud audierint; quare ex quo ad exercitum venerint, providebitur unde
sufficienter in servicio nostro poterant sustentare. Si vero Vic. vel Ball. vel
Praepositus illos quise retraxerint Nobis per breve, vel per scriptum, vel viva
voce non ostenderint; dict. Vic. vel Ballivus, vel Praepositus remanebit in
misericordia nostra de vita and membris. Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod sub
sestinatione Proclamari facias in foris per totam Ballivam tuam, and in
Mercatis and Nundinis, and alibi, and ita te de negotio illo faciendo
intromittas, quod ad te, pro defectu tui, capere non debeamus. Et tu ipse sis
apud London ad praefatum terminum, vel aliquem discretum ex part tua mittas,
and facias tunc Nobis sciret nomina decimorum Militum. Et habeas ibi hoc Breve.
Test meipso apud Wint. 3 die Aprilis.

Sed Nota; Vic. Eborum, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, scribitur in
eadem forma, hoc adjecto, Quod Rob. fill. Rog. and Constable. Cestr. retineat de
Militibus praedictis quos judicat expedire necessario ad defenfionem partium
suarum.

Haee Brevia liberata sunt subscriptis.

Eborum, per Ric. Anglicum, Clericum Rob. fill. Rog. Northumbr. Westmerl.
Cumberl.

Bucks. and Bedf. per Spain. Norf. and Suff. Essex and Herif. Cantebr. and
Hunt. Oxon. Berks. Northt.

Glouc. Rad. de Chumbras. Honor. de Glouc. Worcester. Hereford. Leic. and
Warwic. Salop. and Staff. Lancastr.

Wiltes per Laurentium. Somerset and Dorset Devon. Cornub. Sutht.

Linc. per Rog: Bastard homine^ Senescalli. Roteland Not and Derb.

Kent per Thom fill. Nigell. Clericum Willielmi de Wroth. Surr. Midds. Sussex.

From the Prologue of this Proclamation: Provisum est communi assensu
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, et omnium fidelium nostrorum
Angliae: Archaion, p. 261, 262, 263,
Mr. Lambard inferrs, that the Commonaltie of the Realm, both at this time, and
long before, were summoned to our Great Councils and Parliaments, and present
in, assenting to whatever was ordained in them, as well as the Spiritual and
Temporal Lords; this being in truth the probablest evidence and Authority he
produces to prove this assertion.

But under his correction, I aver First, neither this rectal, nor any other
testimony alleged by him, does clearly evidence, that these omnes fideles
nostri Angliae were Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, or Commons of the Realm
chosen by the people by virtue of the Kings writs, and sent by them to
Parliaments and Great Councils in that or former ages, as Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses have been of later times, no Histories, nor Records making express
mention of any such Writs or Elections of such Knights, Citizens, Burgesses of
Parliament, before 49 H. 3.

2ly. The Writ of Summons extant in the Sea here, p. 2, 3.
Clause Roll of 6. Johan. Regis, dors. 3. this very year, to the Parliamentary
Council at London, (wherein this provision for defense of the kingdom against
foreign Enemies, was made as I conjecture,) makes mention only of Magnatum
terrae nostrae, Quos ad diem illum et locum fecimus convocari: not of any
Commons, Knights of Shires, Citizens or Burgesses summoned to it.

3ly. Hist. Angl. p. 201.
Matthew Paris, and Flores Hist. pars 2. Ann. 1204. p. 80. Seldens Titles of
Honor' p. 707.
Mat. Westminster, who inform us of another Parliamentary Council held under
King John at Oxford this very year, express it thus. Deinde in crastino
Circumcisionis convenerunt ad Colloquium (the word Parliamentum not being then
in use) apud Oxon. Rex et Magnates Angliae: ubi concessa sunt Regi auxilia
militaria. de quolibet Scuto duae marcae et dimidia. Nec etiam Episcopi et
Abbates, sive Ecclesiae personae, sine promissione recesserunt; without
mentioning any Knights, Citizens, Commons or Burgesses present at this Council,
or parties to this grant. Wherefore, if the Ordinance mentioned in this Writ,
was made at Oxford, these Omnium fidelium nostrorum Angliae (as I conceive)
cannot properly be meant of them, but of the Abbots, Priors, 7 E. 1. Stat. of
Mortmain. See part 1. p. 383.
Kings Counsil, or those Omnes alios qui de Capite tenent de Nobis, who were
not Majores Barons Regni, mentioned in the Mat. Paris, 247.
Great Charter of King John, some few years after, in this memorable Clause
which best explains this in the Proclamation: Ad habendum Commune Consiltum
Regni de auxiliis assidendis, submoneri faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abbates, Comites and Majores Barons sigillatim per literas nostras: Et
praeterea faoiemus in Generali per Vicecomites and Ballivos nostros, omnes
alios qui de Capite tenent de Nobis ad certum diem, scilicet ad terminu^
Quadraginta dierum ad minimum, et ad certum locum; in omnibus literis
summonitionis illius Causam submonitionis illius exponemus: which was
accordingly expressed in the writ of Summons 6 Johannis, and in all writs of
like nature since this Great Charter, extant in our Records.

4ly. The very contents of the Provision mentioned in this Proclamation; Quod
novem Milites (to wit, those who held Lands by a Knights fee, and
Knight Service) per totam Angliam invenient decimum Militem been paratum equis
et armis, etc. compared with Clause 19 H. 3. m. 1, 3, 6, 8. Prove these lesser
Barons and Tenants of the King to be the persons intended in this Clause (not
any elected Knights, Citizens and Burgesses,) who were either summoned in
general to this Council, and consented to this provision therein when passed;
or else assented thereto after the Lords and Great men had passed and
communicated it to them in the Country.

5ly. Though this Provision and Proclamation do not clearly prove the Summons
of any elected Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to this Parliamentary Council;
yet they are a clear evidence; That Ordinances for raising Men, Forces, Taxes,
and Impositions for the ne^ie defense of the King and Realm against foreign
Enemies, with forfeitures of Lands, and other severe penalties for defaults
therein, cannot, nor may not be made nor imposed on the Freeholders or Subjects
of England, by the King or his Counsil, but only by the common consent, grant
and provision of the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, Great men, and other Lieges
of the King, assembled in a Parliamentary Council; since the Provisions and
penalties mentioned in this Proclamation were all made by their common consent,
and that upon this occasion.

King Mat. Paris, Hist. Angliae, p. 200, 201, 202.
John in the year 1203. passing out of England into Normandy with a great Army,
giving himself over to luxury, sleep and carelessness, suffered the King of
France to take many Towns and Castles from him, without the least resistance.
Being frequently informed thereof by complaints from all parts, he gave no
other answer but this to the Complainants; Suffer him to do what he pleases, I
will one day recover whatever he now violently surpriseth. Hereupon Comites et
Barons, et alii de regno Angliae Nobiles,, qui ei eatenus fideliter
adbaeserant talia audientes, ejusque desidiam incorrigibilem intelligentes,
impetrata licentia quasi illico reversuri, remearunt ad propria; returning no
more, but leaving the King in Normandy with very few Soldiers; Upon which he
returning into England, the King of France came before most of King John's
Castles and Towns there, and persuaded them to submit themselves to him as
their Chief Lord, seeing King John their immediate Lord had quite deserted
them: who accordingly submitted. King John upon this occasion raising a
puissant Army, intended to cross the Sea with them to regain his lost Towns
and Castles from the French; Whereupon by the common assent of his Spiritual
and Temporal Lords and Lieges assembled in a Parliamentary Council, he made the
precedent provisions and Proclamation for the Defense of the Realm of England
in case the French or any foreign Enemies should invade it during his absence:
After which Anno 1205. he took ship at Portsmouth against the prohibition of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other of his Nobles, who refusing to
follow him, he was enforced to return after he had continued at Sea two days.
Reversus autem Rex coepit de Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, et viris
religiosis, pecuniam infinitam, occasiones praetendens, quod noluerunt eum
sequi in parts transmarinas, ut haereditatem amissam recuperet. And so much
touching the contents, occasion, issue of these Provisions and Proclamation.

The 2. Writ is that of Rot. Claus. Anno 15. Johannis Regis, pars 2. m. 7.
dorso, which I have examined by the Record.

Rex Vicecomiti Oxon. salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod omnes Milites, Ballivae
tuae qui summoniti fuerunt esse apud Oxoniam ad Nos a die Omnium Sanctorum in
quindecim dies, venire facias cum armis suis: corpora vero Baronum sine See
here, p. 4, 5.
armis singulariter, et IV. Discretos Milites de Comitatu tuo, illuc venire
facias ad Nos ad eundem terminum, ad loquendum Nobiscum de Negotiis regni
nostri. Test meipso apud Witten. 11 die Novembr.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus.
This unusual form of Writ, (the later part whereof sounds like a kind of
Summons of Knights out of every County to a Parliament at Oxford) has much
perplexed many See Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, p. 710. My Plea for the Lords,
p. 374.
learned men, who knew not well what to determine thereof, being without
parallel. But under correction of others, I conceive it rather a Summons to a
Military Camp of War, than to a Parliament or Parliamentary Council at Oxford;
and these Quatuor discretos Milites out of every County, were not summoned as
Knights of the Shire to a Parliament then held, but rather as Inquisitors or
Grand-Jury-men, upon a special occasion; thus related by Hist. Angliae p. 224,
229, 230, 231, etc.
Matthew Paris, which in my apprehension will very satisfactorily explain this
obscure Writ. King John being both injuriously excommunicated, deposed from his
Throne, his whole kingdom, interdicted and given by the Pope to the French King
who thereupon prepared a great Army and Navy to possess himself thereof; he did
upon this occasion, to resist the French, and defend his Crown and kingdom
against their intended invasion, by two several Writs, (recorded at large in
this Historian) summon all the Ships of England able to carry six horses to
meet together at Portsmouth, well furnished with victuals and Mariners to
resist these Enemies by Sea; and all Earls, Barons, Knights, Freehold Tenants
and others who were bound by tenure, or able of body to bear arms, to meet him
at Dover, to withstand them by Land. After which, having reconciled himself to
the Pope by resigning his Kingdom of England and Ireland to, and retaking them
from him under an yearly Tribute, he was by the Popes Legate absolved from his
Excommunication, and the kingdom from its long-continued interdict, at
Winchester; swearing upon the Holy Evangelists in this his Absolution; Quod
Sanctam Ecclesiam, ejusque ordinatos diligeret, defenderet, et manuteneret
contra omnes adversarios pro posse suo. Quodque bonas leges Antecessorum
suorum, and praecipue Leges Edwardi Regis revocaret, et iniquas destrueret, et
omnes homines suos secundum justa Curiae suae judicia; judicaret, quodque
singulis redderet jura sua. Juravit etiam, quod omnibus ad Interdicti negotium
pertingentibus, inter proximum Pascha plenariam restitutionem faceret
obtatorum, etc. In pursuance whereof, In crastino misit Rex literas ad omnes
Vicecomites regni Angliae, ut de singulis Dominicorum suorum villis: Quatuor
legales homines cum praeposito, apud Sanctum Albanum, pridie nonas Augusti
fecerent conv^nire, ut per illos, et alios ministros suos de damnis singulorum
Episcoporum, ut ablatis certitudinem inquireret, et quid singulis deberetur.
Dum haec agerentur, interfuerunt Concilio apud Sanctum Albanum, Galfridus
filius Petri, et Episcopus Winton. cum Archiepiscopo, et Episcopis et
Magnatibus Regni. Ubi cunctis pace Regis denunciata, ex ejusdem Regis part
firmiter praeceptum est; quatenus leges Henrici avi sui ab omnibus in regno suo
custodirentur, et omnes leges iniquae penitus enerventur. Denunciatum est
praeterea Vicecomitibus, Forestariis, aliisque Ministris Regis, sicut vitam et
membra sua diligunt, ne a quoquam aliquid violenter extorquerent, vel alicui
injuriam irrogare praesumant, aut scotalla alicubi in regno faciant, sicut
facere consueverant. After which, Rex vero Johannis cum se a quibusdam
Magnatibus (who deserted him in Poytiers) quasi derelictum cognovisset, magnum
Congregabit Exercitum ut rebels ad consuetum obsequium revocaret. Cumque arma
movere incepisset, venit ad eum Archiepiscopus apud Northamtonam, dicens,
plurimum in injuriam sui Sacramenti, quod in absolutione sua praestiterat,
redundare, Si absque Iudicio Curiae suae contra quempiam bella moveret. Quod
audiens Rex, cum ingenti strepitu dixit, Se regni negocia propter Episcopum non
differ, cum laica judicia ad ipsum non pertineant. In crastino autem summo
diluculo iter furibundus arripiens versus Notingham properavit. Secutus est
quoque Regem Archiepiscopus memoratus, constanter affirmans, quod nisi ab
inceptis celerius desisterit, omnes qui versus quempiam ante relaxationem
interdicti hostiliter arma gesserunt, praeter ipsum solum, anathematis vinculo
innodaret. Sicque ab inceptis Regem revocans Archiepiscopus, non prius abe,
recessit donec Diem conipetentem ad Curiam Regis veniendi, et ibidem Iuri
parendi Baronibus impetrasset. The 8. of September following, the Archbishop,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Barons of the Realm assembling together at Paul's,
the Archbishop calling some of the Barons to him apart from the rest, secretly
acquainted them with the Kings forecited Oath taken at his absolution, and
produced before them the Charter of Liberties granted by King Henry the first;
by which they might, if they would, reduce their long lost Liberties to their
pristine estate: At which the Barons greatly rejoicing, juraverunt omnes in
praesentia Archiepiscopi, quod viso tempore congruo, pro hiis libertatibus, si
necesse fuerit, decertabunt usque ad mortem. Archiepiscopus autem promisit eis
fidelissimum auxilium suum pro posse suo; Et sic confoederatione facta inter
eos, Colloquium solutum est. The King hereupon (as I conjecture) issued out the
precedent writ the 3. of November following, (whereon it bears date) to all the
Sheriffs of England, consisting of 3. distinct parts, suitable to that time and
occasion. The first is, to new summon Omnes Milites, all who held of him by
Knight Service, with those Soldiers (not knights, or knights of Shires,) in
their respective Bailiwicks, they had formerly summoned (by some such writ as
this) to repair to Oxford, to come to the Kings person (ad Nos) without naming
any certain place, 15 days after All Souls day; cum armis; with their arms;
(the Sea here, p. p. 4, 5. and Part 1. p. 156. to 180.
usual form and clause in precedent and subsequent writs of Summons of an Army
and forces to aid the King, not to a Parliament, or Great Council of State) and
that to defend and assist him; against the precedent confederacy of the
Archbishop, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and Barons, then newly entered into at
London; against whom he had raised a great Army (by like Writs) but a few
Moneth^ before, to reduce these Rebels to obedience: which Army the Archbishop
caused him to dissolve, as Matthew Paris relates. The 2. Clause is, Corpora
vero Baronum singulariter sine armis; to summon and bring to the King the
Bodies of the Barons in their respective Counties apart one from another,
without arms, (as in the said writ) not two or more of them together, with
their arms and armed attendants, to prevent all dangers, tumults, insurrections
and intended rebellions, if they should come armed to his Court; being now thus
summoned to appear before him, not to treat and advise with him, and the rest
of the Prelates, Earls and Nobles, of any urgent affairs concerning the King or
Realm, (of which there is no mention at all in this writ in relation to the
Barons, as there is in all Writs of Summons to Parliaments or Great Councils
issued to them, extant in our Records;) But rather, according to the
Archbishops engagement to the King at Nottingham a little before this writ, to
submit themselves to the Justice of his Court and a legal trial concerning the
crimes he should there object against them, upon their appearance on the day
prefixed in the writ, the same I conceive, the King and Archbishop had formerly
agreed upon at Notingham. And that this was the reason why they were to appear
without armor, is evident; by the like Summons hertofore to See Malmsbury de
Gestis Regum, l. 2. c. 13. Hoveden, Wigorniensis, and Bromton, Anno 1051. and
My Plea for the Lords, p. 308,
Earl Godwin and his Sons to appear in the Kings Court, to answer the Kings
charge against them, attended only with (...) men, without any force or arms:
by the subsequent Statutes of 7 E. 1. Rastal, Armor; 1 and 2 E. 3. c, 3.
expressly resolving, that in all Assemblies which should be made within the
Realm of England for ever, every man should come without all force and armor,
well and peaceably: And that no man, Great or Small, of whatsoever condition he
be, except the Kings Servants in his presence, and his Ministers and their
Assistants in executing his precepts, or their Office; or upon a cry made for
arms to keep the peace, in such places where such acts happen, should be so
hardy to come before the King or his Justices, or other his Ministers doing
their office with force and arms, nor bring no force in ^ffray of Peace. Which
was but the Sea here, p. 5. Aluredi Regis Lex 41, 42. Chron. Johan. Bromton,
col. 825.
ancient Common and Statute Law of England. The 3. Clause of the Writ, which
only has some resemblance of a writ of Summons; is to summon not two, but
quatuor Discretos Milites de Comitatu tuo; being more than we read summoned in
succeeding Rolls out of every County. as Knights of Shires to our Parliament;
and those not to come to any Parliament or Great Council, at any certain place,
of which there is no mention at all in this Writ, but ad Nos, to the King
himself, at the time there specified; and that only, Ad loquendum Nobiscum de
negotiis regni nostri; not, ad tractandum Nobiscum, et cum Praelatis,
Proceribus, or Magnatibus, or aliis, or caeteris fidelibus regni nostri, de
arduis et urgentissimis negotiis, Nos et statum Regni nostri contingentibus;
or, ad faciendum et consentiendum hiis, quae tunc and ibidem de Communi
Consilio regni nostri, Deo propitio, contigerit ordinari; the usual Clauses in
all Writs of Summons of Barons, or Knights of Counties to Parliaments and Great
Parliamentary Councils; Therefore certainly this Writ was no Summons of Knights
of Shires to a Parliament or Great Council; the rather, because there is no
clause in it for electing these 4. knights; nor yet of any Citizens or
Burgesses, as is usual in the Writs for electing Knights of Counties, and
because no Writs of Summons ever prescribed the Summons of Barous and Knights
together like this: Upon all which considerations, I conceive, this ad
loquendum Nobiscum de negotiis regni nostri, for which these 4. Knights were
summoned; was the very same, or the like business for which Matthew Paris
relates the King some few Months before, sent Letters to the Sherifs of every
County throughout England, to cause Quatuor legales homines (the same with
those this Writ styles, Quatuor Discretos Milites) out of every of their
Counties, to come to St. Albanes the 8. of August following, to inquire of and
inform the King, what damages and losses any of the Bishops had sustained by
the King, and his Officers, during the Interdict and their banishments, and
what was due to every one of them; that so he might satisfy them according to
his premised Oath; as Chart. 16 Iohann. Regis m. 9. n. 67. the next year after
this, compared with Pat. 15 Johan. Regis nu. 3. De Interdicto relaxando, etc.
clearly intimate, if not resolve. This I am fully persuaded, was the true
scope, nature and intention of this Writ; which has puzzled so many, and none
else have hitherto fully or truly explained: which I humbly submit to the
Readers consideration.

The 3. Writ I have found in our Records, touching the election of any Knights
of Counties to a Parliamentary Council before 49 H. 3. is this of Claus. 38 H.
3. m. 7. and 12. dorso, (not mentioned in any Treatises of our Parliaments, or
Collection of Parliamentary Writs of Summons I have seen) transcribed with my
own hand out of the Roll it self, as worthy observation.

Rex Vic. Bed. et Berks salutem. Cum Comites and Barons, and caeteri Magnates
Regni nostri Nobis firmiter promiserunt, Forma directa Magnatibus and Vicom.
Angliae.
quod erunt London a die Pasche prox. futur. in tres Septimanas cum equis et
armis, parati et been muniti ad tendendum sine ulla dilatione versus
Portesmouth, ad transfretand. ad Nos in Vasconiam contra Regem Castle. qui
terram nostram Vasconiae in manuforti in aestate prox. futura hostiliter est
ingressurus. Et tibi mandavimus, quod omnes ill^s de Balliva tua, qui tenent 20
librat. terrae de Nobis in Capite, vel de aliis qui sunt infra aetatem, et in
custodia nostra, ad idem distringas; Tibi districte praecipimus, quod praeter
omnes praedictos venire faciatis coram Consilio nostro, apud Westmon: in
Quindena Paschae prox. futur. Ouatuor Legales et Discretos Milites de
Comitatibus praedictis, quos iidem Comitatus ad hoc eligerint vice omnium et
singulorum eorundem; videlicet, Duos de uno Comitatu, et duos de alio, ad
providendum una cum Militibus aliorum Comitatuum, quos ad eundem diem vocari
fecimus, quale Auxilium Nobis in tanta necessitate impendere voluerint. Et tu
ipse Militibus et aliis de Comitatu praedicto necessitatem nostram, et tam
urgens negotium nostrum diligenter exponas, et ad competens auxilium Nobis ad
praesens impendend. efficaciter inducas. Ita quod praefati Ouatuor Milites
praefato Consilio nostro ad praedictum terminum Pasche respondere possint super
praedicto auxilio pro singulis Com praedictorum. Firmiter etiam tibi
praecipimus, quod omnia debita quae Nobis aretro sunt in Balliva tua et solvi
debuerint ad Scaccarium nostrum ante Pasch. jam instans, vel solvi debent ad
Scace. ejusdem Pasche, habeas ad idem Scac. in quindena praedict. Pasche.
Scientes, quod nisi praedicta debita tunc ibidem babueris, non solum corpus
tuum arrestari faciemus, set debita illa de terris et tenementis (tuis) levari
faciemus ad dampnum tuum non modicum. Test A. Regina, et C. Com. Cornub. apud
Windesore xi. die Febr.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur omnibus Vicecomitibus Angliae.
These Writs, though at first view they look like Writs for electing Knights of
Shires to a Parliamentary Council, yet in truth they are no such Writs, but
only command the Sheriffs to cause two Knights to be elected in every County
by the Counties themselves, in their steads to appear before the Kings Counsel
(not Parl.) at Westminster on Quindena Pasche following, to inform the Counsel,
what voluntary aid each particular County would grant the King in his great
necessity, toward the Defense of Gascoigne against the intended invasion of
the King of Castle. Which Nece^ity and Business, the Sheriffs themselves were
commanded diligently to declare to the elected Knights and others of the
County, and effectually to induce them to grant the King a present competent
aid; So as the Knights of each County might answer, upon their appearance
before the Kings Counsil at the day prefixed, what they would do concerning
this aid thus required of them. This appears 1. By that very Clause of these
Writs, which is most pertinent; which requires not the Sheriffs to elect two
Knights to come to any Great Council or Parliament, there to advise and consult
together touching the granting of a Subsidy or aid to the King, but only 2ly.
By the very Prologue of the Writ, which recites, That the Earls, Barons, and
the rest of the Great men of the Realm had firmly promised the King to be at
London 3. weeks after Easter with their horses and arms: not to hold a
Parliament or Great Council, but to march from thence to Portsmouth without any
delay, and to cross the Seas to the King in Gascoigne, to aid him against the
King of Castle: and that he should distrain all who held 20 l. lands a year of
the King in Capite, or of any of his Wards within their respective Counties, to
accompany the Lords and Great men in this Expedition. And thereupon it requires
a voluntary aid of the rest of the Freeholders and Inhabitants in each County
toward this expedition, in manner aforsaid, for which end they were to elect 2
knights in each County to appear before the Kings Privy Counsil, not the Earls,
Barons, and other Great men of the Realm, 15 days after Easter, a week before
the Nobles and Great men appointed to meet. 3ly. By the whole frame of the
Writ, differing much from the Writs of Summons here ensuing; and commanding the
Sherifs to levy and pay in all the Kings debts under strictest penalties into
his Exchequer by a certain day, which no other Writ of Summons to Parliament
does. 4ly. By comparing it with a like Writ to both the Archbishops, and all
Bishops of Engl. (forecited, Part 1. p. 4, 5.) to summon all their Chapters,
Archdeacons, Clergy, and other Religious persons before them in their
respective Diocesses, and to excite them to a free and liberal contribution of
an aid to the King upon the same necessity and occasion; whereof they were to
certify the Kings Counsil by certain discreet men ^hosen by them, at the same
time as the Knights of Counties were, both which Writs are entered together in
the same membrana, differ but two days in their date, and fully explain each
other. 5ly, By parallelling it with this writ in Claus. 19 H. 3. m. 8. dorso.

Rex Vic. Sussex salutem. Scias quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores,
Comites, Barons, and omnes alii de Regno nostro Angliae qui de Nobis tenent in
Capite, spontanea voluntate sua et sine consuetudine Concesserunt Nobis efficax
Auxilium, ad magna negotia nostra expedienda: unde provisum est De Constlio
illorum, quod habeant de singulis feodis Militum Ward. quae de Nobis tenent in
Capite duas Marcas, ad praedictum Auxilium Nobis faciendum, et unde providerint
reddere Nobis unam medietatem ante festum Sancti Michaelis, Anno regni nostri
19. and aliam medietatem ad Pasch. Anno regni nostri 20. Ideo tibi praecipimus,
quod ad mandatum Venerabilis Patris R. Cicestr. Episcopi Cancellarii nostri
sine dilatione distringas omnes Milites et libere tenentes qui de eo tenent per
Servicium Militare, in Balliva tua, ad reddendum ei de singulis feodis and
Wardis duas Marcas, ad praedictum Auxilium Nobis per manum suam reddendum in
terminis praedictis.

Sic scribitur pro aliis Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, et Magnatibus; to the
number of 23. And dors. 6. of the former Roll, there is the like Writ for other
Temporal Barons.
By which it is apparent, that in this Kings reign, as well as in succeeding
ages, all Public Aids granted in Parliamentarie Councils, were granted by the
common consent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and
others who held of the King in Capite; by Act of Parliament, according to the
forecited Clause of the Great Charter of King John, and the subsequent Statutes
of 25 E. 1. c. 5, 6. De Tallagio non concedendo, 14 E. 3. c. 21. and Stat. 2.
c. 1. the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, and other Acts; Therefore this Aid
which these Knights were chosen and summoned to grant for their respective
Counties, without the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons and
Great men of the Realm, or without any Citizens or Burgesses summoned together
with them, was doubtless no Parliamentary Aid, but a voluntary free
Contribution of their own, without common consent in Parliament; and so this
Writ no Writ of Summons or election to a Parliament, though not impertinent to
my Theme, and worthy observation.

The 4th sort of Writs I have found in my search which have any Analogy to a
Summons of Knights to a Parliamentary Council, is this memorable Writ of Claus.
45 H. 3 ^m 6. dorso, not taken notice of by others.

Rex Vic. Norff. and Suff. salutem. Cum ex part Episcopi Wigorn, Comitem Leic.
et Glouo. ac quorundam aliorum Procerum Regni nostri, vocati sunt tres Milites
de singulis Comitatibus nostris, quod sint coram ipsis ad Sanctum Albanum in
instanti festo Sancti Matthaei Apostoll, secum Tractaturi super communibus
Negotiis Regni Nostri. Et Nos and praedicti Proceres nostri in eundem diem apud
Windesore convenimus ad Tractandum de Pace inter Nos et ipsos. Tibi praecipimus
quod illis Militlbus de Balliva tua qui vocati sunt coram ets ad diem
praedictum, firmiter injungetis.
injungentes ex part nostra; ut omni occasion postposita, ad Nos die
praedicto veniant apud Windesore, et eis etiam districte inhibeas, ne dicto
die, alibi quam ad Nos accedant; sed eos modis omnibus venire fac. coram Nobis
ad diem praedict. Nobiscum super praemissis Colloquium habituros, ut ipsi per
effectum operis videant et intelligant, quod nihil attemptare proponimus, nisi
quod honori atque utilitati Regni nostri (tendere) noverimus, querere. T. Rege
apud Windesor. xi. die September.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicomitibus citra Trentam.
Our See Mat. Paris, Mat. West. Walsingham, Polychronicon, Polydor Virgil,
Fabian, Grafton, Holinshed, Speed and Daniel, Ann. 1261. and 45 H. 3.
Historians relate, that a little before this writ, there fell out a Great
Difference between King Henry and his Barons, concerning the Provisions made at
Oxford, and his Oath for their Observation, from which he held himself
absolved, because it was compulsory: The King and his party objected against
the Barons, (who pretended the profit of the Realm) that they sought only their
own bonor and gain, contrary to their pretenses and decrees: They on the other
side spread abroad rumors among the people, that the King intended to introduce
foreign forces and impose Taxes at his pleasure, etc. to the subversion of the
State of the Realm, and oppression of the people; Which the King by his
Proclamations protested against as false and scandalous, to undeceive his
seduced Subjects, whose affections and assistance the Barons by these false
suggestions endeavored to alienate from him, as Claus. 45 H. 3. pars 1. d. 15.
and Claus. 48 H 3. d. 9. Pat. 48 H. 3. d. 20. record, Whiles the King and
Barons thus banded against each other, it appears by this Writ, the Barons
summoned 3. Knights out of every Connty to come before them at St. Albans, on
St. Matthews day, to treat with them concerning the common affairs of the
Realm: But whether these 3. Knights were elected by the Inhabitants of each
County, or such only as the Barons themselves nominated, (which is most
probable) appears not certainly by the Writ, of which our Histories make no
mention. The King being informed hereof, to prevent this intended Assembly at
St. Albans by his writs commands these Lords and Barons to repair to him at
Windsore the self-sameday on which they appointed these Knights to meet them, to
treat of a Peace between him and them; and by this Writ commanded this and all
other Sheriffs on this side Trent, to whom like writs were sent, to summon
those very Knights the Barons had called to St. Albans, to appear before him
the same day at Windesore, strictly prohibiting them to appear that day at any
other place than before himself; and to cause them by all possible means then
to come before him, to conferr with him about the premises, (to wit, the peace
and reconciliation between him and the Barons) that so they might by the effect
of that Treaty both see and understand, that he purposed to attempt or seek
nothing, but what he knew was for the honor and profit of his Realnt. So as
these Writs in reality, were no proper legal Summons of any Knights of Shires
to a Parliament, or Great Council, but rather an inhibition to divert them from
confederating and meeting with the Barons, by summoning them all at the same
time to appear before the King at Windsore, to be witnesses of his fair
proceedings and public intentions in the Treaty of Peace then intended
between him and his Barons. And that which further clears it, is somewhat a like
Writ in the same Roll to the Barons and Bailiffs of Sandwich about 3. weeks
after the precedent Writ: which for its raritie I shall here insert.

Claus. 45 H. 3. m. 5. dorso.
Rex Baronibus et Ballivis suis de Sandwic. salutem Cum Vos et Progenitores
vestri, Nobis et Progenitoribus nostris et Coronae nostrae semper extitistis
prompti et fideles, and jam per quosdam Nobis adversarios protenus sicut
audivimus, quod hac die quindena post festum S. Michaelis, sub specie
reformandae pacis. inter Vos et Barons nostros de Wincheles, apud Bradhull
convenire debeatis, ubi in dampnum nostrum colligationes requirere, et eos quos
poterint a nostra fidelitate avertere proponunt. Vobis mandamus sub debito
fidelitatis et dilectionis quibus Nobis tenemini specialiter injungentes, ne
ibi aliquo modo accedatis, aut animos vestros eorum suggestionibus aliquo modo
inclinetis, et super contentionibus inter vos et dictos Barons nostros de
Wincheles subortis, in pace vos habeatis usque ad festum Nativitatis Domini, ut
tunc ad vos Custodem Portuum nostrorum, aut aliquem alium fidelem et discretum
mittamus ad pacem illam prout melius et commodius fieri poterit, inter vos et
ipsos reformanda^; Nos enim praedictis Baronibus nostris de Wincheles, hoc
ipsum injunximus per literas nostras. Et quia intelleximus, quod quidam
extranei contra Nos ingressi sunt regnum nostrum, quorum quidam inter Sandwic.
and Dover. quidam autem inter Heth and Fullesham, et quidam apud Shorham nuper
applicuerunt, et insuper quidam in partibus Flandriae se parant ad ingrediendum
modo consimili regnum nostrum, omnimodam diligentiam quam poteritis inhibeatis
ad custodiend. et prohibend. ne aliqui extranei regnum praedictu^ modo
praedicto ingrediantur, prout etiam alias dedimus vobis in mandatis. Attendetis
enim et fidelitatem et devotionem quam semper erga Nos habuistis, et quas pro
custodia Maris (quae vobis et caeteris Portubus nostris specialiter incumbit)
et honores et libertates prae aliis et Regno nostro adepti estis, quas speciali
praerogativa semper intendimus et volumus conservare. T^ste Rege apud Sanctum
Paulum London 3. die Octobris.

Eodem modo mandatum est Baronibus et Ballivo de Wincbeles.
The very first Record I have yet found, wherein Knights, Citizens, Burgesses
and Barons of the Ports to Parliament, is Cl. 49 H. 3. d. 11. Cedula. where
after the Part. 1. p. 5.
forecited Writs to the Bishops of Durham and Norwich, and the Eodem modo
mandatum est, to the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Earls, Lords and Barons,
there follows this entry in the Record,

See my Plea for the Lords, p. 379.
Item mandatum est singulis Vicecom. per Angl. quod venire faciant Duos Milites
de legalioribus, probioribus et discretioribus Militibus singulorum Comitatuum
ad Regem London; in Octab. praedict in forma praedicta.

Item in forma praedicta scribitur Civibus Eborum, Civibus Lincoln, et caeteris
Burgis Angl quod mittant in forma praedicta Duos de discretioribus,
legalioribus et probioribus tam Cibibus quam Burgenlibus suis.

Item in forma praedicta mandatum est Baronibus and probis hominibus Quinque
Portuum prout continetur in Brevi inrotulato inferius.

It seems by this Writ, that the Writs then issued to these Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, were the same in form and substance with those to the Spiritual
and Temporal Lords, with little or no variation. But not one of them is
particularly registered except the Writ to the Cinqueports varying in some
clauses from the Writs to the Lords.

That I shall principally observe from this Entry, is, First, that there were
only two Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports, and no more, to be sent
out of every County, City, Borough and Port. 2ly. That these were to be duly
qualified as these Writs prescribed; to wit, two of the more or most legal,
honest and discreet Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons, in every County,
City, Borough and Cinque-Port. 3ly. That it appears not by this Entry whether
the Counties themselves, or the Sheriffs alone, were to elect and make choice
of these Knights. 4ly. That the Writs for electing Citizens and Burgesses were
directed immediately to the Citizens and Burgesses themselves, not to the
Sheriffs of the Counties, wherein they were situated, nor to their Mayors,
Sheriffs, or chief Officers, as in succeeding ages. 5ly. That no Writ issued to
the Citizens of London, their Mat. Westminster. Anno 1265. p. 340. My Plea for the
Lords, p. 258, 259.
Liberties being then seisea by the King, many of them imprisoned and their
estates confiscated for siding with the Barons against the King; and that York
and Lincoln are the only Cities mentioned particularly in the Roll.

It is evident by these Clauses in the Prologues to the printed Statutes of
Marleborough, Anno 52 H. 3. The more discreet men of the Realm being called
together, as well of the Higher, as of the Lower Estate, etc. of Westminster. 1. Anno
3 E. 1. These be the Acts of King Edward, etc. made at Westminster, at his
first Parliament general after his Coronation by his Counsil, and by the Assent
of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonaltie
of the Realm being thither summoned, etc. That Writs of Summons issued to all
these respectively in these two Parliaments and others succeding them; but yet
I find no Writs of summons or elections to ^hese Parliaments now extant in the
Clause or other Rolls of these years to the Temporal Lords, or Sheriffs; the
Writs being then kept in Bundles by themselves, (especially those to Sheriffs,)
and not entered in the Clause Rolls, and those Bundles quite lost through
negligence, or casualtie. The very first Writs of Summons of Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses issued to Sheriffs, that I have met with in our Records entered at
large in the Rolls, are these of Claus. An. 22 E. 1. m. 6. dorso. Which are
very rare and memorable, extant in no Collections of these Writs by others,
that I have seen.

Rex Vic. Northumbr. salutem. Quia cum Comitibus, Cl. 22 E. 1. m. 6. dorso.
Baronibus, et caeteris Magnatibus de regno nostro super quibusdam negotiis
arduis Nos et idem regnum De Militibus eligendis and mittendis ad Consilium.
nostrum contingentibus, in crastino Sancti Martini, prox. futuro apud Westminster.
Colloquium habere volumus et Tractatum. Tibi praecipimus, quod eligi facias
duos Milites, de discretioribus et ad laborandum potentioribus de Com.
praedicto, et eos ad Nos usque Westminster. venire facias. Ita quod sint ibi in
crastino praedicto, cum plena potestate pro se et tota Communitate Com.
praedicti, ad consulend. et consentiend. pro se et Communitate illa, biis quae
Comites, Barons, and Proceres praedicti concorditer ordinaverint in
praemissis. Et ita quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi idem negotium infectum
non remaneat. Et habeas ibi hoc breve. Test Rege apud Westminster 8 die October.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae. T. ut supta.
After which follows this second Writ entered immediately after it in the same
dorse.

Rex Vic. Northumbr. salutem. Cum nuper tibi praeceperimus, Pro Rege de aliis
Militibus cum Prioribus intendendis ut supra.
quod duos Milites de discretioribus and ad laborandum potentioribus ejusdem
Comitatus, de consensu ejusdem eligi, et eos ad Nos usque Westminster. in crastino
Sancti Martini prox. futuro cum plena potestate pro se and tota Communitate
ejusdem Com. venire faceres, ad consulend. et consentiend pro tota Communitate
illa hiis qui Comites, Barons, et Proceres de Regno nostro in dicto crastino
ordinaverint. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod praeter duos illos
Milites eligi facias alios duos Milites legales, et ad laborandum potentes, et
eos una cum dictis duobus Militibus usque Westminster. venire facias. Ita quod in
dicto crastino sint ibidem, ad audiendum et faciendum quod et tunc ibidem
before injungemus. Et hoc nullo modo omittas. Et habeas ibi hoc Breve. Test
Rege apud Westminster. 9. die Octobr.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicecom.
Angliae, mutatis mutandis. T. ut supra.

In these two Writs there are many things worthy our special observation.

1. That the word Parliamentum is not used in them, but only Colloquium et
Tractatum. 2ly. That there is no mention in these Writs of any Colloquium or
Tractatum, cum Praelatis; but only cum Comitibus, and caeteris Magnatibus de
regno nostro. 3ly. That the Sheriffs are required only Duos Milites de Com.
praedicto eligi fac. etc. without any Citizens or Burgesses of the Cities or
Boroughs within their respective Counties. 4ly. That these two Knights were to
be thus qualified; De discretioribus, et ad laborandum potentioribus, and magis
legales; and to be de Com. praedicto; not of any other County. 5ly. That they
were to be elected, De consensu ejusdem Comitatus, not without or against their
consents. 6ly. That they were to appear at the day and place prescribed in the
Writs; Cum plena potestate pro se et tota Communitate Com. praedict. ad
consulend. et consentiend. and that only, hiis quae Comites, Barons and
Pr^eres praedicti concorditer ordinaverint in praemissis; not what the Knights
themselves should ordain or prescribe: who could then vote, order, determine
nothing, but what the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and the King did first ordain and
advise: much less ordain or order any thing without and against their wills,
order and assents, as some of late most insolently and unparliamentarily have
presumed to do without the least ground, warrant, reason, president: As is
further evident by this in the later Writ; ad audiendum et faciendum quod et
tunc ibidem before injungemus. 7ly. That there is but one days difference
between the dates of both these Writs, and that they issued in the self-same
form (mutatis mutandis) to all the Sheriffs of England. 8ly. (which is most
observable). That the King by these Writs enjoins every Sheriff in each County
of England, quod praeter duos illos Milites, which they were to elect by virtue
of the first Writs, eligi facias Duos alios Milites legales, etc. et eos una
cum dictis duobus Militibus usque Westminster. venire facias, etc. So that they were
to elect no less than 4. Knights by these two Writs for every County, with
equal power and authority; who were all to appear and serve in this Parliament:
A clear evidence, that the King in this age was not confined to any certain
Number of Knights (nor yet of Citizens or Burgesses) in any County, but might
then summ^n so many Knights, as he thought most expedient and necessary, since
reduced to a certainty by the subsequent Statutes of 5 R. 2. c. 4. 7 H. 4. c.
15. 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 6 H. 6. c. 4. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 23
H. 6. c. 11. 15. 27 H. 8. c. 26. 34 H. 8. c. 13. 35 H. 8. c. 11. 9ly. That the
King by his Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, and hoc nullo modo
omittatis; manifests, that the Sheriffs were bound at their peril to obey,
execute both these Writs, without disputing or disobeying them. 10ly. That
though the Writs enjoin the Sheriff only, and habeas ihi hoc breve; yet the
Sheriff was to return the names of the Knights elected together with the Writ,
as the practice and returns in those times resolve.

The next Writs I have met with for electing Knights Citizens and Burgesses,
are those in Claus. 23 E. 1. m' 4. dorso.

Rex Vic. Northt. salutem. Quia cum Comitibus, Baronibus, and caeteris
Proceribus regni nostri super remediis contra pericula quae eidem regno hiis
diebus imminent providend. Colloquium habere volumus et Tractatum, per quod eis
mandavimus, quod sint ad Nos die Dominica prox. post sestum Sancti Martini in
yeme prox. futur. apud Westminster. ad tractand. ordinand. and faciend. qualiter sit
hujusmodi periculis obviand, Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de
Com. praevicto Duos Milites, and de quolibet Civitate ejusdem Com. Duos Cives,
and de quolibet Burgo Duos Burgenses, de discretioribus, et ad laborand.
potentioribus sine dilatione eligi, et eos ad Nos ad praedictos diem and locum
venire fac. Ita quod dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se
and Communitate Com. praedicti, and dicti Cives et Burgenses pro se et
Communitate Civitatum et Burgo^um praedictorum divisim ab ipsis tunc ibidem
habeant ad faciend. tunc quod de Communi Consilio ordinabitur in praemissis.
Ita quod pro defectu hujusmodi potestatis negotium praedictum infectum non
remaneat quoquo modo. Et babeas ibi nomina Militum, Civium and Burgenfium, and
hoc breve. Test Rege apud Cantuar. tertio die Octobr.

Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Vicecom. per Angliam, et de eadem data.
The next Writs of this kind now extant, are those of

Rex Vic. Linc. salutem. Quia cum Comitibus, etc. (as in the former Writ) quod
sint ad Nos in crastino Animarum prox. futur. apud Sanctum Edmundum ad
tractand. ordinand. et faciend. qualiter sit periculis obviand. hujusmodi et
statui ejusdem Regni tutius, et utilius consulend. Tibi praecipimus quod de
Com. praedicto duos Milites, et de qualibet Civitate ejusdem Com. duos Cives,
et de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus et ad laborand.
potentioribus, sine dilatione eligi, et cos ad Nos ad praedictos diem et locu^
venire facias. Ita quod dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se
et Communitate Com. praedicti habeant in praemissis; Ita quod pro defectu
potestatis hujusmodi negotium praedictum non remaneat quoquo modo inane. Et
habeas ibi nomina Militum, Civium et Burgensium et hoc breve. T. ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam. T. ut supra.
There is nothing remarkable in this Writ, but only that it differs somewhat in
words, but not in substance from the ordinary Writs succeeding it, in the Ita
quod, etc. I shall therefore proceed to the next Writs of this kind.

The next are these notable Writs (unobserved by De veniendo pro confirmatione
Magnae Cartae.
Charter of the Liberties and of the Forest were to be confirmed, in respect of
a great aid given to the King against the French, thus entered in Claus. 25 E.
1. d. 6. after the Writ de Parliamento tenendo to the Sea Part 1. p. 9.
Archbishop of Cant. dated 9 die Septembris, and the list of the names of the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords.

Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem. Quia in relevationem omnium incolarum et populi Regni
nostri pro Octava omnium honorum singulorum ligeorum per totum idem Regnum pro
urgentissima nunc dicti Regni contra Gallicos necessitate levanda, concessimus
pro Nobis et Haeredibus nostris confirmare, et firmiter teneri facere Magnam
Cartam de Libertatibus Angliae; et Cartam de Libertatibus Forestae; and
concedere omnibus and singulis ejusdem Regni literas nostras Patentes; quod
dictae Octavae levatio non cedat eisdem in praejudicium, servitutem et
exhaeredationem, usum vel consue tudinem in futurum. Tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes, quod sine dilatione aliqua duos de probioribus et legalioribus
Militibus Com. tui Eligi, et eos plenam potestatem pro ipsis and tota
Communitate dicti Com. habentes, ad Edwardum filium nostrum carissimum,
tenentem in Anglia locum nostrum, venire facias. Ita quod sint London. ad
eundem filium nostrum modis omnibus in Octabis Sancti Michaelis proximo futuri
ad ultimum, Cartas super Confirmatione nostra Cartarum praedictarum, et literas
nostras super dicta concessione pro ipsa Communitate in forma praedicta
recepturi, and facturi ulterius, quod per dictum filium nostrum ibidem fuerit
ordinatum. Et boc nullo modo omittas. Et habeas ibi boc Breve. T. Edwardo filio
nostro apud Sanctum Paulum London 10. die Septembr.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur singulis Vicecom. per Angliam.
From these new extraordinary Writs, I shall observe, 1. That extraordinary
public necessities against foreign enemies, require extraordinary Aids from
the people. 2ly. That when ever such extraordinary excessive ayds were granted
by Parliament, it was with this special caution, that the King by his Patents
as well as the Parliament, should declare, that it should not afterward be
drawn into Custom, nor turn to the prejudice, thraldom, or dishinherison of the
people in succeeding times. 3ly. That those extraordinary Aids were
recompensed with extraordinary Grants and new See 25 E. 1, c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7.
Confirmations of the Great Charters of the Liberties of Engl. and of the
Forest, (which the Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 35. to 42.
Lords and Commons then much pressed and insisted on) for the King and his
heirs, which were new confirmed by special Letters Patents, which the knights
elected for every County, were to be empowered by the Commonaltie of each County
to receive, and to deliver to them. and to do what else the Prince by advice of
the Nobles should ordain in this Parliament. 4. That the chief occasion of this
Writ and Parliament was this; the Earls of Hereford, and Marshall, who were
very powerful and popular, inhibited the Barons of the Eschequer, after the
Kings passage into Flanders, to levy the 8. part of their goods granted to him
at St. Edmunds, without their consents; and induced the City of London to join
with them, not to pay the same, unless these Great Charters and their other
Liberties were first confirmed, which the Prince and his Counsil promised to
do, as you may read at large in Thomas de Walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 35. to
42. and Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 84, 85, 86. etc. Mat. Westminster, Anno 1297. p.
409, 410. Henry de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 3. c. 11. Holinshed,
Grafton, with other our vulgar Historians; and My Plea for the Lords, p. 98. to
104. The Prince, by advice of the Counsil, after the summons of this
Parliament, to prevent all Commotions by these Earls and their Confederates,
issued special Writs not only to all Cl. 25 E. 1 m. 5. 3. dorso
Great Cities and Corporations of England, prohibiting, Ne Congregationes and
Conventicula fiant, to disturb the public peace, and to all Captains and
Governors of Castles, in respect of the present dangers, safely to guard their
Castles, so as non Nobis vel dicto Consilio non passet aliquod periculum
imminere, as the Writs at large inform us; but likewise sent special Writs to
some Earls and Lords formerly summoned to the Parliament at London, and to some
others whom they most confided in, to repair to the Prince and his Counsil,
with their horses and arms; as is evident by these memorable Writs intermixed
with the Writs of Summons to this Parliament, Claus. 25 E. 1. m. 5. dorso.

Claus. 25 E. 1. m. 3. dorso. De veniendo cum equis 8^ armis.
Rex dilecto et fideli nostro Ricardo fill. Alani Comiti Arundell salutem. Quia
nuper ante passagium nostrum ad parts transmarinas injunximus Edwardo filio
nostro, tenenti in Anglia locum nostrum, quaedam Negotia Nos and regnum nostrum
specialiter contingentibus, super quibus ipsum Vobiscum habere volumus
Colloquium and Tractatum. Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis
tenemini firmiter injungentes, quantum sitis, cum equis et armis ad dictum
filium nostrum die Dominica proxima ante instans festum Sti. Michaelis
ubicunque tunc fuerit in Anglia; ad veniendum ibidem cum dicto Filio nostro et
ejus Consilio super dictis negotiis locuturi and tractaturi, ac facturi quod
tunc Uobis per ipsum and Consilium suum injungetur ex part nostra. Et hoc
sicut Nos and bonorem nostrum, and commodum regni nostri diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis. T. Edwardo filio Regis apud Sanctum Paulum London. 9 die Septembris.

Consim. literae diriguntur subscriptis, Roberto de Dacre, and 48 more.
(The like Writs issued Fulconi fill. Warini, to be cum equis and armis ad
dictum filium nostrum London in Octab. Sancti Michaelis, prox futur. Ibidem cum
dicto filio nostro et ejus Consilio super dictis negotiis locuturi et
tractaturi, etc. T^ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur, to 28. others.)

Et Memor. quod omnes isti rogati fuerunt quod venirent apud Roffs: praeter
Phum. Muhaunks, Nichum. Bramcher, Simonem Roges de Fydoks, Petrum Mellore, and
Phum. de Wylyver, quorum brevia fuerunt restituta.

Rex dilecto et fideli suo Johanni Gifford salutem. Licet nuper vobis
mandaverimus, quod propter quaedam ardua Negotia Nos et regnum nostrum
tangentia, ad Parliamentum quod erit London in proximo crastino Sancti
Michaelis ad Edwardum filium nostrum, tenentem in Anglia locum nostrum modis
omnibus veniretis. Vobis tamen ob aliquas certas causas firmiter injungendo
mandamus, quod interim taliter ordinetis, quod equi vestri et arma sint ad Vos
London. in Octabis dicti festi Sancti Michaelis ad ultimum. Et hoc sicut Nos et
commodum regni diligitis, nullatenus omittatis. T. Edwardo filio nostro apud
Sanctum Paulum 16. die Septembris.

Consimiles Literae dirigunlur subscriptis, viz. Edmundo Com. Cornub. Roberto
de Tateshall, Fulconi fill. Warini.
So as it appears by these Writs that there was first a Summons to London to
the Parliament, and after to a kind of Militari Camp, cum equis and armis.

These Writs would have little prevailed to secure the Prince and his Counsil,
and prevent Insurrections, had they not then issued out the former, for the
confirmation and future inviolable observation of the Great Cbarters, and
redress of all other Grievances mentioned in their Petitions in Walsingham, the
free and full concession whereof in Parliament, and ratification of these
Charters, quieted all tumultuous Spirits and drew on the people to a cheerful
payment of that extraordinary Tax which disgusted them.

The next writs are not entered in the Clause Rolls, but I find the Original
Writs themselves, with their returns, in the Bundle of them yet extant in the
Tower, out of which I shall present you with this true transcript, copied with
my own hand.

Anno 26 E. 1. Bundela n. 1. Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus
Hyberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae. Vic. Northt. salutem. Quia apud Ebor. in
instanti sesto Pentecostes esse proponimus Deo concedente, et ibidem Cum
Comitibus, Baronibus, et caeteris Proceribus dicti regni super negotiis Nos et
Statum ejusdem Regni tangentibus habere volumus Colloquium et Tractatum: per
quod mandavimus tisdem Comitibus, Baronibus, et Proceribus quod tunc sint ad
Nos ibidem Nobiscum locuturi, et super dictis negotiis tractaturi. Tibi
praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. praedicto duos Milites, et de
qualibet Civitate ejusdem Com. duos Cives, et de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses
de discretioribus, et ad laborandum potentioribus sine dilatione eligi, and eos
ad Nos ad praedictos diem et locum venire facias. It a quod dicti Milites
plenam et sufficientem potestatem pro se et Communitate Com. praedicti, et
dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se et Communitate Civitatum et Burgorum
praedictorum divisim ab ipsis tunc ibidem habeant, ad faciend. quod tunc de
communi Consilio ordinabitur in praemissis. Ita quod pro defectu hujusmodi
potestatis negotia praedicta infecta no^ remaneant quoquo modo. Et habeas ibi
nomina Militum, Civium et Burgensium, et hoc Breve. Test meipso apud Fulham,
13. die Aprilis, Anno regni nostri vicessimo sexto.

The rest of the Writs in this Bundle to the other Sheriffs were all in the
self-same form, and have the self-same date, except that to the Sheriff of
London; Therefore I shall not repeat any more of them, but acquaint you with
the several different returns of the Sheriffs endorsed on every of these Writs,
or in Cedules annexed to them, being the first Returns extant, full of
excellent variety and use, as well as ratity. The first Writ to the Sheriff of
Northampton, is thus endorsed and returned by the Sheriff.

Nomina Militum Electorum pro Com. Northamptone

Stephanus Rabas Man: per Rogerum fill. Galfridi. Willielmum Cartar Henr. de
Ossevill Willielmum Andrew.

Philippus de Bosco Man. pe^ Alex. Wyn, de Wodeffs. Gervas Gould de eadem.
Will. Pestour de eadem. Simone^ Craneffe de eadem

Nomina Burgensium Electorum pro villata Northampt.

Johannes de Longevylle Man. per Matthaeum le Mercer, Iohannem Minsmyth,
Robertum de Sedeffs, Willielmum Demont.

Spencer de Northt. Man. per Johan. de Thorp Hugo le Paumer Henry de Harwood
Galfr. de Garliks.

The Writ to the Sheriff of the County of Oxford, is thus endorsed and
returned, Oxon.


Milites et Burgenses subscripti electi sunt secundum formam content. in brevi,
et manucapt. de veniend. etc. viz. Willielmus de Nalebrok Miles, Henricus de
Bruly Miles, with two manucaptors for each. De Burgo Oxon: 2. Burgesses are
returned, with 2. manucaptors for each. Non sunt plures Burgi and Civitates in
Com. Oxon.

The writ to the Sheriffs of London is, Quod de Civitale praedicta Duos Cives
de discretioribus and ad laborandum London.
potentioribus sine dilatione eligi, etc. ut supra. T. Rege apud Westminster. 10 die
Aprilis. On which writ this return is indorsed,

Secundum quod injunctum est Nobis per istud mandatum, eligi fecimus Walterum
de Fynchyngfeld, et Adam de Fowham, ad essend. coram Vobis ad diem et locum in
brevi contentos, Vobis collocutur, et super negotiis vestris tractatur. quibus
ad hoc plenam et sufficientem potestatem dedimus nomine nostro, prout
praecipitur in brevi.

The writ for Middlesex is thus returned, Totus Midd. elegerunt Ricum. de
Wyndesore and Henricum de Enefeld Milites, ad veniend apud Eborum, pro toto
Com. etc.

Manucaptores Dom. Rici: de Wyndesore essendi ad diem in brevi, 2. are there
returned, with two for the other. Nulla est Civitas vel Burgus in balliva mea.

The return for Hereford is in this form.

Nomina duorum Militum Com. Hereford.

Manucaptores Thomae de Chabenore, 4. there named as his Manucaptors.

Manucaptores Thomae de la Mare, 4. there listed as his manucaptors.

Nomina duor. Civium Civitatis Hereford, 2. there returned, having each 2.
manucaptors.

Nomina duorum Burgensium de Burgo Leominster, 2. Burgesses returned with their
two manucaptors apeece.

Nomina duorum Burgensium de Burgo de Bewelye 2. with 2. manucaptors for either
returned.

The return of the Sheriff of Buckingham. Johannes de Sherwode Miles, electus
est, et habet plenam et sufficientem potestatem pro se et Communitate Com.
praedicti. Et idem Johannes manucaptus est veniendi coram vobis ad diem in
brevi contentum.

Nomina manucaptorum praedicti Johan. etc. 4. there named and returned.

Laur: de Blunkesdon Miles, electus est in forma praedicta, et manucaptus est
veniendi coram vobis ad diem in brevi contentum. Nomina manucapt. etc. 4. there
specified.

Nulli sunt Cives nec Burgenses in Com: praedicto, nec Civitas, nec Burgus:
propter quod Cives nec Burgenses coram vobis ventre facere non possum.

The return of the Sheriff of Bedford, Walterus fill. Roberti Miles, electus
est, et habet plenam et sufficientem potestatem pro se et Communitate Com.
praedict. Et idem Walterus manucaptus est de veniendo coram vobis ad diem in
brevi contentum.

Nomina manucaptorum praedicti Walteri 4.

Ricardus de Rous Miles, electus est, et habet plenam, etc. ut supra, and
distring: per octo boves et quatuor afros, veniend. coram vobis ad diem in
brevi. Nota.


Burgenses Thomas Halyday de Burgo Bed: electus est, and manucap. per 4. there
listed. Robertus de Cywelle de Burgo Bed. manucapt. per 4. there named.

The return of the Sheriff of Surrey endorsed on the Surr:
Milites, Burgenses electi in Com: Surr. viz. Ioban: de Auburnon Miles,
manucapt. est per 2. there listed. Johannes de Hamme Miles, per 2. others.

Burgus de Gildeford, 2 Burgesses, with 2 manucaptors.

Burg: de Sutbwerk, 2 Burgesses, with 2 manucaptors.

Burgus de Reygate, 2 Burgesses, with 2 manucapsors.

Burgus de Blecchyngelegh 2. with 2 manucaptors for each of all these Burgesses,

Milites, Cives et Burgenses electi in Com: Sussex, viz: Sussex.
and manuc: secundum tenorem Brevis.

Henricus Huse Miles, manucapt. est per 2. venire ad diem, etc.

Radul: Samsaver Miles, manucapt. est per 2. venire ad diem.

Burgenses de Seford 2. having each 2 manucaptors.

Burgenses de Shorham 2. with 2 manucaptors.

Burgenses de Steryng Bunibus, with 2 manucaptors.

Burgenses de Jews 2 with 2 manucaptors for either.

Cives Civitatis Cycestr: 2. with 2 mauucaptors for each.

Nomina Militum, Civium, Burgensium in Com: Wigorn. Wigorn.
electorum,

Willielmus de Meueschal Miles, et sunt manucaptores ejusdem Willielmi 2.

Thomas de Bertelegh Miles, and sunt manucaptores 2. there listed.

Cives Wigorn: 2. man: 2. for each, there named.

Burgenses de Wychia 2. manuc. 2 for either.

Schedula. Nomina Militum et Burgensium secundum tenorem Glouc.
Brevis Domini Regis huic panello attach: electi de essendo ad diem et locum in
brevi content. prout in eodem praeeipitur.

Milites Robertus de. Berkeleye, man. 4. Johan. de Langeleye, man. 4. there
listed.

Burgenses de villa Bristoll Johannes de Tanner, man. 2. Johannes de Cheddre,
man. 2.

Burgenses de villa Gloucestr: 2. with 2 manucaptors returned.

Nulla est civitas in Com: Gloucestr.

De Com. Derby electi sunt duo Milites, qui plenam Derby
Henricus de Braylesford Miles, qui manucaptu^ per 2. Henricus filius Herberti
Miles, qui manucapitur by 2. there listed.

Et breve istud returnatum fuit Willo: le Oyler Balliuo Libertatis Villae Derb:
qui plenum returnum brevis habet pro duobus Burgensibus ejusdem villae, et mihi
respond: quod elegit assensu Communitatis totius villae praedictae Magistrum
Willum. Broun de Derby, et Nicbum. le Latimer de eadem, who have two
manucaptors for each returned.

De Com. Nottingh. electi sunt duo Milites, qui plenam et sussic. potestatem
habent pro se et Communitate Notingh.
Richus. de Byngbam Miles, qui manucaptus per 2. Richus de Furneus Miles, qui
manucaptus per 2. there named.

Et Breve istud retorn, fuit Ballivis Libertatis villae Nottingh. pro duobus
Burgensibus; qui michi responderunt, quod eligerunt assensu Communitatis villae
praedictae, Johem le Flemyng, de Not. Adam de Flemyng de eadem: who found two
manucaptors a-peece there recorded.

Willus: de Hodenet Miles electus, manucaptus est ven: Salop.
ad diem in brevi contentum per 2. Petrus de Byton Miles electus, manucaptus
est per two there named.

Burgenses de Salop 2. Burgenses; de Bruges 2. there named, manuc. per 2
manucaptors for each of them.

Willielmus de Stafford Miles electus, manucaptus est Stafford
Henricus Mauney Miles electus manuc. est per 2. there recorded.

Burg. de Stafford ven. and non alii.

Nomina Militum. Robertus de Hoo and Johannes Aygnel Hereford
Hereford, Duos Milites per communitatem ejusdem Com. ad diem et locum in hoc
breui content. ad faciend. quod Breve exigit; et manucapti sunt prout patet in
Cedula huic brevi annexa: wherein there are four manucaptors for either of them
returned.

Johannes de Westret de Hereford, Simon Wall de eadem electi sunt duos
Burgenses per Communitatem Burgensium Hereford in forma praedicta; et manucapti
sunt, prout patet in dicta Cedula huic brevi consuta: having each 4.
manucaptors, all of Hereford.

Nulla est Civitas, nec plures Burgi in dicto Com. existunt.

Per istud Breve elegi per communitatem totius Com. duos Roteland.
Milites, scil. Johannem de Folevill, et Willielmum de Bercks. qui manucapti
sunt essendi apud Ebor. ad diem in brevi nominatum: and sunt Manucaptores, 3
for each there listed.

Nulla est Civitas nec Burgus in Balliva mea.

Nomina Militum electorum pro Communitate Com. Westmerl. Westmerland.
Thomas de Derewenwater electus est, et manucaptus per 2. Rogerus de Burton,
manucaptus per 2. there named.

De Civibus nichil, quia nulli Cives sunt in Com. praedicto.

Nomina Burgensium, 2. there returned for Apelby; who had two manucaptors for
each.

Responsum istius Brevis est in quodam panello huic Brevi Wyltes.
attacbiato.

VVillus: de Cotes Miles, electus pro Communitate Com: manucaptus est. veniend.
ad diem infra content. per 2. Johannes de Grynstede Miles, electus est pro
eadem Communitate, manucaptus per two there named.

Cives 2. pro Civitate Novae Sarum electi, manucapt. veniend. per two
manucaptors for each.

Burgenses 2. pro Burgo de Dounton, 2. pro Burgo de Devises, 2 pro Burgo de
Chippenham, 2 pro Burgo de Malmsbur. who had two manucaptors for each therein
returned.

Et retorn: fuit Constab. Merleberge, et Ballivis Libertatum de Kalne and
Worth, qui nullum inde dederunt responsum.

Nullus venil nec Burgus de Lanc. is endorsed on the Lanc.
Cedule annexed this return is made. Eligi feci per consensum totius Com:
Henricum de Kyghebey, and Johannem Devias Milites, essendi ad diem ut infra
brevi, qui plenam et sufficientem potestatem habent pro se et Communitate
totius Com. ad faciend. prout in brevi continetur. El sunt manucaptores ipsius
Henrici, veniendi ad diem ut infra 4. and 4. for the other Knight there
returned.

Nulla est Civitas in Com. Lanc. Burgenses 2. de Preston. Lincoln.
Burgenses 2. de Lancastria; who all find 4. manucaptors for each of them
there returned.

Nomina duorum Militum electorum pro Communitate Com. Lincoln, and eorum
manucaptores.

Manucaptores Willi: Dysux Militis 4. Johan: Marmyon Militis 4. there named.

Nomina Civium civitatis Linc. and eorum manucaptorum, two Citizens there
returned, found each 4. manucaptors.

Nomina Burgensium Burgi Stamfordiae, et eorum manucaptores, 2. returned, who
had 4. manucaptors apeece: Grymesby, two Burgenses thence returned had each of
them 4 manucaptors.

Nomina Militum electorum pro Communitate Com. Northumbr. Northumbr.
Dominus Henricus de Dychende, and est manucaptus per 4. Dominus Johannis de
Ogghel, and est manucaptus per 4. there named.

Nomina Burgensium electorum pr^ communitate Burgi Novi Castri super Tynam sunt
in Cedula huic Brevi annexa: 2. Burgenses are returned in the Cedule, with 4.
manucaptors for either.

Arrayamentum hujus brevis attachiatur huic Brevi, is indorsed Nomina Militum
electorum pro Com. Ebor.

Manucaptores Iohannis Sampson 2

Manucaptores Iohannis de Heselarton 2. there named.

Nomina Civium civitatis Ebor. cum eorum manucapt: 2. returned, with two
several manucaptors for either.

Nomina Burgensium de Com. Ebor. cum eorum mas nucapt. Beverlac. 2. Scardeburg.
2. Pontefract 2. Malton 2. Alverton 2. Burgenses returned from each, with two
manucaptors for every of them.

Nomina Militum de Com: Suff. Dominus Johannes cujus manuc. sunt 2. Dominus
Petrus de Dennarstover, cujus man. sunt 2. there named.

Nomina Burgensium Gyppeswic. 2. Nomina Burgensium de Dunewyco 2. Nomina
Burgensium de Oreford 2, returned for either, with two manucaptors for each of
them.

Nullus ven. in Burgo de Norwico is indorsed on the writ. In Cedula.

Nomina Militum Com. Norff. Dominus Willielmus Rostovyn, cujus manuc. sunt 2.
Dominus Willus: de Warnny, cujus manue. sunt 2.

Nomina Civium Norwic. 2. with two Manucaptors apeece.

Nomina Burgensium de Lenn: 2. who found two manucaptors for either. Pro Burgo
de Ieremuta, returnatum fuit istud Breve Ballivis de Ieremuta qui habent
returna Brevium, et nichil inde mihi responderunt.

Responsum est in panello huic Brevi annexo. The Cedule

Nomina Militum, Civium et Burgensium de Comitatu Devon. electorum pro
communitate Com. praedict. De assensu totius communitatis Devon. electi sunt
duo Milites, viz. Johannes de Umfravill, and Willielmus de Chambernoun, quos
distring. essend. ad diem in brevi contentum; sed Johannes de Umfravill nullum
manucaptorem micbi mittere Nota.
voluit. Willielmus de Chambernoun manucaptus est, per Simonem de Hok, Johannem
Richman.

Cives, pro Civitate Exon. electi sunt Cives 2. with two manucaptors apeece.

Burgenses; Barnst. 2. Plimpton 2. Sutton 2. Totton 2. Dertemouth 2. Ashperton
2. with two manucaptors for each Burgess there returned.

Henricus de Blount unus duorum Militum electus, per se et communitate Com.
Essex manucapitur per 6. Willielmus de Dureem alter Miles electus pro eodem
Com. manuc. per 6. The two Burgenses elected pro communitate Burgi Cole. cestr.
manuc. per 4. manucaptors for each. Et non est aliqua Civitas in Balliva mea,
nec alter Burgus quam super nominat.

Johannes de Aunger Mil. and Robertus Pontrel, Milites electi pro toto Com.
Leic. plenam potestatem pro eodem Com. habentes, manucapti sunt essendi coram
vobis ad diem in brevi content. secundum tenorem istius brevis. Et praedictus
Johannes manucap: per two, and the others by two Manucaptors there named.

The 2. Burgenses elected pro villa de Leicest. in forma praedict. find each
two manucaptors, there returned.

Philippus de Gaytone, and Johannes fill. Guidonis, Milites electi de com. War.
plenam potestatem babent pro toto com. praedicto; manuc. sunt essendi coram
vobis ad diem in hoc brevi content. per two manucaptors apeece, Electi 2. de
villa de Coventr, and 2 Homines villae Warwick: each of them find two
manucaptors.

Burgesses 2. Electi de civ. Roff: quorum uterque manu. cap. per 4. there named
as their joint manucaptors.

Milites electi de com. Cant. Richus de Scombard, and Johannes de Gosehall,
quorum uterque man. per 4. manucaptors there listed.

Burgenses Civitatis Cant. 2. quorum uterque man. per 4. there returned.

Milites electi de Com. Cantebr. Stephanus le Messer de Oversdone, Petrus de
Armyngton de eadem: macapt. 4. returned after them. Burgenses 2. Cant. with two
manucaptors for each de eadem villa.

Milites electi de Com. Hunt. Radus. de Laytone, Ricus. man. 4. for both.
Burgenses 2. for Hunt: with two manucaptors for each ejusdem villae.

Regin: de Bevill and Thomas de Pridiex Milites, electi sunt per totam
communitatem Com. Cornub. qui quidem manucapti sunt veniend apud Ebor. ad diem
in brevi content. et ad faciend. prout continetur in brevi: each of them having
4. manucaptors returned over against their names.

Nomina Burgensium; de Bodmin 2. qui man. per 4. manucaptores. Nomina
Burgensium de Launcest. qui man. per 4. manucaptores. Nomina Burgensium de
Trurou. qui manuc. sunt per 4. manucapt. Nom. Burgensium de Helston 2 qui
manuc. per 4. manucaptores apeece, there named.

Responsio hujus Brevis patet in Cedula huic brevi consuta.

Nomina duorum Militum electorum in Com. Sutht. Hugo de Escote Miles, qui
manuc. per 2. Baldewinus de Bello Monte, qui manuc. est per two there returned.

Nomina Civium civitatis Wynton. 2. with two manucaptors for each, all de
Wynton.

Nomina Burgensium de Burgo Sutht. 2. with two manucaptors apeece. Nomina
Burgens. Burgi de Portesmuth 2. with two manucaptors for each.

In plena Com. Dors. per totam Communitatem Com. eligi feci duos Milites, and
de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses, de discretioribus et ad laborandum
potentioribus, secundum tenorem hujus brevis: Nomina continentur in Cedula huic
brevi annexa. Qui quidem Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
communitate Com. praedict. et dicti Burgenses pro se and communitate dictorum
Burgorum divisim ab ipsis habent. Et tam praedicti Milites, quam praedicti
Burgenses, manucapti sunt veniendi coram vobis ad diem et locum in brevi
contentos ad faciend. quod tunc ibidem ordinabitur, secundum tenorem hujus
brevis, prout continetur in eadem Cedula.

Nulla est Civitas in Com. praedicto is indorsed on the Writ. In the Cedule
annexed follows,

Milites Com. Dors. and eorum manucaptores, Philippus Maubanke Miles, with two
man. Jacobus de Trow Miles, with two manucaptors there listed.

Nomina Burgensium ejusdem Comitatus, et eorum manucaptores, viz. de Burgo de
Brideport 2. with two manucaptors for either. De Burgo de Dorcestria 2. with
two manucaptors. De Burgo de Shafton 2. with two manucaptors for either.

The last Writ in the Bundle is thus indorsed.

In pleno Com. Somerset per totam communitatem ejusdem Somersee.
Com. eligi feci duos Milites, et de qualibet Civitate duos Cives, et de
quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus et ad labor andum
potentioribus, secundum tenorem hujus brevis, quorum nomina continentur in
Cedula huic brevi consuta. Qui quidem Milites plenam and sufficientem
potestatem, pro se and Communitate Com. praedict. habent, and dicti Cives pro
se and tota Communitate dictae Civitat. divisim ab ipsis habent, and dicti
Burgenses pro se et tota communitate dictorum Burgorum divisim similiter ab
ipsis habent. Et praedicti Milites, quam praedicti Cives and Burgenses
manucapti sunt veniendi coram vobis ad diem et locum in brevi contentos, ad
faciend. quod tune ibidem ordinabitur, secundum tenorem hujus brevis, prout
continetur in praedicta Cedula; which follows in this form.

Nomina Militum Com. Somerset et eorum manucaptores, Robertus de Brent Miles,
Johannes de Wyk Miles To whose names he returns severally, manucaptus est per
two there named.

Nomina Civium Civitatis Bathon. and eorum manucaptores; Henricus Baton, and
Thomas le Mesteer, who have 2. manucaptors' apeece.

Nomina Burgensium ejusdem Com. de Burgo Taunton, 2. with two manucaptors for
each; De Burgo de Brigges Walteri 2. with two manucaptors; De Burgo de Wells
2. with two manucaptors; De Burgo de Ivelcester 2. with two manncaptors; De
Burgo de Milleburne-port 2. with two manucaptors apeece.

The Writ to the Sheriff of Hertford and the return thereof, is wanting in
this Bundle, and I have here for brevitie, left out the names of most Citizens
and Burgesses returned, with their manucaptors names.

It is observable, from these Writs issued to the Sheriffs, 1, That there is no
mention at all of the Bishops, Abbots, or Clergy summoned to this Convention
at York, touching any Conference or Treaty there to be held with them; but
only cum Comitibus, Baronibus and Proceribus regni nostri; who were only
summoned thither (as this writ imports) the Clergy being then in a See Register
part 1. p. 8. 113. to 126, Mat. Westminster, part 2. p. 407, 408. Tho. Walsingham,
Hist. Angl. p. 34, 35, 36,
Praemunire, and under the Kings displeasure, as I conceive. 2. That the Earls,
Barons, and Nobles of the Realm, were the only persons summoned, Nobiscum
locuturi, and super praedictis negotiis tractaturi: And the Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses elected, required, and empowered only, ad faciend: quod tunc de
communi Consilio ordinabitur in praemissis: which full and sufficient power
they were every of them to receive for themselves and the whole Commonalties
who elected them, from the said respective Commonalties, by virtue of the Kings
writ. 3ly. That the want of such a full and sufficient power, might hinder and
disappoint the execution of such businesses as were there appointed and
ordained by common consent of the King and Lords. 4ly. That the word
Parliamentum is not used in any of these writs. 5ly. That there is no Writ in
this Bundle to the Constable of Dover, and Warden of the Cinque Ports, for
electing any Barons for those Ports, nor any returns made of them. 6ly. That
the City of London had then a particular Writ directed to the Sheriffs thereof
for the election only of two Citizens, and no more.

I shall observe also from the Sheriffs returns of these writs, 1. That the
Knights in every shire were elected in the full County, by and for the whole
County; from whom they received full and sufficient power, ad faciend. quod
tunc ordinabitur secundum tenorem hujus brevis: and that the Citizens and
Burgesses were then elected and empowered by the respective Commonalties of the
Cities and Buroughs for whom they served. 2. That all the Sheriffs did then
exact and receive from every Knight, Citizen, Burgess thus elected and
returned, special manucaptors for his appearing at the day and place appointed
by the writ, whose names they returned; some of them requiring, and they
putting in 6. others 4. most of them two manucaptors apeece of good quality,
for their appearing; though the writs particularly enjoined them not to take
any manucaptors' from them. And that by virtue only of this geueral clause in
the writs: Et eos ad nos ad praedictos diem et locum venire facias: it being
the Sea Brook, Fitzherbert, and Ash. Title, Mainprise.
usual legal way to cause them to repair to the King and Parliament at the day
and usual place prefixed (in other writs) which practice afterward continued;
there being manucaptors returned and sound by most Knights, Citizens, Burgesses,
that I have seen, after the reign of King Edw. the 1. and 2. till 12 E. 4.
though many had none in later times 3. That of all the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses elected and returned this year, one or two of them only refused to
find manucaptors; to wit, John de Umfravill chosen one of the Knights for
Devon, which the Sheriff specially returns: And Sir William Rous one of the
knights for Bedfordshire, as it seems, whom the Sheriff thereupon distrained,
per octo boves et quatuor afros veniend. coram vobis ad diem in brevi: 4ly.
That the Sheriffs returns are various and different in their forms, some more
general, and brief, some more full and punctual according to the contents of
the writ; some with Cedules annexed, others on the dorse of the writs, yet all
accepted as sufficient, and legal. 5ly. That some Counties in after times, and
at this day, have many more Boroughs, sending 2. Burgesses apeece to
Parliaments than they had in 26 E. 1. by new Charters fince purchased, as
appears by comparing these returns with those of later and present times. 6ly.
That such Cities and Boroughs who had returns of writs, made their own returns
of their Citizens and Burgesses elected, with their manucaptors to the
Sheriffs: and that such of them who made no elections nor returns upon the
writs, were returned as defalters by the Sheriffs. 7ly. That Bristoll was
within the County of Gloueester, and its Burgesses and manucaptors returned
amongst others of that County, till afterward made a County within it self.
8ly. That Bath in 26 E. 1. was a City, and elected two Citizens, with
manucaptors; and Wells, then only a Borough, electing and returning two
Burgesses. 9ly. That some of the Knights returned have the word Dominus
prefixed before, not following after their names, which shows they were only
titular, not real Lords, perchance the sons of Lords, which are so styled.

As none of the writs to the Sheriffs are entered in the Clause Roll of 26 E. 1.
so I find no other writ of Summons to the Spiritual or Temporal Lords
registered therein, but only this to the Archbishop of York, which I omitted in
the first Section, and shall here insert.

Claus. 26 E. l. d. 12. Rex Ven. in Christo Patri W. De Consilio sommonito.
eadem gratia Archiep. Ebor. salutem. Quia super quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos
et statum Regni nostri tangentibus, Vobiscum habere volumus Colloquium et
Tractatum; Vobis mandamus in fide et dilectione quibus Nobis tenemini firmiter
injungentes, quod ad Nos usque Westminster. personaliter accedatis. Ita quod omnibus
modis sitis ibidem die Dominica in Ramis Palmarum prox. futur. ad ultimum,
super dictis negotiis locuturi et etiam tractaturi. Et hoc nullo modo
omittatis. Test Rege apud Sandwycum 15 die Martii.

Consimiles literae diriguntur subscriptis, viz. Sc. London Episcopo, Magistro
Roberto de Radeswell, Archidiac. Cestr. and 20 others of the Kings Counsil,
without any other Spiritual or Temporal Lords.

In 27 E. 1. I find a writ issued to the Archbishop of Canterbury, with a De
Parliamento tenendo in the margin of the Roll, though the writ and Postscript
declare it to be but a private Counsil; which I have already presented you
with, Part 1. p. 10, 11. there being very few Spiritual and Temporal Lords, not
any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses summoned thereunto.

In 28 E. 1. there issued two several forms of writs to all Sheriffs, for
electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses for two several Parliaments, held that
year at London, and Lincoln; most of which Original writs, with their several
returns, are yet extant in the Bundle of them in the Tower, and likewise both
of them recorded one after the other in Claus. 28 E. 1. mem: 16. dorso.

Rex Vic. Lincoln. salutem. Quia ad salvationem Coronae nostrae, et communem
utilitatem popull Regni nostri Secunda die Dominica Quadragesimae prox. sutur.
London. Parliamentum tenere, et cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus
ejusdem Regni super negotiis Nos et idem Regnum contingentibus speciale
Colloquium babere volumus et tractatum; Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentos,
quod de Com. praedicto duos Milites, etc. Ita quod, etc. (just as before, m.
23. E. 1. d. 4.) T. Rege apud Berewicum super Twed, 29. die Decembr.

Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.
The other writ (extraordinary and remarkable) is entered in Cl. 28 E. 1. m. 3.
dorso. The Original writs then issued remain in the Bundle of writs of this
year, with the returns annexed.

Rex Vic. Cumbr. salutem. Cum nuper pro communi utilitate populi Regni nostri
concesserimus, quod Charta de De Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus mittend. ad
Parliamentum Regis.
Foresta in singulis suis articulis firmiter observaretur, assignando quosdam
de fidelibus nostris in singulis Com, ejusde^ Regni in quibus Forestae nostrae
existunt ad perambulationem in eisdem Forestis faciend. Ita quod
perambulationem illam distinct et aperte factam ad Nos, antequam aliqua
executio, vel aliquod aliud inde fieret reportarent; et quod Juramentum
nostrum, jus Coronae Angliae, rations et calumpniae nostrae, necnon jus,
rations et calumpniae aliorum omnium salva forent. Nos licet dilecti et
fideles nostri nune primo ad Nos detulerunt quid fecerunt
quod fecerint in negotiis memoratis; quia tamen Praelati, Comites, Barons,
and caeteri Magnates dicti Regni, in quorum praesentia nostras et aliorum
proponi and audiri volumus rations, et de quorum Consilio in eodem negotio,
prout alias diximus, intendimus operari; Maxim cum ipsi ad observand. et
manutenend. Jura Regni et Coronae nostrae praedictae una Nobiscum Juramenti ^i
(...) sint astricti, juxta latus nostrum tunc temporis non fuerunt: ac pro eo
similiter quod illi qui suas rations quatenus illud negotium illos tangit
proponere debeant, inde praemuniti non erant, eidem negotio sine ipsorum
consilio finem imponere non potuimus bono modo. Et quia negotium illud quantum
possumus cupimus maturari, ita quod per Nos non fiet absque ulterioris
dilationis incommodo effectum debitum sorciatur; Uolentes cum Praelatis,
Comitibus, Baronibus and Magnatibus supradictis, ac cumaliis de Communitate
dicti regni, super boc, e^ quibusdam aliis arduis Negotiis Nos et statum regni
praedicti tangentibus babere Colloquium et Tractatum. Tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes, quod venire facias coram Nobis ad Parliamentum nostrum apud
Lincoln. in Octab. Sancti Hillarii prox. futur. Duos Milites de Balliva tua;
Illos videlicet, qui pro communitate Com. praedicti ad Parliamentum nostrum
ultimo praeteritum per Praeceptum nostrum venerant: and eliam de qualibet
Civitate infra Ballivam tuam eosdem Cives, and de quolibet Burgo eosdem
Burgenses qui ad praedictum Parliamentum nostrum alias sic venerant. Et si
forte aliquis Militum, Civium, aut Burgensium praedictorum mortuus fuerit, aut
infirmus, per quod ad dictos diem et locum venire nequerint, tunc loco illius
mortui, aut infirmi, unum alium idoneum ad hoc eligi, et ad dictum Parliamentum
nostrum venire facias. Ita quod Milites, Cives and Burgenses praedicti dictis
die et loco modis omnibus intersint cum plena potestate audiendt et Faciendi ea
quae ibidem in praemissis ordinari continget pro Communi commodo dicti Regni.
Et eisdem Militibus de Communitate Com. praedicti, et Civibus de Civitatibus,
et Burgenfibus de Burgis praedictis, Rationabiles expensas suas habere facias
in Ueniendo ad Parliamentum nostrum, ibidem Morando, et etiam Redeundo. Tibi
insuper praecipimus sicut prius, quod per totam Ballivam tuam sine dilatione
public proclamari fac. Quod omnes illi qui terras aut tenementa habeant
infra-metas Forestae nostrae in Balliva tua, and qui Perambulationem in aliquo
calumpniari voluerint, quod sint coram Nobis in Parliamento nostro praedicto
ostensur. in hac part rations suas et Calumpnias si quas habent. Et habeas
ibi nomina Militum, Civium, and Burgensium, et hoc breve. T. Rege apud le Rose
26 die Septembris.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Vic. subscriptis in quorum Com. Forestae
existunt, Viz.
Westmerl. Surr. Hereford Eborum. Southt. Roteland Notingham Wiltes. Oxon.
Derby Somerset Salop. Northampt. Dorset Stafford. Bucks. Devon. War. Hunt:
Glouc. Essex Wigorn.

Rex Uic. Lincoln. salutem. Cum nuper pro Communi utilitate, etc. ut supra
usque ibi, pro communi commodo dicti Regni. Et habeas ibi nomina praedictorum
Militum, Civium et Burgensium, et hoc breve. T. ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est Vic-subscriptis, in quorum Com. non sunt Forestae.
Norff. Kent Northumbr Suff. Sussex Cumbr. Cantebr. Middlesex Lancastr. Bedf.
Leicestr. Hertford.

These Writs are thus variously returned by the Sheriffs.

Alenus de Fraunceyes manucapitur per 2. Thomas Cantebrigg.
de Scalaris manucapitur per 2. Burgenses 2. Cant. with two manucaptors for
either.

Nomina Militum de Com. Lincoln. duorum Civium de qualibet Civitate, et duorum
Burgensium de Lincoln.
viz. eorum qui ad Parliamentum ultimo praeceptum venerunt, et securitatem quam
michi fecerunt ad veniend. ad Parliamentum nunc tenend. patent in sequenti.
Man. Thomae fill. Eustachii, unius Militis Com. praedicti 4. there returned
after his name: Man. Thomae de Burnham alterius Militis, 4. there listed. Man.
Stephani de Cranham, unius Civis civitatis Lincoln 4. Man. Willi Cause alterius
Civ. 4. all de Lincoln. Man. unius Burgensium de Grymsby 4. alterius Burgensis
4. there named.

Nomina Militum Com. Hertford, Rogerus de Patemer with two manucaptors. Willus
le Galle 2. manucaptors. Hertford
Hertford 2. Burgenses, villae de Sancto Albano. 2. with two manucaptors for
every of them.

Warrenus do Ualoignes Miles, qui ad Parliamentum ultimo praeteritum extitit
pro communitate Com. Kantiae, manucaptus est quod fit ad diem et locum in hoc
brevi contentum per 4. there named. Richardus de Scolande, Miles, qui pro
communitate Com. Cantiae, exitit ad Parliamentum ultimo praeteritum, mortuus
est; in loco ejus per communitatem Com. Cantiae, Henricus de Apeldrefeld
electus est; manucaptus est quod fit ad diem et locum in brevi content. per 4.
Johannes de Sancto Dionysio unus Civium de civitate Roff: manucaptus est per 4.
Robertus de Bettlescombe, unus Civium de civit. Roff. manucapitur per 4. there
listed. De Civibus Civ. Cantuar. retornat. fuit istud Breve Ballivis Libertatis
ejusdem civitatis, qui nichil respondent.

Executio istius Brevis patet in Cedula huic brevi attach.

Milites electi: Petrus de Dennardeston nunc electus Suff.
est loco Johannis de Bishake, qui infirmus est: qui manucaptus est per 2.
Johannis de Peyton manuc. est per 2.

Burgenses electi Gippewic. ss. 2. Donewic. 2. with two manucaptors for every
of them.

Executio istius Brevis patet in Cedula huic brevi attach:

Milites electi, Ricus: de Walsingham manucaptus est Norff.
Robertus de Hengham per 2.

Cives electi, Norwicum 2. with two manucaptors for each.

Burgenses electi, Jernem. 2. Lenn. 2. with two seveal manucaptors.

Johannes de Mandeville et Johannes de Folevill Milites, qui ad Parliamentum
prox, praeteritum manucapti, Leycestr. 2. man. per two manucaptors there
returned: Et omnes supradicti plenam habent potestatem secundum tenorem istius
brevis.

Milites electiss. Johannes Perceval de Samoy, etc. manuc. Warwic.
Iohannis fuit ad Parliamentum prox. praeteritum. ss. Johannes de Clyntone, de
Makstoke, electus est nun^ loco Philippi de Payton, eo quod idem Philippus est
nunc Vicecomes War. and Leic. et praedictus Johannes manuc. est per two there
named. Nota.


Burgenses Villae War. 2. Burgenses Villae Coventr. 2. with two manucaptors
apeece.

Omnes supradicti plenam habent potestatem, secundum tenorem brevis.

Proclamatio public and solenniter facta est secundum tenorem brevis
praedicti.

Manucapt. Iohannis de Elsefeld Militis, qui prius fuit Johan: de Pratellis
alterius Militis, 2. there returned.

Burg. Villae Oxon 2. with two distinct manucaptors for either.

Nulla est Civitas nec aliquis Burgus praeter praedict. Burgum Oxon. in Com.
Oxon.

Public proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam, qnod omnes illi qui habent
terras infra metas Forestae et per ambulationem voluerint calumpniari, sint ad
diem et locum contentos in brevi, prout in eodem praecipitur.

Et quia Com. Berk est in Balliva mea, licet Perambulatio in eodem sacta fuit
et observata, pro eo quod in isto Brevi continetur, quod Colloquium in
Parliamento tractandum erit super aliis negotiis praefatum Regem tangentibus;
Ideo gratis eligerunt duos Milites, quorum nomina si contingat aliquid de eis
fieri, sunt haec, Iohannis de Hues, and Rogerus de Burghfeld.

Nomina Militum pro Communitate Com. Ebor: cum Ebor.


Man. Roberti de Balliolo Militis 2. man: Petri Becard Militis 2. there listed.

Nomina Civium de civitate Ebor. cum eor. manuc. 2. there named, with two
several manucaptors.

Nomina Burgensium de Burgo de Scardeburg. 2. with two manucaptors.

Et Proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam, tam infra libertates quam extra,
quod omnes illi qui terras aut ten. habent infra metas Forestae Domini Regis
sint ad Parliamentum prout breve exigit.

Nomina Militum Com. Essex: Ricardus le Fyshere Essex.
Willus: le Fishere de eadem. Manuc. Iohannem de Fillol. Militem. Ricardus
Clericus de Maden, Robertus de Thapstede manu^. Hugonem le Blunt Militem.

Nomina Burgensium villae Golecestr. 2 with two manucaptors for each.

Proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam, prout praecipitur.

Johannes de Hammes, unus Miles electus pro communitate Surr:
Surr. manuc. est per 2. ven. ad diem. Johannes de Burstowe, per 2.

Burgus de Bleechynghlegh 2. Burgus de Guldeford 2. Burgus de Suthwerke 2.
Burgus de Ryegate 2. with two manucaptors for each.

Manuc. Hugh de Escote Militis 2. manuc. Baldwini de Sutbton.
Bello Alneto. 2.

Burgenses de Portesmue. 2. Burgenses de Overtone 2. Burgenses de Alresford. 2.
Cives Wynton 2. with two manucaptors for every of them.

Pro Burgensibus villae Sutht. And: Insulae Odeham and Basinggestoke, breve
istud retornatum suit Ballivis Libertatum Sutht. qui nullum inde michi dederunt
responsum. Et vobis significo, quod proclamari feci quod in brevi praecipitur,
secundum tenorem ejusdem brevis.

Nomina Mil. electorum per Com. Wygorn, qui manucapti sunt veniend,
adParliamentum ad diem in hoc Wigorn.


Man. Roberti de Bracy 2. Man. Simonis de Crombe 2.

Nomina Civium eodem modo electorum pro Communitate civitatis Wygorn. 2. with
two several manucaptors.

Nomina Burgens. de Wych eodem modo electorum, 2. with two distinct manucaptors.

Eligi in pleno Com. Glouc. feci loco unius Militis Glouc.
Rici de Croupes, per assensum ipsius Comitatus: Sic enim habetis duos Milites
Com. illius, videlicet, Iohannem de Acton in liberate Comitis Glouc. de
Thornbury commorantem, et praedictum Ricardum in liberate Abbatis Cyrenc. sic
conversantem; pro quibus vero Militibus retornatum fuit istud breve Ballivis
praedictarum libertatum, qui habent returnum omnium brevium praedictis
Militibus et eorum expensis, juxta tenorem brevis. Praedictus tamen Ballivus de
Thornbury mihi respondet de manucapt. praedict. Iohannis subscriptis de
expensis vero execut. eorundem Militum Ballivae suae nil michi respondet.
Ballivus etiam praedictae libertatis Cirencestr. de executione dicti Rici:
Militis et eorum expensis nullum mihi dedit responsum. Ideo de execut. ipsius
Rici: ac eorum expensis nichil agere potui. Nec idem Ricus Miles, aliquid habet
in Com. Glouc. extra libertatem praedictam per quod potest distringi.

Manucaptores Iohannis de Acton, Militis, two there named. De expensis insuper
praedictorum Militum juxta mandatum vestrum alibi in Com. praedicto levandis,
retornatum suit istud breve tam Ballivis libertatum de Henebury, Glideslow,
Sancti Brionelli, Bysele Fiscamp et Westow. qui habent retornum omnium brevium,
qui de expensis illis nichil michi respondent. Et etiam Ballivis libertatis de
Poukelechirche et Teukesbury, qui similiter habent return si omnium brevium,
quod partem expensaru^ pro portione sua ipsos contingentes michi persolverunt,
et partem illius nequaquam. de qua quidem alia part michi non respond: quoniam
praeceptum suit aliis Ballivis de Gildabulis, quod omni festinatione expensas
pro portione sua celeriter levarent, de quibus postea partem illarum expensarum
de eodem Gildabul. recepi: et Iohanni de Acton praedicto in partem solutionis
expensarum suarum versus parts Lincolniae, liberavi, et sic major pars illarum
expensarum tam de praedictis libertatibus quam de gildabulo adhuc restat.
levand.

Caeterum Domine retornatum fuit breve istud pro Burgens. Bristoll, et Burgens.
Glouc, Ballivis libertatum Burgorum praedictoru^, qui habent returnum omnium
Brevium, qui mihi respondent, quod executi sunt praeceptum vestrum in omnibus
juxta tenorem, et quod Burgens. sui, Burgorum suorum praedictorum, manucapti
sunt per manucaptores subscriptis.

Manucaptores Johan: de Malmesb. de Bristol, 2. de Bristol.

Public proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam, quod omnes illi qui terras et
ten: habent infra metas Forestae et qui perambulationem illam in aliquo
calumpniari voluerint, quod sint ad Parliamentum, ostensuri rations et
calumpnias si quas habent.

Hugo de Chastiloum Miles, qui pro Communitate com. Bucks. ad Parliamentum
ultimo praeteritum, venit. manuc. per 4. Robertus Pogers Miles, qui ad
Parliamentum Bucks.
infirmus est. In loco ipsius Roberti, Gerardus de Braybroke Miles electus est,
et manucapitur per 4 there returned. Burgenses 2. de Agnundesham, qui ad
ultimum Parliamentum venerunt: manuc. per 4. manucaptors for either. Johannes
de la Lude Burgensis Wycumbe, electus est loco Stepbani Ayet, qui fuit ad
ultimum Parliamentum, pro eo quod idem Stephanus infirmus est: manuc. per 4.
Thomas de Tailleur alter Burgensis de Wycumbe, qui ad ultimum Parliamentum
venit manuc. per. 4. Burgenses; de Wendouer (two there named) qui ad ultimum
Parliamentum ven. manuc. per 4. manucaptors apeece there returned.

Nomina Militum, Civium et Burgensium electorum veniendi Devon.
ad Parliamentum secundum contentum brevis.

Quia Reginaldus de Ferrers et Robertus Beaupell Milites, qui alias fuerunt ad
Parliamentum per electionem Com. non sunt potentes ad laborand. ad praesens,
electi sunt loco eorum Henricus de Ralegh and Nicholaus de Kyrkton; who found 4
manucaptors apeece there returned.

Nomina Civium Exon. Henry de Bokwell, Iohannis Fartheyn loco Nicholai Page qui
impotens est. Pro Burgo Totton 2. Pro Burgo de Okampton 2. Pro Burgo de
Lydeford 2. Pro Burgo de Barnastaple 2. Pro Burgo Honeton 2. without
manucaptors returned.

Milites Com. Hereford manucaptores Rici de Ba^ker Hereford.
Johannis de Acton 2. Cives Hereford 2. with two manucaptors for each.
Burgenses Leominster 2. Butgenses Webeleye 2. with two manucaptors apeece.

Et Proclamari feci prout in brevi continetur.

Milites Com. Salop. Thomas de Rochhale Miles, manuc: Salop.
Petrus de Syton Miles manuc. est per 2. Burgenses Salop 2. Burgenses de
Bruges, 2, manuc. per two manucaptors each man.

Milites de Com. Dors. man. Philippi Maunbanke 2. Henrici Conore 2. Burgenses
de Brideport 2. with two manucaptors for either. Burgens. de Dorcest. 2. with
two manucaptors apeece.

Public proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam; quod omnes illi qui terras et
ten. habent infra metas Forestae Dom: Regis in Balliva mea qui Perambulationem
in aliquo calumniari voluerint, quod sint ad diem et locn^ in brevi isto
content. ostensuri rations suas et calumpnias si quas habent, secundum formam
hujus brevis.

Milites de Com. Somerset manucaptores Willi: de Summers.
Bear Militis 2. man. Hugonis de Popham Militis 2.

Civitas Bathon: manuc. Willi: Leken 2. manuc Petri le Wenetour 2. de Bathon.

Burgus de Mileburn 2. Burgus de Brigwater 2. Burgus Tanton 2. with two
manucaptors for every Burgess.

Publire proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam, quod omnes illi qui terras
and tenem. habent infra metas Forestae Domini Regis in Balliva mea praedicta,
et qui Perambulationem in aliquo calumpniari voluerint. quod sint ad diem and
locum in isto brevi conteut. ostensuri rations suas et calumpnias si quas
habent secundum formam isti^ Brevis.

Responsum istius Brevis est in Panello huic Brevi attachiato.

Nomina Militum Com: Wyltes, simul cum nominibus Civium et Burgensium elect.
pro Communitate Civitatum and Burgorum.

Duo Milites; Petrus filius Warini, manuc. est veniendi per 2. Willus de Cotes,
manuc. est eodem modo per 2.

Cives Sarum, Johannes de Braundestone manuc. per 2. Walterus Goer manuc. est
per two.

Burgenses de Doutone 2. Burgenses de Malmesbury 2. Burgenses de Chypenham 2.
Burgenses de Kalne 2. Burgenses de Wylton 2. Burgenses de Devyses 2. Burgenses
de Merleberge 2. Burgenses de -- -- (torn out of the writ, yet most likely
Lurdgeshall, by the manucaptors) they all having two several manucaptors; Et
Proclamatio facta est secundum formam in brevi Regis contentam public infra
Ballivam meam.

Milites Com. Stafford. Radus. Basset de Sapecote manuc. Henr. Marneysin.
manucapt. est per two manucaptors. Burgenses de Stafford two, with two
Manucaptors apeece.

Plegii Willielmi de Blount 2. Pleg. Iohannis de Foleville

Public proclamari feci per totam Ballivam meam, quod omnes illi qui terras et
tenem. habent inframetas Forestae Domini Regis in Balliva mea, et qui
Perambulationem in aliquo calumpniare volunt, quod sint in Parliamento suo apud
Lincoln. ostensur. in hac part rations et calumpn^as si quas habent.

Manucapt. Iohannis de Deen 2. manuc. Roberti de Gayhouse 2. manuc. Burgens.
Hunt. 2. having both two

Nomina Militum, manuc: Hugonis Wake 2. manuc. Iohannis Deu. 2. Nomina Burgens.
Northton 2. with Northampt.
Public proclamari feci, etc. 20 in former return^.

Radus: de Frecheuyle and Galfridus de Greslye Milites, suerunt Derby; et modo
man: sunt de essend. coram vobis apud Lincoln, secundum tenorem brevis, viz.
Radus de Frechuyle; etc. man. per two apeece.

Burgenses de Derby 2. man: per two apeece; ut supra.

Ranulphus de Waudesby, and Willus d^ Chadworth Milites, Not. man. sunt essendi
coram vobis apud Lincoln. per two man. apeece.

Burgenses 2. pro Notingh. with two manuc.

Nomina Militum elect: per Com: Hugh de Louther, Robertus de Washeton, with two
man: apeece.

Nomina Burg: de Appleby 2. with two manucaptors.

The return is torn and unlegible, together with the most of the writ.

The Writs to the Sheriffs of 4 Counties mentioned in the Clause Rolls, and
their returns are missing in this Bundle, and there is no mention at all in the
roll of any Writs then issued to the Sheriffs of Cornwall, or London, nor any
such writs to them in the Bundle, whatever was the reason of this omission.

I have for brevity recited only the names of the Knights for these Counties,
omitting the names of the Citizens, Burgesses and Manucaptors for the most
part; which those who please may peruse in the returns.

In this Parliament of 28 E. 1. the Great Charter of the liberties of England
and the Forest, were specially confirmed; and not only several writs issued to
Sheriffs through all Counties of England for their reading, publishing, and due
observation, recorded in the Cl. Roll of 28 E. 1. d. 7, 8. but likewise certain
Knights or other Freeholders were publicly elected by the Sheriff, Coroners
and Commonalty of every County throughout England, for the punishing of all
Trespasses and Offenses committed against the same, by special Patents issued
to them by the King and his Counsil; whom they were personally to attend
concerning the same; as is apparent by these two memorable writs, not hither to
taken notice of by any to my knowledge, and not improper for this Section being
See Cooks 2 Instit. p. 540.
grounded on the printed Statute of 28 E. 1. chapter 1.

Rex Vic. Lincoln. et Coronatoribus et Communitati De Militibus mittendis usque
Ebor. pro Magna Carta and Carta de Foresta.
ejusdem Com. salutem. Quia propter communem utilitatem Praelatorum, Procerum
et Magnatum ac populi regni nostri concessimus pro Nobis et haeredibus nostris,
quod Magna Charta de Libertatibus Angliae et Carta de Foresta in singulis suis
Articulis de caetero teneantur et firmiter observentur: Vobis mandamus, quod
tres Milites, vel alios tres de probioribus, legalioribus et discretioribus
liberis hominibus Com. praedicti de assensu ejusdem Com: sine dilatione eligi,
et cos usque Ebor: venire faciatis. Ita quod sint ibidem in Crastino
Ascensionis Domini coram Nobis vel Consilio nostro, ad faciend. et exequend. ea
quae tunc eis ibidem injungetur ex part nostra pro observatione Cartarum
predictarum: et habeatis ibi nomina praedictorum Militum vel liberor. hominum
et hoc breve. Test Rege apud Westminster. 26. die Martii.

Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Vic. and Coronatoribus et
Communitatibus singulorum Comitat. per Angliam.
Claus. 28 E. 1. d. 7. Rex Vic. Nortbt. salutem. Quia De eligendo alium Militem,
Philippus de Geyton unus illorum de Balliva tua quos nuper de speciali
praecepto nostro de tuo et Coronatorum ac Communitatis Comitatus praedicti
communi assensu eligi, et usque Eborum in Crastino Ascenfionis Domini venire
fecisti, ad facienda et exequenda ea quae eis ibidem injungerentur ex part
nostra See Mat. Parisiensis Additamenta, p. 215. such a kind of Writ as this,
Anno 42 H. 3.
pro obserbatione magnae Cartae de Libertatibus Angliae et Cartae similiter de
Foresta, electus est in Com. War. and per Nos una cum quibusdam aliis
fidelibus nostris de eodem Com. assignatus ad Transgressiones quas contra
tenores praedictarum Cartarum ibidem fieri contingat, audiend. et terminand.
per quod ad praemissa facienda in Com. tuo prout erat electus, nequit intendere
quoquo modo: Tibi praecipimus, quod loco ipfius Philippi de assensu Coronatorum
et Communitatis Comitatus tui praedicti; eligi facias unum alium de
probioribus, legalioribus et discretioribus ejusdem Comitatus, qui ad hoc in
eodem Com. tuo una cum ipsis ad hoc ibidem electis, et coram nobis juratis
intendat, juxta formam potestatis ipsis electis, et sibi per Nos tradendae. Et
cum eum fic eligi feceris Nobis de ipsius nomine constare facias sine mora, ut
tunc dictis electis et sibi literas nostras Patentes de potestate sua in hac
part fieri faciamus. Test Rege apud Sanctum Edmundum 10 die Ju.

In and from the former Writs, and their various returns, there are sundry
things very observable, which I shall note before I pass to the next ensuing.

1. The occasion of these Writs and last Parliament; wit, the examination,
confirmation and establishment of the New Perambulation of the Forests then
made and returned to the King by the Commissioners specially appointed
thereunto for the Common profit of the people of the Realm, upon the Lords and
Commons earnest requests in former Parliaments; as you may read at large in
Thomas Walsingham, Hist. Angliae, p. 35. 37, 38, 42, 44, 48. Ypodigm.
Neustriae, p. 84, 85, 86, 87, 88. Mat. Westminster. Ann. 1297, 1299. My Plea for the
Lords. p. 98. to 104. Claus. 28 E. 1. d. 13. and Claus. 9 E. 2. d. 6. Schedula.

2. The excellent principle of right and justice comprised in them; That
Perambulations of Forests, though made and returned by special Commissioners
appointed by the King and Parliament, ought not to be ratified as binding, till
the reasons, exceptions, and complaints of all persons concerned therein were
publicly heard and descided before the Lords in Parliament; and they publicly
summoned by Proclamations in each County, to propound their exceptions and
reasons against them, if they had any. Which rule ought to be still observed in
all other like public cases, both in and out of Parliaments.

3. The special command and limitation of the King in and by these writs,
commanding all Sheriffs throughout England, to summon to this New Parliament
at Lincoln, no new elected Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, except only in the
places of such who were dead, sick, or unable to com to it; but only those
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses who were elected and sent to the last
Parliament before it, by the Kings precept. Which was accordingly executed, as
appears by the Sheriffs returns.

4. A Resolution and Declaration of the King himself by special writs out of
Parliament, without the petition, vote, or privity of the Commons themselves;
That if any Knights of Shires, Citizens or Burgesses elected and returned to
Parliament be sick, or unable to serve and discharge their duties; the Sea my
Plea for the Lords, p. 389, 390, 391.
King himself may by general or special writs, command, other fitting persons
to be elected and sent to Parliament in their places; as well as when they are
actually dead: which was accordingly practiced this year, as the Sheriffs
returns attest: And since that resolved and practiced in the Parliament Anno 38
H. 8. Brook Parliament 7. and Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 16. against
the erroneous opinion of Sir Edward Cook to the contrary, 4 Instit: p. 8. And
one Knight is discharged because made a Sheriff, and another chosen in his
place.

5. That all Knights, Citizens and Burgesses elected and sent to Parliaments,
ought to have full and sufficient power and commission for themselves and the
several Comminalties of the Counties, Cities, Boroughs for which they serve, to
hear, do and consent to such things as shall happen to be ordained by common
advice and counsel in those Parliaments; which ought to be comprised in the
returns of their elections.

6. That all old and new Knights, Citizens and Burgesses elected for this
Parliament, were enforced to put in Manucaptors to appear at the day prefixed,
who are expressed in all the Sheriffs returns.

7. That these old Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, summoned to this new
Parliament, are by a special Clause in the writ of Summons it self, ordered to
receive their reasonable expenses in coming to, abiding at, and returning from
the Parliament, from the Commonalties of the Counties, Cities and Buroughs,
for which they served: for which they usually had special writs only at the
conclusions of Parliaments; there being no such clause in any writ of Summons I
have seen, but thi^ alone. That no Sheriffs in their returns make any mention
what they had done touching the levying of their wages, but the Sheriff of
Gl^cester only: Of which more in its proper place.

8. That the Sheriffs of those Counties wherein there were Forests, had one
Clause in their writs, to make public proclamation in their Counties, that all
such who had lands or tenements within the bounds of any Forest, should appear
before the King in Parliament, to show their reasons and exceptions against the
perambulation, if they had any: which was accordingly executed by such
Sheriffs; which Clause was totally omitted out of the Writs to those Sheriffs
within whose Counties there were no Forests.

9. That there is no mention of any writs of Summons in this Roll issued to the
Warden of the Cinqueports, to summon and elect any Barons of those Ports to
come to this, nor to the two precedent Parliaments.

10. That though there is special mention made in the writs to the Clergy of
the Kings Counsil, and other Assistants summoned to this Parliament at Lincoln,
of a Conference and Treaty to be had in this Parliament at Lincoln, concerning
the right and dominion of the King and his Ancestors, Kings of England, to and
over the Realm of Scotland; yet there is no recital of it in these writs to the
Sheriffs, nor in those to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords.

There were two special writs more issued to the two Justices of the Forests,
beyond and on this side Trent, to summon all the Foresters under them to this
Parliament: Of which in its proper Section in due time.

I find no more Bundles of Writs for elections issued to Sheriffs now extant
in the Tower during the reign of Edward the 1. only the transcripts of some of
them are in the Clause Rolls ensuing.

The next writ of this nature, is that of Clause 30 E. 1. dorse. 9.

Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem. Quia super diversis, and arduis negotiis Nos et Statum
Regni nostri, ac pro commodo and securitate ejusdem Regni Parliamentum in prox:
festo Sancti Michis. London duximus statuend. Tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes, quod de Com. praedicto duos Milites, et de qualibet Civitate duos
Cives, et de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus ipsius Comitatus
sine dilationeeligi, et ad Nos venire faciatis ad diem. et l^cum praedictos.
Ita quod dicti Milites pro Communitate Com. praedicti, etc. tunc ibidem habeant
sufficientem potestatem ad faciend. quod tunc de Communi consilio ordinabitur
in praemissis. Et habeas ibi nomina Militum, Civium, and Burgensium, et hoc
breve. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Julii: [28 die August.]

Consimiles Literae diriguntur singulis Vic^omit. per Angliam. Et ubi est unus
Vic. duorum Com. dicitur sic, quod de utroque Com. praedictorum duos Milites,
etc. ut supra.

It is observable, First, That this Parliament was called as well for the
benefit and security of the people of the Realm, as for the weighty affairs of
the King and kingdom. 2ly. That de discretioribus, is the only qualification
required in the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to be elected. 3ly. That they
were to have sufficient power for the Commonalty of the Counties, Cities, and
Buroughs for which they were chosen, only ad faciend, quod tunc de Communi
Consilio ordinabitur in praemissis. 4ly. That some were Sheriffs of two
Counties at once (usual in former times) and that they had only one writ issued
to them, to elect two Knights etc. in each County, etc. which they severally
returned.

Claus. 30 E. 1. dors. 7. There are other writs issued Uic. Ebor. and singulis
Vicecom. per A^gliam. T. Rege apud Jews 13. die Septembr. agreeing in form
with the precedent. The next is entered Claus. 32 E. 1. dors. 2.

Rex Vic. Ebor. etc. Quia pro quibusdam, etc. usque tractatum. Tibi
praecipimus, etc. quod de Com. praedict. duos Milites, and de, etc. de
discretioribus and ad laborand. potentioribus, sine dilatione eligi, etc. Ita
quod dicti: Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se et Communitate
Com. praedicti, etc. divisim ab ipsis tunc ibidem habeant, ad faciend. quod
tunc de Communi Consilio ordinabitur in praemissis: Ita quod pro defectu
hujusm^di potestatis negotia praedicta non remaneant infacta. Et habeas, etc.
Test ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Uic. per Angliam.
Claus. 33 E. 1. dors. 10. and 20. There are no writs to Sheriffs entered with
the rest to the Spiritual and Vicecom. Ebor. agreeing in form with the last
recited: with like writs, singulis Vicecom. per Angliam; but in Cl. 35 E. 1. d.
13. there are no writs to the Sheriffs entered, nor yet to the Spiritual, but
only to the Temporal Lords.

Claus. 1 E. 2. dors. 19. Claus. 2. E. 2. dors. 11. there Ebor. and Claus. 4 E.
2. dors. 2. Vic. Kanc. with Consimiles literae singulis Vic. per Angliam, after
every of them, agreeing all in form with the precedent writs, and their dates,
recitals are the same with those to the Spiritual Lords forecited. Part 1.
Sect. 1, 2.

In the Parliament of 2 E. 2. at Westminster, the King requesting an Aid from
the Commons then elected by his writs, they granted him the 25 part of their
goods upon this Condition, that he would answer and redress their grievances,
which they then presented, and reduced to 11. Articles, and prayed the King in
a modest manner, to redress if he pleased; who thereupon promised them relief
therein, and accordingly gave answers to them in his next Parliament at
Stanford; thus recorded in Claus. 3 E. 2. m. 1. dorso.

Les Articles souz escritz baillez a nostre Seigneur le Roi Quidam Articuli
liberati Regi pro Communitate Regni.
par la Communate de son Roialme, a son Parliament quil tynt a West: ou Ouis de
Pasch. L'an. de son regne second, en quel Parliament, le Roi preia daver une
Aid de sa terre, e les bones gentz granterent au Roi le xxv. denier Par cien
Condition, qil meist Conseil et remedy en les Articles avantdits. E. le Roi a
son Parliament a Staunford commenceant le dimeynge prochein apres la Saint
Jakes, l'an de son Regne tiercz, ordena respons et remedy a mesmes les
Articles. Les queux respons et remedy il fist notefier son people a son dit
Parliament a Staunford, et que sont cy dessouz escritz, cest asaver, apres
chescun Article le remedy que y est ordene.

Les bone gentz du Roialme qui sont cy venuz au Parliament, prient a nostre
Seygneur le Roi quil voille, si lui plest, aver regard de son pour poeple qe
molt se sent greve de ceo, qil ne sont pas menes si come il deussent estre.
Nomeement des pointm de la Grant Chartre, and pry de ce, si lui plest,
remedy. Estre ce prient a leur Seygneur le Roi, si lui plest, qil voille oir
les chooses que molt ont grevez son poeple, and uncore grevent de nouel de jour
en auter, per ceux qui se dient estre ses Ministres, et mettre en amendment si
lui plest.

A de primes, de bledz, brees, chans, fresches et alors et toute manner de
Polaill, peison de Mere and de Eaw duie pris per ceux qe se diont estre
Ministres le Roy, qe rien ne paent, ne autre certeinete per faille, ne en autre
manner ne font au poeple le Roi, per quoy son poeple est empoueri.

Acest Article est respondu: Qil y avoit une Ordinance faitz de cieuz Prises
en temps le Roi Edward pere nostre Seigneur le Roy qui ore est, la quele
Ordenaunce hom entend qe soit covenable par le. Roy, et profitable pur son
poeple: and voet nostre Seygneur le Roy qe cele Ordenaunce soit tenue and guard
en toutz pointz.

L'autre, qe le Roi per ses Ministres prent de chescun tonel de vyn ij. soldz.
de chescun drap qe Marchandz alieni font venir en sa terre ij s. and de
chescune livre de aver de pois iij. deniers, au d'alnage du poeple, et per
tieuz prises achate le poeple au tierz denier plus qil ne soloit.

Nostre Seigneur le Roi a la request de son poeple grant, qe cete petite
Custom de vyns, de draps, et daver de pois, soit souztrete et ouste a la
volente le Roi, pur saver quel profit et quel avantage amestera alui and a son
people per cele suztrete, et puis en aur a le Roi consail selonc lavantage qil
y verra; Sauves toutes voies a nostre Seignr. le Roi les aunciennes Prises et
Customs aunciennement dues et approves.

Le tierz; qe la ou le Roi ad command qe la money destrelings qe alott en
temps le Roi son pere, a qui dieus face mercy feust tenuz aussi bone come elle
feust en le temps son pere; les vendours es Citez, Burghs, and es autres villes
marchandes des obeissament ne le tout pas, Mais encontre son mandement vendent
au double value, and plus cher en moltz des lieus de sa terre, per quoi la
poeple est molt empoveri.

Le Roi voet, qe briefs soient enueez en touz les Contez Dengleterre a fair
crier, qe lo monoie courge a sa droite value, si come elle soloit en temps son
pere, et ci sur grevouse pain and qe hom nencberisse les chooses pur la monoye,
car le Roi la voet maintenir aussi ausi bone come elle soloit estre.

Le quart; qe come le poeple se senti molt greve et travaille en temps le Roi
lour Seignr. son pere, a qui deiu face mercy, de ce qe Seneschaus et Mareschaux
plederent moltz de manners des pledz qe a eux nafferoient apleder, et as
pleintes de son poeple qe per tieux pledz feust grevez et enpovreux fist remedy
et establi certains pointz and articles des queux et de quoi Senesch. et Mar.
douient devant eux aver conissance apleder, les Senesch: et Mar. qe ore sont,
ceux pointz, ne ceux Articles ne sount, ne re gardent, ainz enlargissent lour
jurisdiction, et lour poair encontre lordenance et establishment son pere, qui
deiu face mercy, don't son poeple est molt greve et enpoveri, et de ceo pry
remedy.

Le Roi voet, qe Senescheaux et Mar. ne teignent autre manner de plede ne en
autre form qe nestote ordenez per le Roi son pere, qui dieus assoile, et qe ne
passent desoremes cele Ordenance qest enroullee en Chauncellere.

Le quint; que les Seneschaux and Mars. ou el vount per pais horse de la verge,
ou lour poair nest pas, tenent pleds, amercient Burghs and Villes grevousement
sauz garant, et au grefs damage es enpoverissement du poeple, pur quoi le
poeple pry remedy.

Le Roi voet, que les pledz de la Mareschaucie ne soient tenuz forsque deinz la
verge, cest asaver, deins le: 12 lieves enviroun la ou corpse le Roi serra, et
selonc lordenaunce avantdits.

Le sisme, Qe les Chevalers, gentz de Citez e de Burghs. e dautres Villes qe
sont venuz a son Parliament per son commandment, pur eux et pur la poeple e ont
Petitions a liver per tortz and grevances faites a eux, qe ne poent estre
redressees per la commune ley, ne en autre manner saunz especial garant, il ne
troeuent hom qe lour petitions recieve, sicome soloit estre au Parliament in
temps le Roi lour Seignr. son pere, qui deiu face mercy, et de ce prient sa
grace and remedy.

Le Roy voet, qe en ses Parlements desoremes gentz soient assignees a receiver
petitions, et qe else soient delivres per son Conseil, aussi come See Claus.
33 E. 1. m. 8. dorso. De Petitionibus recipiendis: where 4 of the Kings Counsel
are commanded and appointed by Writ to receive all Petitions that Parliament.
estre soloient en temps son pere.

Le Septisme Article, qe la ou le Roi ad ses pernours de prises fair en Feires
et Citez, per mi le Roialme les pernours le Roi pernent plus qe ne besoigne al
oeps le Roi, ceux mesmesle livrent au autres pur marchander a lour preudemeyne,
et au profit a qe il le delivrent, et au damage le Roi, et de son poeple; don't
le poeple pry remedy.

Le Roi voet, qe lordenaunce qe sa faite de cieux Prises en temps le Roy son
pere, soit tenue et gardee, la quelle est contenue es Roulles de la
Chauncellarie.

Le Oytisme, qe per la ou il y ad suite faite selonc form de ley en les Banks
nostre Seygneur le Roi, souent per Protections, et per Breffs dessouz la targe,
sont leur dreitures delaez, a grant damage du poeple.

Le Roi voet, qe Protections oue les Clauses daquitance de pledz, ne soient
grantez desoremes a nulles gentz forsqe a ceux qi vent horse du Roialme en le
servise le Roi pur grosses busoignes du Roialme. E le Roi ad charge le
Chanceller qi ne les face en autre manner. Et quant es Breffs de la targe, la
Roi voet qe lordenaunce soit guard qe en fust faite en temps le Roi son pere,
la quelle est en Chancellarie.

Le Novism, qe par la ou larons sont enditez de larciniez, r^beries, homicides,
et autres felonies faites, trop logierement purchaunt la chartre le Roi de sa
pees, per quoi ceux qi les ont enditez ne osent demorer en lour pais pur doubt
de ceux larons, and plusurs se retreent de enditementz fair per cele encheson,
don't le poeple pry remedy.

Le Roi voet, que desoremes ne soit grante pardoun de felony forsqe en cas ou
aunciennement soleit estre grantez, cest asaver, si borne tue autre per
mesaventure, ou soi defendant, ou en deuerie, and ce soit troue per record de
Justices.

Le disme, qe per la ou les communs pledz du Banks le Roi de Contez douient
estre pledez en certain leiu, la veignant les Ministres le Roi de ses Chasteaux
et treent en cieu manner les pledz devant les ports des Chasteaux, contra la
form de la ley, et de ce pry remedy.

Le Roi voet qe les Constables des Chasteaux ne destreignent gentz apleder
devant eux null play de foreign Conte, ne deinz Count, autrement qe
aunciennement soleit estre fait.

Le Viceisme, qe par la ou diverses gentz du Roialme tenent lour tenements en
chefs du Roi et uncore tenuz. eux et lour auncestres du temps don't memoire
nest, veignent les Escheters le Roi, et seisant lour terres et les oustout per
enquestes quil fait de lour office, sanz appeller en la Court le Roi, don't le
poeple se sent molt greve.

Le Roi voet, qe gentz et lour auncestres ont tenuz du temps don't il nyad
memoire, si come la petition suppose, e les Eschetors ne se mellent pur
encheson del premier enter.

Et ordenez est et commander per nostre Seignr. le Roi, qe a ceux qe se
voudront pleinder a Chauncellier, qe null bom soit venus encontre aucun des ditz
pointz, le Chancellier par brofs du grant seal en face cel remedy come il
verra qe face afere pur reason. Et le Roi ad aussint charge le dit Chanceller et
ses Ministres, qe chescun endroit bien guard les pointz avantditz.

He who shall seriously peruse these premised Grievances of the Commons, which
were all they complained of in the Parliaments of 2 and 3 Edw. 2. under the Sea
My Plea for the Lords, p. 263. to 268.
misgovernment of Peter de Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, and other the Kings ill
Counselors who misled him, and were banished, and removed from him by
Judgment of Parliament, will find them not the thousandth part so many for
number, nor so grievous, oppressive, destructive to the persons, lives,
liberties, properties, estates, purses of the people by millions of degrees, as
those the people and whole Nation have lately groaned under for many years, and
suffered from their very real or nominal Parliaments themselves, their
Comittees, and the grand Pretended Gardians, Assertors, Protectors of their
Laws, Liberties, and Enfranchisers of them from Regal Tyranny and Bondage into
a misnamed Free State and Government, or rather Egyptian or Turkish
vassallage; Which I desire all conscientious publike-spirited Englishman now
cordially to contemplate. If the Commons in Parliament were so zealous to get
these few petit Grievances redressed then, bought out with a grant only of the
25 part of their goods, and thereupon thus redressed for the future; How
zealous and industrious should they be now to reform all those innumerable
transcendent grievances and pressures under which we have so long languished
and have paid so many millions of Treasure, yea spent whole Oceans of English
blood to remove, and yet are not eased nor released from them, nor in
probability like to be, being the least of their care, who should redress,
petition, protest against them: Let this president spurr and excite them to
their duties herein, being one of the first Petitions of public grievances
exhibited by the Commons alone without the Lords, to the King, that I have met
with in our records; upon which account, I thought not impertinent to insert it
here at large, having transcribed it with mine own hands out of the Clause Roll
it self.

The next Writ I shall present you with at large being very remarkable, is thus
recorded in Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 26. dorso.

Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem. Praecipimus tibi firmiter injungentes, quod illos
Milites, Cives and Burgenses, de Balliva tua, quos nuper ad praesens
Parliamentum nostrum apud London incboatum demandato nostro venire fecisti, and
qui ab eodem Parliamento certis de causts recesserunt, bell alios ad hoc idoneos
loco eorum, si ad hoc bacare non possint, usque Westminster. ad idem Parliamentum
quod ibid^m duximus continuandum, venire facias. Ita quod sint ibidem in
crastino Sancti Martini prox. futur. ad ultimum cum sufficienti potestate
Comitatus tui, and Civitatum et Burgorum praedictorum ad consentiendum, etc.
Test Rege apud London. xi die Octobris.

By this writ it is apparent, 1. That there were Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses elected and sent to this Parliament at London, by the Kings writ,
though not entered in the Roll of Summons, Claus. 5 E 2. d. 3. 17. 25. 2ly, That
they departed from the Parliament for certain reasons, not expressed, it seems
without the Kings License. 3ly. That thereupon the King by this writ commands
the Sheriff, to resummon them to come to the Parliament again, which was
adjourned to a certain day, most likely by reason of their departure from it:
or else to elect and send other fit persons in their places, if they could or
would not attend, sufficiently empowered from the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs
for which they served. And that without the vote, order, ejection or privity of
the Commons in Parliament; who had then no power to remove, eject, imprison,
suspend their own Members, or issue writs for new elections, as of late they do.

Claus. 6 E. 2. d. 31. I meet with this writ of Prorogation, but not with the
Original writ of Summons issued to the Sheriff.

Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem. Licet nuper Parliamentum nostrum apud Lincoln. (ut
supra Archiepiscopo, usque ordinavimus) Tibi praecipimus, quod de Com. tuo duos
Milites, and de qualibet Civitate duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos
Burgenses de discretioribus and ad laborand. potentioribus eligi, and eos ad
Nos ad dictos diem et locum venire faceres. Ita quod Milites plenam et
sufficientem potestatem pro se and Communitate Com praedicti, et dicti Cives et
Burgenses pro se et Communitate Civium et Burgorum praedictorum divisim ab
ipsis haberent tunc ibidem, ad faciend. quod de Communi Consilio nostro
ordinari contigerit in praemissis. Ita quod pro defectu hujusmodi potestatis
negotia praedicta infacta non remaneant. Quia tamen versus parts London. etc.
(usque tractabuntur.) Et ideo tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod
Milites, Cives and Burgenses praedictos sine dilatione eligi, and eos ad Nos
usque Westminster. ad dictam diem Dominicam post dictum festum Assumptionis venire
facias in forma praedicta. Et babeas ibi nomina dictorum Militum, Civium and
Burgensium, and hoc breve. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulls Vic. per Angliam.
Also in Claus. 6. E. 2. m. 27. dorso. I find this special Memorial entered.

Memorandum, quod die Lunae prox. ante festum decollationis De Revocatione
Militum ad propria.
Sancti Johannis Baptistae Anno Regis Edwardi fill. Regis Edwardi sexto. Dom.
Rex apud Westminster. praecepit, quod Milites, Cives and Burgenses qui ad
Parliamentum Regis ibidem summonitum converant pro Communitatibus, Civibus et
Burgis Angliae, ad propria remearent. Ita quod reverterent ibidem in Crastino
Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. sub paena quae decet. T. Rege apud Westminster. 28 die
Augusti.

A clear evidence, that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses then summoned and
sent to the Parliament, could neither prorogue nor adjourn themselves, nor
depart thence, without the Kings special license; which was entered on record,
and were liable to a fitting penalty, if they returned not upon the day of
prorogation prefixed by the King.

I shall only observe by the way; that whereas the King in his answer to the
second Article of the Commons Petition in the Here, p. 69.
Parliament of 3 E. 2. suspended the Petit Customs upon Wines, Cloth, and other
Merchandise; that the very next year he issued out writs to the Collectors of
the Customs and Officers in England, and to the Chief Justice, Treasurer and
Barons of the Exchequer in Ireland, De nova Custuma colligenda, to collect
these new Customs again, not withstanding this his Ordinance in the Parliament
at Stamford, because there was nulla utilitas regno, by the ceasing and abating
thereof, as appears by the writs of 2. and 6. Augusti, rot. Finium. An. 4 E. 2.
But in Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 23. there came this Countermand by Order from the
Prelates, Earls and Barons of the Realm appointed by Commission to reform the
abuses of the Kings Household and Realm, against the collecting of them and any
other new customs and Maltots.

Claus. 25 E. 2. m. 23.
Rex Collectoribus novae Custumae lanarum, coriorum, pellium lanatorum et
aliarum rerum venalium in portu London salutem. Cum Praelati, Comites and
Barons dicti regni nostri quibus nuper per literas nostras Patentes
commissimus potestatem, ordinandi de statu Hospitii nostri et Regni praedicti,
inter See these Ordinances in the Parl. Roll of 5 E. 2. which were afterward
reversed and nulled.
caeteras Ordinationes quas super praemissis fecerant, et quas acceptavimus, et
per totum regnum fecimus publicari, ordinaverint; Quod omnimodo Custumae and
Maletot levatae post Coronationem Domini E. quondam Regis Angliae patris
nostri, integre amoveantur, et penitus extinguantur; These being settled by
former grants, Rot. Pat. 3. E. 1. m. 1. 9. and the Statute of 25 E. 1. 6, 7.
Lib. Rub. Scac. p. 256. Cooks 2 Instit. p. 630, 631.
Salvis Custumis lanarum, coriorum, and pellium lanatorum ult. vid. de quolibet
Sacco lanae dimid. marc. and de 300. pellibus lanat. dimid. marc. and de lasto
Coriorum unam marcam: Vobis mandamus, quod de nova Custuma praedicta in Portu
praedicto percipiend. supersedeatis omnino. T. R. apud London 9. Octobr. Per
ipsum Regem and totum Consilium.

The like writs then issued to most Port Towns in England. If we could see the
like president now against all new excessive Imposts and Excises issued to all
Collectors and other Officers after so many years continuance of them, to the
ruin of trade, and impoverishing of the Nation (only to enslave them to a New
Military tyrannical usurping power, and keep on their iron yoaks upon their
over-galled necks) it would be a most joyful spectacle to their eyes, and
blessed tidings to their ears, which they have long in vain expected from late
public Conventions, which instead of easing, do still renew and continue these
heavy yokes and burdens upon them, though a thousand times more grievous than
those then complained against and redressed.

In Claus. 5 E. 2. m. 31. 22. I find a Writ issued by the King Willo: de
Marescall, and Mich de Segrave, prohibiting, that they come not armed to the
Parliament, seu alio modo quam tempore clarae memoriae E. quondam Regis Nota.
Angl. Patris nostri fieri consuevit; there being a quarrel between them: and
Dorse 30. 27. 25. 8. and m. 30. there are sundry other particulars concerning
passages and proceedings in that Parliament, worthy perusal, though not proper
for this Section. And so in Cl. 7 E. 2. m. 2. 8. 25. Cl. 8 E. 2. dors. 7, 8.
Claus. 9 E. 2. dors. 27. 26. 20. 17. 6.

Cl. 7 E. 2. m. 7. dorso. the Writ of election entered at large is thus
directed, to the Sheriff of Hertf. and Essex.

Rex Vic. Hertf. and Essex salutem. Cum diversa and ardua negotia (as in the
Writ to the Archbishop.) Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de utroque
Com. Comitatuum praedictorum, duos Milites, et de qualibet Civitate duos Cives,
and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus, et ad laborandum
potentioribus eligi, et eos ad Nos ad dictos diem et locum venire facias. Ita
quod Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and Communitate Com.
praedictorum; et dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se and Communitate Civitatum and
Burgornm praedictorum divisim ab ipsis babeant, and faciend. and consentiend.
biis, quae tunc de Communi Consilto favente Domino ordinari contigerit. Ita
quod, etc.

Consimiles literae diriguntur singulis Uicecom. per Angliam.
The like writs issued to the Sheriff of these two Counties, Cl. 7 E. 2. dors.
15. Cl. 8 E. 2. d. 29. Cl. 9. E. 2. d. 22. Cl. 11 E. 2. dors. 14. and 8. Cl. 12
E. 2. d. 11. 29. Cl. 14 E. 2. d. 5. 23. Cl. 16 E. 2. dors. 26. (varying only in
the Prolognes and dates, like those to the Archbishop) and to all other
Sheriffs of England. And Claus. 19 E. 2. dors. 27. the first writ issued Vic.
Norff. et Suff. Quod de utroque Com. Comitatnum praedictorum du^s Milites, etc.
de discretioribus et al laborand. potentioribus eligi, etc. facias, and to all
other Sheriffs of England in like form.

In Cl. 17 E. 2. d. 27. l find this Writ of Prorogation Rex Vic. Roteland,
salut^m. Cum nuper quo quibusdam specialibus negotiis ordinassemus cum
Proceribus Regni nostri apud Westminster. in Oct. sancti Hillarii prox futur. habere
Colloquium et Tractatum. Tibique praecipissemus quod de Com. praedict. duos
milites, etc. usque ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Ac cum pro
majori commodo and utilitate Regni nostri ordinaverimus Parliamentum nostrum
apud dictum locum tenere Westminster. a die Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis
prox. futur. in tres Septimanas and cum Praelatis, Magnatibns and Proceribus
dicti Regni super dictis negotiis, and aliis idem Regnum tangentibus habere
Colloquium and Tractatum, per quod nolumus, Milites, Cives aut Burgenses
praedicti ad locum praedictum in dictis Octabis ex causa praedicta accedant.
Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. praedicto duos milites, and
de qualibet Civitate duos Cives, and de quolibet Burge duos Burgenses de
discretionibus, and ad laborand. potentioribus eligi, and cos ad dictum locum
Westminster. in dictis tribus Septimanis venire fac. Ita quod praedicti Milites
plenam and. sufficientem potestate^ pro se and communitate com. praed. dictique
Cives and. Burgenses pro se and Civitatibus dictarum Civitatum and Burgorum
praedictorum divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciend. and consentiend. biis quae
in dicto Parliamento ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Ita etiam
quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi dicta negotia infecta non remaneant
quovis modo. Et habeas ibi nomina dictorum Militium, Civium and Burgensium, and
hoc breve. Test Rege apud Kenilworth, 26 die Decembr. per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scribitur singulis Vic. per Angl.
So Cl. 20 E. 2. d. 4. there issued this Writ of Prorogation Northumb. salutem.
Licet nuper super arduis negotiis nos and statum Regni nostri tangentibus
Parliamentum apud Westminster. in Quindena sancti Andreae prox futur. tenere, ac
ibidem per Isabellam Reginam Angliae Consortem nostram carissimam, and per
Edwardum filium nostrum Primogenitum, Custodem ejusdem Regni, nobis extra idem
Regnum tunc agentibus, atque Praelatos, Proceres and Magnates Regni praedicti,
habere voluissemus Colloquium and tractatum. Vobisque praeciperimus quod de
communitate Com. tui duos Milites, and de singulis Civitatibus duos Cives, and
de singulis Burgis duos Burgenses venire faceres ad diem and locum praedictos.
Ita quod dicti Milites a communitate dicti Com. and dicti Cives a
Communitatibus dictarum Civitatum, and praedicti Burgenses a communitatibus
Burgorum praedict. plenam and sufficientem haberent potestatem ad consentiend.
hiis quae tunc ibidem de communi Consilio Regni nostri contigerent ordinari.
Quia tamen quibusdam de causis necessariis and utilibus praedictum Parliamentum
and Tractatum usque in crastino Epiphaniae Domini prox. jam futur. apud dictum
locum Westminster. tunc tenend. duximus prorogand. Tibi significamus, quos praedictos
Milites, Cives and Burgenses ad dictam Quindenam apud dictum locum Westminster. ex
causa Parliamenti and tractatus praedictorum accedere non oportet, and hoc cis
scire facias ex part nostra. Tibi insuper praecipimus quod praedictos Milites,
Cives and Burgenses venire facias in dicto crastino apud dictum locum Westminster.
cum sufficienti potestate sicut praedictum est. Et habeas ibi nomina dictorum
Militum, Civium and Burgensium, and hoc breve, and hoc nullatenus omittatis.
Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vic. per Angl. sub eadem data.
The next Writs for Election issued to Sheriffs are these in Claus. 1 E. 3.
pars 2. dors. 16. Vic. Ebor. dors. 3. Vic. Lincoln. Claus. 2 E. 3. dors. 15.
Vic. Northumb, with Consimiles literes singulis Vic. per Angl. all in the usual
form.

In Claus. 2 E. 3. m. 31 dors. the Writs to Sheriffs,

Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem, cum in Parliamento nostro. apud Eborum convocato,
magna and ardua negotia Nos and statum Regni nostri tangentia proposita
suissent quae propter absentiam quorundam Praelatorum and aliorum Magnatum and
Procerum Regni nostri tunc non poterant terminari: super quibus and aliis
diversis negotiis de assensu omnium Praelatorum, Magnatum and Procerum in eodem
Parliamento nostro tunc existentium, apud Northampton a diePasche prox. futuro,
in tres Sept. a Parliamentum tenere, and cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Proceribus dicti Regni Colloquium habere ordinavimus and Tractatum. Tibi
praecipimus sirmiter injungentes, quod de dicto Com. duos Milites, and de
qualibet civitate Com. illius duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses,
de discretioribus and ad laborandum potentioribus eligi, and ad dictos diem and
locum venire facias. Ita quod dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem
pro se, etc. (as in other Writs to hoc breve:) Et quia ante haec tempora
nogotia in hujusmodi Parliamentis tractanda impedita fuerunt, Nota.
ex eo quod nonnulli Magnates cum multitudine ^umultuosa: hominum armatorum, ad
Parliamenta illa accesserunt, and populus partlum ubi Parliamenta tenta fuerunt
dampnificatus extitit and gravatus, per quod, per nos, and Consilium nostrum
concordatum existit, quod omnes and singuli de Regno nostro cujuscunque status
seu conditionis fuerint, si ad dictum Parliamentum venire voluerint, modo
debito, and absque aliqua hujusmodi multitudine, sub forisfacture omnium quae
nobis forisfacere poterint, accedant. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes,
quod in Balliva tua ubi meli^ expedire videris public proclamari, and ex part
nostra firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis sub forisfactura praedicta cujuscunque
status seu conditionis existit, ad Parliamentum praedictum cum hujusmodi
multitudine hominum armatorum accedere praesumat, per quod populus noster
terreri, seu dicta negotia nostra retardari valiant quovis modo, Test Rege
apud Eborum, 5 die Marcii.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vic. per Angliam.
From which Writ I shall observe, 1. That the Writs of Summons to Parliaments
may be altered and enlarged with necessary Prologues and clauses, according to
the times and emergent occasions, by the King and his Counsel, without consent
or Act of Parliament. 2ly. That the absence of some Prelates, Lords, and Great
men from the Parliament is a just cause to adjourn or dissolve it. 3ly. That no
weighty affairs ought to be concluded but in a full Parliament, when all the
Lords and Members are present; and not in an empty House, when any considerable
number of Lords and other Members are absent or secluded. 4ly. That no Lords
nor other persons whatsoever, though summoned as Members, Sec Part. 1. p. 27,
28. 177. 215. Sec Claus. E. 2. dors. 22. 31.
ought to come to Parliaments with a tumultuous multitude of people, followers,
and armed men; it being inconsistent with the freedom and privileges of
Parliaments, a grand disturbance to their proceedings touching the weighty
affairs of the King and Kingdom therein propounded, and a great terror and
oppression to the people in those places where the Parliaments are held; Much
less then ought Petitioners, or those who are no Members, to draw up whole
Troops, Regiments of armed Soldiers to terrify, force, seclude, secure,
dissolve the very Lords, Members, Houses, and Parliaments themselves. 5ly. That
the King and his Counsil alone may by public Writs and Proclamations lawfully
prohibit the resort of any persons, of what condition soever, to Parliaments,
with any tumultuous multitude, or armed men, under the pain of forseiting all
they have; and that by the ancient Common Law of England, as well as by the
Statute of 7 E. 1. Rastal Armer. 1. it being a chief branch of the Kings
ancient royal Prerogative and Office, as the Act declares. 6ly. That they may
insert this Prohibition and Proclamation into the very Writs of Summons
themselves, when there is just occasion; as there was never so much cause as
now to do it, after so many unparalled eumults and violences offered to
Members, and raised against Parliaments themselves, by tumultuous wultitudes of
rude people, and whole Troops, Regiments, Armies of Swordmen raised for their
defense, to the total, if not final subversion of the ancient Rights,
Liberties, and constitution of our English Parliaments.

In the Parliaments of 5 E. 2. some Noblemen and Earls, by reason of
dissentions between them, and other fears and jealousies, intended to resort to
those Parliaments with a great number of armed men of their friends and
retainers; which the King being informed of, thereupon issued these memorable
writs unto them, expressing the manifold mischiefs and inconveniences thence
ensuing, and prohibiting them to come to these Parliaments with any arms,
horses of war, or multitudes of people, or to disturb the peace, affright the
people of the Realm, or hinder the public affairs of Parliament in any kind,
under pain of forfeiting all their lands, tenements, and whatever else they
might forfeit to him, worthy the consideration and imitation of present and
future ages upon the like occasions.

Clause 5 E. 2. dors. 31. Rex dilecto et fideli sno Nicho: de Segrave, falutem.
Datum est nobis intelligi, quod vos occasion quarundam dissensionum inter vos,
et dilectum and fidelem nostrum Willielmum Marshall, nuper subortarum, ad arma
vos paratis, and amicos and confederatos vesttos, se parare similiter
procuratis, quodque ad Parliamentum nostrum quod apud London die Dominica
proxima post festum Sti. Laurentii. proximo futur. fecimus summoneri, accedere
intenditis cum multitudine armatorum, unde in immensum non immerito commovemur.
Et quia accessus bujusmodi si fieret, in nostri contemptum, et expeditionis
negotiorum nostrorum impedimentum, ac terrorem populi regni nostri et lesionem
pacis nostrae cederet manifest. Uobis mandamus in fide et bomagio quibus Nobis
tenemini, sub forisfactura terrarum ac tenementorum, ac omnium aliorum quae
Nobis forisfacere poteritis districte inhibentes, ne ad dictum Parliamentum cum
armis, seu alio modo, quam tempore clarae memoriae Domini E. quondam Regis
Angl. patris nostri consuevit, accedere, aut aliqua alia per quae expeditio
negotiorum nostrorum in dicto Parliamento retardari, aut pax nostra turbari,
seu populus dicti regni nostri quovis modo terreri valeat facere praesumatis.
Consimilia mandata et Inhibitionem fecimus praefato Willielmo super negotio
antedicto. Test Rege apud Berwic. super Twed. 20 die Julii.

Eodem modo mandatum est praefato Willielmo de Marshall. T. ut supra.
Cl. 5 E. 2. dors. 22. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Gilberto de Clare Comiti
Glouc. and Hereford, salutem. Intelleximus, quod ad praesens Parliamentum
nostrum apud Westminster. continuatum, estis cum equis et armis, more non debito
venientes, unde admiramur non immerito et turbamur; praesertim cum per
hujusmodi accessum vestrum ibidem expeditio negotiorum Nos et statum regni
nostri tangentium in dicto Parliamento nostro tractandorum impediri, et populus
partirum illarum ac alibl in regno nostro, terreri posset non modicum, et pax
nostra turbari. Vobis igitur mandamus in fide et homagio quibus Nobis tenemini
firmiter injungedtes, quod ad dictum Parliamentum nostrum ad tractandum
Nobiscum, et cum Praelatis ac Magnatibus de regno nostro super dictis negotiis
veniatis, prout tempore clarae memoriae Domini E. quondam Regis Angl. patris
nostri fieri consuevit, equis pro armis vobiscum ibidem nullatenus adducentes,
nec aliquid aliud attemptantes per quod pax nostra turbari, aut populus noster
terreri valeat quovis modo. T. apud Westminster. 28 die November: Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum subscriptis, viz. Thomae Comiti Lancastr. Humfr. de Bohun
Comiti Heref. and Essex, Adamaro de Ualenc. Com: Pembroke, Guidoni de
Bello-Campo Com: War. Edmundo Com. Arundell.
It seems notwithstanding those Writs, Walsingham Hist. Angliae, p. 72. to 78.
and other H^rians in Auno 5 E. 2.
there were some forces raised by these Earls and Nobles, principally against
Peter Gaveston; which produced these ill effects; 1. It terrified most of the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, and caused them to depart home, and desert the
Parliament; so as the King was enforced to issue out new Writs, to resummon
them, and to command the Sheriff to elect others in their places, in case they
would not or could not come; as is evident by the Writs in dorse 26 of Cl. 5.
E. 2. forecited, p. 73. 2ly. It frighted away most of the Kings Justices and
Counsil from the Parliament; so that he was constrained to resummon, and
command them not to depart from the Parliament during its continuance, without
his special license, as appears by this ensuing memorable Writ.

Cl. 5 E. 2. d. 27. Rex dilecto et fideli suo Roberto de Retford salutem. Nuper
vobis ex part nostra suit injunctum, quod una cum caeteris de Consilio nostro
in praesenti Parliamento nostro London ad tractandum ibidem super diversis
negotiis Nos et Statum regni nostri tangentibus moram continuam faceretis,
quousque aliud inde praecipissemus. Vosque mandatum nostrum, in hac part minus
just ponderantes, a dicto Parliamento, caeteris de Consilio nostro ibidem
circa dicta negotia nostra tractantibus, ad alias parts vos elongasti^, unde
admiramur non modicum, et merito conturbamur. Vobis igitur mandamus in fide qua
Nobis tenemini sirmiter injungentes, quod statim visis praesentibus, omnibus
aliis praetermissis ad dictam Civitatem cum omni festinatione accedatis, ibidem
cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque
Consilium impensuri, et exinde sine licentia nostra speciali durante
Parliamento praedicto nullaten us recedatis. Et hoc ficut indignationem nostram
vitare volueritis nullo modo omittatis. T. Rege apud Haddelye 12 die Septembr:
Per Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est subscriptis, viz: Willo: de Ormesby, Rico: de
Bereford, Henrico de Staunton, Johi. de Mitford, Henrico le Scrop, Henrico de
Guldeford, Willo: de Colneye, Willo. de Goldington, Johi: de Insula, Johi: de
Doncastr. Johi: Lovell de Snotescumbe, Rico de Rodeneye, Johi: Cheynel, Willo:
de Bourne, Johi: de Batesford, Rog^ro de Scotre.
3ly. It necessitated the King to adjourn the Parliament till a further time,
and much hindered the public affairs of the King and kingdom, which should
have been dispatched therein, as is evident by the writ of Prorogation. Cl. 5
E. 2. dorso 17. And what sadder effects such armed tumults and Soldiers have
of late years produced, not only to the disturbance of the public peace and
affairs of the Realm, and Parliament, but to the very ruin of the King,
Parliament, kingdom, Laws, Liberties themselves, we have seen by sad
experience; Therefore we should use all good and effectual means for the future
prevention of such tumults, armed powers and mischiefs, when and where any
Parliaments are convened.

The next Writs are in Claus. 4 E. 3. dors. 19. Vic. Northumbr. recited at
large, with Cons. literae singulis Vicec. per Angl running all in the ordinary
form, having the same recitals and dates with those to the Prelates forecited,
Section 1.

But in Dors. 13. of this year, I find this memorable Writ of Proclamation
issued to all Sheriffs cf Countles, after the Writs of Elections sent unto
them, to direct them and the people what persons they should then elect for
their Knights, and inviting all that were grieved by the Kings Officers to
complain against them in Parliament to the King himself, or such as he should
appoint who should give them full and speedy relief: There being the like Writs
formerly issued to them by King Edward the first, Claus. 17 E. 1. dors. 2. Quod
Vit. singuli venire fac. illos qui de Ministr. Rs. conqueri voluerint, quod
veniant apud Westminster. coram certis Justiciariis assignandis, to exemine and
redress all offenses, misdemeanors and oppressions, dum Rex erat extra Regnum.

Claus. 4 E. 9. m. 43. dorso. See my plea for the Lords. p. 376, 327.
Le Roy a Viscount de Lancastr. falutz. Pur ce que nous avomous entendues, que
diverses oppressions et duretes ount este faits sur plusours gentz de nostre
Roilme, per acunes q'uont estre nos Ministers en diverses Offices, et auxint
per acunes gentz de nostre Rollme, auxibien Nouz consealers come autres, tant
come nous besoigne per reason de la tenderness de nostre age, ount este meney
per acunes gentz a damage et dishonor de nouz, la quelle chose nous ne voloms
desore soeffrer, et nos avoms mult grant desire que tiels chooses fuissent m^s
en estat due, et les tortes, et misprisions, redresses. Vous mandoms et
charge^nt en la foi que vous nous devoz, que hastiment sanz delay, faitz crier
per mi vostre bailive auxibien deinz Franchise come dehors, que toutz ceux que
se vodroint pleindre des oppressions, duretes ou autres grievance a eux faitz
country droiture et: les loyes, et les usages de nostre Roilme, veigne it a
Westminster. a cest nostre prochein Parliament, et monstrent illeoqes lour plaints a
nous, ou a ceux que nous ferront a ce deput, et nous lour feroms fair
covenable. et hasti^, remede, don't ils se devient aggreer per reason. Et pour
ce que avaunt ces heures ascunes, des Chivalers qe sont venus as Parlements pour
les communautes des countees ount estre gentz de coveigne et maintieners des
fauses querels, et nount mi seoffree que les bones gentz poient monstrer les
grievances du comune poeple, ne les chooses que deuseant avoir este redresses en
Parliament, a gran^ damage, de nous et de nostre poeple, vos mandoms et
chargeoms qe vous faces eslier per come assent de vestre Counte^, deux des plus
leaux et plus suffisouns Chivalers et Es ^uires, not Sergeants at saw. See 5
II. 5. cap. 1.
Sergeantz de mesme le Countee que soient mi suspiciouns de male coveigne ne
communes meinteir^ours des parties, d'estrez a nostre Parliament selonc le form
de nostre mandement que vous en aves. Et ceo ne lessez si come vous voilliez
eschuer nostre grief indignation: Don a Woodstock le triers jour de November,
per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis, Vic. per Angl. A fit Writ to be now revived.
The next writs are those in Claus 5 E. 3. dors. 7.

Rex Vic. Eborum salutem. Cum pro magnis and arduis negotiis Nos and statum a^
regimen Regni nostri specialiter contingentibus de consilio Praelatorum and
Magnatum Nobis assistentium, ordinavimus Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in
crastino sancti Michaelis prox. futur. tenere, and cum Praelatis, Magnatibus
and Proceribus dicti Regni habere Colloquium and Tractatum. Tibi pr^cipimus
firmit^r injungentes, quod de dicto Com. duos Milites, and de qualibet Civitate
Com. illius duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses, de
discretioribus, and ad laborandum potentioribus eligi, and eos ad dictos diem
and locum venire facias. Ita quod dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem
po^estatem pro se, and pro communitate Com. praedicti, and dicti Cives and
Burgenses, pro se and communitate Civitatum and Burgorum divisim ab ipsis
habeant ad faciend. and consentiend. biis quae tunc de communi Consilio favente
Domino ordinari contigerit super negotiis antedictis. Ita quod pro defectu
potestatis hujusmodi dicta negotia infecta non remaneant quovis modo. Et habeat
ibi nomina praedictorum Militum, Civium and Burgensium, and hoc breve. Test ut
supra.

Eodem modo praeceptum est singulis Vic. per Angliam.
The like in all respects, except in the recitals (being always the same with
those to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, relating in special or general the
causes of summoning each Parliament, and in the times and places of the
Parliament, and dates of the Writs) issued to the Sheriffs, and are entered in
the same order as those preceding, in Cl. 5 E. 3. d. 25. Claus. 6 E. 3. d. 9.
19. 36. Claus. 7 E. 3. part 1. d. 3. Claus. 8 E. 3. dors. 18. Claus. 9 E. 3. d.
2. 18. Claus. 10 E. 3. d. 1. 5. Cl. 11 E. 3. pars 2. d. 11. 40. Cl. 12 E. 3.
pars 2. d. 32. Cl. 13 E. 3. pars 2. d. 28. where you may peruse them.

But in Cl. 10 E. 3. dors. 1. there is this Writ of Prorogation and Resummons
entered. Rex Vic. Ebor. salutem. Cum nuper Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Ebor.
in diem lunae in festo sancti Hillarii prox futur. tenere ordinavimus, usque ad
Octabas Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. prorogavimus apud
eundem locum tunc tenend. Et tibi preceperimus, quod de Com tuo Milites duos,
etc. venire faceres, ad faciend. et consentiend biis quae tunc de communi
Consilio ordinari contigerit super quibusdam Negotiis Nos et Statum Regni
nostri tangentibus. Ac propter diversa nova Nobis et dicto regno nostro
permolesta, quae in partibus transmarinis jam noviter emerserunt, etc. (as in
the Writ to the Archbishop) idem Parliamentum usque diem Lunae prox. post
festum Sancti Matthaei Apostoli prox. futur. apud Westminster. tunc tenend. duximus
prorogand. Tibi praecipimus, quod praemuni^i fac. Milites, Cives and Burgenses
praedictos, quod ad Octabas praedictas ad dictum locum Ebor. ex causa
Parliamenti non veniant ista vice. Praecipimus insuper tibi firmiter
injungentes, quod eosdem Milites, Gives et Burgenses sic electos, vel alios
eligend. si electi non fucrunt, in forma praedicta eligi, et eos ad dictum
locum Westminster. ad praedictum diem Lunae venire facias. Ita quod Milites plenam et
sufficientem potestatem pro se and Communitate Com. praedicti habeant, etc. (ut
supra.) usque hoc breve. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vic. per Angl.
In Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 2. dors. 1. the form of the

Rex Vic. Eborum salutem. Cum quaedam ardua and urgentia negotia Nos, et
honorem nostrum, Statumque Regni nostri contingentia in Parliamento nostro apud
Westminster, in Quindena sancti Michaelis prox. praeterito summonito, Praelatis,
Proceribus ct Communitati dicti regni ibidem existentibus exposita extitissent,
super quibus eadem Communitas tempus ad deliberand. petiit, supplicans quoddam
aliud Parliamentum statim infra breve, ut tunc deliberatione hujusmodi valeret
expofitis maturius responderi, per quod de avisamento Praelatorum et Procerum
praedictorum necnon ad dictae Communitatis hujusmodi supplicationem,
ordinavimus, quod super hiis et aliis urgentissimis negotiis tam Nos et
expeditionem guerrae nostrae, ac jura nostra et Coronae nostrae in partibus
transmarinis, quam defensionem dicti regni ceterarumque terrarum nostrarum
contingentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in Octabis Sancti Hillarii
prox. futur. teneatur. Nos advertentes, quod negotia nostra in Parliamento
nostro hactenus agitata saepius impedita fuerunt et etiam retardata, Ita quod
electiones de Militibus, Civibus et Burgensibus pro Communi^tibus Com:
Civitatum et Burgorum ad Parliamenta illa venientibus minus factae provide
exiterunt. Tibi praecipimus districtius injungentes, quod de dicto Comitatu tuo
duos Milites gladiis cinctos, et de qualibet Civitate Com. illius Duos Cives,
et de quolibet Burgo Duos Burgenses de discr^tioribus et probioribus Militibus,
Cidibus et Burgensibus Com. Civitatum et Burgorum, et eosd^m ad laborand.
potentioribus, eligi, et eos ad dictos diem et locum venire facias. Ita quod
iidem Milites plenam et sufficientem potestatem pro se et Communitate Com.
praedicti, and dicti Cives ac Burgenses pro se et Communitatibus Civitatum et
Burgorum divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciend. et consentiend. hiis quae tunc
de Communi Consilio nostro, favente Domino, ordinari contigerit super negotiis
antedictis. Ita quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi, seu Propter improvidam
electionem Militum, Civium aut Burgensium praedictorum (quam tibi si aliter
quam praedictum est facta fuerit imputabimus) dicta negotia infecta non
remaneant quovis modo; and habeas ibi nomina praedictorum Militum, Civium et
Burgensium, et hoc breve. Test ut supra.

Per ipsum Regem, et dictum Custodem and Consilium.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.
From wheuce it is observable,

1. That the Commons in Parliament ought not rashly to determine, or give
answer to any business of great moment propounded to them, without due time and
consideration; and that they may justly desire convenient time to deliberate
upon it, till another Parliament shall be summoned for that purpose; as they
did here: which the King upon their Petition, and the advice of the Prelates
and Great men, assented to by his Cussos Regni.

2. That the indiscreet and Improvident Elections of unfitting, undiscreet,
dishonest, insufficient Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, is a frequent occasion
of hindering and retarding the great and weighty affair^ of the King and
kingdom in Parliament, and cause of their miscarriage without good effect.

3. That the blame of such improvident elections, is much to be imputed to the
Sheriffs, as well as Electors.

4. That the Clause of gladiis cinctos, was first added to duos Milites by this
writ, not being in any former writs; that so none but actual Knights by Order,
as well as tenure, might be elected and returned.

5. That the word Probioribus, is superadded to Discretioribus et ad laborandum
Potentiaribus Militibus, Civibus et Burgensibus, etc. extant in none of the
precedent Writs since 49 H. 3. and Legalioribus omitted.

6. That there was no Alteration at all now made in the Writs to the Warden of
the Cinque Ports, continuing as before, but only in those to Sheriffs for
electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

The next succeeding writ in Claus. 14 E. 3. pars 1. duos Milites gladiis
cinctos, etc. de discretioribus et probioribus Militibus, Civibus et
Burgensibus Com. Civitatum et Burgorum eorundem, et ad labor and. potentioribus
eligi, etc. but de probioribus is omitted out of the Writ to the Warden of the
Cinque Ports. In dors. 23 of this Roll, gladiis cinctos is omitted in the writs
to Sheriffs, as it is in Claus. 15 E. 3. pars 1. d. 37. cl. 16 E. 3 pars 2. d.
22. (where Probioribus is changed into Legalioribus) cl. 17 E. 3 pars 1. d. 25.
(probioribus is used, and legalioribus omitted) as it is likewise in claus. 18
E. 3. pars 2. d. 14. claus. 20 E. 3. pars 2. d. 22.

In Claus. 21 E. 3. p. 2. d. 9. The Writ is Duos Milites de discretioribus et
probioribus, etc. to hoc breve. Then follows this notable clause, Et scire vos
volumus, quod dictum Parliamentum non ad Aurilia seu Tallagia apopulo dicti
regni nostri petenda, vel alia onera eidem populo imponenda, sed duntarat pro
pro su^titia populo nostro super dampuis et gravaminibus sibi illatis faciend.
et pro tractatu super dictis negotiis, ut praemittitur b^end. fecimus
summoneri. Test ut supra. Per ipsum Regem.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur singulis Vio per Angliam, sub eadem data.
This last Clause (which would now be very welcome and seasonable to all
Sheriffs, Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports in writs for elections) shows the
true, proper, genuine principal end of summoning Parliaments, and what they
should principally intend: The calling of them heretofore, and in latter ages,
changes, only to grant Ayds, raise moneys, advance the ambitious or covetous
designs of others, instead of the peoples ease, profit, and redress of their
grievances, damages, oppressions, being a grand Abuse, as Andrew Horn long
since resolved under Edward the 1. in his Mirror of Justices, chapter 5. p. 282.

Claus. 22 E. 3. pars 1. d. 32. The Writ to the Warden of the Cinque ports is
registered before that to the Duos Milites, etc. de discretioribus and
probioribus etc. But the writs to the Sheriffs, dors. 7. are thus varied. Tibi
praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Comitatu tuo duos Milites Gladio
cinctos, et Ordinein Pilitarem habentes, et non alios (in the Negative as well
as Affirmative) Et de qualibet Civitate Com: illius duos Cives, et de quolibet
Burgo duos Burgenses de Aptioribus, discretioribus, probioribus, et fide dignis
Militibus, Cibibus et Burgenssbus Com: Civitatum et Burgorum eorundem eligi,
etc. Ita quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi, aut propter improvidam
electionem Militum, Civium and Burgensium praedictorum, dicta negotia infecta
non remaneant quovis mode: Per quod ad se (te) tanquam ad impedimentum
negotiorum nostroru^ praedictorum materiam babeamus graviter capiend. Et habeas
ibi nomina, etc.

The like Clauses are in the Writs of Prorogation Claus. 22 E. 3. pars 2. d. 3.
But there is no alteration or new clause at all in any of the Writs to the
Cinqueports, which still retains, Duos Barons de discretioribus, and ad
laborand. potentioribus, etc. having only seu propter improvidam electionem
Baronum praedictorum, etc. added sometimes in the last Ita quod, etc. where the
Writs to Sheriffs have it.

In Claus. 24 E. 3. pars 2. m. 3. dorso, there is this England, Quod de
Comitatu tuo duos Milites, etc. de discretioribus et probioribus Militibus,
Civibus, et Burgensibus, and ad laborand. potentioribus, Dut non sunt
placitorum aut querel arum manutentores, aut ex hujusmodi questu viventes, etc.
(in the Negative) Sed homines valentes et bonae fidet, and publicum commodum
diligentes eligi, etc. (in the Affirmative.) Very necessary and just general
limitations, directions both for the Electors and Sheriffs to observe, with a
seu propter improvidam electionem Militum, Civium, aut Burgensium praedictorum
negotia nostra infecta non remaneant quovis modo.

The self same Limitations are in the Writs to all Sheriffs in Claus. 25 E 3.
pars 1. dors. 5. cl. 28. E. 3. d 26. and Claus. 29 E. 3. dors. 8. but not in
those to the Cinque ports in these or other Rolls.

I meet with these unusual Writs both to Sherifs of Counties, Mayors, and
Bailifs of Cities, Buroughs, and to the Warden of the Cinque ports, in Claus.
26 E. 3. m. 14. dorso, worthy special observation.

Rex Vic. Kanc: salutem. Quia per magnis et urgentibus negotiis, etc. (ut
supra, Part 1. p. 57) usque ibi remedium et tunc sic, cum Praelatis et
Magnatibus, ut supra usque ibi tractatum. Tibi praecipimus firmiter
injungentes, quod unum Militem de provectioribus, discretioribus, et magia
expertis Militibus Com. praedicti, De assensu ejusdem Com. eligi, et eum ad
diem et locum praedictum venire facias. Ita quod idem Miles pro se et
Communitate Com. praedicti plenam et sufficientem potestatem habeat ad
tractand. consulend. et consentiend. hiis quae tunc divina favente clementia
contigerit ordinari super negotiis antedictis. Et ut homines ab ista
occupatione autumpnalibus qu^ minus possumus retrabamus, unum tantum Militem de
quolibet Comitatu ad dictum Consilium Mittend. habere volumus ista vice. Nos de
die receptionis praesentium, and per quem tibi delatae fuerint certificans tunc
ibidem. Test ut supra.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur singulis Vic. per Angliam sub eadem data.

Consimile Breve dirigitur Henrico Com. Lancastr. mutatis mutandis, sub eadem
data.

Rex Uicomitibus London salutem. Quia pro magnis and urgentibus negotiis, etc.
ut supra usque tractatum: and tunc sic. Vobis firmiter injungentes quod duos
Cives de provectioribus, discretioribus, and magis expertis Civibus Civitatis
praedictae De assensu ejusdem Civitatis, etc. ut supra. mutandis mutandis,
usque ad amedictis: et tunc sic; Nos de die receptionis, etc. ut supra. Test
ut supra.

Rex Majori et Ballivis Civitatis suae Eborum, salutem. Quia, etc. ut supra
usque ibi tractatum: et tunc sic. Vobis praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod
unum Civem de provectioribus, discretioribus, etc. ut supra, usque ibi
antedictis: and tunc sic. Et ut homines ab istis occupationibus autumpnalibus
quo minus possumus retrabamus, unum tantum Civem de qualibet Civitate ad dictum
Con^lium miltend. habere volumus, ista vice. Nos de die, etc. ut supra. Test
ut supra.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Major^bus et Ballivis Civitatum et Burgorum
subscriptorum sub eadem data, viz.
Majori and Ballivis de Norwich pro uno Cive.

Majori et Ballivis de Kingeston super Hull, pro uno Burgense.

Ballivis de Sancto Botho, pro uno Burgense.

Majori and Ballivis Bristoll, pro uno Burgense.

Majori and Ballivis de Villa Southampton, pro uno Burgense.

Majori and Ballivis Cicestr. pro uno Cive.

Ballivis Villae magnae Jernmutb, pro uno Burgense.

Majori and Ballivis Villae de Lenn: pro uno Burgense.

Majori and Ballivis Lincoln. pro uno Cive.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Bartho. de Burghershe, Constabulario Castri sui
Dovor, and Custodi Quinque Portuum suorum vel ejus (...) Tenenti, salutem. Quia
pro magnis and urgentilus negotiis, etc. Vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes
Quod de Quinque Portubus praedictis duos Barons de Provectoribus,
discretioribus, and magis expertis Baronibus Portuum praedictorum eligi, and
eos ad diem and locum venire faciatis. Ita quod iidem Barons plenam and
sufficientem potest. pro se and commun. Portuum babeant ad tract and. consulend
and consentiend biis quae tunc divina favente clementia de communi Consilio
contiger it ordinari. Et ut homines ab ista occupatione Autumpnalibus quo minus
possumus retrabamus duos tantum Barons de Portubus prae dictis ad dictum
Consilium mittend. habere volumus, ista vic. Nos de die receptionis
praesentium, per and quem vobis dilatae fuerint certificantes tunc ibid. Test.
ut supra.

In these Writs there are these several things remarkable.

1. The occasions of them, Pro magnis and urgentibus negotiis and novis subitis
ad nos perlatis, nos and statum, ac jura Regni nostri Angliae, sum
concernentibus, super quibus festinum and providum oportet exhiberi remedium,
as the Writ to the Part 1. p. 57.
Archbishop recites, and the ut supra in these writs refers to.

2ly. The title given to this Convention, not Parliamentum, but Consilium, as
the latter clauses of these writs: ad dictum Consilium, and the marginal Note
in the Roll, summonitio Consilii import.

3ly. The persons summoned to it, namely, the Archbishops, Bishops, one Prior,
one Abbot, the Earls, and temporal Lords and Barons, the Kings Justices and
Counsil, as well of the Clergy as Laity: but one Knight only, and no more out
of every Shire for the whole Shire, 2 Citizens out of London only, but one
Citizen and Burgess alone out of every other City and Borough, and 2 Barons,
but no more out of all the Cinque Ports.

4ly. The extraordinary qualification of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and
Barons to be elected, who are limited to be de provectioribus, discretioribus,
and magis expertis Militibus, Civibus, Burgensibus and Baronibus.

5ly. The reason rendered why one only in each of these was at this time
prescribed to be elected, and no more, was, ut homines ab ista occupatione
autumpnalibus quo minus possumus retrabamus.

6ly. The clause of the plenary and sufficient power they were to have for
themselves, and the Commonaltyes who elected them, ad tractand. consulend. and
consentiend. hiis quae tunc divina favente clementia de communi consilio
contigerit ordinari super negotiis ante dictis, varyes from former clauses.

7ly. The Certificate required from all to whom these writs issued, Nos de die
acceptionis praesentium, and per quem tibi dilatae fuerint certificans tunc
ibidem; not usual in other writs.

8ly. That writs issued to Sheriffs, only to choose one Knight, but not to
elect any Citizen or Burgess within their Counties, the writs for their
elections now issuing to the Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs of each City and
Borough, not to the Sheriffs.

There are other forms of Writs somewhat like unto these last recited, thus
registered in Claus. 21 E. 3.

Rex Vic. Lanc. salutem. Quia pro magnis and urgentibus negotiis, Nos and
statum Regni nostri Angliae concernentibus, cum Prelatis, Magnatibus,
Proceribus, and aliis fildelibus dicti Regni nostri apud Westminster. die Lunae prox.
post festum sancti Mathaei Apostoli prox. futur. Colloquium habere volumus and
tractatum. Tibi pr^imus firmites injungentes, quod unum Militem gladio Cinctum
de discretioribus and magis expertis Militibus Com praedicti, de assensu
ejusdem Comitatus, sine dilastone eligi, and eum ad dtem and locum praedictos
venire facias. Ita quod idem Miles pro se and pro communitate Com. praedicti
plen^n and sufficientem petestatem habeat ad tractand. consulend and
consentiend. hiis quae tunc divina favente clementia, contigerit ordinari super
negotiis antedictis, and hoc nullatenus omittatisi Test ut supra.

Eodem modo mandatum est singulla Vicecomitibus per Angliam sub eadem data.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Bartho. de Burghersh. Constabulario Castri sui Dov.
etc. vobis mandamus, etc. quod de quolibet Portuum praedictorum unum Baronem de
discretionibus and magis expertis Baronibus Portuum eorundem eligi, etc. Ita
quod iidem Barons plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and communitate
Portuum praedictorum habeant ad tractand. etc. ut supra.

Rex Majori and Vicecomitibus London, etc. ut supra. Quod duos Cives de
provectioribus and discretioribus and magis expertis Civibus Civitatis
predictae, de assensu ejusdem Civitatis sine dilatione eligi, etc. Ita quod
lidem Cives pro se, etc. and hoc nullatenus omittatis.

Eodem modo mandatum est Majoribus and Ballivis Civitatum and Burgorum
subscriptorum, de duobus Civibus sive Burgensibus mittendis, sub eadem data,
viz.
Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Karliol.

Majori and Ballivis villae Novi Castri super Tynam.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Eborum.

Majori and Ballivis Villae de Kingeston super Hull,

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Lincoln.

Majori and Ballivis Villae Cauntebrigg.

Ballivis Villae de santo Botho (Botolph.)

Ballivis Civitatis Norwich.

Majori and Ballivis de Bristol.

Majori and Ballivis Villae Southampton.

Majori and Ballivis Cicestr.

Ballivis Magna Jernemuth.

Ballivis de Gippewico.

Majori and Ballivis de Lenn.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Wynton.

Majori and Ballivis Gloucestr.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Sarum.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Exon.

Majori and Ballivis Bathon.

Majori and Ballivis Wellen.

Majori and Ballivis de Coventr.

Majori and Ballivis de Lichefeld.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Wigorn.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Hereford.

Mojori and Ballivis Villae Northampton.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Cantuar.

Majori and Ballivis Civitatis Roffen.

Majori and Ballivis Bedford.

Majori and Ballivis de Bokingham.

Majori and Ballivis Oxon.

Majori and Ballivis Elien.

Majori and Ballivis Notingham.

Majori and Ballivis Derb.

Majori and Ballivis Salop.

Majori and Ballivis Stafford.

Majori and Ballivis Warwick.

Majori and Ballivis Leicestr.

The things most observable from these writs are these.

1. That in the margin of the Roll, these writs are stied Summonitio Consilii:
that the word Parliamentum is not mentioned in them, but Colloqu. and
Tractatum, and in the Prologue to the printed Statute of the Staple, 27 E. 3.
it is styled, Dur great Counsel at Wettminster.

2ly. That both the Archbishops, all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Temporal Lords, and Kings Counsel usually summoned to former Parliaments, were
summoned to this Great Council, and 2 Citizens and Burgesses out of every City,
and chief, (but not Not one (...) of Cornwall.
petty) Borough, by special Writs issued to their Majors and Bailiffs only, not
to the Sheriffs of Counties as usually; and yet but one Knight out of every
County, and one Baron out of every of the Cinqueports was summoned thereunto:
which is thus expressed in the very printed Prologue to the Statute of the
Staple made therein, Anno 27 E. 3. 1353. Whereas good deliberation had with the
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Great men of the Counties, that is to say,
of every County one (Knight) for all the County, and of the Commons of Cities,
and Boroughs of our Realm, of England summoned to our Great Counsel, etc.

3ly. That the principal cause of summoning this Great Counsel, was the settling
of the Staple for England, Wales, and Ireland, and making Laws and Ordinances
for the same, by the Counsel and common assent of the said Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, and Barons, Knights and Commons, as the Prologue to the Statute of the
Staple made therein, and the Statute it self resolves us: which principally
concerned Cities and Boroughs.

4ly. That the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons to be elected and sent
thereto, were limited to be, De discretioribus and magis expertis Militibus,
etc. and to have plenam and sufficientem potestatem ad tractand. consulend. and
consentiend. etc. as in the precedent writs.

5ly. That the number of the Cities and Boroughs to which special writs issued
were 37. besides London, and the Cinque Ports, entered promiscuously without any
alphabetical or other order, as the Clerks pleased, but none out of Cornwall or
small Boroughs.

6ly. That in 28 E. 3. a Parliament was summoned for confirmation of the
Ordinances and Statutes for establishing the Staple made in this Great Council,
wherein they were confirmed, with certain Declarations and Additions, to be
firmly kept and holden for a Statute to endure for ever, as the printed Act of
28 E. 3. c. 13. the Parliament, and Statute rolls inform us. Therefore no
binding Acts till then.

The next Writs for electing Knights, Citizens and duos Milites, duos Cives,
and duos Burgens. de discretioribus, and provect. and ad laborand.
potentioribus, qui non sunt placitatores, quaerelarum manutentores, aut ex
hujusmodi questu viventes, sed homines valentes and bonae fidei, ac. publicum
commodum diligentes eligi, etc. (as in claus. 24 E. 3. pars 2 dors. 3.
forecited,) and those in claus. 29 E. 3. dors. 8. are both the same with these
in all clauses, except in their dates, and the days, places of the Pailiament,
though the writs of Prorogation Dors. 7. vary from them, having duos Milites
gladiis cinctos, etc de discretioribus, and probioribus Militibus, etc. and ad
laborand. potentioribus, only in them.

Clause 31 E. 3. dors. 21. The writs, to the Sheriffs Duos Milites, duos Cives,
and duos Burgenses, de discretioribus, probioribus Militibus, Civibus, and
Burgensibus, and ad laborand. potentioribus, with a seu propter improvidam
electionem, etc. in the Ita quod, etc. which clause is in the writ to the
Warden of the Cinqueports, entered after those to Sheriffs. But the writs to the
Sheriffs, dors. 2. of this Roll run thus.

Rex, Vic. Kanc. etc. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. tuo
duos Milites, gladiis cinctos, and de qualibet Civitate com. illius duos Cives,
and de quolibet Burgo. duos Burgenses, de discretioribus and probioribus
Militibus, Civibus, and Burgensibus, com. comitatuum and Burgorum eorundem, et
de elegantioribus personis eligi, etc. Ita quod, etc. seu propter improvidam
electionem Militum, Civium, aut Burgensium praedictorum, dicta negotia nostra
infecta no^ remaneant, etc. Et habeas ibi nomina praedictorum, Militum, Civium
and Burgensium, and hoc breve. Et scire facias eisdem, quod propter arduitatem
negotiorum praedictorum and celeriorem expeditionem eorundem, volumus primo die
Parliamenti personaliter interesse, per quod nolumus, nec intervimus aliquem
No^,
ad dictum Parliamentum summonitum quin eodem primo die personaliter intersint,
habere ullo modo excusatum, seu excusationem inde admittere aliqualem. Test ut
supra.

Consimilia brevia diriguntur fingulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam, nec non
Henrico Duo ci Lancastr. vel ejus locum tenenti, sub eadem data
In these writs I observe, 1. A new qualification, De elegantioribus personis
in no writs else before or after. 2ly. An unusual clause in the close of them;
strictly requiring every person summoned to this Parliament, to be personally
present at it on the very first day thereof without any excuse. An infallible
Argument and clear evidence, that all Members of Parliament duly elected or
summoned, ought personally to appear therein at the Sea here p. 41, 42, 43, 44,
45, 47, 48, 49, 54, 56, 59.
very first day, and none of them to be suspended, secluded, ejected by their
Fellow Members, or others. 3ly. That no excuses ought to be admitted for the
non-attendance of Persons duly summoned to Parliaments. 4ly. That the King
alone is and ought to be the principal Judge of Members excuses for absenting
from Parliament, and the only Person who can and ought to dispense with their
non-attendance, since the Parliament is his Parliament, Court, Council,
summoned only by his Writs and Precepts, for his and the public businesses;
not the Lords or Commons, who cannot dispense with absent Members without or
against his consent.

In Claus. 34 E. 3. dors. 4. there is this new addition in the Writs to
Sheriffs.

Rex Vic. Kanc. etc. Quod de Com. tuo duos Milites, etc. de discretioribus, and
probioribus Militibus, Civibus, and Burgensibus, etc. Ita quod iidem Milites in
pleno Comitatu tuo eligentur, and plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se,
etc. Ita quod, etc. seu propter improvidam electionem Militum, etc. with a
Scire facias eisdem quod propter arduitatem negotiorum praedictorum and
celeriorem expeditionem eorundem, etc. as in the last preceding Writs; but in
the writs in this Roll, Dorse 35. to another Parliament this year, these new
clauses are left out.

In the Clause roll, anno 36 E. 3. d. 16. there is this

Rex Vic. Kanc. etc. Quia super quibusdam arduis, etc. Parliamentum nostr. apud
Westminster. etc. tenere ordinavimus and cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus
dicti Regni Colloquium habcre and Tractatum. Tibi praecipimus, etc. Quod de
Com. praedicto duos Milites, etc. de discretioribus, Melioribus et Ualidioribus
Militibus, Civibus, and Burgensibus eligi, and eos ad dictum diem and locum
venire facias. Ita quod iidem Milites pro se and communitate Com. praedicti,
dictique Cives and Burgenses pro se, etc. plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab
ipsiis communitatibus habeant, ad consentiend. hiis quae per Nos ac dictos
Praelatos, Magnates et Proceres ordinari contigerit favente Domino. Et hoc
sicut te indempnem servare voluer is, nullatenus omittas, and habeas ibi nomina
Militum, etc.

The writ to the Warden of the Cinqueports runs de quolibet Portu portuum
praedictorum duos Barons de melioribus, validioribus, and discretioribus
Baronibus: without any other variation from the usual form. The self same
clauses are in both these writs in Claus. 37 E. 3. dors. 22. claus. 38 E. 3.
dors. 3. claus. 39 E. 3. d. 2. claus. 42 E. 3. dors. 22. and claus. 43 E. 3.
dors. 24. all in the self-same form and words.

From these writs it is observable, 1. That the best, ablest, and discreetest
Knights, Citizens, Barons, ought to be elected and summoned to Parliaments, and
that the King may command, require such to be chosen by his writs, without any
prejudice to, or intrenchment upon the peoples liberty and freedom in
elections, who are obliged in prudence, reason, duty, conscience, only to elect
such persons. 2ly. That all Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons of Ports ought
to have full and sufficient authority from the Commonalties who elect them,
both for themselves and them, to consent to those things which the King, Lords,
and Nobles shall ordain in Parliament, concerning the great and weighty affairs
of the Realm. 3ly. That the power of decreeing and ordaining things in
Parliament, whether public or private, resided principally, if not soly in the
King and Lords, and of assenting to them, in the knights, Citizens, Burgesses
and Barons of the Cinque ports in their own and the Commons behalf. 4ly. That
Sherifs may be justly punished and censured by the King for neglects, or
miscarriages in elections of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

The Writs for elections issued to Sheriffs in Claus. 37 E. 3. d. 22. cl. 38 E.
3. d. 3. cl. 39 E. 3. d. 2. cl. 42 Quod de Com. praedicto duos Milites, etc. de
melioribus, valentioribus, or validioribus, or valentioribus and discretioribus
Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus Com. Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum
eligi, etc. facias. The original Writs for elections An. 42 E. 3. are yet
extant in a loose unfiled bundle, with their several returns indorsed on, or
annexed to them; where the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses elected and
returned, are in the returns said to be, de melioribus, valentioribus et
discretioribus Militibus, Civibus et Burgensibus of the respective Counties,
Cities, Boroughs, for which they are returned; and to have plenam et
sufficientem potestatem pro se et communitate dicti Com. Civitatis, or Burgi
(respectively) ad consentiendum hiis quae in instanti Parliamento contigerit
ordinari.

I shall here present you with this brief abstract of the Writs and the several
returns then made.

Bundle 42 E. 3. Rex, etc. Duos Milites, etc. de melioribus, valentioribus and
Discretioribus Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus Com. Civitatum, et Burgorum
praedictorum eligi, etc. Test meipso apud Westminster. 24 die Febr. Anno Regni
nostri 42.

Nomina Militum de Com. Westmerl: Henr: de Croweld Westmerland.
Iohes: de Preston. Nomina Burgensium de Appelby, etc. Sir Thomas de Strickland
Vic.

Ego Walterus Haywode Vic. vobis fic respondeo prout Wiltes.


Pro Burgensibus Burgorum de la Vize, Marleberghe, and Malmesbury, ego dictus
Vic. vobis significo, quod mandavi Willo: Baggeswych, Ballivo libertatis Phe.
Reginae Angliae, cui executio hujus brevis pro dictis Burgensibus venire fac.
pertinet faciend: qui quidem Ballivus michi nullum inde dedit responsum.

Et pro Burgensibus Burgi de Bedewpride, ego dictus Vic. vobis significo, quod
mandavi Jobi Hommede Ballivo Libertatis Radi. Cornitis Stafford de Hundredo suo
de Kynnwardeston, cui executio hujus brevis pertinet faciend. pro dictis
Burgensibus venire fac. etc. Qui quidem ballivus michi nullum inde dedit
responsum.

Two Knights for the County, two Citizens for New Sarum, two Burgesses for old
Sarum, two Burgesses for Wilton are returned by the Sheriff, with two
manucaptors names for each of them.

Two Knights, with two manucaptors. Nullae sunt Civitates infra ballivam meam.
Nomina Burgorum Cornub.
Dounhenedburgh 2. Liskyedburgh 2. Lostwythiel Burgh 2. Trurou Burgh 2.
Hellestonburgh 2. Bodmynburgh 2, Burgesses, with two manucaptors apeece.

Berks, two Knights, Redyng, Walyngford two Burgesses for each, with two
manucaptors for every of Berks.


Two Knights; Wycombe 2. Burgesses, with two manucaptors returned for every of
them. Bucks.


Two Knights, Colecestre two, Maldon two Burgesses, Essex.
Maldon, who has none.

Nomina Militum Com: Gloucestr: elect. Iohes: Tracy, Iohes: Poyns, qui
manucapti sunt per two only. Nomina Glouc.
Glouc. 2. pro Villa Bristol 2. having but two manucaptors for both.

Knights two, Citizens two for Cant. two for Rochester, Kanc.


Knights two, Burgesses two for Leicestr. two manucaptors Leic.
Non sunt plures Civitates vel Burgi infra Com: praedict.

Knights two, Burgesses two, for Derbe, with two manucaptors for each. Derbe.


Knights two, with two manucaptors apeece. Non sunt in eadem Balliva aliqua
Civitas, nec Burgus. Roteland.


Knights two only returned with two manucaptors, Hertford.
Hertford, or St Albans,

Knights two, Burgesses two, for Notyngham, with Notyngham.


Knights two, Burgesses 2. for Warwycke, with two Warwycke.
Non sunt plures Civitates nec Burgi infra Com. praedict.

Vic. Surry et Sussex: There was then but one Sheriff Surr. and Sussex.
Surrey: Burgesses for Guldeford 2. Ryegate 2. Sutbwerke 2. Bleccbynglegh 2.
with two manucaptors for every of them. Sussex, two Knights, Cives Cicestriae
two, Burgenses Arundel 2. Horsham 2. Estgrenstede 2. Jews 2. Shorbam 2.
Stenyng and Brembre 2. with two manucaptors apeece.

Knights 2. Cives 2. for Hereford, Burgenses Leominstre Hereford.


Knights two, Cives Exon. two, Burgenses Dertemuth Devon.
Tottes 2. Plympton 2. Tavystoke 2. Chesing Collyton 2. Barnstable 2.

Knights two, Burgesses two for Oxon, with two Oxon.


Knights two, Burgesses two for Bedford, with two Bedford.


Somerset and Dorset had but one Sheriff for both Somerset and Dorset.
Cedule. Somerset, Knights two, Burgenses Villae de Brigge-water 2. de Taunton
2. two manucaptors for each. Dorset, Knights 2. Burgenses Brideport 2.
Dorchestre 2. Waymouth 2. Melcomb 2. Warham 2. Villae de la Poule 2. with two
manucaptors for each.

Knights two, Cives Lincoln two. Burgenses Grymesby Lincoln


Norfolk and Suffolk had two Writs, but one Sheriff, Norff. and Suff.
Norff: Knights 2. Cives Norw. 2. Burgesses, 2. Len: episcopi, with two
manucaptors; magnae Jernemuth. 2. Suff. Knights two, Burgenses villae Gippewic.
2. Donewich. nullum dedit responsum.

Two Knights, and two Burgesses, for Northampton. Northt.


Two Knights, Cives Wygorn. with two manucaptors for each, Non sunt in Balliva
mea alii Civitates vel Wigorn.
Burgi.

Milites two, Cives two, Karliol. without any manucaptors. Non sunt plures
Civitates, nec aliqui Burgi in Cumbr.
Balliva (...).

Knights two, Cives two, for Wynton, Burgenses, Southton.
Portesmouth. two.

Four Citizens returned without any manucaptors. London.


Two Knights, with two manucaptors, Cives two, Ebor. Burgenses Scardeburg 2.
Kingestone 2. with two Ebor.


Two Knights, with two manucaptors, and two Stafford.

All the rest of the writs, during the reign of King Edward the 3d. but those
of 42. are lost, mislay'd, or through carelessness lie (as many other Records
still do) in a confused heap in the white Tower quite neglected, overspread
with cobwebs, dust, mothes, and cankers, being never yet reduced into order,
through the sloathfulnesse or negligence of those who should preserve and
digest them into a useful regulation for the public benefit of the present
and future Ages.

The writs for elections to the Sheriffs in claus. 44 E. 3. dorso. 12. are thus
altered in form, from the last writs, in some particulars of note.

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. Quia super quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis
Nos and statum and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, ac jura Coronae nostrae
concernentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. die Lunae in prima Septimana
Quadragesimae, viz. in festo sancti Mathiae Apostoli tenere ordinavimus, and
cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti Regni Colloquium habere and
Tractatum. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. praedicto duos
Milites gladiis cinctos, et in armis et actibus armorum magis probatos et
circumspectos et discretos, and de qualibet Civitate ejusdem com. duos Cives,
and de quolibet Burg. duos Burgenses de melioribus and validioribus, and
discretioribus Militibus, Civibus and Burgensibus, Comitat. Civitatum and
Burgorum proedictorum eligi, and eos usque Wesim. die Sabbati in festo sancti
Petri ad Cathedra prox. futur. venire facias ibidem, et tunc durante
Parliamento praedicto continue moraturos, Ita quod iidem Milites pro se, and
communitate Com. praedicti, dictique Cives and Burgenses pro se et communitate
Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum plenam and sufficientem potestatem, ab
ipsis Comimunitat. habeant ad consulend. et consentiend. hiis quae per Nos et
dictos Praelatos, Magnates et Proceres fieri et ordinari contigerit, favente
Domino super negotiis antedictis. Et hoc ^cut teipsum indempnem servari
volueris nullatenus omittas. Et habeas ibi nomina Militum, Civium and
Burgensium and hoc breve. Test Rege apud Westminster. octo die Januarii.

Consimilia brevia diriguntur fingulis Vicec. per Angliam.
From whence it is observable, 1. That in times of war and danger when
Parliaments are summoned for the necessary defense of the Realm, and Rights of
the Crown; Knights who are most approved, skillful, circumspect, and discreet
in matters of Arms and war, and the best, ablest, and wisest men may be
prescribed by the Kings writs to be elected in such general terms as these, and
are fittest to be chosen by the Commonalty in all Counties. 2ly. That Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses when elected and summoned to Parliaments, ought not
only to be admitted freely into, but to continue constantly in them without
suspention, ejectio^ by their fellow Members, or others, and not to depart from
them 3ly. That none can licenso or dispense with their departures from
Parliament but the King, or at least with his privity or consent. 4ly. That
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, are to consult and advise well together of all
public businesses propounded to them, or ordained by the King and Lords,
before they assent unto them. 5. That they ought to have full and sufficient
power from the Commonalty as well to consult of as consent to them.

There are no writs of Summons to a new Parliament extant in the Rolls of 45 E.
3. but this memorable half the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses elected and
returned the last Parliament before, pertinent to my Theme, and very
observable, which I shall here transcribe at large for its rarity, out of
claus. 45 E. 3 m. 21 dors.

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem, Cum Comites, Barons, Magnates and Communitas Regni
nostri Angliae in ultimo De venire faciend. Milites, Cives and Burgenses apud
Wynton.
Parliamento nostro apud Westminster. tento, in auxilium expensarum quas tam pro
salvatione and defensione Regni nostri Angliae and Navigii ejusdem Regni, quam
pro expeditione guerrae nostrae Franciae no^ facere oportebit, concesserint
nobis quoddam subsidium viginti and duorum solidorum and trium denariorum
levand. and percipiend. de qualibet Parochia dicti Regni. Ita quod quaelibet
Parochia majoris valoris auxilians sit and contributoria alteri Parochiae
minoris valoris juxta ratum; ea intensione quod dictum subsidium ad summam,
quinquaginta millium librarum se attingeret. Et quia habita super levatione
subsidii praedicti per Nos and Consilium nostrum deliberatione diligenti,
videtur eidem Consilio, quod dicti viginti et duo solidi, and tres denarii de
qualibet parochia dicti Regni sic levandi, ad dictam summam quinquaginta
millium librarum per multum non attingunt; and sic verisimiliter formidatur,
quod nobis de dicta summa quinquaginta millium librarum ad terminos statutos
juxta intentionem concessionis praedictae responderi non potest. Nos volentes
before informari super declaratione intentionis concessionis subsidii
praedicti, qualiter levatio ejusdem celerius fieri possit, and considerantes,
quod onerosum esset omnes Magnates, Milites, Cives and Burgenses, qui ad dictum
Parliamentum nostrum de mandato nostro venerant, iterum ex hac causa conveniri;
ordinavimus, ut laboribus parcatur et expensis, cum quibusdam eorundem
Magnatum, Civium et Burgensium praedictorum super praemissis Colloquium habere
et Tractatum. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod Thomam Apuldrefeld
unum Militum Com. praedicti, Edmundum Horn, Vnum Civium Civitatis Cantuar. et
Johan. Fynchenfeld unum Civium Civitatis Roffen, qui pro communitate Com. and
Civitatum praedict. ad dictum Parliamentum de mandato nostro venerunt, si
superstites fuerint, alioquin socios suos qui cum eis de veniendo ad
Parliamentum praedictum electi fuerunt, praemunire facias; quod ipsi omnibus
aliis praetermissis, and quacunque excusatione cessante, in propriis personis
suis sint apud Wynton, in Octabis sanctae Trinitatis prox. futur. ad informand.
Nos and dictum Confilium nostrum, super modo and forma quibus Nobis de de dicta
summa quinquaginta millium librarum celerius and commodius, juxta intentionem
concessionis praedictae poterit responderi. Et interim diligenter inquires de
numero Ecclesiarum Parochialium and Capellarum and Praebendarum in Com.
praedicto, tam in manibus Secularium quam religiosorum existentium, et Nobis de
nominibus eorundem, ac de nominibus Militum et Civium praedictorum ad dictos
diem et locum distinct et aperte certifices, hoc breve Nobis remittens. Et hoc
nullatenus omittas. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 die Aprilis.

Confimilia Brevia diriguntur Vircecom. subsciptis de praemuniendo Milites,
Cives, et Burgenses subscriptos de Com. Civitatibus et Burg. subscriptis, de
veniendo apud Wynton: ad Octabas praedictas, sub eadem data, viz.
Vic. Surr. de praemuniendo VVillum. de Cobeham militem, Thomam Dane Burgensem
de Suthwerks, Petrum Somere, Burgensem de Guildeford, et Johan. Bodekesham
Burgensem de Bleechynlegh.

Vic. Sussex, de praemuniendo Johan VValeys militem, Johan. VVyn, Civem
Cicestr. Henr. Exton Burgensem de Midhurst, Johan. Gosham Burgensem de Arundel;
VVillum Snelling Burgensem de Shorham, Robtum, Frensch Burgensem de Horsham,
Henr. VVerkeman Burgensem de Jews, Johan. Chapman Burgensem de Seford,
Gregorium Attebole Burgensem de Est-Grenestede.

Vic. Southt. de praemuniendo Bernardam Brocas militem, Stephanum Hayne Civem
VVynton, VVillum. Bacoun Burgensem Suthampton, Robertum Lekford Burgensem de
Portesmuth.

Vic. Wilts, de praemuniendo Laurencium de sancto Martino militem, Johan.
Bont, Civem Novae-Sarum, William de Keynesham Burgensem de Malmesbury.

Vic. Somerset. de praemuniendo Johan. Beauchamp de Lillesdon militem, Johan.
VVhittokesmede Civem Bathon. Johan. Ropere Civem de Welles, Johan. Osbern
Burgensem de Taunton, Adam Best Burgensem de Br iggewater.

Vic. Dorset. de praemuniendo VValterum Perle militem, Johan. Chichestre
Burgensem de Melcombe, Robertum Osent, Burgensem de Lym, Ricum Suward Burgensem
de Bridport, Johan. Champeon Burgensem de Dorchestre, William Chike Burgensem
de Warham, Walter Henle Burgensem de Shaftesbury.

Vic. Devon. de praemuniendo William Bonevill militem, Johan. Pafford
Burgensem de Dertemouth, Hugonem VVerf Burgensem Torton, Johan. Comb Burgensem
de Plympton, Johan. Bosoun Civem Exon, Ricum. Cokelescombe Burgensem de
Tavystoke, VVillum: Torner Burgensem de Barnstaple.

Vic. Cornub. de praemuniendo Johan. Trevewyth militem, Richardum Truisa
Burgensem de Donbenedburgh, Johan. Jowel Burgensem de Bodmyn, Ricum. Carsur
Burgensem de Lostwythiell, Stephum. Chamberleyn Burgens. de Liskird, Willum.
Boyvill Burgensem de Trureu. Johan. Tremaen Burgensem de Helleston.

Vic. Glouc. de praemuniendo Johan. Points Militem, William Heyberere
Burgensem Glouc. Johan. Bathe Burgensem Bristoll.

Vic. Hereford, de praemuniendo Thomam Chaundos Militem, Henr. Cachepol Civem
Hereford, VVillum. Tavernor Burgensem de Leomynstre.

Vic. Salop. de praemuniendo Robertum de Kendale Militem, Thomam le Skynnere
Burgensem de Salop. Niehum. Palmere Burgensem de Briggenorib.

Vic. Staff. de praemuniendo Johan. de Perton Militem, Hugonem Snell Burgensem
de Stafford, Rogerum Letys Burgensem villae Novi Castri subtus Lymam.

Vic. VVygorn. de praemuniendo Ricum. Fiton Militem, et Johan. Croule Civem
VVygorn.

Vic. Oxon, de praemuniendo Rogerum de Cotesford Militem, VVillum. Coteshale
Burgensem Oxon, Johan. James Burgensem de Walyngford.

Vic. Berks, de praemuniendo Johan. de Foxle Militem, et VVillum. Catour
Burgens. de Redynges.

Vic. Bedf. de praemuniendo Thomam Reins Militem, et Ricum. Frereman Burgens.
de Bedeford.

Vic. Buk. de praemuniendo Fulconem de Bermyngeham Militem, et Willielmum at
Dene Burgens. de Wycombe.

Vic. Northt. de praemuniendo Thomam de Preston Militem, et Johan. de Bukbrok
Burgensem de Norhampton.

Vic. Roteland, de praemuniendo Laurencium Hanberk Militem.

Vic. War. de praemuniendo Johan. Peyto Militem, et Thomam Parny Burgensem de
Warwick.

Vic. Leyc. de praemuniendo Willielmum Flannvil Militem, et Willielmum Taillard
Burgensem villae de Leycestre.

Vic. Notyngh. de praemuniendo, Rogerum Belers Militem, et Rogerum de Holm
Burgensem de Notyngham.

Vic. Derb. de praemuniendo Godefredam Foliambe Militem, et Johan. Frowell
Burgensem de Derby.

Vic. Lincoln de praemuniendo Robertum Hanley Militem, Johan de Outhorp Civem
Lincoln, Ricard. de Herby Burgensem de Grymesby.

Vic. Eborum, de praemuniendo Robertum Rouclyf Militem, Willielmum Graa Civem
Ebor. Henr. de Boston Burgensem de Scardeburgh, Walterum Frost, Burgensem de
Kingeston super Hull.

Vic: Northumbr. de praemuniendo Alanum de Heton Militem, et Laurencium Datton
Burgensem villae Novi Castri super Tynam.

Vic. Westmerl. de praemuniendo Hugonem de Louthre Militem, Robertum Overdos
Burgensem de Applebey.

Vic. Cumbr. de praemuniendo Gibbertum Culwenne Militem, et Johan. de Whitlawe
Civem Karliol.

Vic. Lancastr. de praemuniendo Johan. de Ipres Militem.

Vic. Norff. de praemuniendo Edmundum de Thorp Militem, Johan. Latymer
Burgensem Norwic. Thomam de Bodekesham Burgensem de Lenn, et Johan. de Halle
Burgensem Magnae Iernemuth.

Vic. Suff. de praemuniendo Rogerum de Boys Militem, Robertum de Preston
Burgensem de Gippewico. Johan. Astell Burgensem de Donewich.

Vic. Cantebr. de praemuniendo Johan. Chene Militem, et Johan. Morys Burgensem
Cantebrig.

Vic. Hunt. de praemuniendo Nicb. Stynecle Militem, et Willielmum Wyghtman
Burgensem de Huntyngdon.

Vic. Essex. de praemuniendo Robertum de Marny Militem, Ioban. Halle Burgensem
de Colchestre, et Willielmum Halle Burgensem de Malden.

Vic. Hertf. de praemuniendo Thomam. de Fytlyng Mil.

Vic. Midd. de praemuniendo Johan. Pekbrugge, Milit.

Ric. de Pembrugg Constabular. castri Regis Dovor, de praemuniendo Nichum.
Parker de Hastynges. Robertum Baddyng de Wenchelse, Willum. Taillour de Rye,
Willum. Holynbroke de Romene, VVillum. Hampton de Hethe, Monyn de Davorr,
Arnaldum Broun de Sandwic. Barons

Vicomitibus London de praemuniendo Bartbolomeum Frisling, et Johan. Phelipot
Cives London.

In this excellent Record, we have these observable particulars.

1. Particular writs to all Sheriffs and the Warden of the Cinqueports, after
the Parliament ended and dissolved, to summon to UUinchester only half the
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinqueports formerly summoned
to the Parliament at London, to appear before the King and his Counsel; with
their particular names in the writs, and a special clause to summon their
companions in case any of them since dyed; and that to avoid the great expense
and trouble of summoning all the rest. 2ly. The reasons why they are thus
summoned, not to make Laws, nor grant new subsidies, nor alter any thing
formerly agreed upon and passed by common consent in Parliament, for that had
been very illegal, dangerous, unparliamentary; but only to inform the King and
his Counsel, how a subsidy of fifty thousand pounds granted to the K. by that
Parliament in an entire sum, and then to be raised by a proportionale rate laid
by them upon every parish throughout the Realm, might be speedily and fully
raised according to their intentions by this way of levy; when as the King and
his Counsel upon consideration found, that the entire sum could not be raised
in this way according to their intentions, but would fall far short of their
computation, there being not so many Parishes in England as they conceived.
3ly. That the Commons and whole Parliament may sometimes mistake and err in
their computations and proceedings. 4ly. That no Subsidies or Aids can be
granted or levied for the necessary defense of the Realm by Sea or land, nor
the way and manner of raising them altered but in and by common consent in a
full Parliamen^. 5ly. That in doubtful grants of Subsidies and Acts of this
nature, mentioned in this Writ, the best and speedyest way to resolve the
doubts, and know the true intention of them, is to confer with those Members
who first granted and passed them. 6ly. We have here the particular names of
all the ancient Cities and Boroughs in each County, and of the Cinqueports
which in that Age sent Citizens, Burgesses and Barons to the Parliament, being
one of the fullest Records for this purpose I have seen, and more exact than
any Rolls or Writs for levying their expenses. 7ly. Here are the names of half
the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Ports summoned to this
Parliament, who had writs for their expenses granted them in repairing to
Winchester by virtue of thi^ Writ, as Dorse 22. of this Roll imports, of which
more in its proper place. 8ly. The Sheriffs are required to enquire and
certify the number of all the Parish Churches, Chapels, Prebends in their
respective Counties.

The writs to Sheriffs in Claus. 46 E. 3. dorse 11. are only in the usual form.
Quod de Com. tuo duos this ensuing Ordinance, was made to rectify these.
abuses to disable the election of such for the future.

Rot. parl. an. 46 E. 3. n. 13. Auxi un Ordenance fait en mesme la Parliament
fuit luez, en manner come ensuet. Pur ceo que See my Epistle to the exact
Abridgment of the Records in the Tower.
Gentz de Ley que pursuont diverses busoignes en les Courts le Roy pur
singuleres persons oue queux ils sont procurent, and font mettre pleuseurs
Petitions en Parlementz en nom des comunes que riens lour touch, mes solement
les singulers persons, ou queuz ils sont de moiez. Auxi Viscontz, que sont
Comunes Ministres au people, et dovient demurrer sur lour Office pur droit
fair a checune, sont nomez, et ont devant ces heures retornez en Parlementz,
Chivalers des Countees per mesmes les Viscontz; Est accord and assenta en cest
Parliament, que desormes Null home de ley pursuont busoigues en la Court le Roy,
ne Uiscount pur le temps que il est Uiscount, soient retournem, ne acceptem
Chibalers des Countees; ne que ces qui sont Gentm de ley and Uiscountz ore
retournez au Parliament eient gagem.

Number. 14. Mes voyet lo Roy, que Chivalers and Esquires, not Sergeants at Law.
See 23 H. 6. c. 15 22 E. 3. 18. a. 26 E. 3. 57. Fitz. dtoit. 37. 25 E. 3. stat.
1. and the next writ of 47 E. 3.
Sersaunts des meulz Valeurs du paiis soiz retornez desore Chivalers en
Parlementz, and quils sount estuz en plein Count.

By virtue of this Ordinance all Sheriffs of Counties have always by special
clauses inserted into writs of Elections ever since, been disabled to be chosen
Knights of the Shire, or Burgesses, and sometimes Apprentices, and men of Law,
whiles they pleaded and practiced, for the reasons expressed in this Ordinance.

The very next writs of Summons to Parliament, m. 13. dors. were thus altered,
and some new clauses put into them in pursuance of this Ordinance.

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. Quia de avisamento Confilii nostri, etc. Tibi
praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. tuo duos milites gladiis
cinctos, seu Armigeros, de dicto Com digniores et probiores, et in actibus
armorum magis expertos et discre^ et non alterins conditionis, and de qualibet
Civitate Com. illius duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses, qui in
navigio et exercitio mercandisarum notitiam habeant meliorem, eligi: et eos ad
dictos diem and locum venire facias. Ita quod iidem Milites plenam and
sufficientem potestatem pro se, etc. (as in ordinary Writs) ab ipfis habeant ad
faciend. and consentiend. eis quae tunc de communi Confilio Regni nostri
favente Domino contingant ordinari super negotiis antedictis. Ita quod pro
defectu hujusmodi potestatis, seu propter improvidam electionem Militum,
Civium, aut Burgensium praedictorum, dicta negotia nostra infecta non
remaneant, quovis modo. Nolumus autem quod tu, seu aliquis alius Uicecomes
regni praedicti, aut aliquis alterius conditionis quam superius specificatur
aliqualiter sit electus. Et habeas ibi nomina praedictorum Militum, Civium, and
Burgensium, et hoc breve. Test ut supra.

Consimilia brevia diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.
In the writ to the Warden of the Cinqueports this new clause of qualification
is inserted: Et de quolibet Portu Portuum praedictorum duos Barons de
melioribus, and in navigio et exercitio mercandizarum discretioribus eligi,
without any other alteration.

It is observable, that these Writs issuing in times of war both by Land and
Sea with An exact abridgment, p. 116. Walfing. Fabian, Speed and others.
France, as is evident by Rot. parl. 47 E. 3. number. 2, 3, 4. thereupon these new
qualifications of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinqueports
were inserted into these writs, that the first shall be Knights by order, or at
least Armigeros digniores and probiores, and in actibus armorum magis expertos
and discretos. The later of them such, qui in navigio and exercitio
mercandizarum notitiam habent meliorem; which were fitting qualifications,
considering the times wherein they were inserted into these Writs. 2ly. That
there were express prohibitory clauses in these writs, to inhibite the
elections of any persons not thus qualified, and non alterius conditionis,
relating to the Knights and Esquires; and last clause in the Writ. Nolumus
tamen quid tu, etc. aut aliquis alterius conditionis, quam superius
specificatur aliqualiter sit electus: which was grounded on the Mere p. 114.
Ordinance of Parliament, in 46 E. 3. and manifests the ancient power and
Prerogative of our Kings, to prescribe to their Subjects what kind of fit
persons they ought to elect, and to prohibit the choice of any others not so
qualified, when they are proner to make undue elections of mean, indiscreet,
unable, and unfitting Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons, to the prejudice of
the public, 5ly. That though our Kings cannot prescribe to their subjects what
particular persons they shall elect, being inconsistent with the freeness of
elections, the Stat. of 3 E. 1. c. 5. an apparent incroachment on their
liberty, and a ready means to pack Parliaments at their pleasure, to effect
their own private end, and oppres, enslave their subjects, yet their
prescribing of just and fitting qualifications in the general in all persons to
be elected, and inhibiting the choice of any not so qualified, is no
incroachment upon their libertyes and freedom in elections, as this Writ and
others, and the forecited Ordinance does evidence.

The next Writs to Sheriffs for electing Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are
those in Clause 47 E. 3. dors. 13. cl. 49 E. 3. d. 4, 6. cl. 50 E. 3. p. 1. d.
6. running all in this form. Rex Vic. Kanc. etc. Quod de comitatu tuo duos
Milites gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos et discretos, and de qualibet Civitate
Com. illius duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus,
and magis sufficientibus eligi, etc. with this prohibition in the close of all
these Writs Nolumus autem quod tu, vel aliquis alius Vicecomes Regni noctri
praedicti, aut aliquis altertus Conditionis quam superius specificatur
aliqualiter sit electus. Et babeas ibi nomina praedictorum Militum, Civium, and
Burgensium, and hoc breve.

The writs to Sheriffs for the election of Knights, Citizens, 2. d. 42. cl. 11
R. 2. d. 13. 24. have all the same prohibitory clause, and nolumus autem, etc.
as the last writs in King Edward the third his Reign. But in the writ of claus.
12 R. 2. d. 42. these words aut alterius conditionis quam superius
specificatur, are omitted out of the Nolumus autem: In all the Writs of Claus.
13 R. 2. pars 1. d. 6. they are again inserted. But in the writs of Cl. 14 R.
2. d. 42. cl. 15 R. 2. d. 37. cl. 16 R. 2. d. 32. cl. 17 R. 2: d. 30. cl. 18 R.
2. d. 23. cl. 20 R. 2. p. 1. d. 15. cl. 21 R. 2. p. 1. d. 27. cl. 23 R. 2. d:
3. and in all Writs under H. 4, 5, 6. and E. 4. they are also totally omitted.:
and Nolumus autem quod tu, aut aliquis alius Vicecomes Regni praedicti
aliqualiter sit electus, only retained. In all these Writs under Richard the
2d. there is this clause added, not extant in those of Edward the 3d. Tibi
praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod in pleno Comitatu tuo de communt assensu
ejusdem, duos Milites gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos and discretos, etc. eligi,
etc. facias: which clause most clearly evidenceth, that all Knights ought to be
elected in a full County Court, by the common assent of the County, and not to
be nominated, elected by the King, or any others without or against the
Counties consent and approbation. There are 5 bundles of Writs in Ann. 3, 10,
11, 13, 16 Rich. 2d, yet extant, for elections of Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, issued to Sheriffs, and others; with their retotns indorsed on or
annexed to them, which I shall pretermit.

There are only two extraordinary unusual Writs, concerning the election of
Knights, during the Reign of King Richard the 2d. worthy special observation,
which I shall present you with at large. The first of them thus recorded in
Claus. 7 R. 2. m. 32. De Militibus venientibus ad Parliamentum loco aliorum
eligendis.

Rex Vic. Surry. salatem. Quia ut accepimus, tu Thomam Mr. Seldens Titles of
Honor, p. 737. and my Plea for the Lords, p. 143.
Camoys Chivaler, qui Baronettus est, sicut quamplures antecessorum suorum
extiterunt, ad essendum unum Militum venientiam ad proximum Parliamentum
nostrum pro Comunitate Comitatus praedicti, de assensu ejusdem Comitatus,
eligisti: Nos advententes, quod hujusd. Baronetti ante haec tempora, Milit.
Commit. ratione alicujus Parl. eligi, minime consuev. ipsum de officio Militis,
ad dictum Parliamentum pro comunitate Comitatus praedicti venturi, exonerari
volumus Et ideo tibi praecipimus, quod quendam alium Militem idoneum et
discretum gladio cinctum, in loco ipsius Thomae eligi, and eum ad diem and
locum Parliamenti praedicti venire facias. Cum plena and sufficienti potestate
ad consentiend. hiis quae in Parliamento praedicto fient, juxta tenorem prioris
brevis nostri tibi pro electione hujusmodi Militum directi, and nomen ejus
Nobis scire facias. Test Rege apud Westminster. octavo die Octobris.

Consimile Breve dirigitur Vic. Surry, pro Iacobo Berners, qui est de
retinentia Regis and familiaris, and unus Militum Kantiae T. R. apud Westminster. 18
die Oct.
It is evident by the Rolls and Summons cited in the Sea my Table of the Lords
to my exact abridgement, Title Thomas Camoyes. and part 1. of this Registr. p.
272.
precedent Table of the Temporal Lords and Barons, that Ralph Camoys was
sumoned to Parliament amongst the other Lords and Barons in 49 H. 3. and
another of that name to sundry Parliaments, under Ed. 2 and 3. and John de
Camoyes after them: That this Thomas Camoyes mentioned in the Writ, was
descended from them, and then a Peer and Baron of the Realm, (though styled a
Baronet in the Writ, which in that age signified a Baron of Parliament, as the
hujusmodi Baronetti in the Writ, and Mr. Seldom evidence;) being summoned by
Writ with the rest of the Barons to this very Parliament of 7 R. 2. and sundry
others afterward during his Reign, and the Reigns of Henry the fourth and
fifth; from whence I shall observe.

1. That no Peers or Barons of the Realm may, can, or ought to be elected,
returned Kights of Shires, Citizens, or Burgesses of Parliament, and their
elections void if made, being incapable to sit or vote in the Commons House as
Members thereof, as I have largely proved in My plea for the Lords and house of
Peers, p. 143 to 148. to which I shall refer the Readers for fuller resolution.

2ly. That if any election be once made upon the the Kings first Writ, though
void or illegal in it self, yet the Sheriff and County cannot proceed to a new
election, without a new Writ from the King authorizing them.

3ly. That if a mere void election of a Peer or other person incapable, be made
by the Country and Sheriff, the King may thereupon by such a new writ as this,
declare it null, yea discharge the person elected from his undue election, and
command a new election to be made by such a Writ as this, before the Parliament
meet as well as alter it; as he did here, this Parliament for which the Lord
Camoyes was elected one of the Knights of the County for Surry, being summoned
to begin on the 25 of October (as the Writ it self and Parliament roll assure
us) and the writ for his discharge, and a new election of another fit person
and Knight in his stead, bearing date the 8th. of October, being 15 days
before the Parliament was to meet.

4ly. That the King in this Age, not the Commons House, was the sole proper
Judge of void and double elections, who had no Jurisdiction or authority to
hear or determine any complaints concerning Elections, much less to suspend,
seclude, or reject any of their Fellow Members, (a late dangerous usurpation)
either by Custom of Parliament, the Writs of election, or any other Law,
Statute, authority, but only the King or Lords; as I have largely proved in
my Plea for the Lords, by unreasonable Presidents^, reasons, Statutes, p. 371.
to 420. to which I shall refer the Reader.

5ly. That when the self-same person is elected a kinght for two Counties at
once, the king by his Writ may discharge him of one of them, and issue a new
election in his room, as in the case of James Berners elected both for Surry
and Kent.

The next Writ is this of Clause 11 R. 2. m. 24. dorso.

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. Quia de avisamento Consilii See my plea for the Lords,
p. 384, 385.
nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negogotiis Nos, statum and
defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, seu Ecclesiae Anglicanae contingentibus
quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud Westminster. in Craftino Purificationis beatae
Mariae prox futur. teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum et cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus, and Proceribus Regni nostri Angliae Colloquium habere and
Tractatum. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Comitatu tuo duos
Milites gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and discretos Com. praedicti, and in
debatis modernis magis indifferentes; and de qualibet Civitate ejusdem Com.
duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de discretioribus and magis
sufficientibus eligi, and eos ad dictos diem and locum venire facias, etc.
Test Rege apud Windsore, decimo septimo die Decembr.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur singulis Vic. per Angliam.
The King before any elections made, being informed, that this new inserted
clause, in debatis modernis magis indifferentes,, (relating only to knights of
Shires, not Citizens and Burgesses) was contrary to the forms of Elections
anciently used, and against the liberty of the Lords and Commons of the Realm
till that time used, did thereupon supersede and revoke these writs, as to this
unusual clause alone, by this memorable Writ, entered in the next Membrana, viz.
Cl. 11 R. 2. m. 23. dorso.

Rex Vic. Kant. salutem, licet nuper and breve nostrum inter caetera tibi
praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod de Comitatu tuo duos Milites gladiis
cinctos, magis idoneus and discretos Com. praedicti, and in debatis modernis
magis indifferentes eligi, and eos ad Parliamentum nostrum quod apud Westminster. in
crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae prox. futur. tenere ordinavimus, ad
eosdem diem and locum venire faceres. Nos tamen attendentes dictam clausulam,
in debatis modernis magis indifferentes, contra formam electionis antiquitus
usitatae, et contra libertatem Dominorum et Communitatis regni nostri Angliae
hactenus obtentam existere, volentesque proinde praedictos Milites libere
eligi, modo et forma prout antiquitus fieri consuebit. Tibi praecipimus
firmiter injungentes, quod de Com. tuo duos Milites gladiis cinctos, magis
idoneos and discretos Com. praedicti, prout hactenus fieri consuebit, eligi,
and eos ad praedictos diem and locum venire facias, dicta clausula non
obstante; caeteraque omnia and singula in dicto brevi nostro contenta fac: et
exequaris juxta tenorem ejusdem, dictam clausulam penitus omittens. Et habeas
ibi hoc breve, and aliud breve. Test Rege apud Westmonast. primo die Jan.

Per ipsum Regem and Consilium.

Consimilia brevia diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam: and carissimo
Anvunculo Regis Johanni Regi Castellae and Legionis, Duci Lancastr. vel ejus
Cancellario in eodem Ducatu, sub eadem data.
From these two memorable Writs, compared with some of the limitations in the
precedent Writs, it is evident, 1. That although the King may by his Writs
advise and command the Sheriffs and people by general clauses, to elect two of
the best, wisest, discreetest, fittest, elegantest ablest Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses in each County, City, Borough, and most able to take pains: and
likewise probibite them to elect maintainers of Quarrels and false suits,
persons of ill fame, living by maintenance and dishonest gain, Sheriffs of
Counties, practicing Lawyers, Barons of the Realm, and other unfitting persons
for such a public Service; Yet he ought not to insert any new qualifications
or restraints into his Writs, contrary to the amient, usual form, liberty, and
freedom of the peoples Elections, which may tend to the packing of any
Parliament, to promote any particular factions, parties, or designs to the
public prejudice, or deprive the people of their ancient legal freedom in
their Elections, especially in times of general discord, discontents,
jealousies, or open sad debates between the King and his Subjects, as these new
clauses, in debatis modernis magis indifferentes, etc. and other late Army
qualifications, restraints of more dangerous consequence do in the late
Instrument of Government, and Petition and advice prescribed by the
New-Modellers of Parliaments, and our Republicans since, to advance their own
particular designs, and admit, seclude, what Members they please, though best
affected to the public welfare, ease, peace, fafety, settlement of our
distracted Nations, and most desired, confided in by the people who elected
them by their unanimous Votes.

2ly. That our Kings themselves are bound in Justice and prudence to reverse
and revoke all such unusual, illegal clauses and restraints, inserted into
writs for Elections, which are inconsistent with the just rights and freedom of
the people in their elections, according to the Statutes of 3 E. 1. c. 5. 9 E.
4. c. 14. 7 H. c. 15. and this memorable President of King Ri^bard the 2d. and
that before any public report thereof in Parliament, or examination by the
Commons.

3ly. That no Peer or Baron of the Realm, may or ought (a) See my plea sor the
Lords, p. 144, 145, 146.
to be elected a Knight of the Shire, or Burgess of Parliament, That the King
himself may by his Writ, null and declare their Elections void, and command a
new Election to be made, before the Parliament assembles, without the Commons
precedent or concurrent Votes.

4. That if the same person be elected Knight of the shire in two several
Counties, the King by his Writ may null and discharge the second election
before the Parliament meets, and order the election of a New Knight for the
County wherein he was last elected, (he being incapable to serve in both)
without the Commons order or privity. 5ly. That the Commons House or Committees
in this Age, were not the ludges, Desciders of the lawfulness of Knights and
Burgesses elections, (as now they make themselves) but the King himself, or the
King and Lords House, or his Counsel in Parliament, without the Commons, as I
have Plea for 376 to 410. the Lords, p.
elsewhere proved at large by sundry Presidents.

Besides, the writs for elections under King Richard Bundles of writs, anno 3,
10, 11, 13, and 16 R. 2. issued to Sheriffs for electing Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, for the respective Parliaments held in those years, having the
Retorns of the Sheriffs. with all the names of the knights, Citizens, Burgesses
then elected indorsed on them, or in Cedules annexed to them, most of them
having two Manucaptors apiece for their appearance at the day and place of the
Parliament, and some few of them no Manucaptors at all; the forms of the
Retorns agreeing for the most part with those of 26 and 28 E. 1. and 42 E. 3.
forecited. upon which confideration I shall wholly pretermit them, to avoid
prolixity and nauseousness.

The original writs of Elections and their Retorns Henry 4. are either mislayed
or totally lost, embeseled, perished through negligence, or casualty, so as I
can give you no particular account of them, but only of their transcripts
entered in the Clause-Rolls. The first of them are enrolled, in Claus. 1 H. 4.
m. 37. dors. claus. 2 H. 4. pars 2. dors. 8. cl. 3 H. 4. dors. 2. 17. cl. 5 H.
4. pars 1. dors. 28. pars 2. dors. 11. agreeing all in words, substance, form,
with the usual Writs forecited under Richard the second, without any
variation, except in their Prologues and dates, being the same with those to
the Prelates, Section 1. But in Cl. 5 H. 4. part 2. m. 4. dors. there was an
unusual new Clause inserted into the Writs then issued, prohibiting all
Apprentices, or any other man of Law to be elected, as well as Sheriffs, these
Writs else agreeing in all things with the ordinary form.

Rex Vic. etc. Jalutem, etc. Nolumus autem quod tu sive aliquis alius Vicecomes
Regni nostri, nec Apprenticius, aut aliquis alius homo ad legem aliqualiter sit
electus. Test Rege apud Lichefeld, quinio die Augusti.

Hist. Angl. p. 414.
Thomas of Walsingham, a credible Historian then living, took special Notice of
this extraordinary Writ, recording in his History of England, direxit ergo Rex
brevia Vicecomitibus, ne quosquam pro Comitatibus eligerent quovismedo Milites.
qui in Iure regni docti fuissent vel Apprenticii, sed tales omnino mitterentur
ad boc negotium, quos constat ignorare cujusque Iuris methodum, quod et factum
est. But what prejudice to the Republike and people this produced by imposing
new insupportable Taxes upon them, he informs us in his Ypodigma Nestr. p. 164.
Grave Sir 4 Instit. p. 10.
Edward Cook (the most confident common Mistaker, Mis-reporter of Records that
I have hitherto read) peremptorily affirms, That the Historian (Walsingham)
was (herein) mistaken, and that there was no such Clause in the Writs then
issued. A clear evidence he never perused this Clause Roll or Writ with his
own eyes (or most else be cites) as I have done more than once for my own and
others satisfaction; transcribing this passage out of it, with my own hand,
which I have also met with in sundry other transcripts, as well as in the Roll
it self, where all may peruse it when they please. And if this be not
sufficient evidence, our learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, (a person of far
greater judgment and learning in Antiquities than Sir Edw Cook) has assured
us thereof in his Glossarium p. 44. Prohibet Rex Henrious 4 legum Apprenticios
ad Parliamentaria Comitia Coventriae habita sexto die October. anno Regni sui
sexto in Comitatibus eligendos, ut non solum meminere Annals nostri, sed ipsum
etiam ( 2 Par. Claus. m. dors. n. 4.
breve Parliamentarium unicuique Vicecomitum directum, datumque vigessimo
quinto die Aug. anno ejusdem 5. uti patet ibidem in pede, viz. Nolumus autem
quod tu seu aliquis alius Vic. Regni nostri praedicti, aut Apprenticius sive
aliquis alius homo ad legem aliqualiter sit electus, etc. Hinc Parliamentum
illud Laicorum dicitur and indoctorunr, quo and jugulum Ecclesiae atrocius
petebatur. And Sir Edward Cook himself at unawares confesses as much, some few
pages after 4 Instit. p. 48. as I have evidenced in my Plea for the Lords. p.
379, 380, 381. and Preface to the Exact Abridgement of the Records in the
Tower. I find in truth, that there were no less than three several writs of
Summons and Elections to three distinct Parliaments in this one year of 5 H. 4.
The first dated apud Leichfeld 5 die Augusti, for a Parliament to be held at
Coventree octavo die Octobr. entered Claus. pars 2 H. 4 dors. 4. whereinto this
clause was inserted, omitted in most Collections of Parliamentary writs of
Summons. The second entered in Claus. 5 H. 4. pars 2. dors. 11. Test Johanne
Duce Bedford, Custode Angliae apud Westminster. 5 die Octobris. The third entered
Clause 5 H. 4. pars 1. dors. 28. for a Parliament apud Coventre, tertio die
Decembris. Test Rege apud Westminster. 20 die Octobris, in which two latter writs
there is no such Clause inserted, but only in the first, which perchance was
the ground of 4 Instit. p. 10. 48.
Sir Edward Cooks confident mistake, who only saw a transcript of the latter,
not of the first Writs.

This Clause was warranted by and grounded on the forecited Ordinance of 46 E.
3. as Sir Edward Cook a^tests, and I subscribe to; but that this was an
Ordinance ^ly of the Lords, or that Ordinances differed from Acts of Parliament
in those times, in this, that one had the threefold concurrent assent of the
King, Lords and Commons, the other not, etc. as he there affirms, I utterly
deny, and have Irenarches Redivivus, near the eud. My Table to the Exact
Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, Tit. Ordinance of Parliament.
elsewhere at large resuted by unanswerable evidences, and above an hundred
Acts of Parliament, which make them both one and the same, they having both
this threefold concurrent assent to make them Acts, or Ordinances, without
which they are neither: and himself confesses it in his 2. Institutes p. 101.
645, 646. and elsewhere. The reason for secluding practicing Lawyers from being
elected, whiles they actually continued to plead and prosecute Suites in the
Kings Courts for others, are expressed in the Ordinance, now fit to be revived,
(h) See Cook. 4 instit p. 10, 48, 49.
that so the Lawyers elected may totally attend the public businesses of the
Kingdom and Parliament in the House, and not neglect them: which if they do
faithfully and conscienciously execute with public spirits, there are no
Members whatsoever more useful, necessary, beneficial to the public than
they, both forth penning of good laws, debating all businesses of law,
examining all complaints'and grievances: whence none but Lawyers for the most
part in ancient or late times have been chosen See Mr. Will. Hackwells
Catalogue of the Speakers names printed, 1641.
Speakers of the Commons House, and few else but they employed as Chair-men in
most Committees.

After this, upon the making of the Statutes of 7 H. 4. c. 15. and 11 H. 4. c.
1. upon the Commons petition, as appears, by 1 H. 4. rot. parl. number. 83. 139.
and 11 H. 4. n. 54. for regulating former abuses in the elections of Knights of
Shires to serve in Parliaments; the ant^ent

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. Quia de avisamento Consilii nostri, etc. (as in the
former Writs.) Tibi praecipimus libere et indifferenter per illos qui
proclamationi hujusmodi interfuerint juxta formam Statuti inde editi et
provist, eligi, and nomina eorum Militum Civinm and Burgensium sic
^eligendorum, in quibusdam Indenturis inter te and illos Electorum.
qui hujusmodi electioni interfuerint inde constituend. licet hujusmodi
eligendi praesentes vel absentes fuerint, inseri, eosque ad dictos diem and
locum venire facias. Ita quod, etc. (as in former writs) Nolumus autem quod tu,
vel, (seu) aliquis alius Vicecomes Regni nostri praedicti aiiqualiter sit
electus. Et electionem tuam in pleno Comitatu tuo distinct and aperte factam
sub sigillo tuo and sigillis eorum qui electioni illi interfuerint Nobis in
Cancellaria nostra ad dictos diem and locum certifices indilate. Remittend,
Nobis aliam partem Indenturarum praedictarum praesentibus consutam una cum hoc
breve. Test Rege apud Westminster. 22 die Maii.

The like writs then issued to all other Sheriffs of Counties, and this form
with little or no variation, continued from 1 H. 4. to all Sheriffs of
particular Cities and Boroughs, made Counties within themselves, (as Lincoln,
York, Bristol, Coventre, Norwich, Notyngham, Newcastle upon Tyne, Kingstone
upon Hull, and Southampton, mutatis mutandis) till the Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 7.
concerning Elections was made, as the Clause. Rolls assure us, where the writs
of Summons are recorded; only the writs to the Sheriffs of London were to elect
Qua^uor Cives de discretioribus and magis sufficien^ibus; the writs to the
Sheriffs of other Cities that were Counties, to elect Duos Cives, and to those
Boroughs which were Counties, to choose Duos Burgenses.

The bundle of those original writs which issued in 1 H. 5 is yet extant,
together with the several retorns and Indentures of the Sheriffs, and names of
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses then elected and returned, the major
number of them having Manucaptors returned for their appearance at the day and
place of the Parliament, which others of them have not. The Statutes of 7 H. 4.
c. 15. and 11 H. 4. c. 1. enacting all Sheriffs to make their Retorns of the
Knights elected by Indentures, between the Sheriffs and Electors, under their
respective Seals, never in use before, thereupon the forms of their Retorns
were accordingly altered and made by Indentures, wherein the names of the
Knights elected and of their Electors were returned, some inserting more, some
fewer names of the Electors, with general clauses for the rest; on the dorse of
many of which Indentures the names of the Knights, Manucaptors, and sometimes
of the Citizens and Burgesses, and their Manucaptors are entered, and others of
them on the dorses only of the Writs; These Indentures are somewhat various and
different in their forms and words, but for the most part they accord in
substance: All those from 7 H 4. to the end of his Reign, being not extant, but
lost or mislayd, I shall present you with some few of the first of them yet
extant in 1 H. 5. upon the retorn of the last forecited writ that year.

Executio istius brevis patet in quadam Cedula, and in quadam Indentura huic
brevi consuta.

Haec Indentura facta apud Lostwythiel, 24 die Aprilis Anno Regni Regis Henrici
quinti, post conquestum Angliae primo, in pleno Com. ibidem tent. inter
Johannem Arundel Vic. Com. praedicti; and Johan. Whalesbrew, Willum. Grynevile,
and 32. more there named, and plures alios de dicto Com. ibidem tunc
praesentes, secundum Proclamationem dicti Dom. Regis, de Militibus pro
Parliamento in dicto brevi specificato eligendis factam. Qui tunc ibidem
unanimi assensu et consensu eligerunt Johan. Wibbury and Johan. Trelonny
Milites, qui habent plenam and sufficieutem potestatem pro se and communitate
Com. praedicti, ad faciend. and con. sentiend, prout breve praedictum in se
exegit and requirit. In cujus rei testimonium huic parti Indenturae huic breve
consut. proedictus Johannes Whalesbrew and caeteri omnes praenominati sigilla
sua apposuerunt. Et alteri parti Indentur. praedictarum Vic. sigillum suum
apposuit. Dat. die, loco and anno supradictis.

Nomina Militum electorum pro Parliamento in brevi huic Cedulae consut. Those
named in the Indenture having each two Manucaptors.

Nulla est Civitas in Com. praedicto.

Nomina Burgensium pro Parliamento in Com. praedicto: Dounhevedburgh, 2. Bodmyn
Burgh. 2. Helston Burg. 2. Lostwithiel Burg. 2. Truru Burg. 2. having every of
them two Manucaptors returned over against their names, all there named.

The Counties of Snssex and Surry having a several writs, and but one Sheriff
are returned both together; the Indenture for Surry runs thus, Haec Indentura
facta apud Guldeford, etc. testatur, quod virtute brevis Dom. Regis in pleno
Com. praedicto plenarie lecti and auditi, per assensum and consensum Willi
Weston, (and three more there named) and omnium aliorum fidelium ibidem
existentium, electi sunt in Milites pro communitate Com. praedicti existend. ad
Parliamentum Dom. Reg^s apud Westminster. ex tunc proxtenend. Johannes Burg^. and
Willielmus Aferde. In cujus rei Testimonium, etc.

The Indenture annexed to the Writ for Sussex is in Surry and Suffolk.
French, between the Sheriff, and les gentilles homes and comunes du dit
Count, dauter part, witnessing, that the Gentlemen and Commons had chosen
Richard Sayvyle and Richard Wakebira, a consentie and affair ceo que as
Chivalers de Parliament affair duement appertient, pur le bonor and profit du
dit nostre seigneur le Roy and son Roialme: in testimony whereof the Sheriff
and the Gentlemen, and Commons, to wit, 14 there named, and other Gentlemen and
Commons, set to their Seals the day and year aforesaid.

None of the Knights, Citizens or Burgesses tetorned upon this Indenture, have
any Manucaptors indorsed on the Indenture, nor returned in the Cedule, as most
of the others have in other Counties, though not all; and some of them are
returned to be atached, and quilibet eorum separatim per se, by particular
persons there returned, without any Manucaptors for them, as in the retorn for
Cambridge-shire.

Most of the Indentures mention, that the Knights elected and returned have
plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and communitate Com. praedict. ad
faciend. and consent. ^iis qu^ tunc ibidem de communi co^silio dicti Regni
favente Domino ordinari contigerit super negoti^ in praedicto brevi
specificatis. In cujus rei testimonium, etc. as the retorns of the Sheriff of
Hertford-shire and Essex, (which Counties had then but one Sheriff) and sundry
others attest. The Indenture for Wyltes adds: Item praesens Indentura,
testatur, qnod Cives and Burgenses de qualibet Civitate and Burg. Com.
praedict. electi, etc. plenam and sufficieneem potestatem prose, and
communitate Civitatum and Burgorum praedictorum divisim habentes ad faciend and
consentiend, prout dictum breve in se exigit and requirit. Incujus rei
Testimonium, etc. In some Retorns is added, by the Electors, (as also in 3 H.
5. for Essex.) Dantes and concedentes eisdem Roberto Darcy and Johanni Tyrrel
Militibus, pro proedicto Parliamento, plenam and sufficientem potestatem prose,
and communitate Com. praedicti ad faciend. and consentiend. hiis quae tunc
ibidem de communi Consilio Regni Domini Regis favente Domino ordinari
contigerit super negotiis in praedicto brevi specificatis. The substance
whereof is expressed in most Retorns.

The retorn of the She^iff of Bristol is thus endorfed. Bristol.
Adprox. Com. tentum apud Bristol postquam istud Breve mihi deliberatum fuit,
viz die Lunae 10 die Aprilis, Anno Regni Henrici quarti post conquestum primo,
proclamari feci breve infra scriptum prout illud requirit. Et ulterius vobis
certifico, quod ad eundem. Com. and coadunatis, discretioribus and magis
sufficientibus Burgensibus dictae Villae ex assensu Jobannis Clyve, Majoris
Villae praedictae and aliorum plurimorum ibidem existentium, eligimus duos
discretos and magis sussicientes Burgenses Com. Bristol, viz. Thomam Norton and
Iohannem Leycestre, qui tam ut Milites pro Com. Bristol, quam ut Burgenses
Villae praedict. respondeant in Parliamento Domini Regis tenend. apud Westminster. a
die Pasche in tres Septimanas, prox. futur. and eos ad praedictum Parliamentum
venire faciam, prout in altera part quarundam Indenturarum: inde inter me and
illos qui electioni praedict. interfucrunt confect. huic brevi consut.
continetur, prou^ istud Breve requirit. Johannes Sherpe Vic. Bristol.

Haec Indentura facta Bristol inter Johannem Sherpe Vicecomitem Com. Bristol,
ex part ^una, and Johannem Clyve Majorem villae praedict. (and thirty more
named particularly) and alios probos homines villae praedictae, ex. part
altera testatur; quod virtute brevis. Domini Regis uni parti harum Indenturarum
consut. in Com. tento apud Bristol die Lunae, etc. (as before in the Retorn)
coadunatis discretioribus and magis sufficientibus Burgensibus dictae villae,
Thomas Norton and Johaennes Leycestre Burgenses and Mercatores villae Bristol
sunt electi, essendi in Parliamento Domini Regis tenend. etc. (as before) ad
respondend. in Parliamento praedicto tam ut Milites pro Com. Bristol, quam ut
Burgenses pro Burgo praedict. villae: qui quidem Thomas Norton et Johannes
Leycestre praesentes in Electione praedict. praemuniti (sunt) comparendi in
dicto Parliamento ad diem et locum praedictum, ex consensu and assensu dictorum
Majoris et proborum hominum praedictorum, et communitatis villlae praedictae,
ad consentiend. et faciend. omnia et singula quae in dicto Parliamento
contigerit ordinari, ac omnia alia quod breve praedictum exigit. In cujus rei
testimonium tam praedictus Vicecomes, quam praefatus Major et singuli probi
homines supradicti, sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt. Dat. Bristol anno et
die supradictis.

The Counties of Somerset and Dorset had then two distinct writs, and but one
Sheriff, who returned both writs together.

In the Indenture for the County of Somerset, dated at Yuelchester, 1 die Maii,
anno 1 H. 5. there are 24 Electors only named; Qui ex assensu totius Com.
praedicti eligerunt. Thomam Brook Militem, et Rogerum Chedder, Milites essendi
apud Westminster. ad Parliamentum etc. ad faciend, et consentiend pro Commun.
praedict. tunc. ibidem prout breve praefato Vic. inde direct. etc. in se exigit
et requirit, etc.

These 2. Knights have each one Manucaptor over against their names, but the
Citizens and Burgesses in the County none, except those of Wells, who have two
Manucaptors over against their names: But the Knights for the County of Dorset
have no Manucaptors, nor any of the Burgesses, except Lyme, who have only two
Manucaptors for both Burgesses.

I shall trouble you with no more varieties of Indentures of this kind to avoid
prolixity: Those who are not sufficed with these, may peruse them in the
Bundles of writs and retorns, anne 1, 3, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 13, 20 H.
6. and 7. and 12 Edw. 4. where they may satiate, if not surfeit themselves with
retorns and Indentures of this nature.

The forms and substances of all the several writs for elections of Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses from 11 H. 4. till 2 H. 6. and of their respective
retorns by Indenture in the Bundles of writs and retorns of Anno 3, 8, and 9 H.
5. et Anno 1, 2, 3, 6 H. 6. are the same with those of 1 H. 5. last cited, and
all the transcripts of writs for elections recorded in Cl. 2 H. 5. dors. 16.
cl. 3 H. 5. dors. 15. cl. 4 H. 5. dors. 18. cl. 5 H. 5. dors. 11. cl. 7. H. 5.
d. 9. cl. 8 H. 5. d. 2. cl. 9 H. 5. d. 13. cl. 1 H. 6. d. 22. cl. 2. H. 6. d.
18. cl. 3. H. 6. d. 9. cl. 4. H. 6. d. 15. cl. 5 H. 6. d. 4. cl. 7. H. 6. d. 2.
agree in substance and form with the last recited writs of 1 H. 5. Therefore I
shall not repeat any of them, but refer you to their perusal in these Rolls.
Yet after the Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 7. touching elections of Knights, made upon
the Commons Petition to the King and Lords, entered in the Parliament Roll of 8
H 6. number. 57. the form of the Writs for ^lections was somewhat altered and
enlarged, yet without any ses form or alteration prescribed by that Parliament
or Statute, as is evideut by the Clause rolls of 9 H. 6. dors. 28. 10 H. 6.
dors. 16. 11 H. 6. d. 10. 12 H. 6. d. 2. 13 H. 6. d. 18. 18 H. 6. d. 33. 20 H.
6. d. 27. et 23 H. 6. d. 21. and the bundles and retorns of the writs, an. 11,
13, 20 H. 6. which all accord in this ensuing form of 23 H. 6. which I shall
only here insert.

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. Quia pro quibusdam, etc. Test, ut supra usque ibi: Et
tunc sic: cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti Regni nostri
Colloquiu^ habere volumus et Tractatum. Ac in stat. nostro in Parl. apud West:
(so the writ in 9 H. 6. but those in 10 H. 6. and after) apud Westminster. An. regni
nostri 8. tento edito, inter caetera provisum et ordinatum, existit. Quod
Milites Com. infra Regnum. nostrum Angl. eligend. ad veniond. in parl. ex tunc
tenend. eligantur in quolibet Com. per homines in eodem Com. commorantes et
residentes, quorum quilibet habeat liberum tenement. ad valorem quadraginta
solidorum peran. ad minus, ultra reprisas, et quod illi qui eligendi fuerint
sint similiter in eisdem Com. commorantes et residentes; quodque illi qui
habuerint majorem numerum ipsor. qui quadraginta solidos per an. ac ultra
expendere possunt, ut praedict. est, per Vicecom. cujuslibet Com. per
Indenturas inter ipsos Vicecom. et praefatos electores inde conficiend.
sigiliatas, Milites pro Parl. returnentur. Et quod quilibet Vic. Angliae habeat
potestatem autoritate Parliamenti praedicti, examinandi super sacra dei
Evangelia quemlibet hujusmodi electorem, quantum per annum expendere possit. Et
si aliquis Vic. Milites de veniendo ad Parliamentum in contrarium ordinationis
praedictae retornaverit, habeant Not the Commons-House, or Committee of
Privilege.
Justic. ad Assisas in Sessionibus suis assisarum, potestatem autoritate
supradicta de et super hoc Inquisitionem capiendi, per quam si id coram eisdem
Justiciariis comperi and Vicecomes inde debite convinci contigerit, tunc idem
Vic. paena^ cent. librarum Nobis solvend. incurrat, et imprisonetur per unum
annum absque traditione in ballium, aut manucaptione. Et quod milites pro
Parliamento nostro in contrarium ordinatione praedicta retornati vadia sua
perdent, prout in statuto praedicto before continetur. Tibi praecipimus
firmiter injungentes, quod facta proclamatione in prox. Com. tuo post
receptionem hujus brevi^ tenend. de die et loco praedictis, duos milites
gladiis cinctos, magis idoneos et discretos Com. praedicti, et de qualibet
Civitate Com. illius duos Cives, et de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de
discretioribus et magis sufficientibus, libere et indifferenter, per illos qui
proclamationi interfuerint, juxta formam statuti praedicti, ac cujusdam
alterius statuti inde dudum editi et provisi eligi, et nomina eorundem militum,
Civium et Burgensium sic eligend. in quibusdam Indenturis inter te et illos,
qui hujusmodi electioni intersuerint inde conficiend. sive hujusmodi eligendi
praesentes fuerint vel absentes, inseri, eosque ad dictos diem et locum venire
sac. Ita quod iidem milites plenam et sufficient. potestatem pro se et commun.
Com. illius, ac dicti Cives et Burgenses pro se et communitatibus Civitatum et
Burgorum praedictorum, divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciend. et consentiend.
hiis quae tune ibidem de communi Consilio dicti regni nostri savente domino
contigerit ordinari super negotiis antedictis. Ita quod pro defectu potestatis
hujusmodi, seu propter improvidam electionem Militum Civium aut Burgensium
praedictorum, dicta negotia infecta non remaneant quovis modo. Nolumus autem
quod tu, aut aliquis alius Vicecomes dicti Regni nostri aliqualiter sit
electns. Et electionem tuam in pleno Com. tuo factam distinct et aperte sub
sigillis tui et sigillis eorum qui electioni illi interfuerint Nobis in
Cancellariam nostram ad dictos diem et locum certifices indilate, remittens
nobis alteram partem Indenturarum praedictarum praesentibus consutam una cum
hoc breve. Test Rege apud Westminster. 12 die Januar.

Consimilia brevia diriguntur singulis Vic. Ang^: sub eadem data.
Rex Vic. London salutem. Quia, etc. ut supra.

Consimilia brevia diriguntur Vic. subscriptis mutatis mutandis sub eadem data,
viz.
Vicecomitibus Civitatis Eborum pro 2. Civibus eligend.

Vic. villae Novi Castri super Tynam pro 2. Burgensibus eligend.

Vic. villae de K^ngstone super Hull pro 2. Burgensibus eligend.

Vic. Civitatis Norwici pro 2. Civibus eligend.

Vic. Civitatis Linc. pro 2. Civibus eligend.

By this writ of 26 H. 6. (agreeing with former writs) here transcribed at
large, you may observe, that it differs only from the last recited in the
rehearsal of the Statute of 8 H. 6. and from the precedent writs by the recital
of the Statute of 7 H. 4. That since these Acts the qualification of the
persons is, that the Knights and persons elected be only gladiis cinctos, magis
idoneos and discretos, and similiter in eisdem Com. commorantes and residentes,
etc. That all Elections must be made libere and indifferenter, etc. as these
Writs and Acts prescribe, prohibiting no Officers or professions of men,
whether Lawyers or others, to be elected, but only Sheriffs, in the Nolumus
autem, etc.

In the Parliament of 23 H. 6. c. 15. there was upon De summonitione
Parliamenti.
elections of Knights, whereupon in the next writs of Summons Clause anno 25 H.
6. m. 24. dorso it was inserted into the writs, agreeing verbatim with the last
forecited writ, except only in this Statutes recital thus inserted.

Rex Vic. Kanc. salutem. Quia, etc. ut supra in the last recited to before
continetur: and then, Ac insuper in statuto nostro apud West. ultimo tento
edito inter caetera ordinatum existat, Quod Milites Com. pro Parliamento ex
tunc eligend. Milites notabiles de eisdem Com. pro quibus sic eligentur, seu
saltem notabiles Armigeri, hominesve generosi de natu, eorundem Com. Ou^
habiles sunt Milites fieri, et nullus homo de gradu valettae et gradu inferiori
de essendo Milites hujusmodi existant, prout in eodem statuto before
continetur. Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, etc. verbatim as in the last
recited writ, T. Rege apud Westminster. 14 die Dec. Per ^m Regem and Consil: suum, to
the end. Consimilia Brevia follow to the Sheriffs of Counties, Cities, and
Boroughs, as in it.

This Statute and writ puts a greater restriction in relation to the Knights of
Counties qualities, abilities, sufficiences than any before, to prevent the
elections of persons of mean quality, and estates, which the vulgar rabble of
people in those leveling times were overmuch inclined unto; which form
continued in all succeeding Parliaments under Henry the sixth, and Edward the
fourth, with little or no variation, as the Clause rolls evidence wherein they
are recorded, viz. 27 H. 6. d. 24. 28 H. 6. d. 26. 29 H. 6. d. 41. 31 H. 6. d.
36. 33 H 6. d. 36. 38 H. 6. d. 30. 49 H. 6. d. 6. 1 Ed. 4. d. 35. 2 E. 4. d. 3.
6 E. 4. d. 1. 12 E. 4. d. 21. 22, and 23 E. 4, d. 10.

There are only two bundles of Writs for elections and their returns under King
Edward the fourth remaining in the Tower of London, anno 7 and 12 E. 4.
agreeing in form and substance with the last recited writs, and their retorns
and Indentures with those forementioned in 1 H 5. which those who please may
peruse at leisure, being over-tedious and superfluous to transcribe at large.

The ordinary forms of the Writs, Retorns, and Indentures of this kind used
after those in the Tower (ending with King Edward the fourth) and continued
till the last Parliament of King Charles are these, which I shall present you
with out of Mr. Crompton his Jurisdictions of Courts, f. 1, 2.

Elizabetha Regina, etc. Vic. N. etc. salut. quia de avisamento and assensu
Consilii nostri pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, Nos, statum, and
defensionem regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae, concernent. quoddam
Parlialiamentum nostrum ad Civitatem nostram West. duodecimo die Novembris
prox. futur. teneri ordinavimus, and ibid. cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Procer. dicti regni nostri Colloquium habere and tract. Tibi praecipimus
firmiter injungentes, quod facta proclamac. in prox. comitat. tuo post
receptionem hujus brevis nostri tenend. die and loco praedict. duos Milites
gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and discretos commit. praedicti, and de qualib.
Civitate com. illius duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses de
discretioribus and magis sufficientibus libere and indifferenter per illos qui
proclam. hujusmodi interfuerint juxta forma statutorum inde edit. and provis.
eligi, and nomina eorundum milit. Civium and Burgens. sic electorum in
quibusdam indentur, inter te et illos qui hujusmodi electioni interfuerint,
inde conficiend. sive hujusmodi electi praesentes fuerint vel absentes, inseri:
cosque ad dict. diem and locum venire fac. Ita quod iidem milites plenam and
sufficientem potestatem pro se and communitate commit. praedicti; ac dicti Cives
and Burgenses pro se and communitat. civitatum and burgorum praedictorum
divisim ab ipsis habeant, ad faciendum and consentiendum hiis quae tunc ibid.
de communi consilio dicti regni nostri (favente deo) contigerint ordinari super
negotiis ante-dictis: Ita quod pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi, seu propter
improvidam electionem militum, civium and burgensium praedictorum, dicta
negotia infecta non remaneant quovismodo. Nolumus autem quod tu, nec aliquis
alius vic. dicti reg. nostri aliqualiter sit electus. Et electionem illam in
pleno comitatu factam, distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo, and sigillis eorum
qui electioni illi interfuerint, Nobis in cancellar, nostram ad dict. diem and
locum certifices indilate, remittens nobis alteram partem Indenturarum
praedictarum presaentibus consut. una cum hoc breve. Test me ipsa apud
Westmonasterium decimo octavo die Saptembris anno Regni nostri xxx. H. A.
Gerrard.

Retorn de vicount sur cest brief.
VIrtute istius brevis eligi feci duos milit. gladiis cinctos magis idoneos and
discretos de comitat. meo viz. W. F. and V. S, qui plenam and sufficientem
potestatem pro se and communitate comitat. praedicti habeant, ad faciendum and
consentiendum iis quae ad diem and locum infra contentos de communi consilio
regni Angliae ordinari contigerint: and praedicti W. F. and V. S. manucapti
sunt per I. P. V. B. I. D. and R. N. ad essendum ad Parliamentum Dominae
Reginae apud Westmonast. ad diem infra contentum, ad faciendum quod hoc breve
in se exigit and requirit. li. Int. f. 595.

Feci etiam praeceptum virtute hujus brevis I. B. and A. S. Ballivis libertatis
villae de G. in comitat. meo, quod de eodem Burgo eligi facerent, duos
Burgenses de discretioribus and magis sufficientibus quod sint ad Parliamentum
dictae dominae Reginae ad diem and locum infra content. ad faciendum and
consentiendum ^t praedictum est, qui quidem Ballivi sic mibi respondent; quod
eligi fecerunt de praedicto Burgo de G. duos Bu^g. discretos and magis
sufficientes ad essend. ad Parliamentum praedictum, viz. R. P. and G. I. ad
faciendum and consentiendum ut supradictum est. Virtute etiam istius brevis ad
proximum comi^at. meum post receptionem ejusdem, tentum apud V. tali die and
anno in pleno comitatuillo proclamari feci omnia in isto brevi contenta,
secundam formam and effectum hujus brevis, prout hoc breve in se exigit and
requirit.

Residuum vero executionis istius brevis patet in quibusdam Indent. huic brevi
consut. Li. Intr. 595.

HAEC Indentura facta tali die and anno inter G. A. armig. vic. Comitatus N. ex
una part, and I. B. and I. D. etc. ex altera part testatur, quod secundum
formam brevis huic Indent. consut. fact. proclam. in pleno comitatu meo tento
apud G. tali die and anno praedicti I. B. I. D. and alii qui procl. praedictae
in pleno comitat. praedict. interfuerunt, secundum formam statutorum in brevi
praedicto specificatorum and secundum exigen. brovis illius eligerunt W. F. and
V. S. milites, gladiis cinctos, pro comitatu praedicto, ad essendum ad
Parliamentum in eodem brevi specific. qui plenam and sufficientem potestatem
pro se et communitate comitatus praedicti habeant, ad faciendum and
consentiendum prout breve illud in se exigit and requirit. In cujus rei
testimonium, parts praedictae his Indenturis sigilla sua alternatim
apposuerunt. Datum tali die and ann^. Plo. 120.

G. A. armig. vic.

Autiel Indenture serra fait inter vicount et Burgesses de D. sur election de
lour Burgesses, etc Mutatis mutandis.

I have here given you the exactest, fullest, clearest Account of all the
several forms and varieties of writs for electing Knights of Counties, Citizens
and Burgesses for our Parliaments, and Great Councils, and of their retorns
extant in our Records, ever yet presented to the World, hitherto unacquainted
with most of them, of which our greatest Antiquaries have been in some measure
ignorant: I shall now close up this Section with 2. m^morable rare Records in
the Parliaments of 18 and 38 H. 6. touching the elections of Knights, not
impertinent to my purpose, and worthy publication.

The first of them I find See my I lea for the Lords, p. 396, 397.
thus recorded, Rot. Parl. An. 18 H. 6. m. 13. n. 18. Memorandum quod pro eo
quod 16 die Novembris, anno praesenti, lecto coram Rege and Dominis
spiritualibus and Temporalibus in Parliamento praedicto tunc existentibus, and
per illos before intellecto retorno ejusdem Brevis ipsius Domini Regis
Gilberto Hoar, nuper Vic. Cantebr. pro electione duorum Militum inter alia, qui
ad Parliamentum praedictum pro Com. praedicto venire debuissent juxta formam in
eodem Breve specificatam faciend. directi, satis evidenter constabat tunc
ibidem, quibusdam certis de causis in eodem returno specificatis, nullos
Milites ad veniend. ad Parliamentum praedictum pro eodem Comitatu pretextu
brevis praedicti ^ctos aliqualiter extitisse; Per ipsum Dominum Regem De
avisamento et assensu eorundem Dominorum spiritualium et temporalium
consideratum ^t ordinatum fuit tunc ibidem, quod per quoddam aliud breve ipsius
domini Regis de data dicti prioris Brevis, Vic. Com. praedicti detur
specialiter in mandatis. Quod ipse facta Proclamatione in prox. Comitatu suo
infra dictum Com. Cantebr. post receptionem brevis illius tenend. de die and
loco tentionis Parliamenti praedicti, electionem duorum Militum gladiis
cinctorum, ac omnia alia in eodem continenda juxta formam ejusdem Brevis faciat
and exequatur. Et quod idem Vicecomes antequam ad hujusmodi electionem
procedat, public in eodem Com. proclamari and inhiberi faciat, ne aliqua
persona tunc ibidene armata, seu modo guerrino arraiata ad electionem illam
accedat, nec quicquam quod in perturbatienem pacis ipsius. Domini Regis seu
electionis illius cedere valea^ ibidem, vel alibi faciat vel attemptet, nec
quod aliqua persona se de electione illa intromittat, nec vocem suam in
electione illa, tantummodo excepta persona quae vocem in hujusmodi electione
infra Com. praedictum facienda juxta formam statuti in eoslem brevi specificati
habere debeat, dare praesumat quovis modo sub periculo incumbenti, ac sub paena
imprisonamenti corporis sui ad voluntatem ipsius Domini Regis. Et idem Vicec.
personas quae praemissa seu aliquod praemissorum in aliquo contemnere
praesumpserint, prisonae ipsius Domini Regis mancipet and committat in eadem
salvo and secure custodiend. quosque idem Dominus Rexpro earum deliberatione,
aliter duxerit demandand.

From which memorable writ I shall observe,

1. That the Sheriff of a County after his Writ for electing Knights of the
Shire received and proclaimed, may justly refuse to proceed to the election, in
case any Soldiers or others armed with weapons, and arrayed in warlike manner
resort unto it, to interrupt or disturb the Election: And that this being
returned is a good excuse for the Sheriffs not electing the Knights?

2ly. That the King and Lords in that Age were sole Judges of the Retorns of
Sheriffs upon Writs for Elections, of the legality of them, and the elections
made upon them (as I have Plea for the Lords, p. 371, to 416.
elsewhere largely evidenced by records) not the Commons House.

3ly. That they alone (not the Commons) gave order for new writs for electing
Knights and Burgesses when, or where there was cause, and directions how to
make them, as in this case and others.

4ly. That the Sheriff was here specially directed, to make public Proclam.
before the writ for election of knights for the shire, was read, to prohibit
any person whatsoever to resort to the Election armed, or arrayed in warlike
manner, or to do any thing in disturbance of the Kings peace, or of the
election; and that no person should interpose, meddle with or give his voice in
the election in any kind, but such who had a lawful right to do it according
to the form of the Statute.

5ly. That if any person resorted to it armed, or did any thing that might
either disturb the Kings peace, or election, or intermeddle therein, or gave
his voice who had no voice by Law, that the Sheriff should forthwith imprison
him for his offense, in the Kings prison, till the King himself give order for
his release. Which I conceive all Sheriffs may still do in like Cases by virtue
of the Statute of 3 Edw. 1. c. 5. concerning the freedoms of elections, which
enacts and commands, upon great forfeiture, that no great man, nor other by
force of arms, or menacing, shall disturb any to make free election. And if
none may disturb the freedom of Elections by armed force; much less may they
interrupt the Members from sitting in the House, or disturb them in the freedom
of their debates, when elected, assembled in Parliament; under greater
penalties and forfeitures.

The second is thus enrolled, Rot. Parl. An 38 H. 6. n. 11.

To the King our Sovereign Lord, Meekly beseeching your true Liegemen, Sheriffs
of the Shires of this your noble Realm that were of the years past passed;
Where it pleased your Highness to command diverse of your said Beseechers, by
your honorable Letters of privy Seal to proceed to election of their several
shires of Knights of shires for this your present Parliament, for the good and
hasty speed thereof, Please it your noble Grace to ordain, and to grant by
assent of your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Commons assembled in
this present Parliament by authority of the same; That all elections of Knights
of your seid Shires in such wise chosen, and by your said Beseechers returned,
be as good and effectual as any election of Knights, by any of your seid Shires
made or done by virtue of your seid Writ or Writs to every of your seid
Beseechers direct. And that your seid Beseechers and their Under-Sheriffs and
Clarks, and every of them, be quite and discharged against your Liege-people,
of the penalties and forfeitures that they or any of them be fellyn, or may be
chargeable, by force of a Statute made the 23 year of your noble Reign, as for
occupying or exercising their seid Office longer than a year for every manner
elections of Knights, as well by force of your Writs, as by force of your
letters of Privy Seal, as otherwise, and for retorns of the same, and for all
manner retorns of Citizens and Burgesses in their several Shires for this
present Parliament, by every of them returned before the last day of this
present Parliament. Provided always, that by this Act they nor none of them be
excused or discharged of any other offense or thing done by them in any of
their said Offices. Always forseyn that no man be amerced for any suyt begone by
him against any of your said Beseechers to recover the said penalties for any
occupation of the said Office for the premises.

Le Roy le voet.

The occasion of this Petition and Act then passed is thus expressed in the
printed Statute of 39 H. 6. c. 1. That diverse Knights of Counties, Citizens,
and Burgesses were named, returned, and accepted in this Parliament of 38 H. 6.
some of them without any due or free election, others without any election at
all, against the course of the Kings Laws, and the liberties of the Commons of
this Realm, (by virtue of the Kings Letters of Privy^eal without any free
election:) and that by the means and labors of diverse seditious, and
evildisposed Persons, only to destroy certain of the great faithful Lords and
Nobles, and other faithful Liege-people of the Realm, out of hatred, malice,
and greedy, unsatiable covetousness, to gain their Lands, Inheritances, Offices
and Estates. For which undue elections, the Sheriffs being purposely kept
longer in their Offices than they otherwise should have been, and fearing to be
exemplarily punished by Actions upon the Statute brought against them,
thereupon they petitioned the King, and procured this Act of Parl. for them and
their Under-sheriffs present and future indemnities for these illegal
Elections, and retorns of persons unduly elected, or nominated by the King
alone, without any election by the people; for which misdemeanor of theirs,
this whole Parliament, and all Acts made therein were repealed and made void
the very next year and Parliament following, 39 H. 6. c. 1. from whence I shall
observe,

1. That no Sheriffs or Officers, can be secured, in. dempnified against undue
elections, and retorns of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, nominated to them
by the King, or any others, but only by Act of Parliament. 2. That such undue
elections and retorns as these are usually made by the procurement and labor
of seditious, and evil-disposed persons, out of malice, hatred, or insatiable
covetousness, and for pernicious ends and designs. 3ly. That Parliaments unduly
elected, and packed by policy or power, prove always abortive, and are
repealed, as void and pernicious in conclusion; of which we have seen pregnant
instances in this and other late Parliaments, worthy our saddest considerations.

Useful Observations in and from the precedent Section.
FRom these recited Writs, I conceive it to be most clearly and satisfactorily
evidenced, 1. That there were no Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses elected and
summoned by Writs to our Great Councils, and Parliaments before 49 H. 3. which
I shall here further demonstrate by these punctual, irrefragable Testimonies,
Presidents and Records under his Reign, till this very year, Mat. Paris p. 299.
300. Edit Tig. 1589.
Anno 1221. (the 5 of Henry 3d.) Convenerunt Magnates Angliae ad Regem apud
Westmonasterium, ut de negotiis regni tractarent: After which the King having
suppressed the Welsh the same year, and built a strong Castle at Montgomery,
disbanded his Army, Concedentibus Magnatibus de quolibet scuto duo marcas
argenti Mat. Paris p. 305. Mat. Westminster. p. 113.
Anno 1223. (the 7th. of his Reign.) Rex Henricus in Octavis Epiphaniae apud
Londonias veniens cum Baronibus ad Colloquium, requisitus est ab Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi and Magnatibus aliis, ut libertates, and liberas consuetudines,
pro quibus guerra mota suit, contra patrom suum confirmaret Mat. Paris. 308.
Anno 1224. (8 H. 3.) Per idem tempus convenerunt ad Colloquium in Octavis
sanctae Trinitatis apud Nor^amptonam, Rex cum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis multis, (Lords, Peers, and others of his
Counsel) de regni negotiis tractaturi, voluit enim Rex uti Consilio Magnatum
suorum de terris transmarinis, quas Rex Francorum paulatim occupaverat, Mat.
Paris 311.
Anno 1229. (9 H. 3.) the King demanding advice, and an aid of the fifteenth
part of his peoples Goods to recover his foreign Territories; Archiepiscopus
and Concio tota (apud Westminster.) Episcoporum, Comitum et Baronum, Abbatum and
Priorum habita deliberatione, Regi dedere responsum, quod regiis petitioibus
gratanter adquiescerent, si illis diu petitas libertates concedere voluisset.
Whereupon he granted and confirmed the great Charter. Mat. Paris 312.
The same year, Martio mense, convenerunt apud Westmonasterium ad Colloquium
Rex Angliae cum Magnatibus suis, ubi Rex sententialiter jussit diffinire, quid
de proditore suo Falcatio suit agendum. Proceres vero in hoc pariter
consenserunt, eo quod patri suo multis fideliter servierat annis, ne de vita
periclitaretur vel membris, sed ut Angliam aeternaliter abjuraret, omnes
communiter addixerunt, which was accordingly executed forthwith. Mat. paris p.
316, 319. Mat. Westminster. p. 118, 119.
Anno 1226. (10 H. 3.) venit interea terminus Concilii ad festum sancti
Hillarii apud Westminster. praesixus, ubi Rex cum Clero and Magnatibus Regni
comparere debuerat, ut Domini Papae mandatum audiret, etc. They meeting again
the same year after Easter, Rex convocatis seorsum Praelatis, and quibusdam
Magnatibus, hoc Archiepiscopo dedit responsum, etc. Mat. paris p. 3^.
Anno 1229. (13 H. 3.) fecit Rex conveni^ apud Westminster. Dominica qua contatur
misericordia Domini, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Templarios,
Hospitilarios, Comites, Barons, Ecclesiarum rectores, et qui de eo tenebant in
capite, (but no Knights of Counties, Citizens, and Burgesses we read of) ut
audirent negotia memorata of Stephen ^ho Popes Chaplain, and Nuncio, demanding
an aid against the Emperor from England.) Et de rerum exigentiis communiter
tractarent ibidem. (h) Anno Mat. Paris, p. 354, 355, 357, Mat. Westminster. p. 130.
1231. (15 H. 3.) convenerunt ad Colloquium apud Westminster. Rex cum Praelatis et
aliis Magnatibus Regni, etc. The King this year intending to mary the King of
Scots Daughter, indignantibus Comitibus et Baronibus suis unmersis, because
Hubert who was chief Justice had married the eldest Daughter, he thereupon
desisted from his purpose. Mat. Paris, p. 359, 364. Mat. Westminster. p. 132
Anno 1232. convenerunt Nonas Martii ad Colloquium apud Westminster. ad vocationem
Regis, Magnates Angliae tam Laici quam Praelati, etc. Comes Cestriae Ranulphus
pro Magnatibus aliis loquens, etc. After which the same year, Convenerunt apud
Lambiam ad Colloquium in exaltatione sanctae crucis coram Rege, Episcopi, and
alii ecclesiarum Praelati, cum Proceribus Regni. Ubi concessa est Regi, etc.
quadragesima pars rerum mobilium ab Episcopis, Abbatibus, Priorribus, Clericis
and Laicis, ficut ea habuerunt in frugibus tunc congregatis in autumno, anno
Regni ejusdem Regis 16. The Writ for collecting it (which is memorable)
recites, Mat. Paris, p. 367.
Sciatis quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, and Clerici terras
habentes qui ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent; Comites, Barons, Milltes, liberi
homines et Villani de regno nostro concesserunt Nobis in auxilium 40. partem
omnium mobilium suorum apparentium, etc. Yet w^e read of no Milites, liberi
tenentes, or villani; but only Episcopi and Ecclefiarum Praelati; cum Procerbus
regni, summoned to this Parliamentarie Convention; whose grant of this aid, is
said to be the grant of all the Clergy, Knights, Freemen, and Villains of the
Realm too; yet we never read that Villains were Members of Parliament, or the
Commons House in any age: Mat. Paris, p. 372, 373.
Anno 1233. (17 H. 3.) Rex missis literis vocavit Omnes de regno Comites and
Barons ad Colloquium, ut venirent apud Oxoniam ad festum Sancti Johannis. Sed
ipsi noluerunt ad ejus mandatum venire, tum propter insidias alienigaenarum,
tum propter indignationem, quam conceperant adversus Regem, qui extraneos ob
eorundem Baronum vocavit contemptum, etc. After which the same year, Cum
Comites ac Barons Angliae in magno militiae apparatu Londonias tenderent ad
Colloquium, Calend. Augusti sibi praefixum, etc. Venerunt autem ad Colloquium
praedictum Comes Cestriae, etc. cum aliis Comitibus et Baronibus multis; Sed
nihil ibi actum fuit propter absent^am Comitis Marescalli, and Gilberti de
Basset, et quorundam aliorum absentiam Magnatum. After which the same year,
Mat. Paris, p. 375.
Erat interea Rex apud Westminster. ad Colloquium 7 Idus October. sicut Magnatibus
promiserat,, ut per eorum Consilium emendaret ea, quae in regno erant
corrigenda: the Bishops being there likewise present. Mat. Paris, p. 381, 382,
383, 390, 391.
An. 12^4. (18 H. 3.) Rex Anglorum venit ad Colloquium apud Westminster. in
Purificatione beatae Mariae, etc. After that, Convenerunt ad Colloquium
Dominica prima in passione Domini (5to idus Aprilis) apud Westminster. Rex cum
Comitibus and Baronibus, et Archiepiscopus cum suis Su^fraganeis, ut regno
perturbato salubriter providerent: Mat. Paris, p. 405, 406, 407, 408.
Anno 1236. (20 H. 3.) The Archbishop, cum Episcopis, Magnatibus, Nobilibus,
and Praelatis, were present at Londan at the Kings marriage; which festivitie
ended, Rex venit Mertoniam, utibi revocati Magnates, audito recenti Imperatoris
mandato, una cum Rege de regni negotiis contrectarent. Audiens autem Rex simul
and Magnates ibi congregati, praehabita deliberationis responderunt, etc. Then
reciting the Statutes there made. Item concessit Dominus Rex ex consensu
Magnatum, quod de caetero non current usurae contra minorem, p See pat. 20 H.
3. d. 13. Cl. 20 H. 3. m. 2 ^racton f. 416, 417. Seldens Titles of Honor, p.
721, 722.
etc. Cap. 9. Rogaverunt omnes Episcopi Magnates, ut consentirent, quod nati
ante matrimonium essent legitimi, sicut illi qui nati sunt post matrimonium,
quantum ad successionem haereditariam, quia Ecclesia tales habet pro legitimis,
Et omnes Comites et Barons responderunt una voce (without any Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses or Commons, that we read of) Quod nolunt leges Angliae
mutare, quae bucusque usitatae sunt et approbatae. And cap. 11. Quia Magnates
petierunt, etc. mentions only the Nobles without any Commons. The Mat. Paris,
p. 414, 416, 417.
same year 4 kalend Maii, Congregati sunt Magnates Angliae Londini ad
Colloquium, de negotiis regni tractaturi. After which, Congregati sunt apud
Wintoniam Magnates Angliae praesente Rege, sexto Idus Junii; Ubi rex nitebatur,
etc. Anno quoque eodem Rex suorum Consilio fretus Magnatum iter versus Eboracum
maturavit, ut Consilio fultus Majorum regni, provideret qualiter discordia
inter ipsum et Regem Scotiae Alexandrum, quae jam in odium excreverat, penitus
sedaretur, etc. Mat Paris, p. 420, 421. Mat. Westminster. p. 143. 144.
Anno 1237. (21 H. 3.) Rex Henricus misit continuo per omnes fines Angliae
scripta Regalia, praecipiens omnibus ad regnum Angliae spectantibus, videlicet,
Archiepiscopis, Abbatibus, and Prioribus installatis, Comitibus and Baronibus
(but to no Knights of Shires, Citizens or Burgesses, we read of) ut omnes sine
omissione in Octavis Epiphaniae Londoniis convenirent, Regia negotia tractaturi
totum regnum contingentia. Quod audientes Magnates, Regiis praeceptis continuo
paruerunt. Venit igitur die Sancti Hilarii Londonias infinita Nobilium
multitudo, scilicet Regni totalis universitas, etc There being no mention of
any Commons, but only of the Nobles Magnatum and Baronum, in the debates and
transactions of this Grand Council: After which the same year, Rex asseruit in
Colloquio, ad quod etiam ex longinquo Nobiles convocaverat, cum juramento, etc.
who granted him an aid secundum provisionem Magnatum expendendum. Mat. Paris,
p. 431.
Eodem Anno scripsit Rex omnibus Magnatibus suis, ut coram eo et domino Legato
in festo exaltationis Sanctae crucis Eboracum convenirent, de arduis negotiis
regnum contingentibus tractaturi: where a peace and league was concluded
between him and the King of Scots. Mat. Paris, p. 451, 452.
Anno 1238. (22 H. 3.) Convenerunt Magnates die statuto Londini, super his
diligenter tractaturi, etc. Ibi igitur post multas multorum deceptationes se
subjecit Rex quorundam provisioni de gravioribus viris, jurans se eorum
provisioni adquiesceret. Quod et factum est, et in scriptum redactum, and
appensa sunt tam Legati, quam aliorum Magnatum sigilla, omnibus in communi
manifestanda. Mat. Paris, p. 495.
Anno 1239. (23 H. 3.) Comites, Barons, and alii Magnates Angliae, writ and
sent a Letter to the Pope against his encroachments on their Advowsons,
presented to him by Robert de Twinge, ex part Magnatum Angliae, who returned
an Answer to it beginning thus; Gregorius Episcopus, etc. dilectis filiis
Nobilibus Viris R. Comiti Pictavtae and Cornubiae, and Baronibus Angliae: Mat.
Paris, p. 505, 508.
Anno 1240. (24 H. 3.) congregati sunt Londi^i Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, cum
multis aliis Magnatibus, praesente etiam Legato, reponentes querimoniam coram
Rege in Curia sua, super variis injuriis et oppressionibus, et quotidianis
desolationibus illatis Ecclesiae, per iniquum Regis Confilium, contra suas
Cartas, et juramenta temere veniendo, etc. Ejusdem anni spatio convenerunt apud
Radingum omnes Angliae Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, et majores Abbates, et quidam
Magnates regni, Papalo mandatum a Domino Legato explicandu^, audituri, etc.
Comes vero Ricardus and alii Magnates Crucesignati ibidem existentes, etc. Anno
1242. (26 H. 3.) scripsit Rex Anglorum omnibus regni sui Magnatibus,
Archiepiscopis, y Mat. Paris, p. 560, 561, 562, 563. Mat. Westminster. p. 163.
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus and Baronibus, (without mentioning
any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Commons) districte praecipiens, ut omnes
Generaliter Londinum die Martis ante Purificationem beatae Virginis convenirent
de arduis negotiis regni, dilationem non capientibus, cum summa deliberatione
tractaturi. Imminente vero Purificatione beatae Mariae, totius Angliae
Nobilitas tam Praelatorum, quam Comitum et Baronum, secundum Regium praeceptum,
est Londini congregatum, etc. Responderunt Magnates, cum magna cordium
amaritudine, etc. There being no mention of any Commons, Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses therein (though writ in the margin: Convocatur Generale Parliamentum
Londini, etc.) Postea vero, ne oblivio tenorem responsionis Baronum deleret, in
scriptum taliter sunt haec redacta. Cum Dominus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, et
omnes Episcopi Angliae, Abbates et Priores per se, vel per Procuratores suos,
necnon et omnes Comiteg et fere omnes Barons Angliae, ad mandatum Domini Regis
convenissent apud Westminster. etc. Anno Dom. 1242. regni Henrici 3. Regis 26.
audituri Domini Regis voluntatem et negotium, pro quo ipsos mandaverat. Et idem
Dominus Rex, etc. per eosdem solennes nuncios omnes Magnates de Regno suo
rogasset de consilio ei dando et auxilio faciendo, etc. tandem dicti Episcopi,
Abbates et Priores, Comites et Barons, magno inter eos tractatu praehabito, in
primis Domino Regi per praedictos Magnates dederunt consilium, etc. Et cum
dicti Magnates nuncii istud Domino Regi nunciassent responsum, redeuntes ad
Barnagium, dixerunt, quod in part sufficiens dederunt Domino Regi responsum.
Mat. Paris, p. 619, 620, 621, 622, 623.
Anno 1244. (28 H. 3.) convenerunt Regia submonitione convocati Londinum
Magnates totius Regni, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, and Comites
and Barons; (without Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Commons) In quo Concilio
petiit Rex ore proprio, in praesentia Magnatum, auxilium sibi fieri pecuniare,
etc. Recedentesque Magnates de refectorio, convenerunt Archiepiscopi, and
Episcopi, Abbates and Priores seorsim per se super hoc diligenter tractaruri.
Tandem requisiti ex part eorum Comites and Barons, si vellent suis Consiliis
unanimiter consentire in responfione et provisione super hiis facienda? Qui
responderunt, quod sine commnni universitate nihil facerent: Whereupon the
Spiritual and Temporal Lords appointing a Committee, agreed in an Answer and
Ordinance; there being no mention of any but of these Magnatum, Magnates,
Magnatibus, et Praelatis, in all the passages of this Parliamentary Council,
which are large and notable. a The same year, Convenientibus autem iterum
Magnatibus Mat. Paris, p. 624.
cum Praelatis generaliter Londini, a die purificationis beatae Mariae in tres
Septimanas. Concilium super praedictis negotiis et tractatum habuerunt
diligentem: where they granting the King an aid to marry his daughter of xx
8. upon every Knights fee, upon condition to ratify the Great Charter; cum
novisset Martinus Nuncius Domini Papae, quod Magnates Angliae Regiae
contributioni generaliter consensissent, inhiabat avidius ad negotium suum ad
quod missus fuerat consummandum, etc. After which the same year, Mat. Paris, p.
626, 627. Mat. Westminster. p. 185, 186.
Rex edicto public proposito, and summonitione generaliter facta, fecit
notificare per totam Angliam, ut quilibet Baro tenens de Rege in capite,
haberet prompta and parata Regali praecepto omnia servitia militaria, quae ei
debentur, tam Episcopi et Abbates, quam Laici Barons: Congregata igitur
universitate totius Angliae Nobilium apud Novum Castrum super fluvium Thynam,
tractatum est diligenter, super tam arduo negotio (concerning the differences
and an accord between Alexander King of Scots and King Henry) Concilio habito
circa Assumptionem beatae Mariae diligentissimo: where peace was concluded
between the Kings, and ratified by the Charter of the King of Scots, and the
Seals of his Prelates, Earls and Barons. The same year Mat. Paris, p 631.
in crastino Omnium Animarum convenientes Magnates Angliae, Rex cum
instantissime, ne dic^m impudentissime auxilium pecuniare ab eis iterum
postularet, toties laesi et illusi contradixerunt ei unanimiter et uno ore in
facie. Mat. Paris, p. 674, 677, 678, 679, 680. Mat. Westminster. p. 205, 206, 207,
etc.
Anno 1246. (30 H. 3.) Rex missis, literis suis totius Regni Magnates
convocavit, ut Londini die qua cantatur, Letare Jerusalem, de statu regni
generaliter convenirent tractaturi. On which day, Edicto Regio convocata
convenit ad Parliamentum generalissimum totius Regni Anglicani totalis
Nobilitas Londini, videlicet Praelatorum, tam Abbatum and Priorum, quam
Episcoporum, Comitum quoque and Baronum (without any mention or intimation of
Knights, Citixens. Burgesses, Commoners) ut de statu Regni jam vacillante,
efficaciter, prout exigit urgens necessitas, consulerent. Convenientibus igitur
ad Parliamentum memoratum totius Regni Magnatibus, in primis aggressus est,
Dominus Rex ore proprio Episcopos per se, postea vero Comites and Barons,
deinde autem Abbates and Priores; videlicet, super his pro quibus miserat
nuncios suos solennes ad Concilium- Lugdunense: Then showing them the
Oppressions and grievances of the Church and Realm of England by the Pope,
drawn into Articles; which they all consented unto: the Bishops by themselves,
the Abb^s by themselves, the Earls, Nobles, and Barons by themselves, in their
own names, and in the name of all the Clergy and people of England, and the
King by himself, writ several Letters to the Pope and Cardinals for their
redress. The King in the mean time sending forth Prohibitions under his Seal to
all the Bishops, Mat Paris, p. 686, 687. Mat. Westminster p. 208, 209, 210.
not to pay any tax or tallage to the Pope; Contra provisionem per Magnates
nostros tam Praelatos quam Comites and Barons factam in Concilio nostro
Londinensi, etc. After which, die Translationis beati Thomae Martyris, habitum
est Magnum Concilium inter Regem et regni Magnates apud Wintoniam; where
receiving the Popes answer to their messengers sent to the Council of Lions,
touching their grievances, and his carriage toward them, Haec autem cum
audisset Dominus Rex cum Magnatibus suis, commotus est vehementer et merito,
etc. Anno 1247. (31 H. 3.) Mat. Paris, p. 697, 698.
urgente mandato Papali redivivo, de importabili contributione, etc. fecit
Dominus Rex Magnates suos, necnon et Angliae Archidiaconos (but no Knights,
Citizens or Burgesses) per scripta su^ Regia Londinum convocari. Quo cum
pervenissent die praefixo, Episcopi omnes sese gratis absentarunt, ne
viderentur propriis factis eminus adversari. In crastino igitur purificationis
beatae Mariae, dominus Rex cum suis Magnatibus tractatum habens diligentem, per
plures consilium urgens dies protelavit. g Mat. Paris, p. 707.
At last they sent Letters to the Pope in the name of all the Clergy and people
of England for redress of their grievances. The same year, Mat. Paris, p, 712,
713.
Dominus Rex comperiens regnum suum enormiter periclitari, jussit omnem totins
Regni Nobilitatem convocari, ut de statu ipsius tam mani^e periclitantis,
Oxoniis etc. diligenter contrectarent. Praelatos autem maxim ad hoc
Parliamentum vocavit arctius. After which; Scripsit Rex omnibus regni sui
Magnatibus ut in festo Sancti Edwardi, omnes ibidem convenirent: Die igitur
praefixo convenientes Magnates apud We^m. there was a crystal vessel of the
blo^d of Christ presented and showed to them sent from Jerusalem, which the
King bestowed on St. Peter's at Westminster. Mat. Paris, p. 518, 519.
Anno 1248. (32 H. 3. in Octavis Purificationis edicto Regio convocata totius
Regni Angli^ Nobilitas, convenit Londini, ut de Regni negotiis nimis
perturbati, and depauperati, and de temporibus nostris enormiter mutilati,
diligenter and efficaciter simul, cum domino Rege contrectaret. Advenerunt
igi^r, illuc, excepta Baronum, Militum Nobilium, nec non and Abbatum, Priorum,
and Glericorum, multitudine copiosa, novem Episcopi, cum totidem Comitibus,
(there named.) Et cum proposuisset Dominus Rex, (non enim propositum suum
latuit Universitatem) pecuniare auxilium postulare, redargutus est graviter
super hoc, etc. Quia quando in ultima tali exactione cui Nobiles Angliae vix
consenserunt, confecit Cartam suam, quod amplius talem non faceret Magnatibus
suis injuriam and gravamen, etc. Mat. Paris, p. 732.
Anno 1249. (33 H. 3.) Dominus Rex ad jam solitas cavillationes Romanas
recurrens, cum non posset omnes congregatos Regni Nobiles ad consensum
flectere, singulos ad se vocans, vel unicuique scribens, affatus est eos
impudenter supplicando, etc. The same year, ad clausum Paschae convenerunt
Magnates Angliae, prout condictum fuerat cis Londini, ut quod Rex saepe
promiserat, eisdem saltem tunc adimpleret: but by reason of Earl Richards
voluntary absence nothing was effected. Et sic Magnates delusi ad m Mat. Paris,
(...). to 827.
propria remearunt. Mat. Paris, p. 740.
Anno 1252. (35 H. 3.) Convenerunt velut ex edicto regio convocati Londini
totius Angliae Praelati sere universi and Magnates; of whom he desired a tenth
of all Ecclesiastical livings granted unto him by the Pope; which all the
Bishops jointly and severally opposed: Soluto igitur cum Regis, Cleri, and
Magnatum indignatione consilio. Afterward, Convocatis denno, Dominus Rex
Dptimatibus suis, qui suo impetui primo restiterunt, convenit eos de negotio
Vasconiae, quid agendum? cui responderunt Magnates, etc. Solutum est igitur
Concilium, Rege hinc inde tam contra Magnates, quam contra Praelatos, ira
succensus vehementi. There being no mention nor intimation of any Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses or Commons present in it. Mat. Paris, p. 838, 839.
Anno 1253 (36 H. 3.) In quindena Paschae mense Aprili tota edicto Regio
convocata Angliae Nobilitas convenit Londini, de arduis Regni negotiis simul
cum Rege tractatura. Extiterunt igitur ibidem cum Comitibus and Baronibus,
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, and Episcopi Angliae fere omnes. Archiepiscopus
vero Eboracensis, qui in quantum potest Regis concilia vitare consuevit, quia
expertua ea frequenter esse vana, excusavit se, ^erens se esse remotum and
senem. Pro Cestrensi autem absente valetudo manifesta allegavit. In this
Parliament the Great Charter was confirmed, and a solemn excommunication
denounced by all the Bishops against the Infringers thereof. Mat. Paris, p.
358, 359.
Anno 1254. (38 H. 3.) Congregati iterum Angliae Magnates Londini. Quibus
significavit Rex, quod pecunia indigebat, etc. Responderunt autem omnes and
singuli, etc. Magnates edocti, Regis muscipulas praecaverunt. Mat. Paris, p.
876.
Anno 1255. (39 H. 3.) In quindena Paschae, quae vulgali^ Hokeday appellatur,
convenerunt Londini omnes Nobiles Angliae viri Ecclefiastici, quam seculares,
ita quod nunquam tam populosa multitudo ibi antea visa fuerat congregata. Libi
Dominus Rex se multis debitis conquestus est fuisse implicatum, nec se posse
sine Magnatum suorum efficaci juvamine liberari, etc. Inito igitur consilio,
etc. quia illud nullo modo suisset tollerabile, inter eos concessum est, quod
multum sese gravarent pro magnae chartae sine omni cavillatione observatione ex
tunc and deinceps, quam, etc. Quia nesciebant Praelati vel Magnates quo modo
suum Prothea, scilicet Regem tenerent, etc. Nobiles pro imminenti exactione, in
cordibus sauciabantur, etc. Mat. Paris, p. 884, 885.
Anno 1255. (39 H. 3.) Ad festum sancti Edwardi, fuerunt apud Westmonasterium
omnes fere Angliae Magnates: inter quos prius Rex alloquebatur fratrem suum
Comitem Cornubiae Richardum, petens ab eo instantissime auxilium pecuniare,
etc. Comes autem nec preces Regis, nec Papae voluit exaudire, and eo maxim,
quod negotium eundi in Apuliam assumpsit sine consilio suo and assensu
Baronagii sui, etc. Rex itaque, ad consuetas conversus cavillationes, ut
Magnates flecteret ad cons^sum, per multos dies negotium Parliamenti distulit
inchoati, ita ut usque in mensem fictis occasionibus negotium protelaret. Et
tunc a^ alium locum conciliaturos, evacuatis in Civitate London. crumenis,
potius provocavit, quam convocavit, etc. Et sic infecto negotio singuli
provocati, ad propria remearunt, Mat. Paris, p. 878, 179.
Anno 1257. (41 H. 3.) in media Quadragesima factum est magnum Parliamentum,
etc. Adierant autem ad dictum Parliamentum, Comes Gloverniae Richardus, Dominus
Johannes Mansel, novus in Regem electus Alemanniae Comes Ricardus, Universitati
Angliae valedicturus. Extitit enim ibidem tota fere Angliae Nobilitas. Sciendum
quod in memorato Parliamento generalissimo, fuerunt sex Archiepiscopi,
videlicet Cantuariensis, Eboracensis, Dublanensis, Messanensis, qui opimas a
singulis Ecclesiia recepit procurationes. Et Tarentiuus Appulus, qui venerat ad
infatuandum Regem super negotio Apuliae, the sixts he forgets to name: But he
mentions no Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or Commons present in, or summoned to
this most general Parliament. Mat. Paris, p. 933, to 939.
Anno 1258. (42 H. 3.) Post die Martis, quae vulgaliter Hokedaio appellatur,
factum est Parliamentum Londini. Rex namque multis and arduis negotiis
sollicitabatur, etc. Exigit insuper pecuniam insinitam, etc. Doluit igitur
Nobilitas Regni, se unius hominis, ita confundi supina simplicitate, etc. In
crastino autem and diebus sequentibus, habuerunt diligentem Tractatum Rex and
Magnates, quomodo conterrerent Wallensium tam intollerabilem cum irruptionibus
suis crebris insolentiam. Submonetur igitur generaliter tota Angliae militia,
ut omnes qui tenentur ad servitia militaria Dom^no Regi, sint prompti and
parati sequi Regem profecturum in Walliam, cum equis and armis, die Lunae ante
nativitatem B. Johannis Baptistae apud Cestriam, etc. Eodemque tempore cum
instanter and constanter respondissent Magnates Regni communiter Regi, qui cum
magna instantia in memorato Parliamento urgenter pecuniam insinitam sibi dari
postulasset, pro negotio Apuliae expediendo, and aliis arduis promovendis, quod
nullo modo potuerunt sine eorum irrestaurabili subversione toties inaniter
substantiolas suas usque ad exinanitionem effundere, etc. Cum constanter and
praecise respondissent quasi uno ore Magnates Regni in Parliamento Regi, cum
urgenter ab eis postulasset auxilium pecuniare, quod nec voluerunt, nec
potuerunt amplius sustinere tales extortiones. Rex iratus, ad alia se conuertit
aslutiae argumenta, etc. Duravit adhuc praelibati Parliamenti altercatio inter
Regem and Regni Magnates, usque diem Dominicam proximam post ascensionem, and
multiplicabantur contra Regem variae diatim querimoniae, etc. Et quia
nesciebant adhuc Magnates quomodo suum Prothea tenere voluissent, quia arduum
fuerat negotium and difficile, dilatum est Parliamentum usque ad festum sancti
Barnabae apud Oxoniam diligen ter celebrandum. Interim Optimates Angliae fibi
praecaventes and providentes, consoederati sunt, etc. Mat. Paris, p. 940, 941.
See Mat. Parisiensis Additamenta, p. 215. Henricus Dei gratia, etc. cum n^viter
in Parliamento nostro. Oxoniae, communiter suit Ordinatum etc.
Instante vero festo sancti Barnabae Apostoli, Magnates et Nobiles terrae ad
Parliamentum quod Oxoniae tenendum suit, properabant, praeceperuntque omnibus,
qui eisdem servitium militare debuerant, quatenus cum ipsis venirent parati,
veluti ad corpora sua contra hostiles insoltus defensuri, etc. Parliamento
autem incipiente, solidabatur Magnatum propositum and Confilium Immutabile,
etc. In all the debates and transactions of this Parliament recited at large in
our Historians, there is no mention of any Knights, Citizens, Burgesses,
Commons, but only of Comites, Magnates, Barons, Nobiles, who acted and spoke
all, who are styled Universitas Regni, and the Statutes and Ordinances they
made at Oxford, Statuta Baronum; to which the Londiners and others assented:
Mat. Paris, p. 943, 948. See 960, 961.
Cirea festum sancti Leonardi tale iniit Consilium Universitas Baronagii quod
tunc Londinierat. Mat. Paris, p. 951, 952, 953, 954.
Anno 1259. (42 H. 3) Fuit Rex ad Natale domini Londini, ubi magna
sollicitudine tractatum est inter Nobiles Regni, quomodo conservato suo salubri
proposito, satisfacerent defiderio Regis Richardi de Alemannia, etc.
Proposuerunt igitur Magnates accipere juramentum ab ipso Rege Aleman. antequam
applicuisset, ne Regno Angliae quomodolibet noceret, vel provisionem communem
impediret, Comes autem Legriae Simon, non sine multoram admiratione, in
partibus adhuc transmarinis morabatur. Unde in magna part suit Consilium
Baronagii mutilatum, etc. In crastino autem intraverunt Magnates Angliae
capitulum Cantuariense, where King Richard took a solemn Oath before them,
which they prescribed and administered to him. In octavis purificationis,
congregati sunt Nobiles Angliae Londini, prous inter se prius condixerant, etc.
over against which is printed in the Margin, Parliamentum Londini habitum.
After which the Historian informs us, William de Hortuna y Mat. Paris, p. 955.
See Claus. 43 H. 3. m. 10. dorso and 14 Cedula.
was sent into Scotland, Negotia enim ardua sed secreta Regi and Reginae, as
Scotioe Magnatibus, sibi injuncta fuerunt, ex part Regis and Reginae and
Magnatium Angliae. Quicum illo^ veniret, Regem Scotiae and Reginam, and Regni
Magnates, ibi ad parliameutum in v^nit, prout desideravit, congregatos, etc. By
which it is evident, That in this Age the King, Queen, and Nobles of England
and Scotland, constituted and made up the Parliaments of both kingdoms, without
any elected Knights of Shires, Citizens or Burgesses, introduced in succeeding
times. The same year, Mat. Paris, p. 955, 957.
circa Kalend. Apr. ex praecepto et consilio Domini Regis Angliae et totius
Baronagii, arripuerunt iter transmarinum ad Parliamentum magnum Regis Francorum
tenendum in Francia pro pluribus arduis negotiis Regna Franciae and Angliae, de
resignatione Normanniae et literas credentiae, etc. Magnates vero Angliae
statutis quae inceperant salubriter intendebant, ad malas consuetudines,
injurias et corruptelas amodo delendas, omnino assidui et confederati, Mat.
Paris, p. 967. Mat. Westminster. p. 340.
Anno 1265. (49 H. 3.) after the battle of Evesham, wherein the Barons were
slain and routed, on the Nativity of our Lady, September. 8. Rex potestati
Regiae restitutus, de consilio filii victoris Wintoniam Parliamentum
convocavit, ubi consilio inito, Civitatem Londinensem ob suam rebellionem
privavit suis privilegiis and libertatibus antiquis, Capitaneos etiam factionis
contra Regem, juxta voluntatem ejus plectendos jubet carceri mancipari: Rex et
Regni Proceres writes Matthew Westminster) apud Winton: ordinarunt, quod
ditiores civitatis Londinensis in carcerem truderentur, quod Cives antiquis
libertatibus privarentur, et quod stipites et cathenae quibus Civitas fuerat
roborata, de medio tollerentur, pro eo quod Simoni de Monteforti, Comiti
Leicestriae in regis contemptum, et etiam damnum regni, fortiter adhaeserunt:
quo totum factumest.

By all these Historical passages in Matthew Paris, Rishanger his Continuer,
and Mat. Westminster, it is most apparent beyond contradiction, that as there
were many writs of summons under K. Henry 3. to Parliamentarie Councils issued
to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords before 49 H. 3. not extant in the Clause
Rolls, or other Records: so there were no Knights of Shires, Citizens,
Burgesses or Commons elected or summoned by writ or Charter to these Great
Councils or Parliaments during all the reign of King Henry the (...). until the
Parliament held at London in Octabis Sancti Hillarii, the 49. year of his
reign, when they were first elected, and summoned by writ, for ought appears by
History or Record; there being none but the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Nobles, Barons, Spiritual and Temporal Lords of the Realm,
summoned to, consulting, acting, debating, ordering, enacting Laws or
Ordinances, or granting, refusing aids, subsidies, or expostulating with the
King or Pope in any of them; as all these transcribed passages evidence, with
the Records of Claus. 18 H. 3. m. 10. Vic. Lincoln, Claus. 19 H. 3 m. 20. cited
in my Epistle before the first part of this Brief Register, Calendar and
Survey; and those of 48 H. 3. here cited, p. 4. to 10. To which I shall
superadde for further confirmation of this truth, Claus. 18 H. 3 m. 27. Rex
Majori et Civibus suis Dublin, etc. where the King reciting the death of the
Earl Marshal slain in Ireland; subjoyns: Nos vero ea occasion convocavimus
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Comites, Barons, et omnes Magnates nostros Angliae,
quod sint ad Nos apud London die Dominica prox. post instante^ mediam
Quadragesimam, ad tractandum Nobiscum ibidem super hiis and aliis Statum
nostrum, and terrae nostrae Angliae and Hiberniae tangentibus; and Nos Domino
concedente de Consilio praedictorum ibidem providebimus secundum quod Nobis, et
indempnitati t^rrae nostrae Angliae and Hiberniae viderimus expedire. Quod vero
ad diem illum actum fuerit et provisum, vobis sine mora and dispendio et
significari curabim^. T. Rege apud b Fitz. Not. Br. 32. c.
Westminster. 27 die Martii. Plac. 18 H. 3. rot. 15. dorso: Claus. 19 H. 3. dorso 1.
and dorso 9. Fitzberbert Darrein presentment, 23. Provisum est coram Domino
Rege, Archtepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus, and Consilio Domini
Regis, quod nulla Assisa ultimae praesentationis de caetero capiatur de
Ecclesiiis praebendatis, nec de Praebendis, etc. Pat. 20 H. 3. d. 13. 18. Rex
Vic. Norff. and Suff. Scias, quod die Merc. in crastino Sancti Vinc. in Curia
nostra coram Nobis et coram venerabili Patre E. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, and
Coepiscopis sul^, et coram majori part Comitum et Baronum nostrorum Angliae,
pro communi utilitate totius regni nostri provisum suit, tam a praedictis
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus, quam a Nobis con^ssum, quod
de caetero, Omnes viduae, etc. r^citing the Statute of Merton made that year,
according to the Cooks 2 Instit. p. 79.
Printed Latin Prologue thereof: Claus. 37 H. 3. dorso 9. De Magna Carta
tenenda ad in^antiam P^latorum and Magnatum regm nostri, etc. And Claus. 43 H.
3. dors. 9. where the Pope by his Letters earnestly pressing King Henry the 3d
to restore his brother Adomar to his Bishopric of Winchester, being enforced
to relinquish it and England too by the Barons prosecution; the King in his
Letter to the Pope there recorded, alleged, that though he was ready to
gra^fie his Holiness in any thing he might; yet he could not consent to Adomars
restitution. Adding, Your Nuntio who brought this Letter, Preces et praecepta
vestra coram Nobis and Praelatis regni nostri, qui tunc Nobiscum aderant, ac
alia Universitate Comitum, Baronum ac Procerume regni nostri, plene et
diligenter exposuit, et diebus pluribus nitebamur Nos, Consilium nostrum, et
Universitatem praedictam; to give their assents for Adomars restitution. Tamen
mandatis hujusmodi, quod non solum personam nostram, verum etiam Universitatem
regni nostri contingit, non possumus absque gravi dispendio, et subversione
jurium et consuetudinum Regni ejusdem, et contra juramentum proprium,
adimplere. Et quanquam hoc facere vellemus, praedicta Universitas in hac part,
quae unius confilii et voluntatis existit, propter graves et notabiles excessus
praedicto fratri nostro objectas id nullatenus sustineret, etc. Which passages,
with others in this memorable Letter of the Kings, compared with that Letter
sent about the same time by the Lords against Adomars restitution, to the Pope,
ex part Regni et totius Angliae Universitata, scriptum a Barnagio; mentioned
by Hist. Angliae Edit. Londinl, 1640. p. 978.
Matthew Paris, Anno 1258. and printed in his Additamenta, p. 215, 216, 217.
beginning thus; Sanctissimo patri in Christo Alexandro, etc. Communitas
Comitum, Procerum, Magnatum, aliorumque Regni Angli^, etc. re^iting, that the
King by the Popes power and assistance could not without their counsel and
assent, much less against their wills, effect what he desired; nor reform his
Kingdom, but de Procerum and Magnatum suorum Consilio: Caeterum praefatus
Dominus Rex attendens impossible pondus negotii memorati et Statum Regni sui
imbecillum, voluit et express concessit, ut de Procerum and Magnatum Consilio
(sine quibus Regnum suum gubernare non poterat, nec negotium prosequi
memoratum) dicta reformatio promoveret: which Adomar, breaking his Oath, and
receding from his promises, opposed, to the great disturbance, and almost total
subversion of the whole Realm, etc. His unbrideled rapines, tyrannies and
opp^ssions (which they there expres^ at large) being such, and rendering him so
odious, that Scituri pro certo, quod etiamsi Dominus Rex and Regni Majores,
(assembled in a Parliamentary Council) hoc vellent, Communitas tamen (out of
Parliament) ipsius ingressum in Angliam jam nullatenus sustineret. Which Letter
was subscribed and sealed by 6. Earls, and 4. Noblemen, vice totius
Communitatis (Barnagit) in testimonium praedictorum: Being likewise compared
with the Popes Answer thereunto; Auctuarium Additamentorum: Edit. Londini 1640.
p. 222.
Literae Papales missae Communitati Angliae, Alexander Episcopu^, etc. Dilectis
filiis, Nobilibus Uiris, Consiliariis charissimi in Christo filii nostri
illustris Regis Angliae, ac caeteris Proceribus et Magnatibus Regni Angiiae,
salutem, et Apostolicam benedictionem, etc. will infallibly evidence. First,
that the King, Prelates, Earls, Spiritual, Temporal Barons, and Nobles of the
Realm, were our only Parliament Members, without any Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses annexed to, or pr^t with them, before 49 H. 3. 2ly. That they were
then usually styled the Communitas, or Universitas Regni, or Barnagii,
Baronagii, or Communitas Comitum Procerum et Magnatum regni Anggliae; and only
intended, denoted by these Titles and phrases, not the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses or Commons in Parl. as e Sir Rob Cotton, and others of Note, as well
as some injudicious Antiquaries have mistaken: f Cottoni Posthuma, p. 347, 348.
Mr. Hacwels Catalogue of speakers.
which having see my Epistle to the Exact Abridgment of the Records of the
Tower, and Plea for the Lords, p. 359, 360.
elsewhere at large evinced beyond all contradiction, I shall not here further
insist upon; but proceed to some other general Observations on the precedent
Writs.

2ly. From the manifold Varieties and differences of these recited writs both
of Election and Prorogation before and since the Statutes of Henry 4. 5, and 6.
touching elections, the Readers may discern the Gross oversight and mistake of
Sir Edward Cook in his 4. Institutes, p. 10. That these Writs of Summons and
Election can receive no alteration but by Act of Parliament: Which having
elsewhere touched, and at large refuted, Register Part 1. p. 395. 396, 397. I
shall prosecute no further.

3ly. I shall observe from the precedent Writs, that no persons ought of right
to be elected Knights of any County, nor Citizens, Burgesses, or Barons of any
City, Borough or Port wherein they are elected, but such as are real, actual
Members of the said respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports, residing, or
inhabiting within them, as this Clause in all the recited Writs; De Comitatu
tuo duos Milites, et de qualibet Civitate duos Milites, et de quolibet Burgo
duos Burgenses, and de quolibet Portu duos Barons, etc. de discretioribus and
ad laborandum potentioribus eligi etc. clearly import, and the Statutes of 7 H.
4. c. 15. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 23 H. 6. c. 15. (being declaratory only
in this point) most punctually enact in precise terms: And if any other persons
who are no Inhabitants, or Residents within, or proper Members of such
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports be elected or returned, they may lawfully
refuse to sit or serve, as the Writs and these Statutes clearly evidence,
without the least contempt or penalty, the peoples election of such, contrary
to the Writs and these Statutes, being void in Law, and unable to contradict.
or reverse the Writ, Acts to the contrary if insisted on.

4ly. These usual claus^s in most, Writs de discretioribus, et ad laborandum
potentioribus seclude and exempt all infants under age, Idiots, Lunaticks,
insi^m, aged, sickly persons, unable to travel, sit, counsel, advise, and
discharge their trusts, from being elected Knights, Citizens, Burgesses or
Barons of Ports; and if any such be elected, returned by the oversight,
imprudence, improvidence of the electors, they may and ought to be discharged
by the King and Lords, an^ others by new Writs issued, elected, returned in
their places, who are able to advise, travel, and discharge their duties, as
the writs and statutes enjoin them; Impotency, sickness, and inability in
Members elected, being as just a ground to discharge any Knight, Citizen,
Burgess or Baron of the Ports from serving in Parliaments, as to discharge the
Speaker of the Commons House, as is evident by the forecited Writs, presidents,
and Here, p. 54, 55, 59.
returns of Sheriffs in 2^. E. 1. by the resolution of the Parliament it self
in 38. H. 8. Brook^ Parliament 7. against Sir Edward Cooks groundless fancy to
the contrary, Institutes 4. p. 8. there being the self-same reason and Law too
in both cases.

5. That the election of an^ Sheriff of a County whiles he continues in his
(...), for a ^night, Citizen, Burgess, in his own or any other County, is void
and illegal, being against the express provision of the Ordinance of
Parliament, 46 E. 3. the very inhibition and words of the writs for election,
Here, p. 55, 63.
some presidents before that Ordinance; and the * resolution of the Lords and
Judges in Starchamber 5. Caroli, in the case of Mr. Rushworths Historical
Collections, p. 694, 695, 696.
Mr. Walter Long, elected and returned a Citizen for the City of Bath in
Somersetshire, An. 3 Car. whiles he was Sheriff of the County of Wilts; who
thereupon coming forth of the County against his Oath and trust, and sitting
as a Member in the House during his Shrievaltie, was sentenced in the
Starchamber to be committed Prisoner to the Tower during ^is Majesty's
pleasure, to pay a Fine of 2000 marks to the King, and further to make ^is
humble submission and acknowledgement of ^is Offense, both in the Court of
Starchamber, and to his Majesty, before his enlargement ^nce: Which was
accordingly executed. Yet notwithstanding I sinde in the very Statute of 34 and
35 H. 8. chapter 24. for assurance of certain Lands to John Hind Sergeant at Law
and his heirs, paying x l. yearly to the charges and wages of the Knights of
the Parliament of Cambridgshire for the time being, for ever; that Edward North
Knight, Sheriff of the said Shire, was one of the two Knights for the said
Shire that very Parliament wherein this Act was passed, and he and Thomas
Ruds^ne Esquire his Companion, and their Successors Knights of the said County,
incorporated and made one body politic; together with the Sheriff of the said
County for the time being, by the name of Wardens of the Fees and Wages of the
Knights of the Shire of Cambridge, chosen for the Parl. and to have perpetual
succession, to implead, sue for and receive the said x l. annnual rent, and
that he received his share therein, when both Sheriff and Knight of the Shire,
to his own use, for his fees and wages that Parliament, til a new election of
knights of that County for the Parl. next ensuing it. And Instit. 4. p. 48.
Sir Edward Cook informs us, that at the Parliament holden 1 Car. Rs. the
Sheriff for the County of Buckingham (being then himself) was chosen Knight for
the County of Norfolk, and reterned into the Chancery, and ^aving a Subpaena
out of the Chancery served upon him at the suit of the Lady C. pendente
Parliamento, upon motion, he had the privilege of Parl. allowed unto him by the
judgment of the whole House of Com, mons: though I find not that he then sat
in the house during his Shrievalty.

6. That amongst the writs of Summons to Parliament in Cl. 23 E. 1. dors. 9. 25
E. 1. d, 6. 30 E. 1. d. 12, 35 E. 1 d, 13. 1 E. 2. d. 8. 11. 3 E. 2. d. 17. 11
E. 3. pars 1. d. 15. 32 E 3. dors. 14. There are no writs for electing Knights,
Citizens, or Burgesses entered with the rest; most likely by the negligence of
the Clerks, there being vacant space in some of them left for their entries:
And the Original Writs themselves being all or most of them returned into the
Chancery, and there reserved in distinct Bundles by themselves with the Sherifs
returns upon them (now for the most part lost, mislayed, perished or
imbezelled) made them (perchance) more careless to enter them, than the Writs
to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, issued personally to themselves alone, and
not returnable by them or the Sheriffs, as the writs for elections usually
were; which Writs, (as the Statutes of 5 R. 2. chapter 4. and 23 H. 6. c. 15.
inform us) Sometimes the Sheriffs have not returned, but the said Writs have
embesyled; and moreover made no precepts to Mayors and Bailiffs for the
election of Citizens and Bu^gesses to come to the Parliament, by color of
these words contained in the said Writs, Quod in pleno Comimitatu tuo eligi
facias pro Comitatu tuo, duos Milites, and pro qualibet Civitate in Com. tuo,
duos Cives; and pro quolibet Burgo in Com. tuo, duos Burgenses; The reason why
some of these writs are missing in some extant Bundles, and some Cities and
Boroughs in those returned, now and then omitted in the Sheriffs returns,
(indorsed on or annexed to them) as the subsequent Table will visibly
demonstrate.

7ly. That before the Statutes of 7 H. 4. c. 15. 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 6
H. 6. c. 4. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 23 H. 6. c. 15. 9 H. 8. c. 16. 27 H.
8. c. 26. 34 H. 8. c. 13. 35 H. 8. c. 11. the Kings of England had a very large
and absolute power in limiting, prescribing in and by their Writs to Sheriffs,
Mayors, Bay liffs and others, both the respective numbers, and likewise the
qualifications of the Knights, Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of the Ports,
elected and returned to serve in the several Parliaments and Great Councils
summoned by them, sometimes commanding 4. most times only 2. Knights, sometimes
but one Knight to be elected in each County, for the whole County; sometimes
prescribing the self-same Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses that were elected,
returned for the last precedent Parliament, to be returned and summoned to the
Parliament next succeeding, if in life and able to travel; and to elect new
only in the places of such of them who were dead, sickly, or infirm; Other
times summoning only the moiety of them, to perfect what they all had agreed,
and been mistaken in: And also ordering new elections in the places of those
who would not, or could not attend, or who were unduly elected, or chosen for
2. Counties at once, (as in case of the Lord Here p. 117, 118.
Cameyes and Berners.) Sometimes prescribing 2. sometimes 4. Citizens to be
elected for London; sometimes 4. other times 2. Barons for every of the Ports,
and now and then but 2. Barons for them all: and sometimes 2. other times but
one Citizen and Burgess for each City and Borough: the number of which they
increased or diminished, as they saw just cause, omitting now and then some
Cities, Boroughs out of their writs of summons, formerly sending Citizens, and
Burgesses to Parliaments and Great Councils, and creating by their Patents,
Writs, or both, new Cities and Boroughs, with power to send Citizens and
Burgesses to Parliaments and Great Councils, who never sent any before; and
creating other Boroughs, Cities, Counties within themselves, and then issuing
Writs to their Sheriffs, Mayors, and immediate Officers to make their elections
and returns; which formerly were issued only to, and made by the Sheriffs of
the Counties, wherein they were situated; as the precedent Writs and returns
with the two next Sections will fully evidence: And that without the precedent
Votes, or subsequent consents of the Commons House; who from 49 H. 3. till 23
E. 4. and many years after, were never the immediate, sole or proper Judges,
Desciders either of the undue elections, returns, numbers, or qualifications,
of their own Members or Speakers, but our Kings alone or their Counsil and
House of Lords; as the premises irrefragably evidence, and the Presidents I
have clted in my Plea for the Lords, p. 371. to 419. To which I shall refer the
Reader.

8. I shall for a close of my Observations, give you this brief Catalogue of
the several Cities and Boroughs in each County of England, which sent Citizens
and Burgesses to Parliament, mentioned in the returns of the Bundles of Writs
yet extant in the Tower of London, An. 26, 28 E. 1. and 42 E. 3. and in the
Clause Rolls of 45 E. 3 m. 21. dors. omitting those in 2, 10, 11, 13, 16 R. 2.
1, 3, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 6, 11, 13, 20 H. 6. 7 and 12 E 4. by w^ you may
clearly discern which are ancient Cities, Boroughs, in the reigns of Ed. 1. and
3. which new, and when each of them began to send Citizens, Burgesses to our
Parliaments; which God willing I shall further clear hereafter in a Distinct
Section, of the Several forms and numbers of Writs for levying the expenses of
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament; wherein I shall present you (if
it be deemed worthy my pains, and beneficial to posterity) with an Exact
Calendar of the names of all the several Knights of Counties, Citizens of
Cities, Burgesses of Boroughs, and Barons of the Ports, formerly elected and
returned to our Parliaments, and receiving wages, extant in the Clause Rolls
and returns of the Writs for their Elections, and Expenses in the Tower, not
hitherto undertaken or collected by any man to my knowledge. The first Figures
signify the years of each King mentioned in the Table.

Bedford Borough returned two Burgesses to Parliament Bedfordshire.


Reding 2. Burgesses, 42, and 45 E. 3. Berkeshire.


Walingford 2. Burgesses, 42 E 3.

Amersham 2. Burgesses, 28 E. 1. Buckinghamshire.


Wendover 2. Burgesses, 28 E. 1.

Wycombe 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Cambridge Borough, 2. Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 45 Cambridgshire.


None in Ed. 1. or Ed. 3. Cheshire.


Bodmin Borough 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 42, and 45 E. 3. Cornwall.


Dunbeued, alias Lanceston, 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Helston 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 42 E and 45 E. 3.

Lyscard 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Lostwithiel 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Trurou 26 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Carelisle City two Citizens, 42 and 45 E. 3. Cumberland.


Derby Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3.

Exeter City 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Derbyshire.


Ashperton Borough 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. Devonshire.


Bardnestaple 2 Burgesses 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Chessing-colleton 2 Burgesses, 42 E. 3.

Dartmouth 42 and 45 E. 3.

Honeton 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1.

Lydeford 2 Burgesses 28 E. 1.

O^mpton 2 Burgesses 28 E. 1.

Plimpton 2 Burgesses 26 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Sutton 2 Burgesses 26 E. 1.

Thavestoke 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Totnes 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Brideport 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Dorcester 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Dorsetsh.


Lyme 2 Burgesses 45 E. 3.

Melcombe 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Poole 2 Burgesses, 42 E. 3,

Shaftesbury 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 45 E. 3.

Warham 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Waymouth 2 Burgesses, 42 E. 3.

Colecester 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Essex.


Maldon 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Bristoll, 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. After Gloucestershire.


Gloucester 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Hereford City 2 Citizens 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Hereford.


Bewley 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Leominster 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

We^ 2. Burgesses 28 E. 1.

St. Allans Borough 2 Burgesses 28 E. 1. Hertford.


Hertford 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1.

Huntingdon Borough 2. Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 45 E. 3 Huntingdon.


Canterbury City 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3.

Rochester City 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3. Kent.


Lancaster 2 Burgesses 26 E. 1. Lancaster


Preston in Alderness 2 Burgesses 26 E. 1.

Leicester Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42. and Leicestershire.


Lincoln City 2 Citizens, 49 H. 3. 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and Lincolnshire.


Grymesby 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Stamford 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

London 26 E. 1. 2 Citizens, 42 E. 3. (4. Citizens) 45 Middlesex.


Northampton 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Northt.


Norwich City, 2 citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. Norsolke.


Jernemuth 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Lenne 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Newcastle upon Tyne 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 45 E. 3. Northum.


Nottingham Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3. Nottingh.


Oxford Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 44 and 45 E. 3. Oxfordsh.


Bruges (or Bridgenorth) Borough 2 Burgesses 28 E. Salop.


Salop 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 45 E. 3.

Bath City 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. [whose Somerset.
H. 5. 1, 2, 3 H. 6. and 12 E. 4.

Bridgewater Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 21 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Iv^ster 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Milburne port 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1.

Taunton 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Wells 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 45 E. 3. [Cives.]

Winchester City, 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Southtsh.


Alesford 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1.

Basingstoke 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1.

Odeham 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1.

Ouertone 2 Burgesses 28 E. 1.

Portesmouth 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 45 E. 3.

Southampton 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 45 E. 3.

D^nwich 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Suffolk.


Gyppeswich 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Oreford 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Newcastle under Line 2 Burgesses, 45 E. 3.

Stafford 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Staffordsh.


Blechingleigh Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Surry.


Gildeford 2 Burgesses 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Ryegate 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Southwerke 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E 3.

Chichester City 2 Citizens, 26 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Sussex.


Arundel Borough 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Brembre 2 Burgesses, 42 E. 3.

East Greenstead 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Horsham 2 Burgesses, 42 and 45 E. 3.

Jews 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 42 and 45 E 3.

Midhurst 2 Burgesses, 45 E. 3.

Seaford 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 45 E. 3.

Sh^rham 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Steining 2 Burgesses 26 E. 1. 42 E. 3.

Coventre City, 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E 1.

Warwick Borough 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 Warwick. shire.


Apelby 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 42 E. 3.

New Sarum City 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. Westmerl.


Bedwine Borough 2 Burgesses, 42 E. 3. Wiltshire.


Calne 2 Burgesses 26, 28 E. 1.

Chipenham 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1.

Devises 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3.

Dounton 2 Burgesies, 26, 28 E 1.

Ludgersale 2 Burgesses 28 E. 1.

Merleburge 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3.

Malme^bury 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

Old Sarum 2 Burgesses, 42 E. 3.

Wilton 2 Burgesses 28 E. 1. 42 E. 3.

Worcester City 2 Citizens, 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3. Worcester.
Wych 2 Burgesses, 26, 28 E. 1.

York City 2 Citizens, 49 H. 3. 26, 28 E. 1. 42 and 43 Yorkshire.
E. 3.

Aluerton 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Beverlayco 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Kingston upon Hull 2 Burgesses 42 and 45. E. 3.

Maldon 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Pontefract 2 Burgesses, 26 E. 1.

Scardeburgh 2 Burgesses, 28 E. 1. 42 and 45 E. 3.

I shall observe from these Writs, and the forementioned Retorns and Table, 1.
That the Sheriff of a Here p. 41. 58, 59.
Buckingbamshire in Anno 26 E. 1. retorns, Nulli sunt Cives nec Burgenses in
Com. praedicto. nec Burgus, etc. yet in 28 E. 1. but two years after, the
Sheriff thereof retorns 2. Burgesses a plece, (with 2. Manucaptors for eevery
of them) for Amersham, Wycombe, Wendover, e'ected for a former Parliament that
year: Therefore it is probable the King first created them Boroughs that very
year: The like observation you may make upon the Boroughs of all other Counties
where you meet with any Retorns in 26, 28 Edw. 1. 42 Edw. 3. or since,
reciting, Nulla est Civitas vel Burgus; or Non est alia Civitas vel Burgus, or
Non sunt alii Burgi, in Com. or Balliva mea, then those he then returned as
such: there you may certainly resolve, that every City or Borough omitted then
out of those ancient Retorns and since returned for Cities or Boroughs in
subsequent Retorns, were made Cities and Boroughs since that time; and where
you find any City or Borough first mentioned in the Sheriffs Retorns yet
extant, (which are but 22. Bundles in all before the end of Edward 4. his
Reign,) or in the Writs in the Clause Rolls issued to them, De expensis Civium
and Burgens^um venientibus ad Parliamentum, which are more by far than the
Bundles, (as I shall hereafter God willing evidence in a peculiar Section,) you
may probably, if not certainly, conclude, That it was first created a City, or
Borough, and enabled to send Citizens or Burgesses to Parliament near that
year, wherein you first find such mention of it in both or either of these
Records, and not before, as the precedent and ensuing Table will more fully
inform you. 2ly. You may clearly discern by this Table, and the subsequent
Retorns of Writs, Anno 3, 11, 12, 13. 16 R. 2. 1, 3, 8, 9 H. 5. 1, 2, 3, 6, 11,
13, 20 H. 6. 7, and E, 12, 4. that some Cities and Boroughs, which send
Citizens and Burgesses to Parliament were often times omitted out of the Sheriffs
Retorns in ancient times, and yet imprinted into subsequent retorns
interpolatis vicibns; Now whether this was done by special direction from the
King or his Council, (on whose Arbitrary pleasure they depended (before they
had See Hobarts Reports, p. 14. 15.
special Charters granted enabling them to send Citizens and Burgesses to all
Parliaments, to be afterward held by the King, his Heirs and Successors Kings
of England) or by the carelessnesse of the Sheriffs in not issuing out Warrants
to or not retorning them; which is most probable, as the Stat. of 5 R. 2. Parl.
2. c. 4. and 22 H. 6. c. 15 inform us, and thereupon enacted, That if any
Sheriff of the Realm be from thence forth negligent in making his Retorns of
Writs of Parliament, or that he leave out of the said Retorns any Cities, or
Boroughs which be bound, and of old times were wont to come to the Parliament,
he shall be punished in manner as was accustomed to be done in the said case in
the said time past. And that every Sheriff after delivering of the Writ for
elections to him, shall without fraud make and deliver a sufficient Precept to
the Majors and Bailiffs of the Cities and Boroughs within his County for
electing Citizens and Burgesses, under the penalties therein mentioned. Or
whether they were thus omitted, through their own default in not demanding
Warrants from the Sheriff^, or not electing and retorning Burgesses upon their
Warrants issued, (to which many times the Sheriffs returned nullum mihi
dederunt responsum, etc.) I cannot certainly determine. 3ly. That some ancient
Boroughs once or twice returned heretofore in former times (as Lydeford in
Devonshire, and others) have afterward been totally omitted and discontinned,
either by the Kings mere pleasure, or upon their own Petitions to the King,
they being either unable or unwilling to bear the expenses of their Burgesses
in coming to, continuing at, and returning from the Parliament, which were
constantly levied heretofore by writs de expensis Burgensium levandis, sued to
them or the Sheriffs after most Parliaments ended by many Burgesses of Boroughs
as well as by Knights of Shires, and Citizens of Cities, as I shall, (if God
say Amen) demonstrate at large in its due place, and shall hereno further
insist upon. 4ly. That of late times some of these ancient long-discontinued
Boroughs have been revived, and new Writs or Warrants for electing Burgesses
sent unto them, sometimes upon their own Petitions; now and then upon some
Courtiers Petition to the King, in hopes by Letters from the Court and Feasting
or Bribing the Burgesses, to be elected, and returned Burgesses for the revived
Boroughs; sometimes by motion or order of some Members of the Commons House who
had a design to bring in some Burgesses, and made sure of the Burgesses Voices
before hand; the Burgesses being now very willing to have their Boroughs
revived, because many times instead of giving wages to their Burgesses, for
their service in Parliament as of old, they receive not only thanks, Feasts,
but Rewards and Boons, if not underhand Bribes for their Voices, from their
elected Burgesses, who assure them before their choice, they will neither
expect nor exact any expenses from them, which many of them scarce deserve,
since they do neither them nor their Country any service at all in Parl.
promoting only their own private interests or ends, or their friends.

Finally, though I shall readily subscribe to Mr. Littletons opinions, Section
194. That the ancient Towns called Boroughs, be the most ancient Towns that be
within England, For the Towns that now be Cooks 1 Instit. f. 159.
Cities or Counties, in old time were Boroughs, and called Boroughs; for of
such old Towns called Boroughs come the Burgesses of the Parliament, to the
Parliament, when the King has summoned his Parliament, which I shall further
clear in the next Sections; yet I can by no means assent to Mr. William Lambard
of His Archaion or Commentary upon the High Courts of Justice, p. 257, 258, 259.
Lincolns Inn his Judgment, (though a learned Antiquary) or some others
inferences thence, who thus argues. Now as those written Authorities do
undoubtedly confirm, Our assertion of this manner of Parliament, so is there
also an unwritten Law or Prescription, that does no less infallibly uphold the
same; For it is well known that ln every quarter of the Realm^ a great many of
Boroughs do send their Burgesses to the Parliament, which are nevertheless so
ancient, and so long since decayed; and gone to naught, that it cannot be
showed, that they have been of any reputation, at any time since the Conquest,
and much less, that they have obtained the Privileges, by the Grant of any
King succeeding the same, so that the interest which they have in Parliament
grows by an ancient usage before the Conquest, whereof they cannot show any
beginning. Which thing is also confirmed by contrary usage in the self same
thing. For it is likewise known, that they of ancient Demesne do prescribe, in
not sending to the Parliament; For which reason also, they are neither
Contributors to the Wages of Knights there, neither are they bound to sundry
Acts of Parliament, though the same be generally penned, and do make no
exception of them. But there is no ancient Demesne, saving that only which is
described in the Book of Domesday, under the Title of Terra Regis, which of
necessity must be such; as either was in the hands of the Conqueror himself,
who made the Book, or of Edw. the Confessor that was before him. And so again,
if they of Ancient Demesne have ever since the Conquest, prescribed not to send
Burgesses to Parliament, then no doubt there was a Parliament before the
Conquest, to the vhich they of other places did send their Burgesses. To which
I answer, that this Argument is fallacious, and no ways conclusive. For 1.
these ancient decayod Buroughs that now in many places send Burgesses to the
Parliament, were in no such great reputation at all at or before the Conquest,
as is ins^uated, for ought appears by the Book of Doomsday, or any other Record
or History, but as mean and inconsiderable as now they are. 2ly. There is no
History or Record, that any of these Boroughs, whether decayed, or not
decayed, yea though much enlarged, enrichd since the Conquest, did ever send
Burgesses to any one Parliament, either before or after the Conquest, till 49
H. 3. And I challenge all the Antiquaries in England to demonstrate the
contrary by History or Records. 3ly. It is irrefragable by the forementioned
returns of Sheriffs, that all or most of those poor or decayed Boroughs in
Cornwall, Devonshire, Wiltshire, Southampton, Sussex, and some other Counties,
did in 26 E. 1. and some years after, send no Burgesses at all to our
Parliament; as Camelford, Foway, Grantpount, St. Germins, St. Ives, St. Mary's
[or Maws] St. Michael, Portlow, Saltash, Trebonny, Tregony in Cornwall,
Bearalston in Devon, Christchurch, Newport, Newtown, Stockbridge, Whitechurch,
Yermouth in the County of Southampton, Midhurst and Horsham in Sussex,
Crickland, Henden, Old Sarum, Heytesbury, Westbury, Wotton Basset in Wiltshire;
with others in other Counties, as the precedent Table clearly demonstrates: all
or most of them being enabled to send Burgesses to Parliament since the reign
of Edw. the 1. and not before: much less by prescription before the Conquest,
as M. Lambard and others conceit; and that percliance not by any special
Charters of our Kings creating them Boroughs or Corporations, but by private
directions of the King and Counsil to the Sheriffs of Counties wherein they
were, to issue out Precepts to them to elect and retorn Burgesses, when they
saw any just cause; not by ancient usage or prescription before the Conquest,
which none of these Boroughs ever yet pretended or insisted on, for ought I can
find, upon my best inquiry after their Original. 3ly. The antientest writs for
Knights wages extant, are those of 28 E. 1. Rot. Claus. dors. 3, and 12, and
cl. 29 E. 1. dors. 17. 32 E. 1. dors. 3. and no Records, Histories or Lawbooks
I have seen, derive their original higher than the Reign of King Edward the
first. The first Statute concerning them is that of 12 R. 2. c. 12. (on which
the writ in the Register is grounded) which enacts only, That the levying of
the expenses of Knights shall be, as has been used before this time: the next
Statute of 11 H. 4. c. 1. enacts, That Knights of Shires unduly returned shall
lose their wages of the Parliament of old time accustomed, (not at or before
the Conquest accustomed.) The first printed case concerning them in our
Lawbooks, is but in M. 12 H. 4. f. 3. a. Fitzh. Avowry 52. and Br. 42. and the
first An Exact Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, p. 86.
Petitions in Parliament concerning them, are those of 28 and 51 E. 3. Yea no
man can prove there were any Knights for Counties elected and sent to
Parliaments by the Kings Writs before 49 H. 3. Therefore, the prescription to
be discharged from contributing to their wages, cannot be extended higher than
49 H. 3. not to the Reign of the Conqueror, or before the Conquest, as Mr.
Lambard would strain it. 4ly. The writ in the Register, part 1. f. 192. made
after the Statute of 12 R. 2. c. 12. to exempt the Bishop of Londons Tenants at
Fulham, from contributing to the expenses of the Knights of Middlesex, recites
only; Quod licet ipsi and eorum Antecessores, and Praedecessores, expensis
Militum ad Parliamenta nostra, vel Progeuitorum nostrorum quondam Regum
Angliae, pro Communitate Com. praedicti ante haec tempora venientium nullatenus
solvere aut contribuere consueverunt. And one of the Writs in the Register, f.
261. b. Vic. Huntingdon, Quod Homines de antiquo Dominico non contribuant
expensis Militum, begins thus. Cum secundum consuetudinem in Regno nostro
Augliae hactenus obtentam and approbatam, homines and tenentes de antiquo
Dominico Coronae Angliae, quieti sunt and esse debeant, a contributione
expensarum Militum ad Parliamenta venientium: Both which import only, That
neither they nor their Predecessors or Ancestors, since Knights were first sent
to Parliaments in 49 H. 3. or afterward, were accustomed to contribute toward
their expenses, but exempted from the same: Not that there were such Knights
who had wages, and that they were exempted from it, before the Conquest: And
that other form of the Writ in the Register, f. 261. a. touching Tenants of
ancient Demesne, Quod licet ipsi and eorum A^ecessores tenentes de eodem
manerio, A TEMPORE QUO NON EXTAT MEMORIA, SEMPER HACTENUS QUIETI ESSE
CONSUEVERUNT de expensis Militum ad Parliamenta nostra vel Progenitorum
nostrorum Regum Angliae pro Communitate dicti Comitatus venientium, must have
the self-same interpretation: or this at least which is equivalent to it. That
time out of mind, before there were any Knights of Shires elected in the
County, they were always ^ree from contributing to their Wages, and never used
to pay any such Tax; (this presc^iption will extend to all times before 49 H.
3. and the Conquest it self:) And since 49 H. 3. and the elections of Knights
of Shires, they and their Ancestors time out of mind, or, of old time (as the
statutes of 5 Richard 2. cap. 4. 11 Henry 4. cap. 1. express it) have always
used to be quit from such expenses of Knights, and never charged with them.
There are many Prescriptions and Customs in use in King Edward the third his
time, and since, which are said to be time out of mind, yet certainly they had
their Original not before, but long since the Conquest, as you may read in
Brook^, Fitzherbert, and other Law Books, Title Custom and Prescription, and
Cooks 1 Institutes, fol. 58. 113. That which has been used, or prescribed in
but for two or three Ages only, or out of the memory or mind of men then
living, being Hobards Reports, p. 117, 118, 198, 199.
reputed a legal Custom or Prescription, 34 Henry 6. 36. Br. Prescription 6.
Therefore this Prescription of Tenants in Ancient Demesne, to be exempt from
contributing to Knights wages, or not to send Burgesses to the Parliament, time
out of mind, will no ways warrant Mr. Lambards conclusion thence. Ergo, No
doubt there was a Parliament before the Conquest, to which they of other places
used to send their Knights and Burgesses. I am certain that at this day Tenants
in Ancient Demesne, can plead, that both they and their Ancestors time out of
mind of man, were never accustomed to pay Excise for any thing, for which
Excise is now generally demanded; will it therefore follow; Ergo, all places
else now subject to pay Excise, were liable to pay it before the Conquest, when
as it was first set on foot since 1642? If not, then Mr. Lambards Argument is
as great an inconsequence as it, seeing Knights and Burgesses of Parliament
began, not before the 49th. of Henry the third, as I have evidenced: and were
never heard of (as he conceits) before the Conquest, which none of the
Authorities cited by him do satisfactorily evidence, and all Histories, Records
from the Conquest, till 49 Henry the 3d. most clearly refute. I should now
proceed to the 5th. Section, Of Writs for electing Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, issued to the Earls, Dukes, Lieutenants, and Chancellors of the
Duchy of Lancaster, the Sheriffs of London, Bristol, York, New Castle upon
Tine, Norwich, Lincoln, Kingston upon Hull, Southampton, Coventry, Canterbury,
and other Towns made Counties within themselves, after their severance from the
Shires in which they are situated: with some forms of their Retorns, and
useful Observations on them; but the present Exigence of our affairs, and
strange Vote of a few Commoners, Jan. 5. 1659. creating themselves a Parliament
without a King or House of Lords, and adjudging, declaring above two hundred
Members to stand discharged from voting or sitting as Members of this
Parliament, during this Parliament; And that Writs do issue to elect New
Members in their Places, behind their backs (as being either afraid or ashamed
to look them in the faces) without naming any one of them, and that before the
least legal accusation, hearing, trial or conviction whatsoever, of any
delinquency, except only their loyalty, sincerity, fidelity to their King,
Country, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, constant adhering to their
original Trusts, Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, Vow, Votes, Ordinances,
Declarations, Remonstrances, Principles of Piety, Honesty, Christianity, and
abomination of all Treachery, Perjury, Jesuitical Practices, and destructive
public Innovations, contrary to the express Word of God, the Fundamental
Laws, Statutes and Government of this Realm, and the tenor of the Writs and
Indentures whereby they were made Members, which their secluders have violated,
subverted in the highest degree, has caused me to publish this Chapter by it
self; wherein I have, as Ardua Regni, Plea for the Lords p. 371, to 419. The
(...). part of this brief Register, p. 27, 28, 1^7, 219, to 222, 434, 435.
elsewhere, made good to all the world, by Records, Presidents, Judgments in
Parliament, law, reason, and divinity too, That the whole House of Commons, in
its greatest fullness freedom and power, nover head any lawful right or
Authority, upon full bearing, evidence, conviction, to expel any single Member
of the House for breach of trust, or other misdemeanor whatsoever (no more than
one Judge, Justice, Commissioner, Committee, or Grand Jury-man, to unjudge,
uncommission, discharge or eject another, being all equals, equally entrusted
by the people, and having no power of judicature over each other) without the
Lords or Kings consent, in whom the sole Judicature in our Parliaments resides;
much less then the Tenth part of the Commons House, (sitting under a visible
force, and keeping four times their Number of Members out by armed guards,
which nulls all they vote or do) to eject the Majority of the House, order New
Elections of others in their places, and make them incapable to be elected, by
the mere Clublaw, of pellitur e medio sapientia, vi geritur res: which
unparalleled injustice neither these excluded Members, nor yet the Counties,
Cities and Boroughs for whom they serve, nor the Freeborn English Nation, nor
Army Officers so lately disofficed, cashiered for ejecting the secluders, upon
as good grounds, and by the same Law of the longest Sword they now make use of,
Exact Coll. p. 496, 498.
will patiently endure to their own and the Nations infamy, the ruin of our
Parliaments Constitution and Privileges, if connived at in these times of sad
distraction.

I shall desire these forcible Secluders, and Voters of us out of the House,
seriously to consider these Passages of Exact Coll. p. 650, 655, 657.
A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, to which many
of them were parties, in answer to his Majesty's Declaration 23. October 1642.
If the truth was that the d^my (of the King) is raised, to force some
particular Members of this Parliament, to be delivered up, yet upon this ground
would it follow, that the same is levied against the Parliament: for we have
often declared to his Majesty and the world, That we were always ready to
receive any evidence or accusation against any of them, and to judge and punish
them, according to their demerits; yet hitherto no Evidence produced, no
Accuser appearing, (the case of the now secluded, ejected, disabled Majority of
the Members) And yet notwithstanding to raise an d^my to compel the Parliament
to expose those Members to the fury of those wicked counselors, that thirst
after nothing more than the ruin of them and the Commonwealth; What can be
more evident, then that the same is levied against the Parliament? for, did
they prevail in this, then by the same reason might they demand (and these now
sitting forcibly seclude and eject) twenty more, and consequently, never rest
satisfied, until their malice and Tyranny did devour all those Members they
found cross and opposite to their lewd and wicked designs (as our secluders
have done) and so by depriving the Parliament of their Members, destroy the
whole Body. Thus seconded in Exact Collection, p. 739.
The Remonstrance of the Lords and commons assembled in Parliament, Nov. 2.
1642. in answer to his Majesty's Declaration. This is the doctrine of that
Declaration, 5. That his Majesty, or any other person, may upon suggestion and
pretense of Treason, Felony, or the breach of the Peace, take the Members of
Parliament out of either. House of Parliament, without giving satisfaction to
the House whereof they are Members, of the grounds of such suggestion or
accusation, and without and against their consent: so they may dismember a
Parliament when they please, and make it what they will, when they will: (as
our secluders have done, by voting and keeping out above 200. by mere force
before Accusation or Heating) And in their Exact Collection, p. 4, 6.
Declaration of August 4. 1642. wherewith I shall conclude. If the King (by his
Army) may force this Parliament (as our secluders have done) they may bid
farewell to all Parliaments, for ever receiving good by them. And if
Parliaments be lost, they (the people) are lost, their Laws are lost as well,
^se late^y made, as in former times, all which will be cut in sunder with the
same sword now drawn for the destruction of this Parliament; as they are now by
the forcible seclusion of the Members by Order and Command of those now sitting.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 7. r. Subortam, p. 22. l. 7. sustentari, l. 18. scire, p. 26. l. 7.
Comitum, p. 26. l. 4. Et, de, p. 37. l. 6. posset, p. 50. l. 2. Hertford, r.
Berks. p. 54. 28. extitit. p. 63 l. 31. r. (...) wit. p. 79. l. 18. their, r.
this. p. 83. l. 3 partium. p. 94. l. 12. et, per p 95. l. 2. 21 r. 27 E. 3. p.
119. l. 28. unreasonable, r. unanswerable. l. 33. a new writ for. p. 120. l. 26
et, (...). per. p. 121. l. 14. Avun^ulo. p, 122, l. 15. 16, r. 9 E 2. (...).
13. 7 H. 4 p. 126. l. 11. 1, r. 7 H 4. p. 128. l. 126. brevi. p. 145. l. 26.
Baronis. p. 171. l. 13, 14. imparred, r. i^serted.

FINIS.
THE MISCELLANEOUS WORKS OF WILLIAM PRYNNE, Esquire, UTTER-BARRESTER, of
Lincolnes Inn.

VOL. XXIV.

PSALM 120. v. 5, 6. My Soul has long dwelt with them, that are enemies unto
peace: I labor for peace; but when I speak unto them thereof, they make them
ready to Battle. London: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Edward
Thomas, dwelling in Green Arbor.


