DURUS SERMO, OR Aenigma Moriendi: THE MYSTERY OF Dying Daily: IN A SERMON
PREACHED In Plymouth, at the Funeral of Mistress Joan Warren.

By William Pyke, M. A. and Rector of the Parish of Stokeclimsland in the
County of Cornwall.

Behold I show you a Mystery. 1 Cor. 15.51.

(...). Phil. 1.21.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the King's Arms in S. Paul's
Chucrh-yard. 168^.

TO My Dear and Honored Nephew, Mr. John Warren, Merchant in Plymouth. THE
Author dedicates his mean and unworthy Meditations on this so eminent and
important a Subject, with apprecation of all increase of Grace in this Life,
and Glory in a better.
Dear SIR,
WHat that sad occasion of the Funeral of so near a Relation offered me to
impart, for the refreshing and comforting of the spirits of many mournful
Friends, and for the satisfying of many raised expectations, in bringing to
their remembrance some things which ought to be every days thoughts, as they
are every days hazard, your effectual request has drawn forth to a common
review: and if some witty censurer should pretend to know already all that can
be said on this Scripture, and Subject, it being of so common a Concern, I only
say, I am glad he has been so well instructed; yet I fear he may need a
Remembrancer, to whisper in his ear, Abi tu, and fac similiter; for it fares
with Sermons and Doctrines now adays, as with Seamens dangers, their commoness
causes their disregard; and hearers are as the Catadupi, who are deaf with the
frequent falls of Nile. Sir, I have been told of the desires of many to have
the fight of these Paragraphs; and I am willing to comply with; and to gratify
every such pious desire, if it be their piety indeed, and not their prejudice
or partiality; and it were happy if the reading eye, as well as the hearing ear
might be busied in bringing in more Traffic to enrich the Soul, ^ut you easily
apprehend the great disadvantage of a dead letter, in comparison of that life
and energy which elocution adds to any discourse; such scribbling of Sermons is
but mere Paper-work in comparison of the powerful utterance of the Preacher;
and I more than conjecture, that these Notes will lose much of their efficacy,
by Transcription with reference to the different time, place, and temper of
Readers now, and Hearers then; for when Christians attend at Funerals, and sit
over Graves, and are amused with the doleful passing Bell, and look upon
Skulls, and dead Bones, and Ghastly Spectacles, upon the dropping eyes and
despondent looks of Mourners, they have, if ever, some suitable self-humbling
apprehensions of their own mortality, and accordingly have more penetrable, and
more penitential spirits, apter to take impression from, and to make a more
lively expression of the more mortifying Doctrines.

And the same must Readers be of when they take in and to traverse such a
Subject as is here presented: they must go up to Mount Calvary, and walk up and
down at Golgotha. I mean, their high minds must be, as 'twere mortalized, and
they must with that Disciple stoop down, i. e. mortified.
and look into the Sepulcher, and turn the Grave clothes off the Holy Jesus,
who was dead, and is alive, that they may learn from him, as the great
Exemplar, the Mystery of dying whiles they live; may every one that shall read
these ^lain Pages be thus disposed, that his profiting may appear, and the
Subject lose no weight by the levity of the Reader; else all that is written
may unhappily be resented no better than a Riddle, or a waking Dream to drowzie
reason, which is to the faith and practice of a lively Christian, the most
material concern of his whole life. Sir, whatsoever this well meant Essay may
be, or howsoever it be taken, it is my first fruits of tendering such kind of
Presents, which I offer to you in testimony of my Religiious Affection to you
the principal of all my dear Kindred, to be made more public from my hand to
yours and theirs, and any ones else to whom you shall please to recommend it;
for it challenges entertainment, (which is a bold word) but not from any thing
on the Auohors part, but from its own excellent and Catholic Obligation. And
that the Discourse may meet with the like reception, as when first delivered
(for God gave utterance, entrance, acceptance, and all of his Grace) I have
caused and confined my conceptions, as near as I could to go back to the very
plain style wherein I then expressed them; as thinking it better, (though not
easier) to fetch up those very words I let fall, than to start a new strain,
and follow the chase of a more polite and better studied language; wherefore
what it pleased my dear Friends to hear with patient attention, and with so
good liking to approve, and with so hearty affection to desire, I do not
repine, and hope shall not repent that it should come abroad; that this Paper
may present those things to the eyes of all our Relations, and other Christian
Well-willers, which in the Delivery (for which I bless God) sounded so well in
the ears of your experienced Auditors, (and I hope in God) found an e^^al room
and residence in so many gracious hearts.

I confess it is an easier Task for a Preacher, Writer, Reader, than for a
practiser of this Discourse, Sic vi^ere, sic mori. And there is no cause to fear
it, one ^^ S. Peter's (...), things hard to be understood, as it ^ hard to be
undergone; for like all other necessary Go^pel Truths, it is plain in its own
simplicity, and may ^ have a free passage, (not through the ears, but) ^^rough
the life in a free practice, Act. 17.
else it will be used as a (...) thing (as at Athens) only to be admired and
talk^d of.

But I trust this fault of Men, and Fate of Sermons will be amended and
prevented by this Doctrines Entertainment; for although it be foreign and
formidable to self sparing nature, yet is it highly pertinent and prevalent in
order to the advances of Grace, and a sober, just, and pious life; and although
it seems to be all Mystery, and Theory, and Paradox for the living daily to
die; yet S. Paul reduces it to a practicable State: As dying, 2 Cor. 6.9.
and behold we live. In short, it is a Task, though difficult, yet possible (as
all Salvation work is.) It is an excellent Art, and a necessary comprehensive
Duty, of vast Extent; and as a rich Merchant of copious correspondence, and
brings home to the Soul upon good assurance a vast Revenue of Wisdom and good
Works.

And I do rejoice, Sir, that you told me this Sermon was by many most
passionately craved in Copy, which is a pledge, and likely presage, that all
which may have the draught of it, may, and do resolve to write and walk after
it in duty; which that they may, the God of all Truth and Grace go forth with
it, and prosper it, and bless those that read and hear it, so as to learn and
live it, and all in the rare exercise of Daily Dying.

For me (dear Sir) whatsoever I am, or have, or can speak, write, or act in the
utmost of my poor Faculties, which are any ways communicable, you have justly
merited that all shall be yours: so as this, and whatever Service I shall be
capable to do for you, is devoted to your self, not only upon the account of so
near Relation, and so notable Benefactions, but from the confidence I have that
much of this Mystery is already transcribed, and become legible in your own
heart; and these severer Truths make deepest Impresses, and find best reception
upon the Heart-Tables of experienced Christians, such prize them best, practice
them best, and prove them best. And that you and I and all that read these
Lines may be of this number, and we all may set upon this Work, and do it well,
for it is our Masterpiece for Eternity, is the Hearts desire, and prayer of

Dear Sir, Your sincerely Devoted Uncle and Servant in Faith, and Love, Which
is in Jesus, William Pyke.

THE MYSTERY OF Dying Daily: A SERMON ON 1 Corinthians. 15.31. the last Clause. I
die daily.
MY Text lies within the Territory of the King of Terrors, Job 18.14
whose Empire spreads it self from Pole to Pole, as far as Mortals have any
ground to live, or lie on; even the wide Sea has its depths for the Sepulture
of the dead, as well as for the floating and flitting Traffic, and passage and
wonderment of the living; there is no spot in this habitable world, or
navigable waters, but has a place as rightfully and readily for men's
Recumbency, as for their Residence; and the necessity of dying once, which is
by Statute entayl'd on the Community of Mankind, Heb. 9.27.
is by our Heavenly Apostle S. Paul converted into an Act of Religion, and is
espoused into his Choice, and is taken into his care and timely forecast and
expectancy, and daily account; he tells us, he was in Deaths, often; 2 Cor.
11.23. and here he tells us, Death was in his view and voysinage every day, not
only in respect of Deaths Imminency, as, daily in the danger, and in jeopardy
every hour; but in respect of dying Concerns, Causes, Designs, Duties,
Considerations, as, daily busied about the preparative, provisional, and
consolative qualifications, requisite for the dying Estate. And all this he
represents in all Apostolic Presidency, as an unerring pattern for Catholic
Practice, for all Christians Imitation, because it is the great Task of the
Religion of our dying Lord, who gave his Disciples the same Example, and all
his ever since, and so on till our last Enemy be destroyed; that as we follow
in an inevitable succession of mortality, so we stand bound to be followers of
them who were followers of Christ; to do that often, which ought to be done
well, that we do it at last but once; and so may die not only as Mortals, but
as Christians, with wisdom, in innocence, and in peace; and not like Beasts, or
Fools, or Infidels.

I know whatever we fancy or flatter our selves, every one of us present is
daily dying, in jeopardy every hour: nay, (...) come nearer every moment: the
^w^^d of death hanging over our Heads but by a Heir, and some may be but a
hairs breadth, and some but a hairs length at most from the Grave; it is but
God's speaking the word, not mort^ris in ill^ die, but mort^^^s ^s, thou art a
dead man; as to A^imelech, Psalm. 104.29.
Gen 20.3. for it is upon his breath we live; and though it be called our
Breath, it is only because it plays in our Nostrils, but it is under God's
Restraint; if he restrain our spirit, we die, and return to our Dust. Lo, death
and dust are ours, but our breath is his who gives and takes, continues and
restrains at pleasure; it is but the going forth of God's breath in summons, and
ours goes forth in expiration; Lord, upon how slippery ground do our Feet
stand, as upon the waters paved with Ice, which is both sliding and brittle, so
as there is not more danger of falling, than of sinking! Since then our dying
is consecrated by the Lord Jesus Christ's once dying for us, and we must die
before we can blissfully see our living Redeemer, it grows into a rational
Christian Service, from our Apostles practice, to die daily. I die daily.

The Text is short, hardly one in Scripture shorter; but it is with these
sacred Clauses, as with Coins or Jewels, in smallest compass is the greater
value. So have we seen rare Beauties drawn in little Tablets, and a world of
Countries described in little Maps. So here is much counsel in a narrow room;
and the Holy Ghost affects Brevity, as making wholesome Truths more portable
for memory, and readier for use; such is this, exceeding compendious, and of
rich Contents. It Is a precious Paragraph this, that three words, and four
syllables should comprise the business of the Christian Life. The words are S.
Paul's, as the work was his, he was a Vessel of Election, and we need not doubt
but he presents us a choice draught, he vents it upon this occasion.

An unhappy Doctrinal Error against the Resurrection, springing from the old
four Leven of the Sadduces, which threatened to Leven the whole Lump: 1 Cor.
5.6. had privily crept into the Church of Corinth, which occasioned an
excellent Demonstrative Discourse of the Apostle upon that weighty subject,
which is solid enough to establish many thousand Souls in the succeding
Churches, and serves to shame and extirpate all the Heresies about it, until
the Resurrection come to prove it self. In this his Disc^urse he beats much
upon the Scriptural and rational proof of it, and confirms all by occular
Testimony. But as not contented to dwell on the Doctrinal and Theorical part to
the 29 verse. he comes to personal and practical Instances, as from that
particular notable Ceremony or Ritual of the Church, and Custom of Antiquity,
(and I must tell you Church-Custom in S. Paul's time, 1 Cor. 11.16.
and in this Epistle carries much force) and that was, Baptising the dead; the
beginning whereof, it seems, was, if not altogether good and laudable, yet it
was inoffensively tolerable, which was, that when any one died in the
profession of the Faith of Jesus Christ before he could be washed and cleansed
as for his Interment, some one or more of the Christian Friends would come and
offer themselves to be sprinkled both in their own names, and in the name of
the deceased, whom they attested to have died in the Faith of Christ; that the
Church might write them down in the Register, then kept for Believers, who
dying, they publicly prayed for their happy Resurrection. And so the Apostles
Argument bears, else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead; if the
dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead?

This Custom was anciently observed by the Corinthians, a sort of Heretics,
who notwithstanding their own practice, denied the Resurrection of Bodies, and
it is likely, were Authors of the Error, taxed in this Chapter, in the Church
of the Corinthians; wherefore S. Paul's meaning is, that this custom which
weighed so much in those days were very absurd, if there were no Resurrection,
seeing that the very Ground and Foundation of Baptism, not only Sacramental,
but Ritual, is to seal unto us both our spiritual and corporal rising from the
dead. Romans 6.3.4. Coloss. 2.12.
And the end of this particular Ceremony was the profession of the expectance
of the blessed Resurrection of Believers: a Custom which in following Ages was
much abused unto Superstition, but without doubt was primitively blameless, and
piously practicable.

Then the Apostle comes to a general Instance by way of Quaere, why, and for
what reason, and upon what hope do Christians expose themselves voluntarily to
death, and to so many Dangers, Conflicts and Trials for the Gospel, and the
Cause of Christianity, if it brings us to no happiness after this life; which
happiness according to God's order, and our own aims, cannot be of the Soul
alone without any relation to the body, being eternally separate from it, verse.
19. and 32. compared.

Lastly he comes to his own personal experience and practice, and by a most
strong asseveration or assertion equivalent to an Oath, which is in the Greek
(...), A particle never used by the Greeks, but in Oath only.
which is here rendered I protest, as if he had said, as true as my chief Glory
and Joy in this world is in the blessing of God on my Ministry toward you;
which he seems to speak so earnestly, that he might the more oblige his
Corinthians not to deprive him of that only comfort, amongst so many
sufferings, as sure as you minister Joy to me, or as I in my Ministry rejoice
you; or that he might the more forcibly press on them his own Example, and the
more prevalently win them unto Imitation, I die daily.

The words are but three, and promptly furnish me with three part, which I
intend shall bound my Sermon.

The Protestant, I.

The matter protested, Die.

The Diuturnity of its practice, Daily.

The Protestant is presented in the personal Pronoun singular (I) S. Paul, the
Apostle of the Gentiles, in his Order and Epistolar Writings, which are
tantamount his Sermons, a great Preacher, a living President to the Churches in
all his holy life and labors. His Eminency did not exempt him from strict
Religion, no more than from Mortality, he, who when he says I live, he corrects
himself, Yet not I but Christ lives in me, Galat. 2.20. Philip, 1.21.
To whom to live was Christ. When he says, I die, to be sure it is he, the same
that protests in his mortal, but regenerate Estate, affirming that the better
birth is an entrance and engagement to a dying life, and the choicest Saints,
are both Vessels of Earth, and of Election; as of Earth, so must we return to
our Earth; and as of Election, so must we die unto this world, as Heirs of a
better. New creatures live by a new way of dying, we live unto God by dying
unto sin. The chosen of God have a dying principle, from the Prince of Life,
Romans 6.3, to 12.
who died and rose again. S. Paul's Eminency in Grace directed him to the
frequent exercise of Mortification; Dying was his life, whose Dignity was to
live to God; this is that only life which makes death the Christians Game. To
the common Herd of Men, to live is sin, and to die is loss: but to S. Paul and
such as he, to live is Christ, and to die is Gain; Christ was that great
Example of the dying life of a Christian, whom this his Apostle followed in the
exactness of so choice a Mystery of Dying Daily.

Who? S. Paul the Prisoner; Ephesians. 4.1. no wonder if a Prisoner says, I die; for
a Prison is but a larger Grave, and such a one as is fettered and penned up
within Bars and Bolts, and Grates and Gyves, is but one buried alive, and such
a one may justly say, I die. No, the Apostle shows himself a Freeman, the
Prison Gates are open, the Bars are broken, and Gyves are knocked off from him
that can say, I die, in the sense of the Text. Time was when Paul himself
thought he was a jolly person in a lively posture; Romans 7.9. yet, When the
commandment came, sin revived, and h^ di^d. Then was Paul a Prisoner indeed,
even as a G^lly Slave sold under sin; then he stood in so great need of a
Redeemer, to deliver him from that body of death: but now being made free from
sin, and become the servant of God, he goes about to kill that which would have
sl^in him, and to lead his C^ptivity captive, to crucify the old man, that the
B die of Sin might be destroyed. This is he wh^ (...)

Who, S. Paul the aged? well may such a one say, I die: for Age is the next
stage to death, nay, Philemon v. 9.
the next step to the Grave, when one Foot is already in; what a fardle of
dying Infirmities does old Age carry on its back? yet the oldest living hopes
to live a little longer; yet there are many that have lived to great age and
experience, who have not yet learned to die:; 'twas never in their study, nor
practice. If men would exercise themselves this way, what a Glory would it be
to see many years, and many-fold Graces to meet in one person; the hoary Head
is a Crown of Glory, if found in the way of righteousness. No doubt, S. Paul's
Age was to be reckoned by holy Endowments, as well as hoary Hairs; his
Communion with the Ancient of days, and his relyance on the Rock of Ages, his
Statu^e in Christ, and his Improvements for Eternity, his Growth in Grace and
saving Wisdom, his long serving God in his Generation, and the innumerable
advantages he had procured to the Churches of Christ, and the everlasting good
done so many souls which profited by his effectual Ministry, were so happy
productions of his time and pains, as that his Age might be better computed by
his good works, than by multitude of years; this was he who so lived every day,
that all his days of his Convert Life, were his dying days.

Who, S. Paul the Hebrew? the Israelite? 1 Cor. 1^.22, 23. etc.
of the stock of Abraham? the Minister of Christ? so abundant in labors? so
frequent in dangers, so patient in sufferings; for him to say, I die, you may
believe him without an Oath, and wonder rather that he lived, when ye read the
Catalogue of his Adventures, 1 Cor. 11.28. His daily care of the Churches, his
intimate Sympathies, and ardent ^^plyances of Charity; for such a one as wasted
himself (...) a burning Taper, to give others light, such an one as (...) his
Lungs, spent his Breath* macerated his bo^y, beating his brains, and eating his
bread in a worse ^^eat than that of his brows, breaking his sleep, burning as
in a Fever of Zeal for God's Honor, and the Gospels furtherance, and bringing
in of stubborn and gainsaying Sinners to Christ, weeping in secret, and vexing
his righteous soul for the evil conversations and froward dispositions of men;
surely such a one may sadly, yet safely say, I die daily.

Or yet again, is it Paul the chosen Vessel, once a notorious Persecutor, now
an eminent Saint; once a Blasphemer, a cruel blood-sucker, under whose
Tyrannous Agitations many died daily Martyrs for the Truth of Christ, once mad
against the Church with too much zeal, again reputed mad with too much
Learning; sometimes a Boanerges, in his thundering Comminations, then a
Barnabas, in his Consolatory Rhetoric; such an one as has experienced all the
methods of the Christian Calling, and the perils and persecutions attending
that envied Cause, such a one as had been in the Deeps, by Soul-affliction, 1
Cor. 12.2.
and in the heights of the third Heaven, by Rapture and Revelation; one who
might glory to the utmost, even to the degree of his Apostolate, or Saintship,
as to his excellency in Labors, Faculties, Gifts or Graces? This is he who
affirms of himself, I, even I, die daily.

Now if we find him in this mortified posture, considering his Eminency, which
might be so far doubted, as that it put this holy man upon his Oath to attest
it, sans dispute, he may be believed, he died daily in his meaner and more
ordinary capacities; if he was so busy about dying as an Apostle, we conclude
him so too, as a Tent-maker. If he died daily as a Saint, as the chief of
Sinners much more: It is enough to ground a President in the case, and to
render it an acquirable faculty, and to determine it the Epitome, or Brief of
Practical Christianity, To die daily.

But is not this Durus Sermo? may we not with Nicodemus in such a case, (...)
60.^.
say (...), How can these things be? Can a man die whiles he lives? Such
sayings are Spirit, not Letter; Mystery, not Demonstration.

This is a kind of dying, which consists in Action, not in Cessation; in
laboring, not in rest from Labors. Such as in Jacob's expression, Genesis 48.21.
Behold, I die; yet he had much to do, and it is the story of another Chapter,
before he gave up the Ghost; noting, there is a way of dying for good men
before they expire.

To die, in the Text, may have a five-fold sense.

1. To be in continual jeopardy of death, in the foregoing Verse: for we are
subjected to death every moment, by sentence on Adam's sin, verse. 22. we are
under the statute of Mortality in our best and most vigorous strength and
sufficiency, whiles our Breasts are full of Milk, and our Bones full of Marrow;
we have the sentence of death in our selves, and through fear of death, Job
21.24.
are all our life time subject to bondage; we live but as condemned persons
under reprieve; and life being but a span, every Inch and Barley-breadth of
time is but a respite of the divine patience, protracting the Date, for our
better perfecting our Duty; we are sure we carry deaths enough within us, as to
give our Bodies themselves the denomination of (...), as being incident to
deaths stroke, as open to deaths sting every moment. Nor youth, nor strength,
Rom ^.24.
nor wisdom, nor wealth, nor power, nor parts, nor sufficiency, nor sanctity
can exempt, nor prevent, nor redeem from it. And in weakness, sickness and old
age, we are so under the sentence, as we are not far from the season of death.
Thus because of the daily Incidencies, it is prudential and pious to reckon
upon the daily event. And if the Heathens defined life to be continua mortis
contemplatio, the continual meditation of Death; Christians with S. Paul should
turn it into diurna expectatio, a daily ^^ing expectation; and that is one sense
of the Text.

2. I die, imports the vicinity of death: Genesis 50.24. Jos ph said, I die, (i.
e.) I must shortly go hence. So Joshua, This day I go the way of all the earth:
Josh. 22 ^^.
He reckoned his death for that day, which happened not long after. So Job
computes to day, Job 16.22.
When a few years come, I shall go to the place from whence I shall not return.
Our years (which are the largest measure of man's time) are but few by Moses
his cast, Psalm. 90.10. yet he makes days the Dividend, though seventy years be
the Quotient of man's life. And David reckons by days, noting that the longest
life is but a day of life: the Morning of Youth, and Noon of Strength, Job
9.25. Job 7.1.
and Night of Age. Lord, how swift is the revolution? As a Post, or the swift
Ships, as the day of an Hireling. This, holy David thus expresses, I am
afflicted, and ready to die from my youth; Psalm. 88.15.

3. I die, is as much as to say I am willing to die. It is my indifferency, as
to the time, or manner, or place, but if it were left to my choice, I would
desire to be dissolved, that I might be with Christ. The present Tense is
rendered in the Optative Mood. In matters of Faith, by faith things hoped for
are made present; Heb. 14.1.
and become the matter of Prayer and Option. A good Christian is a Voluntier
for the Grave; Phil. 1.23. 'Twas S. Paul's choice, and Simeon's Prayer, Luke
2.29. Having Christ in his Arms, who had been so long in his hopes, the old
Expectant thought it a burden to live longer: our Apostle always longing to go
hence, and seeming long first, that which is so much in his expectation is
frequent in his Option, and that which is so much in option is in daily action,
and such actions as have a direct tendency to fruition. Death naturally
considered cannot be the object of Election, because it is enmity to nature;
and no man rationally desires his own dissolution; nor death penally considered
cannot be the object of man's choice; but as the dying Jesus has unstung it,
and conquered its Malignity, and destroyed him that had the power of death, and
consecrated Interitum into transitum, a passage from earth to Heaven, and
Introitum the dark Entry to the Mansions of Bliss; so, to die bodily is a
desirable benefit, and Grace turns its necessity into election, and brings
inevitable destination into daily exercise. We look for death, and so with
submission to God's will we long for it, not only as a cessation from
sufferings, and sin, and sorrows, but as our Translation to eternal life, our
Convoy to Christ, our Change, our Removal; and we daily labor, and give all
diligence to be found of Christ Jesus in peace. And, Job 14.14.
all the days of our appointed time we wait till our change come.

4. I die, imports the Apostles fitness for death. Then is a Christian fit to
die, when he is furnished for a better life, and daily practice breeds
promptitude, and the exercise of dying is a tuning and timeing us for the dying
day, that we may be made meet to be partakers of the eternal Inheritance. It is
with Christians as with tender and precious Fruits, they are daily upon some
incremental change, till they come to be mature and mellow, and fit for use,
and then they are every day falling to the earth, as ready for the owners hand.
In Job 5.26. ye have an allusion to this in that Parabolical Speech of Eliphaz
to Job, Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of corn comes
in, in its season. This was a promise of Honor and Comfort in death; As, a
shock of corn in its season, notes a readiness and ripeness for that season:
Thou shall come, notes a willingness and cheerfulness in dying: In season,
notes the ripeness and fitness for death. Now that the allusion may fully bear,
our Apostle helps us to the apprehension of it, in the thirty sixth Verse of
this fifteenth Chapter to the Corinthians, he increpates the dullness of
ignorant Atheists, about the Resurrection; Thou fool, that which thou sowest,
is not quickened, except it die. Dying is in order to quickening, and Growth,
until the Corn come to a full Grain in the Ear, and be ripe for Harvest, and
the Ears are bound (...) in the Sheaves, and the Sheaves gathered into the
Shock; and the Shocks into the Barn. And in this sense, though a Child of God
die in his Youth, in the Flower and Spring of his days, yet his death is as the
Harvest Season to his hopes, and the gathering of his Soul to God, and his Body
to his Fathers; though in his natural capacity he be cut down whiles he is
green, and cropped in the Bud or Blossom, yet in his spiritual capacity he never
dies till he come to ripeness. God ripens his Servants speedily, when he
intends to take them out of the world speedily; he can and does let out such
warm Rays of his Spirit upon them, as shall soon maturate the Seeds of Grace
into a preparedness for Glory. This is S. Paid's, and every good Christian's
profession, so to live, as to be daily ready for death: 'twas holy Job's cast
of his state; Job 17.1. My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the Graves
are ready for me: And I am ready for the Grave; I am undressing my self daily
to lie down in dust, and sleep in death; there is nothing now for me to think
of; I lay all aside, and attend this business alone; and it is a business indeed
of great necessity, and no small difficulty, daily to cast upon it, and
contrive how I may lie down in peace, and rest in death; I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course: I have done my work, 2 Timothy 4.7.
and am going to my Bed; I have nothing to do but to die, and this is my daily
care to sequester my Soul from this world, as one that has life and portion.
and Inheritance in a better. I die daily.

Lastly: And so daily dying notes a continual Exercise of Mortification; for in
the Christian Dialect, and Scriptural Style, to die daily is a spiritual
sanctified Habit, made up of many Acts and quotidian Exercises of suppressing
and destroying the old man, and the whole body of Sin: and this is meant in
those Scriptures which speak of putting off the old man, Ephesians. 4.12. ^ Cor. 9.
^^.
beating down the body, and keeping it in subjection; the Spring of Grace is a
living Fountain always cleansing away the dead Sediments of Dirt a^ Mire. The
expression of the Holy Ghost about this (...) worthy of our serious
consideration; Romans 6.6. Known that our old man is crucified with him, (Christ)
that the b^ of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not s^^ (...).
For he that is dead, is freed from sin. Lo here (...) Appellation, and its
execution, the old man, partly in respect of Antiquity, as old as the eldest of
men; partly in respect of the Renovation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
which is universal of the whole man, Body and Soul. Then it is called the body
of Sin, partly because man's corrupt nature, Coloss. 3.5.
like a body or stock brancheth forth into diverse actual enormities, as so many
Members; partly because of its strength, and for that men are as much naturally
in love of their Sins, as of their Limbs, and are as impatient of Amputation.
But if ye take notice of Sins execution, This old man is crucified; Crucifixion
is made up of many deliberate Acts, and these bring on exquisite Torments, and
the Torments cause successive decays every hour; so does Sin by this crucifying
Discipline grow weaker and weaker, and nearer to its Grave, and utter
Abolition. Regenerative Acts give Sin many wounds, though (as those that are
crucified) it dies lingringly, yet it dies certainly. Sin in the mortifying
Mystery, like a man in a Consumption is always wasting and dying, till at last
it is quite dead; and the dying day of the Regenerate is the utmost date of
Sins being. Thus if as long as we live, we give Sin a daily wound, it may
sprawl and move for a time, but afterward gives up the Ghost. For while
Saints live, though Sin be mortally wounded, as the creature that has lost its
sting, it may rage and stir, but it abateth in strength and malignity, and
dies with them. In Psalm 88.4. Heman complains, Thus, My soul is full of
troubles, and my life draws nigh to the grave: I am accounted with them that
go down into the pit; I am as a man of no strength, free among the dead. The
surest Interpretation of that sweet Singers Style and State, is, That he was
much exercised in this sin mortifying austerity: he was a great Proficient in
it; as we say of one that has served a rigid Apprentiship, he is his
Crafts-Master, he has got the knack of it, he is a Freeman at the Occupation.
And in this sense death is not to be looked on as a Saints expiration, but as
an accumulative Mystery, and an high Improvement in the Faculty of Sin-slaying.
And some Ancients have been rare at it, and some skillful Christians still are
as well versed in it, and they know how to encounter with Soul-Enemies, as
tried Champions, having been long conversant in the Artillery, and
Fencing-School of Christ, as that they have been able to teach it by certain
Rules and Rudiments: and so it is one of the Gospel-Mysteries in which by
frequent exercise we may grow Graduates; and S. Paul had, it seems, commenced
Doctor in it, even in this rare Accomplishment of Dying Daily.

So then, we are resolved upon the Question, what this kind of Dying is. It is
not a natural dying, consisting of many gradual Tendencies unto the Dissolution
of this our mortal Body, though in this sense every living person is daily
dying. Nor a providential Dying, which consists in the daily vicissitudes of
Crosses, Trials and Discomforts, though this is the portion of every living
Saint, and is in part the assertion of our Apostle concerning himself; but a
spiritual and practical Dying, consisting in the frequent and renewed exercise
of mortifying Duties, as Repenting, Self-denying, Self-judging, self-humbling,
dying unto Sin, mortifying our Members, crucifying our Flesh, subduing our
Lusts, being crucified to the world, beating down our Bodies, and bringing them
into subjection, subjugating our wills, captivating our understandings,
submitting our reason to the righteousness of God, governing our passions,
devoting our lives for the testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, and if need be,
and God so order, to die for our Lord, and so to live, as to die in our Lord:
and so to die, as to die unto our Lord, that whether we live or die, we may be
the Lords. These and many more such like are but the several Rules and methods,
and quotidian Exercises through which good Christians must pass, before they
come to the degree of Masters in this Gospel-Art. To this S. Paul had eminently
attained, so as it fell into his daily practice, I die daily. Which brings me
to the third part of my Text. The Diuturnity of the Apostles Practice, (...),
notes the Frequency, Assiduity, Succession, and uncessancy of Action. And with
reference to what is done, supposes time of life to do it in. To day, Joh.
9.4. Eccles. 9.10.
whiles it is called to day; for the day of life is the working day; 'twas so
with Christ in our flesh; and the Churchman Solomon tells us, There is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go. If we
would then set on this work, this rare device of Christian Knowledge and saving
wisdom, it must be before we go to our Graves.

And it is not the work of a single day neither, but the singular work of every
day, to be daily doing, as if daily dying. Nulla dies sine linea is the
laudable industry of a Christian; and without doubt there is no Particle of
Life allowed for Idleness; even Paradise and Perfection, the place and state of
Innocence and Bliss, allowed not a space wherein to do nothing: and Heavens
Paradise, though it be the Saints everlasting Rest, yet has its business for
Eternity.

But this is to be understood of positive Acts; but to be daily dying sounds
harshly and uncomfortably to living Ears. Death is a privation, and to die, a
privative act; and how can an habit grow out of Privatives? Nay; but this kind
of dying is a positive duty in the Cristian Divinity.

1. As it is an Act of the new Creature, to die to sin, and live unto God;
Christ purchased this Estate to us, and preferred us to this capacity. Romans
6.10.
In every birth there is something generated, and something destroyed, says the
Philosopher; so in our New Birth there is the production of Grace, and the
destruction of Vice; the Life of Righteousness, and the death of Sin. And by
dying daily, we set up the Ark, and throw down Dagon. The Sinfulness of our
Souls by our first birth, consisted in our aversion from God and Grace, and our
being perverted to the Devil, and his works, in the defacing of God's Image,
and the imprinting of Satan's. Now the sanctity of the Soul, that is, its
recovery by the second birth, consists in its conversion to God, and aversion
from sin, to have the Image of the evil one rased out, and the Impress of the
Savior re-ingraven: and the Acts that appertain to these Issues, must be in
our daily Exercise.

2. As it is the Answer unto the Divine Ordination; Romans 8.29. which is our
conformableness unto the dying Savior; our conformity to Christ is here our
positive Duty in Grace, as it shall be our everlasting Dignity in Bliss; and
the Elect are sent into the world, to be planted into the likeness of Christ in
his Death and Resurrection; to this end baptized into Christ, that we may
follow his Steps, Phil. 3.10.
as well as bear his Name, and so be found in the fellowship of his Graces and
sufferings; and all his life was a continued dying, until his hour came, that
he died once for all. There is a pertinent, but difficult Text for this in S.
Paul's case; Coloss. 1.24. I fill up that which is behind (says he) of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church. The
personal Sufferings of Christ which he endured in his own body, as the
Mediator, are once for ever finished; but his general Sufferings which he
endures in his mystical Body, the Church, are yet behind, and must be filled up
by S. Paul, and his Fellows, and Followers. Not in way of Office, as
meritorious, and satisfactory: nor in proportion of weight and measure, but in
respect of their Cause, and Managery, and Issue. Thus in dying, by way of
Resemblance; Romans 6.10, 11.

And the likeness is in these Instances, voluntarily, our daily dying must be
spontaneous. Though there be a great Reluctance between Flesh and Spirit, Grace
and Nature, the pure will of God and the perverse will of Man, yet the superior
powers of the (...) carry the Mastery; (...) ^.2^.
sanctified reason consents to mortifying Acts. To die daily, is as irksome to
Self-love; as the Cup was to Christ's Flesh, in the day of his Agony; yet he
willingly drank, because it was his Fathers will he should.

Yet Christ's Death was violent, he died not of nature, but of force. So should
our self-mortifying be, voluntary, in respect of us; but violent, in respect of
sin. And herein is the life of daily dying, that we lay violent hands on our
corruptions, pluck out the right Eye, cut off the right Hand, smite the sinful
Breast, break the perverse Heart, and kill and destroy sin in its Flower,
strength and vigor; many leave their sins, who never mortified them. He that
dies daily, never stays till his sins die; for Lusts, like Weeds, if let alone,
will destroy all the good Seeds, and then wither of themselves. The old
Adulterer has left his Lust, because his Body is dead. And the griping
Mammonist is angry with the world, but it is because he can enjoy it no longer.
Eccles. 12.1.
O remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the days come when
thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them; is a pertinent Caveat. 'Twere good
to condemn and execute sin, without Reprieve; let not Lust live till to morrow,
bring your vicious Habits forth speedily in the sight of God, arraign, condemn,
crucify them now, mortify them whiles they might yet live.

Yet, the Death of Christ was lingering, Matthew. 27.45.
he hung diverse hours upon the Cross; our Dying is daily, sin cannot be
destroyed all at once; cut a Serpent in pieces, yet every part will stir. Sin
will dwell in us long, though it have not Dominion. Like a rebellious Tenant,
Romans 7.17.
it keeps possession in spite of the owner, till the House be pulled down ever
his Head.

True, the Body of Sin has in the Regenerate received its deaths wound, but it
is not quite dead: there is not the most sanctified Soul but has some
remainders of Corruption left in it, enough to require our daily Conflict;
which God in his wise providence permits for the trying and exercising, and
humbling of us, and for the making his own rich Grace in renewing his pity, and
multiplying his pardons, so much the more exceeding glorious.

You find now that dying is a Duty, and it is as necessary as our Bread: this
is daily in our petition, as it is daily in our need. Dying ought to be daily
in our practice, as it is daily at our Doors. We had need to set death before
us, under the easiest, most familiar, and feasible considerations: as the days
of a man's life come about quickly, and one of those days is the Boundary of our
Cares, so let it be of our diligence, so to number them, as to apply our hearts
to this wisdom of dying daily. That which must be of necessity once, should be
admitted into our frequent account and exercise. Let us look upon dying as the
Christians Business, and not as the Creatures Curse; and labor to attain the
Art often, that we may bear the painful stroke the better. The day will come ere
long, when it will be in vain to say, I have no mind to die, or I have no
leisure, or I am not ready, not yet, I Will think on it: What if Esay's Message to
Hezekiah were sent thee? ^ King. 20.^.
Set thine house in order, for thou shall die, and not live: Would thou not
rather live and die too? Heb. 2.13. Luke 12.^^.
It Is possible you see; but what if it should be said, Hac nocte, then Donec
cognominatur hodie had sounded better. Die whiles it is called to day, thou
fool, for this night thy soul shall be taken from thee. To die once is our
Destiny, and to die daily our Duty, why should we not bring them into our
familiar acquaintance: the day of dying is not far from us; by dying daily we
bring it to our hand; it is in our natures, why should it not be so much in our
expectations, as to be daily in our exercise? The spirit of God every where
speaks of it in reference to the Saints, in the most comfortable and grateful
expressions, as of that which we have daily in our use and observation. We
ascribe this to the influence of the dying Jesus, who has so embalmed, yea,
and clothed Mortality by the dress of Holy Language, that there is even a
Sweetness, Beauty and Blessing in it; when a man has worn a Suit of Apparel a
great while, even until it be threadbare, or it becomes foul and unseemly,
would he not be glad to put that off, and get a new Garment on his Back:
therefore death is called an uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4. a putting off the
Flesh; and in answer to that corporal Divesture; the spiritual disapparelling
is so also called, Ephesians. 4.22.
a putting off the old man with his deceivable lusts, and there is no hurt in
that, we are willing to change and shift daily.

When a man has tired himself all the day at his work, would he not gladly go
to Bed? and our sinful course is so laborious and wearisome, as that it is
never well with us, till we come to our rest; and that is no where to be had but
in Christ. Matthew. 1^.28.
Do we not betake our selves to our rest every Evening; therefore our death is
called our sleep; and if we daily need our sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20.51.
why are we not daily solicitous for our rest and refreshment in Jesus? under
these apprehensions the Holy Spirit would have us bury all hard thoughts of
Dying, and that we would familiarise it into our daily endeavors, so to
practice how to die to day, that we need not fear to die to morrow; the main
reason of the terribleness of Death is, that Mortals look on it at a greater
distance than it is, and it is of a more ghastly and formidable aspect to those
that are strangers to it. And indeed what Israelite is not apt to run at the
sight of this Goliath? the fear of dying is natural, and so far from being evil,
that it was incident unto the Son of God, who was heard in that he feared;
Christianity serves not to destroy, but rectify nature; and Grace regulates
this passion in us, and corrects its exorbitances, never intending to root it
out. And this is the method of Grace by daily exercise to master this fear,
though we cannot avoid it. Whiles my fear apprehends ^ust terror in the face of
death, let my Faith carry me to the crucified Jesus, who has both overcome and
sweetened it, let me in the exercise of that Faith daily set my self against
sin, and world, and flesh, and Devil, and the terrors of Death disband. It is
an excellent Christian Temper always to dwell in the Voysinage of the Grave; as
we do in our frailty, so should we in our faith, and hope, and humble
preparations, lie at deaths door; and though nature is loath to long for the
Grave, because she holds dissolution her greatest enemy (for what can she abhor
more than a not being;) yet Faith persuades, that to die is gain. Would we not
carefully trade every day in that which is lucrous, Phil. 1.21.
and profitable? Let us therefore come into S. Paul's practice, of daily
living, so as dying may be advantageous; we have fair respite given us in life,
which at best is but a span, God might shorten it into an Inch, but that he
lengthens the day in order to further our work, and that which is sanctified by
the dying Savior for our cessation, is required as our uncessant Employ. It Is
a woeful Conversion that we read, The sting of death is sin; and again, The
sting of sin is death; both meet in man to make him miserable: death could not
have stung us, neither had it been at all in the world, had it not been for
sin: and sin, though in it self extremely heinous, yet were not so dreadful, if
it paid not so horrible Wages: How do we owe our selves to the Mercy of our
Savior, who has freed us from the evil of both; having pulled out the sting
of death that it cannot hurt us; and having taken such course with the sting of
sin, which is death, that instead of hurting, it shall be exceeding helpful,
and is translated into our daily duty and benefit? Into what a safe condition
has the Lord of Life put us, as that we may daily be exercised about sin and
death, without dread or danger?

O let not the patience and sparing Mercies of God be longer abused by us into
security and spiritual deadness; whiles life is only lent us, and the days of
life are lengthned to us, only in reference to the fitting and better
furnishing us to die at last; why do we not put our selves into the daily
expectation of, and preparation for that which shall shortly put an end to us,
and our days, and duties and all? We have daily preparations and appurtenances
for those very things which represent our death, our journeying, our
apparelling, our sleeping; and why not for our dying too?

We need it much, and it is as necessary for us to die daily, is to die once;
we have abundance of sins and corrupti^ns to subdue, of cares and crosses to
manage, of Gifts and Graces to improve, a great Task, and but a little time,
and it is necessary (if we were so convinced) to be daily ^^ing that upon which
eternal life and death depend; it were no great matter, if we had but one
death, that of the body, to forethink of; and it were needless to multiply the
evil of dying one day, by acting it every day, for all could not prevent it,
though we may be the better qualified for it; but there is the second death,
which calls for the preventives of daily mortification, lest we die eternally.
Whosoever dies daily, when he goes hence no more to return, shall carry a good
conscience with him, (for an evil conscience is a worm that never dies) and
leave a good name behind him, and that is very long lived; Prove. 12.7.
every man is hugely unwilling that his good name should die, we are naturally
ambitious of being thought of when we are gone; those that have not living
Monuments to perpetuate them, affect to have dead; if Absalom have not a Son,
he will erect a Pillar; yet when we have done all, time eats all out at last;
there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever, seeing that
which now is, in the days to come shall all be forgotten; here is a project then
for a lasting Memorial. Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God took him;
his walking with God did not exempt him from dying daily, but engaged him in
it: and ^is not being here below was his blessedness; and his whole story is
upon record, though in a small Character, to the everlasting praise of his
Faith; Heb. 11.5. It is the Glory of the Christian Life to be daily under the
Cross; and as Christ once for all died on it, Luk 9.12.
so for us daily to bear in our bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal.
6.17.22.
who passed to his Glory through the straits of daily sufferings, till he
finished all upon the Cross of his deadly Passion; Et moriendo vicit: he
conflicted all his life by daily dying; he conquered by his death once for all.
2 Cor. 4.10, 11.
Thus by a lively faith in the Holy Jesus we encounter with, and overcome our
quotidian deaths, our afflictions, in pursuance of a better life; we are in
deaths often, Psa. 44.22.
and slain all day long, as it were by piecemeal, under the tyranny and
troubles of a wordly life, and yet are alive unto God and our selves; yet it is
a kind of death to be deprived of those comforts which are the life of our
lives; but if it be for the Lords sake, in his way, and for his ends, it is a
kind of daily Martyrdom, to be accounted as Sheep for the slaughter. This then
is an excellent means to make our names to be Heirs to our Lives, that we live
at the rate of this Mystery, Ephesians. 3.9.
as in that Fellowship of it; always bearing about in the Body the dying of the
Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body, for
we which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh.

Lo here, a Communion betwixt the dying Jesus, and dying Christians (in the
sense and scope of the Text) in his Death and Resurrection. The Lord Jesus died
in the Body, so must we; he once, we always; he bare his dying in the Body
patiently and exemplarily on the Cross, we must bear it about; his dying was by
Crucifixion, ours by a holy and spiritual Necrosie or Mortification; his new
life was the manifestation of his Victory, and it is manifested in our mortal
bodies, by new obedience.

So then our blessed Jesus can best give the rule of dying daily, who died for
us; not only for our Ransom, but for our Pattern; to satisfy for us by dying,
and to exemplify the dying Mystery to us; and therefore he redeemed us from
death, only as to its curse, and left us a method of cure and comfort in dying;
wherein else can death be our gain, unless it become our Faculty and daily
Trade, and if persons bungle in their Calling, they lose credit, and comfort,
and custom, and profit, and all, and turn Bankrupts in Religion; so as we have
need to study this Mystery seriously, and practice it sedulously, for it is by
those that have experienced it a hard work to die both in the body, and out of
the body.

Nevertheless it is feasible, else it had never been given us in precept, or
purchase, or pattern; no doubt that which was done by Christ, and S. Paul, and
many others their succeeding Disciples may in proportion be done by us, if we
resolvedly set about it.

Let me give you some Incentives by way of consideration.

1. He that dies daily, can on no day die suddenly. I consider, that man is
sure that he shall not die suddenly; and therefore if Heaven be worth securing,
it were fit that we should reckon every day the Vespers of Death, and therefore
that according to the Rites of Grace, the day be begun and spent with Religious
Offices. And if uncertainty of condition be an abatement of felicity, and
spoils the good we possess, no man can be happy that does not secure his
felicity by an habitual and living piety; for since God has not told us when
or where, or by what means we shall die: is it not certain he intended we
should be daily ready for that whereof we are in jeopardy every hour? A wise
man therefore supposes himself always upon his Deathbed; and such a
supposition is like making of his will, he is not the nearer death for doing
it, but is the readier for it when it comes; and he that daily dies, bequeaths
his Soul to God, his Body to the earth, and his Goods to the uses of
Righteousness, Holiness and Charity; S. Jerome said well, He deserves not the
name of a Christian, who lives in such a state, in which he would not die. And
indeed it is a great venture to be in an evil state of life, because every day
and minute of it has a danger; and therefore such a succession of Actions, in
every one of which he may as well perish as escape, is a foolish boldness
wherein there is no mixture of wisdom, or pious forecast.

2. There is great gain in dying for such as by frequent exercise are got
skilled in it. Job tells us of some that die without wisdom; certainly, they
that never learned of God to number their days, are to be numbered among those
Ignorants; the Learned in this Arithmetic reckon their days not by
multiplication, but by substraction, so much for God, for Heaven, for Christ,
for Soul, and for the Eternity, as that the least part of time, if any, belongs
to this life. There is a time to be born, and a time to die, says the Preacher;
but he allows no term for this life. For as soon as a man is born, that which
in nature only remains to him, is to die; and it is a wonder, since all the
Records of Scripture urge the certainty of death, the uncertainty of its day,
the horror of the day of Judgment, the severity of God, the dissolution of the
world, the necessity of our last account; and from all these premises the
Spirit of God makes no other Inference, but that we watch and be sober, and
stand in a readiness, that we live in all holy conversation and godliness, that
we repent and turn to God, that we try and examine whether we are in the faith,
that we work out our Salvation, and make our Calling and Election sure. And the
Doctrines, and Rules, and Offices, and Acts of Preparation are every where
interspersed in Holy Scripture, yet this among the rest which is indeed the
Epitome of all, To die daily, is looked on as a Riddle, and Paradox, rarely
received into the Faith and Practice of Men, called Christians; only some
choice Souls hit on it* and to such, To live is Christ, and to die is gain. And
we have seen the vast difference of managing death, when some inexpert persons
have been called to it, and the more experienced have been brought forth as
Champions in Christ on the stage of the Deathbed. It must needs come from this
discriminating Character, some with Paul have died so often, that they are grown
intimate with it, and act it to the life like Jacob; and are meetly furnished
for their Translation, as Enoch. And with Stephen first see the Heavens opened;
and then pass in with inexpressible Joy and Ravishment; certainly such have
been much versed in dying whiles they lived, who die their last in so lively an
assurance.

3. He that dies daily has but one days task to do when he dies. He is come to
his Journeys end after his daily Travel, and he is like a hard Traveller in
this, he is less weary the last day, than when he first set out; he can cast up
his account readily, for he kept his Day-book exact; and now he is ready to be
offered, and the time of his departure is at hand, he reviews his whole life,
and it has been a continual Fight, 2 Timothy 4 6.7.3.
and now he begins his Triumphant assault; he has daily been in his course,
and now comes to finish it, and to pass to his Crown.

O the desperate state of such as instead of dying daily, are sinning daily,
and so are dead whiles they live; such are they as are drunk daily, swear, and
whore, and profane and debauch daily, Epicures, Ephesian Beasts, Cretian Liars
daily; who eat and drink to day, though they die to morrow; O take heed of
dallying with death; and since all our life we are dying, and this minute in
which I now speak death divides with me, and has got the surer part, and more
certain possession; it is but reasonable we should be daily upon the ^^^^ces of
preparation. If to day we were not dying, and passing on to our Graves, then we
might with more safety protract our work till to morrow; but the age of every
day is a beginning of death; and the night going ^^ing us to sleep, ^^ds us go
to our les^^^^^, because that night which is the end of the prece^^ng day is
(...) a lesser death, and (...) ^^d but a s^ster and (...) G^^^^ and whereas
now (...) have died so many days, the last day of our life is but the dying so
many more, and when that last day of dying will come we know not; methinks this
very consideration should put us speedily upon the Religion of dying. There is
nothing to be added but the circumstances of sickness, which also happens many
times before, only men are pleased to call that death which is the end of
dying, when we cease to die any more; and therefore to delay dying till then,
is to put off the work of all our life till the time comes, in which it is to
cease and determine.

Remember how it was in thy purposes on thy last Sickbed; O that thy health
might be such as thy sickness promised; then thy mind was fixed on pious
things, and thou prayedst for sparing mercy, and were vowing religiously, and
thought on thy sins with sorrow and shame, and the Prayers of the Church were
needful and comfortable, and the Ministers company and counsel desirable, and
good discourse acceptable; and O if thou had time in hand again what a new
man thou would be? Thy case is the same still: if thou flatter not thy self,
thou art no farther from thy Grave, when on thy feet, than when on thy sick
Bed, only thou have now in health better strength and better helps, and better
opportunities than when thou last were dying: return then to thy sickly, but
serious purposes and perform them now in thy health and freedom, and practice
to die now, and 'twill be an easier and happier task at last.

And to facilitate all, look still on the dying Jesus; tho^ art called to a
conformity with him whose name tho^ bear; and if thou name the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity, decline and abandon all such Acts in life, (...)
might not be done if thou were dying. Every day t^^ view of your last, and
think either it is this, or might be and remember Christ in the flesh was
always doing his F^ther's Work, which was, to die for Sinners. O let us not
live in the love of Sin, because Christ so loved us as to die for our Sins, and
to save our Souls from the second death. He began his Works betimes, all his
days were dying days; till the hour came that he died for all: Phil. 3.10
he was always waiting for his Fathers appointed time, he was always faithful
to his Fathers work and trust. He held his life upon his Fathers Terms,
resolved himself into his Fathers Will; and at the last resigned his life into
his Fathers Hands: Abi in, and fac similiter, Go thou, and do likewise: Being
made conformable to his death.

Christ died for Sin in way of Expiation, Satisfaction and Pacification betwixt
his Father and us; we die unto Sin in a way of Crucifying, Mortifying, and
destroying it in our selves.

O it is a painful Task: but it is a gainful State. It sequesters us from the
comforts of life. I say it sweetens and sanctifies, and makes all comforts
savory.

It Is hard and irksome only to corrupt flesh.

It rebates only the grosser and more feculent parts of our present Contents,
and Secular Enjoyments. 'Twill keep death in our minds in the height of our
merriments; it is as a deaths head in the Lordly Dishes of our Feasts; it is to
corrupt minds no other than all Salvation work is, grievous and burdensome; but
to the Faith of God's Elect easy and delightsome; to pluck out the Right Eye,
is by interpretation, not to have eyes full of Adultery; to cut off the hand,
is to eschew all Acts of Violence, Oppression, Theft or Fraud; to crucify the
flesh, is but to keep the lower Faculties, and brutish Appetites from
rebelling, and rising against the supremacy of Reason and Virtue.

And so the Spirit of this Letter, To die daily, is no other than to order our
selves, and our conversations aright, as Men, and as Christians, in hope of a
better life, when this is done, which God shall show us in Christ, and here
Seal unto us by his Holy Spirit, to which our temporal Death shall translate
us, even our full Salvation. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

Newly Printed,
THe Glory and Happiness of the Saints in Heaven; or a Discourse concerning the
blessed State of the Righteous after Death; with Motives and Encouragements
unto all Christians to secure to themselves an Interest therein. Sold by
Nathanael Ranew at the King's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

FINIS.

