THE Church of Christ IN BRISTOL Recovering her Vail out of the hands of them
that have smitten and wounded her, and taken it away BEING, A just and
necessary Vindication, from a false and scandalous imputation cast upon her by
Dennis Hollister, formerly a Member of her, but now an Apostate from, and an
opposer of those Ways, Truths, and People, which once he seemed zealous for.

As appears by a late Pamphlet put forth by him, called, The Skirts of the
Whore discovered.

With some particular words, from some particular persons whom he has by name
abused and reproached.

Likewise a word by Thomas Ewen, unto what concerns him in the said Pamphlet,
and also to the later part of another Book, called, Satan enthroned in his
Chair of Pestilence.

1 Timothy 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly that in the later times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrins of
Devils. Acts 20. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them. Isa. 10. 24. O my People that
dwell in Sion, be not afraid of the Assyrian. London, Printed for Thomas
Brewster, at the three Bibles at the West End of Paul's, 1657.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is but little pleasure or delight, to the Authors of the ensuing Papers,
that they should fill the world, or take up thy precious time with matters of
this nature, there being at this day so many things, of so much higher
concernment, for the minds of immortal Souls to be taken up with, and seriously
employed about: But we being (to our grief, and against our wills, forced
hereunto,) for the vindication of the Truth, and justification of the ways
thereof,) by a late scandalous and ridiculous Pamphlet, put forth and published
by one Dennis Hollister of Bristol, once a Member of this Church, and a man as
famous for professing the Truth, as now infamous for and by his Apostasy from
it, opposition to it, and violence against it; Who, upon the first coming of
the People called Quakers, to this City, did in a short time fall in with them,
own them, and plead for them; and by his so doing, drew many a poor Soul out of
the ways of Christ, and into the ways of those miserable deluded People, so
that with himself, there rent from this Church, about eighteen or nineteen
persons, who are now wandering in the dark, and blind paths of deceit and
delusion, toward death and destruction; Whereupon the remaining part, (and
through Grace the major part by far) of the Church, did after seeking the Lord,
and seriously advising together, send Brethren, first to enquire after him and
them, and to know the grounds of their absenting, but some would return no
answer at all, others very contemptuously, slighting and scorning the Church in
this their act, with many revilings as the manner of those People is: After
some months time, the Church sent three Brethren to admonish them of their
great evil and danger, etc. A Copy of which Admonition is in the following
Papers, as likewise a particular Admonition to Dennis Hollister, setting before
him five sore and palpable evils, which we knew he was guilty of, and that
every tittle of it was both true and obvious, though he does with a most
impudent and shameless face deny it, railing at the Church for their so doing,
and instead of hearing the Admonition, or acknowledging his evils, did prepare
a Letter with this Inscription, For the People called Independents; And by his
subtilty engaged two of our Brethren to present it to the Church, putting such
conditions upon them, as might best accomplish his designs, as that it must be
openly read in a full meeting, etc. He likewise speaking to some of the Church
whom he had still an influence upon, and hopes to draw off, that they should be
sure to be there at the reading of that Letter, by which some of us came to
understand his design, and that his Letter was not to give any account to the
Church of the things whereof he was admonished, but rather to stagger and draw
away more of the Congregation to himself, and to those People and ways, unto
whom he was already departed.

Which thing is since evident by many passages in his Papers as that in his
Epistle to the Reader, where he has these words, viz. My just and necessary
defense is kept from the simple hearted amongst them, after whom my soul longs,
and for whose sakes it was principally intended, etc. By which all men may see
that his principal intent was not to answer or satisfy the Church, but rather
to draw away some from it; he also giving out, there were yet such a certain
number of persons, naming of them, that should yet come away: (which the Lord
through the riches of his Grace has hitherunto prevented) and those persons in
particular, are more confirmed and established in the Truth, and against the
principles and ways of those People, and much by his late Book, it being so
filled with rage and fury, envy and bitterness, false accusations, and rash
condemnations, having nothing in it like the Spirit of Christ; but the Church
taking into consideration his Letter, and first finding that he himself was cut
of Gods way; secondly, that he had refused to hear the Church by their
Messengers sent unto him; thirdly, that he did not own us as a Church in the
Superscription of his Letter; and fourthly, understanding his design to be as
aforesaid, to draw away more if he could, etc. Hereupon his Letter was not
opened, but returned back and delivered to his Manservant in his Shop, himself
being then absent; but this did so enrage him, he seeing himself so far
disappointed of his ends and aims, (and the Church in some short time after,
sending three Brethren again the second time, to admonish him and the rest,
according to Scripture rule, Mat. 18. Tit. 3. 10.) that he has hereupon
published, that most scandalous Pamphlet, called, The Skirts of the Whore
discovered, and the mingled People in the midst of her, etc. In which he does
most unchristian-like abuse the whole Church, stiling her a Synagogue of Satan,
and a Cage of unclean and hateful Spirits, with many heaps of slanders and
falsities, etc. to the dishonor of the name of Christ, and the reproach of his
ways and People, and to the defaming of many of those, whom God, through rich
Grace, has preserved faithful in this apostatising day.

We could not therefore (without being guilty of, or accessory to his sin and
evil) let his folly go unreproved, but have set forth these few plain words, of
truth and soberness, aiming at his confutation, the truths justification, our
own vindication, and others information and satisfaction, desiring the
Christian Reader, to weigh well our coddition, judge impartially of our wrong,
and help us affectionately by thy prayers; and so we commit both thee and our
selves, unto him who will one day clear the innocent, bringing forth their
righteousness as the light, and their just dealing as the noon day; in the mean
time we rest and remain; Reader, thy friends if thou be one that art grieved
for the afflictions of Joseph, and art sensible of this day of Jacobs trouble,
and art longing for the welfare of Sion, and walking in the Faith of the Gospel.

Then are we thy companions in tribulation, for the Faith and Testimony of
Jesus.

The Brethren of the Church in BRISTOL, R.P. T.E. I.A. R.M. R.S. B.H.

READER;
THou art desired further to take notice, that Separation from a true Church of
Christ and Communion of Gods People, is a dangerous thing:

First, it is sharply threatened by God, Heb. 10. 38, 39.

Secondly, severely punished, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.

Thirdly, by this they discover themselves both to the Church with whom they
walked, and also to those that are without, that they are the men and women who
have not a true foundation, but only have received some large measures of
illumination, and common gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, and so fall away,
and by their Apostasy, evidence their hypocrisy: Let no man think that the
good can depart from the Church, wind blows not away the Wheat but the vain
Chaff, 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if
they had been of us, they would no doubt, have continued with us, but they went
out that they might be made manifest that they were not of us. Now to prevent
the spreadings of the spirit of Antichrist and his subtle endeavors to draw
more from Jesus Christ, ought not the Church from whom these persons are
departed in obedience to the Command of God, and out of love to the souls of
those that have cast the Ordinances of God behind their backs, send two or
three of their Members in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and in the tender bowels
of pity, to beseech, admonish, and warn them to repent of their sins, and
refrain from their evil ways, and return to the Truth, Faith, and ways of the
Lord Jesus Christ, recorded in the Gospel? 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. and so in meekness
instruct those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover themselves
out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, etc.
Let the Reader seriously consider, whether the Church is not engaged by her
Head and Husband Jesus Christ, Mat. 18. from 15. to* 20. verse. compared with
Titus 3. 10. etc. thus to admonish and warn her deluded back-slidden Members,
although perhaps some of them will not hear, as in Prove: 10: 17. Others reject
both the Reproof and the Reprovers, Prove: 15: 10, 12.

And lastly, perhaps another lays open his folly to the whole Nation, in
casting dirt in the face not only of the Reprovers, but on the whole Church it
self that sent them, and so endeavor to shame them both, see Prove: 9: 7.
compared with Prove: 15: 12. Our Savior tells us, Mat: 11: 19. that Wisdom is
justified of none but of her Children; and therefore his Church may not expect
justification, but rather condemnation from those that are gone out from her as
the snuff of a Candle.

If it be sufficient to be accused who can be found innocent, it is the crown
of those that remain steadfast in their substantial Principles, to be reproached
by those that did once seemingly own them, and afterward for want of grace
backslid from them, etc.

An ANSWER of a Church of Christ in Bristol, (who desires and endeavors
according to the measure of light and strength that they have received from
Christ their Head, to comply with him in waiting upon him in all the Ordinances
of the Gospel, which many cast behind their backs;) unto Dennis Hollister, once
a visible Member, but now a professed Quaker, etc.
Dennis Hollister,
DId you never read that the Church of Christ in Scripture is resembled to a
natural Body, wherein are many Members united each to other, and most of them
to one Head, and by one Spirit? now as in the natural Body there may be many
infirmities; so also in the mistical Body sometimes it may be subject to
distempers, by undigested humors, the want of through closing with divine
truths, or the receiving in of untruths, may occasion a surfeit; sometimes
windy humors, pride, high mindedness, and giving heed to lying Spirits, by some
of its Members may distemper it; sometimes feverish heats of violent headiness,
instead of well tempered zeal for God and godliness may inflame it, so that
many parts of it are sorely laid open to infections, from diverse that seem to
be of it, or converse with it. Art not thou the man, or at least one of them;
oh! who has his eyes in his head and does not see, who has his ears open and
does not hear, who has his tongue untyed, and does not speak to vindicate the
undeceived's innocence, as well as to publish your folly, in answer to a little
Pamphlet, called, The Shirts of the Whore discoveyed, etc. containing in it
many things too low and beneath a serious Christians perusing or reading, much
more the answering; it being in the middle and both ends stuffed with so many
unsavory and unchristian like expressions, yet we shall take the Lords
connsel, Prove. 26* 5. and so answer the Author, lest he should be wise in his
own conceit: in which Answer, we shall not recite all the Absurdities and vain
hoastings, and untruths, etc. yet being, as before* beneath a Christian, much
more a whole Church, to spend precious time, either to read or answer, etc.
neither shall we at present so lay open your folly in all things, that we have
heard or seen, lest our Answer should be seven times as big as your charge. Now
to proceed, consider that as every word of God is true, so has it some more
special time of fulfilling: now we read Acts 20. 30. Also of your own selves
shall men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. O
how truly is this Scripture fulfilled this day upon us and you; first, in your
departing from us, and now in those perverse things written and spoken by you,
to draw away disciples after you, as is clear in many of those expressions in
your Letter.

We have of late met with a little Book put forth by you, the Title of which
when we had read, and seriously considered the People included and intended by
you in those expressions, we could not but even stand amazed to think, unto
what a height of Impudency and Malignity you are already come, and whither may
not a poor fallen creature run if God stop him not? Is it not a high degree of
Luciferian pride, for a poor creature, to set his foot upon the necks of all
the Assemblies and Churches of the Saints this day in England and Wales,
calling them the Whore, (as your expressions must needs import) for if this
Church in Bristol be the Skirts of the Whore, then other Churches in your
account must needs be the Whore, we being indeed but as the Skirts, or
outcasts of Sion: but for your hard censures we shall leave to him that
holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and that walks among the golden
Candlesticks; in the mean time we shall take up David's resolution, when Shimei
cursed him, 2 Samuel 16. 12. It may be the Lord will look on our affliction, (or
tears) and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day. Oh how do
the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, and the uncircumcised triumph? Will
not every profane person that sees us go in the street, say, lo there goes
one of the skirts of the Whore, one of the Synagogue of Satan, one of the
unclean birds, etc. and if we should reprove them for it, will they not say,
that one of your selves have written and published it.

Oh! had it been a Turk, a Heathen, or a professed enemy to Christ, that had
done this, we could have born it, but that one who had tasted of the good word
of God, and knowingly professed the Truth, for him to lift up his heel against
Christ, and to crucify him a fresh in his Members, and put him to open shame,
how will you look the Lord Jesus in the face at his appearing.

Poor man, you often told us there was some Judas in the Church, but little did
we think that ever you would have acted so like Judas, as first to betray us
with a kiss, calling us friends, and then deliver us into the hands of our
enemies to scourge us with their tongues, and to spit in our faces, and so to
condemn us and the way of truth which we profess, hardening their hearts
against it; yea, will not all that pass by clap their hands, hiss, and wag
their heads at us, and say? is this a Church of Bristol, that men use to call
an Assembly of Sion? etc. are these your gathered Churches, about which there
has been so much contending of late? nay then we will continue in our Parish
Assemblies still, we will never believe separation to be the way of God, nor
any of the separated Congregations to be the Churches of Christ, but rather the
Synagogues of Satan, etc. O! are not these the thoughts and sayings of many at
this day? and how shall we answer these things? Must we not make our solemn
addresses unto God? and say as Nehemiah 4. 4, 5. Hear O our God for we are
despised, and turn his reproach upon his own head etc.

You also style us the mingled People, whom you reproachfully call the
Independent, Baptized, etc. O poor man, was it not enough that you had often
spoken reproachfully against that blessed Institution of Christ, which he in
his own person practiced when he was about thirty years of age, Luke 3. 21, 23.
and left as a standing Ordinance of the New Testament to all Generations till
his coming again, you calling it as you have often done, that ugly thing of
Baptism, and so taking it quite away, neither practicing it upon your children
for many years, nor allowing it to believers; but that you should now with
despiteful hatred open your mouth in blasphemy against God, and against his
Tabernacle.

Is it a light thing that you have cast off, and do neglect to practice the
Commands and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, written in his word; but you must
write contemptuously against them, that do in conscience and obedience unto
him, walk in the practice of them: you call us a mingled people, you might
possibly have spoken true, had you said so of us before you and the rest left
us, for we had (as it is to be feared) a company of rotten Professors mingled
amongst us, some of which never brought any great honor to Christ, but since
you and they left us, we do not know any soul in the Church, but is able to
give a good account of their Faith in Christ, and are careful to walk in all
the ways of Christ, so far as they have obtained: But for that mingling the
which you mean, of persons differing in their judgments about somethings, etc.
you know in your own conscience, that it was and is the principle of this
Church to own and receive any that are truly godly, though differing in some
things; and so you your self did readily receive our Brother Simpson though
baptized, and you gave way to another of the Church to be baptized, though now
you scornfully style us a mingled People.

But the Church of Corinth, or the Church of the Romans, or the Church of
Philippi, among whom there were many that did differ in their Judgments about
some things, yet were not styled a mingled people, a harlot, etc.

But had some of those that went with you been faithful to their light, to have
practiced the Ordinance of Baptism, when they were convinced of it, they might
have been some of the mingled too, as you call us; and what a preservative that
might have been to them, we shall not determine, only this is observable, that
there was not, nor is not one of all those that have practiced the Ordinance of
Baptism with us that have fallen away, but only one that was long before drawn
away by the People called Free-willers. You say we call our selves a Church of
Christ in Bristol, etc. We answer, has not Christ called us so, and owned us
so? surely you and others have solemnly professed, that Christ has evidently
manifested his presence in this Church; besides, you and others can testify
that she was at first rightly constituted, according to the light that God gave
to his People in the work of gathering Churches at that time, but it may be you
will say, she is grown carnal and become a harlot, etc.

We shall not proudly boast, but humbly acknowledge both to the Lord and to
men, that we have many weaknesses and failings, which is matter of daily grief
and complaint; but where do you find that ever Jesus Christ did unchurch a
People for such weaknesses as they did acknowledge and bewail, so long as they
did not cast off him, nor the faith of him, nor their obedience to him; read
over the Epistles written to the Churches, either Corinth, or the Churches of
Galatia, or the seven Churches of Asia, among whom there were many very great
weaknesses and miscarriages; pray read and consider, 1 Cor: 5. 1. 2 Cor. 12.
20, 21. Rev. 20. 3. and yet Christ nor his Apostles does not unchurch them; and
who are you then, that durst so proudly set your foot upon the neck of this
poor Church* and trample her down as a harlot, a Synagogue of Satan? etc. Again
consider, who were those that are said to be of the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2.
9 and 3. 9. It was not the Churches that were called so, for Christ owned them
as Churches, and styled them so, though they had many miscarriages; but those
that were styled of the Synagogue of Satan, were a company of proud boasters,
that said they were Jews and Apostles, but did lie and were not; so now
consider, who are those at this day, that call themselves Apostles, and boast
of perfection; do any of us do so, or do not they that ye own do so; and has
not the Church of Bristol tried them and their Doctrins, and found them liars,
and their Doctrins false? as the Church of Ephesus did, Rev. ^. 2. witness
James Naylor.

Christopher Atkinson and others, whose Books some of us have read and tried,
and have found them to be contrary to the glorious Gospel of the grace of God,
which was preached by the true Servants of God, and therefore have upon a good
ground rejected them according to the counsel of the Spirit of God, Gal. 1. 8,
9. 2 John 10, verse. But you say possitively, that we are found to be a
Synagogue of Satan; was it ever heard that any man, either Prophets or
Apostles, or any that feared God, or expected to give an account of his words
and actions, did assume that boldness as thus to judge a people professing
godliness, every one of which are able to give a good account of their faith in
Jesus, and that do strive to walk up to what they know? etc. Is not this to
take the place of Jesus Christ, whose prerogative alone it is to try hearts and
judge persons? etc. Did you not say truly, when you said you did not know
Christ? and might you not have said as truly, you did not acknowledge him? for
certainly did you ever think to stand before him to give an account of your
hard speeches, you could never speak and write thus.

Oh that you would consider, what you have spoken and written to the grief of
Christ's wounded ones, Psalm. 69. 26* If it were better that a millstone were
hanged about a man's neck, and he cast into the Sea, than that he should offend
one of Christ's little ones, Matt. 18. 6. How sad is it then for you to offend
and grieve, judge and condemn near 60 persons, calling them a Synagogue of
Satan? etc. and that for no other cause, but that after praying for you and
mourning over you, we sent three times in love and pity to admonish you of the
evil of your way; you should now break out thus violently against us? O blush
and roll your self in the dust, that if yet the day of Grace, and door of Mercy
be not shut against you. You say it is in answer to a charge brought against
you by some of the Members, etc. Truly we could have been glad that you had
spared us that pains; and had not conscience of our duty, and love to the name
of the Lord, and to your soul prevailed with us, more than any delight we had
in that work, you had never heard of us in that kind You say it is, by you, for
the sake of the simple hearted among us, published; blessed be the Lord there
are some simple plain honest hearted amongst us, had you and the rest been so,
no doubt you would have stayed with us; and thus much for the first branch of
your Title page.

We observe that you begin your Epistle to the Reader, as likewise your Book,
with the word outward fellowship, etc. Truly we shall easily grant, that your
fellowship in the things of God, was but outward; for had it been inward and
spiritual in truth and sincerity, you would, no doubt, have continued in it,
but as it is written, 1 John 2 19. They went out from us, because they were not
of us. We shall not spend time to answer every passage in your Letter, lest as
Solomon speaks, Prove. 26* 4. we should be like unto you; and yet we shall
answer some things, lest as Prove. 26 5. you should be wise in your own conceit.
As for those Scripture expressions in your Book, though misapplied by you, yet
we hope we shall consider them, and examine our selves by them, though not as
they come from you, but as they are the words of God: and as for those taunts,
scorns, false accusations, judgings and condemnations, of which your Pamphlet
is full, we hope we may as we have opportunity spread them before the Lord, as
Hezekiah did the Letter that he received, Isa. 37. 14. we being otherwise
taught than to render evil for evil, or railing for railing but rather to
bless, 1 Pet. 3. 9. having the example of Christ herein, as well as a Precept
hereto, 1 Pet. 2. 23. Mat. 5. 44. yet we cannot but take notice of the
absurdity of your arguing and proceeding, wherein you first beg the question,
and then draw what inferences you please: you first style us a Synagogue of
Satan, etc. and then heap up threatenings against us as such, etc. much like the
heathen persecutors of old, who would first wrap the Saints in the skins of
Beasts, and then set the dogs upon them to tear them, etc. Would you not count
it an absurd thing if any man should come to you, and heap up all the
Scriptures that speak against murderers, Adulterers, Drunkards, Swearers,
Liars, Thieves, etc. and apply them unto you, taking it for granted that you
are such a one; and then ask you if this be not Scripture? etc. Or on the other
side, if one should take all the Scriptures that speak comfort to the true
Saints, in a suffering and persecuted condition, and apply them to a common
thief that is cast in prison for his wickedness, or to a Malefactor that is
going to suffer justly for his evil deeds? etc.

Now this is just your way of reasoning, (and many others with you) first to
heap up multitudes of Scriptures that speak against the Whore of Babylon,
against Antichrist, against the Beast, and the false Prophets, against
Hypocrites and Rejectors of the Gospel, and against other ungodly and wicked
persons, etc. and apply all this to whom you please, either to the Churches of
Christ, or to the faithful preachers of the Gospel, or to any other godly
people; right or wrong, if they stand in your way, you conclude they are such
because you call them so, whereas they may as soon prove the former things
against you, as you can prove the later against them; so likewise the comforts
and promises made to suffering Saints, may as well be applied to a common
thief, etc. As to some of those that you style the Servants and Witnesses of
Jesus, and this we find was Rabshaketh his way of arguing with Hezekiah, 2
Kings 18. 22. Now had Hezekiah been the man, and had he done the things that
Rabshaketh there charged him with, then he had reasoned rightly, but Rabshaketh
was mistaken in his foundation taking the things for granted, whereas there was
no such matter, for godly Hezekiah had done no such thing, only Rabshaketh by
his wit and subtilty framed such arguments as he thought might accomplish his
design, namely to draw away the poor Isralites out of Jerusalem, where God had
set them, and from Hezekiah whom God had set over them, to come forth to their
enemies, as you may read at large, 2 Kings 18. 30, 31, 32. and therefore do you
consider a little, what if you should be mistaken as Rabshaketh was, who was as
confident as you are; and suppose that some of them (at least) whom you have
cried down as false Prophets and Deceivers, should be found the Servants of
Christ, or that those Churches in England, that you or some of your way call
the well favored Harlots, or that this poor despised people in Bristol, that
you so contemptuously trample upon, calling them a Harlot, a Synagogue of
Satan, etc. should at last be found the Churches of Christ, and that he should
own them as his People, his Spouse, the dearly beloved of his Soul, and as
those whom he had shed his blood for, and given Grace unto? Oh! how will you
then be confounded? etc.

And why may you not be mistaken, seeing you have been mistaken thus long,
though few men upon earth were more confident of, and violent for some things
than you have been, and yet you have been mistaken, as you now say? therefore
take heed, cease judging of Churches, persons or things, but leave that till he
come, whose right it is to judge, and who will judge right, but if you shall go
on still to judge us, we shall make our application to the Lord, as David did,
Psalm. 17. 1, 2. Hear the right O Lord, etc. Let our Sentence come forth from
thy presence. But the great matter you harp upon is, that your Letter could not
be received nor read in the Church, etc. Some of us had three reasons against
it, first, because it was not directed to the Church, but as it were in a
deriding manner, viz. To the People called Independents, though now you join
Baptized with them; therefore if you would not own us as a Church, we might
justly refuse to own or receive your Letter. Secondly, you were a person under
admonishing, and had refused to hear the Churches Messengers, therefore we had
no warrant to read nor hear your Letter. Thirdly, some of us understood that
your main design was to draw away some more to you, though the greatest part of
the Church were fully satisfied about the falseness of your way, yet it may be,
there were some weak, as there was in the Church of the Romans, and of the
Corinthians, Romans 14. 1. 1 Cor. 8. 9. But as for your jeering at our weakness
and febleness, and that we were afraid of being shaken, concluding that fear
had surprised the Hypocrites, and that we were the wicked that could not stand
in Judgment, etc. This is like Rabshaketh dealing with Hezekiah and the poor
Jews, etc. as we told you before, but we acknowledge we are a poor, weak, and
afflicted People, even the poor of the Flock whom the Lord has yet preserved,
etc. You likewise jeer at our Fasting day, which in other words you did to a
Member of the Congregation, saying to this effect, What could they not open a
Letter, but they must pray to their God, and now they have prayed will not
their God hear them? as another of your company also jeering at our prayers,
used these words, 1 Kings 18. 26. O Baal hear us, etc. But the truth is we did
keep many Fasting days after you left us, and we can say, through grace* that
God did not shut his ear against our prayers, for This passage concerning R.
Simpson was inserted by some of us without his knowledge.
not one Soul went from us after we did so: As for your reviling and
reproaching that godly man, our Brother Simpson by name, it may be when your
Pamphlet comes into a far Country, where neither he nor you are known, some may
believe what you write, but in Bristol, or any other place where he and you are
well known, your tongue will prove no slander; for his humility, integrity, and
godliness, is better known than to be darkened by your pen, but we shall leave
him to clear his own innocence: As for your Epistle to the Churches and Elders
in England and Wales, and particularly to those in Essex and Norfolk, we shall
leave that to them, either to make their Appeals to the Lord, or their Answer
to you.

As for what you observed in eminent Church Members, and other high Pretenders
to Religion, (as you say) while you sat in Parliament, and other chief places
of Council and trust in the Nation, we shall say nothing to that, only this we
do remember, and did observe in what a height of discontent you came home, and
continued one while crying out against the Priests, and false Prophets, another
while against Hypocrites, and sometimes concluding and saying, that all the
Religion then professed in England was naught, and that we must find out a new
Religion, at which some of us were silent, as not knowing what you had seen and
observed where you had been, though some of us did reply, as we doubt not but
you do remember; but in this posture you continued till a new Religion came,
which you presently within few days or weeks embraced, without so much as
setting apart one hour with the Church to enquire of the Lord, what was in the
bottom of that new Religion, but rather threatening of us, that if we did not
speedily come away and embrace it we were all lost, though you could not tell
us of any thing we should come unto.

We come now to your chief Letter wherein you betray us again with a kiss,
calling us friends, etc. As for your Preface, wherein you first disown any
power that we have over you, etc. we shall not dispute that, but resolve to do
our duty according to Scripture rule, Mat. 18. Tit. 3. 10. 11. and shall leave
the issue to him in whose hands are the hearts of all men.

Secondly, as for your pretended faithfulness, but most unparalled impudency,
and sensoriousness, in judging us to be no Church of Christ, but a Synagogue of
Satan, and a Cage of unclean and hateful Spirits, wherein lodges pride,
hypocrisy, envy, slandering, backbiting, railing, lying, love to this present
world, and conformity to the fashions, etc.

We confess this is a sad sentence, to cloth near threescore persons with such
a spoted garment, many of which are able to give a better account of the work
of grace in their souls, and of their faith in Christ, and have a more
blameless conversation, than ever we could hear of you, or observe in you; what
secret seeds may be in the hearts of any among us we cannot say, neither durst
we proudly boast as others do, but this we must profess ingeniously that we
never observed so much of those evils before mentioned to break forth upon any
of those that now are together, as we have seen in you, and in some of those
that are gone away with you, and we are persuaded there is no judicious
Christian this day in Bristol, that has known and observed you and us, but
will say the same thing; so that there being so many such persons with your
self gone from us, we hope there is some Reformation in the Church, but if
there should still remain any such among us, (as we hope there does not) surely
we shall be ready to deal with them, as we have done with you and others, only
we must know they are such, for we must not take the railing accusations of our
imbittered enemies for a sufficient proof.

Thirdly, you say, notwithstanding there is that in some of us, after which
your soul does greatly long, that the salvation of God were come out of Sion,
etc. We do believe there is many a soul in this Congregation, that does long
and groan day and night after more of the blessed Spirit of Jesus Christ, that
so they might know him better, believe on him more, love him more, and live
more to him, and yet we trust there is never a soul in this Congregation, but
sees sufficient ground to stand at a distance from your Principles and ways;
so that you may cease hoping for any of them to come unto you, the Lord
preserving them by his grace.

We come now to the five things in your Admonishing, a Copy of which we having
by us, do here insert verbatiam.

First, your leaving the Church, which has three sad consequences in it, as we
judge: First, the drawing of many away from the faith and ways of the Gospel:
Secondly, the offending, grieving and stumbling of many weak souls: Thirdly the
opening of the mouths of many to speak evil of the ways of Truth, as 2 Pet. 2.
2.

Secondly, your contemning of some, and neglecting of others of the Ordinances
of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, your extreme sensoriousness and rash judging, not only of persons
abroad, but also of the Church, contrary to Matt. 7. 1. Romans 14. 3. also your
calling the Church an Harlot.

Fourthly, your asserting in the Church Doctrins contrary to Truth: As first,
that we did not know what Faith was, and that Faith was an eternal thing:
Secondly, that Christ and Faith is all one: Thirdly, that Christ is not the
object of Faith: Fourthly, your speaking reproachfully of the blessed
Scriptures, affirming they were blind, and a plague to souls; and further
saying, they are not the Word of God, nor the Rule of Life.

Now because you say these are studied Accusations, and from the Father of
lies, etc. we shall therefore prove every title of these things to be true;
First, that you have left the Church, is true, and that your so doing has
drawn away some, grieved others, and opened the mouths of many to speak evil
of the ways of Christ, this is clear and plain, and not a studied accusation,
but a real thing, and that which has been matter of grief and sadness to the
Church, and therefore we did send to admonish you of the evil of it: Now in
that you reply, all judgment is given to the Son, whom you say we are ignorant
of, and enemies to, etc. and therefore what is our judgment worth, etc. and
then you go on to heap up fourteen dreadful Sentences against us, such as the
Spirit of God does in Scripture give to Reprobates and cast-awaies, and so
conclude with that 2 These. 2. 8. Now we desire any sober Christian to consider
of this your Answer, (which you call your defense to our charge, of which you
complain you had much wrong, because your Letter of defense was not read)
whether this be a Christian-like answer to the Admonition of a Church, you not
giving us herein one word or reason of your departing from us, but only
heaping up 16. or 18. dreadful Sentences against us.

The second thing you were admonished of, was your contemning of some, and
neglecting of others of the Ordinances of Christ: First, that Ordinance which
you contemn is Baptism in Water, which you utterly reject and cast away,
neither using it to your Children, nor allowing it to Believers, but calling it
as you have often done, that ugly thing of Baptism; with other bitter and
violent expressions against it, to the grief of some of us: Now we did not send
to admonish you for not practicing of it, for we knew your judgment was against
it; but to admonish you of your great sin, in speaking so contemptuously
against it, calling some of them that practiced it, ugly Anabaptists, as you
have done in some of our hearing. Now whereas you call us hypocrites, etc.
because as you say, we sent to admonish you for not practicing Baptism by
Water; you speak falsely and do us wrong, for we did not so, but only for your
contemning of it, which we shall leave to the Lord of Ordinances to judge. The
second Ordinance which you neglect, is the Lords Supper, and such other
Ordinances as are practiced, and to be practiced in the Churches of Christ;
which that you do neglect is clear by your practice, etc. And whereas you
demand whether we had meddled in any such thing for some years past, and then
fall a threatening of us again as hypocrites, with deceit and hypocrisy, etc.
To which we answer, you speak false again, for the Church never neglected that
Ordinance of the Lords Supper any years; it is true that through your means and
some others, the Church did forbear the practice of it about a year together;
but it is one thing for a Church upon occasion to forbear an Ordinance, and
another thing totally to neglect it, or deny it as you do: but for your flying
out as you do, in the first part of your Reply to this particular, against
Inventions, Traditions, Imaginations of men's carnal wisdom, etc. We answer, we
use no Ordinance but the Institutions of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he has
commanded to be observed in his Churches till his coming again; in the mean
while all men may see, we had ground to admonish you for the contempt of some,
and neglect of other of the Ordinances of Christ; so that this is no lie, nor
studied accusation as you call it: and whereas you say in the close of this
Reply, that Baptism and the Lords Supper you own; Oh! how durst you to publish
such equivocation to the World, when in your conscience you know, you own
neither of those two Ordinances, neither Baptism by Water, nor Breaking of
Bread; why then do you use such mental reservations? deal plainly that men may
know what you are, did you not say in the words preceding, that God requires
truth in the inward parts, and then presently write an abominable untruth? is
there any fear of God before your eyes? etc.

The third branch of your Admonition is, for your extreme sensoriousness and
rash judging, not only of persons abroad, but also of the Church, calling it a
Harlot, the truth of which sensoriousness, the whole Church can testify, yea
we could give many particular instances were it necessary: but what need we go
further than your present Letter, where, in your Reply to this third
particular, you call the Church a Harlot, etc. and page 20. where you,
rehearsing what you had said amongst us before you left us, confess that you
did at last say, our Church was but a Harlot; and yet now you say this charge
is false, and from the Father of lies, and that the Church of Christ you do own
dearly, etc. Now here you come in again with your mental reservation, saying
you did not call the Church of Christ so, but the People in Bristol, which you
say is a Harlot; now is this honesty or any thing else but deceit and
hypocrisy: did not we send to admonish you, for calling this Church in Bristol
a Harlot, which you confess you did, and yet you say this charge is false, and
from the Father of lies; we wonder who is your Father in this thing, and what
appears in you but mere deceit and subtilty, equivocation, and mental
reservation; O! for shame lay aside these unchristian practices; and here we
desire all Christians to consider, whether this were a studied and false
accusation, as you say.

The fourth branch of your Admonition is, your asserting in the Church Doctrins
contrary to truth, three of which are mentioned, many more might have been,
etc. First, you asserted at a Meeting in your own house, that as Christ was the
great light of the World, so he was the great Faith of the World; and that
Christ and Faith was all one, and that Christ was not the object of Faith: Our
question was not about the oneness or nearness that there is between Christ and
Faith; but whether the person of Christ, and the grace of Faith were not to be
distinguished; and whether Jesus Christ in his person, as God-Man, be not the
object of Faith, as him whom man is to believe in for Salvation: Your assertion
was, we did not know what Faith was, and that Faith was an eternal thing,
alleging that Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. last. But the things which are not seen are
eternal. This occasioned many Scriptures to be brought to prove that Christ and
Faith were to be distinguished, and that Christ was the object of Faith; and
though the word object be not used in Scripture in that sense, yet, we are
often bid to look unto Christ for Salvation, as Isa. 45. 22. Zach. 12. 10 Heb
12 2. which Scriptures were then alleged against what you asserted: Now in your
Reply you allege 1 Timothy 1. 9 you say faith is a Mystery held in a pure
conscience, hid from al ignorant and vulturous eyes, etc. in which Reply of
yours, you show your weakness, in abusing the words and sense of the Apostle,
as any judicious Christian may perceive by comparing your Book with that
Scripture, etc. but upon the matter you do now say as much as we did then
admonish you of. And whereas you demand why we did not then question you, and
that if it be for conscience sake, why had we not done it sooner, and why had
we not disproved you by the Scripture, and why would we suffer things contrary
to truth to be asserted among us without rebuke? etc. We answer, you were
presently opposed and blamed for asserting such things, as you were at several
other times for asserting such things, which in the 20 page of your Book, you
call some manifestation of truth that was breaking forth in you some years
past; at which some were offended, and contradicted it, etc. though for a
solemn dealing with you, we did not, till you left the Church; which perhaps
was our sin and your misery; but considering your spirit, and the state of the
Church, we knew not how to set about it, though some saw ground enough to do
it, etc.

The fifth branch of your Admonition, which was for speaking against the
Scriptures, affirming they were blind, and a plague to souls, and that they
were not the Word of God, nor the Rule of Life, etc.

For the first part of this branch, you did, at a Meeting again at your own
house, affirm, which many took notice of, as well those that were not of the
Church, as those that were, whereby the thing was publicly known in the City,
and became a reproach to the Church; an eminent person of the City enquiring
of one of us about it; and that you did speak these words, is as certain as
ever you did speak word in your life, some of us sitting over against you, do
well remember with what kind of passion you spoke it, clapping your hand upon
the Book or Table, saying, that that Book or Scripture, was one of the greatest
blinds and plagues to men's souls this day in England; and these words became a
reproach to the Church, upon which we did admonish you; and though now in your
Book, you say that this charge is utterly false, and from the Father of lies,
and invented by his instruments; yet we do again affirm, and will set our hands
to it, that you did speak these very words.

Secondly, for that expression, that the Scriptures are not the Word of God,
etc. did not you, at the red Lodge in the Gardenhouse, before near twenty
people, say so? when one of us being by, bid you for shame not to speak so; it
is true, you did at a Meeting a little before you left us, propose it to
consideration, as a thing wherein we had been mistaken; yet so, as your very
proposing of it, did imply the negative: other instances also we could give at
private conferences that some of us had with you about the same thing; but what
need we say more, do you not demand in your Book, page 19. where does the
Scripture call it self the Word of God? to which we answer, we shall give you
four plain places instead of many, Jer. 30. 2, 4. Rev. 17. 17. Prove. 30. 5.
Mark 7. 8, 9, 13. But what should we go to light a candle to the Sun? have not
many judicious and godly Writers long ago proved against former Athiests and
Heretics, that the Scripture is the Word of God; though neither they nor we
deny, that glorious Tittle, that God the Father has put upon the person of
Jesus Christ, that his Name should be called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13.

And thirdly, whereas you demand, to whom was the Scripture, the Rule of Life?
We answer, to all the People of God to whom they were given, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. and 5
31, 32. Mat. 5. 6. 7. chap. Romans 12. All which contains Rules and Directions
for Christians to walk by; but it is the character of wicked men, that they
cast the Law of God behind their backs.

And thus we have proved every tittle you are charged with in your Admonition,
to be true and clear, so that we are no liars, nor false accusers; but we must
turn that back again upon your self, professing to all the World, that you have
wronged us in what you have written against us.

As for the other part of your Letter, wherein you sometimes flatter your self,
and commend your self, about your righteousness, faithfulness, diligence and
deserving; as likewise how freely you had served us, and been a keeper of our
Vineyard, and that now it is time to look to your own Vineyard, and to mind
your eternal habitation, etc. We answer first, as Prove. 27. 2. Let another man
praise thee and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine own lips: But we
never did blame you, nor admonish you, for any good you did among us, but for
your departing from that which was good; Jehu was not blamed for the good he
did, but because he took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel
with all his heart; neither was Amaziah blamed for any good he did, but because
he did it not with a perfect or upright heart; and as for your gift of
discerning, etc. most of us know it was a thing you did much pretend to, and
boast of, etc. though we could observe your gross mistake therein, etc. And for
your now looking to your own Vineyard, and minding your eternal habitation,
etc. truly we hoped you had done that when you were among us, and that your
care and diligence which now you speak of, had been as well about your own soul
as others: but if it were not, we wish you may make better use of your present
time, than you have done of that which is past: As for any manifestations of
truth breaking forth in you as you say, page 20. at which some of our hearts
burned, and others were offended, etc. We know not any one Truth, that ever you
spoke in the Church, but it was readily assented to, and seconded by those that
sat by; whether you did press to believing or holy walking; but for other
things which were not according to Scripture, nor did not tend to faith or
holiness, etc. some of us did sometimes manifest our dissent from you; yet with
all tenderness, as knowing your spirit, and the spirits of some others now with
you, we were not willing to offend you or them. And as for that which you so
often asserted in the Church, and now mention page 20, 21. That you did not
know Christ, and that that knowledge we had of him should profit us nothing,
and that our habitation is in deceit, and through it we refuse to know the
Lord, etc. First, we did not violently oppose you in that thing, as thinking
that it arose from a sight and sense of the want of the Spirit of Christ, to
open and reveal the glory of his person, virtues, Offices, and Mysteries, more
clearly unto you, according to what is written, Ephesians. 1. 17* 18. Col. 2. 2.
John 16. 14, 15. and herein we could and did join with you in complaining of
the littleness or smalness of our knowledge of Christ; yet some of us did often
tell you, that our comfort stood not so much in a speculative knowing, as in a
believing acknowledgment of Christ, to be that which he is said to be in the
Scriptures, and so to own him, believe on him, love him, and obey him; and
therefore we did then, and have since, and do now declare, that we owned no
other Christ, but that one anointed glorious person, who was born of the
Virgin, and who is made both Lord and Christ, who died, rose, and ascended, and
is now sitting at the right hand of God, and is the Mediator, between God and
man, who shall one day come again, according to the Scriptures.

Secondly, we do own no other knowing of Christ, but that which is according to
the Scripture, namely, understandingly, to know him in his person without us,
and experimentally to know him in his Virtues, or by his Spirit within us; and
so through grace we do know him in our measure, and are waiting and praying
daily for a further and clearer knowledge of him in his Virtues, and powers, by
the revelation of his glorious Spirit, according to the Scripture; in the mean
time we desire to acknowledge him, believe on him, love and reverence him as
our Lord and King* and do submit to his Laws and Commands lest in his Word: but
we did little think, that your meaning had been as now you declare, both in
your Book, and by your practice, that you and we should take up that kind of
notion of Christ, as to call that light that is in every man, both Heathens and
others, Christ, and so to slight and nullify that glorious person now in
heaven, from being the object of Faith, etc. as many of your way do and have
done to some of our faces, scoffing and jeering at us for speaking of the
person of Christ, and for thinking to be saved by the blood of him that died at
Jerusalem, and as you your self did jeeringly ask one of this Congregation, to
this effect; whether we did believe Christ to be an old man, sitting in a chair
in heaven? etc. You further tell us, page 21. That many who desired to see
Christ's first Appearance in the flesh became his betrayers and murderers; so
now in his second Appearances in life, power, and spirit, would be found the
greatest enemies to him, and that some of us would betray him; and then appeal
to all that have any discerning to judge, how sadly this is already fulfilled
in us, etc. We grant that many did stumble at Christ when he came in the flesh,
and that many in all ages have stumbled at the truth, and ways of Christ, as
likewise many do now at his person, his Gospel, his ways, and his Ordinances,
etc. which might put you to consider two things: First, whether you be not one
that do so; and secondly, whether you be not one that have caused many to do
so? etc. But you seem to beg the question, and take it for granted, that Christ
is now come in life, power, and spirit, in you and your party; but truly you
must give better demonstrations of it, before we or any other judicious
Christians will believe you; for we have read much, and know something by
experience through grace, what the sweet, gentle, and dove-like spirit of
Christ is, and we have seen and known by sad experience, how unlike your spirit
is to that: Secondly, how can you call this a murdering and betraying of
Christ, namely our sending brethren three times in love and pity to enquire
after and admonish you and the rest that departed from us? we shall leave this
to the Lord to determine, etc. As for those strange and unchristian
expressions* page 21. of our sporting our selves, and making a wide mouth, and
drawing out the tongue and the hand against you, etc. and then calling us
children of transgression, a seed of falsehood, comparing of us to Ishmael and
Cain, etc. We shall say little to it, only desire the Lord to rebuke your
railing; yea, we say again, the Lord rebuke your railing. Have we done any
thing to you or against you, more than sent three Brethren, (after many prayers
made) for to seek to recover your soul. And as for our imagining a vain thing,
and setting our selves, and taking counsel against the anointed one, (as you
say) as likewise our joining in confederacy with the enemies of God, and that
we must be broken to pieces, for the Lord of Hosts is with you, and the shout
of a King is among you, etc. We see it is an easy thing, for a man that has
brain-knowledge in the Letter of the Scriptures, to heap up a multitude of good
words, right or wrong: but whether we or you have set against the anointed
one, whether we or you shall be broken in pieces, we shall humbly leave to the
Lord of Hosts, and King of Israel to determine, but we deny that the shout of
the true King is among you, though some of your way have shouted and cried,
Hosanna, holy, holy, King of Israel, to James Naylor; and if you mean that King
as they called him, etc. we desire with humility, to shout and rejoice: First,
that God has through the riches of his grace preserved us from those strong
delusions, that you and others are fallen under. Secondly, that the Lord has
so wonderfully discovered, the abominable wickedness of those proud boasters
and blasphemers, who called themselves Apostles, and were owned by you as
infallible; and that God should do it in this City, even in the very faces of
you, that you might see it and be ashamed, etc.

You make mention in the 22. page, of some of us beating in our Meetings, like
the enemies of Christ in their Synagogue, etc. Now as we cannot but wonder at
your shamelesness in printing such a thing; so we cannot but declare to all the
world the truth of this story. You know it has been the practice of the Women
of this Congregation for some years past, (especially since the Apostasy of you
and others from us) every second day of the week, toward evening, to seek the
Lord by supplication and prayer by themselves; at which Satan has much raged,
and some of your way have come several times to disturb them, and in particular
upon the day you mention, there came two Women, one of which had been an old
Ranter, but now fallen into your way, the other a late Member of this Church,
but now turned to your opinion; these two wretched Women came rushing into the
room, (one of our Sisters being then in prayer) and so did in a most
unchristian, uncivil, and inhumane manner, walk up and down the room, humming
and making a loud voice, at length came to the Woman that was in prayer, and
putting their mouth to her ear, uttered these words, The prayer of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord; and so forced her to give over praying,
whereupon after many civil entreaties by some, to cause them to depart, and to
leave off telling them, that there was no place for them unless they would be
quiet; but this not prevailing, one of the company, an ancient godly Woman,
took one of them by the arm, and would have put her forth at the door, but
could not, she being too strong for her; which striving together, is that which
you call a beating, and so at length the Woman of the house, claiming her
privilege, did command them to depart; and this was all the beating and
occasion of it, etc.

Now let all the world see the wretched wickedness of these two women which you
justify: Secondly weakness, and shallowness of your foundation upon which you
build your large Discourse of 11 or 12 lines together where you heap up many
dreadful expressions against this Church for this act, calling it a beating
like the enemies of Christ in the Synagogue; whereas there was but 5 or 6 women
there: now is not this to justify the wicked and condemn the rightous both of
which are an abomination to the Lord? as Prove. 17. 15. what more wicked act
could there be than for these two wretched women to come huming, ranting, and
roaring into the room, to disturb a company of poor Christians when they were
seriously pouring forth their Souls to God in prayer? etc. You desire us page
22. to read without prejudice or deceit the 83 Psalm from end to end, and see
whether our practice and portion be not contained in it etc. We do conclude
that if you were to be our judge, the things written therein should be our
portion: but blessed be the Lord our sentence shall come forth from him who
will with rightousness judge the poor and with equity reprove for the meek of
the earth etc. but O poor deceived man, how can you apply the things written in
that Psalm to us, or that in Obediah, from verse the 11, to the 15. as you do?
What gross darkness has seized upon your mind, that you should be crying out
against us, and threatening of us, for that which we through grace, are innocent
of, and you your self so notoriously found to practice, for are not you joined
with all the Papists, Athiests, Ranters, and ungodly rabble of the world, in
this one great design of the Devil, to break in pieces the Churches of Christ
in England? Has it not been the attempt of one power and party after another,
to rout, break, and scatter the Congregations in England, under the name of
Independents, Anabaptists, Sectaries, and Schismatics? etc. And has any party
gone so far in this wicked practice, as you and your company, that call
themselves Quakers have done? Nay, was there ever any party in England, or the
Nations adjacent, that have offered the like violence to the Lord Jesus Christ,
in his person, in his Word, in his Gospel, his Ordinances, his Saints, his
ways, etc. as you and your party have done? And what have those poor sheep
done? have we, (or have not you rather) joined with the Persecutors of the
ways, and people of God at this day? poor man! where are your eyes? are not
you joined in practice with the most embittered spirits in England against the
people of God, whom you and others make the objects of your scorn? Nay, do not
Athiests, Drunkards, and profane persons, cry Aha, at the reading of your
Book? Have you not pierced the sides and hearts of Christ's wounded ones, and
will not this be bitterness in the later end? Nay, have you not out-stripped
all others in lies and falsehoods, slanders and reproaches, scoffs, scorns, and
derisions, which in your Book you have unjustly cast upon us, teaching the
wicked of the world, yea, even the children that have no understanding, how to
blaspheme, and call the Churches and Servants of Christ, the skirts of the
Whore, Synagogues of Satan, and cages of unclean birds? have you not made our
Savior to stink in the nostrils of all the Nation, at the least of so many as
do not know you and us, but will credit your untruths, etc. O! stand still,
smite upon your thigh, and blush for shame at what you have done. Suppose the
things had been true, which the Lord knows they are not true, which you lay to
our charge, was it not the part of wicked Ham, to proclaim his Fathers
nakedness? but as you say to us, so say we now unto you; what should we advise,
we perceive your heart is heardned and you will not hear? O! that we could
mourn for you! your last clause in your Letter is, That from henceforth we
should not trouble you or our selves by word or writing; when we have performed
the last Ordinance that Christ has left for persons in your condition, unless
God give you a new heart, which we should be glad to hear of, we shall not
trouble you: And so to close up what at present we shall say to you; take
notice, that whereas you lay blame upom our Brethren, whom we sent to admonish
you, of whose saithfulness we doubt not in discharging their trusts to you and
the rest; we do desire them to answer for themselves, that their faithfulness
may appear as visibly as your folly.

Signed in the Name and by the consent and appointment of the whole Church, by
us, Robert Purnel, John Andrews, Robert Simpson, Thomas Ewen, Richard Moon,
Brian Hanson.


A Reply of the three Messengers of the Church, to an untrue Charge or Report
of Dennis Hollister, in a little Pamphlet called, The Skirts of the Whore
discovered.
Dennis Hollister,
BEfore we make our defense to your passionate, heady, untrue report of us, we
shall set down in order the Churches order, and our commission from God by them,
to admonish your self and many others in your case, Viz. The Church taking into
consideration, the great dishonor brought to the Name of God, the public
scandals and reproaches cast upon the ways of Jesus Christ, to the wounding and
piercing of him afresh, and to the grieving of the hearts of many precious
Saints, stumbling the weak, and opening the mouths of the adversaries.

We, the whole Church, do again the second time, according to the Scripture
rule, Mat. 18. 15* to the 20. Tit. 3 10, etc. in the name of the Lord Jesus our
Savior, and in tender bowels of pity, and love to your souls, beseech,
admonish and warn you to repent of your sins, and refrain from your evil ways,
and to return to the truth, faith, and ways of the Lord Jesus Christ recorded
in the Gospel, that if it be possible, the glory of God may be recovered,
reproaches, scandals and stumbling blocks removed, our souls refreshed, and your
soul eternally saved, which is the desire and end of the Church, in the
performance of this their duty to the Lord, and service to your souls.

We do also appoint and desire three of our brethren, viz. Robert Simpson,
Richard Moon, Robert Purnel, to admonish them, to whom we shall give the
particular things to admonish each person of, etc.

We the three Messengers of the Church above named, having knowledge of the
Churches order, and having received our Commission from God by them as to this
work. We three only met together, and considered seriously of the particulars
that we were to admonish our back-slidden brethren and sisters of. Most of
which we knowing our selves they were guilty of, and for those things we knew
not our selves, we were fully satisfied by the mouths of many faithful true
witnesses, that were eye and ear-witnesses to the rest; so we being fully
satisfied in every particular, we did in the name of the Lord, and in obedience
to his command, in a filial fear to God, love and pity to your souls,
admonish one after another as we had opportunity, etc.

Now Dennis Hollister, you have falsely accused us in your pamphlet, page 3. in
saying we charged you with false accusasations, and as soon as we had done,
fled away as men surprised with fear, or accused by their own consciences, etc.

For the first of these, that the things we charged you withal are true in
every syllable of it, does at large appear in the foregoing answer to the
whole Church: and for the second, whereas you say, as soon as we had done, that
we fled away as men surprised with fear, or accused by our own consciences,
etc. this is as false as the rest, for through grace we did not fear you,
neither did our consciences accuse, but excuse us in what we did, as being
then, and still are, fully satisfied we had done that which was our duty; Now
if you will know the reason why we did not stay with you after we had done our
work with you, then let us tell you that you may remember when we were sent by
the Church with the first admonition, some of us staid with you above an hour,
and found your spirit in such an ill frame even as a boiling Furnace boiling
over, and scalding all that stand near it; this made us resolve in the strength
of Christ, not to stay so with you the second time, unless we could discern
your spirit to be in a better frame: but as soon as we perceived you not to
hear the Messengers of the Church, but in stead thereof we discerned some
violent headiness breaking forth, as before, etc. So we left you as one not in
a capacity for Christians to converse withal. Much more we might say, but we
judge your tongue or pen can be no slander to us, as to any serious Christians,
our stability as to all substanciall principles of religion, being as well
known as your mutability. We subscribe this with our hands.

Robert Simpson, Richard Moon, Robert Purnel.


Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Verse. 19. A Brother offended is hardern to
be won than it strong City, and their contentions are like the Bars of a
Castle. Jude 22. And of some have compassion making a difference. 23. And
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment
spotted with the flesh. A true Answer of Robert Simpson to a Pamphlet lately
put forth by Dennis Hollister, entitled, The Skirts of the Whore discovered.
I Intend by the grace of God to forbear giving like for Mat. 5. 38. to the
end. Luke 6. 27, 28, 29. Romans 12. 17. to 22. Heb. 12, 15.
like, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, reproach for reproach,
through the infinite abounding grace of God extended to me by Christ, in some
measure I have learned otherwise.

And your censorious bitter language, and judging without, nay against the Rule
which God has set as bounds for us not to pass over; in which judgings of
yours you climb up as high as the Temple of God, I shall say little, or but
small, to you about, but in reference to that seriously consider these places,
2 These. 2. 1 to 13. Romans 14. 4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The Lord give you to see
your wickedness in your bitter censorious spirit, which sure is not small,
though you Ezekiel. 16. 1, 2. Isal. 30. 1.
seem not to discern it, but cover it with a covering that is not of Gods
Spirit, and so add sin to sin, and the good Lord give you repentance for it,
you have not hurt or injured me at all by it, though your self you do; God has
of his infinite goodness, made your hard false speeches, and censorious
judgings of me, of good use to me, though no thanks at all to you for it nor
any thing but what is sad to think on can you reap from it.

As I have said to you sometimes upon the like occasion, when you affirmed unto
me that some men, to wit, such as then you had in admiration, though for that
in which they exceeded, or God owns above others, I never saw nor yet heard,
but this you affirmed to me concerning them, that when they were in the light,
they could see what men's inward states was before God; some of which as you
said, they saw you named to me, though such as they never saw, Matthew. 7. 16.
19, 20, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Deuteronomy. 29. 22.
nor yet heard of any thing visibly apparently evil by them; by which man, by
the blessed Rule of the Scriptures of truth, is to judge: otherwise our rule is
to judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will both bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts; and then shall every man have praise of God.

My answer then to you in that affirmation concerning Isai. 8. 20. 1 Cor. 4 4.
Job 10, 15. 2 Cor. 10. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5. 9.
them, was this in words, or to the same effect, that as I could give no
credence to such assertions groundedly, but contrarily had more than ground of
jealousy to be suspicious they were delusions, as all such things and
pretended revelations be, which have not the Law and the Testimony to warrant
them: So what if all the men in the world, did approve me, what is that in
order to certain ground of holding up my head before God in reference to it?
So, if all did disapprove me, yet upon, and from such a ground, as that I have
a sure word, and certain witness of Gods approving of me, I should not flagg in
my Spirit, nor hang down in reference to that. That use (besides others) as to
my self I have endeavored to make of those great charges you lay upon me; and
if your considerations Were otherwise of me, as sometimes it has been, and
also of others, I would not in Phil, 3. 3.
the least heed or give any regard to it, so as to flesh my self from it, Phil.
3. 3.

The charges indeed that you lay upon me, and send me clothed with before the
world, if so indeed, how sad were my condition; well might my countenance be
changed, and my thoughts be troublesome unto me, and the joints of my loins be
loosed, and my knees smite one against another, as if I did inhabit deceit, and
devise wicked imaginations, and speak lies to you, and that in the name of the
Lord, and the like. Sore charges they be, wickedness of the highest degree, and
of the dangerousest attendance that can be.

But truly it is sufficient to me, that under all the charges you load me with,
that I have always a witness in heaven, Romans 8. 33, 34. Psalm. 3. 3, 4, 5. Job
34. 29.
and brought into my own heart from thence, and confirmed unto me by the Spirit
of truth, which proceeds from the Father and the Son, by which I am cleared
of your charges, and so by that means they take no hold upon me, God To wit,
your own private spirit and consideration, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
gives me much case under all your clamors. Truly, it is a very small matter to
me to be judged of you, (I say of you) who are more than apt to judge all, both
persons and things, to be light, that bears no weight in your Balance.

By which Balance I know you must not your self be weighed at the great day
and appearing of the Lord Jesus: but by that Balance or Rule, that who ever
walk according to it, peace and mercy shall be upon them; the Word that John 12.
48.
Christ has spoken must judge all at that day.

But truly Dennis Hollister I pity thee, me thinks I could even mourn over
thee in the consideration of thy being in Rev. 12 10. Luke 3. 14. Mat 12 43, 44
the Devils work and employment, to wit, an accuser of the brethren, as I am
sure thou art in thy printed Papers.

And for that false charge (as it is altogether) of my speaking lies to you in
the name of the Lord.

That charge of yours, I know, has reference to my being (as you slightly say)
the mouth of three Messengers sent to you by the Church to admonish you of your
sins, (which sins of yours I am sure was obvious, visible and clear.) Truly in
order to that, I knew well what I spoke, Mat. 28. 18. Mat. 18. 16, 17, 18.
when I spoke on that rate I did unto you. I with my brethren that came with
me, had a Warrant sealed and given forth to us from him who has all power
given unto him in Heaven and Earth, for what we did. And if I may speak it
without boasting, as I trust I do, so we did attempt it, as those that God had
vouchsafed that grace unto, to take up into the Mount with him, to confer with
his Majesty by Christ about it, before we did dare to attempt upon it, his
Majesty being pleased graciously to incline our hearts in some measure of holy
reverence, fear and trembling, and in faith to wait upon his Majesty by Christ
our Mediator and Iutercessor, and we had a gracious answer from him by Christ,
to our very hearts about it. And so we are strenthened to that work of the
Lord, which otherwise we had rather any had been Exodus 3. 11. Jer 6. 7, 8, 9,
sent about than we. And then we went not staggeringly, nor yet ignorantly, but
knowingly and understandingly about it, God having in some measure fitted us
for it, and left us not without some sure witness, that he was with us in it.

And not any reluctancie have I or my brethren had for what we did; but are
fully satisfied that what ever was set upon you, and laid at your door as your
sin, to a tittle Isal. 28, 17.
is true, and will be so found when the Lord shall lay Judgment to the Line,
and Righteousness to the Plummet, and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of
lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.

And whereas you say in the first line of your Letter to me, that it came upon
you in soberness to manifest to my conscience, a little of the deceit in which
as you say I inhabit.

That it came upon you to write to me, that is not Jer. 17. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 1. 4,
5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 4. 7. 2 Timothy 2, 16, 17, 23.
questoned, but did it indeed come upon you in soberness, look back, recall
your self, it is possible you may be mistaken, is it not?

The occasion of your writing of it (which I would here relate, but that then I
should be too tedious as well as be of little use to the Reader as all such
Discourses usually be) the tumult and heat which you gave a clear manifestation
of but a little before you writ and sent it, may give, I say, at least a real
ground of jealousy, that it came not from a Spirit in a sober frame at that
time.

And sure when you are come to your self, as I may say, into a sober mind, you
will not say it came upon you in soberness to write what you did, and when you
did write; sure were you not in that altogether a stranger at home, you would
charge upon your self passionateness, even this, that the occasion of your
writing of that, and most, if not all that you writ and sent abroad concerning
others; came from a fire indeed kindled in you, but not from a Cole from off
the Altar, but from a violent heat of wildfire that came upon you, and was
then in you, by which you were hurried, and in that hurry you writ and sent it.

Sure that soberness that is put into the heart by God, which is one of those
good and perfect gifts that comes Jam. 1. 17. Jam. 3. 17, 18, 13, 14, 15. Gal.
5, 22, 23.
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, is just as that Wisdom
is which cmometh down from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, easy to
be entreated, gentle, full of mercy and good works, without partiality and
without hypocrisy.

If that soberness you speak of were of that nature, 1 Samuel 15. 13, 14. Phil.
4. 5.
or had that stamp upon it, how comes it to pass, that, that which you say came
upon you in soberness to write, had so little (if any thing at all) of that
Wisdom that is from above in it. That moderation that the Apostle exhorts
Saints to make known to all men, nothing at all of that in your printed paper,
clearly manifests to any indifferent, sober, unbyassed man; but most (if not
all of it) ootherwise.

And sure that which you say came upon you in soberness to manifest, had little
of any thing at all of that Wisdom that is from above, which in order to the
same is first pure; but indeed that which is point blank contrary to purity of
hearts, to true speaking, was it stuffed withal. And so I come to speak and give
a true Answer.

I desire with that which is real soberness indeed, to the main thing in your
Letter to me, in reference to which you so sport your self, and insult over me
as a Liar, and so present me before all, as one that shall have his part in the
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 22. 15. Rev. 21. 7, 8.
which is the second death.

Whereas indeed not any thing at all was a lie in what I asserted, but what I
said you had my Hand unto, as my particular affirmation, that I say still, and
that groundedly and truly you cannot manifest, much, less have you any ground
at all to lay that upon me which makes a lie, or any other sin, out of measure
sinful, in order to the aggravations of it, (to wit) that it was a Lie
invented, a Lie prosecuted, a Lie denied, and a Lie proved upon me; which words
you say to me in the printed letter to me: Sure you were not in a sober mind
when you said so, I am sure of that, but a great distance from it and true
speaking.

And I cannot but think if you did indeed commune with your own heart, that
light that is in you, and is in all men, if not put cut, it would tell you so,
and that it is a very slender proof that you have of it.

I could wish that in plainness and singleness of heart you had put out that
Letter you have under my hand from end to end, as you did the Letter you sent
to me, but that is forborne by you; for what end you best know: but had it so
been, I know you had not gained any thing at all by it, to be a proof of what
you would charge upon me. Had you in Simplicity, and godly honesty with it,
declared how you came by it, and upon what account it was given unto you, which
for satisfaction to the Reader, I shall truly relate.

You know that after I, with my brethren, had endeavored to set your sins upon
you, and to admonish you for them: afterward I meeting with you, or rather as
I think, you calling of me in to speak with you as I went by your shop, you
desired of me a Copy of the Churches charge of sin, that I with my brethren
did admonish you for, from the Church, (which, said you to me, I know you have
a Copy of) I was not free and forward to do it as you did well perceive; not
as if I was unsatisfied of the warantableness of the doing of it; I was
satisfied, I might, though I told you then, I could not do it as from the
Church, I being but a single person: But that way wardness that was in me of
giving you a copy of the Churches charge of your sins, sprang from some
jealousies that I had, that you would but your self with it, because of that
fierce violent spirit that was manifested from you against your Reprovers, and
that obdurateness that lay upon you.

Yet with your more than once or twice persuading of me with importunity and
entreaty, I did engage my self to you to write out a copy, of what the Church
by us did charge as sin upon you; which I did truly, and deliver to you: and
yet it was both promised and delivered to you, with this engagement, and
actual promise on your part, which I bound you to that you should not make use
of it, for the making of that breach wider, that the wicked one by his
Instruments had made here, I at that time saying these words to you, or to that
effect, I am sure that I would be loath to be found a setter up of partition
walls, I had rather God would make all his people diligent, mindful and
careful, of minding the things that make for peace, and by which we might
edify one another. Which you gave me a promise of; how clearly and fully you
have broken your promise and personal engagement, you cannot be ignorant,
unless wilfully ignorant.

So according to my promise to you, to which I was made more forward then else
I should have been by your solemn promise,, I brought you a true copy of the
charge of the whole Church of your sin, not any one of them but did agree in
it, and did also agree to send us with it; but the copy that I brought you, I
did not bring it signed then with my hand at it, for indeed I was jealous of
your spirit, notwithstanding your promise, who will wring and screw out of
words that which they speak not, and which those that speak them, intend not,

Which was the cause I had not then set my hand to it: but you looking at it,
and seeing my hand was not then to it, you entreated me to set my hand to it,
that it was a true Copy of the Churches Charge of those sins, for which I,
with my brethren from them, did admonish you, I not considering what end you
had in it; which was, it appears, to make me a transgressor before all: in that
your own conscience cannot but tell you I was clear, you tendering me a pen with
ink in your shop, with the Copy I brought to you, I set my hand to it.

And what did I set my hand to? you know, speak truth, deal plainly and singly,
do not evade and equivocate, though too much you have of that in your printed
paper, in that you do profess you own Baptism and the Lords Supper, or breaking
of Bread, as Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, whilst it is visible to all
that have eyes, that in your oxning of them you give no answer at all to those
that upon good grounds question you about them (just so you deal with me) you
know that what I set my hand to, was that; that which I delivered to you, was a
true Copy of the Churches Charge, and that is all that you have my hand to, in
reference to which you make such a noise all over, in order to which there is
merely by you the sounding of brass, and the tinkling of the Cymball, only the
beating of the air. But to wind up this troublesome discourse, as to me it is,
in which I would have been altogether silent, if not, drawn and put upon it by
weighhty considerations.

I shall propose this before you, take it and consider of it.

Say it be thus; That apparent injury and violence is offered to you in that
which is near and dear unto you, say your nearest relations, or to your name
and estate, which I conceive you would preserve and rescue to your power, by
all lawful means, from those forces that is put upon them, and injuries done
to them, you being really satisfied without any the least scruple or question,
that such violence and injury is done to them though your self was not
personally present and saw all done, though the most part of it you did; yet
you being so clearly satisfied about that part you saw not, that the fact in
every part of it, is as clear to you as the Sun at Noonday. Now if in this
case of yours that does so nearly concern you: you should go; and from those
from whom you could not have the least suspicion from, of speaking otherwise
than right in every Tittle.

And from those from whom you are so fully satisfied, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Deuteronomy. 19.
15. Mat. 18. 16.
besides the testimony of many standers by, about two or three Witnesses by
which the matter is established.

I say, in this case should you go in a sober and Christian way, and tell such
as have done that injury, and put that violence upon you of it, and debite the
matter with them, telling of them they were much out of the way; they were
injurious in what they did, and the end of it without repentance, would be very
sad and lamentable. Do you think that in this case fair and even dealing were
measured out unto you in case you should be rendered as a Liar all over the
nation for it, because you did not see it every bit your self, though the most
part of it you did; and what little part you did not, you had certain real
true testimony of, not to be questioned? I judge you would not.

This is the naked real case I conceive between you and I, in reference to
that for which you so foully fall upon me, and tell me for it in your printed
paper, that I am without, and for the Lake, and have a proud look, and a lying
tongue, and a heart that devises wicked imaginations, which indeed the Lord
hates, and say I have uttered perverseness; and as the false witness shall not
go unpunished. Whilst I spoke nothing but what was true in every Tittle of it,
and could not for bear to speak, but with the making of my self guilty of your
sin, having that clear Lev. 5. 1. Lev. 19. 17.
Call to speak it which I had, the most part of it being that, which to my
grief I heard my self, and that which I did not hear, I was fully satisfied of
by true, clear, and unqustionable proof. I would leave this to you to make
application of, as in order to that, that yo write in your Letter concerning me.

But, sure I am, you did offer apparent violence and injury to that which
should be nearer and dearer to us than our nearest relations, much more our
names and estates. I saw and heard it, almost all the particulars you were
charged with; that which I did not hear, I wanted not satisfaction in.

Now being called to put to my hand with others, to see if I could be a means
to recover you out of the snare of the Devil, and the precious Institutions of
Christ from those forces and violences that you offered to them: judge right; am
I, think you, for this to be blamed? you do, it is true, but I pass not for it,
if that make me vile, as to you it does, I resolve to be more vile.

So that by what I have said as to your great charge against me, I sland clear,
and never had you my hand in particular, to that which I said, I heard not, and
you well know it your own self, though I said I was not there when you spoke so
reproachfully of the blessed Scriptures of Truth; yet I said I did believe it,
and yet do; and you know you had not my hand to any thing but this, that, that
which I delivereed to you at your your request and solicitation, was a true
copy of that the Church sent us to admonish you for; if it be not, prove that,
and then I shall own the condemnation as just, that you lay upon me for being a
Liar, which I knowingly know you cannot, and tell that Romans 2. 1, 2, 3
you say nothing at all in order to your great charge: but only quibble at
words, catching to get some hold so of me, but cannot.

Besides, it was some good space of time after you had that, you have my hand
to, ere you did pick any quarrel with me about it, though if you had pleased
you might have spoken with me every day, I think, in my passing to and fro* or
at the least word of yours sent to me to desire it, and, I judge, I should not
have denied it.

But I conceive you had not spoke when you did, but that you were heared by
that fire that is sure from beneath by my contesting against that held out by
you, which I desire to war against by the Spirit and spiritual weapons, so
long as I have any being, and not otherwise, as being fully satisfied Romans 6.
13. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
that only such a war, of that kind and nature, is to be maintained; the wrath
of man and carnal weapons not being appointed of God, and so not under a
promise of 2 Thessalonians 2. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. 1 Samuel 17. 45.
47. 50. Rev. 12 7, 8, 9, 11.
a blessing from him, to bring down and to naught such wickedness. And indeed I
am clearly and in some measure satisfied by God, from that most sure word of
prophecy, whereunto we do well to take heed, that one main cause why the Lambs
Warriors and Soldiers gain no more ground than they do against the Lambs and
their enemies and opposers, both those enemies within, and those enemies they
combat withal without, is because such contests and combats with them, the war
is so little maintained by the Spirit and spiritual weapons, which if it were,
sure they would she and fall before them.

And immediately after you have subscribed the Letter you sent me, in the third
line of the next page you say concerning your Letter that you sent me, you have
received no answer of me; this is true, but did I promise to send you an
answer? If so, you might charge me home, which I know you would not spare: But
I did not, neither indeed could you groundedly expect any answer from me of it,
if in a sober mind: but yet that had been done, but that the bearer, by whom
you sent the Letter to me, by some thing that he proposed to me, which had
weight in it, did persuade me not to meddle in such vain fruitless janglings,
as to that effect some of his words was to me, by which I was detained from
writing to you; and indeed his counsel in that was sound and savourie,

And whereas you mention that Festus, a Heathen Roman Governor, was so noble,
that he heard Paul's defense, as to the accusation made against him by his own
Countrymen; and King Agrippa said, Thou art permitted to speak for thy self:
but, say you, you are falsely accused, condemned and refused to make your
defense.

First, I say, you are not falsely accused, condemned and refused to make your
defense, that is but your own saying, it is a mere a rye vapor.

Secondly, were you not desired, nay entreated to come and appear, and so if
you had any thing to say, to speak and make your defense? Do you not well know,
that liberty was never denied unto you? but what ground, I pray you, has one
in your case to expect the making his defense that way you would do, by a
Proxes, as I may say, with refusing to come face to face, as Paul did before
Agrippa and Festus, that you know you were entreated and desired to do, and
therefore in your naming of them in order to that you name them for, you speak
nothing at all; you were permitted to do it as they were and might have done,
as Paul did; and I hope that groundedly; an evener Rule, and another kind of
dealing had you found than what Paul was tried by, or he found from them,
though I know you are more than apt to conclude otherwise of all that is not of
your stature; but I fear sense of guilt lay so open upon you, as that if you
speak truth, that was it that kept you away from making your defense in that
way, that was clear by that Rule, we are to go by in the managing of the things
of Gods House, and so not any would have denied or excepted against you in a
warrantable way, which you had free liberty to do; and then before your self,
it not falling down under the sins charged upon you: all in every particular
had been proved, so as that you could not justly have excepted against the
Charge in no part of it; and I believe that would have been done by some of
those, if not all, for whose sakes, as you say, you made that you sent, and was
not read visibly.

So simple honest hearted they were, and so remain, as that they, to save you
out of the snare of the Devil, would have in soberness of Spirit, in conscience
of their duty to God, and in love to your soul, witnessed before you that which
was charged upon you.

But I forget my self, now a true Answer you have of all that Letter which in
particular you sent to me, with a small Isal. 43. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 19. 1 Pet. 2.
15. and 3. 1. 16. Psalm: 37, 5,
touch upon some thing, that in order to the not sending you an answer you
speak to me afterward, I confess I have more words in my answer than I would or
intended. But I could not tell how plainly to answer it so, as to satisfy the
Reader in a briefer way.

It is probable a flood you will cast after me, but I pass not, such floods
shall not drown me, nor such fire burn me; I resolve, in the strength of
Christ, in the way of well doing, to commit my self to him who in this I know
will bring forth my righteousness as the light, and my judgment as the
noonday, and so to labor, by well doing, to put you to silence in this, as
not knowing any way otherwise better to do it. And for your self, I have, if my
heart deceive me not, no coar at all against you; but could be glad I might be
of any use unto you, and could rejoice to see God recovering of you out of the
snare of the Devil, by giving of you repentance to the acknowledging of the
truth, the which I am sure you are departed from; which is the groans of your
Friend, who is a lover of your Soul, though a Witness against your falsehood and
deceit.

Robert Simpson.

A WORD to DENNIS HOLLISTER BY THOMAS EWEN.
Dennis Hollister,
I Have of late met with a Book put forth by you, in which there is a Letter
formerly written by you to me, which Letter I acknowledge I received above a
year since; and having read it, I laid it by, intending never to have Answered
you, lest (as Solomon says, Prove. 26. 4.) I also should be like unto you: but
now you having published it (with your folly) to the world, I take my self
bound to Answer you, lest as (Prove. 26. 5.) you should be wise in your own
conceit, etc.

In the second Branch of your Title page, you say, That I have before several
witnesses often denied my self to be a Minister of the Gospel; in which you
deal like your self, though not like a friend, nor like a Christian: but as for
your ends in so publishing, I shall leave to him by whom Actions and Spirits
are weighed, who will preserve the faithful, and plentifully reward the proud
doer.

I shall therefore with all plainness, soberness, and faithfulness, declare
(both unto your self, and also to the world) upon what grounds, and in what
sense, I have sometimes denied to be called Minister, though I never denied my
self a Preacher of the Gospel. But the first ground upon which I denied the
title of Minister, was this; When you with, many others, as I shall farther
show, had prevailed with me to come to Bristol, I gave it under my Hand to the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commissioners, That I should not come as a Parish Minister
to take any Parochial Charge upon me, but rather as a Public Preacher of the
Gospel in the City, by way of Lecture, and so I have (sometimes by word,
sometimes by writing, as I had occasion) denied my self to be a Minister of any
Parish in Bristol; so that I never did, nor I hope never shall own my self a
Minister of any Parish, etc. so that this is the first ground, and this you
know in your Conscience to be true, and that I did it in tenderness of
Conscience, though now you make it matter of reproach.

Secondly, I have sometimes (as it is like in your hearing, and some others)
denied my self a Minister in Office, I having not then been Called,
Constituted, or Ordained to any Office in any Church otherwise than by the
unanimous Consent, Approbation, and Request of this Church of Bristol, to serve
them in the Lord, as that other godly man who left the City at my coming hither
had done before me, I always distinguishing, between a Person sent forth to
preach the Gospel to the World, and a Person Called, set apart, and Ordained to
Office in a Church: whether this distinction were right or no, I shall not now
dispute, but this was your judgment then, and therefore in this you deal
unworthily in publishing this to the world, to my reproach, whereas you know in
your Conscience, that I never denied my self to be a Preacher of the Gospel,
nor a Minister, or Servant to this Church, but only that I was not a Minister
by Office, at least by an actual, and solemn Ordination.

Thirdly, There is yet another ground (as the Lord only, who is the searcher of
hearts knows) upon which I have often put off, that honor and dignity, when
you and others have put that style or title upon me, my heart has secretly
answered, What am I that I should be called so, I being a poor inconsiderable
worm, the least in my fathers house: which have often brought those words to my
mind, Amos 7. 14 I was no Prophet, neither the Son of a Prophet, etc. and this
did arise from the sense I had of the honor and dignity, weight and excellency
of that high Calling, and the great unworthiness and unfitness that I saw in my
self of so glorious an employment, and this also I am persuaded you know in
your Conscience, that I have often hinted unto you in private discourse, and
when you have spoken of me, and to me, (more indeed than was fit for any wise
man to speak to the face of any Christian) namely, what God had done in Bristol
by me since I came hither, etc.

But that I have been, and am through the grace of Christ (though the
unworthiest upon earth) yet a Preacher and publisher of the glorious Gospel, of
the grace of God both in Wales, and now in Bristol, I have no need to seek a
proof of you, nor of any other man; I having had

First, The approbation, and recommendation of a Church of judicious Saints in
London, where I had been for some time a Member, and unto whom my Principles as
to matters of Religion, my Gift as to the work of Preaching, and my manner of
life was well known.

Secondly, I having been solemnly sent forth by a Church of Christ in Wales,
with Prayer and Supplication, recommending me to the Work and Grace of God,
appointing me to Preach the Gospel in Wales, where, though I was accompanied
with manifold weaknesses and temptations, yet the Lord was pleased to give me
some Seal of my Ministry, the lawfulness of which Call, and sending forth to my
work of Preaching, I could sufficiently prove, both from Scripture, and from
the practices of the Churches of Christ: but of that more hereafter.

Now having continued Preaching in Wales about the space of three years, it
came to pass that some Overtures were made by the people of this City for my
coming hither, and your self, with a Minister then of this City came as
Messengers to treat with the Church of Lannachas, in Wales, to spare me to this
place, which though at first they denied, yet the importunity of many here (and
as some have said) the incessancy of Prayer prevailed, so that that Church did
consent that I should come, and ordered that a Letter should be written to
acquaint the City and Commissioners, That if they could prevail with me, I
should come unto them, etc. Whereupon as you know there was two Letters sent
unto me, the one from the City, signed by the then Major, some Aldermen, (one
of which was then a Parliament man) with diverse others of the Council, and
Commissioners of the City of Bristol, your self being then one: Some of the
words of which Letter I shall here insert, etc.

We being met together to consider and advise of able and godly men to Preach
the Gospel in Bristol, and having experience, and much assurance of your
faithfulness, and sufficiency for that Work, do desire you, Sir, that you will
please to come unto us: And they adding farther, their care of my maintenance,
etc.

Another large Letter I then received from diverse godly people, the inhabitants
of the City, some of which words I shall also here insert,

Dearly beloved, since after much waiting upon the Lord, the hearts of the
People, generally throughout the City, is so much set upon you, desiring to
enjoy you in the service of the Gospel, etc. And since our Motion formerly made
by our Messengers, has been so much prospered by the Lord in the hearts of our
Brethren there, etc. We do therefore earnestly and very seriously beseech you
in the Name of our Lord Jesus, that you will with all convenient speed come to
Bristol and help us, etc.

Upon the receipt of which two Letters, and some advise had with godly friends,
I resolved in the strength and garce of Christ, That I would come, though I had
much fear and trembling in my own heart, from the apprehension I had of the
greatness of the Work of Christ in Bristol, and the insufficiency I saw in my
self, so that it was not Riches, nor Honors that drew me hither, but mere
Conscience, and Obedience to that Call, which I judged was of, and from the
Lord; the thing having never been sought or desired by me, which has much
supported my Spirit under many trials and temptations which I have met with
since.

But all this is little in comparison of what I have yet (through grace)
farther to speak, and that is; That the Lord has been pleased, through his
goodness, to own me in my Work, so that though I am the unworthiest in the
world, yet I trust I may say with a holy reverence, and humble boldness, that
my record is on high, and that God has given me a seal of my Ministry in
Bristol, there being many Souls in this City that lay weltring in their blood
of ignorance, and ungodliness, when I came hither, that are now, through the
riches of grace, made living and precious stones, and are able to give to any
man that shall ask them, a clear account, of the time when, the place where,
the manner how, and the word and instrument by which the Lord was pleased to
turn their Souls unto himself, several of which are since received into this
Church, and though they seem contemptible now in your eyes, and in the eyes of
some others, yet I have good ground to believe that they are precious in the
sight of the Lord Jesus, and will be found in him at his appearance.

Likewise I doubt not but I have a testimony in your conscience (though now it
seem obliterated) that you have found by experience, that Christ was with me in
my Work, and I am sure I have often heard it from your mouth (if that were
worth any thing) etc.

But I trust there are hundreds in Bristol, that can say, That the Lord has
been, and still is, with my Ministry, quickening, comforting, teaching, and
refreshing their Souls, however you and others make it your work to traduce and
reproach me, casting contempt upon me, to weaken my hands, and sadden my
Spirit, and what in you and them lies, to discourage, and take off people from
hearing of me; you saying to one in this City, That I Preach the Doctrine of
Devils, etc. And to another, That I do wors hurt to your Way, than all the
Preachers in Bristol: Others cry me down as an Usurper, Uncalled, Unlearned,
Ignoramus etc. And another in his late Book, loads me with Scoffs, Jeers,
(...), etc. which makes me wonder, That you and they which are so different in
other things, yet can all agree, to cast stones at me, and discouragements upon
me, who never intended them or you any hurt, etc.

But, through grace, I find this by experience, That all your and their labor
(as to this particular) is in vain, for the more you and they strive to beat me
down, and to cast me out of the hearts of the people, the more room the Lord
gives me in them, and the more prosperous and successful, I trust (and some
think) my work is among them, through the help, grace, and goodness of my dear
Lord Jesus: I write this with lowliness and humility, without boasting or
vanity, to the praise of God, and to the stoping the mouth of envy, etc.

It is true, I am no Preacher of that thing which you, and some of your way,
call the Gospel, namely, To bid every man turn to a Light within him: neither
did I ever read, or hear, that any of the Prophets, Apostles, or holy men of
God did preach such a Gospel, etc.

But that Gospel of good news and glad tidings, which Jesus Christ gives
commission and commanded to be published and preached, to all Nations, and to
every creature, that Gospel I preach, and you have sometimes born witness to me
therein, though now your testimony be veiled, even the Gospel of the grace of
God, as Acts 20. 24. wherein the everlasting love, grace, and good will of God
in Christ, is freely published and declared to poor lost and one sinners, and
the way to eternal life by Jesus Christ, through Faith in his blood and
righteousness, etc. this Gospel I preach, pressing all that receive it to give
up themselves to Christ in love and obedience, according to the scope and tenor
of the Gospel.

But the great Argument by which you would prove me to be no Minister of the
Gospel is my speaking, as you say, in the second branch of your title page) of
having Sarah Latchet whipped and sent to Bridwel, etc. Now that the Reader may be
informed, and you, if possible, convinced of your weakness and folly in
publishing this thing; I shall here faithfully relate the truth of that story.

This Sarah Latchet was sometime a Member with the Baptized people in Bristol,
but Apostatizing from them, was Excommunicated by them, and so does seem to
have the greater hatred to, and rage against the truth, ways, and people of
Christ; this Sarah Latchet being one of the fiercest sort of the people who
call themselves Quakers, has come several times to disturb us in our
Meetings: I shall mention three times especially.

First, Once in the public Place after Sermon was done, she fell a railing at
me, as their manner is, with fierce and cruel words, at which time she was only
turned out of the place, and nothing done to her.

Secondly, Another time the Church being assembled to break Bread, and to
celebrate the Lords Supper, this Sarah Latchet came into the place, I having
spoken to the Church a word of Exhortation, in reference to that Ordinance, and
addressing my self to administer it to the Church, this Sarah Latchet came
rushing up toward the Table, and in the face of me, with a loud shrill voice
began thus, O thou deceiver, the plagues of the eternal God, etc. I spoke not a
word to her, but desired the Church, to be still in their spirits, and to mind
the work in hand; one of our Brethren stepped forth, and took her by the arm, and
led her to the door, and put her forth; and this was all the hurt she had at
that time.

Thirdly, Another time, the Church being assembled, at the usual time and place
of Meeting, one of our Brethren being in Prayer, as soon, as ever he had done,
she being present in the room, did again with a loud shrill voice begin thus,
The Prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, etc. and so ran on a
long time, with railing, menacing, dreadful, expressions, where upon I did
endeavor to stop her, by casting in some words, but it would not be, she still
continued to heap up, and threaten plagues and judgments against us; then I
went near, thinking to speak a word to her, but she let flee at me with a
multitude of railing, reviling terms, such as they use to give to the Ministers
of the Nation, and that in such a fierce and furious manner, as hardly any
Scould in the street could parrallel; whereupon I spoke these words, or to this
effect, That it were fitter such an idle Huswife as she was, should be whipped,
and sent to Bridwel to work, than to go about railing at people as she did. And
when I had spoken these words, I went from her, and she went her way, and never
was questioned, nor punished for any of these abuses; and those words I spoke
but once to her, and this was all I did and the occasion of it, upon which you
build your great structure, concluding that I am no Minister of the Gospel, but
a Persecutor of the truth, etc. as in your large Letter to me thereupon you
declared; and that now in the title page of your Pamphlet you proclaim to the
Nation, etc. but I wish you lay a better foundation for your other buildings,
lest you prove a foolish builder.

Now I would ask you a few sober Questions.

First, How comes it to pass, that you can style Sarah Latchet a Servant of
Jesus, and publish her so to the world, who is an Apostate, and an
Excommunicate person, going on in such a railing, reviling, fierce, manner, as
has been now declared, and as diverse witnesses can prove, whereas there are
many precious Servants of Jesus, and Saints of the most High, now living in
England and Bristol, that have been known to walk with God for many years in
uprightness, their foot having held its steps, and not declined from the good
ways of the Lord, neither gone back from the Commandments of his lips, but
have esteemed his words, before their appointed food, and have stood fast in
the worst of Times, and sorest of Trials, etc. and yet they must be censured,
judged, condemned, and cried out against by you, as if they were the vilest
Persons on earth, and all because they cannot close in with you, and your way?
etc.

Secondly. How durst you in your Conscience say, That those raylings,
revilings, cursings, and lies, etc. which she uttered, are a testifying from
the Lord? Do you not blush to name, or write such a word? Will Jehovah, the
great and glorious God of Heaven and Earth, ever own such raylings, revilings,
etc. to be a testifying from him? Or will he ever justify you, in what you
have here written, and published to the world? O be ashamed, and confounded,
poor deceived man.

Thirdly, How will you bring both ends of your Parallel together: you endeavor
in your Letter to parallel Sarah Latchet with Paul, and Sarah Latchet 's
sufferings with Paul 's sufferings, and me with Paul 's Persecutors? Now then
let me a little examine your Parallel.

1. Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ, having received a Commission from heaven,
does accordingly preach and publish the glorious Gospel of the grace, mercy,
and love of God in Christ to poor sinners; and likewise sets forth the Lord
Jesus, in his person, virtues, and offices, inviting and beseeching, with all
love and tenderness, those where ever he came to receive this grace, and
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And Sarah Latchet comes forth railing,
reviling, cursing, etc. Ergo: Sarah Latchet and Paul are alike.

2. After Paul had with meekness and love, tendered the grace of God, and the
person, and virtues of Jesus Christ, the Savior, as before, some did rise up
against him, beat him, stone him, imprison him, and whip him, so that five
times he received forty strips save one, with many other fore and cruel abuses,
as you mention in your Letter out of 2 Cor. 1. etc.

And Sarah Latchet, after she had rayled, reviled, and pronounced curses
against people; it was said to her, It were fitter such an idle Huswife were
sent to Bridwel; Ergo, Sarah Latchets sufferings, and Paul's sufferings, are
both alike, etc.

3. Paul's Persecutors, after they had heard the pretions glad-tydings of the
Gospel, and the report of Jesus Christ made unto them, as before, did actually
take, and cruelly beat, stone, whip, and imprison Paul, etc. And I after I had
been revised, rayled upon, etc. said of Sarah Latchet, it were fitter she were
whipped and sent to Bridwel, Ergo, Paul's Persecutors, and I, were both alike, and
under the same condemnation, etc.

Is this good Logic? May not all that read your lines, read your folly? etc.
But to go on.

Fourthly, Will you ask your Conscience this question, Did you not publish and
set forth this thing (to wit, of my not being a Minister of the Gospel, etc.)
to lay me, if you could under contempt and scorn, both in the City and Nation,
though you know in what sense, and upon what ground, I had denied the title and
dignity of a Minister, as I have before declared: but you knowing that this was
a nail that would go, and therefore you strick here; and was not this such
another piece of envy and hypocrisy, as poor Mris. Prince did manifest when
she came to rayl at me, and reproach me at my Lecture at Nicholas, when in her
Conscience she durst not object against any thing that was delivered, though it
were often put to her by me, but instead thereof, after much bitter revilings
against me, called to the People, and bid them to beware of me, for she had
heard me say, I had not the Spirit of God, etc.

Now suppose this had been true, That I had at any time uttered my complaint to
her, or any others, in the sadness and bitterness of my soul, when under
temptation (as the Lord knows what sad hours and dark days I have passed
through, since I came to Bristol) though you and many others little observed
it, or enquired after it: but suppose, I say, I had uttered my complaint to
her, as she and many others have done to me, was it a Christian-like part in
her, to publish this in the face of a Congregation, many of which might be apt
enough to take up a prejudice against me? etc. would you, or she, or any other,
think it, either honesty, christianity, ingenuity, civility, or humanity in me,
if I should publish to the world, what you, or she, or they have at any time
uttred to me, as a matter of grief, burden, trouble, sadness, affliction, or
temptation, that lay upon your, or their spirits? now both you and she also
knew full well the sad complaints of my soul under the sense of my own
weakness, the fore and terrible temptations that I encountered with the
greatness and weightiness of my work, the many eyes that were upon me, and the
great dishonor that would have come to the name of Christ, if I should have
miscarried in my work, which made me to see the necessity, and prize the
excellency and long for the supplies of the Spirit of Christ, and often to
complain of that small measure I apprehend I had of it, etc.

But Secondly, Both you and she, and some others, know in your Consciences that
there was another ground upon which, and another sense in which, I had
sometimes questioned, whether I and many other Christians, had yet received the
Spirit: which for the Readers information, end my own vindication, I shall now
declare: When I lived in London, and sat under the Ministry of some choice
godly men, I did sometimes hear expressions to this effect, That there was a
twofold coming of the Spirit of Christ into the hearts of Believers. The first
was that by which the eyes of men's understandings are opened, and they turned
from darkness to light, Faith and Repentance, wrought in the Soul, conversion,
regeneration, or the new birth, effected; and so he that was once a dead
sinner, becomes a living Saint or Believer, though as yet but weak, a babe in
Christ, etc.

The Second work or coming of the Spirit, is that by which the Soul is sealed,
confirmed, established, filled with joy and peace in believing, and fitted and
furnished to every good work, that God calls them, whether doing or suffering,
etc.

Now this put me upon the search of the Scripture, as first, Ephesians. 1. 13.
After you believed, you were sealed: which Scripture relates to that Acts 19.
2. Have you received the holy Spirit since you believed? etc. So Acts 8. 14. to
17. Samaria having received the Word of God, and believed in the Lord Jesus
Christ, were baptized by Philip the Deacon, the Church at Jerusalem, or rather
the Apostles sent forth Peter and John, that they should pray, that they might
receive the holy Ghost, for as yet he was not fallen upon any of them, etc.
Another Scripture, I find, Joh. 7. 37, 38, 39. In the last day the great day of
the feast Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink, he that believes on me as the Scripture has said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water: but this spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive, for the holy Ghost was not yet (given)
because that Jesus was not yet glorified: So Luke 11. 9. to 13. such as God is
a Father unto, are bid to pray, to ask, to seek, and to knock, etc. with
assurance, by many Arguments, that they should receive the holy Spirit: So in
the 14, 15, 16, Chapters of John, our Savior speaking to such as did believe
in him, love him, and keep his Commandments, etc. he promises to send the
Comforter unto them, even the holy Spirit which the world could not receive,
etc: and to this agree many of the Prophecies both in Isa. Jer. Ezekiel. Joel,
Zach. and others.

Now then as to the first work or coming of the Spirit, (namely) to make a man
to become a Saint, a Christian, a Believer, a new Creature, etc. I never
denied, but always affirmed, that whosoever did believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, or had the least beginning of a work of Grace in their Souls, it was by
the Spirit of God, and they had the Spirit of Christ in the first sense,
according to. Romans 8. 9. now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his, etc.

But in the second or latter sense, namely, to seal, stablish, fill with joy
and comfort, etc. with many other glorious effects which the Scripture speaks
of, and which the Saints in the primative times, did enjoy, in this sense I
have often said, that I did question, Whether I (then) had or whether many
others in the Church had received the Spirit? and to this you did then assent,
etc. And therefore I did often press it in the Church, that we might pray more
for that blessed Spirit, according to the command and promise of Christ, Luke
11. 9. 13. as before; and this is that which I have often called the great
legacy of the new Testament, and as Jesus Christ was the great promise of the
first or old Testament, so this blessed Spirit is the great promise of the
second or new Testament, which all believers are to wait, pray, and long for,
as the believers under the first Testament, were to wait and long for the
Messiah; and this was my meaning, when I have sometimes said, That a man may be
a Christian, a Believer, a converted Soul, or a babe in Christ, and not as yet
have received the Spirit, I mean still in this latter sense, in respect of
sealing, establishing, etc. yet I neither did, nor do expect the Gift of
tongues, or working Miracles, etc. neither do I find that the great promise of
the Spirit, was principally to that end, though that was accomplished by it,
when and how the Lord pleased, as Heb. 2. 4. with diverse miracles and gifts, or
distributions of the holy Ghost, according to his own will, but I find rather
that the great promise of the Spirit, is, for such glorious ends as these, etc.

1. To open and reveal the hidden Mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, as
Matthew. 13. 11. to you it is given to know the Mysteries of the kingdom of
Heaven, etc. So 1 Cor. 2. 9. to the 14. we read that those things which the
eyes of men (as men) have not seen, neither can the natural man perceive, yet
God does reveal by his Spirit, etc. So it is promised in John, to lead and
guide into all truth, therefore, Ephesians. 1. 17. the Apostle prays for believers,
that they might receive the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, etc.

2. To comfort and cheer up poor drooping believers, filling them with all joy
and peace, consolation and refreshment, which is one main end for which it is
promised: as in 14, 15, 16, Chapters of John, to which agree many of the
sayings of the Prophets, etc.

3. To heighten and strengthen the Saints with boldness, courage, constancy,
and resolution in their Spirits, to do, or to suffer for God, as Acts 4 8. Then
Peter filled with the Holy Ghost, said, etc. so to the 19. verse. So Acts 5. 41.
And they -- rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer, etc. which thing
neither they nor Peter could do (a little before, as Mark 14. 50* 66 to 71.)
But observe, they had not then received the Spirit, so Acts 16. 25. Paul and
Silas sang in prison

4. To purge and purify, cleanse and sanctify believers, and make them holy,
as Isa. 4. 3, 4. so Ezekiel. 36. 25. to 29. Joel. 3. 17. then shall Jerusalem be
holy, that is, when the Mountains shall drop new wine, and the hills flow with
milk; as verse. 18. And the fountain come forth of the house of the Lord, to
water the valley of Shittim.

5. To make poor, dry, barren, empty souls to become fruitful to God, and to
grow in grace, Isa. 32. 5. until the Spirit be poured from on high, and the
wilderness become a fruitful field, Isa. 44. 3, 4. I will pour my Spirt upon
thy seed, etc. and they shall spring up, etc. so Hos. 14. 5. I will be as the
dew unto Israel, and he shall grow, etc.

6. To fill the Saints with meekness and love, yea, with end cared love toward
Christ, and bowels of pity toward men, as we see it was with the Saints in the
primitive times, but is much wanting now

7. To unite the Saints more together in judgment and affection into one
heart, and one way, as the Scripture speaks.

8. To make them more exact and spiritual in the use and practice of all Gospel
Ordinances, as Acts 2. 41. to 47.

9. To beautify and adorn Christians with every spiritual gift and grace, as
Gall. 5. 22. Ezekiel 16. 10, 11, 12, 13.

10. To fill them with a mighty Spirit of Faith and Prayer, as the Saints in
the primitive times, after the pouring forth of the Spirit had.

In a word it is a Christians All, for by it he can do all things, as Phil. 1.
19. 4. 13. and without it he can do nothing well, as John 15. 5. Without me ye
can do nothing.

And thus I have declared my judgment fully about this blessed truth, and what
I mean by the pouring forth of the glorious Spirit which I so often mention in
prayer and preaching, as the great legacy, privilege, and portion of the Saints
or believers in the New Testament, etc.

Now then let me ask you this Question, Whether it had not been better for you,
and those that are gone away with you, that you had set your selves solemnly to
seek the Lord by Supplication and Prayer, and so have continued in the ways,
and under the Ordinances of Christ, waiting for that blessed spirit, as many of
the Servants of God have done, and still do, etc. rather than to have taken up
a Notion of a Light in every man, and call that the eternal Spirit, as some of
your way do, and then jeer and scoff at them, that pray for the Spirit, and
reproach them which complain out of their sense of the want of it, as poor
Mris. Prince did, when she came to revile me at my Lecture, etc. But blessed be
the Lord, there are many Churches in England and Wales, that are now wrestling
with the Lord day after day jointly, and day and night singly (in the deep
sense of their wants) for the accomplishment of that glorious, New Testament
promise, and such an Answer is already given to some, both Independent and
Baptized, as you call them, that they have no cause to repent of the time they
have set apart for that work; and I verily believe, That if the people whom you
and others so much despise, go on and continue praying as now they do, for the
pouring forth of the blessed Spirit, there will shortly be such a breaking
forth of the day of Christ, that all the antichristian foggs, of false doctrins
and false worships, will fly and fall, as the darkness before the rising Sun.

And Oh that some men in England and Bristol that are now wrangling and
quarrelling about their humane learning, and scoffing and envying those that
have it not, would seriously consider this thing, before their lamp go out in
obscurity, and their feet stumble upon the dark mountains, before their arm be
dried up, and their eye utterly darkened, etc.

Now before I part with this, I will also clear my self about another
expression, that I have sometimes used, and at which many have been offended,
and that is about an old and a new Testament Spirit (though of late to avoid
offense, have forbore it) now by those expressions, I did not mean nor intend
the Spirit of God, so as to call that an old Testament Spirit, for I know that
Spirit, was one and the same from everlasting, but by an old or New Testament
Spirit.

1. I mean the frame and temper of a man's own Spirit, and so by an
Old Testament Spirit, I always mean, that dark, weak, childish and low frame
and temper of Spirit, which professors generally had, in the time of the old
Testament, while under the Mosaical administration, with that bondage and fear,
that weakness and sadness, that did accompany it, etc.

2. By a New Testament Spirit, I always mean, that lively, cheerful, active,
joyful, bold, son-like frame and temper of Spirit, which the Saints generally
in the primitive times under the new Testament did enjoy, which is called a
Spirit of Adoption, as the other is called a Spirit of Bondage; a full
description of what I mean is set forth in two Scriptures, as namely, Gal. 4.
from the 1. to the 7. and Heb. 12. from 18 to 24. In which two Scriptures is
set forth,

First, The weakness, darkness, childishness, fear, bondage, etc. of the
Old Testament state, which is that that I call, the frame, temper, or spirit of
the Old Testament.

And Secondly, There is set forth, the light, life, strength, boldness,
comfort, courage, joy, and rejoicing of the New Testament state, which is that
that I call, the frame, temper, or Spirit of the new Testament, etc. And
whether Christians be not generally, more under the Old Testament frame, than
under the new, I leave to their experiences: and thus I have fully declared my
self, as to these two particulars; and if any sober Christian, into whose hands
this may come, shall apprehend that I am mistaken in either of them, I shall be
glad to receive a word from them in love, but I do not expect it from you, to
whom I now write, etc.

You farther tell me in your Letter, that you were warned from invisible lights
some months past, to beware of me, which you could not believe, till now it
breaks out like fire, etc. I conceive those invisible lights, were some secret
whisperers that did bring you many stories, both of me, and others, etc. but
truly I could discern by visible light, long before you left us, that my
speaking was but little acceptable to you, and some others, especially after I
did begin to oppose your spleen and passion, though whilst I sat still and
silently approved of what you spoke, then I was the excellentest man that ever
you met with, and you would often, both to my face, and behind my back, applaud
and extol me; but when once I began a little to cross you, as many others of
the Brethren did, and as some godly men had formerly done (as they saw cause
enough) then you and your party began to fume and fret, and as it was often
observed to go out of the Meetings, when I had been to speak though I did
oppose you with all the tenderness that possibly I could, as knowing what a
party you had in the Church, and what influence you had upon them; but now you
say the fruits does appear, and break out like fire, etc.

Q. And what is it?] But that I should say, That such an idle Huswife, as is
before mentioned, should be sent to Bridwel, rather than to go railing about,
as she did: Now I appeal to all Christians upon the face of the earth, what
hurt this was, to this poor, railing, cursing, fierce creature? etc.

Q. And was this the ground upon which some of your company spread it about the
Country, and place of my nativity, what a persecutor I was become, so that the
good people there, that had known me to be of another temper, did wonder, and
were troubled, until they understood, what you and your company meant by such
things, and that it was because I would not join with you and your new
Religion, and with the people that call themselves Quakers. Again, Was this the
ground upon which you did so often cry out against Judases in the Church, a
little before you left us; but blessed be the Lord, we can now rejoice, that
the innocence of the upright is cleared, and the Judases are discovered, etc.
and whether I or you have betrayed and crucified the Lord Jesus, in his Saints,
in his ways, in his name, and in his truth, I shall humbly leave, etc. I do
not boast, but desire with all humility and reverence to acknowledge and
admire the power, grace, mercy, and goodness of him by whom, I a poor worm have
been preserved, whilst such a Cedar, or Star, as you were taken to be, is so
sadly fallen; but it is no more than what some have thought and said long ago,
That pride and arrogancy would have a fall, as Prove. 29. 23. But let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, etc. 1 Cor. 10. 12.

But now you say, I openly oppose the appearance of Christ, where it is found
in life and power, etc. What, because I said of that poor deluded Creature, It
were fitter she were sent to Bridwel? O poor deceived man, that you should be a
professor of Religion, so long, and now come to publish such a piece of folly
to the world, as to call the Since this I have been three times disturbed for
which one is now imprisoned.
fierce raylings, etc. of these people, the appearances of Christ, in life and
power; and my speaking that one word to her once, an opposing of Christ, etc.
whereas she had no hurt done her, not a word spoken to any Magistrate against
her; nay, though she, and others of your way, have 16 or 17 times opposed me,
and rayled at me, yet never but one, and that but once was questioned or
imprisoned for it, and yet I am cried out against in word and writing by you
and your company, as the great persecutor, which now you tell the world you
have been warned by invisible lights some months past, to beware of me: But how
can you call Sarah Latchet the Servants of God, and Witnesses of Jesus (in the
plural number) whereas it was but to she only, and that but once I spoke those
words, though she rayled at me many times, but ask your own heart, whether your
Design were not to draw out my supposed Offense to the world, and then
consider, whether instead thereof you have not let out your own folly, envy,
and hypocrisi? But where is that meekness, and bearing, that some of you boast
of, that you would not return evil for evil, but being cursed, you bless, etc.
poor-creatures, it is an easy thing to flatter your selves, and speak words,
etc. but let any one touch you, though but in a word, and they shall find you
as rough, both in railing and writing, as any: But what would you have done
unto me, if I should have come into your Meetings and disturbed you, and railed
at you, etc. as she and others have done at me? you would have sent me (not to
Bridwel) but to the bottomless pit, if words could have done it? You close your
Letter with many seeming expressions of love and pity: as, 1. That I might see
the sandiness of my foundation. 2. Know the things that belong to my peace. 3.
Escape the pit. 4. Not shut up the kingdom of Heaven against my self and
others, etc.


1. As for my foundation, I know no other, nor preach no other than that
foundation and Corner stone which is laid in Sion, even Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, and Son of man, in one person, upon whom, through grace, I have cast my
soul for eternity, and other foundations I look not for, etc.

2. As to my knowing the things that belong to my peace, etc. I bless the Lord
it is the groaning of my soul to him, for that blessed Spirit of revelation, in
the knowledge of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, that I
may believe more, love more, and obey more, etc.

3. As for my escaping the Pit: I desire the like for you: and in order to
that, I have consented to, and helped on, the Admonitions that have been sent
by the Church to you, and the other poor souls that are with you, etc.

4. But fourthly, As for my shutting up the kingdom against my self, and
others, etc. I can say, through grace, it has been, and is daily my great care
and work, to preach the kingdom of God freely to sinners, and to set forth the
Lord Jesus Christ, as the way to that kingdom, and to invite, and encourage all
poor souls to come into that kingdom, by Jesus Christ the true door or way, and
by the strait gate of believing, which the Scribes and Pharisees, by putting
men upon working for life, did shut up against themselves, and others: and who
does so now, but those that bid all men turn to a Light within them, and so
take them off from believing on the person of Jesus Christ, or looking to be
saved by what he has done, and suffered, wrought, and accomplished for man,
etc.

But I suppose your meaning is, That I should give over preaching, and come to
you, and your way; I know this has been the longing desire of many of you a
great while: for these were the words of one of your way, the last time I was
in your house, That I kept many from receiving, or embracing the Light: but I
desire to bless the Lord, that through the riches of his grace to my soul, I
have been hitherto preserved, and I have seen my Call to, and Work in this City
clearer since you left us, than ever I did before, both as to this poor
desolate Church, and likewise to many precious souls in Bristol, among both of
which I trust I may say with humility and comfort, that God has made me of
some use, though I be as nothing, etc. And truly I do hope, that God who
chooses the things that are not, to confound the things that are, etc. will yet
use me, as an instrument for good unto his people in this City, and the rather
because, both you with them of your way, and others that are of other ways, do
so violently, and causelessly set against me, which makes me sometimes take up
the complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 15. 10. Woe is me, etc. I have
neither lent upon usury, nor have men lent me upon usury, and yet every one of
them does curse me, or speak evil upon me, as some translations read it: but
blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that yet my lamp is not
gone forth in obscure darkness, etc. And thus I have done with the substance of
your Letter, I intend to add a short word to the ensuing part of your Book, but
I shall first make a little digression, by joining an occasional word to what I
have now written, etc.

I shall desire you to Consider, Whether you are not by this act of yours, in
publishing me thus to the world, tickled the hearts, and pleased the fancies of
many, who were full enough of prejudice against me before; nay, are you not
joined as a Brother in bitterness, with him that wrote the late Book, called,
Satan Enthroned in his chair of Pestilence: Let any judicious Christian compare
your Book with the latter part of his, and see whether those two bitter
streams, do not both arise from one corrupt fountain; namely, the Spirit that
is from beneath: may not I return your own words upon you, which you unjustly
charge upon me and this Church, from Obediah 11, Thou wast like one of them,
etc. and is this the kindness of a friend, or the part of a brother? O how
truly are those Scriptures fulfilled in you, Mic. 7. 5. Trust ye not in a
friend etc. Jer. 9. 4. Take ye heed, etc. for every brother will utterly
supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders. You had written your
Letter to me about a year ago; and if you had known ought by me, you might have
written more; but for you, now to publish it to the world, and to proclaim it
in your Frontispiece, and that in such a subtle manner, that he that reads
your title page and my name, would verily think (if they did not know
otherwise) that I were some dreadful persecutor, and that I had caused some
Servant of Christ to be whipped and punished: but I trust the Lord will look upon
my wrong; and your envy; my innocence, and your hypocrisies, etc. but I know
it is in vain to write farther to you, and truly had it not been for the
vindication of the truth, and satisfact on of some poor souls in this City and
Nation, I should have cast your Book, and the other man's Book aside, and never
have troubled my self to have answered you or him; but since it is so, that
both your Books are spread abroad, and read by many, at which some are grieved;
others staggered, and people generally apt to conclude that things are so, as
he and you have said, because I am silent and say nothing, as I remember it was
with me once before, when a public Scandal was raised and cast upon me at my
first coming to Bristol, which the Lord knew, and I in my own Conscience knew,
I was as innocent in, as any man or child under heaven, and therefore sat
still about half a year, resolving my innocence should answer for me, etc.
which made many conclude I was guilty because I was silent, till at length I
was forced to seek a public Vindication by the Magistrate (which I had) and
then the mouths of bad people were stopped, and the minds of good people
satisfied:

So I conceive it might be now, if I were wholly silent, as to what you and he
do write, though indeed I had resolved silence, and to have given you, and him,
and others, leave to have trampled upon me; and were I in a private capacity, I
think I should do so: but forasmuch as the Lord has set me as a public
instrument in his work, and that; that which you and he have written of me,
tends much to the defaming of me, and the hindrance of my work, by laying
stumbling blocks of prejudice, into the minds of people against me, I therefore
think my self bound for the truths sake; and for the sake of some good people
in this City; being thereunto also advised and persuaded by godly friends, to
set forth a few words of truth and soberness, both to your Book and his.

And I desire that neither you nor he will be offended that I join you both
together in this my Answer, for first you are much alike Brethren in
bitterness, against the people called Independants and Baptized, as may be seen
throughout your Book: and in the latter part of his.

Secondly, I find, that he has often joined you with me, therefore I think it
not improper to coupple him with you, and I hope that neither your friends, nor
his, will look upon my so doing as any disparagment to you, or him. Yet I must
needs say in some things he is more modest than you in that he does not name
me, as you often do, though in some things you are more serious than he, in
that you do not (...) as he often does; but both you and he have done what you
could, to lay me under contempt and scorn to the whole City and Nation, and
therefore I shall now address my self to answer some few passages in his Book,
though not for your information, but for my own Vindication, and for public
and general satisfaction, etc.

And first in the 48 page of that his Book, called, Satan enthroned in his
Chair of Pestilence, etc. he tells a story, how they, meaning the Church in
Bristol, send for a Tailor out of Wales to be their Teacher, etc. in which he
deals very dis-ingeniously, for first, he knew that I was sent for by the Major
of the City, some Aldermen, many of the Council, and other Gentlemen and
Commissioners of the City of Bristol, which I take to be the Representative of
the City, etc. As likewise, I was sent for by many of the godly inhabitants, as
I have elsewhere declared; and that not only to be a Teacher in the Church of
Bristol, but to be a public Preacher of the Gospel in the City, as I have,
through the help and grace of Christ, hitherto continued; and he himself, at my
first coming, gave me the right hand of fellowship, and professed he was
satisfied in my Call.

But secondly, I was no more a Tailor in Wales, than he was any of his former
Callings after he came to Bristol: For when I was called to Preach the Gospel
in Wales, I left my former Employment, as he did leave his several Callings,
when he took to Preaching: the next thing concerning me in his Book, is page
50. where he mentions a great Woman, that had three Children unbaptized: the
truth of which I shall relate, by which the falseness of his Relation will
appear, etc. There was about the time of my coming first to Bristol a godly
woman, one at whose Husbands house, the Church did often use to meet; she
having been delivered of a Child, did about a month after desire the Church to
meet at her house, to render praise to the Lord, and to spend some time in
Prayer and conference, etc. accordingly the Elder, that then was, did upon the
first day of the week appoint that the next Meeting should be at such a place,
to such an end: now when the Church was met, she desired that her Children
might also be presented to the Lord by Prayer, both that which she then lay in
with, and one more about the age of two years, whether any more of her Children
were then present, I do not remember; but the like was done again about two
years after, when the Lord gave her another Child, and as it has been done for
many others upon the like occasion, and as I have known it often done in Wales,
and I here recommend it to all sober Christians, especially such as are
dissatisfied in their judgments and Consciences, about Infants Baptism, namely,
That when any godly Woman, a Member of a Congregation, has received such a
mercy, she should at some convenient season present her self with her Child in
the Church, that Praise may be rendered to the Lord on her behalf, presenting
her Child also to the Lord by Prayer, etc. at which time the Parents may
declare in the Congregation the name of the Child, that it may be entered into
the Book, where the names of the Congregation are written, as the Children of
the Church, who upon occasion may be mentioned to the Lord as the seed of the
faithful, that when these Children come to age, and the Lord shall give them to
profess Faith in Christ, and that they do believe with all their hearts, as
Acts 8. 37. they may then be admitted to the Ordinances of Christ, both
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as Believers were in the Primitive times, Acts
2. 41, 42. this I leave to the Consideration of all, but especially such as do
not see ground to sprinckle their Children, and I the rather mention this,
because there are many who since they left of Infant Baptism, that are (as I
conceive) too remiss in the duty of thankfulness, and too careless of the
precious Souls of their Children, etc.

Now this was all, that I know, that was in the eye and intent of this godly
Woman, and this was the utmost which was done at that time, concerning the
Woman and her two children, (which this man calls a blood-daring attempt) which
I desire the judicious Reader to consider, etc. As for this jerking, jeering,
quibling, and scoffing at the learned Teacher, the reverent Congregation, the
mock-Ordinance, and dry Baptism, etc. I shall not answer him, lest I should be
like unto him, neither can I say what discourse she had with the other discreet
Gentlewoman which he mentions, but this I know, the Woman was a very
judicious Christian, and was well informed and satisfied about the
unwartantableness of Infant Baptism, and was her self shortly after Baptized,
according to the true intent, manner and administration of that Ordinance, so
that this was no invention to give her satisfaction, as he says; neither did
she or any of the Congregation look upon this as Bapt^^m, for both she and they
(for ought I know) were fully satisfied against that practice, before I had
ever any acquaintance with her or them; and for his jerking, and jeering again
about prayer, before and after and about the words of Institution to the new
Ordinance, etc. All which might better become the mouth of a Stage Player, than
the pen of a Minister. And for his saying the Children were as much heathen as
before; truly I trust they had more benefit by this solemn act of the Churches
prayer, than if he had in his way baptized them; but I did not think till now,
that he had held that Children were made Christians by Baptism.

The next thing he mentions is, about my being Baptized at London, etc. I had
two reasons for my being Baptized there rather than here: First, because I am a
Member of a Church there, who are of the same judgment, as to this particular:
Secondly, because I knew none there that had that latitude in their Principles,
as to Baptize me, unless I should come off from this Church in point of
Communion, which in my conscience I could not do, I knowing them to be a
precious godly people, how ever now under contempt; but that I did it there, or
that I concealed it at all to save my Maintenance, that is not true; for I did
publicly own it as soon as I did come home, though with that moderation and
tenderness, as not to grieve or offend any, but as for his jerking and jeering,
at my falling from dry Baptism to Dipping, etc. I shall not answer him: But for
that godly man Mr. Jesse, whom he calls an Anabaptist, Teacher of London, I
shall not say much for him, he has grace enough to bear his reproaches, only
this I must say, his coming hither was not to perform any Bishop like
confirmation, as this man seems to intimate; but rather to endeavor the
settling and establishing the minds of the People of this City, against the
pernicious Doctrine of the Quakers; and I believe his endeavors were not
successless in that thing. Again, for my becoming an open professed Dipper, (as
he says) though I abhor his jeering, yet I do own the word and practice, and
therein I do no more than all the Preachers in Bristol do, for they Baptize and
Preach, and I Preach and Baptize; only they Baptize Infants, and I Baptize Men
and Women, as Philip did, Acts 8. 12. and whose practice is most justifiable,
theirs or mine, I refer to the Scriptures in their proper and genuine sense to
determine, and to any judicious impartial Scholar to interpret, as John 3. 23.
Acts 8. 37, 38, 39. Acts 10. 47, 48. Acts 22. 16. But for my unchristening him
and his Children; I never uttered such a word; but if my practice grounded upon
Scripture do it, J ought not to be blamed: Likewise for his unchristian-like
dealing with that godly man, Mr. Tombs, publishing his name to the World; I
shall say little, for he has wisdom and grace, either to answer him, or to
bear his reproaches, only this I perceive by a Letter from Mr. Tombs, that the
thing is false; And for his calling Mr. Tombs our greatest Champion, etc. truly
the man is much mistaken, for we do not lean upon Man for our practice, we
having both the Command and example of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his blessed
Apostles, recorded in Scripture, as Matt. 28. Mark 16. Luke 3. 23. Christ
himself was Baptized when he was about 30 years of age; so that Mr. Tombs, is
not our Champion: But for his mis-drawn consequences, how I can give the Lords
Supper to the Devils children, if Mr. Tombs had said so, as he writes of him,
would it therefore follow, that I, and all others, must be of Mr. Tombs his
mind in that thing? I cannot see this to be a necessary consequence, etc. but I
do abhor and detest any such uncharitable sensoriousness, and I believe Mr.
Tombs does so also, etc.

He asks further, by what authority I make a single judgment to my self; I
ask again, how he durst to say that I make a single judgment to my self, when
as there are many Churches, and many men both learned and godly, that are of my
judgment in this particular, so as to hold communion with persons differing in
that point? and so I do administer the Lords Supper to this people in Bristol,
as they are a Church of godly sober Christians, believing in Christ, though
some of them mis-baptized, yet none of them deny the Ordinance of Christ, only
some of them have not light to see the right Administration of it, but reckon
their Infant Baptism sufficient; yet as further light comes in, they are
willing to walk up to it, in the mean time we can bear with them in love, as we
desire them and others, to bear with us in other things.

As for that mis-construed passage in my Lecture, about dry breasts, which he
applies to Infant Baptism, etc. 1, I deny that ever I spoke those words in such
terms: 2. Much less to that sense, but I have often prayed against that sore
judgment threatened, Hosea 9. 14. and that I might not have a miscarrying womb,
so as not to bring any soul to Christ by conversion; or dry breasts, so as not
to feed or refresh any poor thirsty soul, that comes to wait upon God in his
Ordinances, as I fear it is with many Congregations in England; and this was
the substance and sense of what I spoke, though as for Infant Baptism, I have
declared and do declare my dislike of it; yet so as not to judge or condemn any
godly man, that thinks he has Warrant to do it, etc.

And whereas he says, That the professed, thorow-paced Anabaptists, leave me,
and would not join with me, and therefore commends them that they are true to
their principles, and do not juggle, implying that I am not so, but do juggle,
etc. Truly I know no through ^ac'd, godly man, either Anabaptist, or others in
Bristol, but do show love and respect to me in their way, only in this, they
walk according to their light, and so do I; but they think I am too large in my
Principles, and I think they are too strait in theirs; yet we do not differ,
but can bear with each other in love, though for my juggling or dis-ingenuity I
pass not to be judged by him, etc. though I know it would please him better, if
I were of a furious, impetuous, violent spirit, so as to break all in pieces,
and set the City and this Church in a flame, and thereby make my self to be
abhorred of all both good and bad; but, I trust, as the Lord has, so he will
graciously give me a more sober, sweet spirit, to walk tenderly toward all,
and to do good to all: And truly I can say, through grace, that I do not love
any man the more or less for his judgments sake, whether he be Presbyterian,
Independent, Baptized, etc. But where ever I see the Image of Christ appear
(which is love and holiness) there I desire to love and honor.

And for his large Parentheses, from page 52. to page 55. wherein he makes an
Apology for his bitterness and passion, (as he had need enough to do) and then
closes with a proposal, that if we will but acknowledge his Ministry,
Churches, and Ordinances, to be according to the Institutions of Christ, and
such as with whom we will hold communion, then he will write a Retractation,
etc.

I answer, let him first but prove that they are so, and then we will soon
acknowledge it; but till then, though he be so wise as to propse it, we shall
not be so foolish as to grant it, etc.

And as for his Marginall Note upon page 55 about our being thought to own
their Ministry, because we hear some of them. Truly, I think, he had need not
speak of that, for few of us do hear him, or intend it, till he be of another
temper, yet I do not refuse to hear any sober, godly man, though I must needs
say, I have but little comfort in, or encouragement to, the hearing of some,
who are so often venting their passion and bitterness, etc.

The next thing concerning me is, page 55. where he lays an accusation against
me, and the Society with whom I walk, that we neglected (for a long time) the
Declarations of his (Highness) for solemn meetings, etc. whereby he endeavors
if he could, to render me, and this Church, obnoxious in the eyes of the
Governors of England; but, through mercy, the chief Magistrate, and chief
Governors of this Commonwealth, have more wisdom and grace, than to hearken
to such accusations, especially from men of his temper; but if I were so
wicked, and void of ingenuity, as to go about to accuse men for such neglects,
I might find matter enough to write and publish against my neighbors; but I
abhor and detest such an envious and unworthy spirit, etc. But I do not
remember that ever this Church neglected one such meeting, neither did I ever
omit above once or twice, at the most, preaching publicly, as I durst appeal
to the whole City to bear me witness; but suppose I had upon the change of the
Government, being scrupled or dissatisfied, so as to omit once or twice
preaching, are there none in England or Bristoll have done the like, and is it
the part of a Minister to rake up old Stories, to present to the ears of the
Magistrate, and to publish to the Nation to incense them against a person or
people that live peaceably under, are subject unto, and make supplication for
those that are in authority, as the Scriptures require, Titus 3. 1. 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2. and as we are well known to do, etc. I shall say no more but the Lord
rebuke the Spirit of Envy, etc.

As for many other things in his Book, both concerning me and the Church with
whom I walk; as first, his jeering at our cutting out Churches according to our
fancied primitive pattern, and our being marred in the shaping, etc. wherein he
pleases himself, and men like himself: And secondly, his gross mistake in
laying the blame of all the mischief the Quakers have done in Bristoll, with
many other evils and falsities to the charge of this poor Congregation, some of
whom bave stood as much, and born as full a testimony against the principles
and practices of those miserable deluded people, as ever he has done, and
perhaps to better purpose, etc.

Now as for his large and unlearned Discourse about an ungodly learned man,
being fitter to preach than a godly man, that wants only human learning, in
respect of diverse Tongues; as likewise his supposed insufficiency of the Spirit
of Christ, to furnish and accomplish, fit and enable men to that work, etc. I
shall not undertake to answer every particular that he asserts about this
matter, from page 62. to page 66. Only if I might be thought worthy to inform
such a man as he is, or any other of his mind, I should advise them to take
heed of grating upon, jerking against, slighting or undervaluing of that
blessed Spirit of the Lord Jesus, in any of its Offices, operations, effects,
or different administrations, in and among the People or Church of God; I say,
I should advise them to take heed, lest when God sets the solitary in families,
the rebellious dwell in a dry land, and whilst some are like trees planted by
the waters, never ceasing to yield their fruit, others be like the Heath in the
Desert, that should not see when God comes, but inhabit the parched places in
the wilderness; For all the Trees of the field shall know, that the Lord can
bring down the high Tree, and exalt the low Tree, he can dry up the green Tree,
and make the dry Tree to flourish; yea, and by the pouring forth of the Spirit
from on high can make the Wilderness become a fruitful Field, and the fruitful
Field to be counted for a Forest, as Ezekiel. 17. 24. Isa. 32. 15.

He lays it upon some as a reproach, page 62. That we teach by the Spirit,
etc. I desire humbly to acknowledge and attribute it unto the blessed Spirit of
Christ, that I have at any time been, or now am enabled in any measure to speak
or publish any truth of God, either to the conversion of sinners, or to the
edification or consolation of the Saints and People of God; and truly if this
man do not lean and depend upon the help of the Spirit in his work of
preaching, I shall not much wonder, if his Ministry prove as I have sometimes
said or feared, many men's have done, as a miscarrying Womb, and dry breasts,
notwithstanding all their great learning, of which they seem to boast. and. He
further demands, page 62. whether all that have the Spirit can teach publicly,
etc. First, if by teaching publicly, he mean preaching and publishing what God
has done for them; and likewise declaring to others what the Lord has taught
them, etc. Then I answer it is the duty of all Christians so to do, 1 Pet. 4.
10. As every man has received the gift, so let him minister the same, etc. as
Eldad and Medad did, Numb. 11. though one man envitd, and another complained,
as some do now, yet Moses the man of God, he approved of it, etc.

But secondly, if by preaching publicly, he mean a public and solemn
undertaking the work of preaching etc. Then I answer, I do not think that every
one, that has the Spirit of Christ in him, or the work of grace in his soul,
is fit to be a public Preacher; for there are diversities of gifts, and
differences of administrations, as appears, 1 Cor. 12. 4. to the 11. Yet, where
the Spirit of God has fitted any, and the People of God that know them well,
do see them fit, and judge them fit, and approve of them publicly, calling
them thereunto, these may be fit to teach publicly, at lest to their own
Nation, as the 70 Disciples were, Luke 10. 1. though they had no gifts of
Tongues as we read of, no more than the twelve Apostles had, during the time of
their preaching to their own Nation, before the Assention of Christ; and that
they were to preach to all Nations according to their second Commission, Matt.
28. Mark 16. yet I do not in the least slight, despise, or undervalue learning,
nor learned men, that have grace with it, and do not scornfully trample upon
them that want it; but to say that no man may preach without it, is to make a
law, where Christ has made none; for the seventy Disciples, and twelve
Apostles, did preach long before the day of Pentecost, etc.

He likewise demands, who will step forth and tell him, (and not lie) that the
Spirit does teach them to understand the meaning of the word Justification, or
Adoption, etc. I answer, if none but such as can speak Greek and Latin, can
understand what Justification and Adoption is, etc. how then can any that have
not Greek or Latin, believe they are justified or adopted, seeing that it is
another Maxim in the Schools, that no man can believe more than he does
understand: But surely those Souls that have been first enlightened by the Word
and Spirit of Christ, to see and know their lost condition, while under sense
of condemnation; and has also been led by the same Spirit through the Word of
grace, to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ with all there hearts, and by his
precious blood, to see themselves freed from condemnation, and in his
righteousness to be made righteous, aod so to find the comfort of it in some
measure in their own souls, they can speak of it to the praise of God, and to
the edification of others, and that by the help and assistance of the same
blessed Spirit, yea perhaps more sensibly, feelingly, plainly, and profitably,
than the most learned Doctor in the world, that knows it only speculatively,
by learning, reading, and studying.

As for that scornful word unlettered, which he does so often use, and cast as
a reproach upon some men, etc. I answer, truly some of us do know our Letters
as well, and can put them together into Syllables and Sentences as right, and
pronounce them as distinct and plain, perhaps as himself; but I shall not ad to
this, only conclude with Prove. 3. 34. Surely the Lord scorneth the scorner,
and gives grace to the lowly. And I desire seriously to weigh, and to commend
to all sober Christians, those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. from 19. to 29.
and Chap. 2. from 1. to 15. and Chap. 3. 18, 19, 20. by all which it appears,
the great Apostle of Christ, was of another mind, than this man seems to be. He
demands page 65. what an unlettered Teacher, or Ignoramus would say, if he were
to discourse with a Papist, or an Adversary about Justification, etc. Truly, I
would say this, if any should out of pride, curiosity, and vain confidence, run
without a call, to discourse with an Adversary, (Papists or others) about that
or any other point of Christianity, etc. he might expect that the Lord might
justly leave him to himself, and so he might betray, or shame the truth, and so
might it be with the most learned Teacher in the world.

But secondly, if a godly man were providentially, or clearly called, to
maintain or defend, that or any other truth of God against an Adversary,
(Papist or others) he going in the fear of the Lord, and in a sense of
self-insufficiency, in faith and hope of the presence and assistance of the
grace and Spirit of Christ, he might expect according to his promise, Matt. 10.
9. Take no thought for it shall be given you in that same hour, what ye shall
speak. And verse 20. For it is not ye which speak, but the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you. And how truly was this fulfilled in the Martyrs,
both in plain Countrymen, and also Women, yea, young Youths and Mayds, who
discoursing about points of Christian Religion, and disputing with men of as
profound Learning, as some are now, who boast so much of it, namely, the Popish
Bishops and Doctors, and how those poor Martyrs did by the help of the blessed
Spirit, without Latin or Greek, confound those enemies of truth, and assert and
maintain both the Doctrine of Justification, and other points of Christian
Religion, as the History of Acts and Monuments do sufficiently declare; and
though we have no cause to presume, yet we have good ground to hope and
believe, that the same God, will by the same Spirit, give in the same supplies
to his Servants in the same case, if he should again call them to it, or if he
should call any of us to assert and maintain the bles^^ Doctrine of
Justification, or to despute the glorious privilege of Adoption. And whereas he
says, page 56. That we give out our selves to be gifted Brethren, and so fit
for the work of the Ministry, etc. For my own part I do not know that ever I
gave out such a word, and the Lord knows, that I have lower and meaner thoughts
of my self; and truly had not the importunity and persuasions of some prevailed
with me, beyond what I thought of my self, I think I had never been an eyesore
to this man in Bristol, nor a trouble to any others in the work of preaching;
and if he or any other can make it appear to me, that it is the will of God,
that I should give over my present work, I trust it is not all the Gold and
Silver in Bristol, that should hire me to continue in it; but truly (as other
things) so the violent opposition that I meet with from men of diverse sorts, do
much confirm that it is the will of God, that I should continue in my work of
preaching, etc. And so long (though I should meet with greater difficulties
than over I have yet done) I trust I shall go on with it, expecting the
presence of Christ with me; and his blessing upon me therein. I do not at all
reflect upon those godly men, that he quotes page 66, 67. though I cannot but
wonder that a man should express so much bitterness against Anabaptists, as he
does in his Book, and yet seem so to applaud a baptized man, that is a person
of honor, etc. Likewise how a man can speak so contemptuously against
Separation, and separated Churches, and yet seem so to applaud that eminent Dr.
Owen, who is a man so eminently for the Congregational way, that some men call
Independency or Separation; which makes me to think, that if all the people in
England and Bristol, which are called Independents or Anabaptists, were great
or in high places, he would love them, or make them believe so, etc.

But thirdly, for that godly man Mr. Baxter, whose face I never saw, yet do I
highly honor and esteem for some of his works, and for what good I hear of him,
yet I see no ground, why I should so understand Mr. Baxter, or the other two,
as this man seems to force their meaning; for, admit it be true, that an
ungodly learned man, may know as much, or more, of the literal and grammatical
sense (...) Scripture, than a gracious man may do, which is all that they
affirm; does it therefore follow, that a godly unlearned man, (if it were
proper to call any so) may not understand and know, publish and declare the
truth of Christ, to their own comfort, and the edification of others, for my
own part I cannot see this to be an infallible consequence, and I am confident
that two of those men are otherwise minded; and if godly Mr. Baxter should mean
so, yet I know, there are many others of like eminency, both for Learning and
Godliness, that are of another mind in this particular, as I might abundantly
show from their works that are extant, as likewise that experience God has
given us in this later age, of his owning, blessing, and prospering, such in
the preaching of the Gospel, to the conversion of many souls, both in England
and Wales, etc. But what I have here written may be sufficient to disprove what
he does falsely assert, page 67. that the pretense of preaching by the Spirit is
but a pious fraud, to set up our selves in the hearts and consciences, and
consequently in the purses of people, etc which thing he again mentions, page
51, 52 where he jeers at my contribution, calling it a Feeling argument etc.
wherein he seems to compare me to the Lawyers, who account a good Fee to be a
feeling argument in their Clyents cause: But I shall not answer him, only as
the Proverb is, It is the property of a covetous Man to think every thing too
much that another has. But he draws up the result of all. page 68. and
concludes, that the inlet and outlet, the fore-door and backdoor of all our
miseries, is an ignorant, unlettered, and contemptible Ministry.

If by the word (Our) he mean our misery in Bristoll, then I Bristoll (in his
sense) all the rest (be they what they will) are learned and called,
constituted and established Ministers, as he mentions again, page 60, etc. No
doubt but the Princes of Israel, through the instigation of the Prophets,
thought the like of Jeremiah when they were wroth with him, smote him, and put
him in prison, and when they said unto the King We beseech thee let this man be
Jer. 37. 15. 38. 4
put to death, for he seeks not the welfare of this people, but the hurt. So
likewise Amaziah the Priest of Bethel, when he sent to Jeroboam King of Israel,
saying, Amos has conspired against Amos 7. 10. 14
thee, etc. Poor Amos he had not indeed been bred a Prophet, neither was he the
son of a Prophet, but a Herdsman and a gatherer of Summer fruit; and now he
must be banished the Kings Chapel as a conspirator: this was hard measure, but
God provided better for him. Reader, I do not compare my self with Jeremiah and
Amos but only to let thee see that as Solomon says, That which has been is
now, and there is no new thing under the Sun.

But secondly, if by the word Our misery, he mean the misery England first or
last; truly then I shall grant and say as he does, that the in let and out let
fore-door and backdoor of much of Englands misery (and consequently of
Bristols) is an ignorant, ungodly, ^asie, proud, scandalous, soul murdering
Ministry, who have made themselves contemptible and base in the eyes of all
good men, and in the consciences of many bad. And though (as I have heard)
there were two thousand of them petitioned against in the time of the long
Parliament, and many of them then plucked up by the roots both in England and
Wales; besides what has been since laid aside for scandal and insufficiency,
by other Committees and Commissioners appointed for that purpose: yet I think
England has cause enough still to mourn for, complain of, and pray against, a
great part of the Ministry thereof: I do not speak this of all, nor intend it
to all; for I doubt not to affirm against the Quakers, that God has many
precious servants in the Ministry, both among those called Presbyterians, and
them called Independents, and the Baptized, and some that are of, or under none
of these names; yea, both learned and unlearned, etc. who yet are faithful to
the Lord Jesus, and do prefer the conversion and salvation of precious souls,
before all the treasures in the world, and who do rejoice to see that work of
God carried on by any, either learned or unlearned, as men now speak; and I
trust, that as the Lord, who holds the Stars in his right hand, will establish
such; So the time is near, when men shall not wear a rough garment (or a
prophetical garb) to deceive, but that the false Prophets and unclean spirits
shall pass out of the Land, and that God will raise up, and give Pastors,
according to his own heart, for faithful is he that has promised, who also
will do it.

And whereas he says, page 68. That you shall know them (to wit the ignorant
and unlettered Ministers) by this Badge or Character, they are separating,
factious, and schismatic, etc. I remember these were words much in use, and
cast as brands upon the godly people called Puritans, by the Bishops and their
Clergy about 20, or 30 years ago, and how it comes to pass that these words
are taken up again, I know not, unless it be that the same spirit that was in
the Bishops and their Clergy is again revived: and if so, then they in whom it
is, had best take heed that they apply those Nicknames righter than the former
did, lest, etc.

But I shall give another Badge or Character of those that I mean, and that is,
you shall always know them by their pride, envy, and covetousness, or their
scorning, reviling and persecuting all those that differ from them; and
therefore as he commends the caution and counsel of the Apostle Romans 16. 17.
18. So shall I make bold humbly to recommend the caution and counsel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 7. 15, 16. Beware of false Prophets, etc. for by
their fruits you shall know them. I do not speak this of any godly man or men,
for I know no godly men can do so as above.

Now for his closing word to the Ministers that are lawfully called, etc. if by
lawfully called he mean Pastors or Elders, called, chosen, constituted,
ordained and appointed to office in Churches, and by Churches, according to the
New Testament, and according to the example and practice of the Churches of
Christ both in New England and Old, then I freely close with him therein; for
such a Calling and Ordination I own and plead for according to Scripture.

But if by Ministers lawfully called, he mean all the Parish Ministers in
England or Bristoll (as such) then I cannot but wonder how any man pretending
to godliness, durst so to abuse that precious Scripture, Acts 20. 28. and how
he will be able to prove that Parishes are such Churches, and that all Parish
Ministers (are such) and by the holy Ghost made Overseers in the sense of that
Scripture; for my own part I must be silent, and so I think might he well have
been. It is true the 29. verse may in a sense be rightly applied to some men in
England that call themselves Ministers, who since the Apostles times, and the
apostasy that followed, have like grievous Wolves entered in, not sparing the
flock, etc. I write not this of, nor intend it to any godly man of any
judgment whatsoever.

But as for the rest of his jerks, jeers, quibles, scoffs, derisions, reproaches
and untruths, which he has cast upon me, with all the injury and wrong that he
has (thereby) done to me, I shall lay it at my feet looking upon it as the
fruits of a froathy brain, and the products of a spleenish temper, and shall
not bestow a pen full of ink, or one minutes time to answer it, but do rather
in my heart wish and desire, that he may so repent of this piece of folly and
wretchedness, whereby he has hardened the hearts, and opened the mouths (of
many against me) that it may do his soul no more hurt another day than it does
me at present; in the mean time I resolve to sit down in silence as to him, etc.

And now I return again to you Denn^^ Hollister, to close up my answer to your
Book, and I cannot but take notice (as many others do) of your shameful
abusing that precious upright servant of Jesus Christ Robert Simson, though I
suppose, he will clear himself, or (at least) his innocence will answer for
him, and stop your mouth another day: In the mean time I cannot but bear a
testimony of his integrity and your impudency, in that you do so fiercely and
faisly charge him to be a liar; whereas I can testify that the thing was true,
which he, as messenger of the Church, did admonish you of; namely, that you
should say, that the Scripture was a blind and plague to Souls; which thing you
did speak at a public meeting in your own house, as I doubt not but there are
more than twenty persons, some of the Church, and others not of the Church, who
can also testify the same. Whether your meaning was then as now you write,
page 18, 19. I shall not dispute; but that you did speak those words is true,
and no lie invented, nor lie prosecuted, etc. Therefore if there be any liar in
this thing, you are the liar; yet I durst nor judge you to the Lake, but rather
pray and hope that God may show a miracle of mercy in saying you from it, and
do advise you to take heed how you throw them into the Lake, or under
condemnation, whom Jesus Christ has by his precious blood, and perfect
righteousness graciously freed from it. And as for the sin of lying, you will
do well to east the beam out of your own eye, etc. For Robert Simpson is a man
as well known in Bristoll to be a truth speaker, and a just, upright,
conscientious dealer, as any of those that do accuse him. I shall say no more,
but let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6. 4.

But passing by many of those impertinencies in your book, I find that after
your letter to me, there is an answer to 16. Queries, formerly sent to you, or
to the people called Quakers, and afterward printed by that precious servant
of Christ, John Pendarves before his death.

I might commend your wit, in putting forth your answer after the man is dead:
Secondly, I observe that these sixteen Queries have been once answered (in a
fashion) by James Naylor, a man then highly admired and cried up by you, or
those of your way, as a man of great infallibility, which perhaps might help to
puff him up with pride, by which he came to fall into this fad condemnation,
etc.

Now whereas some of your way, boast much of your being all led by one and the
same Spirit, so that though they were at a great distance, yet they all speak
but one thing, etc. Now let any man read and compare your answers with James
Naylors, and see how near they come together, unless it be in railing, judging,
and censuring, though therein I must needs say his answers are more moderate
than yours.

And whereas a late Writer for your way, puts it by way of derision to the
Preachers in England, that if six of the most able Doctors, should have a
portion of Scripture given them to interpret, and they shut up in six several
rooms, etc. that perhaps not two of the six agree in their interpretation.

Now suppose you had taken four more of your Teachers, (such as some of you had
challenged the whole world to accuse of sin) and made them six in number, and
have given them these sixteen Quaeries apart to answer, perhaps they would have
come as rear, as you and Naylor do in your answers, or as six of the weakest
Preachers in England might have done in their interpreting a place of Scripture.

As for your word to England, I shall say little to that, but desire rather to
mourn for the evils and abominations therein, as I know it is my duty and yours
also, if you knew how to do it; and so I conclude, expecting that I shall have
many sharp Arrows of bitter words shot at me, both by you and others; but for
that I matter not much, being conscious to my self, that I have written in
plainness words of truth and soberness, and that I have been pressed by others
to do what I have done, and that rather, for the vindication of truth, than of
my self, and rather for the sakes of some godly people who may read it, than
for your sakes to whom I direct it; and if you or others, shall dip your pens
in Vinegar or Gall to write again, I hope I shall bear it, or modestly reply to
it, though my thoughts, are rather to suffer my self to be trampled upon, then
again to answer a word, seeing that of making many Books there is no end, and
much study is a weariness of the flesh, Eccles. 12. 12. And knowing also that
neither you nor others, can speak or write me so vile, as I can and do, see,
and acknowledge my self to be, as in my self, yet is my perfection and
compleatness in another, even in Christ Jesus my Lord; in whom is all
righteousness, all strength, and all fullness, laid up for all those, that
sensibly see and feel that in them, (that is in their flesh) dwells no good
thing, etc. and thereupon do look unto him, to receive of his fullness, grace
for grace; in which glorious person, all that do believe are justified, and by
whose grace and blessed Spirit, they are in a measure sanctified, and through
whose precious blood, and perfect righteousness, mediation and intercession,
they shall be eternally saved, and in whose way, I could as gladly now as ever,
subscribe my self,

Your Friend, T. E.

FINIS.
There is now in the Press, a Book written by Robert Purnel, entitled, A
little Cabbinet, richly stored with all sorts of heavenly varieties; wherein
there is a Remedy for every Malady; viz. Milk for Babes, and Meat for strong
Men, and the ready way for both to obtain, and retain assurance of Salvation:
being an Abridgment of the sum and substance of the true Christian Religion;
and to be fold at the Three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard.


